MARX & ENGELS
COLLECTED WORKS
VOLUME 2
Frederick Engels 1838-42    
=====第1页=====
file:///G|/Temp/menewisbns/intros/meint_2.htm [31/08/2011 18:35:17]KARL MARX
FREDERICK ENGELS
Volume
2 
Frederick Engels 1838-42
2010
Lawrence & Wishart
Electric Book
=====第2页=====
file:///D|/Temp/menewisbns/me2.htm [09/12/2010 14:18:39]Editorial commissions:
GREAT BRITAIN: Jack Cohen, Maurice Cornforth, MauriceDobb, E. J. Hobsbawm, James Klugmann, Margaret Mynatt.USA: James S. Allen, Philip S. Foner, Dirk J. Struik, William W.Weinstone.USSR: N. P. Karmanova, V. N. Pavlov, M. K. Shcheglova, T. Y.
Solovyova, Y. V. Yeremin, P. N. Fedoseyev, L. I. Golman, A. I.
Malysh, A. G. Yegorov, V. Y. Zevin.
Digital Edition Copyright © Lawrence & Wishart 2010Digital production: Electric BookISBN 978-1-84327-946-4 All rights reserved. Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of
private study, research, criticism or review, no part of thispublication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, ortransmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, electrical,
chemical, mechanical, optical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner.
=====第3页=====
Contents 
Preface XIII 
FREDERICK ENGELS 
WORKS 
August 1838-December 1842 
1. The Bedouin 3 
2. To the Enemies 5 
3. Book Wisdom 6 
4. Letters from Wuppertal 7 
5. To the Bremen Courier 26 
6. Open Letter to Dr. Runkel 27 
7. F. W. Krummacher's Sermon on Joshua 29 
8. From Elberfeld 30 
9. German Volksbücher  32 
10. Karl Beck 41 
11. Retrograde Signs of the Times 47 
12. Platen 53 
13. On the Invention of Printing > 55 
14. Joel Jacoby 63 
15. Requiem for the German Adelszeitung  66 
16. Modern Literary Life 71 
I. Karl Gutzkow as Dramatist 71 
II. Modern Polemics 81 
17. On Anastasius Grün  94 
18. Landscapes 95 
19. Reports from Bremen 102 
Theatre. Publishing Festival 102 
Literature 104 

=====第4页=====
VI Contents 
20. An Evening 107 
21. Reports from Bremen  112 
An Outing to Bremerhaven  112 
22. Two Sermons by F. W. Krummacher  121 
23. On the Death of Immermann 123 
24. Reports from Bremen 126 
Rationalism and .Pietism 126 
Shipping Project. Theatre. Manoeuvres 128 
25. St. Helena 131 
26. Siegfried's Native Town 132 
27. Ernst Moritz Arndt 137 
28. Night Ride 151 
29. The Emperor's Procession 153 
30. Reports from Bremen 155 
Ecclesiastical Controversy 155 
Relation to Literature. Music 158 
Low German 159 
31. Immermann's Memorabilien 161 
32. Wanderings in Lombardy 170 
I. Over the Alpsl 170 
33. Schelling on Hegel 181 
34. Schelling and Revelation 189 
35. Schelling, Philosopher in Christ 241 
36. North- and South-German Liberalism 265 
37. Diary of a Guest Student 268 
I -.-, 268 
II 270 
38. Rhenish Festivals 274 
39. Marginalia to Texts of Our Time 277 
40. Polemic Against Leo 281 
41. Alexander Jung, "Lectures on Modern German Literature" 284 
42. Participation in the Debates of the Baden Chamber of Deputies 298 
43. The Liberalism of the Spenersche Zeitung 300 
44. The End of the Criminalistische Zeitung  302 
45. On the Critique of the Prussian Press Laws 304 
46. The Insolently Threatened Yet Miraculously Rescued Bible 313 
Canto the First 315 
Canto the Second 326 
Canto the Third 334 
Canto the Fourth 344 
47. F. W. Andrea and the High Nobility of Germany 352 
48. Berlin Miscellany 353 
49. Centralisation and Freedom 355 
50. Frederick William IV, King of Prussia 360 

=====第5页=====
Contents VII 
51. The English View of the Internal Crises 368 
52. The Internal Crises 370 
53. The Position of the Political Parties 375 
54. The Condition of the Working Class in England 378 
55. The Corn Laws 380 
LETTERS 
August 1838-August 1842 
1838 
1. To Marie Engels, August 28-29 385 
2. To Friedrich and Wilhelm Graeber, September 1 388 
3. To Marie Engels, September 11 390 
4. To Friedrich and Wilhelm Graeber,  September  17-18 392 
5. To Marie Engels, October 9-10 399 
6. To Marie Engels, November 13 402 
7. To Marie Engels, end of December 403 
1839 
8. To Marie Engels, January 7 405 
9. To Friedrich Graeber, January 20 407 
10. To Friedrich Graeber, February 19 414 
11. To Hermann Engels, March 11-12 417 
12. To Marie Engels, March 12 419 
13. To Friedrich Graeber, April 8-9 420 
14. To Marie Engels, April 10 423 
15. To Friedrich Graeber,  about  April 23-May 1 425 
16. To Marie Engels, April 28 437 
17. To Wilhelm Graeber, about April 28-30 442 
18. To Marie Engels, May 23 447 
19. To Wilhelm Graeber, May 24-June 15 448 
20. To Friedrich Graeber, June 15 453 
21. To Friedrich Graeber, July 12-27 457 
22. To Friedrich Graeber, after July 27 463 
23. To Wilhelm Graeber, July 30 464 
24. To Marie Engels, September 28 469 
25. To Wilhelm Graeber, October 8 471 
26. To Wilhelm Graeber, October 20-21 474 
27. To Friedrich Graeber, October 29 476 
28. To Wilhelm Graeber, November 13-20 481 
29. To Friedrich Graeber, December 9, 1839-February 5, 1840 487 

=====第6页=====
VIII Contents 
1840 
30. To Levin Schücking, June 18 494 
31. To Levin Schücking, July 2 496 
32. To Marie Engels, July 7-9 498 
33. To Marie Engels, August 4 501 
34. To Marie Engels, August 20-25 503 
35. To Marie Engels, September 18-19 507 
36. To Marie Engels, October 29 510 
37. To Wilhelm Graeber, November 20 513 
38. To Marie Engels, December 6-9 516 
39. To Marie Engels, December 21-28 519 
1841 
40. To Marie Engels, February 18 523 
41. To Friedrich Graeber, February 22 525 
42. To Marie Engels, March 8-11 528 
43. To Marie Engels, April5  531 
44. To Marie Engels, about the beginning of May 532 
45. To Marie Engels, about the end of August 533 
46. To Marie Engels, September 9 534 
1842 
47. To Marie Engels, January 5-6 536 
48. To Marie Engels, April 14-16 539 
49. To Marie Engels  542 
50. To Arnold Ruge, June 15 , 543 
51. To Marie Engels, July 2 544 
52. To Arnold Ruge, July 26 545 
53. To Marie Engels, August 2-8 546 
EARLY LITERARY EXPERIMENTS 
1833-1837 
1. To My Grandfather 553 
2. Poem, 1836 554 
3. Poem, probably written early in 1837 555 
4. A Pirate Tale 557 
5. The Single Combat of Eteocles and Polynices 572 
APPENDICES 
1. Birth Certificate of Friedrich Engels 577 
2. Friedrich Engels Senior to Karl Snethlage, December 1, 1820 578 

=====第7页=====
Contents IX 
3. Baptism Certificate of Friedrich Engels  580 
4. Friedrich Engels Senior to His Wife Elise, August 27, 1835 581 
5. School-Leaving Reference for Prima Pupil Friedrich Engels 584 
6. Friedrich Engels Senior to Karl Snethlage, October 5, 1842 586 
7. Certificate of Conduct for the One-Year Volunteer Friedrich Engels 588 
NOTES AND INDEXES 
Notes 591 
Name Index 621 
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 646 
Index of Periodicals 662 
Subject Index 669 
ILLUSTRATIONS 
Frederick Engels in 1839 8-9 
Pages 208 and 209 of the Gutenbergs-Album containing M. J. Quin-
tana's poem A la invenciôn  de la imprenta and Engels' translation .... 57 
Title-page of Engels' pamphlet Schelling and Revelation 193 
Title-page of Engels' pamphlet Schelling,  Philosopher  in Christ 245 
Title-page of Engels' pamphlet The Insolently Threatened Yet Miracu­
lously  Rescued Bible 317 
Engels' caricature of "The Free", the Berlin group of Young 
Hegelians 329 
Frederick Engels in the 1840s 376-77 
Facsimile of Engels' letter to Wilhelm Graeber of April 28-30, 
1839 440-41 
Facsimile of the beginning of Engels' letter to Marie Engels of 
December 6-9, 1840 520-21 
Facsimile of the end of Engels' letter to Marie Engels of December 
6-9, 1840 520-21 
Cover of Engels' history exercise book 569 
Drawing by Engels from his history exercise book 570 
Engels' mother and father 552-53 
The house in Barmen where Engels was born 552-53 
The gymnasium in Elberfeld where Engels studied 584-85 

=====第8页=====

=====第9页=====
TRANSLATORS: 
ROBERT BROWNING: The Single  Combat  of Eteocles 
and Polynias 
JACK COHEN: Letters 1-25,  41-53,  and Appendix 4 
RICHARD DIXON: Appendix 6 
CLEMENS DUTT: Works 4, 11, 12, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 
41, 42, 49-55, and Appendix 2 
ALEX MILLER: Poems 
BARBARA RUHEMANN: Works 6-10, 16, 21, 22, 24, 
26, 27, 30-40, 43-45, 47, 48, Letters 26-40, 
and Appendices 1, 3, 5 and 7 
CHRISTOPHER UPWARD: A Pirate Tale 

=====第10页=====

=====第11页=====
Preface 
The Second Volume of the Collected Works of Marx and Engels 
contains Engels' early writings and letters dating from the years 
1838 to 1842, grouped together in two main sections. A special sec­
tion contains his poetic and prose works in manuscript of an earlier 
period (1833-37); other biographical material is given in appen­
dices. 
Engels' outlook developed on similar lines to that of the young 
Marx. He had steeped himself in the progressive philosophical 
and political ideas of the time, and was moved by a sense of 
protest against the reactionary order in Germany. His ambition 
was to take part in the ideological and political controversies on 
the eve of her bourgeois revolution. Like Marx, Engels became an 
adherent of the Hegelian philosophy, drawing revolutionary con­
clusions from it and soon afterwards coming under the influence 
of Ludwig Feuerbach's ideas, which helped to crystallise the 
materialist aspects of his thinking. 
Engels, however, found it much harder than Marx to arrive at a 
progressive outlook. He came from the conservative and religious 
family of a Barmen industrialist and was forced by his father to 
leave school and go into business. This meant that he had to 
complete his education independently, to find his own way 
through the labyrinth of contemporary religious, philosophical, 
political and literary trends, and in much painful soul-searching to 
rise above the religious convictions nurtured in him since early 
childhood. It was in the main Engels' critical analysis of- religion 
and theology that led him to progressive philosophical ideas. 
Literature, too, had an important part to play in his development, 
particularly in his early years. 

=====第12页=====
XIV Preface 
While espousing the rational elements in the views of Ludwig 
Börne and the writers of the Young Germany movement, and in 
Hegel's philosophy and the Young Hegelians' radical theories, 
Engels came to realise at each stage of his intellectual development 
the inconsistencies and limitations in their ideas, subjecting them 
to critical analysis as he carved out his own path to other views 
which were more profound and more radical. His attention was 
soon drawn to the contradictions of the society in which he lived 
and to the wretched conditions of the working masses. This was an 
additional stimulus to his turning his back on the bourgeois 
outlook. By late 1842 he had become an advocate of communist 
reconstruction of the existing social system, though he still saw this 
largely in Utopian terms. 
This stage in Engels' intellectual evolution can be broadly 
summed up as the emergence and rapid development of revolu­
tionary-democratic ideas, followed in the second half of 1842, two 
years before he and Marx began to work closely together, by his 
incipient transition from idealism to materialism, and from a 
revolutionary-democratic outlook to communism. 
Engels' early journalistic writings make up the first section of 
this volume. At the age of eighteen he became a regular 
contributor to the press and published many letters, articles and 
essays on literary and socio-political subjects in various journals 
and newspapers, as well as some poems and philosophical pam­
phlets. His first published work, the poem The Bedouin (September 
1838),  breathed a spirit of liberty. 
A good dozen articles and letters from the young Engels' pen 
appeared in the columns of the Hamburg journal, Telegraph für 
Deutschland, a mouthpiece of the Young Germany movement 
edited by Karl Gutzkow. Engels had already begun to discern the 
contradictory nature of Young Germany, but remained firmly in fa­
vour of its demands for a constitution, freedom of the press, aboli­
tion of all forms of religious coercion, and emancipation of women. 
It was in the Telegraph für Deutschland that Engels published, in 
the spring of 1839, his first major journalistic work, "Letters from 
Wuppertal", describing life in his home town of Barmen and 
neighbouring Elberfeld. With an eye for detail remarkable for his 
years Engels describes in these letters the grim working conditions 
in the factories, the terrifying poverty, the widespread disease and 
the drunkenness among the poorer classes. He likewise paints the 
true portrait of broad sections of the German bourgeoisie, with 
their philistinism, obscurantism and religious bigotry. With them 
pietism served as a mask for the inhuman exploitation of the 

=====第13页=====
Preface XV 
unfortunate masses and the poverty of intellectual life. Engels' 
highly critical attitude to the social conditions of his day is 
pointedly expressed in the irony and sarcasm with which he 
describes the mores of the burghers of Wuppertal. 
In the article "German Volksbücher", Engels attacks the "popular 
literature" which gave either overt or covert expression to the 
interests of the reactionary classes. Condemning the serving up of 
pious homilies and the idealisation of meekness in pseudo folk­
tales,  Engels demands books to foster the people's proud aware­
ness of its rights and dignity, to help arouse its courage and love 
for its country. 
Subsequent articles by Engels, such as "Karl Beck", "Platen", 
".Retrograde Signs of the Times" and "Immermann's Memo-
rabilien", show that already at this early stage he was coming 
to understand very well the processes then at work in German 
literature and distinctive aspects of the relationship between 
literature and society. In the article "Retrograde Signs of the 
Times", he remarks that criticism should not only expose tenden­
cies to hark back in art and literature, but also their links, often 
not visible at first glance, with related phenomena in politics and 
in public and social life. 
Engels' revolutionary-democratic approach to literature undeni­
ably set him apart from other critics and writers of his day. This 
is especially evident in his articles on poets like August von Platen, 
Karl Immermann and Karl Beck. Beck's poems had at first led 
Engels to expect great things in view of the love of freedom 
professed in them, but later proved a source of considerable 
disappointment. Engels stressed that contemporary poetry should 
not express a futile Weltschmerz but rather the positive fight for 
freedom and against tyranny, philistinism and religious bigotry 
(see this volume, p. 43). 
It was in the autumn of 1839 that Engels acquainted himself 
with Hegel's philosophy, to which he was led to turn after reading 
David Strauss Das Leben Jesu. Engels adopted a radical, revolu­
tionary approach to Hegel's philosophy from the start, and this 
helped him to escape the influence of the conservative aspects of 
Hegel's ideas and, in particular, to recognise the narrowness of his 
political views. While Hegel presented the constitutional monarchy 
as the culmination of the process of historical development and 
even implied that the Prussian monarchy might well be regarded 
as the final stage of evolution of absolute spirit, Engels opposed to 
this the open-endedness of historical progress and mankind's 
advancement (pp. 47-48). 

=====第14页=====
XVI Preface 
In his article "Requiem for the German Adelszeitung", published 
in April 1840, basing himself on the Hegelian theory of world 
history as the implementation of the idea of freedom, Engels 
attacked conservative trends in philosophy, romantic historio­
graphy, the "historical school of law", etc., which proclaimed the 
eternal and immutable character of the medieval social system and 
the privileges of the nobility. Pouring scorn on the political 
programme of the Adelszeitung, Engels wrote: "The foreword 
teaches us that world history exists ... solely to prove that there 
must exist three estates: the nobility, which has to fight, the 
burghers — to think, and the peasants — to plough" (pp. 68-69). In 
this and other articles he attacked the feudal-monarchic institutions 
of Germany which had outlived their day, the bureaucracy and the 
censorship. 
Engels' revolutionary-democratic convictions were expressed still 
more clearly in his articles "Siegfried's Native Town" (published in 
December 1840) and "Ernst Moritz Arndt" (published in January 
1841).  In these he calls for an all-out struggle against conservatism 
and philistinism, praises the urge to perform heroic exploits in the 
name of freedom, and protests against the suppression of "every 
free movement" (p. 136). Condemning the antipathy to the demo­
cratic principles of the French Revolution which was kept alive 
and encouraged by the German nobility, he proclaims a programme 
of democratic reform in Germany, including such demands as 
elimination of the vestiges of feudalism, liquidation of absolutism 
together with the social estates, introduction of trial by jury and 
formation of a united democratic state. He declares that "so long 
as our Fatherland remains split we shall be politically null, and 
public life, developed constitutionalism, freedom of the press, and 
all else that we demand will be mere pious wishes always only 
half-fulfilled" (p. 150). 
In the article "Ernst Moritz Arndt", Engels praises Arndt's 
generation of German patriots for their role in the liberation 
struggle against Napoleon, while pointing out the national limita­
tions inherent in their ideas. He castigates the German nobility's 
reactionary Teutomania and arrogant attitudes towards other 
nations, while at the same time rejecting the abstract cosmopolitan­
ism and nihilism on the national question to be found among 
many representatives of the liberal bourgeoisie. But while criticis­
ing nationalist ideology in many of its aspects Engels had yet to 
dissociate himself completely from all the nationalist tendencies to 
be found in the work of such writers as Arndt. He echoed Arndt's 
ideas about the return of Alsace and Lorraine to Germany and the 

=====第15页=====
Preface XVII 
"Germanisation of a disloyal Holland and of Belgium" (p. 149). But 
the main aspect of Engels' article was not the re-echoing of Arndt's 
demands, which he very soon came to regard as unwarranted, but 
his opposition to national prejudices, his stand for the idea of the 
equal rights of nations, and his strongly voiced conviction that 
every nation deserves respect and makes its own specific contribu­
tion to world civilisation. 
While still contributing to Gutzkow's journal, Engels also wrote 
articles for a number of other German periodicals. His article 
"Modern Literary Life", published in the Mitternachtzeitung 
(March-May 1840), shows his increasingly critical attitude to the 
adherents of the Young Germany movement. He draws attention 
to their inconsistency and irresolution, their incapacity for energet­
ic action, their lack of ideological unity, and their unprincipled 
literary wrangling. By this time, Engels was clearly aware that the 
Young Germany movement had retreated a long way from the 
political radicalism of its forerunner, Börne, and lacked a coherent 
outlook. In "Modern Literary Life" he stressed the need to 
integrate progressive philosophy with political activity, an idea he 
was later to elaborate in a number of other articles. He expressed 
his conviction that essential in the fight for freedom was "co­
operation between science and life", between philosophy and the 
modern political trends, between Hegel and Börne (pp. 50-51). 
Of particular interest in this volume are Engels' reports in the 
newspaper Morgenblatt für gebildete Leser, which give a picture of 
the political, religious and cultural life of Bremen, where Engels 
worked in the office of a trading company between July 1838 and 
March 1841. "An Outing to Bremerhaven" (written in July 1840 
but published in August 1841) reflects his sensitive awareness of 
social problems, and in particular his search for the cause of the 
working people's underprivileged status, desperate poverty and 
lack of rights. 
In the autumn of 1841 Engels went to Berlin for his military 
service. For a year he underwent military training in a brigade of 
the Guards' Artillery and in his spare time attended lectures and 
seminars at Berlin University as a non-matriculated student. 
Finding himself at the centre of a fierce controversy between the 
various philosophical schools, he made contact with the Berlin 
group of Young Hegelians, who had formed a study circle which 
went by the name of "The Free", and took a most active part in 
their fervent battle of ideas. At this stage his philosophical and 
political convictions had assumed an even more radical and 
consistently revolutionary-democratic character. 

=====第16页=====
XVIII Preface 
An important element of Engels' writings in this period is his 
spirited defence of the philosophy of Hegel and the Young 
Hegelians from attacks by adherents of religious and conservative 
principles, and in particular by Schelling. Schelling, an old man by 
then, had veered to the right and lately been invited by the king 
of Prussia to Berlin University so as to root out the "dreadful 
dragon of Hegelianism" (p. 192). After regularly attending the 
lectures given by this prophet of irrationalism Engels dashed off a 
series of critical studies — Schelling on Hegel, Schelling and Revelation 
and Schelling, Philosopher in Christ—showing the reactionary, 
mystical character of Schelling's latter-day ideas and the absurdity 
of his attempts to discredit Hegel, whom at one time he had 
praised. Engels still shares the Hegelian belief in the Weltgeist as 
the moving force behind historical development, but he is more 
clearly aware of the need to reject the conservative elements in 
Hegel's thinking and go beyond "the limits within which Hegel 
himself had confined the powerful, youthfully impetuous flood of 
conclusions from his teaching" (p. 196). Engels gave a revolution­
ary meaning to Hegel's doctrine of the omnipotence of thought 
and the triumph of reason and truth, which he saw as the triumph 
of democracy. 
The pamphlet Schelling and Revelation bears obvious traces of 
the influence of Feuerbach 's Wesen des Christentums which Engels 
read in the second half of 1841. Following in Feuerbach's 
footsteps while not as yet realising the essentially materialist 
character of his criticism of religion, Engels here takes his first 
step towards a materialist view of consciousness, and of the 
relation between reason (spirit) and nature. The pamphlet also 
testifies to a considerable advance in the evolution of Engels' 
atheism. Feuerbach's book, together with various works by Bruno 
Bauer on the history of early Christianity, helped Engels to shed 
the influence of religion. 
An interesting work by Engels to be found in this volume is the 
satirical poem entitled The Insolently Threatened Yet Miraculously 
Rescued Bible written together with Edgar Bauer in June-July 1842. 
It is a sharp attack in Young Hegelian style on religious obscuran­
tism and fanaticism. At the same time Engels is aware of the 
inconsistencies and the patchwork character of the Young 
Hegelian trend. He is pointedly ironical about the contradiction 
between the revolutionary talk of many members of "The Free" 
and their incapacity for practical action, which was already 
becoming evident by that time. Making no secret of where his own 
sympathies lie Engels names the most radical thinkers and writers 

=====第17页=====
Preface XIX 
of contemporary Germany, among whom he ranked Marx. Even 
before the two men met, Engels paints a dynamic and vivid por­
trait of Marx as an impassioned and indefatigable champion of 
the revolutionary cause. 
A swarthy chap of Trier, a marked monstrosity. 
He neither hops nor skips, but moves in leaps and bounds, 
Raving aloud. As if to seize and then pull down 
To Earth the spacious tent of Heaven up on high (p. 336). 
Engels' work on the opposition newspaper Rheinische Zeitung, 
from April 1842, marked the beginning of a new stage in his 
political and intellectual development. Marx, who also contributed 
to this paper, became one of its editors in the autumn of 1842. 
Between April and December 1842, Engels published seventeen 
articles and sketches in the Rheinische Zeitung (including "Diary of 
a Guest Student", "Rhenish Festivals", "Polemic Against Leo", 
"On the Critique of the Prussian Press Laws") in which he 
advocated radical social reform, freedom of speech and the press, 
and criticised conservative ideology and the timidity of the liberals. 
Engels' articles for the Rheinische Zeitung contributed to setting the 
paper's revolutionary-democratic tone, which it acquired under 
Marx's editorship. 
It was at this time that Engels made a clean break with the 
Young Germany movement. His review of Glossen und  Rand­
zeichnungen zu Texten aus unserer Zeit, published in the Rheinische 
Zeitung, condemned the eclecticism and political spinelessness of its 
spokesmen who, to use* his words, "have sunk into lethargy" 
(p. 280). Engels treated the ideas and political attitudes of this 
movement with still harsher criticism in his review of Alexander 
Jung's book Vorlesungen über die moderne Literatur der Deutschen, 
published in the July issues of the Young Hegelian journal, 
Deutsche Jahrbücher. In this review Engels champions a committed 
literature and hurls passionate invective at the philosophy of "the 
golden mean", which sought artificially to reconcile opposites. 
In the columns of the Rheinische Zeitung, in particular in articles 
such as "North- and South-German Liberalism" and "Centralisa­
tion and Freedom", Engels openly opposes bourgeois liberal 
ideology and treats the conciliatory stand of the Young Germany 
movement as merely one of its manifestations. Engels' attitude to 
the liberal opposition was a genuinely dialectical one, a far cry 
from the nihilist attitude of "The Free", who prided themselves 
on their show of radicalism. He recognised, given the conditions 
of that particular period, the progressive nature of the criticism 
directed by opposition spokesmen at the reactionary order in the 

=====第18页=====
XX Preface 
German states. Yet he was aware that liberal moderation and 
inconsistency were serious obstacles to revolutionary initiative and 
efforts to arouse the people's revolutionary energy. 
The article "Centralisation and Freedom" shows that by the 
autumn of 1842 Engels was convinced of the limitations of 
liberalism and of its increasingly anti-popular tendencies in Ger­
many and all over Europe. As a revolutionary democrat, he 
condemns the idealisation of the July monarchy in France and the 
Guizot régime, which was openly violating "the principles of 
popular sovereignty, of a free press, of an independent jury, of 
parliamentary government" (p. 355). With deep historical insight 
he grasped the connection between bureaucratic centralisation and 
the absolutist state, going on. to observe how the bourgeois régime 
of the July monarchy represented a direct continuation of the old 
absolutist order. 
While attacking bourgeois liberalism, Engels continued his on­
slaught against the absolute monarchy, against the Prussian state 
and the ideologists of the "Christian German state". This is clearly 
expressed in his article, "Frederick William IV, King of Prussia", 
written in the autumn of 1842, which predicts inevitable revolution­
ary upheavals in Germany like those in France at the end of the 
eighteenth century. The censorship forbade the article being 
printed in Germany and it appeared in a collection published in 
Switzerland. 
The first section of this volume closes with reports specially sent 
to the Rheinische Zeitung from England, where Engels went at the 
end of November 1842. His experiences in England, then the 
bastion of the capitalist world, were to play a decisive role in the 
development of his materialist ideas and his full turn to commun­
ism. These reports were written during his first few weeks in 
England and clearly indicate the subsequent direction of his ideas. 
He had been closely following the progress of the socialist and 
communist movements for some time, and was coming round to 
the view that communism alone could solve the social question. 
His acquaintance with economic and social conditions in England 
and with the English labour movement did much to confirm this 
opinion. 
In the reports entitled "The Internal Crises", "The English 
View of the Internal Crises", "The Position of the Political 
Parties", "The Condition of the Working Class in England" and 
"The Corn Laws", Engels describes the mounting economic and 
political struggle in England, which he understood as rooted in the 
incompatibility of interests of the various classes. He describes with 

=====第19页=====
Preface XXI 
evident sympathy the English workers' resistance to capitalist 
exploitation, in particular the activities of the Chartists. There was 
no doubt in his mind that the English working class was destined 
to play a crucial role in the coming social revolution: all that it 
needed to put an end to the domination of the propertied classes 
was to become aware of its real strength and to organise its ranks. 
Engels had still to overcome completely the contradictory aspects 
of his former outlook, with its Hegelian attribution of the 
dominant role in history to ideas rather than material interests. 
Yet he could not be blind to the fact that in an industrially 
developed country like England "it will be interests and not 
principles that will begin and carry through the revolution; ... the 
revolution will be social, not political" (p. 374). 
The second section of this volume contains Engels' letters to his 
school friends Wilhelm and Friedrich Graeber, his sister Marie, his 
brother Hermann, the writer Levin Schücking and the journalist 
Arnold Ruge. They shed much light on the formation of his 
character, and show the wide range of his interests, his conviviali­
ty, his literary and artistic tastes and the workings of his rich and 
subtle mind. 
Engels' developing ideas in literature, philosophy, religion and 
politics emerge most clearly in his letters to the Graeber brothers, 
which reflect his gradual escape from religion. From the outset he 
conceived a violent dislike for pietism and the hypocritical or­
thodox forms of Christianity, and gradually came to doubt the 
very essence of Christian dogma. In his correspondence with the 
Graeber brothers, both clergymen, Engels conducted serious dis­
cussions on the authenticity of the Gospel legends and on the 
contradictions to be found in the Bible. Concentrated critical 
analysis, his searching study of the history of Christianity, his wide 
acquaintance with critical works on the Gospels, and his grasp of 
the Hegelian dialectic set Engels on a path which was to lead him 
to a scientific interpretation of religion and his subsequent 
elaboration of scientific atheism. 
Engels' letters dating from the years 1838 to 1842 give a clear idea 
of his literary interests, the extent of his reading, and his flair for 
subtle criticism. Originally Engels dreamed of the poet's laurels 
and now and again quotes his own verses in his letters. Indeed, 
some of his poems made their way into print: they are often 
imitative in form, and it is the epigrams and satirical parodies 
which betray the greatest degree of originality. However, certain 
poems are set apart by their perceptive political and philosophical 
content, and their revolutionary implications. A good example is 

=====第20页=====
XXII Preface 
the ode on the anniversary of the July 1830 revolution in France 
which Engels sent to Friedrich Graeber in the summer of 1839 
(pp. 463-64). It is a veritable hymn to revolution which the poet cele­
brates as a surge of vital energy among the popular masses, a truly 
popular festival. 
Engels' critical view of his own work made him realise that 
poetry was not his true vocation. This merely meant, however, that 
he turned with all the more energy to other forms of literary 
activity, to literary, social and political criticism. His letters bear 
witness to the intensity of his work in these fields. Engels' original 
ideas,  which subsequendy found expression in his articles of 
literary criticism, were first expounded in his letters to the 
Graeber brothers before they appeared in print. 
He was also to try his hand at translation, and rendered into 
German a poem, On the Invention of Printing (A la invention de la 
imprenta),  by the Spanish poet M. J. Quintana. Even as a boy he 
had shown great interest in the study of foreign languages, for 
which, as his letters make clear, he had a phenomenal flair, and he 
was widely read in several languages. His letters to his school 
friends and the writer Levin Schückine show that what he looked 
for in literature was above all love of liberty and humanistic ideas. 
This explains his predilection for Shelley and his plans for 
publishing his own translations of the latter's verse, which, how­
ever, were never to materialise. He valued most in Shelley, whom 
he was always to admire, his praise of freedom and his furious 
protest at oppression. Engels used Shelley's words "To-morrow 
comes!" as an epigraph to his poem An Evening, in which he 
expresses the conviction that the dark despair then reigning in 
Germany would give way to "Freedom's day" (p. 107). 
Engels often declares his political convictions more openly in his 
letters than in his literary writings, which were subject to censor­
ship;  he expounds them without concealing his hatred and 
contempt for despotism, the arbitrary rule of monarchs, the social 
arrogance of the aristocracy and the prosperous bourgeoisie, and 
the general atmosphere of political and intellectual bondage in his 
native land. Much of what Engels writes in his letters is permeated 
by a truly democratic spirit and reveals how, as he came to realise 
the transforming role of revolution in history, he began to 
advocate revolutionary methods for removing social and political 
barriers standing in the way of Germany's advance and unifica­
tion. 
Engels had a tremendous zest for life, which shows itself 
abundantly in his letters. He took great interest in art and 

=====第21页=====
Preface XXIII 
painting, travel and sport. He was something of a connoisseur of 
beer, wines and tobacco. He spent much of his leisure time riding, 
fencing, swimming and going for long walks. His letters to his 
favourite sister, Marie, also reveal his love of music: he was a keen 
concert-goer and opera-lover, and admired the works of Bach, 
Handel, Gluck, Mozart, Mendelssohn and above all Beethoven, 
and even attempted to write chorales  himself.  He was extremely 
sensitive to the grandeur and beauty of nature, and his landscape 
descriptions are often detailed and compelling (see "Landscapes", 
"Wanderings in Lombardy", etc.). 
The two main sections of this volume are followed by a section 
of Early  Literary  Experiments,  containing the poems Engels wrote in 
his schooldays and chapters of A Pirate Tale, written in 1837, in 
which for his heroes he turned to the Greek corsairs fighting 
against Turkish rule. This fragment and the poems shed some 
light on the very earliest formation of Engels' literary tastes and 
social ideals. 
The documents included in the appendices are also of bio­
graphical interest, and enable us to form some idea of the setting 
in which Engels spent his childhood and youth. This applies in 
particular to the letters from his father, one of which, addressed 
to Karl Snethlage (October 5, 1842), testifies to the strained 
relations which by then existed in the family, and to the pious and 
conservative father's deep anxiety about his son's free-thinking. To 
a large extent this accounted for the decision to send Engels to 
England, where it was hoped the eldest son would be cured of the 
malaise besetting German youth and return to the bosom of the 
Church. Engels' father never imagined that in England Frederick 
would become a proletarian revolutionary and communist, to 
remain one till the end of his days. 
* * * 
This volume contains all the extant writings and letters of the 
young Engels, nearly all of which are here published in English 
for the first time. The supplementary material has not previously 
been published in English. Engels' original drawings, musical 
notations, etc., are reproduced in the letters. 
Letters written in a number of languages are printed in the 
original with a word-for-word translation in the footnotes. Words 
underlined by the author in the manuscripts are given in italics. 
Headings of articles and the dates and places of letters, provided 
by the editors, where the author's own are missing, are given in 
square brackets. The asterisks indicate footnotes by the author; the 

=====第22页=====
XXIV Preface 
editors' footnotes are indicated by index letters, and reference 
notes by superior numbers. 
This volume was compiled by Lev Golman and Vladimir Sazonov 
of the Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the Central Committee of 
the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, who also prepared the 
preface and the greater part of the notes. Some notes, the name 
index, the index of quoted and mentioned literature and of period­
icals,  were prepared by Albina Gridchina. Yuri Vasin also assisted 
in the arrangement of the reference material. 
All the articles, letters, etc., in this volume have been translated 
from the German, unless otherwise stated. 
The prose was translated by Jack Cohen, Clemens Dutt, Barbara 
Ruhemann and Christopher Upward, and edited by Frida Knight, 
Margaret Mynatt and Alick West (Lawrence & Wishart Ltd.), 
Kate Cook and Richard Dixon (Progress Publishers). The poems 
were translated by Alex Miller in consultation with Diana Miller 
and Victor Schnittke, except for The Single  Combat  of Eteocles  and 
Polynices  translated from Engels' Greek composition by Robert 
Browning. 
The volume was prepared for the press by the editors Lydia 
Belyakova, Yelena Chistyakova, Victor Schnittke and Lyudgarda 
Zubrilova, and the assistant-editor Tatyana Butkova, for Progress 
Publishers, and Irene Bach, scientific editor, for the Institute of 
Marxism-Leninism. 

=====第23页=====
FREDERICK ENGELS 
WORKS 
August 1838-December 1842 

=====第24页=====

=====第25页=====
THE BEDOUIN1 
Now the bell rings, and suddenly 
The silken curtain swift ascends. 
And all in hushed expectancy 
Wait for the evening to commence. 
No Kotzebue commands the scene 
To set the merry audience roaring. 
No Schiller of the earnest mien 
Steps forth, his golden words outpouring. 
Sons of the desert, proud and free, 
Walk on to greet us, face to face; 
But pride is vanished utterly, 
And freedom lost without a trace. 
They jump at money's beck and call 
(As once that lad from dune to dune 
Bounded for joy). They're silent, all, 
Save one who sings a dirge-like tune. 
The audience, amazed and awed 
By what these acrobats can do, 
Applauds them, just as it applauds 
The trumperies of Kotzebue. 
Fleet nomads of the desert lands, 
You've braved the sun's fierce noontide rays 
Through harsh Morocco's burning sands, 
Through valleys where the date-palms sway. 

=====第26页=====
4 Frederick Engels 
And through the garden paradise 
Of Bled-el-Djerid once you swept. 
You turned your wits to bold forays. 
Your steeds to battle proudly stepped. 
You sat there, where moon lustres spill 
By rare springs in a palm-tree grove, 
And lovely lips with gracious skill 
A fairy-story garland wove. 
Sleeping in narrow tents you lay 
In love's warm arms, with dreams all round, 
Till sunrise ushered in the day 
And camels made their bellowing sound. 
They jump at money's beck and call, 
And not at Nature's primal urge. 
Their eyes are blank, they're silent, all, 
Except for one who sings a dirge. 
Printed according to the journal 
Published in English for the first 
time Written in the first half of September 
1838 
First published in the Bremisches Conver-
sationsblatt No. 40, September 16, 1838 

=====第27页=====
TO THE ENEMIES2 
Why can you never leave what's well alone 
And let a little honest striving 
Or well-meant words said in a kindly tone 
Do their good work among the living? 
To falsify what people really mean 
Is very easy to arrange. 
Bad in the good is all too quickly seen, 
But good to bad you'll never change. 
Or is it that you seriously expect 
To gain advantages by making light 
Of others' efforts? If you want respect, 
Then win respect in your own right. 
Use your own brains then; if you would succeed, 
Prepare to make the upward climb; 
Hanging behind those who are in the lead, 
Belittling them, you waste your time. 
Say, can you hope to do the courier wrong 
For whom you lay your spiteful snares? 
He carries news, so let him pass along 
As on his lawful way he fares. 
If truth he brings, truth shall indeed prevail, 
Transcending perfidy and fraud. 
The wise old saying hits it on the nail  — 
"Honesty is its own reward." 
Written about February 24, 1839 
First published in Der Bremer Stadtbote 
No. 4, February 24, 1839 
Signed: Theodor H. Printed according to the news­
paper Bremisches Unterhaltungsblatt 
No. 17, February 27, 1839 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第28页=====
BOOK WISDOM3 
He is not wise who from his reading draws 
Nothing but floods of useless erudition. 
For all his learning, life's mysterious laws 
Are a closed book beyond his comprehension. 
He who acquires a thorough textbook grounding 
In Botany, won't hear the grass that grows. 
Nor will he ever teach true understanding 
Who tells you all the dogma that he knows. 
Oh, no! The germ lies hid in man's own heart. 
Who seeks the art of life must look within. 
Burning the midnight oil will not impart 
The secret of emotion's discipline. 
The man is lost who hears his own heart's voice 
And spurns it, wilfully misapprehending. 
Of all your words so noble and so wise 
The most profound is human understanding. 
Written in March 1839 Printed according to the text given 
_. . .. , . . _ „ „ , , in Engels' letter to his sister Marie 
First published in Der Bremer Stadtbote j March 12 1839 
No. 8, March 24, 1839 
Published in English for the first 
Signed: Th. Hildebrandt time 

=====第29页=====
® * I * # tr a p I) 
für 
1839« fSl â t h Jti 49. 
LETTERS FROM WUPPERTAL 4 
I 
[Telegraph für Deutschland No. 49, March 1839] 
As is well known, people understand by this name, held in much 
ill-repute among the Friends of Light,5  the two towns of Elberfeld 
and Barmen, which stretch along the valley for a distance of 
nearly three hours' travel. The purple waves of the narrow river 
flow sometimes swiftly, sometimes sluggishly between smoky fac­
tory buildings and yarn-strewn bleaching-yards. Its bright red 
colour, however, is due not to some bloody battle, for the fighting 
here is waged only by theological pens and garrulous old women, 
usually over trifles, nor to shame for men's actions, although there 
is indeed enough cause for that, but simply and solely to the 
numerous dye-works using Turkey red. Coming from Düsseldorf, 
one enters the sacred region at Sonnborn; the muddy Wupper 
flows slowly by and, compared with the Rhine just left behind, its 
miserable appearance is very disappointing. The area is rather 
attractive: the not very high mountains, rising sometimes gently, 
sometimes steeply, and heavily wooded, march boldly into green 
meadows and in fine weather the blue sky reflected in the Wupper 
causes the red colour to disappear completely. After a bend round 
a cliff,  one sees the quaint towers of Elberfeld straight ahead (the 
humble houses are concealed behind gardens), and a few'minutes 
later one reaches the Zion of the obscurantists. Almost outside the 
town is the Catholic church; it stands there as if it has been 
expelled from the sacred walls. It is in Byzantine style, built very 
badly by a very inexperienced architect from a very good plan; the 
old Catholic church has been demolished to make room for the 
left wing, not yet built, of the Town Hall; only the tower remains 

=====第30页=====
8 Frederick Engels 
and serves the general good after a fashion, namely, as a prison. 
Immediately afterwards one comes to a large building, its roof 
supported by columns,3  but these columns are of a most remark­
able kind; they are Egyptian at the bottom, Doric in the middle, 
and Ionic at the top; moreover, for very sound reasons, they 
dispense with all superfluous accessories, such as a plinth and 
capitals. This building used to be called the museum, but the 
Muses kept away and there remained only a huge burden of debt 
so that not very long ago the building was sold by auction and 
became a casino, a name which adorns the bare façade, dispelling 
all reminders of the former poetic name. Incidentally, the building 
is so clumsily proportioned that at night it looks like a camel. Here 
begin the dull streets, devoid of all character; the fine new Town 
Hall, only half completed, is situated so awkwardly owing to lack 
of space that its front faces a narrow, ugly side street. Finally, one 
comes to the Wupper again, and a fine bridge shows that you are 
approaching Barmen, where at least more attention is paid to 
architectural beauty. As soon as you cross the bridge, everything 
assumes a more friendly character; large, massive houses tastefully 
built in modern style take the place of those mediocre Elberfeld 
buildings, which are neither old-fashioned nor modern, neither 
beautiful nor a caricature. New stone houses are springing up 
everywhere; the pavement ends and the street continues as a 
straight highway, built up on both sides. Between the houses one 
catches sight of the green bleaching-yards; the Wupper is still clear 
here,  and the closely approaching mountains with their lightly 
sketched outlines, and the manifold alternation of forests, 
meadows and gardens from which red roofs peep out everywhere, 
make the area increasingly attractive the farther one goes. Halfway 
along the avenue one sees the façade of the Lower Barmen 
church, set somewhat back; it is the valley's most beautiful 
building, very well constructed in the noblest Byzantine style. But 
soon the pavement begins again and the grey slate houses jostle 
one another. There is, however, far more variety here than in 
Elberfeld, for the monotony is broken by a fresh bleaching-yard 
here,  a house in modern style there, a stretch of the river or a row 
of gardens lining the street. All this leaves one in doubt whether 
to regard Barmen as a town or a mere conglomeration of all kinds 
of buildings; it is, indeed, just a combination of many small 
districts held together by the bond of municipal institutions. The 
most important of these districts are: Gemarke, the ancient centre 
a From Goethe's poem Mignon. — Ed. 

=====第31页=====
Letters from Wuppertal 9 
of the Reformed faith; Lower Barmen in the direction of 
Elberfeld, not far from Wupperfeld and above Gemarke; farther 
on Rittershausen, which has Wichlinghausen on the left, and 
Hekinghausen with the remarkably picturesque Rauhental on the 
right. These are all inhabited by Lutherans of both churches 6; the 
Catholics—at most two or three thousand — are scattered 
throughout the valley. After Rittershausen, the traveller at last 
leaves behind the Berg area and goes through the turnpike to 
enter the Old-Prussian Westphalian region. 
This is the outward appearance of the valley which in general, 
apart from the gloomy streets of Elberfeld, makes a very pleasant 
impression; but the latter, as experience shows, is lost on the 
inhabitants. There is no trace here of the wholesome, vigorous life 
of the people that exists almost everywhere in Germany. True, at 
first glance it seems otherwise, for every evening you can hear 
merry fellows strolling through the streets singing their songs, but 
they are the most vulgar, obscene songs that ever came from 
drunken mouths; one never hears any of the folk-songs which are 
so familiar throughout Germany and of which we have every right 
to be proud. All the ale-houses are full to overflowing, especially 
on Saturday and Sunday, and when they close at about eleven 
o'clock, the drunks pour out of them and generally sleep off their 
intoxication in the gutter. The most degraded of these men are 
those known as Karrenbinder, totally demoralised people, with no 
fixed abode or definite employment, who crawl out of their 
refuges, haystacks, stables, etc., at dawn, if they have not spent the 
night on a dungheap or on a staircase. By restricting the 
previously indefinite numbers of ale-houses, the authorities have 
now to some extent curbed this annoyance. 
[Telegraph für Deutschland No. 50, March 1839] 
The reasons for this state of affairs are perfectly clear. First and 
foremost, factory work is largely responsible. Work in low rooms 
where people breathe in more coal fumes and dust than ox­
ygen— and in the majority of cases beginning already at the age 
of six—is bound to deprive them of all strength and joy in life. 
The weavers, who have individual looms in their homes, sit bent 
over them from morning till night, and desiccate their spinal 
marrow in front of a hot stove. Those who do not fall prey to 
mysticism are ruined by drunkenness. This mysticism, in the crude 
and repellent form in which it prevails there, inevitably produces 
the opposite extreme, with the result that in the main the people 
2-384 

=====第32页=====
10 Frederick Engels 
there consist only of the "decent" ones (which is what the mystics 
are called) and the dissolute  riff-raff.  This division into two hostile 
groups, irrespective of their nature, is capable by itself of destroy­
ing the development of any popular spirit, and indeed what hope 
is there in a place where even the disappearance of one of the 
groups would be of no avail, since the members of both are 
equally consumptive? The few healthy people to be found there 
are almost exclusively joiners or other craftsmen, all of whom have 
come from other regions. Robust people can also be found among 
the local-born leather-workers, but three years of such a life 
suffice to ruin them physically and mentally: three out of five die 
from consumption, and it is all due to drinking spirits. But this 
would not have assumed such horrifying proportions if the 
factories were not operated in such a reckless way by the 
proprietors and if mysticism did not take the form it does and did 
not threaten to gain an increasing hold. Terrible poverty prevails 
among the lower classes, particularly the factory workers in 
Wuppertal; syphilis and lung diseases are so widespread as to be 
barely credible; in Elberfeld alone, out of 2,500 children of 
school age 1,200 are deprived of education and grow up in the 
factories—merely so that the manufacturer need not pay the 
adults, whose place they take, twice the wage he pays a child. But 
the wealthy manufacturers have a flexible conscience, and causing 
the death of one child more or one less does not doom a pietist's 
soul to hell, especially if he goes to church twice every Sunday. For 
it is a fact that the pietists among the factory owners treat their 
workers worst of all; they use every possible means to reduce the 
workers' wages on the pretext of depriving them of the opportuni­
ty to get drunk, yet at the election of preachers they are always the 
first to bribe their people. 
In the lower social strata mysticism is most prevalent among the 
craftsmen (I do not include manufacturers here). It is a pitiful 
sight to see one of them in the street, a bent figure in a very long 
frock-coat, with his hair parted in the pietist fashion. But anyone 
who really wants to get to know this breed should visit the 
workshop of a pious blacksmith or boot-maker. There sits the 
master craftsman, on his right the Bible, on his left—very often at 
any rate—a bottle of schnapps. Not much is done in the way of 
work; the master almost always reads the Bible, occasionally 
knocks back a glass and sometimes joins the choir of journeymen 
singing a hymn; but the chief occupation is always damning one's 
neighbour. One sees that the tendency here is the same as 
everywhere else.7 Their proselytising zeal is not without fruit. In 

=====第33页=====
Letters from Wuppertal 11 
particular, many godless drunkards, etc., are converted, mostly in 
a miraculous way. But this is not surprising; these proselytes are 
all enervated, spiritless people, and persuading them is a mere 
bagatelle; they become converted, allow themselves to be moved to 
tears several times a week, and secretly continue their old way of 
life. Some years ago all this business suddenly came to light, to the 
horror of all the hypocrites. An American speculator turned up 
calling himself Pastor Jürgens; he preached several times attract­
ing large crowds, for most people imagined that being an 
American he must be dark-skinned or even black. How amazed 
they were that he was not merely white but preached in such a 
way that he had the whole church in tears; incidentally, the reason 
for this was that he himself began to whimper when all other 
means of moving his audience had failed. The believers were 
unanimous in their wonder; true, there was some opposition from 
a few sensible people, but they were simply decried as godless. 
Soon Jürgens began to organise secret gatherings; he received rich 
gifts from his prominent friends and lived in clover. His sermons 
attracted larger crowds than any others, his secret gatherings were 
filled to overflowing, his every utterance made both men and 
women weep. All were now convinced that he was at the very least 
a demi-prophet and would build a new Jerusalem, until one day 
the fun came to an end. What was going on at his secret 
gatherings suddenly came to light; Herr Jürgens was arrested and 
spent a few years doing penance for his piety, while under 
investigation in Hamm. Later he was released, after promising to 
make amends, and sent back to America. It also became known 
that he had already practised his tricks in America, for which he 
had been deported, and in order not to get out of practice had 
given a rehearsal in Westphalia, where, owing to the leniency, or 
rather the weakness, of the authorities, he had been freed 
without further inquiries and had finally crowned his dissolute life 
by another repetition in Elberfeld. When it was revealed what had 
actually taken place at the gatherings of this noble creature, 
everyone rose up against him, and no one wanted to have 
anything to do with him; everyone turned away from him, from 
Lebanon to the Dead Sea, that is to say, from Mount Rittershaus 
to the weir at Sonnborn on the Wupper. 
[Telegraph für Deutschland No. 51, March 1839] 
But the real centre of all pietism and mysticism is the Reformed 
community in Elberfeld. From the early days it was marked by a 
2* 

=====第34页=====
12 Frederick Engels 
strict Calvinist spirit, which in recent years owing to the appoint­
ment of extremely bigoted preachers — at present four of them 
officiate there — has developed into the most savage intolerance 
and falls little short of the papist spirit. Regular trials of heretics 
take place at the meetings; the behaviour of anyone who fails to 
attend the meetings is reviewed; they say: so and so reads novels, 
it is true the title-page states that it is a Christian novel, but Pastor 
Krummacher has said that novels are godless books; or so and so 
seems to be a God-fearing man, but the day before yesterday he 
was seen at a concert—and they wring their hands in horror at 
the abominable sin. And if a preacher is reputed to be a rationalist 
(by this they mean anyone whose opinion differs in the slightest 
from theirs), he is taken to task and carefully watched to see 
whether his frock-coat is perfectly black and his trousers of the 
orthodox colour; woe to him if he allows himself to be seen in a 
frock-coat with a bluish tinge or wearing a rationalist waistcoat! If 
someone turns out not to believe in predestination, they say at 
once:  he is almost as bad as a Lutheran, a Lutheran is little better 
than a Catholic, and Catholics and idolaters are damned by their 
very nature. But what sort of people are they who talk in this way? 
Ignorant folk who hardly know whether the Bible was written in 
Chinese, Hebrew or Greek, and who judge everything, whether 
relevant or not, from the words of a preacher who has been 
recognised for all time as orthodox. 
This spirit had existed ever since the Reformation gained the 
upper hand here, but it remained unnoticed until the preacher 
G. D. Krummacher, who died a few years ago, began to foster it in 
precisely this community. Soon mysticism was in full bloom, but 
Krummacher died before the fruit ripened; this occurred only 
after his nephew, Dr. Friedrich Wilhelm Krummacher, had de­
veloped and formulated the doctrine in such a strict form that one 
is at a loss whether to regard the whole thing as nonsense or 
blasphemy. Now the fruit has ripened, but no one knows how to 
pluck it and so in time it will inevitably fall off miserably rotten. 
Gottfried Daniel Krummacher, brother of the Dr. F. A. Krum­
macher who was well known for his parables in Bremen, died 
about three years ago in Elberfeld after a long period of office. 
When over twenty years ago a preacher in Barmen taught 
predestination from his pulpit in a less strict form than Krum­
macher, the congregation began smoking in the church, created a 
disturbance and prevented him from preaching on the pretext 
that such a heretical sermon was no sermon at all, so that the 
authorities were compelled to intervene. Krummacher then wrote 

=====第35页=====
Letters from Wuppertal 13 
a dreadfully rude letter to the Barmen magistracy, such as 
Gregory VII might have written to Henry IV,8 demanding that 
the bigots should not be touched, since they were only defending 
their beloved Gospel. He also preached a sermon on the same 
lines,  but he was only ridiculed. All this is characteristic of his 
frame of mind, which he preserved to his dying day. Moreover, he 
was a person of such peculiar habits that thousands of anecdotes 
were told of him, judging by which he should be regarded either 
as a strange eccentric or an exceptionally rude individual. 
Dr. Friedrich Wilhelm Krummacher is a man of about forty, 
tall, strong, with an impressive figure, but since he settled in 
Elberfeld his circumference has noticeably increased. He has a 
very peculiar way of dressing his hair, which is imitated by all his 
supporters. Who knows, some day it may become the fashion 
to wear one's hair à la Krummacher, but such a fashion 
would surpass all preceding ones, even powdered wigs, in lack 
of taste. 
As a student he was involved in the demagogy of the gymnastic 
associations, composed freedom songs, carried a banner at the 
Wartburg festival, 9 and delivered a speech which is said to have 
made a great impression. He still frequently recalls those dashing 
times from the pulpit, saying: when I was still among the Hittites 
and Canaanites. Later the Reformed community in Barmen chose 
him for their pastor and his real reputation dates from this 
period. He had hardly been appointed before he caused a split by 
his doctrine of strict predestination, not only between Lutherans 
and Reformists, but also among the latter, between the strict and 
moderate supporters of predestination. On one occasion an old 
orthodox Lutheran coming back a little tipsy from seeing friends 
had to cross a broken-down bridge. That seemed to him somewhat 
dangerous in his condition and he began to reflect: if you get over 
safely it will be all right, but if not you will fall into the Wupper 
and then the Reformists will say that this was as it should be; but 
that is not as it should be. So he turned back, looked for a shallow 
place and then waded across waist-deep, with the blissful feeling 
that he had robbed the Reformists of a triumph. 
When a vacancy occurred in Elberfeld, Krummacher was chosen 
for it, and immediately all dissension ceased in Barmen, whereas 
in Elberfeld it became still fiercer. Already Krummacher's inau­
gural sermon made some people angry and delighted others; the 
dissension continued to increase, particularly because soon every 
preacher, although they all held the same views, formed his own 
party consisting of his congregation alone. Later people got bored 

=====第36页=====
14 Frederick Engels 
with the business and the eternal shouting of I am for Krum-
macher, I am for Kohl, etc., ceased, not through love of peace, but 
because the parties became more and more distinct from one 
another. 
Krummacher is undeniably a man of excellent rhetorical, and 
also poetic, talent; his sermons are never boring, the train of 
thought is confident and natural; his strength lies primarily in 
painting gloomy pictures — his description of hell is always new 
and bold no matter how often it occurs — and in antitheses. On 
the other hand, he very often resorts to biblical phraseology and 
the images found in the latter, which, although his use of them is 
always ingenious, are bound in the end to be repetitive; in­
terspersed with them one finds an extremely prosaic picture from 
daily life or a story based on his own life-history and his most 
insignificant experiences. He drags all this into the pulpit, whether 
appropriate or not; not long ago he regaled his reverent audience 
with two sermons about a journey to Württemberg and Switzer­
land, in which he spoke of his four victorious disputes with Paulus 
in Heidelberg and Strauss in Tübingen, naturally quite differently 
from Strauss' account of the matter in a letter.—In some 
passages his declamation is very good, and his powerful, explicit 
gesticulations are often entirely appropriate, but at times incredi­
bly affected and lacking in taste. Then he thrashes about in the 
pulpit, bends over all sides, bangs his fist on the edge, stamps like 
a cavalry horse, and shouts so that the windows resound and 
people in the street tremble. Then the congregation begins to sob; 
first the young girls weep, then the old women join in with a 
heart-rending soprano and the cacophony is completed by the 
wailing of the enfeebled drunken pietists, who would be thrilled to 
the marrow by his words if they still had any marrow in their 
bones;  and through all this uproar Krummacher's powerful voice 
rings out pronouncing before the whole congregation innumerable 
sentences of damnation, or describing diabolical scenes. 
[Telegraph für Deutschland No. 52, March 1839] 
And what a doctrine this is! It is impossible to understand how 
anyone can believe in such things, which are in most direct 
contradiction to reason and the Bible. Nevertheless, Krummacher 
has formulated the doctrine so sharply, following and firmly 
adhering to all its consequences, that nothing can be refuted once 
the basis is accepted, namely, the inability of man on his own to 

=====第37页=====
Letters from Wuppertal 15 
desire what is good, let alone do it. Hence follows the need for 
this ability to come from outside, and since man cannot even 
desire what is good, God has to press this ability on him. Owing to 
God's free will, it follows that this ability is allotted arbitrarily, and 
this also, at least apparently, is supported by the Scriptures. — The 
entire doctrine is based on such pretence of logic; the few who are 
chosen will, nolentes, volentes, be saved, the rest damned for ever. 
"For ever? — Yes, for ever!!" (Krummacher.) Further, the Scrip­
tures say: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me.1 But the 
heathen cannot come to the Father by Christ, because they do not 
know Christ, so they all exist merely to fill up  hell.  — Among 
Christians, many are called but few are chosen; but the many who 
are called are called only for the sake of appearance, and God 
took care not to call them so loudly that they obeyed him; all this 
to the glory of God and in order that they should not be forgiven. 
It is also written: for the wise men of this world the wisdom of 
God is foolishnessb; the mystics regard this as an order to make 
their creed quite meaningless so that this statement may be 
fulfilled. How all this fits in with the teaching of the apostles who 
speak of rational worship of God and the rational milk of the 
Gospel is a secret beyond human understanding. 
Such doctrines spoil all Krummacher's sermons; the only ones in 
which they are not so prominent are the passages where he speaks 
of the contradiction between earthly riches and the humility of 
Christ, or between the arrogance of earthly rulers and the pride of 
God. A note of his former demagogy very often breaks through 
here as well, and if he did not speak in such general terms the 
government would not pass over his sermons in silence. 
The aesthetic value of his sermons is appreciated only by very 
few in Elberfeld; for, compared with his three colleagues, nearly 
all of whom have an equally large congregation, he appears as 
figure one, and the others as mere noughts who serve only to 
enhance his value. The oldest of these noughts is called Kohl, 
which at the same time characterises his sermons.c The second is 
Hermann, no descendant of the Hermann,10 to whom a monu­
ment is now being erected which should survive history and 
Tacitus. The third is Ball, namely, a ball for Krummacher to play 
with. All three are highly orthodox and imitate the worst aspects 
a John 14:6.— Ed. 
b Cf. 1 Corinthians 3:19.— Ed. 
c A pun: "Kohl" is a surname but also a German word meaning rubbish.— Ed. 

=====第38页=====
16 Frederick Engels 
of Krummacher in their sermons. The Lutheran pastors in 
Elberfeld are Sander and Hülsmann, who used to be deadly 
enemies, when the former was still in Wichlinghausen and became 
involved in the famous quarrel with Hülsmann in Dahle, now in 
Lennep, the brother of his present colleague. In their present 
position, they behave with courtesy to each other, but the pietists 
try to revive the dissension between them by constantly accusing 
Hülsmann of all kinds of misdemeanours against Sander. The 
third in this company is Döring, whose absent-mindedness is most 
odd; he is incapable of uttering three sentences with a connected 
train of thought, but he can make three parts of a sermon into 
four by repeating one of them word for word without being at all 
aware of it. Probatum est. His poems will be dealt with later. 
The Barmen preachers differ little from one another; all are 
strictly orthodox, with a greater or lesser admixture of pietism. 
Only Stier in Wichlinghausen is worthy of some attention. It is said 
that Jean Paul knew him as a boy and discovered excellent talents 
in him. Stier held office of pastor in Frankleben near Halle, and 
during this period he published several writings in prose and 
verse, an improved version of the Lutheran catechism, a substitute 
for it, and a small book as an aid to its study for dull-witted 
teachers, and also a booklet on the lack of hymn books in the 
province of Saxony, which was particularly praised by the 
Evangelische Kirchen-Zeitung 11 and did at least contain more ratio­
nal views on church songs than those which can be heard in blessed 
Wuppertal, although it also has many unfounded judgments. His 
poems are extremely boring; he also distinguished himself by 
making some of Schiller's pagan poems acceptable to the or­
thodox. For example, lines from Die Götter Griechenlands he 
revised as follows: 
When vain Earth you held in domination 
With Sin's treacherous and deceitful bond, 
Leading many a mortal generation, 
Hollow Idols of a mythic land! 
When your sinful cult still scintillated, 
Things were different, different then by far! 
When with flowers your shrines were decorated, 
Venus Amathusia! a 
Really very ingenious, truly mystical indeed! For six months now 
Stier has been in Wichlinghausen in place of Sander, but so far he 
has not enriched Barmen literature. 
a R. Stier, Christliche Gedichte, S. 190-91.—  Ed. 

=====第39页=====
Letters from Wuppertal 17 
Langenberg, a little place near Elberfeld, by its whole character 
still belongs to Wuppertal. The same industry as there, the same 
spirit of pietism. Emil Krummacher, brother of Friedrich Wilhelm, 
has his post there; he is not such a strict believer in predestination 
as his brother, but imitates him very much, as the following 
passage from his last Christmas sermon shows: 
"With our earthly bodies we are still sitting here on wooden benches, but our 
spirits together with millions of believers are borne aloft to the sacred heights and, 
after observing the rejoicing of the heavenly hosts, they go down to lowly 
Bethlehem. And what do they see there? First of all, a poor stable, and in the poor, 
poor stable a poor manger, and in the poor manger poor, poor hay and straw, and 
on the poor, poor hay and straw lies like the poor child of a beggar, in poor 
swaddling clothes, the rich Lord of the world." 
Something should now be said about the mission-house, but the 
book Harfenklänge, by an ex-missionary, a which has already been 
mentioned on the pages of this journal,b is sufficient testimony to 
the spirit that prevails there.12  Incidentally, the inspector of this 
mission-house, Dr. Richter, is a learned man, an eminent orientalist 
and naturalist, and has also published an Erklärte Hausbibel. 
Such are the activities of the pietists in Wuppertal; it is difficult 
to imagine that such things can still take place in our day; 
however, it looks as though even this rock of old obscurantism will 
not be able to withstand the surging flood of time any longer; the 
sand will be washed away and the rock will collapse with a great 
fall. 
II 
[Telegraph für Deutschland No. 57, April 1839] 
It goes without saying that in an area so full of pietist activities 
this spirit, spreading in all directions, pervades and corrupts every 
single aspect of life. It exerts its chief influence on the education 
system, above all on the elementary schools. Part of them are 
wholly controlled by the pietists; these are the church schools, of 
which each community has one. The other elementary schools, 
over which the civil administration has greater influence, enjoy 
more freedom, although they, too, are under the supervision of 
the clerical school inspectors. Here too the retarding effect of 
mysticism is very obvious; for whereas the church schools still 
a J. Ch. F. Winkler.— Ed. 
b Telegraph für Deutschland. — Ed. 

=====第40页=====
18 Frederick Engels 
drum nothing but the catechism into their pupils, apart from 
reading, writing and arithmetic, as of old under the Elector Karl 
Theodor of blessed memory, in the other schools the rudiments of 
some sciences are taught, and also a little French, with the result 
that after leaving school many of the pupils try to continue their 
education. These schools are rapidly developing and since the 
Prussian Government came to office, 13 they have advanced far 
ahead of the church schools, behind which they used to lag 
considerably. The church schools, however, have a much greater 
attendance because they are far cheaper, and many parents still 
send their children to them partly out of an attachment to 
religion, partly because they consider that intellectual progress of 
the children gives worldliness the upper hand. 
Wuppertal maintains three high schools: the municipal school in 
Barmen, the modern secondary school [Realschule] in Elberfeld, 
and the grammar school in the same city. 
The Barmen municipal school, which is very poorly financed 
and therefore very badly staffed, nevertheless does everything in 
its power. It is wholly in the hands of a limited, niggardly 
governing body which in most cases also selects only pietists as 
teachers. The headmaster is also not averse to this trend, but is 
guided by firm principles in discharging his duties and manages 
very skilfully to keep every teacher in his place. Next to him comes 
Herr Johann Jakob Ewich, who can teach well from a good 
textbook and in history teaching is a zealous supporter of the 
Nösselt system of anecdotes. He is the author of many pedagogical 
works of which the greatest, i.e., in size, is entitled Human, 
published in Wesel by Bagel, two volumes, 40 printed sheets, price 
1 Reichstaler. They are all full of lofty ideas, pious wishes and 
impracticable proposals. It is said that in practice his teaching lags 
far behind his beautiful theory. 
Dr. Philipp Schiff lin, the second senior teacher, is the most 
efficient teacher in the school. Probably no one in Germany has 
delved so deeply into the grammatical structure of modern French 
as he has. He took as his starting point, not the old Romance 
language, but the classical language of the last century, particularly 
that of Voltaire, and went on from there to the style of the most 
modern authors. The results of his research are contained in his 
Anleitung zur Erlernung der französischen Sprache, in drei Cursen, of 
which the first and second courses have already appeared in 
several editions, and the third will be out by Easter. Without 
doubt, next to Knebel's, this is the best textbook on the French 
language which we possess; it met with universal approval as soon 

=====第41页=====
Letters from Wuppertal 19 
as the first course appeared and already enjoys an almost 
unprecedented circulation throughout Germany and even as far as 
Hungary and the Baltic provinces of Russia. 
The remaining teachers are young graduates, some of whom 
have been excellently trained, while others are full of all sorts of 
jumbled knowledge. The best of these young teachers was Herr 
Köster, a friend of Freiligrath; an annual report contains his 
outline of poetics, from which he has totally excluded didactic 
poetry, and put the classes usually allotted to it under the epic or 
lyric;  this article testified to his insight and clarity. 14 He was invited 
to Düsseldorf, and since the members of the governing body knew 
him as being opposed to every kind of pietism, they very willingly 
released him. The very opposite of him is another teacher 3 who, 
when asked by a fourth-form pupil who Goethe was, replied: "an 
atheist". 
The Elberfeld modern secondary school is very well financed 
and can therefore select better teachers and arrange a fuller 
curriculum. On the other hand, it is addicted to that horrible 
system of filling up exercise books which can make a pupil 
dull-witted in six months. Incidentally, the administration is little 
in evidence: the headmasterb  is away half the year and proves his 
presence only by excessive severity. Linked with the modern 
secondary school is a trade school where the pupils spend half 
their lives scribbling away. Of the teachers one must mention Dr. 
Kruse who spent six weeks in England and wrote a little work on 
English pronunciation which is remarkable for being completely 
unusable; the pupils have a very bad reputation and were the 
cause of Diesterweg's complaints about the Elberfeld youth. 
The Elberfeld grammar school is in very straitened cir­
cumstances, but is recognised as one of the best in the Prussian 
state.  It is the property of the Reformed community, but suffers 
little from the latter's mysticism, since the preachers are not 
interested in it and the school inspectors have no understanding of 
grammar school affairs; but it has to suffer all the more because 
of their stinginess. These gentlemen have not the slightest idea of 
the advantages of the Prussian grammar school education; they try 
to provide the modern secondary school with everything—money 
and pupils — and at the same time reproach the grammar school 
for being unable to meet its expenditure out of school fees. 
Negotiations are now taking place for the government, which is 
a Rudolf Riepe .— Ed. 
b P. K. N. Egen.— Ed. 

=====第42页=====
20 Frederick Engels 
very concerned in the matter, to take over the grammar school. If 
this does not happen, it will have to close down in a few years' 
time for lack of funds. The selection of teachers is now also in the 
hands of the school inspectors, people capable, it is true, of 
making very accurate entries in a ledger, but with no conception at 
all of Greek, Latin or mathematics. Their guiding principle in 
selection is as follows: it is better to choose a mediocre Reformist 
than an efficient Lutheran or, worse still, a Catholic. But as there 
are far more Lutherans than Reformists among the Prussian 
philologists, they have hardly ever been able to apply this 
principle. 
Dr. Hantschke, a royal professor and temporary headmaster, 
comes from Luckau in Lausitz, writes poetry and prose in 
Ciceronian Latin and is also the author of a number of sermons, 
works on education and a textbook for the study of Hebrew. He 
would have been made permanent headmaster long ago if he were 
not a Lutheran and if the school inspectorate were less miserly. 
Dr. Eichhoff,  the second senior teacher, in conjunction with his 
junior colleague, Dr. Beltz, wrote a Latin grammar which, how­
ever, was not very well reviewed by F. Haase in the Allgemeine 
Literatur-Zeitung. 15 His best subject is Greek. 
Dr. Clausen, the third senior teacher, is, undoubtedly, the most 
capable man in the entire school, with an expert knowledge in all 
spheres of learning, and outstanding in history and literature. His 
lectures have a rare charm; he is the only one who can arouse a 
feeling for poetry among the pupils, a feeling which would 
otherwise be bound to perish miserably among the philistines of 
Wuppertal. As far as I know, his only written work is a thesis in an 
annual report, "Pindaros der Lyriker", which won him a high 
reputation among grammar school teachers in Prussia and beyond 
her borders. 16 It did not, of course, reach the book market. 
These three schools were not founded until 1820; previously 
Elberfeld and Barmen had one Rektoratsschule 17 each and numerous 
private institutions which could not provide an adequate educa­
tion. Their influence can still be felt in the Barmen merchants of 
the older generation. Not a trace of education; anyone who plays 
whist and billiards, who can talk a little about politics and pay a 
pretty compliment is regarded as an educated man in Barmen and 
Elberfeld. The life these people lead is terrible, yet they are so 
satisfied with it; in the daytime they immerse themselves in their 
accounts with a passion and interest that is hard to believe; in the 
evening at an appointed hour they turn up at social gatherings 
where they play cards, talk politics and smoke, and then leave for 

=====第43页=====
Letters from Wuppertal 21 
home at the stroke of nine. So they live day in, day out, with never 
a change, and woe to him who interferes with their routine; he 
can be sure of most ungracious treatment in all the best 
houses.—Fathers zealously bring up their sons along these lines, 
sons who show every promise of following in their fathers' 
footsteps. The topics of conversation are pretty monotonous: 
Barmen people talk more about horses, Elberfeld people about 
dogs;  and when things are at their height there may also be 
appraisals of fair ladies or chat about business matters, and that is 
all. Once every half a century they also talk about literature, by 
which they mean Paul de Kock, Marryat, Tromlitz, Nestroy and 
their like. In politics they are all good Prussians, because they are 
under Prussian rule and a priori very much against liberalism, but 
all this is only for as long as it suits His Majesty to preserve the 
Napoleonic Code, for all patriotism would disappear with its 
abolition. No one knows anything about the literary significance of 
Young Germany; it is regarded as a secret alliance, something like 
demagogues, under the chairmanship of Messrs. Heine, Gutzkow, 
and Mundt. 18 Some of the upper-class youth have probably read a 
little Heine, perhaps the Reisebilder, omitting the poems in it, or 
the Denunziant, 3 but they have only a hazy notion of the rest from 
the mouths of pastors or officials. Freiligrath is known personally 
to most of them and has the reputation of being a good fellow. 
When he came to Barmen he was deluged with visits from these 
green noblemen (as he calls the young merchants); however, he 
very soon realised what they were like and kept away from them; 
but they pursued him, praised his poems and his wine, and did 
their utmost to get on close terms with a man who had something 
in print, because for these people a poet is nothing, but an author 
whose works have been printed is everything. Gradually Freili­
grath ceased to associate with these people and now meets only a 
few, since Roster left Barmen. Freiligrath's employers 19 in their 
precarious situation have always behaved in a decent and friendly 
manner towards him; surprisingly he is an extremely accurate and 
diligent office worker. It would be quite superfluous to speak of 
his poetic achievements after Dingelstedt in the Jahrbuch der 
Literatur and Carrière in the Berlin Jahrbücher have given such an 
accurate assessment of him. 20 It seems to me, however, that 
neither of them has paid sufficient attention to the fact that 
however far afield his thoughts may roam, he is still extremely 
attached to his homeland. This can be seen from his frequent 
a H. Heine, Salon, Preface to Vol.  3.—  Ed. 

=====第44页=====
22 Frederick Engels 
allusions to German folk-tales, e.g., the Unkenkönigin (p. 54), 
Snewittchen 21 (p. 87), and others to which (p. 157) an entire poem 
(Im Walde) is devoted, from his imitation of Uhland (the Edelfalk, 
p. 82, Die Schreinergesellen, p. 85; the first of the Zwei  Feldherrngräber 
also reminds one of Uhland, but only to his advantage), then Die 
Auswanderer and, above all, his incomparable Prinz Eugen. One 
must pay more attention to these few points in his poetry the 
farther Freiligrath strays in the opposite direction. A deep insight 
into the state of his feelings is afforded by Der ausgewanderte 
Dichter, particularly the excerpts published in the MorgenblatP 2; 
here he already realises that he cannot feel at home in distant 
parts unless he has his roots in true German poetry. 
[Telegraph für Deutschland No. 59, April 1839] 
Journalism occupies the most important place in Wuppertal 
literature proper. At the top is the Elberfelder Zeitung edited by Dr. 
Martin Runkel, which under his perspicacious guidance won 
for itself a considerable and well-deserved reputation. He took 
over the editorship when two newspapers, the Allgemeine and the 
Provinzialzeitung, were merged; the newspaper came into being 
under somewhat unfavourable auspices; the Barmer Zeitung com­
peted with it, but thanks to his efforts to get his own corre­
spondents and to his leading articles Runkel gradually made 
the Elberfelder Zeitung one of the main newspapers in the Prussian 
state.  True, in Elberfeld, where only a few people read the leading 
articles, the newspaper met with little recognition, but it received 
a much greater welcome elsewhere, which the decline of the 
Preussische Staats-Zeitung may have helped to bring about. The 
literary supplement, the Intelligenzblatt, does not rise above the 
usual level. The Banner Zeitung, the publisher, editors and censors 
of which have frequently changed, is at present under the 
guidance of H. Püttmann, who from time to time writes reviews in 
the Abend-Zeitung. He would very much like to improve the 
newspaper, but his hands are tied by the well-justified parsimony 
of the publisher. Nor does the feature page with some of his 
poems, reviews or extracts from larger writings provide a remedy. 
The newspaper's companion, the Wuppertaler Lesekreis, derives its 
material almost exclusively from Lewald's Europa. In addition, 
there is also the Elberfeld Täglicher Anzeiger along with the 
Fremdenblatt —a product of the Dorfzeitung, which is unrivalled for 
its heart-rending poems and bad jokes — and the Barmer Wochen-

=====第45页=====
Letters from Wuppertal 23 
Matt, an old nightcap, with pietist asses' ears sticking out constantly 
from its literary lion's skin. 
Of the other types of literature, the prose is of no value at all; if 
one takes away the theological or, rather, pietist works and a few 
booklets on the history of Barmen and Elberfeld, written very 
superficially, there is nothing left. But poetry is much cultivated in 
the "blessed valley" and a fair number of poets have taken up 
residence there. 
Wilhelm Langewiesche, a bookseller in Barmen and Iserlohn, 
writes under the name of W. Jemand 2; his main work is a didactic 
tragedy Der ewige Jude which is, of course, inferior to Mosen's 
treatment of the same subject. As a publisher, he is more 
important than his Wuppertal rivals, which is very easy, incidental­
ly, since the two of them, Hassel in Elberfeld and Steinhaus in 
Barmen, publish only genuinely pietist works. Freiligrath lives in 
his house. 
Karl August Döring, the preacher in Elberfeld, is the author of 
numerous prose and poetry works; to him Platen's words are 
applicable: "You are a river in full spate which no one can swim to 
the end."b 
He divides his poems into religious songs, odes and lyrics. 
Sometimes, by the middle of a poem he has forgotten the 
beginning and is carried away into most peculiar regions; from the 
Pacific islands with their missionaries to hell, and from the sighs of 
a contrite soul to the ice of the North Pole. 
Lieth, the headmaster of a girls' school in Elberfeld, is the 
author of poems for children; most of them are written in a now 
outmoded fashion and cannot bear comparison with the poems of 
Rückert, Gull and Hey, yet there are a few nice things to be found 
among them. 
Friedrich Ludwig Wülfing, indisputably the greatest Wuppertal 
poet, born in Barmen, is a man of unmistakable genius. Should 
you see a lanky individual, about forty-five years of age, wrapped 
in a long reddish-brown frock-coat half as old as its owner, above 
his shoulders a countenance that defies description, on his nose 
gold-rimmed spectacles through the lenses of which every glance 
from his lustrous eyes is refracted, his head crowned by a green 
cap, in his mouth a flower, in his hand a button which he has just 
twisted off his frock-coat — this is the Horace of Barmen. Day in, 
day out he walks on the Hardtberg hoping to come across a new 
a Jemand means "someone".— Ed. 
A. Platen, Der romantische Oedipus, Act III, Scene 4.— Ed. 

=====第46页=====
24 Frederick Engels 
rhyme or a new beloved. Until his thirtieth year this indefatigable 
man worshipped Pallas Athena, then fell into the hands of 
Aphrodite, who presented him with nine Dulcineas, one after the 
other; these are his Muses. Speak not of Goethe, who found a 
poetic aspect in everything, or of Petrarch, who embodied every 
glance, every word of his beloved in a sonnet— Wülfing leaves 
them far behind. Who counts the grains of sand beneath his 
beloved's feet? The great Wülfing. Who sings of Minchen (the Clio 
of the nine Muses), her stockings bespattered in a swampy 
meadow? No one but Wülfing. — His epigrams are masterpieces of 
the most eccentric, popular crudity. When his first wife died he 
wrote an announcement of her death which reduced all maidser­
vants to tears and an even finer elegy: "Wilhelmine—the most 
beautiful of all names!" Six weeks later he became betrothed 
again; and now he has a third wife. This ingenious man has new 
plans every day. When still in the full flowering of his poetic 
talent, he thought of becoming a button-maker, then a farmer, 
then a paper-merchant; finally he ended up in the haven of 
candle-making, so as to make his lamp shine in some way or other. 
His writings are like the sand on the sea-shore. 
Montanus Eremita, an anonymous Solingen writer, 23 should be 
included here as a neighbour and friend. He is the most poetical 
historiographer of the Berg area; his verses are less absurd than 
tedious and prosaic. 
Here, too, belongs Johann Pol, a pastor in Heedfeld near 
Iserlohn, who has written a slim volume of poems. 
Kings come from God and missionaries too, 
But Goethe the poet comes from mankind alone. 
This reflects the spirit of the entire book. But Pol is also a wit, 
for he says: "Poets are lamps, philosophers are the servants of 
truth."" And what imagination is shown by the two opening lines 
of his ballad Attila an der Marne. 
Like the monstrous avalanche, like sword and flint hard 
cutting all, 
Through the blazing towns and ruins whirls the Scourge 
of God on Gaul. 
He has also composed psalms, or rather combined fragments 
from the psalms of David. His greatest work is a song in praise of 
the quarrel between Hülsmann and Sander, written in a most 
a Engels is speaking ironically of Pol's wit; he is alluding to the internal rhymes 
in the German: "Die Dichter sind Lichter, die Philosophen sind der Wahrheit 
Zofen.  " — Ed. 

=====第47页=====
Letters from Wuppertal 25 
original way, in epigrams. The whole thing centres round the idea 
that the rationalists dared 
To slander and blaspheme against Lord God. 
Neither Voss nor Schlegel have ever ended a hexameter with 
such a perfect spondee. Pol is even better than Döring at grouping 
his poems: he divides them into "religious chants and songs and 
miscellaneous poems". 24 
F. W. Krug, candidate of theology, author of Poetische Erstlinge 
und prosaische Reliquien, and translator of a number of Dutch and 
French sermons, has also written a touching short novel 3 in the 
manner of Stilling in which, among other things, he presents new 
evidence supporting the Mosaic account of the creation. A delight­
ful book. 
In conclusion, I must also mention a clever young man who has 
the idea that since Freiligrath can be a business clerk and a poet 
simultaneously, he should be able to as well. It is to be hoped that 
German literature will soon be enriched by some of his short 
novels, which will not be inferior to the best; the only shortcom­
ings of which he can be accused are hackneyed treatment, 
ill-conceived design and careless style. I would willingly quote 
extracts from one of them, if decency did not forbid it, but soon 
perhaps a publisher will take pity on the great D.b (I dare not give 
his full name lest his wounded modesty leads him to sue me for 
libel) and publish his short novels. He also wants to be a close 
friend of Freiligrath. 
This just about covers the literary manifestations of the 
world-famous valley to which, perhaps, should be added a few 
wine-inspired geniuses who from time to time try their hand at 
rhyming, and whom I can warmly recommend to Dr. Duller as 
characters for a new novel. This whole region is submerged in a 
sea of pietism and philistinism, from which rise no beautiful, 
flower-covered islands, but only dry, bare cliffs or long sandbanks, 
among which Freiligrath wanders like a seaman off course. 
Written in March 1839 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the Published in English for the first 
Telegraph für Deutschland Nos. 49, 50, time 
51 and 52 for March and Nos. 57 and 
59 for April, 1839 
a F. W. Krug, Kämpfe und Siege des jungen Wahlheim oder Lebensbilder aus dem 
Reiche des Wahren, Guten und Schönen. — Ed. 
b Dürholt, a clerk in Barmen. See this volume, p. 427.— Ed. 

=====第48页=====
TO THE BREMEN COURIER 
Dear Bremen Courier, 
Please don't be offended 
If you've become the laughing-stock of town. 
Remember, friend, that folk have always tended 
To ridicule what's patently unsound. 
Your sunshine days have very nearly ended 
In the three months that you've been trotting round. 
Have you been saying things you didn't ought, 
To give yourself such food for afterthought? 
My poems cost little effort when I did them; 
The donkey work was almost wholly done. 
I took your articles and parodied them; 
The subject-matter came from you alone. 
Simply subtract the rhyme-schemes and the rhythm — 
The image that remains is all your own. 
Rage, if you like, at your respectful and 
Obedient servant, 
Theodor Hildebrand 
Written about April 27, 1839 Printed according to the news-
First published in the Bremisches Unterhai- ° " 
tungsblatt No. 34, April 27, 1839 Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第49页=====
[OPEN LETTER TO DR. RUNKEL] 
To Herr Dr. Runkel in Elberfeld 
Elberfeld, May 6th 
You have violently attacked me and my "Letters from Wupper­
tal" in your newspaper and accused me of deliberate distortion, 
ignorance of the conditions, personal abuse and even untruths. It 
does not matter to me that you call me a Young German, for I 
neither accept the charges you level against Young Literature nor 
have the honour of belonging to it. Up to now I have felt nothing 
but respect for you as a man of letters and journalist; I have even 
expressed my opinion to this effect in the second article, where I 
deliberately refrained from mentioning your poems in the 
Rheinisches Odeon 21 since I could not have praised them. Anyone 
can be accused of deliberate distortion, and this tends to be done 
wherever an account does not conform to the preconceived 
notions of the reader. Why do you not give a single example as 
evidence? As for ignorance of the conditions, I should have 
expected this reproach least of all did I not know what a 
meaningless expression this phrase has become, used everywhere 
for lack of anything better. I have possibly spent twice as much 
time as you in Wuppertal, have lived in Elberfeld and Barmen and 
have had the most favourable opportunity to observe closely the 
life of all social estates. 
Herr Runkel, I do not, as you accuse me of doing, make any 
claim to genius, but it would indeed require an extraordinarily 
dull intelligence not to acquire a knowledge of the conditions in 
such circumstances, especially if one makes the effort to do so. As 
for personal abuse — a preacher or a teacher is just as much a 
public figure as a writer, and you would surely not call a 

=====第50页=====
28 Frederick Engels 
description of his public actions personal abuse. Where have I 
spoken of private matters, or even of such as would require a 
mention of my name, where have I ridiculed such things? As for 
the alleged untruths, much as I would like to avoid coming to 
blows or even causing a sensation, I find myself compelled, in 
order not to compromise the Telegraph or my anonymous honour, 
to challenge you to point out a single one of the "multitude-  of 
untruths". To be honest, there are in fact two. Stier's adaptation is 
not printed word for word, and Herr Egen's travels are not that 
bad. a But please, now be so kind as to complete the clover  leaf! 
You say further that I have not shown a single bright side of the 
district. That is so; I have throughout acknowledged competence 
in individual cases (though I have not shown Herr Stier in his 
theological importance, which I truly regret), but in general I was 
unable to find any purely bright sides; and I await a description of 
the latter from you. Furthermore, it never occurred to me to say 
that the red Wupper becomes clear again in Barmen. That would 
be nonsense, or does the Wupper flow uphill? In conclusion I 
would ask you not to pass judgment before you have read the 
whole, and in future to quote Dante accurately or not at all; he 
does not say: qui si entra nell' eterno dolore, b but per me si va nell' 
eterno dolore 0 (Inferno, III, 2). 
The author of the Letters from Wuppertal 
Written on May 6, 1839 Printed according to the news-
First published in the Elberfelder Zeitung " " 
No. 127, May 9, 1839 Published in English for the first 
time 
a See this volume, p. 19.— Ed. 
Here is the gateway to eternal pain.— Ed. 
c Through me you pass into eternal pain (Dante, La Divina Commedia).— Ed. 

=====第51页=====
[F. W. KRUMMACHER'S SERMON ON JOSHUA] 28 
In a recent sermon in Elberfeld on Joshua 10:12-13, where 
Joshua bids the sun stand still, Krummacher advanced the inter­
esting thesis that pious Christians, the Elect, should not suppose 
from this passage that Joshua was here accommodating himself to 
the views of the people, but must believe that the earth stands still 
and the sun moves round it. In defence of this view he showed that it 
is expressed throughout the Bible. The fool's cap which the world 
will give them for that, they, the Elect, should cheerfully put in 
their pockets with the many others they have already re­
ceived.— We should be happy to receive a refutation of this sad 
anecdote, which comes to us from a reliable source. 
Written in May 1839 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the Published in English for the first 
Telegraph für Deutschland No. 84, time 
May 1839 

=====第52页=====
FROM ELBERFELD 
For some time there have been loud and bitter complaints about 
the deplorable power of scepticism; here and there one looked 
gloomily at the toppled edifice of the old faith, anxiously waiting 
for the clouds covering the sky of the future to break. With a 
similar feeling of melancholy I laid down the Lieder eines 
heimgegangenen Freundes; they are the songs of a dead man, a 
genuine Wuppertal Christian, recalling the happy time when one 
could still cherish a childlike belief in a doctrine whose contradic­
tions can now be counted on the fingers, when one burned with 
pious zeal against religious liberalism, a zeal at which people now 
smile or blush.— The very place of printing shows that these 
verses must not be judged by ordinary standards, that no brilliant 
thoughts, no unfettered soaring of a free spirit are to be found 
here;  indeed, it would be unfair to expect anything but a product 
of pietism. The only proper standard that can be applied to these 
poems is provided by earlier Wuppertal literature, about which I 
have already vented my irritation at length, 3 to allow one of its 
products for once to be judged from a different standpoint. And 
here it is undeniable that this book reveals progress. The poems, 
which appear to come from a layman, although not an uneducated 
one, are in their thought at least on the level of those of the 
preachers Döring and Pol; at times even a faint hint of romanti­
cism, as far as that can go together with the Calvinistic doctrine, is 
unmistakable. As regards form, they are undeniably the best that 
Wuppertal has produced so far; new or unusual rhymes are often 
See this volume, pp.  22-23.—  Ed. 

=====第53页=====
From Elberfeld 31 
used not without skill; the author even rises to the distich or the 
free ode, forms which are actually too elevated for him. Krum-
macher'sa influence is unmistakable; his phrases and metaphors 
are used everywhere. But when the poet sings: 
Pilgrim: Though lamb of Jesus' flock you be, 
No ornament of His I see 
On Thee, O lamb so still. 
Little Lamb: Oppressed, but only to arise, 
The lamb shall go to Paradise. 
Be silent, Pilgrim, be a lamb; 
Meek and low through gate may go, 
Be silent, pray, and be a lamb, 
this is no imitation, but Krummacher  himself!  Nevertheless one 
can find passages in these poems which are truly moving by their 
genuineness of feeling; but, alas, one can never forget that this 
feeling is for the most part morbid! And yet, even here one can 
see how fortifying and comforting a religion which has truly 
become a matter of the heart is, even in its saddest extremes. 
Dear reader, forgive me for presenting you with a book which 
can be of infinitely little interest to you; you were not born in 
Wuppertal, perchance you have never stood on its hills and seen 
the two towns b at your feet. But you too have a homeland and 
perhaps return to it with the same love as I, however ordinary it 
looks,  once you have vented your anger at its perversities. 
Written in the autumn of 1839 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the Published in English for the first 
Telegraph für Deutschland No. 178, time 
November 1839 
Signed: S. Oswald 
a Friedrich Wilhelm Krummacher.— Ed. 
Barmen and Elberfeld.— Ed. 

=====第54页=====
GERMAN VOLKSBUCHER* 
[Telegraph für Deutschland No. 186, November 1839] 
Is it not a great commendation for a book to be a popular book, 
a book for the German people? Yet this gives us the right to 
demand a great deal of such a book; it must satisfy all reasonable 
requirements and its value in every respect must be unquestion­
able.  The popular book has the task of cheering, reviving and 
entertaining the peasant when he returns home in the evening 
tired from his hard day's work, making him forget his toil, 
transforming his stony field into a fragrant rose garden; it has the 
task of turning the craftsman's workshop and the wretched 
apprentice's miserable attic into a world of poetry, a golden palace, 
and showing him his sturdy sweetheart in the guise of a beautiful 
princess; but it also has the task, together with the Bible, of 
clarifying his moral sense, making him aware of his strength, his 
rights,  his freedom, and arousing his courage and love for his 
country. 
If, generally speaking, the qualities which can fairly be de­
manded of a popular book are rich poetic content, robust 
humour, moral purity, and, for a German popular book, a strong, 
trusty German spirit, qualities which remain the same at all times, 
we are also entitled to demand that it should be in keeping with its 
age, or cease to be a book for the people. If we take a look in 
particular at the present time, at the struggle for freedom which 
German Volksbücher were similar to the English chap-books of the same 
period, that is, cheap popular books intended for the mass of the people and 
containing legends, tales, poetry, etc.— Ed. 

=====第55页=====
German Volksbücher 33 
produces all its manifestations—the development of con­
stitutionalism, the resistance to the pressure of the aristocracy, the 
fight of the intellect against pietism and of gaiety against the 
remnants of gloomy asceticism — I fail to see how it can be wrong 
to demand that the popular book should help the uneducated 
person and show him the truth and reasonableness of these 
trends, although, of course, not by direct deduction; but on no 
account should it encourage servility and toadying to the aristocra­
cy or pietism. It goes without saying, however, that customs of 
earlier times, which it would be absurd or even wrong to practise 
today, must have no place in a popular book. 
By these principles we should, and must, also judge those books 
which are now genuinely popular German books and are usually 
grouped together under this name. They are products in part of 
medieval German or Romance poetry, in part of popular supersti­
tion. Earlier despised and derided by the upper classes, they were, 
as we know, sought out by the romantics, adapted, even extolled. 
But romanticism looked at their poetic content alone, and how 
incapable it was of grasping their significance as popular books is 
shown by Görres' work on them. a Görres, as he has shown but 
lately, actually versifies all his judgments. Nevertheless, the usual 
view of these books still rests on his work, and Marbach even refers 
to it in the announcement of his own publication. The three new 
revised adaptations of these books, by Marbach in prose, and 
Simrock in prose and poetry, two of which are again intended for 
the people, 29 call for another precise examination of the material 
adapted here from the point of view of its popular value. 
So long as opinions about the poetry of the Middle Ages vary so 
widely, the assessment of the poetic value of these books must be 
left to the individual reader; but naturally no one would deny that 
they really are genuinely poetic. Even if they cannot pass the test 
as popular books, their poetic content must be accorded full 
recognition; yes, in Schiller's words: 
What in immortal song shall live forever, 
Is doomed to die in life, 
many a poet may find yet one more reason to save for poetry by 
means of adaptation what proves impossible to preserve for 
the people. 
There is a very significant difference between the tales of 
German and Romance origin. The German tales, genuine folk 
a J. Görres, Die teutschen  Volksbücher. — Ed. 
From Schiller's poem Die Götter Griechenlands. — Ed. 

=====第56页=====
34 Frederick Engels 
stories, place the man in action in the foreground; the Romance 
give prominence to the woman, either as one who suffers 
(Genovefa), or as one who loves, passive towards passion even in 
her love. There are only two exceptions, Die Haimonskinder and 
Fortunat, both Romance but also folk legends; while Octavianus, 
Melusina, etc., are products of court poetry which only reached the 
people later in prose adaptations.— Of the humorous tales only 
one, Salomon und Morolf,  is not directly of Germanic origin, while 
Eulenspiegel, Die Schildbürger, etc., are indisputably ours. 
If we view all these books in their entirety and judge them by 
the principles stated at the beginning, it is clear that they satisfy 
these requirements only in the one respect that they have poetry 
and humour in rich measure and in a form which is easily 
understood in general even by the least educated, but in other 
respects they are far from adequate, some of them a complete 
contradiction, others only partially acceptable. Since they are the 
products of the Middle Ages, they naturally fail entirely in the 
special purpose which the present age might require them to 
fulfil. Thus in spite of the outward richness of this branch of 
literature and in spite of the declamations of Tieck and Görres, 
they still leave much to be desired; whether this gap is ever to be 
filled is another question which I will not take it upon myself to 
answer. 
[Telegraph für Deutschland No. 188, November 1839] 
To proceed now to individual cases, the most important one is 
undoubtedly the Geschichte vom gehörnten Siegfried.— I like this 
book; it is a tale which leaves little to be desired; it has the most 
exuberant poetry written sometimes with the greatest naivety and 
sometimes with the most beautiful humorous pathos; there is 
sparkling wit—who does not know the priceless episode of the 
fight between the two cowards? It has character, a bold, fresh, 
youthful spirit which every young wandering craftsman can take 
as an example, even though he no longer has to fight dragons and 
giants. And once the misprints are corrected, of which the 
(Cologne) edition in front of me has more than a fair share, and 
the punctuation is put right, Schwab's and Marbach's adaptations 
will not be able to compare with this genuinely popular style. 30 
The people have also shown themselves grateful for it; I have not 
come across any other popular book as often as this one. 
Herzog Heinrich der Löwe. — Unfortunately I have not been 
able to get hold of an old copy of this book; the new edition 

=====第57页=====
German Volksbücher 35 
printed in Einbeck 31 seems to have replaced it entirely. It starts 
with the genealogy of the House of Brunswick going back to the 
year 1735; then follows a historical biography of Herzog Heinrich 
and the popular legend. It also contains a tale which tells the same 
story about Godfrey of Bouillon as the popular legend of 
Heinrich der Löwe, the story of the slave Andronicus ascribed to a 
Palestinian abbot called Gerasimi with the end substantially al­
tered, and a poem of the new romantic school of which I cannot 
remember the author, in which the story of the lion is told once 
more. Thus the legend on which the popular book is based 
disappears entirely under the trappings with which the munifi­
cence of the clever publisher has furnished it. The legend itself is 
very beautiful, but the rest is of no interest; what do Swabians care 
about the history of Brunswick? And what room is there for the 
wordy modern romance after the simple style of the popular 
book? But that has also disappeared; the adapter, a man of genius, 
whom I see as a parson or schoolmaster at the end of the last 
century, writes as follows: 
"Thus the goal of the journey was reached, the Holy Land lay before their 
eyes,  they set foot on the soil with which the most significant memories of religious 
history are linked! The pious simplicity which had looked forward in longing to 
this moment changed into fervent devotion here, found complete satisfaction here 
and became the keenest joy in the Lord." 
Restore the legend in its old language, add other genuine folk 
legends to make a complete book, send this out among the people, 
and it would keep the poetic sense alive; but in this form it does 
not deserve to circulate among the people. 
[Telegraph für Deutschland No. 189, November 1839] 
Herzog Ernst.— The author of this book was no great poet, for he 
found all the poetical elements in oriental fairy-tales. The book is 
well written and very entertaining for the people; but that is all. 
Nobody will believe any longer in the reality of the fantasies which 
occur in it; it can therefore be left in the hands of the people 
without alteration. 
I now come to two legends which the German people created 
and developed, the most profound that the folk poetry of any 
people has to show. I mean the legends of Faust and of Der ewige 
Jude. They are inexhaustible; any period can adopt them without 
altering their essence; and even if the adaptations of the Faust 
legend after Goethe belong with the Iliads post Homerum, they still 
always reveal to us new aspects, not to mention the importance of 

=====第58页=====
36 Frederick Engels 
the Ahasuerus legend for the poetry of later times. But how do 
these legends appear in the popular books! Not as products of the 
free imagination are they conceived, no, as children of a slavish 
superstition. The book about the Wandering Jew even demands a 
religious belief in its contents which it seeks to justify by the Bible 
and a lot of stale legends; it contains only the most superficial part 
of the legend  itself,  but preaches a very lengthy and tedious 
Christian sermon on the Jew Ahasuerus. The Faust legend is 
reduced to a common witches' tale embellished with vulgar 
sorcerer's anecdotes; what little poetry is preserved in the popular 
comedy has almost completely disappeared. These two books are 
not only incapable of offering any poetical enjoyment, in their 
present shape they are bound to strengthen and renew old 
superstitions; or what else is to be expected of such devilish work? 
The awareness of the legend and its contents seems to be 
disappearing altogether among the people, too; Faust is thought to 
be no more than a common sorcerer and Ahasuerus the greatest 
villain since Judas Iscariot. But should it not be possible to rescue 
both these legends for the German people, to restore them to their 
original purity and to express their essence so clearly that the deep 
meaning does not remain entirely unintelligible even to the less 
educated? Marbach and Simrock have still to adapt these legends; 
may they exercise wise judgment in the process! 
We have before us yet another series of popular books, namely, 
the humorous ones, Eulenspiegel, Salomon und Morolf,  Der 
Pfaff vom Kaienberge, Die sieben Schwaben, and Die 
Schildbürger. This is a series such as few other nations have 
produced. The wit, the natural manner of both arrangement and 
workmanship, the good-natured humour which always accom­
panies the biting scorn so that it should not become too malicious, 
the strikingly comical situations could indeed put a great deal of 
our literature to shame. What author of the present day has 
sufficient inventiveness to create a book like Die Schildbürger} How 
prosaic Mundt's humour appears compared with that of Die sieben 
Schwaben] Of course, a quieter time was needed to produce such 
things than ours which, like a restless businessman, is always 
talking about the important questions it has to answer before it 
can think of anything else.— As regards the form of these books, 
little needs changing, except for removing the odd flat joke and 
distortions of style. Several editions of Eulenspiegel, marked with 
the stamp of Prussian censorship, are not quite complete; there is 
a coarse joke missing right at the beginning which Marbach 
illustrates in a very good woodcut. 

=====第59页=====
German  Volksbücher 37 
In sharp contrast to these are the stories of Genovefa, Griseldis 
and Hirlanda, three books of Romance8  origin, each of which has 
a woman for heroine, and a suffering woman at that; they 
illustrate the attitude of the Middle Ages to religion, and very 
poetically too; only Genovefa and Hirlanda are too conventionally 
drawn. But, for heaven's sake, what are the German people to do 
with them today? One can well imagine the German people as 
Griseldis, of course, and the princes as Markgraf Walther; but then 
the comedy would have to end quite differently from the way it 
does in the popular book; both sides would resent the comparison 
here and there on good grounds. If Griseldis is to remain a 
popular book I see it as a petition to the High German Federal 
Assembly for the emancipation of women. But one knows, here 
and there, how this kind of romantic petition was received four 
years ago, which makes me wonder greatly that Marbach was not 
subsequently counted among the Young Germans. 32 The people 
have acted Griseldis and Genovefa long enough, let them now play 
Siegfried and Reinald for a change; but the right way to get them 
~> do so is surely not to praise these old stories of humiliation. 
The first half of the book Kaiser Octavianus belongs to the 
ime class, while the second half is more like the love stories 
proper. The story of Helena is merely an imitation of Octavianus, 
or perhaps both are different versions of the same legend. The 
second half of Octavianus is an excellent popular book and one 
which can be ranked only with Siegfried; the characterisation of 
Florens and his foster-father Clemens is excellent, and so is that of 
Claudius; Tieck had it very easy here.33 But running right through 
is there not the idea that noble blood is better than common 
blood? And how often do we not find this idea among the people 
themselves! If this idea cannot be banished from Octavianus—and 
I think it is impossible — if I consider that it must first be 
eradicated where constitutional life is to arise, then let the book be 
as poetic as you like, censeo Carthaginem esse delendam. b 
[Telegraph für Deutschland No. 190, November 1839] 
In contrast to the tearful tales of suffering and endurance I 
have mentioned are three others which celebrate love. They are 
Magelone, Melusina and Tristan. I like Magelone best as a popular 
book; Melusina is again full of absurd monstrosities and fantastic 
a The Telegraph für Deutschland has "romantic", which is a misprint.— Ed. 
I am of the opinion that Carthage must be destroyed.— Ed. 

=====第60页=====
38 Frederick Engels 
exaggerations so that one could almost see it as a kind of Don 
Quixote tale, and I must ask again: what do the German people 
want with it? On top of that the story of Tristan and Isolde — I 
will not dispute its poetic value because I love the wonderful 
rendering by Gottfried von Strassburg,34 even if one may find 
defects here and there in the narrative — but there is no book that 
it is less desirable to put into the hands of the people than this. Of 
course, here again there is a close connection with a modern 
theme, the emancipation of women; a skilful poet would today 
hardly be able to exclude it from an adaptation of Tristan without 
falling into a contrived and tedious form of moralising poetry. But 
in a popular book where this question is out of place the entire 
narrative is reduced to an apology for adultery and whether that 
should be left in the hands of the people is highly questionable. In 
the meanwhile the book has almost disappeared and one only 
rarely comes across a copy. 
[Telegraph für Deutschland No. 191, November 183^ 
Die Haimonskinder and Fortunat, where we again see the mo 
in the centre of the action, are another couple of true popuk 
books. Here the merriest humour with which the son of Fortuna* 
fights all his adventures, there the bold defiance, the unrestrained 
relish in opposition which in youthful vigour stands up to the 
absolute, tyrannical power of Charlemagne and is not afraid, even 
before the eyes of the prince, to take revenge with its own hand 
for insults it suffered. Such a youthful spirit that allows us to 
overlook many weaknesses must prevail in the popular book; but 
where is it to be found in Griseldis and its like? 
Last but not least, the Hundertjährige Kalender, a work of 
genius, the super-clever Traumbuch, the unfailing Glücksrad, and 
similar progeny of miserable superstition. Anyone who has fven 
glanced at his book, knows with what wretched sophistries Görres 
made excuses for this rubbish. All these dreary books have been 
honoured with the Prussian censor's stamp. They are, of course, 
neither revolutionary, like Börne's letters, a nor immoral, as people 
claim Wally b is. We can see how wrong are the charges that the 
Prussian censorship is exceedingly strict. I hardly need waste any 
more words on whether such rubbish should remain among the 
people. 
a L. Börne, Briefe axis Paris.— Ed. 
K. Gutzkow, Wally, die Zweiflenn.— Ed. 

=====第61页=====
German  Volksbücher 39 
Nothing need be said of the rest of the popular books; the 
stories of Pontus, Fierabras, etc., have long been lost and so no 
longer deserve the name. But I believe I have shown, even in 
these few notes, how inadequate this literature appears, when 
judged according to the interest of the people and not the interest 
of poetry. What is necessary are adaptations of a strict selection 
which do not needlessly depart from the old style and are issued 
in attractive editions for the people. To eradicate forcibly any 
which cannot stand up to criticism would be neither easy nor 
advisable; only that which is pure superstition should be denied 
the stamp of the censor. The others are disappearing as it is; 
Griseldis is rare, Tristan almost unobtainable. In many areas, in 
Wuppertal, for example, it is not possible to find a single copy; in 
other places, Cologne, Bremen, etc., almost every shopkeeper has 
copies in his windows for the peasants who come into town. 
But surely the German people and the best of these books 
deserve intelligent adaptations? Not everybody is capable of 
producing such adaptations, of course; I know only two people 
with sufficient critical acumen and taste to make the selection, and 
skill to handle the old style; they are the brothers Grimm. But 
would they have the time and inclination for this work? Marbach's 
adaptation is quite unsuitable for the people. What can one hope 
for when he starts straight away with Griseldis} Not only does he 
lack all critical sense, but he cannot resist making quite unneces­
sary omissions; he has also made the style quite flat and in­
sipid— compare the popular version of the Gehörnter Siegfried and 
all the others with the adaptation. There is nothing but sentences 
torn apart, and changed word order for which the only justifica­
tion was Herr Marbach's mania to appear original here since he 
lacked all other originality. What else could have driven him to 
alter the most beautiful passages of the popular book and furnish 
it with his unnecessary punctuation? For anyone who does not 
know the popular version, Marbach's tales are quite good; but as 
soon as one compares the two, one realises that Marbach's sole 
service has been to correct the misprints. His woodcuts vary 
greatly in value.— Simrock's adaptation is not yet far enough 
advanced for judgment to be passed on it; but I trust him more 
'han his rival. His woodcuts are also consistently better than 
Marbach's. 
These old popular books with their old-fashioned tone, their 
misprints and their poor woodcuts have for me an extraordinary, 
poetic charm; they transport me from our artificial modern 
"conditions, confusions and fine distinctions" into a world which is 

=====第62页=====
40 Frederick Engels 
much closer to nature. But that is not what matters here; Tieck, of 
course, made this poetic charm his chief argument—but what 
weight has the authority of Tieck, Görres and all other romantics 
when reason contradicts it and when it is a question of the German 
people? 
Written in May-October 1839 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the Published in English for the first 
Telegraph für Deutschland Nos. 186, 188, time 
189, 190 and 191, November 1839 
Signed: Friedrich Oswald 

=====第63页=====
KARL BECK 
[Telegraph  für Deutschland  No. 202, December 1839] 
I am a Sultan, driven by storms that blow, 
My warrior hosts are armoured forms of song, 
And grief has laid a turban on my brow 
With many mysteries its folds among." 
With these bombastic words Herr Beck approached the German 
poets'  ranks, demanding admission; in his eyes the proud 
awareness of his calling, about his lips an expression of modern 
world-weariness. Thus he stretched out his hand for the laurel 
wreath. Two years have passed since then; does the laurel 
appeasingly cover the "mysterious folds" of his brow? 
There was much boldness in his first collection of poems. 
Gepanzerte  Lieder, a Neue Bibel, a Junges Palästina 35—the twenty-
year-old poet jumped straight from the top form into the third 
heaven! That was a fire such as had not blazed for a long time, a 
fire which gave out much smoke because it came from wood that 
was too fresh and green. 
The Young Literature developed so rapidly and brilliantly that 
its adversaries perceived they stood to lose rather than gain by 
arrogant rejection or condemnation. It was high time to take a 
closer look at it and to attack its real weaknesses. Thus, the Young 
Literature was, of course, recognised as an equal. Soon quite a 
number of these weaknesses were found—whether real or appar­
ent does not concern us here; but the loudest claim was that the 
former Young Germany had wanted to dethrone lyric poetry. 
* K. Beck, Nächte.  Gepanzerte  Lieder. From the poem Der Sultan.—  Ed. 
3-384 

=====第64页=====
42 Frederick Engels 
Heine, of course, fought against the Swabians36 ; Wienbarg made 
bitter comments on the humdrum lyrics and their eternal 
monotony; Mundt rejected all lyrics as being out of tune with the 
times and prophesied a literary Messiah of prose. That was too 
much. We Germans have always been proud of our songs; if the 
Frenchman boasted of his hard-won charter and derided our 
censorship, we pointed proudly to philosophy from Kant to Hegel 
and to the line of songs from the Song of Ludwig 37 to Nikolaus 
Lenau. Are we to be deprived of this lyrical treasure? Behold, 
there comes the lyrical poetry of the "Young Literature" with 
Franz Dingelstedt, Ernst von der Haide, Theodor Creizenach and 
Karl Beck. 
Beck's Nächte appeared shortly before Freiligrath's poems. a We 
know what a sensation both these collections of poems made. Two 
young lyrical poets had emerged with whom at that time none of 
the younger could be ranked. A comparative study of Beck and 
Freiligrath was made in the Elegante Zeitungb  by Kühne 38 in the 
manner familiar from the Charaktere. I would like to apply 
Wienbarg's remark about G. Pfizer to this criticism. 39 
The Nächte are chaos. Everything lies in motley disorder. 
Images, often bold, like strange rock formations; seeds of a future 
life, but drowned in a sea of phrases; now and then a flower 
begins to bud, an island to take firm shape, a crystal layer to form. 
But still everything is in confusion and disorder. The words: 
Oh, how the frenzied, flashing images 
Race through my wrathful, thunder-laden head,0 
fit not Börne but Beck  himself. 
The image which Beck gives of Börne in his first attempt is 
terribly distorted and untrue; Kühne's influence here is unmistak­
able.  Apart from the fact that Börne would never have used such 
phrases, he also knew nothing of all the desperate world-weariness 
which Beck ascribes to him. Is that the clear-headed Börne, the 
strong, imperturbable character whose love warmed but did not 
burn, least of all himself? No, it is not Börne, but merely a vague 
ideal of a modern poet composed of Heine's coquetry and 
Mundt's flowery phrases; the Lord preserve us from its realisation! 
Frenzied and flashing images never raced in Börne's head; his 
locks never stood on end with curses against heaven; in his heart 
a F. Freiligrath, Gedichte. —Ed. 
Zeitung für die elegante Welt.— Ed. 
c K. Beck, Nächte. Gepanzerte Lieder. Zweiundzwanzigste Nacht. — Ed. 

=====第65页=====
Karl Beck 43 
midnight never sounded, but always morning; his sky was never 
blood-red but always blue. Fortunately, Börne was never filled 
with such dreadful despair that he could have written Die 
achtzehnte Nacht. If Beck did not gabble so much about the Red of 
Life with which his Börne writes I should believe that he had 
never read the Franzosenfresser. 3 Let Beck take the most melancholy 
passage of the Franzosenfresser and it is bright day compared with 
his affected night-of-storm despair. Is not Börne poetic enough in 
himself,  must he first be spiced with this new-fangled world-
weariness? I say new-fangled because I can never believe that this 
sort of thing is a part of genuinely modern poetry. Börne's 
greatness is precisely that he was above the miserable flowery 
phrases and cliquish catchwords of our days. 
[Telegraph für Deutschland No. 203, December 1839] 
Before a definite judgment of the Nächte could be formed, Beck 
had already come forward with a new series of poems. Der 
fahrende Poet showed him to us from a different angle. The storm 
had blown itself out and order began to emerge out of chaos. One 
had not expected such excellent descriptions as those in the first 
and second songs; nor had one believed that Schiller and Goethe, 
who had fallen into the clutches of our pedantic aesthetics, could 
offer material for such a poetic unity as is to be found in the third 
song, nor that Beck's poetic reflection could hover in almost 
philistine calm over the Wartburg as now in fact it did. 
With Der fahrende Poet Beck had formally entered literature. 
Beck announced the Stille Lieder, and the journals reported that 
he was working on a tragedy, Verlorene Seelen. 
A year passed. Except for a few poems nothing was heard of 
Beck. The Stille Lieder remained unpublished and nothing definite 
could be learned of the Verlorene Seelen. Eventually, his Novellis­
tische Skizzen appeared in the Elegante. An attempt at prose by such 
an author would command attention in any event. I doubt, 
however, whether this attempt satisfied even a single friend of 
Beck's Muse. The earlier poet could be recognised in a few 
metaphors; with careful cultivation the style could be developed 
quite nicely; but that is all one can say for this little tale. Neither in 
profundity of thought nor poetic imagination did it rise above the 
a L. Börne, Menzel, der  Franzosenfresser. — Ed. 

=====第66页=====
44 Frederick Engels 
usual sphere of literature meant for entertainment; the invention 
was rather ordinary and indeed ugly, and the execution was 
commonplace. 
A friend told me during a concert that Beck's Stille Lieder had 
arrived. Just then the adagio of a Beethoven symphony began. 
The songs will be like this, I thought; but I was mistaken, there 
was little Beethoven and a great deal of Bellini lamentation. I was 
shocked when I took the booklet in my hands. The very first song 
was so infinitely trivial, so cheaply mannered, only given a 
spurious originality by an affected turn of phrase. 
Only the enormous dreaming in these songs still recalls the 
Nächte. That a lot of dreaming was done in the  Nächte  could be 
excused; it could be overlooked in  Der fahrende  Poet;  but now Herr 
Beck never comes out of his sleep at all. He is dreaming already 
on page 3; p. 4, p. 8, p. 9, p. 15, p. 16, p. 23, p. 31, p. 33, p. 34, 
p. 35, p. 40, etc., dreams everywhere. In addition there is a whole 
series of dream images. It would be ridiculous if it were not so 
sad. The hope of originality dwindled to a few new metres, and to 
make up for it there are suggestions of Heine and an infinitely 
childish naivety  which runs most repulsively through almost all the 
songs.  The first part, Lieder der Liebe. Ihr Tagebuch, suffers 
particularly. I would not have expected such weak, revolting pap 
from the blazing flame, the noble, strong spirit that Beck wants to 
be. Only two or three songs are tolerable. Sein Tagebuch  is a little 
better; here there is occasionally a real song to make up for the 
frequent nonsense and drivel. The worst of the drivel in Sein 
Tagebuch  is Eine Träne. We know what Beck produced earlier in 
tear poetry. There he let "the suffering, that bloody, raw corsair, 
sail in the quiet sea of tears" 3 and  "grief,  the dumb, cold fish", 
splash about in it. Now this is joined by: 
Teardrop, not in vain 
So large and round a-brimming, 
All life's joy and pain 
In your lap (?) are swimming. 
So much, so much in you 
My love and lute are swimming too, 
Teardrop, not in vain 
So large and round a-brimming. 
How stupid it is! The better part of the whole booklet is to be 
found in the dream images, and some of the songs there are at 
a K. Beck, Nächte. Gepanzerte Lieder. From the poem Der Sultan.— Ed. 
K. Beck, Stille Lieder. From the poem Die Träne. — Ed. 

=====第67页=====
Karl Beck 45 
least heartfelt. Particularly Schlaf wohl! which, to judge by the date 
of its first publication in the Elegante,* 0 must belong to the earlier 
of these songs. The final poem is among the better ones, although 
somewhat verbose, and at the end there is again the "tear the 
strong shield of the world spirit".* 
To conclude there are attempts at the ballad. The Zigeunerkönig, 
with an opening which smacks strongly of Freiligrath's descriptive 
manner, is weak compared with the vivid portrayal of gipsy life in 
Lenau, and the gushing phrases, which are meant to make us find 
the poem fresh and strong, only render it more repulsive. Das 
Rbslein is, however, a prettily reproduced moment. Das ungrische 
Wachthaus is in the same class as the Zigeunerkiinig; the last ballad 
of this cycle is an example of how a poem can have flowing and 
sonorous verses and beautiful phrases without leaving much 
impression. The earlier Beck would have presented the sinister 
robber Janossyk more vividly in three striking images. And this 
Beck must have a final dream on the last page but one and so the 
booklet ends, but not the poem, the continuation of which is 
promised for the second slim volume. What does this mean? Are 
poems, like journals, to end with "to be continued"? 
After several theatre managements had declared it impossible to 
produce, Verlorene Seelen was, we hear, destroyed by the author; 
he now appears to be working on another tragedy, Saul; at least, 
the Elegante has only published the first act and the Theater-
Chronik 11 an extensive prospectus of it. This act has already been 
reviewed in these columns. 41 Unfortunately I can only confirm 
what is said there. Beck, whose uncontrolled and uncertain fantasy 
makes him incapable of presenting characters in the round, who 
compels all his personages to use the same phrases, Beck, who 
showed in his interpretation of Börne how little he can understand 
a character, let alone create one, could not have hit upon a more 
unfortunate idea than to write a tragedy. Beck was forced unwit­
tingly to borrow the exposition from a recently published model, 42 
to make his David and Merob speak in the tearful tone of Ihr 
Tagebuch, to present Saul's changes of mood with the crudeness of 
a comedy at a country fail?. Hearing this Moab speak you begin to 
realise the significance of Abner as his model; is this Moab, this 
coarse, bloody disciple of Moloch, more like an animal than a 
man, supposed to be Saul's "evil spirit"? A child of nature is not a 
a K. Beck, Stille Lieder. From the poem  Weltgeist.—  Ed. 
Allgemeine Theater-Chronik. — Ed. 

=====第68页=====
46 Frederick Engels 
beast, and Saul, who opposes the priests, does not for that reason 
find pleasure in human sacrifice. In addition, the dialogue is 
wooden beyond measure, the language feeble, and only a few 
tolerable images, which, however, cannot carry the weight of even 
one act of a tragedy, recall the expectations which Herr Beck no 
longer seems capable of fulfilling. 43 
Written in November-early December Printed according to the journal 
1839 
Published in English for the first 
First published in the tmle 
Telegraph für Deutschland Nos. 202 
and 203, December 1839 
Signed: Friedrich Oswald 

=====第69页=====
RETROGRADE SIGNS OF THE TIMES 
[Telegraph für Deutschland No. 26, February 1840] 
There is nothing new under the sun! That is one of those happy 
pseudo-truths, which were destined to have a most brilliant career, 
which have passed from mouth to mouth in their triumphal 
procession round the globe, and after centuries are still often 
quoted as if they had only just made their appearance in the 
world. Genuine truths have rarely been so fortunate; they have 
had to struggle and suffer, they have been tortured and buried 
alive, and everyone has moulded them as he thought fit. There is 
nothing new under the sun! On the contrary, there is enough that 
is new, but it is suppressed if it does not belong to those pliant 
pseudo-truths which always have a loyal "that is to say, etc." in 
their train and like a flash of the northern lights soon give way to 
night again. But if a new genuine truth rises on the horizon like 
the red morning sky, the children of night know full well that it 
threatens the downfall of their kingdom and they take up arms 
against it. For the northern lights the sky is always clear, whereas 
the roseate dawn usually occurs in an overcast sky, the gloom of 
which it has to conquer or enkindle with its flames. And it is such 
clouds obscuring the roseate dawn of our time which we now 
intend to pass under review. 
Or let us tackle the subject in another way! Attempts to depict 
the course of history in the form of a line are familiar. 
"The form taken by history," states an intelligent work written to oppose 
Hegel's philosophy of history, "is not ascent and descent, not a concentric circle or 
a spiral, but an epic parallelism, sometimes converging" (this is what the word 
should be instead of "congruent"), "sometimes diverging."a 
a K. Gutzkow, Zur Philosophie der Geschichte, S. 53.—  Ed. 

=====第70页=====
48 Frederick Engels 
Yet I prefer a free hand-drawn spiral, the turns of which are 
not too precisely executed. History begins its course slowly from 
an invisible point, languidly making its turns around it, but its 
circles become ever larger, the flight becomes ever swifter and 
more lively, until at last history shoots like a flaming comet from 
star to star, often skimming its old paths, often intersecting them, 
and with every turn it approaches closer to infinity.— Who can 
foresee what the end will be? And at those points where history 
seems to be resuming an old path again, short-sighted people who 
see no farther than their noses rise up and joyfully cry out that it 
is just as they thought! And there we are: there is nothing new 
under the sun! So our heroes of Chinese stagnation, our manda­
rins of retrogression are jubilant and pretend to have cut three 
centuries out of the annals of the world as an inquisitive excursion 
into forbidden regions, as a delirious dream — and they fail to see 
that history only rushes onward by the most direct route to a new 
resplendent constellation of ideas, which with its sun-like mag­
nitude will soon blind their feeble eyes. 
It is at just such a point in history that we now stand. All the 
ideas which have been advanced since Charles the Great, all the 
tastes which successively supplanted one another through five 
centuries, want to assert their extinct rights once more at the 
present time. The feudalism of the Middle Ages and the absolutism 
of Louis XIV, the hierarchy of Rome and the pietism of the past 
century contend for the honour of driving free thought from the 
field! Permit me not to speak of these at greater length; for some 
thousand swords, all sharper than mine, immediately flash in 
opposition to anyone who bears one of these devices on his shield, 
and we surely know that they all disintegrate in conflict with one 
another and under the adamantine foot of the forward moving 
time.  But corresponding to those colossal reactionary phenomena 
in the life of the church and state are less noticed tendencies in art 
and literature, an unconscious harking back to earlier centuries, 
which, it is true, are not a threat to the times but nevertheless are 
a danger to contemporary taste, and whose composition has 
curiously enough nowhere been comprehensively treated. 
We do not need to go far afield to encounter these phenomena. « 
Only go to visit a salon furnished in the modern style and you will 
see whose spiritual offspring are the figures that surround you. 
All the rococo abortions of the period of crassest absolutism have 
been conjured up in order to force the spirit of the movement 
into the forms in which the "l'état c'est moi" felt at ease. Our 
salons, with their chairs, tables, cupboards and sofas, are decorated 

=====第71页=====
Retrograde Signs of the Times 49 
in the style of the Renaissance, and all that is needed is to put a 
wig on Heine and squeeze Bettina 3 into a hooped petticoat, and 
the restoration of the siècle will be complete. 
[Telegraph für Deutschland No. 27, February 1840] 
Such a room is of course eminently suitable for reading a novel 
by Herr von Sternberg, with his remarkable preference for the 
period of Madame de Maintenon. People have forgiven Sternberg 
for this caprice of his mind, they have also looked carefully, but of 
course in vain, for deeper reasons for it; I venture to assert, 
however, that precisely this feature of Sternberg's novels, which 
for the moment perhaps promotes their circulation, will be a 
considerable obstacle to their prolonged existence. Apart from the 
fact that a perpetual harping on a most arid and prosaic period, in 
comparison with whose eccentric nature, floundering between 
heaven and earth and conventional puppets, our time and its 
children are still natural, does not precisely enhance the beauty of 
a literary work—apart from this fact, we are certainly too 
accustomed to regarding this period in a mocking light for it to 
have a lasting appeal to us under any other illumination, and to 
find such a caprice in every one of Sternberg's novels finally 
becomes extremely boring. This tendency of his cannot be re­
garded as more than a caprice, in my opinion at least, and 
therefore has no deeper reason; nevertheless I think I have found 
its starting point in the life of "good society". Undoubtedly, Herr 
von Sternberg was brought up for this society; he learned to move 
in it with pleasure, and perhaps found his proper home in its 
circles. So no wonder he flirts with a period whose social forms 
were far more definite and polished, though more wooden and 
tasteless than those of the present day. Far more audaciously than 
in the case of Herr von Sternberg, the taste of the siècle is 
expressed in its mother city, Paris, where it makes a serious 
pretence of wresting from the romantic writers their barely won 
victory. Victor Hugo arrived, Alexandre Dumas arrived, and the 
herd of imitators with them; the unnaturalness of the Iphigenias 
and Athalias gave way to the unnaturalness of a Lucrezia Borgia; 
cramped rigidity was followed by a burning fever; the French 
classics were shown to have plagiarised the ancient writers — and 
then Demoiselle Rachel appears and all is forgotten: Hugo and 
a Bettina von Arnim. — Ed. 

=====第72页=====
50 Frederick Engels 
Dumas, Lucrezia Borgia and the plagiarisms; Phèdre and le Cid 
walk the stage with measured tread and stylish Alexandrine lines; 
Achilles parades with his hints at the great Louis, and Ruy Bias 
and Mademoiselle de Belle Isle hardly venture to emerge from 
wings in order at once to find salvation in German translation 
factories and on the stage of German national theatres. It must be 
a blissful relief for a legitimist to be able to forget the revolution, 
Napoleon, and the great week, 44 by watching Racine's plays; the 
glory of the ancien régime rises from the grave, the world is draped 
with high-warp tapestries, Louis, the absolute monarch, walks 
along the well-clipped avenues of Versailles in brocaded waistcoat 
and full-bottomed wig, and an all-powerful array of mistresses 
rules the happy court and unhappy France. 
While in all this the reproduction of the past remains in France 
itself,  it seems that a peculiarity of previous-century French 
literature is seeking to repeat itself in German literature of the 
present day. I mean the philosophical dilettantism displayed by 
several recent authors just as much as by the Encyclopaedists. The 
place occupied by materialism among the latter is beginning to be 
taken by Hegel among the former. Mundt was the first who—to 
use his own phraseology—introduced the Hegelian categories into 
literature; Kühne, as always, did not fail to follow him and wrote 
the Quarantäne im Irrenhause, and although the second volume of 
Charaktere' betrays a partial falling off from Hegel, the first 
volume contains enough passages in which he tries to translate 
Hegel into the modern idiom. Unfortunately, these translations 
must be numbered among those which cannot be understood 
without the original. 
The analogy is undeniable; will the conclusion which the author 
who has already been referred to drew from the fate of 
philosophical dilettantism in the previous century — namely, that 
with the system the germ of death is introduced into litera­
ture—  will this conclusion be confirmed also in the present 
century? Will the roots of a system that surpasses all its predeces­
sors in its consistency be obstacles encumbering the field cultivated 
by poetic genius? Or are these phenomena merely a sign of the 
love that philosophy has for literature and the fruits of which are 
so brilliandy manifested in Hotho, Rötscher, Strauss, Rosenkranz 
and the Hallische Jahrbücher? In that case, of course, the point of 
view would be different, and we could hope for that co-operation 
between science and life, between philosophy and the modern 
a F. G. Kühne,  Weibliche  und  männliche  Charaktere. — Ed. 

=====第73页=====
Retrograde Signs of the Times 51 
trends, between Hegel and Börne, which a section of so-called 
Young Germany aimed earlier at promoting. Apart from these 
two conclusions, there remains only one way out, one which, 
to be sure, looks somewhat strange compared with either of them: 
namely, to assume that Hegel's influence will be of no importance 
for belles-lettres. I think, however, that there are few who will be 
able to make up their minds to adopt this course. 
[Telegraph für Deutschland No. 28, February 1840] 
But we must go farther back than to the Encyclopaedists and 
Madame de Maintenon: Duller, Freiligrath and Beck claim to 
represent the Second Silesian School of the seventeenth century 45 
in our literature. Is there anyone to whom Duller's portrayals in 
Ketten und Kronen, Der Antichrist, Loyola, Kaiser und Papst, do not 
recall the heaven-storming pathos of the Asiatische Banise written 
of old by Ziegler von Kliphausen or Lohenstein's Grossherzog 
Arminius sammt seiner durchlauchtigsten Thusnelda} Beck has even 
quite surpassed these good men in pomposity; some passages of 
his poems are almost regarded as nothing but products of the 
seventeenth century dipped in a tincture of modern world-
weariness; and Freiligrath, who also at times is incapable of 
distinguishing between pomposity and poetic diction, makes the 
retrograde step to Hofmannswaldau complete by reviving the 
Alexandrine, 2 and re-introducing coquetting with foreign words. It 
is to be hoped, however, that he will discard this along with his 
foreign subject-matter. 
Withered the palm, blown off the desert sand. 
The poet seeks the heart of his homeland, 
A different man, and yet the samelb 
And, certainly, if Freiligrath were not to do so, in a hundred 
years'  time his poems would be regarded as a herbarium or a 
sand-box and used, like Latin rules of prosody, for teaching 
natural history in schools. A man like Raupach could not count on 
any other kind of practical immortality for his iambic chronicles, 
but it is to be hoped that Freiligrath will provide us with poetic 
works fully worthy of the nineteenth century.— However, it is 
nice,  is it not, that in our revivalist literature since the romantics 
we have already covered from the twelfth to the seventeenth 
a Allusion to Freiligrath's series of poems.— Ed. 
F. Freiligrath. From the poem Freistuhl zu Dortmund.— Ed. 

=====第74页=====
52 Frederick Engels 
century? In that case Gottsched, too, will not make us wait much 
longer for him. 
I confess to being perplexed how to arrange these individual 
items from a single point of view. I confess to having lost the 
threads by which they are linked to the torrent of time which 
keeps rolling on. Perhaps they are not yet ripe for a survey to be 
made with assurance, and will yet increase in size and number. 
But it remains remarkable that this  reaction  is conspicuous in art 
and literature as also in life, that the complaints of ministerial 
newspapers re-echo from walls that seem to have belonged to the 
"l'état c'est moi", and that corresponding to the shouting of the 
modern obscurantists, on the one hand, is the exaggerated 
obscurantism, on the other hand, of a part of recent German 
poetry. 
Written in November 1839-January 1840 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the Published in English for the first 
Telegraph  ßr Deutschland  Nos. 26, 27 and time 
28, February 1840 
Signed:  Friedrich Oswald 

=====第75页=====
PLATEN 
Among the poetic offspring of the Restoration period, whose 
powers were not crippled by the electric shocks of the year 1830 
and whose fame only became established in the present literary 
epoch, there are three who are distinguished by a characteristic 
similarity: Immermann, Chamisso, and Platen. All three possess 
unusual individuality, considerable character, and an intellectual 
power which at least outweighs their poetic talent. In Chamisso, it 
is sometimes imagination and feeling that predominate, and at 
other times calculating intellect; especially in the terza rimas the 
surface is altogether cold and rationalistic, but underneath one 
hears the beating of a noble heart; in Immermann, these two 
qualities oppose each other and constitute the dualism which he 
himself acknowledges and the extreme features of which his 
strong personality can bend together but not unite; lastly, in 
Platen, poetic power has abandoned its independence and finds 
itself at ease under the domination of the more powerful intellect. 
If Platen's imagination had not been able to rely on his intellect 
and his magnificent character, he would not have become so 
famous. Hence he represented the intellectual in poetry, the form; 
hence also his wish to end his career with a great work of art was 
not granted. He was well aware that such a great work was 
essential to make his fame lasting, but he felt also that his powers 
were still inadequate for it and he put his hopes on the future and 
his preparatory work; meanwhile, time passed, he did not get 
beyond the preparatory work and finally died. 
Platen's imagination followed timorously the bold strides of his 
intellect, and when it was a matter of a work of genius, when his 
imagination should have ventured on a bold leap that the intellect 
could not accomplish, it had to shrink back. That was the source 
of Platen's error in considering the products of his intellect to be 
poetry. His poetic creative powers sufficed for anacreontic ghazals 
and sometimes flashed like a meteor in his comedies; but let us 
admit merely that most of what was characteristic of Platen is the 

=====第76页=====
54 Frederick Engels 
product of the intellect, and will always be recognised as such. 
People will tire of his excessively affected ghazals and his rhetori­
cal odes; they will find the polemics of his comedies for the most 
part unjustified, but they will have to pay full respect to the wit of 
his dialogue and the loftiness of his parabases, and see the 
justification of his one-sidedness in the greatness of his character. 
Platen's literary standing in public opinion will change; he will go 
farther from Goethe, but will come closer to Börne. 
That his views, too, make him more akin to Börne is evident not 
only from a host of allusions in his comedies but already from 
several poems in his collected works, of which I shall mention only 
the ode to Charles X. A number of songs inspired by the Polish 
struggle for freedom were not included in this collection, although 
they were bound to be of great interest for a characterisation of 
Platen. They have now been issued by another publishing firm as 
a supplement to the collected works. 46 I find my view of Platen 
confirmed by them. Thought and character here have to be the 
substitute for poetry to a greater extent and more noticeably than 
anywhere else. For that reason Platen seldom feels at home in the 
simple style of the song; there have to be lengthy, extended verses, 
each of which can embody a thought, or artificial ode metres, the 
serious, measured course of which seems almost to demand a 
rhetorical content. With the art of verse, thoughts also come to 
Platen and that is the strongest proof of the intellectual origin of 
his poems. He who demands something else from Platen will not 
find satisfaction in these Polish songs, but he who takes up this 
booklet with these expectations will find himself richly compen­
sated for the lack of poetic fragrance by an abundance of exalted, 
powerful thoughts that have sprung from a most noble character, 
and by a "magnificent passionateness", as the preface aptly says. It 
is a pity that these poems were not published a few months earlier, 
when German national consciousness rose against the imperial 
Russian European pentarchy47; they would have been the best 
reply to it. Perhaps the pentarchist, too, would have found in 
them many a motto for his work.a 
Written in December 1839 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the Published in English for the first 
Telegraph für DeutschkndNo. 31, time 
February 1840 
Signed: Friedrich Oswald 
a Allusion to K. Goldmann's book Die europäische Pentarchie.— Ed. 

=====第77页=====
[ON THE INVENTION OF PRINTING]48 
Shall then the Poet's voice sing, only telling 
Of bloody Ambition, Thrones in all their pride, 
When Fame's shrill trumpets sound about him, swelling 
The lips in places where the Gods abide? 
Have you forgotten shame? And do you waste 
The precious gift of Praise with its bright light 
On men to curses and to execration 
Ever condemned by History outright? 
Awake, awake! Song, that's become so shy, 
Soar up above the clouds, 
With might unmatched to lofty triumph fly! 
And he who wants the world to find his song 
Well worthy of the laurels on his brow, 
Must make his song from now 
Unfold well worthy of the world, and strong! 
They were not prodigal in olden days, 
But freely at the Altar 
Of beneficial Spirit, of Invention, 
They spent the sacrificial smoke of Praise. 
Saturn came down, and with the mighty plough 
Divided he the Earth's maternal breast. 
And then mankind beheld 
The living seeds grow on the barren ground. 
Heaven received Man's gratitude profound: 
God of the Golden Age is Saturn called. 
And were you not a God, you who once found 

=====第78页=====
56 Frederick Engels 
Body for Thought, for Word, 
Fixing in signs the life of speech that would 
Have otherwise flown off, by no ties bound? 
Without you, Time had gone, 
Still self-consuming, sinking, dying, down, 
Buried forever in oblivion. 
You came. 'Twas then that Thought 
Saw the swift widening of the narrow sphere 
That once enfolded its long infancy. 
It winged its way into that world so vast, 
Where mighty dialogue doth fill the air 
Between Time Future and deed-heavy Past. 
You've helped the blind to see! 
Immortal one, enjoy the honours rare, 
The lofty hymns of praise, 
That are your due alone, Exalted Spirit! 
And Nature, just as if the one invention 
Were of itself enough to prove her power, 
Rests from that time and, parsimonious, 
Gives the world no such wonder any more. 
But Nature in the end bestirs  herself, 
To give another token: the icy Rhine 
Sees Gutenberg come forth: "O vain endeavours! 
What does it help'you, that you can inspire 
Your thoughts with life by writing, 
If thought dies, petrified, dumb in the dire 
Darkness of lethargy and long forgetting? 
Say, can a single vessel be enough 
E'er to contain the billowing sea that rages? 
Much less can Man's gifts of the Spirit be 
Unfolded in a single volume's pages! 
What lacks? The art of flight? But when bold Nature 
Created in one image countless beings, 
Now, after hers, there comes my own Invention! 
That, echoing a thousandfold, Truth might 
Embrace the world with powerful proclamation, 
Soaring aloft with Clarity's sheer flight!" 
He spoke. And there was Print. And lo! all Europe, 
Astounded, moved, forthwith herself bestirs 
With thund'rous sound. As if by storm winds fanned, 
Swift-rushing onward roars 

=====第79页=====
Gpanififc. 
jSeri que siempre la ambition sangrienla, 
Ô del solio el poder pronuncie solo, 
Caando la trompa de la lama alienla 
Vnestro divino labio, injos de Apolo? 
iNo os da rubor? iEI don de la alabanza, 
La hermosa luz de la brillante gloria 
Serin tal vez del nombre, â quien daria. 
Eterno oprobrio ö maldicion la historia? 
lOh,  despertad! el humillado acento 
Con mageslad no usada, 
Suba a las nubes, penetrando el vicnlo: 
Y si quereis que el uniTerso os créa 
Dignos del lauro, en que cefiis la trente, 
Que Tuestro canto enérgico y valientc 
Digno tambien del unirerso sea. 
No los aromas del loor se vieron 
Vilmenle degradados 
Asi en la antiguedad: siempre las aras 
De la invencion sublime, 
Del genio bienhechor los recibieron. SBirfe kenn allein bee 3)id)ttr» Stimme fingen 
»Jon tuit'gtm <Sf)rgei| m* »on ftoljm îbrunen, 
SBemt Me £rommttcn ganta'« um ibjt Hingen, 
î>!t !h»)tn fdmwUenb, tto Me (Botta nwbnra! 
SBarb aid) fo frtmb Me edjam? S)e» Çrtifm« (Babe, 
IX« Ruhme« Strahl mit feinem heûen 8ld)te 
Scrfdraxnbtt ihr lut SRaïutcm, »chfeen «tig 
Slue) fvnuiet nnb Strmünfdnrag bit ®tfd)ia)te? 
(Ernad)!, erawdjt! bit SBolten überfliege 
Sxt Sang, ber fdpngemorb'nc, 
Stit nie gefeb'ntr Äraft in hehrem Siege! 
Unb »001 ihr, baê Me SBclt cud) wûrMg r>altt 
Sx» îerteer«, ber um eure Srime b(ûr>t. 
Se fergt, bal tuer Sieb 
SBûtMg ber SBelt unb triftig fid) entfalte! 
3n alter 3tit warb nimmermehr »crfdm>enbtt 
3>et Onferbuft bee te'M; 
an bem Wtar wcbtthdtiger (frjinbung, 
SBohltbaTgen Qtiftee warb er ftet« gcftenbet. 
Pages 208 and 209 of the Gutenbergs-AUmm containing M. J. Quintana's 
poem A la invencion de la imprenta and Engels' translation 

=====第80页=====

=====第81页=====
On the Invention of Printing 
The wrathful fire that has so long lain deep 
In the dark bowels of the Earth, asleep. 
O evil Pile, raised up for Ignorance there 
By base brutality and Tyrants' wrath! 
Rocks glowing, the Volcano gushes forth, 
And your foundations tremble in their fear! 
What is this monster of the evil spirit, 
This foul abortion, that, all scruples gone, 
Founds on the old decaying Capitol 
Its loathsome and abominable Throne, 
And now bids to destroy, yea, murder all? 
It stands, although the structure of its power 
Is crumbling slowly. But one day that Throne 
Shall fall and cast its ruins o'er the land. 
A fastness perching on a crag alone 
Thus crowns the summit of a mountain high. 
The Sons of War once took up their abode 
In its security. 
Ruling by force of stolen power, they 
Would sally forth exultant to the fray. 
Deserted and alone, 
The Keep stands in the forest, seen by none. 
It still surveys, though crumbling with neglect, 
The world all round with menacing aspect. 
One day it shall fall down, 
And then the fields shall groan, 
Covered with ruins. Meanwhile, it shall be 
Scarecrow and bogey to all folk that lived 
In fear and terror of it recently. 
That, then, was the first wreath of bay to deck 
The brow of Reason; but Intellect now rises 
Courageously, athirst for certain knowledge, 
Encompassing the world in its embraces. 
Copernicus soars to the starry places 
Hitherto shrouded in a heavy pall; 
And then he sees, immeasurably far, 
Day's bringer, our forever festive star, 
The brightest luminary of them all. 
Then Galileo feels beneath his feet 
The Earth's ball rolling; but blind Italy 
Rewards him with a prison cell's disgrace. 

=====第82页=====
Frederick Engels 
Meanwhile, the Earth sails onward ceaselessly 
And swiftly through the infinite sea of space, 
And with it, fast as lightning, sweep the stars, 
Shimm'ring in flight. Then Newton's fiery spirit 
Is flung aloft into their very midst. 
He follows, understands them, 
Charting the tracks of forces 
That keep them racing in their whirling courses. 
What does it help you, then, to conquer Heaven, 
To find the law that moves eternally 
Air's circle and the seas? To split the ray 
Of light incorporeal; or to dig down 
Into the bowels of Earth and snatch the cradle 
Of gold and crystal? Spirit, return once more 
To Man! 
And so it did, only to pour 
Its bitterness into lamentations loud: 
"How is the Intellect with blindness cowed! 
How rings that chain of iron 
Forged by the frenzied powers of Tyranny, 
From pole to pole each with the other vying, 
And pins Man helpless lying, 
Upon his death-bed, tired of slavery! 
This must be ended." 
And the Despots heard, 
And wielded in their vile and villainous hands 
Two weapons to depend on—Fire and Sword. 
"O senseless ones! Those very high-piled faggots 
That threaten to devour me horribly, 
That burn to keep me from the Truth away, 
Are beacons guiding me along Truth's way, 
Are Torches to light up Truth's victory! 
Truth fondly I desire; 
With rapture drunk, my heart to Truth gives prayer, 
My spirit looks on Truth; I follow her, 
Not of the sword afraid, nor yet of fire. 
That being so, then shall I still demur? 
Can I turn back again, 
Retrace my steps? The waves of Tagus never 
Run back towards the source from which they came 
Once they have flowed into the mighty sea. 

=====第83页=====
On the Invention of Printing 61 
The mountains seek to bar its course in vain; 
They cannot stay it in its onward motion. 
It rushes in the train 
Of Destiny that roars into the Ocean." 
And then the great day came 
On which a mortal man arose outraged, 
In wrath from all-encompassing disgrace, 
And, with almighty voice, 
Called out to all the World: Mankind is free! 
And narrow boundaries no longer caged 
The sacred call: it rose up on the wing 
Of the great echo Gutenberg invented, 
Soared up, a wondrous thing, 
And swift, in mighty inspiration, 
O'erleapt the mountains and the ocean wide 
And o'er the very winds held domination. 
It was not shouted down by Tyranny, 
And loud and lusty rang on every side 
The joyful cry of Reason: Man is free! 
Oh, free, yes, free! Sweetest of words, the breast 
Swells, beating faster at the sound of you; 
My spirit, that you imbue, 
O'erbrimming with your holy inspiration, 
Soars to serene celestial dominions, 
Bearing me on its fiery beating pinions. 
Where are you all that hear 
My singing, mortal beings? From on high, 
I see the awesome prison doors of Fate 
Open, the impenetrable veil of Time 
Is torn apart—the Future lies before me! 
I see full clear that Earth never again 
Shall be the wretched planet where Ambition 
And War with its fierce countenance can reign. 
Now both of them are gone from Earth for ever, 
As Plague and Storm, those torturers, prepare 
To leave the zone they've pillaged and laid bare, 
When Polar ice-winds threaten to blow over. 
All people felt their true equality; 
With strength untamed, brave heroes struggled for 
That right and won it with triumphant glee. 

=====第84页=====
62 Frederick Engels 
Bremen There are no Slaves or Tyrants any more. 
Now Love and Peace fill all the World around, 
And Love and Peace breathe over all the Earth, 
And "Love and Peace!" both near and far resound. 
And up aloft, upon his golden Throne 
In blessing doth the Lord his sceptre raise, 
Dispensing Air and Joy all round below, 
So that on all Earth's ways 
They might, as once of old, abundant flow. 
Do you not see that column soaring there, 
Towering in all its splendour to the sky, 
A-throb with flashing light, eye-dazzling? 
Less mighty are the pyramids so high, 
The work of slaves who toiled in abject fear 
Of one whose glory came from suffering. 
See there, unwavering, 
The eternal incense rise, 
As the whole Earth gives thanks to Gutenberg. 
For such beneficence, a modest prize! 
Hail to the one who broke the insensate power 
Of battering violence; raised the might of Reason, 
The strength of soul, high o'er the world to fly! 
Praise him who raised the Truth in triumph high, 
Making his hands' work fruitful for all time! 
Sing the Well-Doer's praise in song sublime! 
Translated in the first half of 1840 Printed according to the album 
First published in the G 
Braunschweig, 1840 
Signed: Friedrich Engels First published in the Gutenbergs-Album, Published in English for the first 
Braunschweig, 1840 time 

=====第85页=====
JOEL JACOBY 
Görres' troupe of tight-rope dancers has acquired a valuable 
recruit in Joel Jacoby. The role of clown was previously performed 
by Herr Guido Görres, whose jokes, however, were not ap­
preciated by the public; but in his Kampf und Sieg the new 
member has recently again demonstrated his vocation for this role 
in surprising fashion. Such a versatile man, who can wear with 
equal grace the red cap and purple of David, the frock-coat of a 
candidate eager for a post, or the penitential shirt of a catechu­
men, who finds pleasure in acting as a walking advertisement, 
carrying in front of him an issue of the Berliner politisches 
Wochenblatt and behind him the publications list of Manz in 
Regensburg —such a man is quite at his ease in all roles. Now he 
makes his first appearance without being in the least embarrassed, 
and while "Prosperity and peace, struggle and victory, sound their 
strains for you", he has one eye on the Order of the Red Eagle 
and the other on the bishop's mitre. 
"What should I give you for your refreshment?" he asks the 
public. "Do you want something from the year 1832 or 1834, 1836 
or 1839? What should I declaim, Marat or Jarcke, David or Görres 
or Hegel?" But he is generous and gives us a ragout of all the 
reminiscences that spring up in the desert of his mind, and it is 
true that he gives us something refreshing. 
One is perplexed how to deal with this nonsense. I shall readily 
be permitted not to analyse the perfidy of disposition and chaotic 
confusion of ideas which distinguish also this work of the author; 
we are indeed faced with a semi-lunatic in whose mind his own 
shapeless thought embryos have other people's ideas grafted on 

=====第86页=====
64 Frederick Engels 
them to produce an unbridled orgy! How much, for example, can 
our poet know of his own past if he calls himself "a quiet man"I 
He, who for the past eight years has continually shouted, raged 
and stormed for the revolution, against the revolution, for Prussia, 
for the Pope. He, a quiet man? He, whose plaints were always 
equivalent to complaints,2 the born informer who always cast 
suspicion on a massive scale — does he belong to the country's 
quiet men? 
Franz Karl Joel Jacoby's confusion of language is in keeping 
with his confusion of ideas. I would never have believed that the 
German language could be so closely linked with the most 
confused conceptions. Words which have never been seen in 
company with one another are here thrown together; ideas which 
are mutually antagonistic are here coupled together by an all-
powerful verb; the most lawful and innocent expressions occur 
suddenly among reminiscences from Joel's revolutionary years, 
among suspicious-looking phrases of Menzel's, Leo's and Görres', 
among incorrectly understood thoughts of Hegel's, and over all 
this the poet brandishes his riding-whip so that the whole wild 
pack rushes along, knocking one another over, turning somer­
saults,  and reeling, until it finally comes to rest in the bosom of 
the church as the sole source of salvation. 
The actual content of this masterpiece, which is composed in 
accordance with a pseudo-parallelism, in the old "grand manner 
of saying everything twice" (and even three or six times!), consists 
of the lyrical laments of a Jew and a catechumen, and then the 
laments of a Catholic, where the author abandons one-sided lyrical 
subjectivity and develops a genuine modern drama, in the centre 
of which the vigorous personality of the author acts a tragic role 
(he is at least mournful enough to look at), and over whose 
disconsolate confusion rises the medieval dawn of the Catholic 
Church. The new prophet Joel rises up in gigantic form out of the 
modern chaos and predicts the downfall of all revolutionary, 
liberal, Hegeling,49 and Protestant efforts, which will give way to a 
new age of absence of thought. A curse is pronounced on 
everything that does not bow down before the crosier. Only the 
"Prussian Fatherland" receives pia desideriah ; on the other hand, 
the Carlist Basques and the "Belgian nightingale" 50 perish to the 
joy of their master Loyola. One sees that the terrorism of the 
Jacobin era remains firmly in Herr Jacoby's memory. A bloody 
a A pun on the German words Klagen and Verklagen. — Ed. 
Pious wishes.— Ed. 

=====第87页=====
Joel Jacoby 65 
j'udgment  is held on all enemies of Jesuitism and the monarchist 
principle, above all on the new philosophers, who carry a dagger 
in a sheath of mind-confusing ideas, and among their many-
coloured rags the well-known shroud (at least Herr Jacoby knows 
it very well from former days) in which the priests and princes 
together sleep their sleep of death. But the new prophet knows 
them, "I have always understood you," he says  himself.  On the 
other hand, he acquits the master, a because a few of the latter's 
ideas have entered Herr Jacoby's heated brain like snowflakes, and 
there, of course, have turned to water. In face of the chorus of 
vultures and owls that now follows, as also in face of the infernal 
rejoicing, criticism is justly silent. 
In Joel Jacoby we see the horrifying extreme to which all 
knights of unreason are driven in the end. That is the final 
outcome of all hostility to free thought, of all opposition to the 
absolute power of the mind, whether it appears in the form of 
wild, unruly sansculottism or the unthinking servile mind; whether 
it is represented by the parted hair of the pietist or the tonsure of 
the priest. Joel Jacoby is a living trophy, a sign of the victory 
which the thinking mind has achieved. Anyone who has ever 
entered the lists on behalf of the nineteenth century can gaze in 
triumph on this unfortunate poet of our time, for sooner, or later 
all its other adversaries will suffer the same fate. 
Written in January-March 1840 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the  Telegraph  für Published in English for the first 
Deutschland  No. 55, April 1840 time 
Signed:  Friedrich Oswald 
' Hegel.— Ed. 

=====第88页=====
REQUIEM FOR THE GERMAN ADELSZEITUNG 
[Telegraph für Deutschland No. 59, April 1840] 
Dies irae, dies ilia 
Saecla solvet in favilla.3 
The day that Luther produced the original text of the New 
Testament and with this Greek fire burnt to dust and ashes the 
centuries of the Middle Ages, with their lordly splendour and 
feudal servitude, with their poetry and lack of thought,52 that day 
and the three centuries that followed brought forth, at long last, a 
time 
"which belongs wholly to the public, a time of which Napoleon, whose rare 
perspicacity cannot be denied in spite of his many qualities that are reprehensible, 
particularly in German eyes, said: 'Le journalisme est une puissance'" . 
I quote these words here merely to show how little medieval, 
i.e., lacking in thought, is the prospectus of the Adelszeitung from 
which they are taken. 53.And the German Adelszeitung was intended 
to set the crown on this public and give it consciousness. For it is 
clear that Gutenberg did not invent printing to assist a Börne, who 
was certainly a demagogue, or Hegel  — who is indeed servile in 
front, as Heine proved, and revolutionary behind, as Schubarth 
proved 0—or any other burgher to spread his confused ideas 
throughout the world, but for the one and only purpose of 
enabling the Adelszeitung to be founded.—  Peace  be with it, it has 
passed away! It took only a stealthy, timid look at this nasty, 
The day of anger, the day the world is reduced to  ashes.  — This and other 
Latin quotations are taken from the sequence on the Last Judgment in the Roman 
Catholic Requiem mass.— Ed. 
"Journalism is a power." — Ed. 
c K. Schubarth, Ueber die Unvereinbarkeit der Hegel'schen Staatslehre mit dem 
obersten Lebens- und Entwickelungsprinzip des Preussischen Staats. — Ed. 

=====第89页=====
Requiem for the German Adelszeitung 67 
unmedieval world, and its pure, maidenly soul, or rather its 
gracious young lady's soul, recoiled before the abomination of 
desolation, before the filth of the democratic canaille, before the 
horrifying arrogance of those who are not admitted to court, 
before all those lamentable circumstances, relations and disorders 
of our time which, if they show themselves at the gates of nobles' 
castles, are welcomed with a riding-whip. Peace be with it, it has 
passed away; it sees no longer the hollowness of democracy, the 
undermining of what exists, the tears of the high- and noble-born, 
it has passed into eternal sleep. 
Requiem aeternam dona ei, Domine!* 
And yet we have lost much by its death. What joy there was in 
all the salons to which only gentlemen with sixteen generations of 
ancestors are admitted, what delight in all the half-lost advance 
posts of orthodox aristocracy! There sat the old gracious papa in 
his inherited arm-chair, surrounded by his favourite hounds, in 
his right hand his inherited pipe, in his left hand his inherited 
riding-whip, and reverently studied the antediluvian genealogical 
tree in the first book of Moses, when the door opened and the 
prospectus of the Adelszeitung was brought in to him. The 
nobleman, seeing the word Adel b printed in large letters, hastily 
adjusts his spectacles and blissfully reads through the sheet; he 
sees that the new newspaper also gives space to family news, and 
he rejoices at the thought of his obituary — how he would like to 
read it himself!—when one day he is gathered to his ances­
tors.—  Then the young squires gallop into the castle yard; the old 
man hurriedly sends for them. Herr Theoderich "von der 
Neige", 0 with a lash from his whip, drives the horses into the 
stable, Herr Siegwart rides down a few flunkeys, treads on the 
cat's tail and in knightly fashion pushes aside an old peasant who 
has come with a request and has been refused; Herr Giselher 
orders the servants on pain of corporal punishment to make 
impeccable arrangements for the hunt; and so at last the young 
barons noisily enter the hall. Barking, the dogs rush to meet them, 
but are driven under the table with lashes from riding-whips, and 
Herr Siegwart von der Neige, who had quietened his favourite 
hound with a kick of his gracious boot, does not receive from the 
delighted father even the usual angry glance because of it. Herr 
a Eternal rest give unto it, O Lord! — Ed. 
b Nobility.—Ed. 
c Neige means "decline".— Ed. 

=====第90页=====
68 Frederick Engels 
Theoderich, who besides the Bible and the family tree has read a 
few things in the encyclopaedia and therefore knows how to 
pronounce foreign words more correctly than the others, has to 
read the prospectus aloud, and the old man amid his tears of joy 
forgets about the redemption ordinance and the burdens of the 
nobility. 
[Telegraph für Deutschland No. 60, April 1840] 
How morally-modestly-condescendingly the gracious lady rode 
into the modern world on her white paper palfrey, how boldly her 
two knights looked out into the world — each of them every inch a 
baron, each drop of their blood the fruit of sixty-four nuptials 
between partners of equal rank, each glance a challenge! First of 
all, Herr von Alvensleben, who has pranced his knightly charger 
over the arid waste of French novels and memoirs so that now he 
can venture also on a tilt against bourgeois louts. His shield bears 
the device: "A properly inherited right can never be a wrong", 
and he cries out to the world in a loud voice: "It has been 
vouchsafed to the nobles in the past to earn distinction, now they* 
are resting on their laurels or, in plain language, they have grown 
idle;  the nobles have given powerful protection to the princes and 
thereby to the  peoples  also, and I shall take care that these great deeds 
are not forgotten, and my beloved, the Adelszeitung —requiescat 
in pace*—is the most beautiful lady in the world, and whoever 
denies it, he—" 
But here the noble hero falls off his horse, and in his place 
Herr Friedrich, baron de la Motte Fouqué, jogs into the lists. The 
old "light-brown" Rosinante, whose horseshoes had fallen off 
from prolonged sojourn in the stable, this  hippogriff,  which had 
never been well fed even in its best days and long ago ceased to 
make romantic leaps among the warriors of the North, suddenly 
began to stamp on the ground. Herr von Fouqué forgot the 
annual poetic commentary for the Berliner politisches Wochenblatt, 
ordered his armour to be polished and the old blind horse 
brought out, and with the grandeur of a lone hero set out on a 
crusade against the ideas of the times. But so that the honour-lov­
ing burgher estate would not think that the bent lance of the old 
warrior was directed against it, Fouqué throws it a foreword. 54 
Such condescending kindness deserves discussion. 
The foreword teaches us that world history does not exist in 
order to realise the idea of freedom, as Hegel most erroneously 
" May it rest in peace.— Ed. 

=====第91页=====
Requiem for the German Adelszeitung 69 
supposes, but solely to prove that there must exist three estates: 
the nobility, which has to fight, the burghers  — to  think, and the 
peasants—to plough. But there should be no caste distinctions; 
the estates should replenish and renovate one another, not by 
misalliances, but by elevation to a higher estate. It is, of course, 
difficult to understand how the nobility, "a lake clear as spring 
water" which pure springs combined to produce, which gushed 
forth from the heights of robber castles, could be in any need of 
renovation. But the noble baron allows that people who have not 
been only burghers, but also "ostlers", and perhaps even tailors' 
journeymen, should renovate the nobility. But how other estates 
should be renovated by the nobility, Herr Fouqué does not say. 
Probably by persons who have been degraded from the ranks of 
the nobility, or perhaps—since Herr Fouqué is kind enough to 
confess that the nobility in itself is no better at bottom than the 
canaille—it will be as much an honour for a nobleman to be raised 
to the burgher estate, or even to the peasant estate, as it is for the 
burgher to obtain a nobleman's patent? Furthermore, in the Herr 
Fouqué state, care is taken to ensure that philosophy does not get 
the upper hand too much; Kant with his ideas of eternal peace 55 
would have gone to the stake there, for where eternal peace 
prevails the nobility could not fight, at best only apprentices 
would. 
It is clear that on account of his thorough studies of history and 
statecraft Herr Fouqué deserves to be raised to the thinking, i.e., 
the burgher estate; he has managed excellently to detect among 
the Huns and Avars, among the Bashkirs and Mohicans, indeed 
even among antediluvians, not only an honourable public, but also 
a high nobility. Moreover, he has made a totally new discov­
ery—that in the Middle Ages, when the peasant was a feudal  serf, 
the peasant estate was the giver and recipient of love and kindness 
in respect of the other two estates. His language is incomparable, 
he lays about him with "dimensions penetrating to the very roots" 
and "knows how to extract gold from phenomena that are in 
themselves  (Hegel—Saul among the prophets) most obscure". 
Et lux perpétua luceat eis 1— 
they are truly in need of it. 
The defunct Adelszeitung has indeed had some splendid ideas, 
for example, the one about the landownership of the nobility, and 
a hundred more which it would be impossible to praise, but its 
a And may perpetual light shine upon them.— Ed. 

=====第92页=====
70 Frederick Engels 
happiest idea, however, was that in its very first issue, among the 
announcements, it immediately advertised a misalliance. Whether it 
was prepared with equal humanity to include Herr von Rothschild 
in the German nobility, it did not say. May God comfort the 
unfortunate parents and raise the deceased to heavenly baronial 
rank. 
And let them sleep in peace 
Until the Judgment Day. 
We, however, shall sing a requiem for it and pronounce a 
funeral oration, as is the duty of an honest burgher. 
Tuba mirum spargens sonum 
Per sepulcra regionum 
Coget omnes ante thronum." 
Do you not hear the trumpet, whose sound overturns the 
tombstones and makes the earth shake with joy so that the graves 
burst open? The Day of Judgment has come, the day that will 
never be followed by another nightb; the spirit, the eternal king, 
has ascended his throne and at his feet are gathered all the 
peoples of the earth to render account of their thoughts and 
deeds;  new life pervades the whole world, so that the old family 
trees of the peoples joyfully wave their leafy branches in the 
morning air, shedding all their old foliage to be at the mercy of 
the wind, which blows them together into a large funeral pyre 
which God himself ignites with his lightning. Judgment has been 
pronounced on the races of the earth, a judgment which the 
children of the past would like to defeat as much as in a lawsuit 
over inheritance, but the eternal judge inexorably threatens them 
with his piercing glance; the talent which they did not put to use is 
taken from them and they are cast out into the darkness where no 
ray of the spirit refreshes them. 
Written in January-April 1840 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the Telegraph für Published in English for the first 
Deutschland Nos. 59 and 60, time 
April 1840 
Signed: Friedrich Oswald 
a The trumpet spreading wonderful sound over the graves of all regions 
summons all before the throne.— Ed. 
The Telegraph für Deutschland has the misprint Macht (might) for Nacht 
(night).—  Ed. 

=====第93页=====
MODERN LITERARY LIFE 56 
I 
KARL GUTZKOW AS DRAMATIST 
[Mitternachtzeitung für gebildete Leser No. 51, March 26, 1840] 
One would have thought that after Gutzkow's well-known article 
in the Jahrbuch der Literatur 57 his opponents would feel moved to 
equally noble revenge; with the possible exception of Kühne, who 
was really dismissed too superficially here also. But one little 
knows the egoism of our literature if one expects any such thing. 
It was most significant that the Telegraph in its literary share-list 
took each writer's evaluation of himself as the price at par. So it 
was predictable that Gutzkow's latest writings would receive no 
special welcome from this quarter. 
Nevertheless there are those among our critics who pride 
themselves on their impartiality to Gutzkow, and others who admit 
to a decided predilection for his literary work. The latter spoke 
very highly of his Richard Savage, 58 the Savage which Gutzkow 
wrote in feverish haste in twelve days, while his Saul, 59 where one 
can see with how much love the poet worked on it, how carefully 
he nurtured it, they dismiss with a few words of half-hearted 
recognition. At the very time when Savage was making its fortune 
on every stage and all the journals were filled with reviews, those 
to whom knowledge of this play was denied should have been 
prompted to trace Gutzkow's dramatic talent in Saul, which was 
available to them in print. But how few journals gave even a 
superficial criticism of this tragedy! One really does not know what 
to think of our literary life if one compares this neglect with the 
discussions aroused by Beck's Fahrender Poet, a poem which is 
surely farther from classicism than Gutzkow's Saull 
But before discussing this play we must consider the two 
dramatic studies in the Skizzenbuch. 60 The first act of Marino 

=====第94页=====
72 Frederick Engels 
Falieri, an unfinished tragedy, shows how well Gutzkow can 
fashion and shape each single act by  itself,  how skilfully he can 
handle the dialogue and endow it with refinement, grace and wit. 
But there is not enough action, one can relate the content in three 
words, and so on the stage it would bore even those who can 
appreciate the beauties of the execution. Any improvement, it is 
true,  would be difficult since the action is so constructed that to 
move anything from the second act to the first would only do 
harm elsewhere. But here the true dramatist proves his worth, and 
if Gutzkow is one, as I am convinced he is, he will solve the 
problem satisfactorily in the tragedy as a whole which he has 
promised to and will, we hope, soon complete. 
Hamlet in Wittenberg already gives us the outline of a whole. 
Gutzkow has done well to give only the outlines here, since the 
most successful part, the scene in which Ophelia appears, would 
offend if depicted in greater detail. I find it inexplicable, however, 
that in order to introduce doubt, that German element, into 
Hamlet's heart, Gutzkow should bring him together with Faust. 
There is no need whatever to bring this trait into Hamlet's soul 
from without, since it is already there, and is inborn in him. 
Otherwise Shakespeare also would have especially motivated it. 
Gutzkow here refers to Börne, but it is precisely Börne who not 
only demonstrates the split in Hamlet but also establishes the unity 
of his character.* And by what agency does Gutzkow introduce 
these elements into Hamlet's mind? Perhaps through the curse 
which Faust pronounces on the young Dane? Such  deus-ex-machina 
effects would make all dramatic poetry impossible. Through 
Faust's conversations with Mephistopheles which Hamlet over­
hears? If so, firstly, the curse would lose its significance, and, 
secondly, the thread leading from this character of Shakespeare's 
Hamlet is often so fine as to be lost to sight, and, thirdly, could 
Hamlet speak so casually of other things immediately afterwards? 
It is different with the appearance of Ophelia. Here Gutzkow has 
seen through Shakespeare, or if not that, has supplemented him. 
It is a case of Columbus and the egg; after the critics have argued 
about it for two hundred years a solution is given here which is as 
original as it is poetical and probably the only possible one. The 
execution of the scene is also masterly. Those who were not 
convinced by a certain scene in Wally 61 that Gutzkow also has 
imagination and is not coldly matter-of-fact, can learn it here. The 
tender, poetic bloom on the delicate figure of Ophelia is more 
a L. Börne, Hamlet, von Shakespeare.— Ed. 

=====第95页=====
Modem Literary Life 73 
than one is entitled to expect from mere outlines.— The verses 
spoken by Mephistopheles are totally unsuccessful. It would 
require a second Goethe to reproduce the language of Goethe's 
Faust, the melody that rings in the seeming doggerel; in anybody 
else's hands these light verses would become wooden and ponder­
ous. On the interpretation of the principle of evil I will not argue 
with Gutzkow here. 
Now we come to our main work, König Saul. Gutzkow has been 
upbraided for having his Savage preceded by a number of trumpet 
blasts and fanfares in the Telegraph, although all the fuss is about 
two or three short notices; it does not occur to anybody that others 
have had their works welcomed by paid musicians; but because it 
is Gutzkow, who has told someone a home truth and perhaps 
done someone else a slight injustice, it is made out to be a great 
crime. With König Saul there is no room for such reproaches; it 
came into the world unannounced either by notices below the line 
or excerpts in the Telegraph. There is the same modesty in the 
drama  itself;  no spectacular effects with thunder and lightning rise 
like volcanic islands from a sea of watery dialogue, no pompous 
monologues are intoned whose inspired or moving rhetoric has to 
conceal a number of dramatic blunders; everything develops 
calmly and organically, and a conscious, poetic force leads the 
action safely to its conclusion. And will our critics read such a 
work once and then write an article whose bright, flowery 
flourishes show from what thin, sandy soil they sprout? I regard as 
a great merit of König Saul the fact that its beauties are not on the 
surface, that one must look for them, that after a single reading 
one may well throw the book contemptuously into a corner. Let an 
educated man forget how famous Sophocles is and then let him 
choose between Antigone and Saul; I am convinced that after a 
single reading he would find both works equally bad. By that I do 
not, of course, mean to say that Saul can be compared to the 
greatest poetic work of the greatest Greek; I only wish to indicate 
the degree of perverseness with which frivolous superficiality can 
judge. It was entertaining to see how certain sworn enemies of the 
author now suddenly believed themselves to have won an enor­
mous triumph, how jubilantly they pointed to Sauf as a monument 
to all Gutzkow's hollowness and lack of poetry, how they did not 
know what to make of Samuel and pretended it was always being 
said of him "I don't know if he is alive or dead". It was amusing 
how beautifully they unconsciously revealed their boundless super­
ficiality. But Gutzkow may be reassured; it happened thus to the 
prophets who came before him, and in the end his Saul will be 
4-384 

=====第96页=====
74 Frederick Engels 
among the prophets. Thus they despised Ludwig Uhland's plays 
until Wienbarg opened their eyes. 62 Precisely Uhland's plays have 
much in common with Saul in the modest simplicity of their dress. 
[Mitternachtzeitung für gebildete Leser No. 52, March 27, 1840] 
Another reason why superficiality could dismiss Saul so easily 
lies in the peculiar conception of historical fiction. With historical 
works which are as well known as the first book of Samuel and 
regarded in so many and various ways, everyone has his own 
peculiar standpoint which he wishes to see recognised or heeded 
at least to some extent in the case of a poetic adaptation. One 
reader is for Saul, another for David, a third for Samuel; and 
everybody, however solemn his assurances that he is willing to let 
the poet have his views, is nevertheless piqued if his own are not 
respected. But Gutzkow has done well here to leave the common 
highway where even the most ordinary cart finds a rut. I would 
like to see the man who would undertake to create a purely 
historical Saul in a tragedy. I cannot be satisfied with the attempts 
hitherto made to place the story of Saul on a purely historical 
basis.  Historical criticism of Old Testament scripture has not yet 
got beyond the bounds of old-fashioned rationalism. A Strauss 
would still have much to do here if he wanted to separate strictly 
and clearly what is myth, what is history, and what is interpolated 
by the priests. Furthermore, have not a thousand failures shown 
that the Orient as such is an infertile ground for drama? And 
where in the story is that higher power which emerges victorious 
when the individuals who have outlived themselves break down? 
Surely not David? He remains as before amenable to the influence 
of the priests and is a poetic hero at most in the unhistorical light 
in which the Bible presents him. Consequently Gutzkow has not 
only taken advantage here of the right belonging to every poet, he 
has also removed the obstacles standing in the way of a poetic 
presentation. How then would a purely historical Saul appear in 
all the trappings of his time and nationality? Imagine him 
speaking in Hebrew parallelisms, all his ideas relating to Jehovah 
and all his images to the Hebrew cult; imagine the historical David 
speaking in the language of the psalms — to imagine an historical 
Samuel is altogether impossible — and then ask yourselves whether 
such figures would be even tolerable in drama? Here the 
categories of period and nationality had to be removed, here the 
outlines of the characters as they appear in biblical history and in 
previous criticism had to undergo many very necessary changes; 

=====第97页=====
Modem Literary Life 75 
indeed, a great deal here which historically was known to them 
only as notions or at most as vague representations had to be 
developed into clear concepts. Thus the poet had the perfect 
right, for example, to assume that his characters were familiar 
with the concept of the church.— And one cannot but heartily 
applaud Gutzkow when one observes how he solved his problem 
here.  The threads from which he wove his characters are all to be 
found, however entangled, in his source; many had to be pulled 
out and thrown away, but only the most biassed criticism can 
charge him with having interwoven anything alien, except in the 
scene with the Philistines. 
Grouped in the centre of the drama are three characters by 
whose original portrayal alone Gutzkow made his material truly 
tragic. Here he shows a genuinely poetic view of history; no one 
will ever be able to convince me that a "coldly matter-of-fact" 
person, "a debater", would be capable of selecting from a 
confused tale precisely that which would produce the greatest 
tragic effect. These three characters are Saul, Samuel and David. 
Saul concludes one period of Hebrew history, the age of the 
Judges, the age of heroic legend; Saul is the last Israelite Nibelung 
whose generation of heroes has left him behind in an age he does 
not understand and which does not understand him. Saul is an 
epigone whose sword was originally destined to gleam through the 
mist of the age of myth but whose misfortune it was to have lived 
to see the age of advancing culture, an epoch which is alien to 
him, which covers his sword with rust, and which he therefore 
seeks to drive back. He is otherwise a noble person to whom no 
human feeling is alien, but he does not recognise love when he 
encounters it in the apparel of the new age. He sees this new age 
and its manifestations as the work of the priests, whereas the 
priests only prepare it, are only tools in the hands of history from 
whose hierarchical seed sprouts an unsuspected plant; he fights 
the new epoch, but it prevails over him. It gains giant strength 
overnight and smashes the great, noble Saul together with all who 
oppose it. 
Samuel stands at the transition to culture; here as always the 
priests, as the privileged possessors of education, prepare the state 
of culture among primitive peoples, but education penetrates to 
the people, and the priests must resort to other weapons if they 
want to preserve their influence on the people. Samuel is a 
genuine priest whose holy of holies is the hierarchy; he firmly 
believes in his divine mission, and is convinced that if the rule of 
the priests is overthrown Jehovah's wrath will descend on the 
4 

=====第98页=====
76 Frederick Engels 
people. To his horror he sees that the people already know too 
much when they demand a king; he sees that moral power, the 
imposing frock of the priest, no longer suffices with the people; 
he must resort to the weapons of cleverness and unwittingly 
becomes a Jesuit. But the very crooked ways he now pursues are 
doubly hateful to the king who could never be the priests' friend, 
and in the struggle Saul's eyes soon become as sharp for priestly 
tricks as they are blind to the signs of the times. 
The third element, which emerges victorious from this struggle, 
the representative of a new historical epoch in which Judaism 
attains a new stage of consciousness, is David, equal to Saul in his 
humanity, and far exceeding him in his understanding of the age. 
At first he appears as Samuel's pupil, barely having left school; but 
his reason has not so bowed itself before authority as to lose its 
resilience; it springs up and restores his independence to him. 
Samuel's personality may still impress him, but his intellect always 
comes to his aid, his poetic imagination rebuilds the new 
Jerusalem for him as often as Samuel destroys it with the lightning 
of his anathemas. Saul cannot become reconciled with him since 
both are pursuing opposite aims, and when he says that he hates 
only what priestly deceit has put into David's soul, he is again 
confusing the effects of priestly lust for power with the signs of 
the new age. Thus David develops before our eyes from a foolish 
boy to the bearer of an epoch, and so the seeming contradictions 
in his portrayal vanish. 
In order not to interrupt the development of these three 
characters, I have deliberately passed over a question raised by all 
critics who took the trouble to read Saul once, the question of 
whether Samuel appears as a living person in the witches' scene 
and at the end or whether his ghost delivers the speeches there 
recorded. Let us suppose that no easy or thoroughly satisfactory 
answer is to be found in Saul; would that be such a great fault? I 
think not—take him for what you like, and if you feel inclined 
start boring discussions about it; after all one finds the same thing in 
Shakespeare's Hamlet whose madness all the critics and commen­
tators have discussed for the past two hundred years "three long 
and three broad and altogether polygonally"a  and from all angles. 
Gutzkow has not made the problem so very difficult, however. 
He has long known how ridiculous ghosts are in broad daylight, 
how mal à propos the Black Knight appears in Die Jungfrau 
a A quotation from Wienbarg's article "Ludwig Uhland, als Dramatiker". See 
this volume, p. 42.— Ed. 

=====第99页=====
Modem Literary Life 77 
von Orleans," and that all ghostly apparitions would be quite out 
of place in Saul. In the witches' scene especially the mask is easy to 
see through, even if the old high priest had not appeared earlier 
in a similar manner, before there was any talk of Samuel's death. 
Of the play's remaining characters the best drawn is Abner, who 
devotes himself to Saul with utter conviction and due to perfect 
compatibility of temperament and in whom the warrior and 
enemy of the priests has relegated the man wholly into the 
background. Least successful, by contrast, are Jonathan and 
Michal. Jonathan indulges throughout in phrases about friendship, 
and insists on his love for David without, however, proving it in 
anything but words; he dissolves completely in the friendship for 
David, thereby losing all manliness and strength. His butter-like 
softness cannot properly be called character. Gutzkow was con­
fused here as to what he should do with Jonathan. In any case, he 
is superfluous like this. Michal is kept quite vague and is 
characterised to some extent only by her love for David. How very 
unsuccessful these two figures are can best be seen in the scene 
where they converse about David. What is said there about love 
and friendship lacks all the striking sharpness, all the wealth of 
thought, to which we are accustomed in Gutzkow. Mere phrases 
which are neither quite true nor quite false, nothing remarkable, 
nothing significant.— Zeruiah is a Judith; I don't know whether it 
was Gutzkow or Kühne who once said that Judith, like every 
woman who transcends the limits of her sex, must die after her 
deed if she does not want to appear unattractive; Zeruiah also dies 
accordingly.— In itself the characterisation of the Philistine princes 
is excellent and rich in entertaining features, but whether it fits 
into the play is a question still to be settled. 
[Mitternachtzeitung für gebildete Leser No. 53, March 30, 1840] 
I trust I shall be excused for not giving a consecutive analysis of 
the dramatic action; only one point must be emphasised here, 
namely, the exposition. This is excellent and contains features in 
which Gutzkow's great dramatic talent is unmistakable. Wholly in 
keeping with Gutzkow's quick, impetuous manner, the mass of the 
people appears only in short scenes. There is something awkward 
about large crowd scenes; if one is not a Shakespeare or a Goethe 
they easily become trivial and insignificant. By contrast, a few 
words spoken by a couple of warriors or other men from the 
Schiller, Die Jungfrau von Orleans, Act III, Scene 9.— Ed. 

=====第100页=====
78 Frederick Engels 
crowd are often very effective and achieve perfectly their aim of 
sketching public opinion; moreover, they can appear much more 
frequently without being conspicuous and tiresome. So much for 
the first and fourth scenes of the first act. The second and third 
scenes contain Saul's monologue and his conversation with Samuel, 
which are the finest and most poetic passages of the play. The 
classically restrained passion of the dialogue is characteristic of the 
spirit in which the whole play is written. After the general state of 
the action has been rapidly outlined in these scenes, we are 
introduced to more specific matters in the fifth scene between 
Jonathan and David. This scene suffers somewhat from a confu­
sion of thought; several times one loses sight of the dialectical 
thread — without any doubt the result of the unsuccessful drawing 
of Jonathan right from the start. The final scene in the act is 
masterly, however. We are already familiar to some extent with 
the chief characters, and here they are brought together; David 
and Saul meet with the serious intention of being reconciled. Here 
the poet had to develop their different natures, show their 
incompatibility and bring about the inevitable conflict instead of 
the intended reconciliation. And this task, which only the most 
lively awareness, the most acute delineation of the characters, the 
surest look into the human soul can deal with satisfactorily, is 
solved here unsurpassably; the transitions in Saul's mind from one 
extreme to the other are so true psychologically, so finely 
motivated, that I must judge this scene the best in the whole play, 
in spite of the unfortunate episode with the son-in-law. 
In the second act, the scene with the Philistines is striking, or, to 
use Kühne 's expression, "freshly piquant", but I doubt whether its 
rich wit suffices to secure it a place in the tragedy. When Gutzkow 
lifted his Saul above the concepts of his age and ascribed to him a 
consciousness which he did not have, that can be justified; 
however, this scene introduces a purely modern concept, and 
David is standing on German soil here. That is damaging, at least 
for the tragedy. Comic scenes could still occur, but they would 
have to be of a different kind. The comic element in tragedy is 
not there, as superficial criticism says, for the sake of variation or 
contrast, but rather to give a more faithful picture of life, which is 
a mixture of jest and earnest. But I doubt if Shakespeare would 
have been satisfied with such reasons. In real life does not the 
most moving tragedy invariably appear in comic dress? I will only 
remind you of the character who, though he appears in a novel as 
he must, is yet the most tragic I know, Don Quixote. What is more 
tragic than a man who from sheer love of humanity and 

=====第101页=====
Modem Literary Life 79 
misunderstood by his own age falls into the most comic follies? 
Still more tragic is Blasedow, a Don Quixote of the future, whose 
consciousness is more heightened than that of his model. Inciden­
tally, I must here defend Blasedow against the otherwise penetrat­
ing criticism in the Rheinisches Jahrbuch which charges Gutzkow 
with having treated a tragic idea comically. 83 Blasedow had to be 
treated comically, like Don Quixote. If he is treated seriously, he 
becomes a prophet of world-weariness, a quite ordinary one, torn 
by emotion; remove the foil of comedy from the novel, and you 
have one of those formless, unsatisfactory works with which 
modern literature began. No, Blasedow is the first sure sign that 
Young Literature has left behind the period, necessary though it 
was, of wretchedness, of the Wallys and of the Nächte "written in 
red life".— The truly comic in tragedy is to be found in the fool in 
King Lear or the grave-digger scenes in Hamlet. 
[Mitternachtleitung für gebildete Leser No. 54, March 31, 1840] 
Here also that pitfall of the dramatist, the two last acts, has not 
been negotiated by the author entirely without damage. The 
fourth act contains nothing but decisions. Saul decides, Astharoth 
decides twice, Zeruiah decides, David decides. Then the witches' 
scene which also yields only meagre results. The fifth act consists 
of nothing but battle and reflection. Saul reflects a little too much 
for a hero, David too much for a poet. One often thinks that one 
is hearing not a poet-hero but a poet-t/iinfeer, perhaps Theodor 
Mundt. In general Gutzkow has a way of making monologues less 
conspicuous by having them spoken in the presence of others. But 
since such monologues can rarely lead to decisions and are purely 
reflective, there are still more than enough real monologues. 
The language of the play, as was to be expected of Gutzkow, is 
thoroughly original. We again find those images of Gutzkow's 
prose which are so expressive that one is unaware of moving from 
simple, naked prose into the flourishing region of the modern 
style,  those pithy, apt expressions which frequendy sound almost 
like proverbs. There is nothing of the lyric poet in Gutzkow, 
except in the lyrical moments of the action, when lyrical en­
thusiasm grips him unawares, and he is able to use prose. Hence 
the songs put into David's mouth are either unsuccessful or 
insignificant. When David says to the Philistines: 
I need but make you up as verses 
For fun into a wreath," 
a K. Gutzkow, König Saul, Act II, Scene 1.— Ed. 

=====第102页=====
80 Frederick Engels 
what does it mean?—The basic thought of such a song is often 
very pretty, but the execution invariably miscarries. In other 
respects, too, one notices in the language that Gutzkow does not 
possess sufficient skill in writing verse, which is, of course, better 
than making the verses more flowing, but also more insipid, with 
old phrases. 
Unsuccessful images have not been entirely avoided either. For 
example: 
The anger of the priest 
From whom the people first did wrest the crown 
And then in whose emaciated hand 
It should have been a  staff. 2 
Here the crown is already an allegory for kingdom and cannot 
become the abstract basis for the second image of the  staff.  This is 
all the more striking as the mistake could so easily have been 
avoided, and proves clearly that verse still presents difficulties for 
Gutzkow. 
Circumstances have prevented me from gaining a knowledge of 
Richard Savage. I admit, however, that the immoderate applause 
which greeted the first performances made me suspicious of the 
play. I recalled what had happened three years ago with Grisel-
dis. 64 Since then enough disapproving voices have made themselves 
heard, the first and most thorough, as far as one can judge 
without knowing the play from accounts given in journals, 
strangely enough in a political paper, the Deutscher Courier. 65 But I 
can easily spare myself a criticism, for what journal has not 
already reviewed it? Let us wait, therefore, until it is available in 
print. 
Werner,66  Gutzkow's most recent work, has received the same 
applause in Hamburg. To judge by its antecedents, the play is 
probably not only of great value in  itself,  but may be the first 
really modern tragedy. It is strange that Kühne, who has so often 
reviewed the modern tragedy that one might almost think he 
himself was writing one, has allowed himself to be forestalled by 
Gutzkow. Or does he not feel called upon to try his hand at 
drama? 
However, we hope that Gutzkow, having prepared the way to 
the stage for the Young Literature, will continue with original, 
vital plays to drive shallowness and mediocrity from the usurped 
theatre. It cannot be done through criticism, however devastating; 
a K. Gutzkow, König Saul, Act I, Scene  3.—  Ed. 

=====第103页=====
Modem Literary Life 81 
that we have seen. Those who pursue the same tendencies as 
himself will support him most strongly, and thus new hope is 
rising in us for the German drama and the German theatre. 
II 
MODERN POLEMICS67 
[Mitternachtzeitung für gebildete Leser No. 83, May 21, 1840] 
The Young Literature has a weapon through which it has 
become invincible and gathers under its banners all young talents. 
I mean the modern style, which in its concrete vitality, sharpness 
of expression, and variety of nuances offers to every young writer 
a bed in which the river or the stream of his genius can comfort­
ably roll on without his originality — if he has any — being infect­
ed too strongly with alien elements, Heine's carbonic acid or 
Gutzkow's caustic lime. It is a pleasure to see how every young 
author seeks to adopt the modern style with its proudly soaring 
rockets of enthusiasm which at their highest point dissolve in a gai­
ly coloured shower of poetical fire or burst in crackling sparks 
of wit. In this respect the criticisms in the Rheinisches Jahrbuch, 
which I mentioned earlier in my first article of this series, are of 
importance; they are the first sign of the effect which a new 
literary epoch has had on Rhenish soil, fairly alienated from Ger­
man poetry. Here is the whole modern style with its light and 
shade, its original but apt descriptions, and its iridescent poetic 
spotlight. 
In these circumstances we can say of our authors not only: le 
style c'est l'homme," but also: le style c'est la littérature} 1 The modern 
style bears the stamp of mediation, not only between the celebrities 
of the past, as L. Wihl recently remarked, but also between 
production and criticism, poetry and prose. It is Wienbarg in 
whom these elements interpenetrate most intimately; in Die 
Dramatiker der Jetztzeit the poet has been absorbed into the critic. 
The same would apply to the second volume of Kühne's Charak­
tere' if there were more coherence in the style.— German style has 
a "The style makes the man." The expression belongs to G. L. Buffon.— Ed. 
"The style makes the literature."—Ed. 
c F. G. Kühne, Weibliche und männliche  Charaktere. — Ed. 

=====第104页=====
82 Frederick Engels 
gone through its dialectical mediation process; from the naive 
directness of our prose there emerged the language of the intellect 
which culminated in the lapidary style of Goethe, and the language 
of the imagination and the heart, the splendour of which has been 
revealed to us by Jean Paul. Mediation began with Börne, but in 
him the intellectual element nevertheless still dominated, especially 
in the Briefe* while Heine helped the poetical side to come into its 
own. Mediation is completed in the modern style; imagination and 
intellect do not unconsciously flow into each other, nor do they 
stand in direct opposition; they are united in style, as in the 
human mind, and since their unification is conscious, it is also 
lasting and genuine. Hence I cannot admit that fortuitousness 
which Wihl still tends to vindicate in the modern style, and I am 
compelled to discern a genetic, historical development here.— The 
same mediation occurs in literature; there is almost no one in 
whom production and criticism are not combined; even among the 
lyric poets Creizenach has written Der schwäbische  Apoll and Beck a 
work on Hungarian literature, 68 and the reproach that the Young 
Literature is getting lost in criticism has its foundation far more in 
the mass of critics than of criticisms. Or do not the productions of 
Gutzkow, Laube, Mundt and Kühne significantly outweigh their 
critical writings, both in quantity and quality? Thus the modern 
style remains a reflection of literature. There is, however, one 
aspect of style which is always a sure test of its essence: the 
polemical. With the Greeks polemic took the form of poetry, 
becoming plastic with Aristophanes. The Romans clad it in the 
gown of the hexameter which was suitable for everything, and 
Horace, the lyric poet, developed it likewise lyrically into satire. In 
the Middle Ages, when the lyric was in full flower, it passed with 
the Provencals into sirventes and chansons, with the Germans into 
the Lied.  When bare intellect made itself master of poetry in the 
seventeenth century, the epigram of the later Roman period was 
sought out to serve as the form for polemical wit. The French 
fondness for classical imitation produced Boileau's Horacising 
satires. In Germany, the previous century, which fastened on to 
anything until German poetry began to develop in complete 
independence, tried all polemical forms until Lessing's antiquarian 
letters found in prose the medium which permits the freest 
development of polemics. Voltaire's tactics, which deal the oppo­
nent a blow now and then, are truly French; so is the sniping war 
L. Börne, Briefe aus Paris.— Ed. 

=====第105页=====
Modem Literary Life 83 
of Béranger, who in the same French manner puts everything into 
a chanson. But what about modern polemics? 
Forgive me, dear reader, you have probably long ago guessed 
the aim of this diatribe; but I happen to be a German and cannot 
rid myself of my German nature which always starts with the egg. 
Now, however, I will be all the more direct; it is a question of the 
dissensions in modern literature, the justification of the parties 
and especially the dispute at the root of all the rest, the dispute 
between Gutzkow and Mundt, or, as the matter now stands, between 
Gutzkow and Kühne. This dispute has now been going on for two 
years in the midst of our literary developments and could not but 
have upon them an influence partly favourable, partly unfavour­
able.  Unfavourable because the smooth course of development is 
always disturbed when literature lets itself become the arena of 
personal sympathies, antipathies and idiosyncrasies; favourable 
because, to speak in Hegelian terms, it stepped out from the 
one-sidedness in which it found itself as a party, and proved its 
victory through its very destruction; also because, contrary to the 
expectations of many, the "younger generation" did not take 
sides,  but used the opportunity to free itself from all alien 
influences and to devote itself to independent development. If 
then a few have taken sides, they prove thereby how little 
confidence they have in themselves and of what little consequence 
they are to literature. 
Whether Gutzkow picked up the first stone, whether Mundt was 
the first to put his hand to his left hip, may be left unexamined; 
suffice it that stones were thrown and swords drawn. It is only a 
question of the deeper causes of a war which was bound to break 
out sooner or later; for nobody who has watched its whole course 
without bias will believe that on either side there prevailed 
subjective motives, spiteful envy or frivolous love of fighting. Only 
in Kühne's case was personal friendship with Mundt a motive, and 
in itself surely no ignoble one, for accepting Gutzkow's challenge. 
[Mitternachtzeitung für gebildete Leser No. 84, May 22, 1840] 
Gutzkow's literary work and aspirations bear the stamp of a 
sharply defined individuality. Only a few of his numerous writings 
leave a wholly satisfying impression and yet it cannot be denied 
that they are among the finest products of German literature since 
1830.  Why is this so? I believe I see in him a dualism that has 
much in common with the schism in Immermann's mind which 

=====第106页=====
84 Frederick Engels 
Gutzkow himself first tore open. Gutzkow possesses the greatest 
power of intellect, as is recognised by all German authors—of 
belles-lettres,  of course; his judgment is never at a loss, his eye finds 
its bearings with wonderful facility in the most complex phenome­
na. Alongside this intellect there is, however, an equally powerful 
heat of passion which expresses itself as enthusiasm in his 
productions and puts his imagination in that state of, I would 
almost say, erection, in which alone spiritual creation is possible. 
His works, though they are often very protracted compositions, 
come into being in a flash, and if on the one hand one can see in 
them the enthusiasm with which they are written, on the other this 
haste prevents the calm working out of detail and, like Wally, they 
remain mere sketches. More calm prevails in the later novels, most 
of all in Blasedow, which is chiselled with a plasticity altogether 
unusual in Gutzkow up to now. His earlier figures were character 
drawings rather than characters, jjL£Ts(opa, a hovering between heaven 
and earth, as Karl Grün says. Nevertheless, Gutzkow cannot 
prevent the enthusiasm from giving way momentarily to intellect; 
in this mood are written those passages of his works which 
produce the disagreeable impression already mentioned; it is this 
mood which Kühne in his insulting language called "senile 
shivers".— But it is also this passionate disposition which leads 
Gutzkow so easily into outbursts of wrath, often about the most 
insignificant things, and which brings into his polemic a gushing 
hatred, a wild vehemence, which Gutzkow surely regrets after­
wards; for he must see how unwisely he acts in moments of fury. 
That he does see this is proved by the well-known article in the 
Jahrbuch der Literatur? on whose objectivity he somewhat flatters 
himself—he knows, then, that his polemic is not free of momen­
tary influences.— To these two sides of his mind, whose unity 
Gutzkow does not yet appear to have found, there is also added a 
boundless feeling of independence; he cannot bear the lightest 
fetters, and whether they were of iron or cobweb, he would not 
rest until he had smashed them. When against his will he was 
counted as belonging to Young Germany with Heine, Wienbarg, 
Laube and Mundt, and when this Young Germany began to 
degenerate into a clique, he was overcome by a malaise which left 
him only after his open breach with Laube and Mundt. But 
effectively as this desire for independence has preserved him from 
alien influence, it easily becomes heightened into a rejection of 
a High above.— Ed. 
See this volume, p.  71.—  Ed. 

=====第107页=====
Modem Literary Life 85 
everything different, a withdrawal into  himself,  an excess of 
self-reliance, and then it borders on egoism. I am far from 
accusing Gutzkow of consciously striving for unrestricted domina­
tion in literature, but at times he uses expressions which make it 
easier for his opponents to charge him with egoism. His passionate 
disposition alone drives him to give himself wholly as he is, and so 
one can discern at once the whole man in his works.— Add to 
these spiritual characteristics a life continually wounded over the 
last four years by the censor's scissors and the restrictions imposed 
on his free literary development by the police, and I may hope to 
have sketched the main features of Gutzkow's literary personality. 
While the latter's nature thus proves to be thoroughly original, 
in Mundt we find an amiable harmony of all spiritual powers, 
which is the first prerequisite for a humourist: a calm intellect, a 
good German heart, and in addition the necessary imagination. 
Mundt is a genuinely German character, who, however, for 
precisely this reason, rarely rises above the ordinary and often 
enough verges on the prosaic. He possesses amiability, German 
thoroughness, sterling honesty, but he is not a poet concerned 
with artistic development. Mundt's works prior to the Madonna are 
insignificant; the Moderne Lebenswirren is rich in good humour and 
fine detail, but worthless as a work of art and tedious as a novel; in 
the Madonna enthusiasm for new ideas gave him an impetus which 
he had not known before, but again the impetus did not produce 
a work of art, merely a mass of good ideas and splendid images. 
Nevertheless, the Madonna is Mundt's best work, for the showers 
of rain sent into the literary sky shortly afterwards by the German 
cloud-gatherer Zeus 69 cooled Mundt's enthusiasm considerably. 
The modest German Hamlet strengthened his protestations of 
harmlessness with innocent little novels in which the ideas of the 
times appeared with trimmed beard and combed hair, and 
submitted in the frock-coat of a suppliant a most abject petition 
for most gracious assent. His Komödie der Neigungen did his 
reputation as a poet an injury which he attempted to heal with 
Spaziergänge und Weltfahrten instead of with new, rounded poetical 
works. And if Mundt does not throw himself into production with 
his earlier enthusiasm, if instead of travel books and journalistic 
articles he does not give us poems, then there will soon be no 
more talk of Mundt the poet. One could observe a second retreat 
by Mundt in his style. His preference for Varnhagen, in whom he 
thought he had discovered Germany's greatest master of style, led 
him to adopt the latter's diplomatic turns of phrase, affected 
expressions and abstract flourishes; and Mundt entirely failed to 

=====第108页=====
86 Frederick Engels 
see that the fundamental principle of the modern style — concrete 
freshness and liveliness — was thereby violated to the core. 
[Mitternachtzeitung  für gebildete  Leser No. 85, May 25, 1840] 
Besides these differences, the intellectual development of the 
two disputants had been wholly opposed. Gutzkow manifested 
from the start an enthusiasm for Börne, the "modern Moses", 
which still lives on in his soul as fervent adoration; Mundt sat in 
the secure shade thrown by the giant tree of Hegel's system and 
for a time betrayed the conceit of most Hegelians; in the early 
years of his literary activity the axioms of the philosophical 
padishah that freedom and necessity are identical and that the 
aspirations of the South-German liberals are one-sided, prejudiced 
Mundt's political views. Gutzkow left Berlin with distaste at 
conditions there and acquired a predilection for South Germany 
in Stuttgart which never left him; Mundt felt at home in Berlin 
life, loved to sit at the aestheticising tea-parties and distilled from 
the intellectual activity of Berlin his Persönlichkeiten und Zustände, 10 
that literary hothouse product which suffocated all free poetic 
activity in him and in others. It is saddening to see how Mundt, in 
the second issue of Freihafen for 1838, reviewing a work by 
Munch, goes into raptures in his description of such a personality, 
raptures to which he could never be roused by a work of poetry.' 1 
Berlin conditions — it is as if this word were invented for Ber­
lin— made him forget everything else and he even let himself be 
misled into a ridiculous contempt for the beauties of nature, such 
as is revealed in the Madonna. 
So Gutzkow and Mundt confronted each other when the ideas 
of the age suddenly made their paths cross. They would soon have 
separated, perhaps waved greetings to each other from afar and 
been happy to recall their meeting, had not the setting up of 
Young Germany and the Roma locuta est of the most serene 
Federal Diet compelled them both to unite. The state of affairs 
was thus radically altered. Their common fate obliged Gutzkow 
and Mundt to give weight in their judgments of each other to 
considerations the observation of which was bound in the long run 
to become unbearable for both of them. Young Germany, or 
Young Literature, as it called itself after the catastrophe from 
above so as to sound more harmless and not to exclude others 
with similar aims, was near to degenerating into a clique, and that 
against its will. From all sides one found oneself compelled to 
drop opposing tendencies, to cover up weaknesses, to overstress 

=====第109页=====
Modem Literary Life 87 
agreement. This unnatural, forced pretence could not last long. 
Wienbarg, the finest figure in Young Germany, withdrew; Laube 
had from the start protested against the conclusions which the 
state permitted  itself;  Heine in Paris was too isolated to quicken 
the literature of the day with the electric sparks of his wit; 
Gutzkow and Mundt, by mutual agreement, as I would like to 
think, were frank enough to break the public peace. 
Mundt polemicised little and insignificantly, but once he let 
himself be misled into conducting his polemic in a manner inviting 
the sharpest censure. At the end of the article "Görres und die 
katholische Weltanschauung" (Freihafen, 1838, II) he says that if 
German religiousness will have nothing to do with Young Ger­
many, the movement has sufficiently shown that it contains more 
than enough rotten elements as far as religion is concerned. It is 
clear that this refers not only to Heine, who does not concern us 
here,  but to Gutzkow. However, even if the accusations were true, 
Mundt should at least have enough respect for those to whom he 
is bound by common fate not to champion narrow-mindedness, 
philistinism and pietism against them! Mundt could hardly behave 
worse than when he says in pharisaic triumph: God, I thank thee 
that I am not as Heine, Laube and Gutzkow, and that in the eyes 
of German religiousness, if not of the German Confederation, I 
can pass as respectable! 
Gutzkow, by contrast, took real pleasure in polemics. He pulled 
out all the stops and followed the allegro moderato of the Literarische 
Elfen 12 with an allegro furioso of literary notices. He had the 
advantage over Mundt in that he could expose the latter's literary 
whims in full focus and place them within range of the perma­
nently loaded gun of his wit. Almost every week at least one blow 
against Mundt could be found in the Telegraph. He knew how to 
profit by the overwhelming advantage which possession of a 
weekly journal gives over an opponent limited to a quarterly* and 
his own works; it is particularly remarkable that Gutzkow inten­
sified his polemic, allowing his contempt for Mundt's literary gifts 
to appear only gradually, while the latter treated Gutzkow as an 
inferior personality immediately after the declaration of war, 
without regard for such a descending climax.— The usual 
artifices of political journals, recommending articles of the same 
colour in other journals, smuggling in hidden malice under the 
guise of recognition and praiseworthy objectivity, etc., were car­
ried over into the literary sphere in this polemic; whether their 
a Freihafen. — Ed. 

=====第110页=====
88 Frederick Engels 
own articles appeared under the pseudonyms of provincial corre­
spondents cannot, of course, be determined, since right from the 
start there streamed to each party a crowd of obliging, nameless 
assistants, who would have felt very flattered if their labours were 
taken for the works of their commanding generals. Marggraff at­
tributes most of the blame for the dispute to these interlopers who 
with their zeal wished to buy commendatory notices below the line.73 
Towards the end of 1838 a third fighter entered the lists, Kühne, 
whose armoury we must review for the moment. For a long time 
Mundt's personal friend and without doubt the Gustav to whom 
Mundt once appeals in the Madonna, his literary character also has 
much in common with Mundt, although on the other hand a 
French element is clearly evident in him. He is linked with Mundt 
particularly by their common development through Hegel and the 
social life of Berlin, which determined Kühne's taste for per­
sonalities and conditions and Varnhagen von Ense, the true 
inventor of these literary hybrids. Kühne is also one of those who 
give much praise to Varnhagen's style and overlook the fact that 
what is good in it is really only an imitation of Goethe. 
[Mitternachtzeitung für gebildete Leser No. 86, May 26, 1840] 
The chief foundation of Kühne's literary stature is esprit, that 
French, quickly combining intellect, linked with a lively imagina­
tion. Even the extreme of this trend, the cult of the phrase, is so 
little alien to Kühne that, on the contrary, he has achieved a rare 
mastery in handling it, and one cannot read reviews such as that 
of the second volume of Mundt's Spaziergänge (Elegante Zeitung, 3 
May 1838) without a certain enjoyment. Naturally, it also happens 
often enough that this play with phrases makes a disagreeable 
impression and one is reminded of a few apt words of Mephi-
stopheles which have become commonplace.b  In a journal one may 
well tolerate passages interwoven with phrases in this fashion; but 
when in a work like the Charaktere a passage occurs which reads 
quite well but lacks all real content — and that is more than once 
the case — this shows too much levity in selection. On the other 
hand, his French cleverness makes Kühne one of our best 
journalists, and it would surely be easy for him, with greater 
activity, to lift the Elegante Zeitung far above its present level. But 
oddly enough, Kühne is far from displaying the agility of mind 
a Zeitung für die elegante Welt.— Ed. 
b Goethe, Faust, Erster Teil, Studierzimmer: "Mit Worten lässt sich trefflich 
streiten, mit Worten ein System bereiten...." — Ed. 

=====第111页=====
Modem Literary Life 89 
which alone seems to correspond to the esprit in which he recalls 
Laube.— Kühne displays this trans-Rhenish nature most clearly as 
a critic. While Gutzkow does not rest until he has got to the 
bottom of his subject and forms his judgment from that alone 
without regard to any favourable or mitigating minor considera­
tions,  Kühne places the subject in the light of a witty thought, 
which, it is true, consideration of the object has most often 
inspired. When Gutzkow is one-sided, it is because he judges 
without due regard of person, more by the object's weaknesses 
than its virtues and demands classical creations from budding 
poets like Beck; when Kühne is one-sided, he endeavours to 
regard all aspects of his object from a single viewpoint which is 
neither the highest, nor the most illuminating, and excuses the 
playfulness of Beck's Stille Lieder with the truly apt phrase that 
Beck is a lyrical musician. 
In Kühne one must further distinguish two periods; the begin­
ning of his literary career was marked by a bias towards the 
Hegelian doctrine and, so it seems to me, by a devotion to Mundt 
or a community of views with him in which independence was not 
always duly respected. The Quarantäne marks his first step towards 
emancipation from these influences; Kühne's views did not find 
their full development until the literary troubles after 1836. For a 
comparison of Kühne's and Gutzkow's poetic aims two works 
written at the same time are available, the Quarantäne im Irrenhause 
and Seraphine. Both reflect the whole personality of their authors. 
Gutzkow portrayed the reasonable and the genial side of his 
character in Arthur and Edmund; Kühne, as a beginner, revealed 
himself fully and more artlessly in the hero of the Quarantäne, as 
he looks for a way out of the labyrinth of the Hegelian system. 
Gutzkow excels, as always, in the sharpness of his portrayal of the 
soul, in the psychological motivation; almost the entire novel takes 
place in the mind. Such an intellectual compounding of the 
motives from nothing but misunderstandings, however, destroys 
all quiet enjoyment, even of the interspersed idyllic situations, and 
no matter how masterly Seraphine is on the one hand, it is a failure 
on the other. Kühne, by contrast, bubbles over with witty reflec­
tions on Hegel, German soul-searching and Mozart's music, with 
which he fills three-quarters of the book, but in the end succeeds 
only in boring the readers and spoiling the novel as such. 
Seraphine does not contain a single well-drawn character; and 
Gutzkow's aim, which was to show his ability to portray female 
characters, is realised least of all. The women in all his novels are 
either trivial, like Celinde in Blasedow, devoid of real womanliness, 

=====第112页=====
90 Frederick Engels 
like Wally, or unlovely through a lack of inner harmony, like 
Seraphine  herself.  He almost seems to realise this himself when he 
makes Michal say in Saul: 
You can lay open, like the human brain, 
The very heart of woman, 
You can show all a woman's heart is made of; 
But that which is the spirit of life within it 
No scalpel can lay bare, nor keen comparison." 
The same lack of precise characterisation is displayed in the 
Quarantäne. The hero is not a complete character but a personifi­
cation of the transitional epoch in the present-day consciousness, 
who therefore lacks all individuality. The remaining characters are 
almost all made too indeterminate so that one cannot properly say 
of most of them whether they are successes or failures. 
Kühne had long been challenged by Gutzkow but had replied 
only indirectly by praising Mundt's merits excessively and rarely 
mentioning Gutzkow's. Eventually Kühne also came out in opposi­
tion to him, at first calmly and critically rather than polemically; 
he called Gutzkow a debater, but would not concede to him any 
further literary claim; soon afterwards, however, he began his 
offensive in a manner which perhaps no one had expected, with 
the article "Gutzkows neueste Romane". 74 Here with much wit 
Gutzkow's dual nature is distorted into caricature and traced in his 
writings, but there is also such a mass of unworthy expressions, 
unfounded assertions and ill-concealed innuendoes that the 
polemic only benefited Gutzkow. He replied with a brief reference 
to the Jahrbuch der Literatur for 1839 (why has that for 1840 not 
yet appeared?) which carried his article on the latest literary 
disputes. The policy of winning minds by impartiality was shrewd 
enough, and the restraint which this article cost Gutzkow must be 
recognised; if it was not entirely satisfactory and, in particular, 
disposed too easily of Kühne, who can surely not be denied an 
important influence on present-day literature or a sound talent for 
the historical novel, although not yet very clear in the Klosternovel­
len, this can gladly be overlooked until his opponents have done as 
well or have excelled him. 
[Mitternachtleitung für gebildete Leser No. 87, May 28, 1840] 
This Jahrbuch der Literatur, however, bore within itself the seed 
of a new split, Heine's "Schwabenspiegel". 75 Probably only a few of 
a K. Gutzkow, König Saul, Act III, Scene  3.—  Ed. 

=====第113页=====
Modem Literary Life 91 
those involved know what actually happened; I find it best to pass 
over this whole embarrassing story. Or could not Heine muster 
the required number of sheets again soon to bring out an 
uncensored volume, which would also contain the complete 
"Schwabenspiegel"? Then one could at least see what the Saxon 
censorship considered fit to cut and whether the mutilation is 
indeed to be laid to the charge of any censorship authority. 76 
Enough, the flames of war were fanned again. Kühne behaved 
unwisely by accepting the stupid article on Savage and by accom­
panying Dr. Wihl's explanation (which it was surely too much to 
expect the Elegante to accept, rather as if Beck had sent his 
declaration against Gutzkow to the Telegraph) with a currish 
parody which the other side likewise rejected with a bark. 77 This 
dog-fight is the most shameful blot on all modern polemics; if our 
men of letters start treating each other like beasts and applying 
the principles of natural history in practice, German literature will 
soon be like a menagerie and the long-awaited Messiah of 
literature will fraternise with Martin and van Amburgh. 
To prevent the once more slackening polemic from going to 
sleep,  an evil spirit stirred up the dispute between Gutzkow and 
Beck™ I have already given my judgment of Beck elsewhere, 3 but, 
as I willingly admit, not without bias. The retrogressive step which 
Beck took in Saul and in the Stille Lieder made me suspicious and 
unfair to the Nächte and the Fahrender Poet. I ought not to have 
written the article, much less sent it to the journal which printed 
it. I may therefore be permitted to correct my judgment to the 
effect that I accord recognition to Beck's past, the Nächte and 
Fahrender Poet, but that it would go against my conscience as a 
critic if I did not describe the Stille Lieder and the first act of Saul 
as retrogressive. The faults of Beck's first two works were 
inevitable because of his youth, nay, in the press of images and the 
immature impetuousness of thought one might be inclined to see a 
superabundance of strength, and in any case here was a talent of 
which one might have the highest hopes.— Instead of those 
flaming images, instead of that wildly excited youthful strength, 
there is a tiredness, a languor in the Stille Lieder, which was least 
to be expected of Beck, and the first act of Saul is equally feeble. 
But perhaps this flabbiness is only the natural, momentary 
consequence of that over-excitement, perhaps the following acts of 
Saul will make up for all the defects of the first — but Beck is a 
poet, and even in its most severe and just censure criticism should 
a See this volume, pp. 41-46.— Ed. 

=====第114页=====
92 Frederick Engels 
show a proper respect for his future creative work. Every true 
poet deserves such reverence; and I myself would not like to be 
taken for an enemy of Beck's, since, as I readily admit, I am 
indebted to his poetic works for the most varied and enduring 
stimulation. 
The dispute between Gutzkow and Beck might well have been 
avoided. It cannot be denied that in the exposition of his Saul 
Beck followed Gutzkow to some extent, unwittingly, of course, but 
that does not detract from his honesty, only from his originality. 
Instead of being indignant about it, Gutzkow should rather have felt 
flattered. And Beck, instead of laying stress on the originality of 
his characters, which no one had called in doubt, had indeed 
to take up the gauntlet once it was thrown down, as he in fact 
did, but should also have revised the act, which one trusts he 
will have done. 
Gutzkow now adopted a hostile position to all the Leipzig men 
of letters and has since harried them unremittingly with literary 
witticisms. He sees them as a regular band of organised ruffians 
which harasses him and literature in every possible way; but he 
would truly do better to adopt a different method of attack if he 
does not want to give up the fight. Personal connections and their 
reaction on public opinion are inevitable in Leipzig literary circles. 
And Gutzkow should ask himself whether he has never succumbed 
to this sometimes unfortunately unavoidable sin; or must I remind 
him of certain Frankfurt acquaintances? Is it surprising if the 
Nordlicht, the Elegante and the Eisenbahn occasionally agree in their 
judgments? The description clique is quite unfitting for these 
circumstances. 
This is how matters stand at present; Mundt has. withdrawn and 
no longer bothers about the dispute; Kühne also is rather tired of 
the interminable warfare; Gutzkow is also sure to see soon that his 
polemic must eventually become boring to the public. They will 
gradually begin to challenge each other to novels and plays; they 
will see that a journal is not to be judged by a biting literary 
article, that the nation's educated circles will award the prize to the 
best poet, not the most impetuous polemicist; they will get used to 
a calm existence side by side, and, perhaps, learn to respect each 
other again. Let them take Heine's conduct as an example, who in 
spite of the dispute does not conceal his esteem for Gutzkow. Let 
them determine their relative value not by their own subjective 
estimation, but by the conduct of the younger people to whom 
literature will sooner or later belong. Let them learn from the 
Hallische Jahrbücher that polemic may only be directed against the 

=====第115页=====
Modem Literary Life 93 
children of the past, against the shadows of death. Let them 
consider that otherwise literary forces may arise between Hamburg 
and Leipzig which will overshadow their polemic fireworks. The 
Hegelian school, in its latest, free development, and the younger 
generation, as they prefer to be called, are advancing towards a 
unification which will have the most important influence on the 
development of literature. This unification has already been 
achieved in Moritz Carrière and Karl Grün. 
Written in March 1840 Printed according to the news-
First published in the Mitternachtzeitung P P 
für gebildete Leser Nos. 51-54, March Published in English for the first 
1840,  and Nos. 83-87, May 1840 time 
Signed: Friedrich Oswald 

=====第116页=====
[ON ANASTASIUS GRUN] 
In connection with Anastasius Gain's application for the post of 
chamberlain, one is involuntarily reminded of the verses he 
published two years ago in the Elegante." The poem was entitled 
Apostasie and concluded: 
God's will, you'll know how well I fare 
By this flag overhead. 
God's truth, if ever you see me there, 
I'm sick or good as dead. 
Then think of me as dead and gone: 
Bitter, to cast one's eye, 
Living, on one's own gravestone, 
As one is passing by. 
It sounds almost like a premonition. 
Written in the first half of April 1840 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the Telegraph für Published in English for the first 
Deutschland No. 61, April 1840 time 
Signed: F. O. 
a Zeitung für die elegante Welt.— Ed. 

=====第117页=====
LANDSCAPES 
[Telegraph für Deutschland No. 122, July 1840] 
Hellas had the good fortune of seeing the nature of her 
landscape brought to consciousness in the religion of her inhabi­
tants.  Hellas is a land of pantheism; all her landscapes are — or, at 
least, were — embraced in a harmonious framework. And yet every 
tree,  every fountain, every mountain thrusts itself too much in the 
foreground, and her sky is far too blue, her sun far too radiant, 
her sea far too magnificent, for them to be content with the 
laconic spiritualisation of Shelley's spirit of nature," of an all-em­
bracing Pan. Each beautifully shaped individual feature lays claim 
to a particular god, each river will have its nymphs, each grove its 
dryads — and so arose the religion of the Hellenes. Other regions 
were not so fortunate; they did not serve any people as the basis 
of its faith and had to await a poetic mind to conjure into 
existence the religious genius that slumbered in them. If you stand 
on the Drachenfels or on the Rochusberg at Bingen, and gaze 
over the vine-fragrant valley of the Rhine, the distant blue 
mountains merging with the horizon, the green fields and vine­
yards flooded with golden sunlight, the blue sky reflected in the 
river—heaven with its brightness descends on to the earth and is 
mirrored in it, the spirit descends into matter, the word becomes 
flesh and dwells among us — that is the embodiment of Christiani­
ty. The direct opposite of this is the North-German heath; here 
there is nothing but dry stalks and modest heather, which, 
conscious of its weakness, dare not raise itself above the ground; 
here and there is a once defiant tree now shattered by lightning; 
and the brighter the sky, the more sharply does its self-sufficient 
magnificence demarcate it from the poor, cursed earth lying below 
it in sackcloth and ashes, and the more does its eye, the sun, look 
a The words "spirit of nature" are in English in the original. In Shelley's works, 
in particular in Queen Mab, the pantheistic figurative symbol of Pan appears.— Ed. 

=====第118页=====
96 Frederick Engels 
down with burning anger on the bare barren sand — there you 
have a representation of the Jewish world outlook. 
The heathland has been much reviled, all literature* has 
heaped curses on it and, as in Platen's Oedipus, it has been used only 
as a background for satire, but people have scorned to seek out its 
rare charms, its hidden poetic connections. One must really have 
grown up in a beautiful region, on mountain heights or forest-
crowned crags, to feel properly the frightening, depressing char­
acter of the North-German Sahara, but also to be able to detect 
with pleasure the beautiful features of this region, which, like the 
mirage in Libya, are not always visible to the eye. The really 
prosaic Germany is to be found only in the potato fields on the 
righta  bank of the Elbe. But the homeland of the Saxons, the most 
active of the German races, is poetic even in its desolation. On a 
stormy night, when clouds stream ghost-like past the moon, when 
dogs bay to one another at a distance, gallop on snorting horses 
over the endless heath and leap with loose reins over the 
weathered granite blocks and the burial mounds of the Huns; in 
the distance the water of the moor glitters in the reflected 
moonlight, will-o'-the-wisps flit over it, and the howling of the 
storm sounds eerily over the wide expanse; the ground beneath 
you is unsafe, and you feel that you have entered the realm of 
German folk-lore. Only after I became acquainted with the 
North-German heathland did I properly understand the Grimm 
brothers' Kinder- und Haus-Märchen. It is evident from almost all 
these tales that they had their origin here, where at nightfall the 
human element vanishes and the terrifying, shapeless creations of 
popular fantasy glide over a desolate land which is eerie even in 
the brightness of midday. They are a tangible embodiment of the 
feelings aroused in the solitary heath dweller when he wends his 
way in his native land on such a wild night, or when he looks out 
over the desolate expanse from some high tower. Then the 
impressions which he has retained from childhood of stormy 
nights on the heath come back to his mind and take shape in those 
fairy-tales. You will not overhear the secret of the origin of the 
popular fairy-tales on the Rhine or in Swabia, whereas here every 
lightning night—bright lightning night, says Laube — speaks of it 
with tongues of thunder. 
The summer thread of my apologia for the heath, carried by 
* In the third volume of Blasedow the old man is concerned for the 
heath.— Note by Engels. 
The Telegraph für Deutschland has "left", which is a misprint.— Ed. 

=====第119页=====
Landscapes 97 
the wind, would probably continue to be spun out, if it had not 
become entangled with an unfortunate signpost painted in the 
colours of the land of Hanover.a I have long pondered over the 
significance of these colours. It is true that the royal Prussian 
colours do not show what Thiersch tries to find in them in his bad 
song about Prussia 80 ; nevertheless, by their prosiness they remind 
one of cold, heartless bureaucracy and of all that the Rhinelander 
still cannot find quite plausible about Prussianism. The sharp 
contrast between black and white can provide an analogy for the 
relation between king and subject in an absolute monarchy; and 
since, according to Newton, they are not colours at all, they can be 
an indication that the loyal frame of mind in an absolute 
monarchy is that which does not hold a brief for any colour. The 
gay red and white flags of the people of the Hanse towns were at 
least fitting in olden days; the French esprit displays its iridescence 
in the tricolour, the colours of which have been appropriated by 
phlegmatic Holland too, probably in derision of  itself;  the most 
beautiful and significant, of course, is still the unhappy German 
tricolour. But the Hanoverian colours! Imagine a dandy in white 
trousers who has been chased for an hour at full speed through 
road-side ditches and newly ploughed fields, imagine Lot's pillar 
of salt 81—an example of the Hanoverian Nunquam retrorsumb  of 
former times as a warning for many—imagine this honourable 
memorial splashed with mud by ill-bred Bedouin youths, and you 
have a Hanoverian frontier post with its coat of arms. Or does the 
white signify the innocent basic law of the state and the yellow the 
filth with which it is being bespattered by certain mercenary pens? 
To continue with the religious character of various regions, the 
Dutch landscapes are essentially Calvinist. The absolute prose of a 
distant view in Holland, the impossibility of its spiritualisation, the 
grey sky that is indeed the only one suited to it, all this produces 
the same impression on us as the infallible decisions of the Dord­
recht Synod. 2 The windmills, the sole moving things in the land­
scape, remind one of the predestined elect, who allow themselves to 
be moved only by the breath of divine dispensation; everything else 
lies in "spiritual death". And in this barren orthodoxy, the Rhine, 
like the flowing, living spirit of Christianity, loses its fructifying 
power and becomes completely choked up with sand. Such, seen 
from the Rhine, is the appearance of its Dutch banks; other parts 
of the country may be more beautiful, I do not know them.— Rot-
a Yellow and white.— Ed. 
Never turning back (inscription under the rampant steed of the Hanoverian 
coat of arms).— Ed. 

=====第120页=====
98 Frederick Engels 
terdam, with its shady quays, its canals and ships, is an oasis for 
people from small towns in the interior of Germany; one can 
understand here how the imagination of a Freiligrath could ply 
with the departing frigates to distant, more luxuriant shores. Then 
there are the cursed Zeeland islands, nothing but reeds and dykes, 
windmills and the tops of chiming church steeples, between which 
the steamboat winds its way for hours! 
But then, with what a blissful feeling we leave behind the 
philistine dykes and tight-laced Calvinist orthodoxy and enter the 
realm of the free-ranging spirit! Helvoetsluys vanishes, on the 
right and the left the banks of the Waal sink into the rising, 
jubilant waves, the sandy yellow of the water changes to green, 
and now what is behind is forgotten, and we go forward into the 
dark-green transparent sea! 
And now have done with grieving, 
And shed that bitter load. 
And you'd go travelling onwards 
Time to be up and leaving 
To take the great highroad. 
The sky leans gently downwards 
To mingle with the sea — 
In tired despondency? 
The sky bends downwards, holding 
The world with all its charms, 
Happy to be enfolding 
Such beauty in his arms. 
As if to kiss her lover 
The wave leaps up to the sky, 
And you'd wish life was over, 
In dark despondency? 
The God of Love, descending, 
Makes all this world his own; 
To dwell here without ending, 
He gives himself through Man. 
And does that God not really 
Abide within your breast? 
Then let him reign more freely 
And shine his worthiest. 
Then climb on to the rigging of the bowsprit and gaze on the 
waves, how, cleft by the ship's keel, they throw the white spray 
high over your head, and look out, too, over the distant green 
surface of the sea, where the foaming crests of the waves spring 
up in eternal unrest, where the sun's rays are reflected into your 
eyes from thousands of dancing mirrors, where the green of the 

=====第121页=====
Landscapes 99 
sea merges with the blue of the sky and the gold of the sun to 
produce a wonderful colour, and all your trivial cares, all remem­
brance of the enemies of light and their treacherous attacks 
disappear, and you stand upright, proudly conscious of the free, 
infinite mind!  L have had only one impression that could compare 
with this; when for the first time the divine idea of the last of the 
philosophers," this most colossal creation of the thought of the 
nineteenth century, dawned upon me, I experienced the same 
blissful thrill, it was like a breath of fresh sea air blowing down 
upon me from the purest sky; the depths of speculation lay before 
me like the unfathomable sea from which one cannot turn one's 
eyes straining to see the ground below; in God we live, move and 
have our being! We become conscious of that when we are on the 
sea; we feel that God breathes through all around us and through 
us ourselves; we feel such kinship with the whole of nature, the 
waves beckon to us so intimately, the sky stretches so lovingly over 
the earth, and the sun shines with such indescribable radiance that 
one feels one could grasp it with the hand. 
The sun sinks in the north-west; on its left a shining streak rises 
from the sea — the Kentish coast and the southern bank of the 
Thames estuary. Already the twilight mist lies on the sea, only in 
the west is the purple of evening spread over the sky and over the 
water; the sky in the east is resplendent in deep blue, from which 
Venus already shines out brightly; in the south-west a long golden 
streak in the magical light along the horizon is Margate, from the 
windows of which the evening redness is reflected. So now wave 
your caps and greet free England with a joyful shout and a full 
glass.  Good night, and a happy awakening in London! 
[Telegraph für Deutschland No. 123, August 1840] 
You who complain of the prosaic dullness of railways without 
ever having seen one should try travelling on the one from 
London to Liverpool. If ever a land was made to be traversed by 
railways it is England. No dazzlingly beautiful scenery, no colossal 
mountain masses, but a land of soft rolling hills which has a 
wonderful charm in the English sunlight, which is never quite 
clear. It is surprising how various are the groupings of the simple 
figures; out of a few low hills, a field, some trees and grazing cattle, 
nature composes a thousand pleasant landscapes. The trees, which 
occur singly or in groups in all the fields, have a singular beauty 
that makes the whole neighbourhood resemble a park. Then 
a Probably Hegel.—Ed. 

=====第122页=====
100 Frederick Engels 
comes a tunnel, and for a few minutes the train is in darkness, 
emerging into a deep cutting from which one is suddenly 
transported again into the midst of smiling, sunny fields. At 
another time the railway track is laid on a viaduct crossing a long 
valley; far below it lie towns and villages, woods and meadows, 
between which a river takes its meandering course; to the right 
and left are mountains which fade into the background, and the 
valley is bathed in a magical light, half-mist and half-sunshine. But 
you have hardly had time to survey the wonderful scene before 
you are carried away into a bare cutting and have time to recreate 
the magical picture in your imagination. And so it goes on until 
night falls and your wearied eyes close in slumber. Oh, there is 
rich poetry in the counties of Britain! It often seems as if one were 
still in the golden days of merry England 3 and might see 
Shakespeare with his fowling-piece moving stealthily behind a 
hedge on a deer-poaching expedition, or you might wonder why 
not one of his divine comedies actually takes place on this green 
meadow. For wherever the scenes are supposed to occur, in Italy, 
France or Navarra, his baroque, uncouth rustics, his too-clever 
schoolmasters, and his deliciously bizarre women, all belong 
basically to merry England,0 and it is remarkable that only an 
English sky is suited to everything that takes place. Only some of 
the comedies, such as the Midsummer Night's Dream, are as 
completely adapted to a southern climate as Romeo and Juliet, even 
in the characters of the play. 
And now back to our Fatherland! Picturesque and romantic 
Westphalia has become quite indignant at its son Freiligrath, who 
has entirely forgotten it on account of the admittedly far more 
picturesque and romantic Rhine. Let us console it with a few 
flattering words so that its patience does not give out before the 
second issue appears.83  Westphalia is surrounded by mountain 
ranges separating it from the rest of Germany, and it lies open 
only to Holland, as if it had been cast out from Germany. And yet 
its children are true Saxons, good loyal Germans. And these 
mountains offer magnificent points of view; in the south the Ruhr 
and Lenne valleys, in the east the Weser valley, in the north a 
range of mountains from Minden to Osnabrück — everywhere 
there is a wealth of beautiful scenery, and only in the centre of the 
province is there a boring expanse of sand which always shows up 
through the grass and corn. And then there are the beautiful old 
The words "golden days of merry England" are in English in the orig­
inal.— Ed. 
The words "merry England" are in English in the original.— Ed. 

=====第123页=====
Landscapes 101 
towns, above all Münster with its Gothic churches, with its market 
arcades, and with Annette Elisabeth von Droste-Hülshoff and 
Levin Schücking. The last-named, whose acquaintance I had the 
pleasure of making there, was kind enough to draw my attention 
to the poems of that lady, 84 and I could not let this opportunity 
slip without bearing part of the blame which the German public 
has incurred in regard to these poems. In connection with them it 
has once again been proved that the much-vaunted German 
thoroughness treats the appreciation of poetry much too light-heart­
edly; people leaf through it, examine whether the rhymes are 
pure and the verses fluent, and whether the content is easy to 
understand and rich in striking, or at least dazzling, images, and 
the verdict is complete. But poems like these, which are marked by 
a sincerity of feeling, a tenderness and originality in the depiction 
of nature such as only Shelley can achieve, and a bold Byronic 
imagination—clothed, it is true, in a somewhat stiff form and in a 
language not altogether free from provincialism — such poems 
pass away without leaving a trace. Anyone, however, who is 
prepared to read them rather more slowly than usual—and, after 
all, one only takes up a book of poems in the hours of a 
siesta—could very well find that their beauty prevents him from 
going to sleep! Furthermore, the poetess is a fervent Catholic, and 
how can a Protestant take any interest in such? But whereas 
pietism makes the man, the schoolmaster, the chief curate Albert 
Knapp, ridiculous, the childish faith of Fräulein von Droste 
becomes her very well. Religious independence of mind is an 
awkward matter for women. Persons like George Sand, Mistress 
Shelley, 2 are rare; it is only too easy for doubt to corrode the 
feminine mind and raise the intellect to a power which it ought 
not to have in any woman. If, however, the ideas by which we 
children of the new stand or fall are truth, then the time is not far 
off when the feminine heart will beat as warmly for the flowers of 
thought of the modern mind as it does now for the pious faith of 
its fathers — and the victory of the new will only be at hand when 
the young generation takes it in with its mother's milk. 
Written at the end of June and in July Printed according to the journal 
1840 Published in English for the first 
First published in the Telegraph für time 
Deutschland Nos. 122 and 123, July and 
August 1840 
Signed: Friedrich Oswald 
a Mary Wollstonecraft-Shelley, née Godwin.— Ed. 

=====第124页=====
S» 181. 
r j e »H dtt 
jïonnrrftag,  ÄMI 30. Juli 1840. 
?>* fwrt wir am gut: 9BU [i(£*n 6U $ffle(r«, 
?>U &4ta G(» «wer«, »il fwfm 6U ÏB5«»(, 
PU ItointrtanflMtfenBin, relU ^înttv uni. 
p. g. ». JBoIff. 
[REPORTS FROM BREMEN] 
THEATRE. PUBLISHING FESTIVAL 
[Morgenblatt für gebildete Leser No. 181, July 30, 1840] 
Bremen, July 
As far as I know, no periodical of any note has a permanent 
correspondent in Bremen, and it could easily be concluded from 
this consensus gentium" that there is nothing to write about from 
here.  But that is not the case; for have we not a theatre, which 
only recently had in succession Agnese Schebest, Caroline Bauer, 
Tichatscheck, and Mme Schröder-Devrient performing as visiting 
stars,  and whose repertory could compete in quality with many 
other more famous theatres. Have not Gutzkow's Richard Savage 
and Blum's Schwärmerei nach der Mode already been shown here? 
The first of these two plays has by now been discussed to excess; 
I consider that a very recent review of it in the Hallische 
Jahrbücher, 85 if one leaves out the frequent hostile remarks, con­
tains very much that is true and, in particular, hits on its basic 
mistake, namely, that the relationship between mother and child, 
as an unfree relationship, can never provide the basis for a drama. 
Perhaps Gutzkow was aware of this mistake beforehand, but he 
was right in not allowing that to prevent him from carrying out his 
plan; for if he wanted to break into the theatrical world with 
a single play he had to make some concessions to established 
theatrical routine, which he could always withdraw later if his plan JÄ 0 
a Universal opinion.— Ed. 

=====第125页=====
Reports from Bremen 103 
was successful. He had to give his play an original foundation, even 
if this could not stand up to poetic criticism, and even if his scenes 
became melodramatic and effect-seeking. One can find fault with 
Richard Savage, one can condemn it, but one must also admit that 
by it Gutzkow proved his dramatic talent.—.1 would not say 
anything at all about Blum's Schwärmerei nach der Mode had this 
play not been loudly hailed as "timely" in many journals. But 
there is absolutely nothing timely about it, neither in the charac­
ters,  nor in the action, nor in the dialogue. It is true that Blum 
performed one service by having the courage to bring pietism on 
to the stage, but one cannot so easily dispose of this sprained foot 
of Christianity. One must at last stop looking for deception, greed 
or refined sensuality concealed behind pietism; real pietism deci­
sively turns away from such exaggerations and extremes as were 
displayed in Königsberg, or such abuses as Stephan from Dresden 
indulged in. When Stephan with his unfortunate company came 
here to take ship for New Orleans, and no one had as yet the 
slightest moral suspicion of him, I myself saw how distrustfully the 
pietists here behaved towards him. Anyone who wants to write 
about this trend should try going to the "Quakers", as they are 
called here, and see the love these people show towards one 
another, how quickly friendship is established between two com­
plete strangers who know nothing more of each other than that 
they are both "believers", with what assurance, consistency and 
determination they follow their path, and with what subtle 
psychological tact they are able to discover all their little faults, 
and I am convinced he would not write another Schwärmerei nach 
der Mode. Pietism is just as right in condemning this play as it is 
wrong in respect of the free thinking of our century. — Hence, 
too, the only notice of the play taken by the pietists here was to 
ask whether it contained "blasphemous speeches". 
The Gutenberg festival86  has also been celebrated here, in the 
ultima Thule* of German culture, and indeed in a more gladdening 
way than in the other two Hanse towns. For several years past the 
printers had been putting by something from their wages each week 
to ensure a worthy celebration of the festival. Already at an early 
stage, a committee was set up, but here too difficulties were 
encountered from the state in holding the festival. Small cabals, 
mostly connected with particular personalities, developed, as is 
inevitable in such small states. For a while, nothing was heard of 
a An island lying at the extreme north of the habitable world, mentioned in 
ancient legends and in Virgil's Georgia.— Ed. 

=====第126页=====
104 Frederick Engels 
the whole affair, and it seemed that at most a "craftsmen's gala" 
was being organised. Only on the eve of the festival did the 
interest become more general, the programme was issued, Profes­
sor Wilhelm Ernst Weber, well known for his excellent translations 
of the ancient classics and his commentaries on German poets, 
drew attention to the next day's event by his speech in the big hall, 
and the merchants were undecided whether they ought not to 
grant their office workers a half-holiday next day. The festival day 
came; all ships on the Weser flew their flags, and at the lower end 
of the town were two ships, the mast-tops of which were connected 
by a long line of innumerable flags to form a huge arch of 
honour. On one of these ships was mounted the only available 
gun, which thundered throughout the day. The committee, 
together with all the assembled printers, marched in a solemn 
procession to the church and from there to the newly-built 
steamship Gutenberg which, with its snow-white, gilt-ornamented 
hull, is the finest steamer that ever sailed the Weser. For this, its 
inaugural journey, it was festively decorated with garlands and 
flags;  the procession went on board, cruised with music and 
singing up the Weser as far as the bridge; there a halt was made, a 
choral was sung and one of the printers delivered a speech. While 
all the participants in the festival took part in a luncheon on board 
arranged by the ship's owner, Herr Lange von Vegesack, the 
Gutenberg proceeded with a speed that did honour to its builder 
through the arch of flags to Lankenau, a pleasure resort below the 
town, thousands of people hailing it with shouts of "hurrah" from 
the bridge and the quayside. It was the festive procession and the 
Weser excursion that gave the celebration the character of a 
people's festival, but even more so the distribution, at first 
restricted but later liberal, of tickets for an evening in a public 
garden which had been taken over and illuminated for the 
occasion. There the committee repaired after a banquet, and the 
festival concluded under the bright illuminations with music and 
the drinking of Haut-Sauternes, St. Julien and champagne. 
LITERATURE 
[MorgenbhU für gebildete Leser No. 182, July 31, 1840] 
Bremen, July 
For the rest, life here is rather monotonous and small-townish; 
the haute volée, i.e., the families of patricians and monied aristo­
crats,  are spending the summer on their landed estates; the 

=====第127页=====
Reports from Bremen 105 
middle-class ladies even in this fine period of the year cannot tear 
themselves away from their tea-parties, where cards are played 
and tongues wag; and the merchants day after day visit the 
museum, the stock exchange, or their club, to talk about coffee 
and tobacco prices and the state of the negotiations with the 
Customs Union87 ; few go to the theatre.— Interest in the current 
literature of the Fatherland as a whole is not to be found here; it 
is pretty generally held that Goethe and Schiller set the coping-
stones of the arch of German literature, and that in any case the 
romantic writers served only as later ornamentations. People 
subscribe to a reading-club, partly because it is the fashion, partly 
because a siesta can be more comfortable with a periodical; but 
they are interested only in scandal and anything that the papers 
may say about Bremen. With many educated people this apathy 
may of course be due to lack of leisure, for here the merchant 
especially is always compelled to keep his business in mind, and 
any time he may have left over is taken up by the duties of 
etiquette towards his usually numerous relatives, visits, etc. On the 
other hand, there is a seclusive kind of literature here which has 
an ample circulation, partly through pamphlets, most of which are 
concerned with theological controversies, and partly through pe­
riodicals. The Bremer Zeitung, tactfully edited and with informa­
tive reports, used to enjoy a considerable reputation over a 
wide area, which however has decreased since its involuntary in­
volvement in the political affairs of the neighbouring state. Its 
West-European articles are intelligently written, even if they are 
not definitely liberal-minded. A supplement to the newspaper, 
the Bremisches  Conversationsblatt,  tried to represent Bremen in 
current German literature and carried clever articles by Pro­
fessor Weber and Dr. Stahr in Oldenburg; poems were supplied 
by Nicolaus Delius, a talented young philologist who could gradu­
ally achieve an honourable position also as a poet. But it proved 
difficult to recruit important outside contributors, and so the 
newspaper had to close down for lack of material. Another 
periodical, the Patriot, which endeavoured to serve as a worthier 
organ for the discussion of matters of local interest and at the 
same time to be more valuable from the aesthetic point of view 
than the small local newspapers, died because o'f the ambiguity of 
its position as neither a local newspaper nor an organ of 
belles-lettres.  The smaller local newspapers, which feed on scandals, 
feuds between actors, town gossip, and such like, can boast of a 
more tenacious existence. In particular, the  Unterhaltungsblatt,' i 
" Bremisches  Unterhaltungsblatt. — Ed. 
5-384 

=====第128页=====
106 Frederick Engels 
owing to its numerous contributors (almost every clerk in an 
office can boast of having written a few lines for the Unterhal­
tungsblatt),  has achieved a singular degree of omniscience. If there 
is a nail sticking out of a seat in the theatre, if a pamphlet 
has not been ordered in the club, if a drunken cigar-maker 
has spent a night of merriment in the street, if a gutter has 
not been properly cleaned — the first to pay attention to it is the 
Unterhaltungsblatt. If a militia officer believes that his rank gives 
him the right to ride on the foot-path, he can be sure that the 
next issue of this newspaper will raise the question whether 
militia officers ought to be allowed to ride on the foot-paths. 
This excellent sheet could be called the providence of Bremen. 
Its chief contributor, however, is Crischan Tripsteert, the pseudo­
nymous author of poems in Low German. It would be better 
for this dialect if it were abolished in accordance with Wienbarg's 
demand rather than that it should have to let itself be misused 
by Crischan Tripsteert for his poems. The other local newspapers 
are of too low a level for even their names to be merely mentioned 
before the general public. Quite apart is the Bremer Kir­
chenbote, a pietistic-ascetic newspaper edited by three priests 2 to 
which Krummacher, the well-known writer of parables,b  sometimes 
contributes. This newspaper is so zealous that the censorship 
is often compelled to intervene, although to be sure this only hap­
pens in extreme cases, since its tendency meets with approval in 
higher circles. It carries on a continual polemic against Hegel, 
the "father of modern pantheism", and "his disciple, the ice-
cold Strauss", as well as against any rationalist who comes within 
ten miles. Next time I shall say something about Bremerhaven 
and social conditions in Bremen. 
Written in July 1840 Printed according to the news­
paper 
First published in the Morgenblatt für , 
gebildete Leser Nos. 181 and 182, July 30 Published in English for the first 
and 31, 1840 t,me 
Signed: F. O. 
' Georg Gottfried Treviranus, Friedrich Ludwig Mallet, and F. A. Toel.— Ed. 
Friedrich Adolf Krummacher.— Ed. 

=====第129页=====
AN EVENING 
To-morrow comes! 
Shelley" 
1 
I sit in the garden. 'Neath the ocean's rim 
The old day's sun has slowly slipped from sight, 
And hidden shafts that draw their strength from him 
Now fill the heavens with scintillating light. 
But with day's brilliance fading from the sky, 
The flowers stand and grieve in silent sadness; 
Meanwhile the birds, safe in the tree-tops high, 
Carol their love-songs full of joy and gladness. 
Ships that have traced the oceans with their wake 
Now lie at anchor in the peaceful bay. 
From end to end the timbered bridges shake 
As the tired people trudge their homeward way. 
The cool wine bubbles in the crystal glass. 
I leaf through Calderon's great comedies, 
Drinking my fill to very drunkenness 
On heady wine and headier tragedies. 
2 
The radiance in the West is almost gone. 
Patience! A new day's coming—Freedom's day! 
The sun shall mount his ever-shining throne 
And Night's black cares be banished far away. 
New flowers shall grow, but not in nursery beds 
We raked ourselves and sowed with chosen seeds: 
All earth shall be their garden full of light; 
a Written in English in the original. (Shelley, Queen Mab.) — Ed. 

=====第130页=====
Frederick Engels 
AU plants shall flourish in far alien lands. 
The Palm of Peace shall grace the Northern strands, 
The Rose of Love shall crown the frozen wight, 
The sturdy Oak shall seek the Southern shore 
To make the club that strikes the despot down, 
And he who brings his nation peace once more 
Shall wear upon his head the oak-leaf crown. 
The Aloe, flourishing all over Earth, 
Is like the People's spirit everywhere, 
As prickly, coarse, and lacking grace as they are, 
Till, with a crash, there suddenly bursts forth 
Through every obstacle a blossom bright— 
The Freedom flame, that glowed concealed from sight; 
Its scent is far more like to reach the Lord 
Than all the incense of the pious fraud. 
Only the Cypress-trees are left alone, 
Abandoned in the grove, their meaning gone. 
3 
The birds on their green branches greet the dawn 
With paeans of tumultuous song, and know 
That when the drifting cloudlets have withdrawn 
Their steamy summits to the vales below, 
Then shall the sun begin to mount his throne — 
These birds are minstrel singers, every one; 
Their words fly free as the free winds that blow; 
And winds and words as one united go. 
These songsters do not haunt the castle walls 
(Those stately homes have long since tumbled down), 
But, in proud oaks unbent by howling squalls, 
Boldly they look towards the rising sun, 
Though they be dazzled when his brilliance falls 
To ring the earth with radiant light around. 
I, too, am one of Freedom's minstrel band. 
'Twas to the boughs of Börne's great oak-tree 
I soared, when in the vales the despot's hand 
Tightened the strangling chains round Germany. 
Yes, I am of those plucky birds that make 
Their course through Freedom's bright aethereal sea. 
Though I be just a sparrow in their wake, 

=====第131页=====
An Evening 109 
Rather that little sparrow would I be 
Than the caged nightingale that can't take wing 
And only to a prince's ear may sing. 
4 
No longer does the cargo vessel press 
Across the ocean to enrich the few 
Or swell the greedy merchant's revenue: 
It bears the seeds of human happiness. 
It is a noble stallion prancing high, 
Whose rider slays all hypocrites and crawlers, 
It is the fearless scourge of human dolours, 
It is a thought that dreams of Liberty. 
The flag bears not the royal coat of arms 
For the ship's frightened crew to tremble under; 
It bears the cloud on which, after the thunder, 
After the lightning bolts of raging storms, 
The reconciling Freedom rainbow forms. 
5 
The bridge of Love shall throw its spans unseen 
Across from heart to heart; between the piers 
Runs Passion's wild and ever-rushing stream, 
The swiftly flowing torrent of the years. 
The bridge is diamond hard: it will not sag. 
Across goes Freedom's bravely shining flag. 
Across goes Man. Where'er his feet may lead him, 
Wherever he may choose to cast his eye, 
He sees a friendly roof against the sky 
And knows that food and drink are there to meet him; 
A very home from home awaits to greet him, 
Wherever he may make his bed and lie. 
A bridge of purer faith shall pierce the clouds. 
Man shall ascend it, climbing without fear 
Its heavenward steps to gaze on, humbly proud, 
The Eternal Archetype of All the Spirits. 
Out of his bosom issues forth Mankind, 
And to his bosom Men return again, 
All conscious links in the great spirit-chain 
By which Eternal Matter is confined. 

=====第132页=====
110 Frederick Engels 
6 
New wine shall fill your glasses to the brim, 
Pure Freedom wine's intoxicating brew: 
Not the unwary senses to bedim, 
But jaded senses to exchange for new, 
That with revived perception you may hear 
The spheres in heaven singing high and low; 
That the blood coursing through your veins may clear, 
Transformed into pure Aether, which flows through 
The Infinities; that your eye-beams may spear 
Primordial Space, like warriors bold that go 
To storm the starry summits without fear. 
Between, like Jack-o'-Lanterns in the sky, 
Images of past woe are gliding by. 
7 
And there shall rise another Calderön, 
Pearl-fisher in the tide of poetry, 
With images like flames ascending from 
The layered wood of the sweet Cedar-tree. 
With golden lyre, he shall exalt in song 
The bloody stamping out of Tyranny. 
Mankind shall hear proud Victory's refrain, 
And Peace shall flourish in the world again. 
He too shall sing how Mankind made a stand 
Against the cruel hordes of Tyranny 
Upon Mantible Bridge***; how that brave band 
Fought on through levelled spears to victory 
And so set foot on Freedom's hallowed land; 
How Doctor of His Honour** came to be 
Man, likeThe Constant Prince,*** condemned to languish 
In chains until deliverance from anguish; 
How Freedom came, The Daughter of the Air,**** 
Descending earthwards from aethereal space 
To sing her magic songs, so wondrous fair; 
* La puente de Mantible.— Note by Engek. 
** El médico de su honra. — Note by Engels. 
*** El principe  constante. — Note by Engels. 
**** La hija del aire.— Note by Engels. 

=====第133页=====
An Evening 111 
How Life became a  Dream *  of joy and grace, 
And how the Cup of Happiness shone clear 
Of furious ferment showing not a trace; 
And how the sun shall put the clouds to flight, 
Bringing sweet  April-and-May-Morning? **  light. 
8 
But say, when is the new sun going to rise? 
When will the bad old times be cracked asunder? 
We saw the old sun sinking in the skies— 
How long must night's oppression keep us under? 
The melancholy moon peers through the cloud, 
And white mists, bivouacked in the vales below, 
Hide all that lives on earth beneath their shroud. 
Like blind men tapping through the dark we go. 
Patience! For look, already heavenward bound, 
The sun would chase the gloomy clouds away. 
The very mists that crawl along the ground 
Are Spirits' dawn-breeze-wakened roundelay. 
The morning star dances his upward way. 
The mists are pierced by shafts of blood-red fire. 
Do not the flowers unfold to greet the day? 
Do you not hear the joyful feathered choir? 
Now half the heavens are filled with radiance bright. 
The snow-capped mountains blaze with ruby light. 
The golden clouds rear up their noble heads 
Like the sun's fiery chariot-drawing steeds. 
Look yonder, where the densest light rays run 
In joyous throng to greet the new-born sun! 
Written in July 1840 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the Telegraph für Published in English for the first 
Deutschland No. 125, August 1840 time 
Signed: Friedrich Oswald 
* La vida es  sueno. — Not« by Engels. 
** Marianas de Abril y Mayo.—Note by Engels. 

=====第134页=====
[REPORTS FROM BREMEN] 
AN OUTING TO BREMERHAVEN 89 
[Morgenblatt für gebildete Leser No. 196, August 17, 1841] 
Bremen, July 
The Roland was due to leave at six o'clock in the morning. I 
stood leaning against the wheel-house and looked for familiar 
faces in the throng of people pushing to get on board the steamer. 
For today a Sunday outing to Bremerhaven had been arranged, 
and at reduced prices, so everybody took the opportunity to get a 
little nearer to the sea and to look at some big ships. I thought it 
strange that the craze for profit, which otherwise continually 
serves the monied aristocracy, should here for once make some 
concessions to democracy. The price reduction made it possible 
for the more impecunious to join in, and in addition the 
distinction between first and second class had been eliminated, 
which means a great deal in Bremen where the "upper crust" shy 
at nothing so much as mixed company. So the steamer became 
very full. True Bremen burghers, who had never once left the 
territory of the free Hanseatic town 90 and now wanted to show 
their families the port, formed the core of the party; coopers, 
emigrants and journeymen were also there in large numbers; here 
and there a man from the stock exchange was standing apart from 
the crowd since he belonged to high society, and everywhere one 
saw the pawns who are always pushed forward on the chessboard 
of a trading city, the office clerks, who are again divided into 
agents, senior apprentices and juniors. The agent already regards 
himself as an important person; he is only one step from 
independence; he is the factotum of his firm, he knows the 
situation of his house inside out, he is familiar with the state of the 
market and the brokers crowd around him at the stock exchange. 
Nor does the senior apprentice think much less of  himself; 

=====第135页=====
Reports from Bremen 113 
although  he is not on the  same footing with  his master  as the 
agent,  he already knows very well  how to  deal with  a broker  and 
especially  a cooper  or boatman  and in the  absence  of the  master 
and the agent  he displays  the consciousness that  he now represents 
the firm  and  that the  credit  of an  entire house depends  on his 
conduct.  The  junior, however,  is an  unfortunate creature;  at most, 
he represents  the  merchant house  to the  worker  who  packs  the 
goods,  or the  postman  in whose area  the office  is situated. As well 
as having  to copy  out all the  business letters  and  bills of exchange, 
deliver invoices  and pay  them,  he must also  be the  universal 
messenger boy, take letters  to the  post,  tie up  parcels, mark crates, 
and fetch letters from  the  post. Every  day at  noon you  can see the 
post-office crowded with these "juniors", waiting  for the  mail from 
Hamburg.  And  worst  of all, the  junior must take  the  blame  for 
whatever goes wrong  in the  office,  for it is  part of his calling  to be 
the scapegoat  for the  entire office. These three classes also keep 
strictly separate  in society:  the juniors, who  for the  most part have 
not yet worn  out  their school boots, like  to laugh loudly  and  make 
much  ado  about nothing;  the senior apprentices zealously debate 
the latest  big purchase made  by a  sugar merchant,  and  each  one 
has his own  conjectures about  it; the  agents smile  at jokes which 
are not for  publication  and  could tell you  a thing  or two about  the 
ladies present. 
[Morgenblatt  für gebildete Leser  No. 197,  August  18, 1841] 
Bremen, July 
The steamer  set off.  Although  the  people  of Bremen  can see 
such a spectacle every  day,  Bremish curiosity  had to  make itself 
felt nevertheless  in the  enormous mass  of people who watched  our 
departure from every vantage point  on the  shore.— The weather 
was not too  promising;  for it was the  same  old  metallic  sky of 
which Homer tells, though  the  side turned towards  us, which  the 
eternal gods  do not  have polished every  day, had a  considerable 
coating  of rust. More than once  a drop  of rain extinguished  my 
cigar with  a hiss.  The  dandies  who had up to now  carried their 
mackintoshes over  the arm  found they  had to put  them  on, and 
the ladies opened their umbrellas.— Seen from  the  Weser,  the 
view of Bremen  as you  leave  it is  very pretty;  on the  left the new 
town with  its long "dyke" planted with trees,  on the  right  the 
gardens  on the  earthwork which stretch down  to the  Weser here 
and are  crowned with  a colossal windmill.  But  then comes  the 

=====第136页=====
114 Frederick Engels 
Bremen desert, willow bushes right and left, marshy fields, potato 
patches and a mass of broccoli fields. Broccoli is the favourite dish 
of the people of Bremen. 
A lanky assistant insurance broker stood on the wheel-house, in 
spite of the pouring rain and sharp wind, and conversed in Low 
German with the captain who was quietly drinking his coffee. 
Then he hurried below again to a company of second-class 
merchants to report to them on the important pronouncements of 
the captain. The agents and the senior apprentices almost fought to 
get near this respected personality, but he took no notice of them, 
for today he was only speaking to established houses. Now he 
hurried down from the wheel-house with the news: "In a quarter 
of an hour we'll be in Vegesack." "Vegesack!" repeated all the 
hearers delightedly, for Vegesack is the oasis of the Bremen 
desert, in Vegesack there are mountains sixty foot high, and the 
people of Bremen even speak of the "Vegesack Switzerland". 
Vegesack is indeed situated quite prettily, or, as one says here, 
"nicely" or "sweetly", which makes one think of the latest 
consignment of brown sugar from Havana sold so advantageously. 
The view of the place from the Weser is charming; before you 
reach it you see many ships' hulls on the Weser, some worn out, 
others newly built here. The Lesum flows into the Weser here and 
its hills also form quite "nice" banks which are even considered to 
be romantic, or so the schoolmaster from Grohn, a village near 
Vegesack, assured me on his honour. Soon after Vegesack the sea 
of sand really tries to send up some decent waves and descends 
fairly steeply into the Weser. Here are the villas of the Bremen 
aristocracy whose gardens add greatly to the beauty of the Weser's 
banks for a short distance. Then it becomes dull and boring 
again.— I went below and in a little side room of the saloon found 
a crowd of "senior apprentices", who had hoisted all their sails 
to entertain three pretty tailor's daughters fittingly; a crowd of 
"juniors" jostled each other at the door, listening eagerly to 
the talk of the senior apprentices; behind them stood the ladies' 
garde d'honneur, an old friend of the family, growling in anno­
yance at their behaviour. The conversation bored me, so I went 
back on deck and stood on the wheel-house. Nothing is more 
enjoyable than to stand like this above a crowd of people, to 
watch the thronging and to hear the babel of words rising from 
below. The fresh breeze has greater freshness up here, and if 
the rain is also felt more freshly, it is at least better than 
the drops which a philistine shakes down your neck from his 
umbrella. 

=====第137页=====
Reports from Bremen 115 
[Morgenblatt für gebildete Leser No. 198, August 19, 1841] 
Bremen, July 
At last, after various uninteresting Hanover and Oldenburg 
villages, came a pleasant change, the free port of Bracke, its houses 
and trees forming an effective background to the ships on the 
Weser. Quite large sea-going vessels come as far as this, and the 
Weser is impressively wide from here on downstream except 
where it is broken up by islands.— The steamer went on after a 
brief stop and an hour and a half later we had reached our goal, 
in about six hours' sailing altogether. As the fort of Bremerhaven 
came into view a bookdealer of my acquaintance quoted Schiller, 
the insurance broker quoted the Shipping and Mercantile Gazette, 
and a merchant quoted the latest issue of the import list. With a 
splendid curve the steamer entered the Geest, a little river which 
flows into the Weser near Bremerhaven. But in spite of the 
captain's warnings, the passengers crowded too near the bow of 
the ship, and the water being at its lowest ebb, the  Roland,  the 
representative of Bremen's independence, ran aground on the 
sand with a jolt. The passengers dispersed, the engines reversed, 
and the Roland managed to get off the sandbank. 
Bremerhaven is a young town. In 1827 Bremen bought a 
narrow strip of land from Hanover and had the port built there at 
enormous cost. Gradually an entire Bremen colony moved into it, 
and the population is still growing. Hence, everything here is 
Bremish, from the style of the buildings to the Low German 
language of the inhabitants, and the Bremen people of the old 
sort, who were perhaps irritated by the extraordinary tax levied to 
buy the strip of land, can now hardly conceal their pleasure when 
they see how beautiful, how practical, how Bremish everything 
is.— You get the best view of the whole straight from the steamer 
jetty. A beautiful, broad quay with the colossal port building in the 
middle standing out in unsuccessful antique style; the whole 
length of the port, with all its ships; on the left and beyond it the 
little fort which is occupied by Hanoverian soldiers, while its brick 
walls show only too clearly that it is there only pro forma. It is 
thus quite consistent that no one is allowed inside, although such 
permission is easily obtained for any Prussian fortress.— We 
walked along the quay in the rain. Now and then a side street 
offered a view into the centre of the town; everything is rectangu­
lar, the streets straight as a ruler, and the houses often still in the 
process of building. Only this modern layout of the place forms a 
contrast to Bremen. With the bad weather and church services not 
yet over, the streets were as quiet as in Bremen. 

=====第138页=====
116 Frederick Engels 
[Morgenblatt für gebildete Leser No. 199, August 20, 1841] 
Bremen, July 
I went on board a big frigate the deck of which was full of 
emigrants who stood watching the "yawl" being hauled up. A yawl 
here is any boat which has a keel and is therefore suitable for 
service at sea. The people were still cheerful; they had not yet 
trodden the last clod of their native soil. But I have seen how 
deeply it affects them when they really leave German soil forever, 
when the ship, with all its passengers on board, slowly moves from 
the quay into the roadstead and thence sails into the open sea. 
They are almost all true German faces, without falseness, with 
strong arms, and you need only be among them for a moment 
and see the cordiality with which they greet each other to realise 
that it is certainly not the worst elements who leave their 
Fatherland to settle in the land of dollars and virgin forests. The 
saying: stay at home and feed yourself honestly3 seems to be 
made for the Germans, but this is not so; people who want to feed 
themselves honestly go, very often at least, to America. And it is 
by no means always lack of food, much less greed, which drives 
these people into distant lands; it is the German peasant's 
uncertain position between serfdom and independence, it is the 
inherited bondage and the rules and regulations of the patrimo­
nial courts91 which make his food taste sour and disturb his sleep 
until he decides to leave his Fatherland. 
The people going over on this ship were Saxons. We went below 
to take a look at the inside of the ship. The saloon was most 
elegantly and comfortably appointed; a little square room, every­
thing elegant, mahogany inlaid with gold, as in an aristocratic 
drawing-room. In front of the saloon were the berths for the 
passengers in small, nice little cabins; from an open door by the 
side we got a whiff of ham from the larder. We had to go on deck 
again to reach the steerage by another companion-way: "But it's 
terrible down there,"b  all my companions quoted when we got 
back. Down there lay the dregs who had not enough money to 
spend ninety talers on the cabin class fare, the people to whom 
nobody raises a hat, whose manners some here call common, 
others uneducated, a plebs which owns nothing, but which is the 
best any king can have in his realm and which alone upholds the 
German principle, particularly in America. It is the Germans in 
a Cf. Psalms  37:3.—  Ed. 
Schiller, Der Taucher. — Ed. 

=====第139页=====
Reports from Bremen 117 
the cities who have taught the Americans their deplorable con­
tempt for our nation. The German merchant makes it a point of 
honour to discard his Germanness and become a complete Yankee 
ape. This hybrid creature is happy if the German in him is no 
longer noticed, he speaks English even to his compatriots, and 
when he returns to Germany he acts the Yankee more than ever. 
English is often heard in the streets of Bremen, but it would be a 
great mistake to take every English speaker for a Britisher or a 
Yankee. The latter always speak German when they come to 
Germany in order to learn our difficult language; but these 
English speakers are invariably Germans who have been to 
America. It is the German peasant alone, perhaps also the 
craftsman in the coastal towns, who adheres with iron firmness to 
his national customs and language, who, separated from the 
Yankees by the virgin forests, the Allegheny mountains and the 
great rivers, is building a new, free Germany in the middle of the 
United States; in Kentucky, Ohio and in Western Pennsylvania 
only the towns are English, while everybody in the countryside 
speaks German. And in his new Fatherland the German has learnt 
new virtues without losing the old ones. The German corporative 
spirit has developed into one of political, free association; it 
presses the government daily to introduce German as the language 
of the courts in the German counties,* it creates German newspa­
pers one after another, which are all devoted to the calm, 
level-headed endeavour to develop existing elements of freedom, 
and, as the best proof of its strength, it has caused the "Native 
Americans"b party to be founded which has spread through all 
the states and aims to hinder immigration and to make it difficult 
for the immigrant to acquire citizenship.92 
"But it's terrible down there." All round the steerage runs a row 
of berths, several close together and even one above the other. An 
oppressive air reigns here, where men, women and children are 
packed next to one another like paving stones in the street, the 
sick next to the healthy, all together. Every moment one stumbles 
over a heap of clothes, household goods, etc; here little children 
are crying, there a head is raised from a berth. It is a sad sight; 
and what must it be like when a prolonged storm throws 
everything into confusion and drives the waves across the deck, so 
that the hatch, which alone admits fresh air, cannot be opened! 
And yet, the arrangements on the Bremen ships are the most 
* This word is in English in the original.— Ed. 
b This name is in English in the original.— Ed. 

=====第140页=====
118 Frederick Engels 
humane. Everybody knows what it is like for the majority who 
travel via Le Havre. Afterwards we visited another, an American, 
ship;  they were cooking, and when a German woman standing 
nearby saw the bad food and even worse preparation she said 
weeping bitterly that if she had known this before she would 
rather have stayed at home. 
[Morgenblatt  für gebildete  Leser No. 200, August 21, 1841] 
Bremen, July 
We went back to the inn. The prima donna of our theatre sat 
there in a corner with her husband, its ultimo uomo, and with 
several other actors; the rest of the company was very dull, and so I 
reached for some printed matter that lay on the table, of which an 
annual report on Bremen trade was the most interesting. I took it 
and read the following passages: 
"Coffee in demand in summer and autumn, until slacker  conditions  set in 
towards winter. Sugar enjoyed a steady sale, but the actual  idea  for this only came 
with rising supplies." 
What is a poor man of letters to say when he sees how the 
manner of expression not only of modern belles-lettres but of 
philosophy is infecting the style of the broker! Conditions and 
ideas in a trade report—who would have expected that! I turned 
the page and found the description: 
"Superfine medium good ordinary real Domingo coffee." 
I asked the agent of one of the leading Bremen merchant 
shippers who happened to be present what this superfine designa­
tion might mean. He replied: "Look at this sample I have just 
taken from a consignment delivered to us; that description will fit 
it roughly." Thus I learned that superfine medium good ordinary 
real Domingo coffee is a pale grey-green coffee from the island of 
Haiti, each pound of which has fifteen half-ounces of good beans, 
ten half-ounces of black beans and seven half-ounces of dust, small 
stones and other rubbish. I then let myself be initiated into several 
other mysteries of Hermes and in this way passed the time until 
midday, when we partook of a very indifferent meal and were 
called back to the steamer by the bell. The rain abated at last, and 
no sooner had the steamer "laid" the Geest than the clouds broke 
and the rays of the sun fell bright and warming on our still wet 
clothes. To everybody's astonishment, however, the steamer did 
not go upstream, but down the roadstead where a proud 
three-master had just anchored. We had barely reached the middle 

=====第141页=====
Reports from Bremen 119 
of the current when the waves grew bigger and the steamer began 
to pitch noticeably. Who, if he has ever been to sea, does not feel 
his pulse quicken when he senses this sign of the proximity of the 
sea! For a moment he believes he is again going out into the free, 
roaring sea, into the deep, clear green of the waves, right into the 
middle of that marvellous light which is created by the sun, 
azure and sea together; he involuntarily begins to find his sea-legs 
again. The ladies, however, were of a different opinion, looked at 
each other in fright and grew pale, while the steamer, "in a gallant 
style",*  as the English say, described a semicircle around the newly 
arrived ship and picked up its captain. The assistant insurance 
broker was just explaining to some gentlemen, who had vainly 
endeavoured to find the ship's name on the bow, that according to 
the number on its flag it was the Maria, Captain Ruyter, and that 
according to Lloyd's list it had sailed from Trinidad de Cuba 
between such-and-such a date, when the captain came up the 
steamer's companion-way. Our assistant insurance broker met him, 
shook his hand with the expression of a protector, asked how the 
voyage had been, what cargo he was carrying, and in general 
conducted a long discourse with him in Low German, while I 
listened to the flatteries which the bookdealer was lavishing on the 
half-naive, half-flirtatious tailor's daughters. 
The sun went down in full glory. A glowing ball, it hung in a 
net of clouds, the strands of which seemed already to have caught 
fire, so that one expected it to burn through the net at any  • 
moment and drop hissing into the river! But it sank calmly behind 
a group of trees which looked like Moses' burning bush, Truly, 
both here and there God speaks with a loud voice! But the hoarse 
croaking of a member of the Bremen opposition tried to shout 
Him down; this clever man was straining hard to prove to his 
neighbour that it would have been much wiser to deepen the 
fairway of the Weser for larger ships instead of building Brem­
erhaven. Unfortunately, the opposition here is too often moti­
vated by envy of the power of the patricians than by the 
consciousness that the aristocracy resists the rational state, and in 
this matter its representatives are so narrow-minded that talking to 
them about the affairs of Bremen is as difficult as to firm 
supporters of the Senate. 93—Both parties convince one more and 
more that such small states as Bremen have outlived themselves 
and even in a mighty union of states would lead a life under 
pressure from without and phlegmatically senile within.— Now we 
These words are in English in the original.— Ed. 

=====第142页=====
120 Frederick Engels 
were close to Bremen. The high spire of the Church of Ansgarius, 
with which our "church troubles" were connected, rose from 
moor and heath, and soon we reached the tall warehouses framing 
the right bank of the Weser. 
Written in July 1840 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the  Morgenblatt  für 
gebildete  Leser Nos. 1%, 197, 198, 199 Published in English for the first 
and 200, August  17-21,  1841 time 

=====第143页=====
[TWO SERMONS BY F. W. KRUMMACHER] 
We have before us the two sermons which caused the otherwise 
so pious people of Bremen to prohibit the Elberfeld zealot,  JF. W. 
Krummacher,  from further officiating by invitation in the Church 
of St. Ansgarius. If the ordinary sermon in which God is spoken of 
only as the Father of the World or the Highest Being generally 
sounds very watery, the text of these orations by Krummacher is 
lye, caustic, even aqua  regia.  They will be read with interest if only 
because of the originality displayed in communicating thus with 
the congregation from the pulpit; they show that Krummacher is a 
zealot of intelligence, blessed with wit and imagination. Whether 
he speaks in this fiery language out of a real rock-like faith in 
Christianity may be doubted; we believe that Krummacher is no 
hypocrite but that he fixed on this manner of preaching merely 
because he liked it and cannot now abandon it, the less so because 
the ordinary tone of the evangelical whisperers on love and of the 
preachers for the ladies is very insipid. This much is certain, 
however, that Krummacher is badly mistaken about the signifi­
cance of the pulpit if he raises it to a seat of the Inquisition. What 
can a congregation take home from such a sermon? Nothing but 
that spiritual pride which is so repellent in pietism. He who 
demands of his congregation nothing but faith, who merely 
reiterates this rigid commandment in synonyms and uses the rest 
of the sermon-lecture for current polemics, will spread much 
self-conceit, pride and orthodox obduracy, but little Christianity. 
Krummacher seems to be methodically carrying on this task of 
elevating Christian simplicity into pride. The statement that spirit, 
wit, imagination, poetic talent, art and science are all nothing 
before God is a cliché to him. 

=====第144页=====
122 Frederick Engels 
He says: 
"There is more joy in heaven over a repentant sinner than over the birth of a 
poet."a 
He paints such a picture of the  importance  which the poorest 
member of his congregation could have that the latter must 
inevitably fancy himself higher and wiser than Kant, Hegel, 
Strauss, etc., whom Krummacher constantly anathematises in his 
sermons. Is it not possible that at the root of Krummacher's 
inmost being there is frustrated ambition, a longing for distinc­
tion? There are many minds which have striven for the highest, 
failed to achieve it by diligence, talent and hard work, and 
then hope to win the eternal crown by an unexampled  virtuosity of 
faith.  This and nothing else, one is inclined to believe, explains 
Krummacher's constant polemic against everything famous in the 
world.—  It is truly painful to find in these sermons so few  softening 
elements,  so little pathos, feeling, or true  grief.  The tone of love 
cannot come easily to such a rigid zealot. And yet there are 
passages which reconcile us to this man's strange nature. How few 
sermons we have in which one can find such a beautiful passage as 
the following: 
"Yes,  friends, the world does not end where the storm howls on the sea's distant 
shore, or where the sorrowing moon walks on high and the silent stars look down 
in sadness on the earth. Beyond, there is another, wider, brighter region. Oh.'tis 
better to be there than here. There roses are no longer carried to the grave; there 
love no longer fears separation; there no drop of gall remains in the cup of joy. 
That such a world exists is as true as that the Lord Jesus vtsifclj (?) ascended into 
it." b 
Written in early September 1840 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the Telegraph für Published in English for the first 
Deutschland No. 149, September 1840 time 
3 F. W. Krummacher, Paulus kein Mann nach dem Sinne unsrer Zeit. Pre­
digt.— Ed. 
F. W. Krummacher, Das letzte Gericht. Gastpredigt. — Ed. 

=====第145页=====
ON THE DEATH OF IMMERMANN 
In the camp's finest tent we'd sat all night 
And mingled Spanish wine with German song. 
The fields were turning grey in dawn's first light; 
Our eyes were aching—we'd stayed up so long. 
The sun's rays peeped into our tent and found 
Our sherry bottles drained, in disarray. 
The hour was late. Time we were homeward bound. 
Come, let us mount the horses and away! 
We flew. After carousing all night long, 
What bliss to feel the freshness of the morrow. 
Still in our ears the sound of strings and song; 
Still far away the long day's care and worry. 
The shades of night had vanished. From the sky 
Light fell on river, trees, fields bathed in dew. 
We all looked up to trace with joyful eye 
The sun's bright progress through the cloudless blue. 
We're home. Our steeds coursed well. Now I stand here 
Upon the threshold of work's tribulations. 
Here is the paper. Let me draw fresh cheer 
By drinking from the well-spring of the nations. 
Russia, Great Britain, Turkish catastrophes! 
And now for Germany—does all go well? 
Ah, here.... What? Dead? Can I believe my eyes? 
You, Immermann, must also bid farewell? 

=====第146页=====
Frederick Engels 
Defiant heart, so full of noble scorn, 
Must you depart, then, for eternity, 
Now that we see the rose despite the thorn 
And bow to you in all humility? 
Now that, like Schiller, proudly you beheld 
Your people hang on every word from you? 
Now that the love within your bosom held 
Had blossomed forth with shining rays anew? 
Aloof in German poetry's sacred grove, 
You shunned your fellow bards' vociferous throng, 
And by the Rhine in solitude you wove 
The images of many a gentle song. 
The mob's harsh clamour never came to hurt you 
In the flower garden where you toiled away. 
So few the stories they could spread about you; 
Living, you were a legend in your day. 
Because the maltitude, that never can 
Conceive what power inspires the poet's lays, 
Why should they heed the silent, serious man 
Who wanders far from their well-trodden ways? 
But you, O Immermann, that now have died, 
Wanted to wrestle with  yourself,  alone, 
And all the bitter jarring strife inside 
That you grew up with, master on your own. 
So, meditating through the long dark night 
That held in thrall our German poetry, 
In solitude you fought the inner fight 
And battled through to see the dawning day. 
When far above your dwelling's mossy stones 
July's wild thunder" rolled away at last, 
You sent into the world your Epigones, 
That requiem for a generation past. 
And yet you saw the rising generation, 
Those in whose hearts the youthful fires blaze, 
Speak loudly to defend your reputation, 
Your right to wear the bard's full crown of bays. 
a The July 1830 revolution in France.— Ed. 

=====第147页=====
On the Death of Immermann 125 
In your abode you saw us drawing nigh, 
You saw us silent at your feet, as we 
Looked up into your rapt and thoughtful eye 
And listened to your rolling poetry. 
Now that the people, who forgot your name, 
Have welcomed you with shouts of joy, bestowing 
On you your rightful laurels of acclaim, 
0 Immermann, is this a time for going? 
Farewell! Here in this land of Germany 
Poets to match your skill are very few. 
1 settled down to work, and swore to be 
As German, and as strong and firm as you. 
Written in September 1840 Printed according to the news-
First published in the Morgenblatt für paper 
gebildet« Leser No. 243, October 10, 1840 Published in English for the first 
time 
Signed: Friedrich Oswald 

=====第148页=====
[REPORTS FROM BREMEN] 
RATIONALISM AND PIETISM 
[Morgenblatt für gebildete Leser No. 249, October 17, 1840] 
Bremen, September 
At last once again a topic which extends beyond tea-party gos­
sip, which so excites the entire public of our Free State that every­
one takes sides either for or against, and which gives food for 
thought even to the more serious-minded. The thunderstorm in 
the sky of our age has struck even in Bremen, the fight for a 
freer or narrower conception of Christianity has been kindled 
even here, in the capital of North-German fundamentalism; the 
voices which were recently raised in Hamburg, Kassel and Magde­
burg have found an echo in Bremen.— Briefly, the course of 
events was as follows: Pastor F. W. Krummacher, the Pope of the 
Wuppertal Calvinists, the St. Michael of the doctrine of pre­
destination, visited his parents here and gave two sermons for his 
father 3 in the Church of St. Ansgarius.b The first sermon dealt 
with his favourite spectacle, the Last Judgment, the second with an 
anathematising passage in the Epistle to the Galatians; both were 
written with the burning eloquence, the poetic, if not always well-
chosen, splendour of imagery for which this richly talented pulpit 
speaker is famous; but both, particularly the last, flash with curses 
against those who think differently, as one might expect from such 
a harsh mystic. The pulpit became the presidential chair of a court 
of inquisition whence the eternal curse was hurled against 
all theological trends which the inquisitor did and did not know. 
Anyone who did not accept this crass mysticism as absolute Chris­
tianity was delivered up to the devil. And with a sophistry which 
a Friedrich Adolf Krummacher.— Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 121-22.— Ed. 

=====第149页=====
Reports from Bremen 127 
emerged as strangely naive, Krummacher always managed to shelter 
behind the apostle Paul. "It is not I who is cursing, nay! Children, 
reflect, it is the apostle Paul who condemns you!"—The worst of it 
was that the apostle wrote in Greek and scholars have not yet been 
able to agree on the precise meaning of certain of his expressions. 
Among these dubious words is the anathema used in this passage, to 
which Krummacher, without more ado, ascribed the most extreme 
meaning of a sentence of eternal damnation. Pastor Paniel, the 
chief representative of rationalism in this pulpit,94  had the misfor­
tune to interpret this word in its milder sense, and in general to 
oppose Krummacher's way of thinking; he therefore preached 
controversial sermons." Whatever you may think of his views, his 
behaviour is irreproachable. Krummacher cannot deny that in 
composing his sermons he had in mind not only the rationalistic 
majority of the congregation, but Paniel in particular; he cannot 
deny that it is wrong for a guest preacher to try to prejudice a 
congregation against its appointed pastors; he must admit that a 
coarse wood needs a coarse wedge. What was the point of all the 
invective against Voltaire and Rousseau, whom even the worst 
rationalist in Bremen fears like the devil, or of all the curses 
against speculative theology, which, with two or three exceptions, 
his entire audience was as incapable of judging as he  himself,  what 
was the point of this except to disguise the very definite, even 
personal, tendenciousness of the sermons? — Paniel's controversial 
sermons were certainly preached in the spirit of Paulus' rational­
ism and, in spite of the lauded care in their arrangement and their 
rhetorical pathos, they suffer from all its weaknesses. It is all 
vague and verbose; where the poetic impulse is set in motion, it is 
like the working of a spinning-machine, and the treatment of the 
text like a homoeopathic brew; Krummacher has more originality 
in three sentences than his opponent in three sermons.— An hour 
from Bremen lives a pietistic country pastor b who is so superior to 
his peasants that he has begun to think himself a great theologian 
and linguist. He issued a tract against Paniel in which he brought 
into play the entire apparatus of a philological theologian of the 
last century. The scientific pretensions of the worthy country 
pastor were punctured most painfully in an anonymous paper. 
With as much spirit as learning the anonymous author,0 believed 
* K. F. W. Paniel, Drei Sonntagspredigten, mit Bezug auf eine besondere Veranlas­
sung, am 12., 19. und 26. Juli 1840 gehalten.— Ed. 
Johann Nikolaus Tiele. — Ed. 
c Wilhelm Ernst Weber.— Ed. 

=====第150页=====
128 Frederick Engels 
to be a deserving, learned inhabitant of our town who has several 
times been mentioned in my previous report," has demonstrated 
to the clever "God's word from the country" all the absurdities 
which he had extracted with great trouble from long antiquated 
handbooks. Krummacher issued a Theologische  Replik to Paniel's 
controversial sermons, in which he made an unconcealed attack on 
his whole personality, and, moreover, in a manner which nullified 
the charge of slander brought against his adversary. Though the 
reply takes skilful advantage of the weaknesses of rationalism, 
particularly those of his adversary, Krummacher acts clumsily in 
trying to demolish Paniel's. interpretation. The most capable work 
written from the pietistic standpoint in this controversy was the 
pamphlet by Pastor Schlichthorst, who lives nearby, in which 
rationalism, and that of Pastor Paniel in particular, was quietly and 
dispassionately traced back to its basis, Kantian philosophy, and 
the question was posed: Why are you not honest enough to admit 
that the foundation of your faith is not the Bible but its 
interpretation according to Kantian philosophy as expounded by 
Paulus? —A new paper by Paniel b is expected to come from the 
press some time soon. Whatever it may prove to contain, he has 
stirred the old leaven, he has brought the Bremen people, who 
believed in everything but themselves, to their senses, and pietism, 
which till now has considered the fact that its adversaries were 
split among themselves into so many parties to be a gift from God, 
will now have to learn for once that we all stand united when it is 
a question of fighting obscurantism. 
SHIPPING PROJECT. THEATRE. MANOEUVRES 
[Morgenblatt für gebildete Leser No. 250, October 19, 1840] 
Bremen, September 
A plan is under consideration here which, if implemented, 
would be of the greatest consequence, and not only for Bremen. A 
respected young local merchant has recently returned from 
London where he informed himself exactly about the equipment 
of the steamer Archimedes which, as you know, has a newly 
invented method of propulsion by an Archimedean screw. He 
went on the ship's trial run round the whole of Great Britain and 
Ireland, in which it greatly exceeded the speed of steamboats 
a See this volume, pp. 104-05.— Ed. 
K. F. W. Paniel, Unverholene Beurtheilung. — Ed. 

=====第151页=====
Reports from Bremen 129 
equipped in the usual way, and he is now planning to apply 
the new invention to a newly designed steamship which is to 
provide a fast and regular service between New York and Bre­
men. The empty ship, the so-called hull, will be built by our 
master shipbuilder at his own expense, while the cost of the 
machinery, etc., is to be raised by shares. Everybody senses the 
importance of such an enterprise; although some of our sailing 
vessels make the crossing from Baltimore to here in the inconceiv­
ably short time of twenty-five days, their speed always depends 
on the wind which can treble the duration of such a voyage, and 
a steamboat, which in case of a favourable wind is also equipped 
for sailing, would undoubtedly need only eleven to eighteen days 
from a port in the United States to Bremen. Once a beginning is 
made with a steam packet-boat service between Germany and the 
American continent, the new equipment is bound to be developed 
quickly and have the greatest consequences for the linking of the 
two countries. We will not have to wait long before we can reach 
New York from any part of Germany in a fortnight, see the 
sights of the United States in a fortnight, and be back home again 
in a fortnight. A couple of railways, a couple of steamships, and 
that's that; since Kant eliminated the categories of space and time 
from the sensory impressions of the thinking mind, mankind 
has been striving with might and main to emancipate itself from 
these limitations materially too. 
An unprecedented animation prevailed in our theatre recently. 
Usually our stage is quite outside society; the subscribers pay their 
contributions and go there now and again when they have nothing 
better to do. Then Seydelmann came, and actors and public were 
filled with a fervour to which we are not accustomed in Bremen. 
One may complain as much as one likes about the decay of the 
spoken drama through the domination of opera, even Schiller and 
Goethe may find empty houses, while everybody rushes to hear 
the tootling of a Donizetti and Mercadante; but as long as the 
spoken drama can still achieve such triumphs through its most 
capable representative, our stage can still be cured of its languor. 
Besides some plays by Kotzebue and Raupach, we have seen 
Seydelmann as Shylock, Mephistopheles and Philipp (Don Carlos). 
It would be like pouring water into the sea if I were to enlarge 
upon his well-known interpretation of these roles. 
The recent manoeuvres of the Oldenburg-Hanseatic brigade 
conducted in the adjoining part of the Oldenburg region give us a 
picture in miniature of the camp at Heilbronn. During the sham 
tight for the capture of a village our troops are said to have 

=====第152页=====
130 Frederick Engels 
behaved so courageously that the force of the cannon fire 
shattered all the window-panes. The people of Bremen are glad 
that they have a new amusement spot and go out in droves to 
watch the fun, while their sons and brothers move to the guard 
posts and spend the merriest nights of their lives there with wine 
and song. 
Written in September 1840 
First published in the  Morgenblatt  für 
gebildete Leser  Nos. 249 and 250, October 
17 and 19, 1840 Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
Signed: F. O. 

=====第153页=====
ST. HELENA 
Fragment 
You proud pile in the ocean's solitude, 
Grim rock-tomb of a heart as strong as stone 
That here on self-made history came to brood 
And in Promethean agony died alone — 
Black-cowled, you loom above the ocean's flood, 
Of all his many burnt-out candles, one 
That God, in need of more illumination, 
Kindled to light the work of his creation. 
Well might they send the Hero to this place, 
Who at the hour of the century's birth 
Lit with his firebolts history's darkling face 
And with his thunder filled all ears on earth, 
Until within the walls of cosmic space 
The babe's first cry was lost as it burst forth; 
Then Time threw coldly down in cruel jest 
Another burnt-out stump to join the rest. 
Written in November 1840 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the Telegraph für Published in English for the first 
Deutschland No. 191, November 1840 time 
Signed: Friedrich Oswald 

=====第154页=====
SIEGFRIED'S NATIVE TOWN 
There lived in the Low Lands a rich king's heir 
by right, 
His father Siegmunt, his mother Siglint hight, 
In a castle brave that everywhere was famed 
Down by the Rhine, and Santen it was named. 
Der Nibelunge Not, [I] 20 
The Rhine should not be visited only above Cologne, and 
young Germans particularly should not imitate the travelling John 
Bull who sits bored in the saloon of the steamer from Rotterdam 
to Cologne and only comes up on deck here because it is the be­
ginning of his panorama of the Rhine from Cologne to Mainz, or 
his Guide for Travellers on the Rhine.' Young Germans should 
choose a seldom visited place for their pilgrimage—I am speaking 
of Xanten, the native town of the Horny Siegfried. 
A Roman city, like Cologne, it remained small and outwardly 
insignificant during the Middle Ages, while Cologne grew big and 
gave its name to an electoral archbishopric. But Xanten Cathedral 
looks'  out in splendid perfection far across the prose of the Dutch 
sand flats, and Cologne's more colossal cathedral remained a 
torso;  but Xanten has Siegfried and Cologne only St. Anno, and 
what is the Song of Anno 95 compared to the Nibelungs! 
I came there from the Rhine. I entered the town through a 
narrow, dilapidated gate; dirty, narrow alleys led me to the 
friendly market-place, and from there I approached a gate built 
into the wall which encircled the former monastery court with the 
church. Above the gate, right and left, below a pair of small 
turrets, were two bas-reliefs, unmistakably two Siegfrieds, easily 
distinguished from St. Victor, the patron-saint of the town, who is 
to be seen above every house door. The hero stands in a 
closely-fitting coat of mail, spear in hand, driving the spear into 
the dragon's jaws in the image on the right, and trampling down 
a The title is in English in the original.— Ed. 

=====第155页=====
Siegfried's Native Town 133 
the "strong  dwarf"  Alberich on the left. It struck me that these 
bas-reliefs are not mentioned in Wilhelm Grimm's Deutsche Helden­
sage, where everything else relating to the subject is collected. Nor 
do I recall having read of them anywhere else, although they are 
among the most important pieces of evidence for the local 
connections of the legend in the Middle Ages. 
I passed through the echoing Gothic vaulted gateway and stood 
before the church. Greek architecture is clear, gay consciousness; 
Moorish is mourning; Gothic is holy ecstasy; Greek architecture is 
bright, sunny day; Moorish is star-spangled dusk; Gothic is dawn. 
Here in front of this church I sensed as never before the power of 
the Gothic style. Not when it is seen among modern buildings, like 
Cologne Cathedral, still less when it is built round with houses 
clinging to it like swallows' nests, as with the churches in the 
North-German towns, does a Gothic cathedral make its most 
powerful impression; only between wooded hills, like the Alten-
berg church in the Berg country, or at least separated from 
everything alien, modern, between monastery walls and old build­
ings,  like Xanten Cathedral. Only there does one feel deeply what 
a century can accomplish when it throws itself with all its might 
into a single, great aim. And if Cologne Cathedral, in all its 
gigantic dimensions, stood free and open to the gaze from all 
sides,  like the church of Xanten, truly the nineteenth century 
would have to die of shame that for all its super-cleverness it 
cannot complete this building. For we no longer know the 
religious deed and so we marvel at a Mrs. Fry, who would have 
been a most commonplace phenomenon in the Middle Ages. 
I entered the church; high mass was just being celebrated. The 
notes of the organ thundered down from the choir, a jubilant 
throng of heart-storming warriors, and raced through the echoing 
nave until they died away in the farthest aisles of the church. You, 
too, son of the nineteenth century, let your heart be conquered by 
them — these sounds have enthralled stronger and wilder men 
than you! They drove the old German gods from their groves, 
they led the heroes of a great age across the stormy sea, through 
the desert, and their unconquered children to Jerusalem, they are 
the shadows of hot-blooded centuries which thirsted for action! 
But when the trumpets announce the miracle of the transubstanti-
ation, when the priest raises the glittering monstrance and the 
whole consciousness of the congregation is intoxicated with the 
wine of devotion, rush out, save  yourself,  save your reason from 
this ocean of feeling that surges through the church and pray 
outside to the God whose house is not made by human hands, 

=====第156页=====
134 Frederick Engels 
who is the breath of the world and who wants to be worshipped in 
spirit and in truth. 
I went away shaken and asked to be shown the way to an inn, 
the only one in the little town. When I entered the inn parlour I 
could feel that I must be close to Holland. A quaintly mixed 
exhibition of paintings and engravings on the wall, landscapes cut 
into the window-panes, goldfish, peacock feathers and the ribbed 
leaves of tropical plants in front of the mirror clearly showed the 
host's pride in possessing things which others do not have. This 
passion for rarities which in decidedly bad taste surrounds itself 
with products of art and nature, be they beautiful or ugly, and 
which feels most at home in a room full to bursting with such 
absurdities, is the Dutchman's besetting sin. But what a shudder 
seized me when the good man took me into his so-called 
picture-gallery! A small room, all the walls densely covered with 
paintings of little value, although he claimed that Schadow had 
declared one of the portraits, which was actually much prettier 
than the rest, to be a Hans Holbein. A few altar pieces by Jan van 
Calcar (from a neighbouring small town) had lively colouring and 
would be of interest to an expert. But as for the rest of the room's 
decorations! Palm leaves, coral branches and the like protruded 
from every corner; there were stuffed lizards everywhere, a couple 
of figures made of coloured seashells, such as one finds frequently 
in Holland, stood on the stove; in a corner was a bust of the 
Cologne  Wallraf,  and beneath it hung, desiccated like a mummy, 
the dead body of a cat, with one forepaw treading right on the 
face of a painted Christ on the cross. If my reader should ever 
stray into this one hotel in Xanten, let him ask the obliging host 
about his beautiful ancient gem; he possesses an exquisite Diana 
cut in an opal, which is worth more than his entire collection of 
paintings. 
In Xanten one should not miss seeing the collection of anti­
quities in the possession of Mr. Houben," a solicitor. It includes 
almost everything that has been dug up or found at Castra vetera. 96 
The collection is interesting, but it does not contain anything of 
particular artistic value, as is to be expected of a military station, 
which Castra vetera was. The few beautiful gems which were found 
here are dispersed all over the town; the one piece of sculpture of 
any considerable size is a sphinx, about three feet long, in the 
possession of the innkeeper already mentioned; it is made of 
The Telegraph für Deutschland has "Huber", which is a misprint.— Ed. 

=====第157页=====
Siegfried's Native Town 135 
ordinary sandstone, badly preserved, and was never particularly 
beautiful. 
I went out of the town and up a sandy rise, the only natural 
elevation for miles around. This is the mountain on which, 
according to the legend, Siegfried's castle stood. At the entrance to 
a pine grove I sat down and looked at the town below. Sur­
rounded on all sides by earthworks, it lay as it were in a cauldron, 
only the church rising majestically over the brim. On the right the 
Rhine embracing a green island with broad, gleaming arms, on the 
left the hills of Cleves in the blue distance. 
What is it about the legend of Siegfried that affects us so 
powerfully? Not the plot of the story  itself,  not the foul treason 
which brings about the death of the youthful hero; it is the deep 
significance which is expressed through his person. Siegfried is the 
representative of German youth. All of us, who still carry in our 
breast a heart unfettered by the restraints of life, know what that 
means. We all feel in ourselves the same zest for action, the same 
defiance of convention which drove Siegfried from his father's 
castle; we loathe with all our soul continual reflection and the 
philistine fear of vigorous action; we want to get out into the free 
world; we want to overrun the barriers of prudence and fight for 
the crown of life, action. The philistines have supplied giants and 
dragons too, particularly in the sphere of church and state. But 
that age is no more; we are put in prisons called schools, where 
instead of striking out around us we are made with cruel irony to 
conjugate the verb "to strike" in Greek in all moods and tenses, 
and when we are released from that discipline we fall into the 
hands of the goddess of the century, the police. Police for 
thinking, police for speaking, police for walking, riding and 
driving, passports, residence permits, and customs docu­
ments— the devil strike these giants and dragons dead! They have 
left us only the semblance of action, the rapier instead of the 
sword; but what use is all the art of fencing with the rapier if we 
may not apply it with the sword? And when the barriers are finally 
broken down, when philistinism and indifference are trodden 
underfoot, when the urge to action is no longer checked  — do you 
see the tower of Wesel there across the Rhine? The citadel of that 
town, which is called a stronghold of German freedom, has 
become the grave of German youth, and has to lie right opposite 
the cradle of the greatest German youth! Who sat there in prison? 
Students who did not want to have learnt to fence to no purpose, 
vulgo duellists and demagogues. 9' Now, after the amnesty of 
Frederick William IV, we may be permitted to say that this 

=====第158页=====
136 Frederick Engels 
amnesty was an act not only of mercy but of justice. Granted all 
the premises, and in particular the need for the state to take 
measures against the student fraternities, nevertheless, everyone 
who sees that the good of the state does not lie in blind obedience 
and strict subordination will surely agree with me that the 
treatment of the participants demanded that they should be 
rehabilitated in honour and dignity. Under the Restoration and 
after the July days* the demagogic fraternities were as under­
standable as they are now impossible. Who then suppressed every 
free movement, who placed the beating of the youthful heart 
under "provisional" guardianship? And how were the unfortunates 
treated? Can it be denied that this legal case is perfectly cal­
culated to show in the clearest light all the disadvantages and 
errors of both public and secret judicature, to make manifest the 
contradiction that paid  servants  of the  state,  instead of independent 
jurors,  try charges of offending against the state; can it be denied 
that all the sentencing was done summarily, "in bulk", as mer­
chants say? 
But I want to go down to the Rhine and listen to what the waves 
gleaming in the sunset tell Siegfried's mother earth about his 
grave in Worms and about the -sunken hoard. Perhaps a friendly 
Morgan le Fay will make Siegfried's castle rise again for me or 
show my mind's eye what heroic deeds are reserved for his sons of 
the nineteenth century. 
Written in November 1840 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the Telegraph für Published in English for the first 
Deutschland  No. 197, December 1840 time 
Signed:  Friedrich Oswald 
* The July 1830 revolution in France.— Ed. 

=====第159页=====
ERNST MORITZ ARNDT « 
[Telegraph für Deutschland No. 2, January 1841] 
Like the faithful Eckart of the legend, old Arndt stands on the 
Rhine and warns the youth of Germany, who for many years now 
have been gazing across to the French Venusberg and the 
- seductive, passionate maidens, the ideas," that beckon from its 
pinnacles. But the wild youths do not heed the old hero and storm 
across, and not all of them remain in enervated prostration like 
the new Tannhäuser Heine. 
This is Arndt's position in relation to the German youth of 
today. Though all hold him in high esteem, his ideal of German 
life does not satisfy them; they want more freedom to act, fuller, 
more exuberant vitality, ardent, impetuous throbbing in the veins 
of world history which carry Germany's life-blood. Hence the 
sympathy for France, not, of course, the sympathy of submission 
about which the French romance, but that loftier and freer form 
whose nature has been so admirably set forth by Börne in his 
Franzosenfresser,  in contrast to Germanising one-sidedness. 
Arndt has sensed that the present is estranged from him, that it 
does not respect him for his thought but respects his thought for 
the sake of his strong, manly personality. Hence, as a man whose 
life had been given meaning both by his talent and conviction and 
by the course of developments over a number of years, he was 
faced with the duty of leaving his nation a memorial of his cultural 
development, his way of thinking and his times, which he has 
done in his much discussed Erinnerungen aus dem  äussern  Leben. 
Disregarding its trend for the moment, Arndt's book is also 
aesthetically a most interesting publication. This concise, pithy 
language has not been heard in our literature for a long time and 
6-384 

=====第160页=====
138 Frederick Engels 
deserves to make a lasting impression on many of the young 
generation. Better firm than flabby! There are, of course, authors 
for whom the essence of the modern style is that every ripple of 
the muscles, every taut sinew of speech should be prettily 
enveloped in soft flesh, even at the risk of appearing effeminate. 
No, give me the manly, bony structure of Arndt's style rather than 
the spongy manner of certain "modern" stylists! Particularly since 
Arndt has avoided the idiosyncrasies of his comrades of 1813 so 
far as possible and comes near to affectation only in the absolute 
use of the superlative (as in the southern Romance languages). 
Nor should one look in him for that repulsive mixing of languages 
which has again become the fashion; on the contrary, he shows 
how few alien shoots we need graft on our language without being 
at a loss. The carriage of our thoughts does indeed run better on 
most roads with German rather than French or Greek horses, a 
fact which ridicule of the extremes of the puristic trend does not 
alter. 
Let us now examine the book more closely. Most of it is taken 
up with the idyll of his early life, which is drawn with a genuinely 
poetic hand. Anyone who has spent his first years as Arndt did, 
can be eternally thankful to God! Not in the dust of a big city, 
where the joys of the individual are crushed by the interests of the 
whole, not in children's homes or philanthropic prisons, where 
budding vigour is blunted; no, it was under the open sky in fields 
and woods that nature formed the man of steel at whom an 
effeminate generation gazes as at a northern warrior. The great 
plastic force with which Arndt depicts this period of his life almost 
compels one to believe that all idyllic compositions are superfluous 
as long as our authors experience such idylls as Arndt did. What 
will appear most strange to our century is the self-discipline of the 
young Arndt, which combines German chastity with Spartan 
vigour. But this vigour, so naive, so free from any Jahn-like 
bragging, as it hums to itself its hoc tibi proderit olim,* cannot be 
recommended enough to our stay-at-home youths. Young men 
who shun cold water like mad dogs, who put on three or four 
layers of clothing when the weather is the least bit frosty, who 
make it a point of honour to obtain exemption from military 
service on grounds of physical weakness, are truly a fine support 
for the Fatherland! As for chastity, it is regarded as a crime even 
to speak of it in an age where one's first inquiry in every town is 
the way to the "gate where the last of the houses stand". b I am 
3 This will come in handy one day.— Ed. 
From Goethe's ballad Der Gott und die Bajadere. — Ed. 

=====第161页=====
Ernst Moritz Arndt 139 
certainly no abstract moralist, I detest all ascetic nonsence, and 
shall never pass judgment on fallen love; but it grieves me that 
moral seriousness threatens to disappear and that sensuality strives 
to set itself up as the highest good. The emancipation of the flesh 
in practice will always have to blush beside an Arndt. 
With the year 1800 Arndt enters the profession allotted to him. 
Napoleon's armies flood Europe, and as the French Emperor's 
power increases Arndt's hatred of him grows; the Greifswald 
professor protests in the name of Germany against the oppression 
and has to flee. At last the German nation rises up and Arndt 
returns. We could wish that this part of the book contained more 
detail; Arndt retires modestly into the background before the 
arming of the nation and its deeds. Instead of leaving us to guess 
that he was not inactive he should have described his part in the 
developments of the time in greater detail, and told us the history 
of these days from the subjective standpoint. Later events are 
treated still more briefly. What is remarkable here is on the one 
hand the increasingly pronounced tendency to orthodoxy in 
religious matters, on the other the mysterious, almost servile, 
kiss-the-rod manner in which Arndt speaks of his suspension. But 
those who find this strange will have been convinced by Arndt's 
statements issued recently in the public press, in which he regards 
his reinstatement as an act of justice, not of grace and favour, that 
he still possesses his old firmness and determination. 
Arndt's book gains particular importance, however, from the 
simultaneous publication of a mass of memoirs on the war of 
liberation. The glorious period when the German nation, for the 
first time in centuries, rose once more in all its power and 
greatness and opposed foreign oppression is vividly brought close 
to us again. And we Germans cannot recall these battles often 
enough if we are to keep awake our somnolent national conscious­
ness;  of course not in the sense of a party which believes it has 
now done everything and regards itself complacently in the mirror 
of history, resting on the laurels of 1813, but rather in the 
opposite sense. For the greatest result of the struggle was not the 
shaking off of foreign rule, whose elaborate artificiality, resting as 
it did solely on the Atlas shoulders of Napoleon, was bound to 
come crashing down of its own accord sooner or later, nor was it 
the "freedom" which was won; it was the deed  itself,  or rather an 
aspect of it, which only very few people at the time clearly sensed. 
That we became conscious of the loss of our national sanctuaries, 
that we armed ourselves without waiting for the most gracious-
permission of the sovereigns, that we actually compelled those in 
6* 

=====第162页=====
140 Frederick Engels 
power to take their place at our head,* in short, that for a 
moment we acted as the source of state power, as a sovereign 
nation, that was the greatest gain of those years, and therefore 
after the war the men who had felt this most clearly and had acted 
accordingly with the greatest resolution, were bound to appear 
dangerous to the governments.—But how soon the moving power 
went to sleep again! The bane of disunity absorbed for the parts 
the impulse so much needed for the whole, split the general 
German interest into a multitude of provincial interests and made 
it impossible to provide Germany with a foundation for state life 
such as Spain created for herself in the Constitution of 1812.10° 
On the contrary, the gentle spring rain of general promises which 
surprised us from the "higher regions" was too much for our 
hearts bowed down by oppression, and we fools did not reflect 
that there are promises the breaking of which can never be 
excused from the point of view of the nation, but very easily from 
that of the individual. (?) Then came the Congresses101  giving the 
Germans time to sleep off their intoxication with freedom and 
wake up to find themselves back in the old relationship of Your 
Most Gracious Majesty and Your Most Humble Servant. Those 
who had not yet lost their old aspirations, and could not reconcile 
themselves to having no active part in the life of the nation, were 
driven by all the forces of the time into the blind alley of 
Germanisation. Only a few distinguished spirits broke out of the 
labyrinth and found the path which leads to true freedom. 
jlie Germanisers wanted to complete the facts of the war of 
libération and to free a now materially independent Germany 
from foreign intellectual hegemony as well. But for that very 
reason Germanisation was negation, and the positive elements with 
which it plumed itself lay buried in an unclarity from which they 
never quite emerged; what did come up into the daylight of 
reason was for the most part paradoxical enough. Its whole world 
view was philosophically without foundation since it held that the 
entire world was created for the sake of the Germans, and the 
Germans themselves had long since arrived at the highest stage of 
evolution. The Germanising trend was negation, abstraction in the 
Hegelian sense. It created abstract Germans by stripping off 
everything that had not descended from national roots over 
sixty-four purely German generations. Even its seemingly positive 
features were negative, for Germany could only be led towards its 
ideals by negating a whole century and her development, and thus 
* Cf.. K. Bade, Napoleon im Jahre 1813, Altona, 1840.— Note by F. Engels. 

=====第163页=====
Ernst Moritz Arndt 141 
its intention was to push the nation back into the German Middle 
Ages or even into the primeval German purity of the  Teutoburger 
Wald.  Jahn embodied this trend in its extreme. This one-sidedness 
turned the Germans into the chosen people of Israel and ignored 
all the innumerable seeds of world history which had grown on 
soil that was not German. It is against the French especially, whose 
invasion had been repulsed and whose hegemony in external 
matters is based on the fact that they master, more easily than all 
nations at least, the form of European culture, namely, civilisa­
tion—it is against the French that the iconoclastic fury was 
directed most of all. The great, eternal achievements of the 
revolution were abhorred as "foreign frivolities" or even "foreign 
lies and falsehoods"; no one thought of the kinship between this 
stupendous act of the people and the national uprising of 1813; 
that which Napoleon had introduced, the emancipation of the 
Israelites, trial by jury, sound civil law in place of the pandects, 102 
was condemned solely because of its initiator. Hatred of the 
French became a duty. Every kind of thinking which could rise to 
a higher viewpoint was condemned as un-German. Hence patriot­
ism too was essentially negative and left the Fatherland without 
support in the struggle of the age, while it went to great pains to 
invent bombastic German expressions for foreign words which had 
long been assimilated into German. If this trend had been 
concretely German, if it had taken the German for what he had 
become in two thousand years of history, if it had not overlooked 
the truest element of our destiny, namely, to be the pointer on the 
scales of European history, to watch over the development of the 
neighbouring nations, it would have avoided all its mistakes.— On 
the other hand, one must not ignore the fact that Germanisation 
was a necessary stage in the formation of our national spirit and 
that together with the succeeding stage it formed the contrast on 
whose shoulders the modern world view rests. 
[Telegraph für Deutschland No. 3, January 1841] 
This contrast to the Germanising trend was the cosmopolitan 
liberalism of the South-German estates which worked for the 
negation of national differences and the formation of a great, 
free, united humanity. It corresponded to religious rationalism 
and stemmed from the same source, the philanthropy of the 
previous century, whereas the Germanising trend consistently led 
to theological orthodoxy, at which almost all its adherents (Arndt, 
Steffens, Menzel) arrived in due course. The one-sidedness of 

=====第164页=====
142 Frederick Engels 
cosmopolitan liberalism has so often been exposed by its oppo­
nents,  albeit in a one-sided fashion, that I can be brief where this 
trend is concerned. The July revolution at first seemed to favour 
it, but this event was exploited by all parties. The actual destruc­
tion of the Germanising trend or rather of its propagating power 
dates from the July revolution and was inherent in it. Yet so was 
the collapse of the cosmopolitan trend; for the overwhelming 
significance of the great week3 was the restitution of the French 
nation in its position as a great power, whereby the other nations 
were compelled to close their ranks as well. 
Even before this latest world-shaking event two men had been 
working quietly on the development of the German, or as it is 
preferably called the modern, spirit, two men who almost ignored 
each other in their lifetime and whose complementary relationship 
was not to be recognised until after their death, Börne and Hegel. 
Börne has often and most unjustly been branded as a cosmopoli­
tan, but he was more German than his opponents. The Hallische 
Jahrbücher has recently linked a discussion of "political practice" 
with the name of Herr von Florencourt 10S; but he is certainly not 
its representative. He stands at the point where the extremes of 
the Germanising trend and cosmopolitanism meet, as happened in 
the Burschenschaften, 104 and was only superficially affected by the 
later developments of the national spirit. The man of political 
practice is Börne, and his place in history is that he fulfilled this 
calling perfectly. He tore the ostentatious finery off the Germanis­
ing trend and also unmercifully exposed the shame of cos­
mopolitanism, which merely had impotent, more pious wishes. He 
confronted the Germans with the words of the Cid: Lengua sin 
manos, cuemo osas fablar? b No one has described the glory of the 
deed like Börne. With him all is life, all is vigour. Only of his 
writings can it be said that they are deeds for freedom. Do not 
speak to me here of "reasoned definitions", of "finite categories"! 
The manner in which Börne understood the position of the 
European nations and their destiny is not speculative. Yet Börne 
was the first to show the relationship of Germany and France in its 
reality and thereby did a greater service to the idea than the 
Hegelians, who were meanwhile learning Hegel's Enzyklopädie by 
heart and thought that they had thereby done enough for the 
century. That same portrayal also proves how high Börne stands 
above the level of cosmopolitanism. Rational one-sidedness was as 
The events of the July revolution in France (July 27-August 2, 1830).— Ed-
Tongue without hands, how dare you speak? (Poema del Cid.) — Ed. 

=====第165页=====
Ernst Moritz Arndt 143 
necessary for Börne as excessive schematism for Hegel; but 
instead of understanding this we do not get beyond the crude and 
often false axioms of the Briefe am Paris. 
By the side of Börn$ and opposed to him, Hegel, the man of 
thought, presented his already completed system to the nation. 
Authority did not take the trouble to work its way through the 
abstruse forms of Hegel's system and his brazen style; but then, 
how could it .have known that this philosophy would venture 
from the quiet haven of theory onto the stormy sea of actuality, 
that it was already brandishing its sword in order to strike directly 
against existing practice? For Hegel himself was such a solid, 
orthodox man, whose polemic was directed at precisely those 
trends which the state power rejected, at rationalism and cos­
mopolitan liberalism! But the gentlemen at the helm did not 
appreciate that these trends were only combated in order to make 
room for the higher, that the new teaching must first root itself in 
recognition of the nation before it could freely develop its living 
consequences. When Börne attacked Hegel he was perfectly right 
from his standpoint, but when authority protected Hegel, when it 
elevated his teaching almost to a Prussian philosophy of the state, 
it laid itself open to attack, a fact which it now evidently regrets. 
Or did Altenstein, whose more advanced standpoint was a legacy 
of a more liberal age, receive such a free hand here that 
everything was laid to his account? Be that as it may, when after 
Hegel's death the fresh air of life breathed upon his doctrine, the 
"Prussian philosophy of the state" sprouted shoots of which no 
party had ever dreamt. Strauss will remain epoch-making in the 
theological field, Gans and Ruge in the political. Only now do the 
faint nebulae of speculation resolve themselves into the shining 
stars of the ideas which are to light the movement of the century. 
One may accuse Ruge's aesthetic criticism of being prosaic and 
confined within the schematism of the doctrine; yet credit must go 
to him for showing the political side of the Hegelian system to be 
in accord with the spirit of the time and for restoring it in the 
nation's esteem. Gans had done this only indirectly, by carrying 
the philosophy of history forward into the present; Ruge openly 
expressed the liberalism of Hegelianism, and Koppen supported 
him; neither was afraid of incurring enmity, both pursuing their 
course, even at the risk of a split in the school, and all due respect 
to their courage for it! The enthusiastic, unshakable confidence in 
the idea, inherent in the New Hegelianism, is the sole fortress in 
which the liberals can find safe retreat whenever reaction gains a 
temporary advantage over them with aid from above. 

=====第166页=====
144 Frederick Engels 
These are the most recent developments of German political 
consciousness, and the task of our age is to complete the fusion of 
Hegel and Börne. There is already a good deal of Börne in Young 
Hegelianism, and Börne would have little hesitation in signing 
many an article in the  Hallische  Jahrbücher.  However, the combin­
ing of thought and action is in part not yet conscious enough, in 
part it has not yet penetrated the nation. Börne is still looked 
upon by many as the exact opposite of Hegel, but just as Hegel's 
practical importance for the present (not his philosophical signifi­
cance for eternity) is not to be judged by the pure theory of his 
system, neither is Börne to be flatly rejected because of his 
one-sidedness and his extravagances, which have never been 
denied. 
[Telegraph  für Deutschland  No. 4, January 1841] 
I trust that I have characterised the attitude of the Germanising 
trend to the present day sufficiently and may now proceed to a 
detailed review of the trend's individual aspects as expounded by 
Arndt in his book. The wide gulf which separates Arndt from the 
present generation is expressed most clearly in the fact that he is 
indifferent to those matters of state for which we sacrifice our 
life-blood. Arndt declares himself a decided monarchist; good. Yet 
he never once discusses whether the monarchy is to be constitu­
tional or absolute. The point of difference is this: Arndt and his 
whole company believe that the well-being of the state consists in 
sovereign and people being attached to each other by sincere love 
and co-operating with each other in the striving for the common 
good. We, however, are convinced that the relationship between 
the governing and the governed must first be regulated by law 
before it can become and remain amicable. First law, then equity! 
Where is there a sovereign so bad that he does not love his people 
and is not loved by them  — I speak here of Germany—simply 
because he is their sovereign? But where is there a sovereign who 
can claim to have brought his people any real advance since 1815? 
Is it not all our own work; is not what we own ours in spite of 
control and supervision? It is all very fine to talk of the love 
between a sovereign and his people, and since the great f>oet" of 
"Heil Dir im Siegerkram" sang that "a free man's love makes the 
steep heights secure where sovereigns stand", ever since then 
a An ironical reference to Balthasar Gerhard Schumacher.— Ed. 

=====第167页=====
Ernst Moritz Arndt 145 
infinite nonsense has been talked about it. The kind of govern­
ment threatening us from a certain quarter might be called an 
up-to-date reaction. Patrimonial courts to promote the formation 
of a high aristocracy; guilds to reawaken a "respectable" burgher 
estate; encouragement of all so-called historical seeds, which in 
reality are old, cut-off stalks. 
But it is not only in this respect that the Germanising trend has 
let itself be cheated of freedom of thought by a determined 
reaction; its ideas on the constitution are the whispered prompt­
ings of the gentlemen of the  Berliner politisches  Wochenblatt.  It was 
painful to see how even the solid, quiet Arndt allowed himself to 
be dazzled by the sophisticated glitter of the "organic state". 
Phrases about historical development, making use of the given 
factors, organism, and so on, must once have possessed a charm 
which entirely eludes us now because we realise that they are 
mostly fine words which do not seriously mean what they actually 
signify. Challenge these ghosts point-blank! What do you under­
stand by the organic state? A state whose institutions have grown 
with and out of the nation in the course of the centuries, and 
which have not been constructed from theory. Very well; now 
apply this to Germany! This organism is supposed to consist of the 
citizens being divided into nobility, burghers and peasants, and 
everything else that goes with it. All this is supposed to lie hidden 
in nuce in the word organism. Is that not deplorable, shameful 
sophistry? Self-development of the nation, does that not look 
exactly like freedom? You grasp at it with both hands and what 
you get is the full burden of the Middle Ages and the ancien 
régime. Fortunately this sleight-of-hand cannot be laid to Arndt's 
account. Not the supporters of division into estates, but we, its 
opponents, want an organic state life. The point at the moment is 
not "construction from theory"; it is what they want to blind us 
with: the self-development of the nation. We alone are serious and 
sincere about it. But these gentlemen do not know that every 
organism becomes inorganic as soon as it dies; they set the corpses 
of the past in motion with their galvanic wires and try to fool us 
that this is not a mechanism but life. They want to promote the 
self-development of the nation and fasten the ball and chain of 
absolutism to its ankle so that it will go ahead more quickly. They 
do not want to know that what they call theory, ideology, or God 
knows what, has long passed into the blood and sap of the nation 
and in part has already come to life; that not we, therefore, but 
they have lost their way in the Utopias of theory. For that which 
was indeed still theory half a century ago has developed as an 

=====第168页=====
146 Frederick Engels 
independent element in the state organism since the revolution. 
Moreover, and this is the main thing, does the development of 
mankind not rank above that of the nation? 
And what about the estates? The dividing line between burghers 
and peasants simply does not exist; not even the historical school105 
takes it seriously; it is put there only pro forma, to make the 
separation of the nobility more plausible to us. Everything turns 
on the nobility. When the nobility goes, so does the estates system. 
And with the nobility's position as an estate things look even worse 
than with its composition.* An entailed hereditary estate is absolute 
nonsense according to modern conceptions. Not in the Middle 
Ages,  of course. In those days in the free cities of the Empire (as 
in Bremen, for example, even today) there were hereditary guilds 
with hereditary privileges, pure bakers' blood and pure pewterers' 
blood. Indeed, what is the pride of the nobility compared with the 
consciousness: My ancestors have been beer-brewers for twenty 
generations! We still have butchers', or in the more poetical 
Bremen name, bone-choppers' blood in the nobility, since the 
military profession, laid down by Herr Fouqué as proper to it, is 
continual butchery and bone-chopping. For the nobility to regard 
itself as an estate, when no calling is exclusively reserved for it 
under the law of any state, neither the military nor that of the 
large landowner, is ridiculous arrogance. Anything written on the 
nobility could have as a motto this line by the troubadour William 
of Poitiers: "I'll make a song about sheer nothing." And since the 
nobility feels its own inner nothingness, no nobleman can hide the 
pain of it, from the very intelligent Baron of Sternberg to the very 
unintelligent C. L. F. W. G. von Alvensleben. The tolerance which 
would leave the nobility the pleasure of regarding itself as 
something special so long as it does not demand any privileges is 
most misplaced. For as long as the nobility represents something 
special, it will desire and must have privileges. We stand by our 
demand: No estates, but a great, united nation of citizens with 
equal rights! 
[Telegraph für Deutschland No. 5, January 1841] 
Another thing which Arndt demands of his state is entails, in 
general an agrarian legislation laying down fixed conditions for 
landed property. Apart from its general importance, this point 
also deserves attention because here too the up-to-date reaction 
a A pun on the German words Stand and Bestand. — Ed. 

=====第169页=====
Ernst Moritz Arndt 147 
already mentioned threatens to put things back on the footing 
before 1789. How many have been raised to the nobility recently 
on condition that they institute an entail guaranteeing the prosper­
ity of the family!— Arndt is definitely against the unlimited 
freedom and divisibility of landed property; he sees as its 
inevitable consequence the division of the land into plots none of 
which could support its owner. But he fails to see that complete 
freeing of the land provides the means of restoring in general the 
balance which in individual cases it may, of course, upset. While 
the complicated legislation in most German states and Arndt's 
equally complicated proposals will never eliminate, but only 
aggravate anomalies in agrarian relations, they also hinder a 
voluntary return to the proper order in the event of any 
dislocation, necessitate extraordinary interference by the state and 
hinder the progress of this legislation by a hundred petty but 
unavoidable private considerations. By contrast, freedom of the 
land allows no extremes to arise, neither the development of big 
landowners into an aristocracy, nor the splitting up of fields into 
patches so small as to become useless. If one scale of the balance 
goes down too far, the content of the other soon becomes 
concentrated in compensation. And even if landed property were 
to fly from hand to hand I would rather have the surging ocean 
with its grand freedom than the narrow inland lake with its quiet 
surface, whose miniature waves are broken every three steps by a 
spit of land, the root of a tree, or a stone. It is not merely that the 
permission to entail means the consent of the state to the 
formation of an aristocracy; no, this fettering of landed property, 
like all entails, works directly towards a revolution. When the best 
part of the land is welded to individual families and made 
inaccessible to all other citizens, is not that a direct provocation of 
the people? Does not the right of primogeniture rest on a view of 
property which has long ceased to correspond to our ideas? As if 
one generation had the right to dispose absolutely of the property 
of all future generations, which at the moment it enjoys and 
administers, as if the freedom of property were not destroyed by 
so disposing of it that all descendants are robbed of this freedom! 
As if human beings could thus be tied to the soil for all eternity! 
Incidentally, landed property well deserves the attention which 
Arndt devotes to it and the importance of the subject would 
certainly merit thorough discussion from the highest standpoint of 
the present time. Previous theories all suffer from the hereditary 
disease of German men of learning who think they must assert 
their independence by each having a separate system of his own. 

=====第170页=====
148 Frederick Engels 
If the retrograde aspects of Germanisation deserve closer 
examination partly for the sake of the revered man, who defends 
them as his own convictions, partly because of the favour which 
they have found of late in Prussia, another of its tendencies must 
be all the more decisively rejected because it is again threatening 
to prevail among us: hatred of the French. I will not join issue 
with Arndt and the other men of 1813, but the servile twaddle 
which without any principle all newspapers now serve up against 
the French is utterly repulsive to me. It requires a high degree of 
obsequiousness to be convinced by the July convention 106 that the 
Eastern question is a matter of life or death for Germany and that 
Mohammed Ali endangers our nationhood. By supporting the 
Egyptian, France has from that standpoint indeed committed 
against the German nation the same crime of which she became 
guilty at the beginning of the century. It is sad that for half a year 
already one has not been able to open a newspaper without 
meeting this newly awakened French-eating fury. And what is it 
for? To give the Russians enough additional land and the English 
enough trading power so that they can get us Germans in a vice 
and crush us to smithereens! The stable principle of England and 
the system of Russia, these are the sworn enemies of European 
progress, not France and her movement. But because two German 
sovereigns have found it proper to join the convention, the affair 
has suddenly become a German concern, France is the old godless, 
"Gallic" sworn enemy, and the perfectly natural arming of a truly 
insulted France is a crime against the German nation. The 
ridiculous clamour of a few French journalists for the Rhine 
frontier is thought worthy of lengthy rejoinders, which are 
unfortunately never read by Frenchmen, and Becker's song "They 
shall not have it" a is par force turned into a folk-song. I do not 
grudge Becker his song's success and I will not examine its poetic 
content, I am even glad to hear such expressions of German 
sentiment from the left bank of the Rhine, but I share the view of 
the articles already published in this journal which have just come 
to hand that it is ridiculous to want to elevate this modest poem 
into a national anthem. "They shall not have it." So again 
negative? Can you be satisfied with a negative folk-song? Can 
German nationhood find support solely in polemic against foreign 
countries? The text of the Marseillaise is not worth much in spite 
of all its enthusiasm, but how much more noble is its reaching out 
a "Sie sollen ihn nicht habenl" — the first line of N. Becker's song Der deutsche 
Rhein.— Ed. 

=====第171页=====
Ernst Moritz Arndt 149 
beyond nationality to mankind. And now, after Burgundy and 
Lorraine have been torn from us, after we have let Flanders 
become French and Holland and Belgium independent, after 
France has already advanced in Alsace as far as the Rhine and 
only a relatively small part of the once German left bank of the 
Rhine is still ours, we are not ashamed to talk big and to write: at 
least you shall not have the last piece. Oh, the Germans! And if 
the French had the Rhine, we would cry with the most ridiculous 
pride: they shall not have it, the free German Weser, and so on to 
the Elbe and Oder, until Germany was divided up between France 
and Russia, and it was only left for us to sing: they shall not have 
it, the free stream of German theory, so long as it calmly flows 
into the ocean of infinity, so long as a single unpractical ideal fish 
flaps a fin on its bottom! Instead of which we should do penance 
in sackcloth and ashes for the sins through which we have lost all 
those beautiful lands, for the disunity and the betrayal of the idea, 
for the provincial patriotism which deserts the whole for the sake 
of local advantage, and for the lack of national consciousness. 
True,  it is a fixed idea with the French that the Rhine is their 
property, but to this arrogant demand the only reply worthy of 
the German nation is Arndt's: "Give back Alsace and Lorraine!" 
For I am of the opinion, perhaps in contrast to many whose 
standpoint I share in other respects, that the reconquest of the 
German-speaking left bank of the Rhine is a matter of national 
honour, and that the Germanisation of a disloyal Holland and of 
Belgium is a political necessity for us. Shall we let the German 
nationality be completely suppressed in these countries, while the 
Slavs are rising ever more powerfully in the east? Shall we give up the 
Germanness of our most beautiful provinces to buy the friendship 
of France; possession going back barely a century which could not 
even assimilate what was conquered—shall we accept this and the 
treaties of 1815* as a judgment of the world spirit against which 
there is no appeal? 
On the other hand, however, we are not worthy of the Alsatians 
so long as we cannot give them what they now have: a free public 
life in a great state. Without doubt, there will be another war 
between us and France, and then we shall see who is worthy of the 
left bank of the Rhine. Until then we can well leave the question 
to the development of our nationhood and of the world spirit, 
until then let us work for a clear, mutual understanding among 
the European nations and strive for the inner unity which is our 
a The decisions of the Vienna Congress.— Ed. 

=====第172页=====
150 Frederick Engels 
prime need and the basis of our future freedom. So long as our 
Fatherland remains split we shall be politically null, and public life, 
developed constitutionalism, freedom of the press, and all else that 
we demand will be mere pious wishes always only half-fulfilled; so 
let us strive for this and not for the extirpation of the French! 
Nevertheless, Germanising negation has still not fully completed 
its task: there is still plenty to be sent home over the Alps, the 
Rhine, and the Vistula. The Russians can have the pentarchy,107 
the Italians their papism with all its hangers-on, their Bellini, 
Donizetti and even Rossini if they want to make him out greater 
than Mozart and Beethoven, and the French their arrogant 
opinion of us, their vaudevilles and operas, their Scribe and 
Adam. We want to chase all these crazy foreign habits and 
fashions, all the superfluous foreign words back whence they 
came; we want to cease to be the dupes of foreigners and want to 
stand together as a single, indivisible, strong, and with God's will 
free German nation. 
Written in October-December 1840 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the Telegraph für Published in English for the first 
Deutschland Nos. 2, 3, 4 and 5, time 
January 1841 
Signed: F. Oswald 

=====第173页=====
NIGHT RIDE 
One night, my carriage bore me all alone 
Across that well-known German territory 
Where many a heart, by power beaten down, 
Rages in impotent and blazing fury. 
In fury that the freedom bought so dear 
With struggle and with ceaseless vigilance 
Had been cast out, for venal tongues to jeer 
And cavil at with cruel insolence. 
A mist lay on the meadows, deep and calm. 
At times, a gust of wind would smite amain 
The poplar-trees and they, in quick alarm 
Aroused from sleep, soon slumbered on again. 
Clear was the air. Sharp hung the sickle moon, 
A sword of Damocles above the town 
Towards which I sped. The wrath of kings flies soon 
From far away to strike its victims down. 
Around the carriage wheels run leaping packs 
Of dogs that bark at me. And do they howl 
Just like the Capital's paid writer-hacks, 
Having caught wind of my free-thinking soul? 
What do I care? Sunk in my cushions low, 
I live in dreams of many brave tomorrows. 
Make no mistake — just before dawn, we know, 
The nightmare plumbs the deepest of its horrors. 

=====第174页=====
152 Frederick Engels 
Yes, morning comes at last in silence stealing. 
A single star shines forth to light its way. 
The pious wake to bells of freedom pealing— 
No tocsin now, but peace this joyful day! 
The spirit's tree has coiled its root-limbs round 
The past, to crush all things outworn and old, 
And now its branches strew the world around 
With shining blossoms of eternal gold! 
And so I slept, and woke that morning after, 
And saw the earth all happy, cleansed and bright, 
And Stiive's city" filled with joy and laughter, 
City of Freedom, bathed in morning light. 
Written at the end of 1840 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the  Deutscher  Courier Published in English for the first 
No. 1, January 3, 1841 time 
Signed:  Friedrich Oswald 
' Osnabrück, whose burgomaster was Johann Karl Bertram Stüve. — Ed. 

=====第175页=====
THE EMPEROR'S PROCESSION108 
Paris is empty. All the populace 
Swarms out to throng the Seine on either side. 
Bright shines the sun of France, though veiled 
in mourning. 
A tear bedews the smiling face of pride. 
Today the ebullient French are grave and calm. 
They dream of victory's laurel wreath no more. 
Ringed with eternal laurels comes the scourge 
Of Europe, God of France, the Emperor. 
Like grey old battle ruins, the veteran soldiers 
Ride on before and after. The funeral train 
With cannon thundering and banners flying 
Moves on towards Paris. Rich, exuberant, vain, 
Plunged into  grief,  devotion-drunk once more, 
Paris falls prostrate at her idol's feet; 
And if the price be still more suffering— 
They shall not flinch. Thoughts of revenge are sweet. 
Music of death and music of the wars 
Crashes all round. The gentlest heart is thrilled. 
Thus rode he in the blaze of victory 
From Austerlitz and from Marengo's field. 
And pale, and mute, and proud, and great, as when 
He rode in triumph through the swirling throng, 

=====第176页=====
154 Frederick Engels 
Transformed as never by the light of glory, 
Acclaimed by all, the Emperor rides along. 
Where are they now, the Guards? Where is Dombrowski, 
General of the Slavs and no man's slave? 
Murat, the prince of horsemen? Poniatowski? 
And where is Ney, the Bravest of the Brave? 
Thinned is the forest of the mighty heroes. 
Waterloo's fury mowed the Guardsmen down. 
The remnants march in silence, heads held high. 
Behind iron bars weeps Montholon, alone. 
The strength and flower of Empire follow after. 
United here the young and old of France. 
And even the elite of the Republic 
Weep at the shrine where weeps the whole of France. 
And who are these with brows of victory 
That yet betray the anguish of their souls, 
Their features ravaged by the grief of mourning, 
Though they step proudly? Hush, it is the Poles. 
To greet the Emperor—arches, columns, stones, 
Memorials, images of eternity, 
Ideas in bronze as daring as his own, 
To sanctify his fallen majesty. 
Collapsed his house, tumbled the royal crown, 
Gone is the world empire that he dreamed might be. 
Like Alexander, without heirs he sleeps 
The eternal sleep beneath the laurel-tree. 
He rests in peace, Silent the Te Deum. 
In pious gloom the shadowed columns rear. 
This very church is now his mausoleum. 
A deity lies dead and buried here. 
Written in December 1840 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the Telegraph für Published in English for the first 
Deutschland No. 23, February 1841 time 
Signed: Friedrich O. 

=====第177页=====
[REPORTS FROM BREMEN] 
ECCLESIASTICAL CONTROVERSY3 
[Morgenblatt für gebildete Leser No. 13, January 15, 1841] 
With the old year the records of our ecclesiastical controversy 
may be more or less closed. At least, any future polemical treatises 
can now no longer count on the public interest which the earlier 
ones enjoyed; it will not happen again that several editions are 
sold out in a week. And yet this kind of controversy depends 
mainly on such participation by the people; a purely scientific 
interest cannot be claimed by a question which is only valid in 
terms of trends long since disposed of by science.— Pastor Paniel 
justified the delayed appearance of his treatise against Krum-
macher's Theologische Replik by its size. b He attacks his adversary 
with ten sheets of print. In the preface he explains that he wishes 
to reply to possible future attacks with a history of pietism and to 
prove in it that this movement has its source in paganism. That 
would indeed have to be a source like Arethusa, which ran under 
the earth for a long time before it came to the surface on 
Christian soil.109 For the rest he practises the right of retaliation on 
his attacker, for not only does he repeat the charges usually made 
against pietism, but conscientiously flings back at him almost every 
hostile word. In this fashion the whole controversy is finally 
reduced to quibbling; half-true claims fly back and forth like 
playballs, and in the last resort it becomes merely a matter of 
defining terms which, of course, ought to have been done before 
the controversy began. But face to face with orthodoxy rationalism 
will always find itself in this predicament. It owes this to its 
vacillating position, wanting to rank now as a new development of 
a See also this volume, pp. 127-28.— Ed. 
K. F. W. Paniel, Unverholene Beurtheilung. — Ed. 

=====第178页=====
156 Frederick Engels 
the Christian spirit, now as its original form, and in both cases it 
appropriates the biblical catchwords of orthodoxy, only with a 
different meaning. It is not honest either with itself or with the 
Bible; the concepts of revelation, redemption and inspiration have 
a highly uncertain and twisted meaning on its lips.— The dry 
reasoning of rationalism has reached a rare height in Paniel. With 
a forbidding logic, more like that of Wolf than of Kant, he takes 
the greatest pride in making the whole structure of his work 
glaringly apparent. His arguments are not the living flesh in which 
the logical skeleton is clothed, but rags soaked in a mush of 
sentimentality which he hangs out to dry on the jutting corners of 
the church building. Then Paniel also has a great liking for those 
watery digressions in which one recognises the rationalist 
everywhere, despite the most orthodox catchwords; yet he does 
not know how to blend them with the dryness of his reasoning 
and often finds himself compelled to interrupt the most beautiful 
stream of phrases by a firstly, secondly, and thirdly. But nothing is 
more repugnant than this tasteless flabbiness when there is 
method in it. The most interesting part of the whole book are the 
excerpts from Krummacher's writings, where his crass manner of 
thinking shines out in all its sharpness.— The decisiveness with 
which rationalism acted here moved the preachers of the opposing 
party to draw up a joint declaration which was put in pamphlet 
form and signed by twenty-two preachers.3 It contains the princi­
ples of orthodoxy coherently presented and with a half-concealed 
reference to the facts of the unresolved controversy. An intended 
declaration by the seven rationalist preachers failed to appear. It 
would be a very great mistake, however, to judge the proportion­
ate strength of the parties among the public by the relative num­
bers of the preachers. 
[Morgenblatt für gebildete Leser No. 14, January 16, 1841] 
The great majority of the pietistic preachers in the area is made 
up of pastors who owe their positions partly to the temporary 
preponderance of their party, partly to a mild nepotism. Among 
the public, on the contrary, the rationalists at least balance the 
pietists in numbers, and all they lacked was an energetic repre­
sentative to make them conscious of their position. In this respect 
Paniel is of incalculable value to his supporters; he has courage, 
determination and in many respects also sufficient learning, and 
a Bekenntniss bremischer Pastoren in Sachen der Wahrheit. — Ed. 

=====第179页=====
Reports from Bremen 157 
lacks only the talent of rhetoric and writing to achieve something 
of significance. Latterly several little pamphlets have appeared, 
mostly anonymous, all of which remained without any influence 
on the public, however. A few days ago, a sheet of Unpietistische 
Reime came out which does not do its author any particular credit 
and is mentioned only for its curiosity value. The chief spokesman 
of the Bremen pietists, the talented preacher F. L. Mallet, has 
promised a treatise entitled Dr. Paniel und die Bibel; but since it 
will hardly be able to count on the attention of the opposing party, 
one may assume the controversy to be over and summarise the 
complete facts from a general point of view.— It must be admitted 
that this time pietism has conducted itself with more skill than its 
opponent. It also had certain advantages over rationalism, a 
prestige of two thousand years' standing and a scientific, if 
one-sided, training through the latest orthodox and semi-orthodox 
theologians, while rationalism, in its finest development, was 
caught between two fires and attacked simultaneously by Tholuck 
and Hegel. Rationalism has never been clear about its attitude to 
the Bible; the unhappy half-way stance which at first appeared 
definitely to imply belief in revelation but in further argumenta­
tion so restricted the divinity of the Bible that almost nothing 
remained of it, this vacillation puts rationalism at a disadvantage 
whenever it is a question of giving its tenets a biblical foundation. 
Why praise reason without proclaiming its autonomy? For where 
the Bible is acknowledged by both sides as the common basis, 
pietism is always right. However, this time talent, too, was on the 
side of pietism. A Krummacher may show bad taste in many a 
single passage, but he will never go round and round for whole 
pages in such empty phrases as does Paniel. The best that was 
written from the rationalist side was Die Verfluchungen, of which 
W. E. Weber acknowledged himself to be the author. G. Schwab 
once said of Strauss that he stood out from the great throng of 
opponents of the positive no by a receptive awareness of the 
beautiful in every form. By the same token I should distinguish 
Weber from the ordinary run of rationalist. He has broadened his 
horizon by a rare knowledge of the Greek and German classics, 
and even if one cannot always agree with his assertions, particular­
ly when they relate to dogma, his free mind and noble, vigorous 
diction must always find recognition. A recently published opposi­
tion pamphlet lacks all these qualities. A treatise just received 
here,  Paulus in Bremen* is written not without wit and contains 
a The author of the anonymous pamphlet was Eduard Beurmann. — Ed. 

=====第180页=====
158 Frederick Engels 
piquant digs at political and social conditions in Bremen, but it is 
as inconclusive as those already mentioned.— This controversy was 
of great importance for Bremen especially. The parties opposed 
each other without thought, and things did not go any further 
than petty heckling. Pietism pursued its own purposes, while 
rationalism did not care about it and for that very reason had 
many mistaken notions about it. In the Ministerium, that is, the 
official assembly of all the Reformed and United preachers of the 
town, rationalism had hitherto been represented by only two 
members, and very timid ones at that; as soon as Paniel arrived, 
he acted more resolutely and presently we began to hear of 
dissension in the Ministerium. Now, since Krummacher fanned the 
controversy, each party knows where it stands. Pietism had long 
known that its principle of authority could not be reconciled with 
reason, the basis of rationalism, and correctly saw in that trend, 
even when it was only germinating, a falling away from old-
orthodox Christianity. Now even the rationalist has realised that 
his belief is not distinguished from pietism by a different interpre­
tation of the Bible, but stands in direct opposition to it. Only now 
that the parties are getting to know each other, is a unification on 
a higher plane possible, and in that regard the future can be 
awaited with tranquillity. 
RELATION TO LITERATURE. MUSIC 
[Morgenblatt  für gebildete Leser  No. 15, January 18, 1841] 
It seems that the Hanseatic towns are now to be drawn forcibly 
into the stream of literature. Since Beurmann's Skizzen, there have 
been frequent discussions of this undeniably interesting topic. 
Beurmann  himself,  in Deutschland und die Deutschen, has given 
considerable space to the three free maritime cities. The Freihafen 
carried Soltwedel's Hanseatische Briefe. Hamburg has had some 
relation to German literature for a long time; Lübeck occupies a 
slightly too peripheral position and its age of material prosperity is 
also long past; yet A. Soltwedel is to found a journal there too. 
Bremen eyes literature suspiciously since it has not got a very clear 
conscience with respect to it and is not usually treated very gently 
by it. And yet with its position and political conditions Bremen is 
undeniably better suited to be a centre for the culture of 
North-West Germany than any other city. If only two or three 
capable men of letters could be attracted here, it would be possible 
to found a journal which would have a most important influence 

=====第181页=====
Reports from Bremen 159 
on the cultural development of North Germany. The bookdealers 
of Bremen are enterprising enough, and I have heard it said 
already by several of them that they would be glad to provide the 
necessary funds and willing to bear the probable losses of the first 
few years of publication. 
The best thing about Bremen is its music. There are few towns 
in Germany with so much and such good music as here. A 
relatively very large number of choral societies have been formed 
and the frequent concerts are always well attended. Musical taste, 
moreover, has remained almost quite pure; the German classics, 
Handel, Mozart, Beethoven, of the more modern composers 
Mendelssohn-Bartholdy and the best song composers, are decided­
ly preponderant. The new French and new Italian schools have an 
audience almost only among the young office employees. One 
might only wish that Sebastian Bach, Gluck and Haydn were less 
pushed into the background. Nor are more recent compositions 
rejected; on the contrary, there are perhaps few places where the 
works of young German composers are performed as readily as 
here.  There have also always been names here which enjoyed a 
high reputation in the musical world. The talented song composer 
Stegmayer conducted the orchestra of our theatre for several 
years;  his place has now been taken by Kossmaly, who will have 
made many friends partly with his compositions, partly with the 
articles which he publishes mostly in Schumann's Neue Zeitschrift 
für Musik. Riem, who conducts the choir and most of the concerts, 
is also a recognised composer. Riem is a lovable old man with a 
youthful, infectious enthusiasm in his heart; nobody knows as well 
as he does how to inspire both singers and instrumentalists to 
lively performance. 
LOW GERMAN 
[Morgenblau für gebildete Leser No. 16, January 19, 1841] 
What first strikes the stranger here is the use of the Low 
German language, even in the most respected families. As soon as 
the people of Bremen become cordial and familiar they speak Low 
German; indeed they are so attached to this dialect that they carry 
it over the ocean. On the Lonja* in Havana as much Bremen Low 
German is spoken as Spanish. I know people who have learnt the 
Bremen dialect perfectly in New York and Veracruz from the 
Stock exchange.— Ed. 

=====第182页=====
160 Frederick Engels 
Bremen people living there in large numbers. It is, of course, not 
yet three hundred years since High German was declared the 
official language; the basic laws of the city, the Tafel and the Neue 
Eintracht, 111 are written in the Low German language, and the first 
sounds which an infant here learns to imitate are Low German. It 
is rare for a child to begin to speak High German before the age 
of four or five. The peasants in this region never learn it and thus 
very often compel the courts to conduct proceedings in Low 
German and record in High German. Incidentally, Low Saxon is 
still spoken here in a very pure form and has remained completely 
free from mixing with High German forms, which disfigures the 
Hessian and Rhenish dialects. The North-Hanoverian dialect has 
certain archaisms which are not found in the Bremen dialect but 
suffers all the more from various local colourings; the Westphalian 
has lost greatly through a most ugly broadening of the 
diphthongs, while west of the Weser the transition to Frisian 
begins. One may safely regard the dialect of Bremen as the purest 
further development of the old Low Saxon written language; even 
now the popular language is so conscious of itself that it constantly 
changes High German words in accordance with the phonetic laws 
of Low German and assimilates them, a capacity which only a few 
Low Saxon popular dialects still enjoy. Almost the only thing 
which distinguishes the language of Reineke Vos m from the 
present dialect is its fuller, now contracted, forms, while the roots 
of the words, with few exceptions, still survive. The linguists were 
therefore quite right to regard the Bremisches Wörterbuch as giving 
the lexical median of present-day Low Saxon popular idioms, and 
a grammar of the Bremen dialect taking into consideration the 
dialects between the Weser and the Elbe would be a most 
meritorious work. Several scholars here have displayed interest in 
Low German, and it is greatly to be desired that one of them 
should undertake this task. 
Written in January 1841 
First published in the Morgenblatt für 
gebildete Leser Nos. 13, 14, 15 and 16, 
January 15, 16, 18 and 19, 1841 Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第183页=====
IMMERMANN'S MEMORABILIEN 
Erster Band. Hamburg, Hoffmann 
und Campe, 1840 
[Telegraph für Deutschland No. 53, April 1841] 
The news of Immermann's death was a hard blow for us 
Rhinelanders, not only because of the poetical but also because of 
the personal significance of this man, although the latter, even 
more than the former, was only just beginning to develop. He 
stood in a special relationship to the younger literary forces which 
have lately emerged on the Rhine and in Westphalia; for in 
respect of literature Westphalia and the Lower Rhine belong 
together, however sharply they have been politically divided up to 
now, and in fact the Rheinisches Jahrbuch provides a common 
rallying point for writers from both provinces. The more the 
Rhine had hitherto kept literature at a distance, the more Rhenish 
poets now tried to figure as representatives of their home province 
and hence acted if not according to one plan, at least towards one 
aim. Such an endeavour rarely remains without a strong personali­
ty at its centre to which the younger ones subordinate themselves 
without surrendering any of their independence, and Immermann 
seemed to want to become that centre for the Rhenish poets. In 
spite of many prejudices against the Rhenish people he had 
gradually become naturalised among them; he had publicly made 
his peace with the literary present to which all the younger ones 
belonged; a new, fresh spirit had come over him, and his work 
was finding increasing recognition. Hence, the circle of young 
poets who rallied around him and gravitated towards him from 
the surrounding area kept growing; how often did not Freiligrath, 
for example, shut his memorandum and ledgers, when he was still 
writing invoices and current accounts in Barmen, to spend one or 
two days in the company of Immermann and the Düsseldorf 

=====第184页=====
162 Frederick Engels 
painters! Thus Immermann came to occupy an important place in 
the dreams which were cherished here and there of a Rhenish -
Westphalian school of poetry; before Freiligrath's fame matured 
he was the mediating transition from the provincial to the general 
German literature. This had long been no secret to anyone with 
an eye for such relationships and ties; a year ago Reinhold Köstlin, 
among others, drew attention in Europa to the fact that Immer­
mann was maturing towards a standing similar to that of Goethe 
in his later years. 113 Death has destroyed all these hopes and 
dreams for the future. 
Immermann's Memorabilien appeared a few weeks after his 
death. Was he, a man in his prime, already mature enough to 
write his own memoirs? His fate says yes, his book says no. 
However, we must not regard the Memorabilien as an old man's 
final settlement with life, by which he declares his career closed; 
Immermann was rather settling accounts with an earlier, the 
exclusively romantic period of his work, and hence a different 
spirit prevails in this book than in the works of that period. 
Moreover, the events described here had receded so far through 
the great changes of the last decade that even to him, their 
contemporary, history seemed to have finished with them. And yet 
I think I am justified in maintaining that in ten years' time 
Immermann would have grasped the present and its attitude to 
the war of liberation, on which his work hinges, more profoundly, 
more freely. But for the moment we must take the Memorabilien as 
they are. 
If the earlier romantic, in the Epigonen, had already striven for 
the higher standpoint of Goethe's plasticity and repose, and 
Münchhausen already rested firmly on the basis of the modern 
poetic manner, his posthumous work shows even more clearly how 
well Immermann appreciated the latest literary developments. The 
style and with it his vision of things are quite modern; only the 
more thoroughly thought-out content, the stricter arrangement, 
the sharply stamped individuality of character and the albeit 
rather veiled, anti-modern views of the author distinguish this 
book from the mass of descriptions, characters, memoirs, re­
views,  situations, conditions, etc., with which our literature, 
gasping for healthy, poetic fresh air, is suffocated today. Immer­
mann, moreover, has sufficient tact only rarely to arraign before 
the forum of reflection subjects which are entitled to a different 
tribunal than that of bare reason. 
The present first volume finds its material in the "youth of 
twenty-five years ago" and the influences which dominated it. A 

=====第185页=====
Immermann's Memorabilien 163 
"bill of lading" prefaces it in which the character of the whole is 
most faithfully outlined. On the one hand, a modern style, 
modern catchwords, and even modern principles; on the other, 
the peculiarities of the author, the significance of which has long 
been dead for a wider circle. Immermann writes for modern 
Germans, as he says fairly bluntly, for those who stand equally far 
from the extremes of Germanism and cosmopolitanism; he has an 
entirely modern conception of the nation and establishes premises 
which would lead logically to autocracy as the people's destiny; he 
pronounces himself emphatically against that "lack of  self-
confidence, the rage to serve and throw oneself away" a from 
which the Germans suffer. And yet, at the same time Immermann 
has a most inadequately grounded preference for Prussianism and 
the cool indifference with which he speaks of constitutional 
aspirations in Germany reveals only too clearly that he has not yet 
understood the unity of the modern spiritual life at all. One sees 
that the concept of the modern does not appeal to him at all since 
he resists many of its aspects, but nevertheless he cannot dismiss 
the concept. 
The memoirs proper begin with the "Boyhood Reminiscences". 
Immermann keeps his promise to describe only those moments at 
which "history made its passage through him". b World events 
grow with the boy's consciousness and the colossal edifice is raised 
of which he was to witness the fall; at first storming in the 
distance, the waves of history break through the dam of North 
Germany in the battle of Jena, sweep over complacent Prussia, 
making the saying of its great king "après moi le déluge" particular­
ly true of his own state, 114 and at once flood first over Magdeburg, 
Immermann's home town. This part is the best in the book; 
Immermann is stronger at narrative than reflective writing, and he 
has succeeded excellently in perceiving how world events are 
mirrored in the individual heart. This is also the point at which he 
links himself frankly to progress, even if only for the time being. 
For him, as for all the volunteers of 1813, the Prussia of before 
1806 is the ancien régime of this state, but also, what is now less 
often admitted, the Prussia of after 1806 is a Prussia entirely 
reborn, a new order of things. The rebirth of Prussia is a peculiar 
affair, however. The first rebirth, through the great Frederick, has 
been so praised on the occasion of last year's jubilee that it is hard 
to understand how an interregnum of twenty years could already 
a K. Immermann, Memorabilien, 1. Teil, S. 27.— Ed. 
b Ibid., S.  30-31.—  Ed. 

=====第186页=====
164 Frederick Engels 
make another necessary.115  It is also claimed that in spite of the 
double baptism of fire, the old Adam has of late shown new, 
strong signs of life. In the present section, however, Immermann 
spares us the praises of the status quo, hence the point at which 
Immermann's road diverges from that of the modern day will only 
become clearer in the course of these lines. 
[Telegraph für Deutschland No. 54, April 1841] 
"Until it enters public life, youth is educated by the family, by study, by 
literature. For the generation which we are here considering, despotism was added 
as another, a fourth medium of education. The family cherishes and nurses it, 
study isolates it, literature leads it again into wider fields; despotism gave us the 
beginnings of character."3 
This is the pattern according to which the reflective part of the 
book is arranged, and which has the great and undeniable merit 
of showing the development of consciousness in its successive 
stages.  — The section on the family is quite excellent as long as it 
describes the old family, and it is only regrettable that Immermann 
has not made more effort to combine aspects of light and shade 
into a whole. The remarks he makes here are all most apt. By 
contrast his concept of the newer family shows again that he has 
not yet rid himself of the old prejudice and resentment against the 
phenomena of the last decade. True, the "old-fashioned comfort", 
the contentment with the family hearth, increasingly give way to ill 
humour, to dissatisfaction with the joys of family life; but against 
that background the philistinism of the patriarchal way of life, the 
halo around the nightcap, are more and more lost, and the causes 
of the ill humour, almost all of which Immermann emphasises 
quite correctly and only too glaringly, are no more than the 
symptoms of a still struggling, uncompleted, epoch. The epoch 
preceding foreign rule was completed and as such bore the stamp 
of repose, but also of indolence, and carried within it the seeds of 
decay. Our author could have said quite briefly: the reason why 
the newer family cannot fight off a certain sense of discomfort is 
that new demands are being made on it which it does not yet 
know how to reconcile with its own rights. As Immermann admits, 
society has changed, public life has been added as an entirely new 
element; literature, politics, science, all this now penetrates into 
the family more deeply, and it has difficulty in accommodating all 
these alien guests. That is the point! The family still lives too 
much in the old style to be able to come to a proper understand-
a K. Immermann, Memorabilien, 1. Teil, S. 95.— Ed. 

=====第187页=====
Immermann's  Memorabüien 165 
ing with the intruders and be on good terms with them, and here 
indeed a regeneration of the family is occurring; the disagreeable 
process just has to be gone through, and to my mind the old 
family badly needs it. Incidentally, Immermann studied the 
modern family in precisely that part of Germany, on the Rhine, 
which is most mobile and receptive to modern influences, and 
here the discomfort of the transition process came to light most 
clearly. In the provincial towns of interior Germany the old family 
continues to live, move and have its being in the godly shadow of 
the dressing-gown; society still stands where it stood in A. D. 1799, 
and public life, literature, science, are dismissed with calm and 
deliberation, without anybody allowing his comfortable routine to 
be disturbed.— The author adds "pedagogical anecdotes" to 
prove what he has put forward about the old family and then 
concludes the narrative part of the book with "Uncle", a character 
typical of the old days. The education which the adolescent 
generation receives from the family is completed; the young throw 
themselves into the arms of study and literature. Here the less 
successful sections of the book begin. Study touched Immermann 
at a time when philosophy, the soul of all science, and knowledge 
of the ancient world, the basis of everything the young were 
offered, were caught up in a whirlwind revolution, and Immer­
mann did not have the advantage of being able to follow it up to 
its goal as a student. When it drew to its close, he had long 
outgrown school. Nor does he say much more for the time being 
than that teaching in those days was narrow, and makes up for 
this by dealing with the most influential thinkers of the time in 
separate articles. Speaking of Fichte he obliges with a philosophy 
which would strike gentlemen familiar with the subject as fairly 
peculiar. Here he lets himself be lured into a witty argument 
about a matter which it needs more than a witty and poetic eye to 
penetrate. How our strict Hegelians will shudder when they read 
the history of philosophy as presented here in three pages! And it 
must be admitted that it would not be easy to discuss philosophy 
in a more dilettante fashion than is the case here. The very first 
sentence, which says that philosophy always oscillates between two 
points, seeking certainty either in the thing or in the ego, was 
clearly written in deference to the fact that Kant's "thing-in-itself" 
was followed by Fichte's "I", and can, with difficulty, be applied to 
Schelling, but in no sense to Hegel.— Socrates is called the 
incarnation of thinking and for that very reason the ability to have 
a system is denied him; pure doctrine is said to be combined in 
him with a direct penetration of empiricism, and since it tran-

=====第188页=====
166 Frederick Engels 
scended the concept, this union, it is declared, could manifest itself 
only as a personality, not as a doctrine. Are these not sentences 
which must throw into the greatest confusion a generation that has 
grown up under Hegelian influence? Does not all philosophy end 
where conformity of thinking and empiricism "transcends the 
concept"? What logic can stand its ground where lack of system is 
asserted to be a necessary attribute of the "incarnation of 
thinking"? 
But why pursue Immermann into a sphere which he himself 
only wanted to fly through? Suffice it to say that he can no more 
cope with the philosophical concepts of earlier centuries than he 
can unite Fichte's philosophy with his personality. By contrast he 
again describes excellently the character of Fichte, the orator of 
the German nation, and the gymnastics enthusiast Jahn. These 
character sketches shed more light on the effective forces and 
ideas by which the youth of the time was influenced than might 
any lengthy discourses. Even where literature forms the theme we 
enjoy far more reading the description of the relationship in 
which the "youth of twenty-five years ago" stood to the great 
poets than the inadequately substantiated demonstration that, 
unlike all its sisters, German literature has a modern, non-
romantic origin. It will always appear forced to make Corneille 
sprout from a romantic medieval root and to attribute more in 
Shakespeare to the Middle Ages than the raw material which he 
found to hand. Is this perhaps the not altogether clear conscience 
of the erstwhile romantic seeking to reject the charge of continu­
ing crypto-romanticism? 
The section on despotism, namely, that of Napoleon, will not 
please either. Heine's worship of Napoleon is alien to the con­
sciousness of the people, yet nobody will be happy that Immer­
mann speaks as an insulted Prussian, while claiming the impartiali­
ty of the historian. He must have sensed that the national German, 
and particularly the Prussian, standpoint needed to be tran­
scended here; hence he is as cautious as possible in style, adapts his 
viewpoint as closely as possible to the modern and ventures out 
only in minor and incidental matters. Gradually he does become 
bolder, however, admitting that he cannot quite see why Napoleon 
should be counted as a great man, establishing a complete system 
of despotism and showing that in this craft Napoleon was a pretty 
bad tyro and bungler. But this is hardly the right way to 
understand great men. 
Hence, apart from a few ideas which run ahead of his 
convictions, Immermann stands in the main far from the modern 

=====第189页=====
Immermann's Mtmorabilien 167 
consciousness. Nevertheless, he cannot be classed with any of the 
parties into which Germany's spiritual status quo is customarily 
divided. He explicitly rejects the trend to which he seems to stand 
closest, Germanism. The well-known dualism in Immermann's 
convictions was expressed, on the one hand, as Prussianism, on the 
other, as romanticism. The former gradually lapsed, however, 
especially in Immermann the official, into the most sober, 
mechanistic prose, the latter into unlimited effusiveness. So long as 
he remained at this point Immermann could not achieve real 
recognition and was compelled more and more to realise that not 
only were these trends polar opposites but that they left the heart 
of the nation increasingly indifferent. 
At last he dared a poetic advance and wrote the Epigonen. No 
sooner had this work left the publisher's shop than it showed its 
author that only his previous tendency had prevented a more 
general recognition of his talent by the nation and the younger 
men of letters. The Epigonen were appreciated almost everywhere 
and occasioned diatribes on the character of their author such as 
Immermann had not been previously accustomed to. The Young 
Literature,* if we may apply this name to the fragments of what 
had never been a whole, was the first to recognise the significance 
of Immermann, and was responsible for his becoming properly 
known to the nation. He had been inwardly resentful at the 
constantly sharpening division between Prussianism and romantic 
poetry, and also at the relatively slight popularity enjoyed by his 
writings, and he had unwittingly impressed more and more on his 
works the stamp of a stark isolation. Now that he had taken a step 
forward and won recognition, a different, freer, more cheerful 
spirit came over him. The old youthful enthusiasm thawed again 
and in Münchhausen made a start towards reconciliation with the 
practical, reasonable side of his character. The romantic sym­
pathies which still remained at the back of his mind he appeased 
with Ghismonda and Tristan; but what a difference from his earlier 
romantic poetry, and especially what plasticity compared with 
Merlin] 
[Telegraph  für Deutschland  No. 55, April 1841] 
Basically, romanticism was only a matter of form for Immer­
mann. The sobriety of Prussianism saved him from the dreaming 
of the romantic school, but this was also the cause of a certain 
a The literature of the Young Germany movement.— Ed. 

=====第190页=====
168 Frederick Engels 
resistance in him to the developments of the time. We know that 
in religious matters Immermann was very liberal; politically, 
however, he was a far too zealous supporter of the government. 
True,  his attitude to the Young Literature brought him closer to the 
political aspirations of the century and taught him to view them 
from another aspect; but, as the Memorabilien show, Prussianism 
was still very firmly entrenched in him. Yet precisely in this book 
we find quite a few statements which contrast so strongly with 
Immermann's basic views and rest so much on a modern basis that 
the significant influence of modern ideas on him is quite unmis­
takable. The Memorabilien clearly show their author's endeavour to 
keep pace with his time, and who knows whether the current of 
history might not eventually have undermined the conservative 
Prussian dam behind which Immermann kept himself entrenched. 
And now one more remark! Immermann says that the character 
of the epoch which he describes in the Memorabilien was primarily 
youthful; youthful motives were given play and youthful moods 
were voiced. Is that not also true of our epoch? The old 
generation has died out in literature, and youth has seized hold of 
the word. Our future depends more than ever on the growing 
generation, for this generation will have to decide contradictions 
of ever-heightening intensity. The old may complain about the 
young, and it is true that they are most disobedient; but just let 
them go their own way: they will find their bearings, and those 
who get lost have only themselves to blame. For we have a 
touchstone for the young in the shape of the new philosophy; they 
have to work their way through it and yet not lose the enthusiasm 
of youth. He who is afraid of the dense wood in which stands the 
palace of the Idea, he who does not hack through it with the 
sword and wake the king's sleeping daughter with a kiss, is not 
worthy of her and her kingdom; he may go and become a country 
pastor, merchant, assessor, or whatever he likes, take a wife and 
beget children in all piety and respectability, but the century will 
not recognise him as its son. You need not therefore become Old 
Hegelians and throw around "in and for  itself",  "totality", and 
"thisness", but you must not fight shy of the labour of thinking, 
for only that enthusiasm is genuine which like the eagle is afraid 
neither of the dull clouds of speculation nor of the thin, rarefied 
air in the higher regions of abstraction when it is a question of 
flying towards the sun of truth. And in this sense the youth of 
today has indeed gone through Hegel's school, and in the heart of 
the young many a seed has come up splendidly from the system's 
dry husk. This is also the ground for the boldest confidence in the 

=====第191页=====
Immermann's Memorabilien 169 
present; that its fate depends not on the cautious fear of action 
and the ingrained philistinism of the old but on the noble, 
unrestrained ardour of youth. Therefore let us fight for freedom 
as long as we are young and full of glowing vigour; who knows if 
we shall still be able to when old age creeps upon us! 
Written in late 1840 and early 1841 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the Telegraph für Published in English for the first 
Deutschland Nos. 53, 54 and 55, April time 
1841 
Signed: Friedrich Oswald 

=====第192页=====
WANDERINGS IN LOMBARDY1 
I 
OVER THE ALPS! 
[Athenäum No. 48, December 4, 1841] 
Thank God, we have left Basle behind! Such a barren town, full 
of frock-coats and cocked hats, philistines and patricians and 
Methodists, where nothing is fresh and vigorous but the trees 
around the brick-red cathedral and the colours of Holbein's 
Passion, which can be seen among other paintings in the library 
here;  such a hole-and-corner town, with all the ugliness of the 
Middle Ages and none of their beauty, cannot appeal to a young 
heart whose imagination is fully engaged with the Swiss Alps and 
Italy. Is the transition from Germany to Switzerland, from the 
mellow, vine-covered Margravate of Baden to Basle, perhaps so 
discouraging only in order that the impression made by the Alps 
later should be the more profound? The country through which 
we are travelling now is not the most beautiful either. On the right 
are the last spurs of the Jura, green and fresh, it is true, but 
without character; on the left the narrow Rhine, which also seems 
to have a horror of Basle, so slowly does it crawl downdale, and 
beyond the Rhine another little piece of Germany. Gradually we 
move away from the green river, the road goes uphill, and we 
ascend the outermost spur of the Jura, which pushes forward 
between the Aar and the Rhine. Then suddenly the scenery 
changes. A sunny, cheerful valley lies before us, no, three or four 
valleys. The Aar, Reuss and Limmat, visible for long stretches, 
wind through the hills and join their waters; villages and townlets 
lie along their banks, and in the distance one mountain chain after 
another rises like the tiers of a giant amphitheatre behind the row 
of hills in front; here and there snow glistens through the mists 
which hover round the most distant summits, and Pilatus rises 
above the mass of peaks as if it were sitting in judgment like the 

=====第193页=====
Wanderings in Lombardy 171 
Judaean governor of old who gave it his name — these are the 
Alps! 
We go downhill quickly and only now that the Alps are near 
become aware that we are in Switzerland. Swiss dress and Swiss 
architecture make their appearance with Swiss scenery. The 
language sounds more beautiful, more refined than the Basle 
dialect, to which the portliness of patrician city life has lent a 
materialistic, uncouth broadness; the countenances become freer, 
more open, more vivacious, the cocked hat gives way to the round 
hat, the long, trailing coat-tails to the short velvet jacket. — The 
little town of Brugg soon lies behind us, and following the road we 
cross the swift, green rivers; as our eyes pass rapidly over all the 
charming and quickly changing views, we leave the Aar and Reuss 
with the Hapsburg, the ruins of which look down from a wooded 
summit, and enter the Limmat valley to follow it as far as Zurich. 
I had to spend a day in Zurich, and on the way to the promised 
land of German youth a day is quite a considerable delay. What 
could I expect of Zurich? Would the stay be rewarding? I 
admit, since the September affair and the victory ot the Pfäffikon 
guardians of Zion, 1I7 I could not picture Zurich as anything but a 
second Basle and thought with dismay of the day I had already 
given up as lost. In my innocence I no longer thought of the lake 
at all, particularly since the showers which, after continuous 
sunshine, had at last overtaken me between Basle and Zurich 
promised me a wet day. But when on awakening I saw a blue 
morning sky over the sunny mountains I quickly sprang up and 
hurried out. Sauntering off at random I came to a sort of terrace 
surrounded by gardens and surmounted by old trees. A notice-
board informed me that the gardens were public and so I climbed 
briskly up. Then I saw the lake lying before me, glistening in the 
morning sun, steaming with early mist, enclosed by densely 
wooded mountains, and for the first moment I was quite over­
come by a certain naive astonishment at the existence of such a 
strikingly beautiful landscape. A kindly citizen of Zurich whom I 
accosted told me that up there on the Utliberg the view was so 
beautiful that the people of Zurich called their mountain the little 
Rigi,a and not entirely without justification. I took a look at the 
top; it was the highest in the Albis chain, which runs along the 
south-western side of the lake, and, in general, higher than the 
other mountains you could see. I asked the way and set off 
forthwith. After one and a half hours' march I was at the top. 
a Peak in the Swiss Alps famed for its beauty.— Ed. 
7* 

=====第194页=====
172 Frederick Engels 
Here the lake lay before me in its full length with all its 
scintillating play of green and blue, with the town and the 
innumerable houses on its hilly shores, and there, on the other 
side of the Albis, a valley full of green meadows into which light 
oak and dark fir woods descended, a green sea with hills for waves 
in which the houses lay like ships, and to the south, on the 
horizon, the glistening chain of glaciers, from the Jungfrau to the 
Septimer and Julier; and from the blue sky above the May sun 
poured the glory of its rays over the world in its Sunday finery, so 
that lake and field and mountain vied in their radiance and there 
was no end to the splendour. 
Tired from looking I went into the wooden house which stands 
on the summit and ordered a drink. I received it, together with 
the visitors' book. We all know what is to be found in books of this 
kind: every philistine regards them as institutions for securing 
immortality, in which he can transmit his obscure name and one 
of his exceedingly trivial thoughts to posterity. The duller he is, 
the longer the commentaries with which he accompanies his name. 
Merchants want to prove that besides coffee, train-oil or cotton, 
beautiful nature, which has created all this and even gold  itself, 
still holds a tiny corner in their hearts; ladies give expression to 
their gushing sentiments, students to their high spirits and 
impertinence, and sage schoolmasters write out nature a bombastic 
certificate of maturity. "Magnificent Utli, Rigi's dangerous rival!" 
a doctor of the illiberal arts began to apostrophise in Ciceronian 
style.  In annoyance, I turned the page and left all the Germans, 
French, and English unread. Then I found a sonnet by Petrarch 
in Italian which in translation sounds roughly like this: 
I soared in spirit to the abode up there 
Of her I seek below but never find. 
Gentle the looks that once avoided mine— 
So stood she in the third celestial sphere. 
Taking my hand, she softly said, "No tear 
Can flow where we may never be disjoined. 
Tis I that long disturbed your peace of mind, 
Returning all too soon to my home here. 
"Oh, that man's mind my joy might understand! 
I seek but you, and the form that you loved 
And that I left down there so long ago." 
Why did she say no more, let go my hand? 
A little more of that sweet sound, I know, 
And then from Heaven had I never moved. 

=====第195页=====
Wanderings in Lombardy 173 
The person who had copied this out was called Joachim Triboni 
from Genoa and by this entry at once became my friend. For the 
more hollow and nonsensical the other comments, the more 
sharply this sonnet stood out against such a background, and the 
more it moved me. Where nature displays all its magnificence, 
where the idea that is slumbering within it seems, if not to awaken, 
then to be dreaming a golden dream, the man who can feel and 
say nothing except "Nature, how beautiful you are!" has no right 
to think himself superior to the ordinary, shallow, confused mass. 
In a more profound mind, however, individual sorrows and 
sufferings rise, only to be merged in the splendour of nature and 
to dissolve in gentle reconciliation. This reconciliation could hardly 
be expressed more beautifully than in this sonnet. But there was 
yet another circumstance which made me a friend of that 
Genoese. So another before me had brought his lover's grief to 
this summit; so I did not stand there alone with a heart that only a 
month ago had been filled with infinite bliss and now was torn 
and desolate. And what pain has more right to speak out in face 
of the beauty of nature than the noblest and most profound of all 
personal sorrows, the sorrow of love? 
I gazed over the green valleys once more and then went down 
the mountain to take a closer look at the town. It lies round the 
narrow end of the lake like an amphitheatre and from the lake too 
presents a charming aspect with its surrounding villages and 
country-houses. The streets also stand out because of their 
handsome new buildings. I learned from an evening conversation 
with an old traveller that this state of affairs had not existed for 
very long. He could not marvel enough how much more beautiful 
the old Zurich had become over the last six years and how 
brilliantly the previous government had enhanced the outward 
dignity of the Republic by erecting public buildings. Today, when 
a certain party cannot throw enough mud at that government's 
corpse, the fact deserves mention that during its lifetime it not 
only had the unprecedented courage to appoint a Strauss, but also 
performed other governmental duties with honour. 
The next morning I left for the south. First the road ran along 
the whole length of the lake to Rapperswil and Schmärikon, a 
marvellous road through gardens, country-houses and picturesque­
ly grouped, vine-clad villages; on the other side of the lake the 
long, dark-green Albis ridge with its luxuriant foot-hills, and to 
the south, where the mountains divide, the dazzling peaks of the 
Glarner Alps. In the middle of the lake an island appears, Ufnau, 
the grave of Ulrich von Hütten. To fight like him for the free idea 

=====第196页=====
174 Frederick Engels 
and thus to rest from strife and toil — what more could one ask for? 
Lulled by the subdued pounding of the green waves breaking against 
the hero's grave with a sound like the distant clash of arms and bat­
tle-cries, guarded by giants armoured in ice and eternally youthful, 
the Alps! And then a Georg Herwegh, as representative of the Ger­
man youth, making a pilgrimage to this grave and laying upon 
it his songs, the most beautiful expression of the ideas which inspire 
the young generation — that outweighs statues and monuments. 
A fair was being held in Uznach, where the road led after 
leaving the lake, and the inside of the mail-coach, which I had 
hitherto occupied by  myself,  filled up with people returning from 
the fair, who gradually began to feel the effects of the previous 
riotous night and fell asleep, leaving me to my reflections. A most 
beautiful valley received us now; soft-sweeping hills clothed in 
green meadows and crowned with woods enveloped us; for the 
first time I saw here at close range the peculiarly shaded green of 
the Swiss forests which are a mixture of deciduous and coniferous 
trees,  and I cannot describe the profound impression it made on 
me. This mixture, which brings out light and dark shades .equally, 
lends great charm even to monotonous country, and although the 
grouping of mountain and valley here was not unusual it was 
surprising to find an area where almost all the beauty lay in the 
colouring; this made the colouring all the more beautiful. There 
was enough sublime and austere nature awaiting me on the way to 
the heights of the Alpine chain; but this softness and grace I found 
again only on the Italian side. 
In the meantime I was soon again at the foot of higher 
mountains whose peaks, though below the snow-line, were still 
white now, in May. Through valleys now narrow, now wider, we 
went along the canal which links the Lake of Zurich with the Lake 
of Wallenstädt. Soon the latter lay before me. Here the coun­
tryside is already of a very different character from that around 
the Lake of Zurich; the basin lies almost unapproachable between 
steep rocks which rise directly out of the water and leave only a 
narrow opening at either end of the lake. A poor steamboat took 
on the coach travellers, and soon Weesen, the little town where we 
had embarked, disappeared as the mountains closed in. All traces 
of human activity were left behind us, the steamboat paddled 
lonely into the beautiful wilderness, deeper and deeper into this 
silent realm of nature; the green heads of the waves, the snowy 
mountain tops and the waterfalls which gushed down from them 
here and there, glistened in the bright sunshine. Occasionally a 
green, wooded gorge or a patch of meadowland smiled among the 

=====第197页=====
Wanderings in Lombardy 175 
white-grey granite of the rocks, and in the distance the thin veil of 
mist which rose from the lake blurred into soft, violet shades 
against the mountain background. It was the kind of country 
which all but challenges the human spirit to that personification of 
the spirit of nature which we find in folk legend where the 
fissured rocks with their snowy crowns take on the lines of old 
men's faces with deep furrows and silver locks and the green-
flowing hair of bewitching mermaids rises from the clear waves. 
Gradually the pressing walls opened a little, spurs thickly covered 
with bushes protruded into the lake, and a white streak shim­
mered through the blue mist—the houses of Wallenstädt which 
lies at the end of the lake. We disembarked and proceeded 
cheerfully on to Chur, above our heads the rocky chain whose 
highest peaks are called Die sieben Kurfürsten. In their petrified 
ermine coats, their crowns of snow gilded by the evening sun, the 
severe gentlemen sat there as solemnly as if they were assembled 
in the Römer in Frankfurt to elect the Emperor, undisturbed by 
the shouting and jostling of the people at their feet throughout 
the Holy Roman Empire, the constitution of which had, with the 
passage of time, become as petrified as its seven representatives 
here. 119 Such names in the mouth of the people, by the way, are 
proof of how thoroughly German the Swiss are, however little they 
themselves may like to admit it. I shall perhaps return to this 
theme later in more detail and therefore leave it for the present. 
Now we went deeper and deeper into the rocks; places where 
the hand of man had imparted a milder aspect to nature in the 
raw became ever more infrequent; the castle of Sargans clung to a 
perpendicular cliff like a swallow's nest, until at Ragatz the trees 
finally found enough earth on the stony ground to be able to 
clothe it in dense forest. Here, too, a castle lies on the slope, but it 
is in ruins, just as in general the passes from one river valley to 
the next here rather frequently show such traces of club-law. At 
Ragatz the valley widens again, the mountains retreat in awe 
before the mighty genius of the young river which has vigorously 
struck a passage for itself through the granite giants at Gotthard 
and Splügen and now swells towards its great destiny with the 
pride and courage of youth; it is the Rhine which we now greet 
again. In a broad bed it rolls on solemnly over gravel and sand, 
but from the widely scattered rocks one can see how wildly it 
lashes out when it has had enough of indolent comfort and braces 
itself in a destructive mood. From here onward its valley forms the 
road which leads up to Chur and from there to the Splügen 
pass. 

=====第198页=====
176 Frederick, Engels 
In Chur there already begins the language mixture which reigns 
throughout the whole of the highest part of the Alps. German, 
Romanic and Italian in the Lombardic dialect were all to be heard 
at the coach-station. Romanic, the language of the mountain 
dwellers of Graubünden, has been much discussed by philologists, 
yet it is still veiled in a mysterious darkness. Some have tried to 
group it with the main Romance languages in respect of indepen­
dence; others have sought French elements in it without consider­
ing how these could have penetrated there. If this idiom is to be 
honoured with some attention, the thing that most naturally 
suggests itself is to compare it with the neighbouring dialects. But 
so far this has not been done. The little I was able to gather 
during my transit from people who know the language indicates 
that in word formation it is very closely related to the neighbour­
ing Lombardic idiom and differs from the latter only dialectally. 
Everything that has been taken for French influence is to be 
found again south of the Alps. 
The next morning we went from Chur further up the Rhine 
along a broad valley surrounded by wild rocks. After a few hours 
a precipitous mountain face loomed out of the thin morning mist, 
crowned with the ruins of a castle, and placed itself straight across 
the road. The valley seemed to be blocked ahead of us and we 
could only advance through a narrow gorge. A slim white tower 
rose up before us; it belongs to Thusis, or, as the Lombards say, 
Tosana, which means Maidentown. It is beautifully situated in a 
narrow hollow enclosed by sheer towering rocks; the one most 
difficult of access bears the ruins of the castle of Hohenrhätien. 
There is no greater seclusion than that to which nature has 
condemned this village, and yet even here men have been stronger 
than nature; as if to spite it they have laid the highway through 
the middle of Thusis and every day carry Englishmen, merchants, 
and tourists over it.— After Thusis the Alpine chain which we had 
to cross by evening began to rise steeply. I abandoned the coach 
and walked along the road, fortified by a glass of Veltliner, which 
is to be had here at its best. There is no other road like it in the 
whole world. Hewn into overhanging rock it winds upwards 
through the gorges which the Rhine has quarried for  itself.  Giant 
perpendicular granite walls stand rigid on either side of the path, 
which in many places even the midday sun does not reach, and far 
down below the wild mountain torrent rages and thunders 
through fissured rock, uprooting firs, rolling boulders like a 
furious titan on whose chest a god has flung two mountains. The 
last defiant mountains, unwilling to bow to the all-conquering 

=====第199页=====
Wanderings in Lombardy 177 
domination of man, seem to have sought refuge here, gathering in 
rank and file to defend their freedom; terrifying and stern, they 
gaze upon the traveller, and in imagination one hears their voice: 
"Come here, man, if you dare; scale our summits and sow your 
corn in the furrows of our brows; but up there the sense of your 
smallness will grip you and make you dizzy, the ground will give 
way beneath you, and you will be dashed to pieces as you plunge 
from jagged rock to jagged rock. You may drive your roads 
between us; every year our ally, the Rhine, will descend swollen in 
wrath and tear your work to pieces!" 
Nowhere is this resistance of the power of nature to the human 
spirit so colossal, one might almost say so conscious of  itself,  as 
here.  The lonely horror of the road and the former danger of this 
Alpine crossing have given it the name of Via mala. Today it is 
different, of course. Here, too, spirit has conquered nature and 
like a linking ribbon the road goes on from rock to rock, safe, 
comfortable, almost indestructible, and negotiable at all seasons of 
the year. Yet an awful feeling of fear creeps over one at the sight 
of the menacing rocks; they seem to be brooding on vengeance 
and liberation. 
[Athenäum No. 49, December 11, 1841] 
Gradually the gorge widens, however, the rushing cataracts 
become rarer, the bed of the Rhine, which often had to push its 
way through defiles measured only in inches, expands, the steep 
walls become more sloping and recede farther back, a green valley 
opens and Andeer, a little village known to the people of 
Graubünden and the Veltlin valley as a spa, lies in the centre of 
this first terrace of the Splügen. The vegetation here is much 
more sparse, which is all the more striking as neither leaves nor 
grass were to be seen from Thusis until here and only fir-trees 
were able to cling to the steep cliffs. But even so it was comforting 
to the eye to see a valley green with meadows, a bushy slope, after 
all the gloomy, grey-brown granite walls. Directly after Andeer we 
ascended a steep slope up which the road snaked in a thousand 
convolutions. I left these to the coach and scrambled up the scree, 
through bushes and densely tangled creepers, to the point where 
the road turned towards the other side of the mountain. There 
the green valley lay deep below me, threaded by the Rhine, whose 
thunder again came echoing across to me. One more glance down 
in greeting and then onward. The road led me between sloping 
rocks,  high as the sky, into a hollow, again into the most forsaken 

=====第200页=====
178 Frederick Engels 
loneliness in the world. I leant against the parapet and looked 
down into the Rhine, which formed a pool under dark-leaved 
trees.  The still, green surface over which the boughs bent hiding 
secret little corners everywhere with their foliage, the mossy walls 
of rock, the sunbeams which penetrated here and there — all held 
a peculiar magic. The murmur of the quietened river sounded 
almost intelligible, like the talking of those beautiful swan maidens 
who come flying over the mountains from afar to strip off their 
swan's plumage in a secluded secret spot and bathe in the 
snow-cold wave under the green branches. In between the thunder 
of the cataracts rang out like the angry voice of the river spirit 
berating them for their lack of circumspection, for they know they 
must follow the man who robs them of their swan's plumage and a 
whole stage-coach full of maiden-oglers is already arriving, and in 
any case it is not becoming for females to bathe near the open 
highway, even if they are romantic swan maidens. But the 
beautiful nymphs laugh at the anxious old man for they know, of 
course, that no one sees them except he to whom the dreaming 
life of nature has been revealed, and that he will do them no 
harm. 
Every moment it was becoming cooler between the mountains; 
about noon, after some climbing, I found the first snow, and 
suddenly, heated as I was from rapid climbing and running in the 
burning sun, I felt a marked chill in the air. This was the 
temperature of the second terrace in this pass on which the village 
of Splügen is situated, the last place where German is spoken, 
between high mountains against whose green walls the dark-brown 
chalets stand out. The midday meal was taken in a house which 
was arranged completely in Italian style and had only stone floors 
and thick stone walls even in the upper storeys; then the journey 
was continued up an almost vertical rock face. In a wooded gorge 
among the last trees which I saw on this side of the Alps, lay an 
avalanche, a broad river of snow which had rolled down from the 
steeper walls. It was not long before desolate gorges began where 
the mountain torrents thunder under a firm, vaulted cover of 
snow and the naked rocks are barely covered with patches of 
moss.  The snow lay thicker and spread further. Right at the top a 
path had been cut out for the road on either side of which the 
snow was three or even four times as high as a man. I dug steps 
into the snow wall with my heels and clambered up. A broad, 
snow-white valley lay before me in the middle of which rose a grey 
roof,  the Austrian customs-house, the first building on the Italian 
side of the Alps. The inspection of our luggage at this house, 

=====第201页=====
Wanderings in Lombardy 179 
during which I successfully concealed my Varinas3  from the eyes 
of the frontier guards, gave me leisure to look around a little. On 
all sides bare, grey layers of rock, their summits covered with 
snow, a valley in which not a blade of grass was to be seen for 
snow, much less a bush or a tree, in short, a dreadful, forsaken 
desert above which Italian and German winds meet and continual­
ly drive grey clouds towards each other, a solitude more terrible 
than the Sahara and more prosaic than the Lüneburger Heide, a 
region where it snows for nine months and rains for three months 
year in, year out—that was my first sight of Italy. But then we 
descended rapidly, the snow disappeared, and where the white win­
ter cover had barely melted yesterday, yellow and blue crocuses were 
already coming up today, the grass began to grow green, bushes 
appeared again, then trees with white waterfalls tumbling down 
between them, and the foaming Liro flowed far below in a valley 
full of violet shadows, gleaming snowy white through dark 
chestnut avenues; the air grew warmer and warmer although the 
sun was already sinking behind the mountains, and in Campo 
Dolcino we were already among real Italians, if not in real Italy. 
The inhabitants of the little village crowded around our coach and 
chattered in their rough nasal Lombardic dialect about the horses, 
the vehicle and the travellers; all true Italian faces, their vigorous 
expression heightened by thick black hair and beard. We went on 
quickly, down the Liro, between meadows and woods, through 
innumerable huge granite blocks hurled down from the Alpine 
peaks who knows when, whose sharp black jags and edges looked 
strange against the light-green background of the meadows. A row 
of beautiful villages, leaning against the rocks, with their slender, 
snow-white church towers, in particular S. Maria di Galivaggio, 
pass before our eyes; at last the valley opens up and in a bend 
rises the tower of Chiavenna or in German Kläwen, one of the 
chief townsin the Veltlin valley. Chiavenna is a completely Italian 
town with tall houses and narrow streets where one hears passionate 
Lombardic outbursts everywhere: fiocul d'ona putana, porco della 
Madonna, etc. While an Italian supper and Veltliner wine claimed 
our attention here, the sun was sinking behind the Alps of 
Rhäticon; an Austrian coach with an Italian condottiere and an 
escorting carabiniere picked us up and we set off for Lake Como. 
The moon stood full and clear in the dark-blue sky where here 
and there a star began to shine. The sunset flamed high, gilding 
a Varinas—a brand of tobacco named after the Venezuelan town of the same 
name.— Ed. 

=====第202页=====
180 Frederick Engels 
the mountain peaks, and a magnificent southern night drew on. 
So I continued through the green vineyard country, the vines 
climbing over arbours and into the tops of mulberry trees; the 
warm air of Italy breathed upon me ever more mildly, the magic 
of a land never known but long dreamed of sent a sweet thrill 
through me, and beholding in spirit the glories my eye was to see, 
I fell blissfully asleep. 
Written in the spring of 1841 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the Athenäum Nos. 48 Published in English for the first 
and 49, December 4 and 11, 1841 time 
Signed:  Friedrich  Oswald 

=====第203页=====
SCHELLING ON HEGEL120 
[Telegraph für Deutschland No. 207, December 1841] 
Ask anybody in Berlin today on what field the battle for 
dominion over German public opinion in politics and religion, that 
is, over Germany  itself,  is being fought, and if he has any idea of 
the power of the mind over the world he will reply that this 
battlefield is the University, in particular Lecture-hall No. 6, where 
Schelling is giving his lectures on the philosophy of revelation. For 
at the moment all the separate oppositions which contend with 
Hegel's philosophy for this dominion are obscured, blurred and 
pushed into the background by the one opposition of Schelling; all 
the attackers who stand outside philosophy, Stahl, Hengstenberg, 
Neander, are making way for a fighter who is expected to give 
battle to the unconquered on his own ground. And the battle is 
indeed peculiar enough. Two old friends of younger days, room 
mates at the Tübingen theological seminary, are after forty years 
meeting each other again face to face as opponents; one of them 
ten years dead but more alive than ever in his pupils; the other, as 
the latter say, intellectually dead for three decades, but now sud­
denly claiming for himself the full power and authority of life. 
Anybody who is sufficiently "impartial" to profess himself equally 
alien to both, that is, to be no Hegelian, for surely nobody can as yet 
declare himself on the side of Schelling after the few words he has 
said — anybody, then, who possesses this vaunted advantage of 
"impartiality" will see in the declaration of Hegel's death pro­
nounced by Schelling's appearance in Berlin the vengeance of the 
gods for the declaration of Schelling's death which Hegel pro­
nounced in his time. 

=====第204页=====
182 Frederick Engels 
An imposing, colourful audience has assembled to witness the 
battle. At the front the notables of the University, the leading 
lights of science, men everyone of whom has created a trend of his 
own; for them the seats nearest to the rostrum have been 
reserved, and behind them, jumbled together as chance brought 
them to the hall, representatives of all walks of life, nations, and 
religious beliefs. In the midst of high-spirited youths there sits 
here and there a grey-bearded staff officer and next to him 
perhaps, quite unembarrassed, a volunteer who in any other 
society would not know what to do for reverence towards such a 
high-ranking superior. Old doctors and ecclesiastics the jubilee of 
whose matriculation can soon be celebrated feel the long-forgotten 
student haunting their minds again and are back in college. 
Judaism and Islam want to see what Christian revelation is all 
about; German, French, English, Hungarian, Polish, Russian, 
modern Greek and Turkish, one can hear all spoken to­
gether— then the signal for silence sounds and Schelling mounts 
the rostrum. 
A man of middle stature, with white hair and light-blue, bright 
eyes,  whose expression is gay rather than imposing and, combined 
with a certain fullness of figure, indicates more the jovial family-
man than the thinker of genius, a harsh but strong voice, 
Swabian-Bavarian dialect with a recurring "eppes" for etwas, 1 that is 
Schelling's outward appearance. 
I pass over the contents of his first lectures so as to come 
immediately to his utterances on Hegel, with the reservation that I 
shall add later whatever is necessary to explain them. I reproduce 
them as I took them down myself during the lecture. 
"The philosophy of identity, as I have set it out, was only one aspect of the whole 
philosophy, namely, the negative aspect. This 'negative' had either to be satisfied by 
the presentation of the 'positive', or, absorbing the positive content of previous 
philosophies, to posit itself as the 'positive' and hence to set itself up as absolute 
philosophy. Over the fate of man also presides a reason which makes him persist in 
one-sidedness until he has exhausted all its possibilities. Thus it was Hegel who 
established the negative philosophy as the absolute philosophy.— I mention Herr 
Hegel's name for the first time. Just as I have expressed myself freely on Kant and 
Fichte, who were my teachers, so will I also on Hegel, although it gives me no 
pleasure to do so. But I will do it for the sake of the frankness which I have 
promised you, gentlemen. It must not appear as if I had anything to be afraid of, 
as if there were points on which I could not speak freely. I recall the time when 
Hegel was my listener, my comrade in life, and I must say that while in general the 
understanding of the philosophy of identity was shallow and superficial, he it was 
who saved its fundamental thought for the time to come and acknowledged it 
constantly to the last, as his Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der Philosophie above all 
a Something.— Ed. 

=====第205页=====
Schelling on Hegel 183 
proved to me. Having found the great material already mastered, he concerned 
himself chiefly with the method, while the rest of us preferred to concentrate on 
the material. I  myself,  not satisfied with the negative results achieved, would readily 
have accepted any satisfactory conclusion, even from a stranger's hand. 
"Incidentally, the question here is whether Hegel's position in the history of 
philosophy, the position which is to be accorded to him among the great thinkers, 
is precisely that he attempted to raise the philosophy of identity to the absolute, the 
final philosophy, a thing which could be done, of course, only with significant 
changes; and this I intend to prove from his own writings, which are open to all 
the world. If one were to say that this is precisely what Hegel is to be reproached 
with, I would reply that Hegel did that which lay closest to him. The philosophy of 
identity had to wrestle with  itself,  to transcend  itself,  so long as the science of the 
'positive', which covers existence as well, was not yet there. Hence in this endeavour 
Hegel had to raise the philosophy of identity above its limitation, the power of 
being, the pure ability to be, and to make existence subject to it. 
'"Hegel, who with Schelling rose to the recognition of the absolute, diverged 
from him in that he wished the absolute to be conceived, not as presupposed in 
intellectual perception, but rather as discovered by scientific method.' These words 
form the text on which I shall now speak to you.— At the basis of the above 
passage lies the view that the philosophy of identity has as its result the absolute 
not only in substance but in existence; since the starting point of the philosophy of 
identity is the indifference of subject and object, their existence is also assumed 
because validated by intellectual perception. In this way Hegel assumes quite 
artlessly that I wished to prove the existence, the feeing, of that indifference by 
intellectual perception, and reproaches me for the inadequate  proof.  That I did 
not wish to do so is shown by the protest I have so often voiced that the philosophy 
of identity is not a system of existence, and, as concerns intellectual perception, the 
term in question does not occur at all in the presentation of the philosophy of 
identity which is the sole and only one of the earlier period that I recognise as 
scientific. This presentation is to be found where no one looks for it, namely, in the 
Zeitschrift für spekulative Physik, Vol. II, Part 2. Elsewhere it does indeed occur and 
is part of Fichte's legacy. Fichte, with whom I did not wish to break outright, 
arrives through it at his immediate consciousness, the 'I'; from this, I went further 
and thus arrived at the indifference. Since in intellectual perception the T is no 
longer regarded as being subjective, it enters the sphere of thought and thus its 
existence is no longer immediately certain. Accordingly, intellectual perception 
would not even prove the existence of the T, and though Fichte uses it for this 
purpose, I cannot base myself on it to prove from it the existence of the absolute. 
Hence Hegel could not reproach me for the inadequacy of a proof which I never 
wished to provide, but only for not having stated explicitly enough that I was not at 
all concerned with existence. For if Hegel demands proof of the being of the 
infinite power he goes beyond reason; should the infinite power exist, philosophy 
would not be free of being, and we must here ask whether something prior to 
existence can be thought. Hegel denies it, for he begins his logic with being and 
proceeds directly to an existential system. But we affirm it, by beginning with the 
pure power of being as existing only in thinking. Hegel, who so often speaks of 
immanence, nevertheless is only immanent in that which is not immanent in 
thinking, for being is this non-immanent. To retreat into pure thinking means in 
particular to retreat from all being outside thought. Hegel's contention that the 
existence of the absolute is proved by logic has the further disadvantage that in this 
way one has the infinite twice, at the end of the logic and again at the end of the 
whole process. In general one cannot conceive why the logic is put first in the 
Enzyklopädie, instead of pervading and animating the entire cycle." 

=====第206页=====
184 Frederick Engels 
[Telegraph  für Deutschland  No. 208, December 1841] 
Thus far Schelling. In large part and so far as I could I have 
quoted his very words and can boldly claim that he could not 
refuse to put his signature to these excerpts. To complete this 
presentation I add from the preceding lectures that he considers 
things from two aspects, separating the quid from the  quod,  the 
essence and the concept from existence. The first he apportions to 
the pure science of reason or negative philosophy, the second to a 
science to be newly founded and containing empirical elements, 
positive philosophy. Of the latter we have not yet heard anything; 
the former appeared forty years ago in an inadequate form 
abandoned by Schelling  himself,  and is now being developed by 
him in its true, adequate expression. Its basis is reason, the pure 
power of cognition, which has as its immediate content the pure 
power of being, the infinite ability to be. The necessary third 
element to be added here is the power over being, which can no 
longer alienate  itself,  and this is the absolute, the spirit, that 
which is released from the necessity of transition into being and 
persists in eternal freedom in relation to being. The absolute can 
also be called the "orphie" unity of these powers, as that outside 
of which there is nothing. When these powers come into con­
tradiction with each other this mutual exclu siveness is finiteness. 
These few sentences suffice, I think, for the understanding of 
the preceding passages and as an outline of neo-Schellingianism as 
far as this can be given here and up to now. It only remains for 
me to draw from this the conclusions probably intentionally 
concealed by Schelling, and to enter the lists for the great dead 
man. 
If Schelling's death sentence on Hegel's system is divested of its 
bureaucratic language, it comes down to this: Hegel actually had 
no system whatever of his own, but eked out a miserable existence 
with the leavings of my thoughts; while I occupied myself with the 
partie brillante, the positive philosophy, he revelled in the partie 
honteuse, the negative, and since I had no time for it he took upon 
himself its completion and elaboration, infinitely happy that I had 
entrusted this to him. Will you reproach him for this? "He did 
that which lay closest to him." He has nevertheless a "position 
among the great thinkers", for "he was the only one who 
recognised the fundamental thought of the philosophy of identity, 
while all the others had a shallow and superficial understanding of 
it". All the same, prospects seemed bad for him, for he wanted to 
make half of philosophy into the whole. 

=====第207页=====
Schelüng on Hegel 185 
A well-known saying is quoted, allegedly from Hegel's mouth, 
but which, after the above utterances, doubtless stems from 
Schelling: "Only one of my pupils understood me, and even he 
unfortunately understood me wrongly." 
But to be serious, can such libels be engraved upon Hegel's 
tombstone and we, who owe him more than he owed Schelling, 
not dare to issue a challenge to protect the honour of the dead, 
however terrible the opponent? And they are libels, let Schelling 
say what he will, and the form be ever so scientific in appearance. 
Oh, "in a purely scientific manner" I could show up Herr von 
Schelling, or anybody else, if that were required, in such a 
thoroughly bad light that he would certainly recognise the advan­
tages of the "scientific manner", but what help would that be to 
me? It would in any case be frivolous of me, the youth, to teach an 
old man, and particularly Schelling, who, however decisively he 
may have deserted freedom, nevertheless always remains the 
discoverer of the absolute and in his part as Hegel's forerunner is 
mentioned by all of us only with the deepest reverence. But 
Schelling as Hegel's successor can only lay claim to a certain piety 
and will demand calm and coolness least of all from me, for I am 
standing up for a dead man, and it is fit for a fighter to have a 
certain amount of passion: he who draws the sword in cold blood 
rarely has much enthusiasm for the cause for which he is fighting. 
I must say that Schelling's speech here and especially these 
invectives against Hegel leave little doubt that the portrait painted 
in the preface to RiedePs well-known latest pamphlet3  is a likeness, 
something one was hitherto reluctant to believe. Schelling presents 
the entire development of philosophy in this century, Hegel, Gans, 
Feuerbach, Strauss, Rüge and the Deutsche Jahrbücher as dependent 
on himself to begin with, and then not only negates it, but, 
with a flourish merely intended to bring him more into the 
limelight, presents it as a luxury in which the spirit indulges with 
itself,  a curio collection of misunderstandings, a gallery of useless 
aberrations. If this does not exceed all that Schelling is reproached 
with in that pamphlet, then I have no idea what is customary in 
mutual intercourse. It might, of course, be difficult for Schelling 
to find a middle way which compromised neither him nor Hegel, 
and the egoism which caused him to sacrifice his friend so as to 
preserve  himself,  might be pardonable; but it is a little too much 
when Schelling asks the century to take back forty years of effort 
and work, forty years of thinking, of sacrifice of the dearest 
a Carl Riedel's Schellings religionsgeschichtliche Ansicht, which was published 
anonymously.— Ed. 

=====第208页=====
186 Frederick Engels 
interests and the most sacred traditions, as a waste of time, an 
erroneous trend, only so that he shall not have lived these forty 
years too long; it sounds like more than irony when he allocates to 
Hegel a position among the great thinkers precisely by deleting 
him in reality from their number and by treating him as his 
creature, his servant; and finally it appears somewhat like intellec­
tual meanness, like petty—what does one call that well-known, 
pale-yellow passion?—when Schelling claims each and every thing 
he acknowledges in Hegel as his own property, nay, as flesh of his 
own flesh. It would indeed be strange if Schelling's old truth had 
only been able to maintain itself in Hegel's bad form, and in that 
case the reproach of obscurity of expression, which the day before 
yesterday Schelling levelled against the man he was attacking, 
would of necessity recoil upon  himself,  as in the common 
judgment it already does, in spite of the promised clarity. Anyone 
who indulges in such periods as Schelling constantly does, who 
uses expressions like quidditativ and quodditativ, orphie unity, etc., 
and even with them is so often at a loss that every moment Latin 
and Greek phrases and words have to help out, clearly forfeits the 
right to criticise Hegel's style. 
Incidentally, Schelling is most of all to be pitied because of the 
unfortunate misunderstanding concerning existence. The good, 
naive Hegel with his belief in the existence of philosophical results, 
in the right of reason to enter into existence, to dominate being! 
But it would be really strange if he, who after all studied Schelling 
thoroughly and for a long time maintained personal intercourse 
with him, if all the others who tried to penetrate the philosophy of 
identity, had noticed nothing of the real joke, namely, that all this 
was just bits of nonsense which existed only in Schelling's head 
and laid no claims whatever to any influence on the external 
world. Somewhere that must have been in black and white and 
somebody would certainly have found it. But one is in fact 
tempted to doubt whether this was Schelling's view from the 
beginning or whether it is a later addition. 
And the new version of the philosophy of identity? Kant freed 
rational thinking from space and time, Schelling takes existence 
away as well. What then are we left with? This is not the place to 
prove against him that existence belongs indeed to thought, that 
being is immanent in the mind and that the foundation of all 
modern philosophy, the cogito, ergo sum* cannot thus be stormed 
and overrun; but I may be permitted to ask whether a power 
a René Descartes, Principia philosophiae, Vol. I, Ch. 7 and 10.— Ed. 

=====第209页=====
Schelling on Hegel 187 
which itself has no being can produce a being, whether a power 
which can no longer alienate itself is still power, and whether 
the trichotomy of the powers does not correspond in a remarkable 
manner with the trinity of idea, nature and mind which emerges 
from Hegel's  Enzyklopädie"? 
And what will result from all this for the philosophy of 
revelation? It belongs, of course, to the positive philosophy, to the 
empirical side. Schelling will have no other course open to him 
than to assume the fact of a revelation, which he will perhaps 
substantiate in one way or another, only not by reason, for he has 
locked the door on himself in that respect. Hegel made things a little 
harder for himself—or can it be that Schelling has other sources 
of information up his sleeve? This philosophy can thus quite cor­
rectly be called empirical, and its theology positive, while its jurispru­
dence will probably be historical. That would indeed be not unlike a 
defeat, for we already knew all that before Schelling came to Berlin. 
It will be our business to follow the course of his thinking and to 
shield the great man's grave from abuse. We are not afraid to 
fight. Nothing more desirable could have happened to us than for 
a time to be ecclesia  pressa.*  There the minds part. What is genuine 
is proved in the fire, what is false we shall not miss in our ranks. 
The opponents must grant us that youth has never before flocked 
to our colours in such numbers, that the thought which dominates 
us has never before unfolded itself so richly, that courage, 
conviction, talent have never been so much on our side as now. 
Hence we shall rise confidently against the new enemy; in the end, 
one will be found among us who will prove that the sword of 
enthusiasm is just as good as the sword of genius. 
Let Schelling see whether he can muster a school. Many only join 
him now because like him they are opposed to Hegel and accept 
with gratitude anybody who attacks him, be it Leo or Schubarth. 
But for these, I think, Schelling is far too good. Whether he will 
find any other adherents remains to be seen. I do not yet believe 
so, although some of his hearers are making progress and have 
already got as far as indifference. 
Written in the second half of November Printed according to the journal 
1841 
Published in English for the first 
First published in the Telegraph für time 
Deutschland Nos. 207 and 208, December 
1841 
Signed: Friedrich Oswald 
The church oppressed.— Ed. 

=====第210页=====

=====第211页=====
SCHELLING AND REVELATION 
Critique of the Latest Attempt of Reaction 
Against the Free Philosophy 121 

=====第212页=====
Written in late 1841 and early 1842 Printed according to the pamphlet 
First published as an anonymous Published in English for the first 
pamphlet in Leipzig in 1842 time 

=====第213页=====
191 
For a decade there hung on the mountains of South Germany a 
thundercloud which gathered in ever darker menace against 
North-German philosophy. Schelling appeared again in Munich; it 
was understood that his new system was approaching completion 
and would oppose the domination of the Hegelian school. He 
himself spoke out resolutely against that school, and its other 
opponents, when all arguments had to give way before its 
conquering might, still had the resort of pointing to Schelling as 
the man who would ultimately demolish it. 
Hence Hegel's disciples must have welcomed Schelling's arrival 
in Berlin six months ago and his promise to submit to the public 
verdict his by then completed system. One could hope no longer 
to have to hear the irksome, empty chatter about him, the great 
unknown, and to see at last what there was in it. Besides, with the 
fighting spirit which has always distinguished it and the self-confi­
dence it possessed, the Hegelian school could only welcome the 
opportunity to try its strength with a famous opponent; Schelling 
had, indeed, long ago been challenged by Gans, Michelet and the 
Athenäum, and his younger pupils by the Deutsche Jahrbücher. 
So the thundercloud came up and discharged itself in thunder 
and lightning which from Schelling's rostrum began to excite all 
Berlin. Now the thunder has died away, the lightning has ceased; 
has it found its target, is the structure of the Hegelian system, that 
proud palace of thought, going up in flames, are the Hegelians 
hastening to save what can still be saved? So far nobody has 
witnessed anything of the kind. 

=====第214页=====
192 Frederick Engels 
And yet everything had been expected of Schelling. Had not the 
"Positives" been down on their knees groaning about the great 
drought in the land of the Lord and imploring that the rain cloud 
hanging on the far horizon might draw nearer? Was it not just as 
of old in Israel, when Elijah was entreated to drive out the then 
priests of Baal?" And when at last he came, the great exorcist, how 
all the loud, shameless denunciation, all the wild raging and 
shouting, suddenly ceased so that not a word of the new revelation 
should be lost! How the valiant heroes of the Evangelische and the 
Allgemeine Berliner Kirchenzeitung, h of the Literarischer Anzeiger and 
Rente's magazine 0 drew back modestly to make room for the St. 
George who was to slay the dreadful dragon of Hegelianism, 
which breathed the fire of godlessness and the smoke of obscura­
tion! Was there not a silence in the land as if the Holy Ghost was 
about to descend, as if God Himself wished to speak out of the 
clouds? 
And when the philosophical Messiah mounted his wooden, very 
poorly upholstered throne in the Auditorium maximum, when he 
promised deeds of faith and miracles of revelation, what jubilant 
cries greeted him from the camp of the Positives! How all tongues 
were full of him in whom the "Christians" had placed their hopes! 
Was it not said that the bold hero would venture alone like Roland 
into enemy territory, plant his banner in the heart of enemy 
country, blast the innermost citadel of wickedness, the uncon-
quered fastness of the Idea, so that the enemies, left without base 
or centre, could no longer find counsel or any place of safety in 
their own country? Was it not proclaimed that the fall of 
Hegelianism, the death of all atheists and non-Christians, was to 
be expected by Easter 1842? 
Everything has turned out differently. The Hegelian philosophy 
lives on, on the rostrum, in literature, in the young; it knows that 
all the blows dealt it up to now could do it no harm and calmly 
proceeds on its own course of inner development. Its influence on 
the nation, as proved if only by the increased rage and activity of 
its opponents, is rapidly growing, and Schelling has left almost all 
his hearers dissatisfied. 
These are facts which not even the few adherents of the new 
Schellingian wisdom will be able to dispute with valid arguments. 
When the prejudices formed against Schelling were found to be 
a 1 Kings  IS.—Ed. 
Berliner Allgemeine Kirchenzeitung. — Ed. 
c Zeitschrift für Philosophie und spekulative Theologie, edited by Fichte Jr.— Ed. 

=====第215页=====
wtb He 
beô tteiteften 9teaHi0n*vetftt<H 
âtg« We 
Rttett JB in ft *t. 
1842. 
Title-page of Engels' pamphlet Scheming and  Revelation 

=====第216页=====

=====第217页=====
Schelling and Revelation 195 
all too fully confirmed, there was at first embarrassment as to how 
reverence for the old master of science should be reconciled with 
that trank, resolute rejection of his claims that was owed to Hegel. 
He soon helped us out of this dilemma, however, when he 
expressed himself on Hegel in a manner which released us from 
all consideration for the alleged successor and conqueror. It will 
therefore not be taken amiss if in my judgment I follow a 
democratic principle and without regard to persons confine myself 
to the matter and its history. 
When in 1831 the dying Hegel left the legacy of his system to 
his disciples, their number was still relatively small. The system 
only existed in that no doubt strict and rigid, but also solid form 
which has since been much criticised but was nothing less than a 
necessity. Hegel  himself,  proudly confident in the strength of the 
Idea, had done little to popularise his doctrine. The writings he 
had published were all couched in a rigorously scientific, almost 
thorny style, and, like the Jahrbücher für wissenschaftliche Kritik, in 
which his pupils wrote after the same fashion, could count on only 
a small, and moreover preoccupied, public of scholars. The 
language did not need to be ashamed of the scars received in the 
struggle with thought; what was first required was to reject 
decidedly everything imaginary, fantastic, and emotional, and to 
grasp the pure thought in its self-creation. Once this secure base 
of operations had been achieved, it was possible to await in calm a 
subsequent reaction of the excluded elements and even descend 
into unphilosophic consciousness, since the rear was covered. The 
influence of Hegel's lectures always remained limited to a small 
circle, and although its importance there was great, it could bear 
fruit only in later years. 
But it was only after Hegel had died that his philosophy really 
began to live. The publication of his collected works, particularly 
the lectures,122 had an immeasurable effect. New doors were 
opened to the wonderful hidden treasure which lay in the secret 
depths of the earth and of whose splendour only a few had yet 
caught the gleam. Small had been the number of those who had 
had the courage to venture on their own into the labyrinth of its 
approaches; now there was a straight, smooth road by which the 
fabulous jewel could be reached. At the same time, coming from 
the lips of Hegel's pupils, the teaching assumed a clearer, more 
human form, the opposition on the part of philosophy itself 
became weaker and less significant, and by and by only the most 
hidebound theologians and jurists were heard to complain about 
the impertinence with which a layman was intruding into their 

=====第218页=====
196 Frederick Engels 
special field of learning. Youth seized upon the new offering the 
more eagerly as in the school itself an advance had meanwhile 
taken place which urged on to the most meaningful discussions on 
vital questions both of science and of practice. 
The limits within which Hegel himself had confined the power­
ful, youthfully impetuous flood of conclusions from his teaching 
were conditioned partly by his time, partly by his personality. In 
its fundamentals Hegel's system had been completed before 1810, 
his world outlook by 1820. His political views, his teaching on the 
state,  which had been developed in reference to England, bear 
unmistakably the stamp of the Restoration, nor did the world-
historical necessity of the July revolution ever become clear to him. 
Hence he himself came under his own pronouncement that every 
philosophy is but the thought content of its own time. His 
personal opinions, on the other hand, were no doubt clarified by 
his system, but not without influencing its conclusions. Thus his 
philosophy of religion and of law would undoubtedly have turned 
out very differently if he had abstracted himself more from the 
positive elements which were present in him as a product of his 
time,  and had proceeded instead from pure thought. All inconsis­
tencies and contradictions in Hegel can be reduced to that. 
Everything which in the philosophy of religion appears too 
orthodox, and in the philosophy of law too pseudo-historical, is to 
be understood from this point of view. The principles are 
throughout independent and free-minded, the conclusions—no 
one denies it—sometimes cautious, even illiberal. Now some of his 
pupils appeared on the scene who kept to the principles and 
rejected the conclusions where they could not be justified. The 
Left wing took form; Ruge created an organ for it in the Hallische 
Jahrbücher, and overnight the abolition of the sovereignty of the 
positive was proclaimed. But one did not yet dare to express 
openly all the conclusions. Even after Strauss 123 one still believed 
oneself to be within the Christian fold, indeed, in relation to the 
Jews,  one even prided oneself on one's Christianity; on such 
questions as the personality of God or the immortality of the 
individual one was not sufficiendy clear to be able to pronounce 
an unreserved judgment; indeed, when one saw the inevitable 
conclusions approaching, one was even in doubt whether the new 
teaching should not remain the esoteric property of the school and 
be kept secret from the nation. Then Leo came out with his Die 
Hegelingen and thereby did his opponents the greatest service; and 
indeed, everything that was intended to bring about the ruin of 
this school worked to its advantage and proved to it most clearly 

=====第219页=====
Schelling and Revelation 197 
that it was walking hand in hand with the world spirit. Leo gave 
the Hegelings clarity about themselves, he reawakened in them the 
proud courage which follows truth to its most extreme conclusions 
and declares it openly and intelligibly, be the consequences what 
they may. It is amusing now to read what was then published in 
defence against Leo, to see how the poor Hegelings struggled and 
protested and hedged themselves with reservations against Leo's 
conclusions. Today not one of them thinks of denying his charges, 
so high has their audacity risen these past three years. Feuerbach's 
Wesen des Christenthums, Strauss' Dogmatik 3 and the Deutsche 
Jahrbücher show the fruits of Leo's denunciation; nay, Die Posaune h 
demonstrates the relevant conclusions even in Hegel. This book is 
so important for Hegel's position if only because it shows how 
often the bold, independent thinker in Hegel prevailed over the 
professor who was subject to a thousand influences. It is a 
vindication of the personality of the man of whom it was expected 
that he should transcend his time not only where he had genius 
but even where he had not. Here is the proof that he did this too. 
So the "hegelingische Rotte" 0 no longer conceals that it neither 
can nor will any longer regard Christianity as its limit. All the basic 
principles of Christianity, and even of what has hitherto been 
called religion  itself,  have fallen before the inexorable criticism of 
reason, the absolute idea claims to be the founder of a new era. 
The great upheaval of which the French philosophers of the last 
century were merely the forerunners has achieved in the realm of 
thought its completion, its self-creation. The philosophy of Protes­
tantism since Descartes has come to an end; a new era has begun, 
and it is the most sacred duty of all who have followed the 
self-development of the spirit to transmit the immense result to 
the consciousness of the nation and to raise it to Germany's living 
principle. 
During this internal development of the Hegelian philosophy, its 
external position did not remain unchanged either. Altensteiri, the 
Minister through whose mediation the new doctrine had found a 
cradle in Prussia, died; with the subsequent changes, not only did 
the doctrine cease to be favoured in any way, endeavours were 
also made gradually to exclude it from the state. This was the 
consequence of the greater emphasis on principles both by the 
a The main section of D. F. Strauss' Die christliche Glaubenslehre in ihrer 
geschichtlichen Entwicklung und im Kampfe mit der modernen Wissenschaft. — Ed. 
[B. Bauer,] Die Posaune des jüngsten Gerichts über Hegel den Atheisten und 
Antichristen. Ein Ultimatum. — Ed. 
c Hegelian gang.— Ed. 

=====第220页=====
198 Frederick Engels 
state and by philosophy; as the latter was not afraid to express 
what was necessary, so the former, quite naturally, insisted more 
definitely on its own conclusions. Prussia is a Christian-monarchic 
state and its position in world history entitles it to have its 
principles recognised as valid in fact. One may share them or not, 
it is enough that they are there, and Prussia is strong enough to 
defend them if need be. Moreover, the Hegelian philosophy has 
no cause for complaint on that score. Its former position threw a 
false light upon it and apparently attracted to it a number of 
adherents who could not be relied on in times of struggle. Its false 
friends, the egoists, the superficial, the half-hearted, the unfree, 
have now fortunately withdrawn and it now knows how it stands 
and on whom it can count. Besides, it can only welcome a 
sharpening of the contradictions, since its final victory is assured. 
So it was quite natural that men of the opposite trend were 
summoned as a counterweight to the hitherto dominant tenden­
cies.  The struggle against these was taken up again, and when the 
historical-positive faction had again found some courage, Schelling 
was called to Berlin to turn the scales in the struggle and to ban 
the Hegelian teaching from its own field of philosophy. 
His appearance in Berlin was bound to arouse general excite­
ment. He had played so prominent a role in the history of modern 
philosophy; in spite of all the stimulation he had given, he had 
never produced a finished system and had put off his settlement 
with science time and again, until he had now promised to give 
this great account of his entire life's work. And he really did 
undertake to achieve the reconciliation of faith and science, of 
philosophy and revelation, and everything else he had mentioned 
in his first lecture." A further important source of heightened 
interest in him was the relation in which he stood to the man he 
had come to conquer. Already friends and roommates at the 
University, the two men later lived together in Jena in such 
intimacy that to this day it cannot be decided what influence they 
had on each other. One thing alone is certain, that it was Hegel 
who made Schelling realise how far he had already gone beyond 
Fichte without knowing it.* After their separation, however, their 
* If Schelling really is as "straightforward and frank" as he claims, if he is 
sincere in his assertions about Hegel and has good reasons for them, he should 
prove it by publishing his correspondence with Hegel, which is said to be in his 
possession, or at least the publication of which depends only on him. But that is the 
tender spot. If be demands belief in his sincerity, let him come forward with this 
proof which would end all arguments on the issue.— Note by Engels. 
a Schelling's erste Vorlesung in Berlin, 15. November  1841.—  Ed. 

=====第221页=====
Schelling and Revelation 199 
paths of development, which until then had been parallel, soon 
began to part. Hegel, whose profound, restless dialectic only now 
began freely to develop after Schelling's influence had receded, 
made in 1806 with the Phänomenologie des Geistes a giant step 
beyond the standpoint of natural philosophy and declared his 
independence of it; Schelling despaired more and more of the 
possibility of achieving the great results he desired by the method 
hitherto followed and already at that time attempted to master the 
absolute directly by empirical assumption of a higher revelation. 
While Hegel's thought-creating power proved itself increasingly 
energetic, lively and active, Schelling, as is already evidenced by 
his making such an assumption, sank into an inert lassitude which 
soon became outwardly manifest in the slackening of his literary 
activity. He may well talk complacently now about his long, secret 
philosophical labours, about the hidden treasures in his desk, 
about his thirty years' war with thought, nobody will believe him. 
He who concentrates the entire effort of his mind on a single 
point, who still lays claim to the youthful vigour which overcame a 
Fichte, and wants to be a hero of science, a genius of the first 
order—and only such a one would be able to overthrow Hegel, as 
everybody must admit—would he need thirty years and more to 
produce a few insignificant results? If Schelling had not taken 
philosophising so lightly, would not all the stages in the develop­
ment of his thought lie before the world in separate writings? 
After all, he never showed much self-control in this regard, and 
used to send at once anything new he found into the world 
without much criticism. If he still felt himself to be the king of 
science, how could he live without the recognition of his people, 
how could the miserable existence of a dethroned prince, a 
Charles X, how could the long since worn and faded purple of the 
philosophy of identity satisfy him? Should he not have dared 
everything to reinstate himself in his lost rights, to reconquer the 
throne of which a "later comer" a had deprived him? Instead, he 
left the road of pure thought, buried himself in mythological and 
theosophical fantasies and kept his system at the disposal, as it 
would appear, of the King of Prussia,b for at his call the never 
completed was at once ready. So he came here, with the reconcilia­
tion of faith and knowledge in his bag, got himself talked about 
and a« last mounted the rostrum. And what was the New he 
brought, the Unheard-of with which he wanted to work wonders? 
a An allusion to F. Schiller, Die Piccolomini, Act I, Scene 1.— Ed. 
b Frederick William IV.— Ed. 

=====第222页=====
200 Frederick Engels 
The philosophy of revelation, on which he had lectured in Munich 
"since 1831 in exactly the same way", and the philosophy of 
mythology, which "dates from even earlier". Quite old things 
which had been proclaimed in Munich for ten years without 
success, which could captivate only a Ringseis or a Stahl. That is 
what Schelling calls his "system"! There lie the forces which are to 
save the world, the anathema against godlessness—in the seed 
which refused to germinate in Munich! As these lectures have 
been ready for ten years, why did Schelling not have them 
printed? With all his self-assurance and confidence in success there 
must be something behind this, some secret doubt must be 
keeping him from this step. 
In appearing before the Berlin audience, he did indeed come a 
little closer to the public than up to now in Munich. What could 
there easily remain an esoteric secret teaching because nobody 
bothered about it, is here mercilessly forced into the light of day. 
Nobody is admitted to heaven before he has gone through the 
purgatory of criticism. Anything remarkable that is said in the 
University here today appears tomorrow in all German newspa­
pers.  Hence all the reasons which kept Schelling from having his 
lectures printed should have held him back also from moving to 
Berlin. Even more so, for the printed word admits no misunder­
standing, while the carelessly spoken word, hastily taken down and 
perhaps only half heard, is indeed exposed to false interpretations. 
But, of course, there was now nothing else for it; he had to go to 
Berlin or by his action admit his inability to defeat Hegelianism. It 
was now also too late to go into print, for he had to bring to 
Berlin something new, not yet printed, and his manner here 
showed that he did not have anything else "in his desk". 
So he confidently mounted the rostrum, and immediately 
promising his hearers the most tremendous things, he began his 
lectures before almost four hundred people, of all social positions 
and nations.3 Of these I shall now report, on the basis of my 
own notes, which I have compared with the most accurate of 
other available records, whatever is necessary to justify my judg­
ment. 
Up to now, all philosophy has made it its task to understand the 
world as reasonable. What is reasonable is, of course, also 
necessary, and what is necessary must be, or at least become, real. 
This is the bridge to the great practical results of modern 
philosophy. If Schelling now does not acknowledge these results, it 
a See this volume, pp.  181-82.—  Ed. 

=====第223页=====
Schelling and Revelation 201 
would have been consistent to deny also the reasonableness of the 
world. He dared not, however, say this outright, but preferred to 
deny the reasonableness of philosophy. So he makes a most 
devious way for himself between reason and unreason, calls the 
reasonable the understandable a priori, the unreasonable the 
understandable a posteriori, and assigns the former to the "pure 
science of reason or negative philosophy", the latter to a "positive 
philosophy" yet to be founded. 
Here is the first great gulf between Schelling and all other-
philosophers, here is the first attempt to smuggle belief in dogma 
[Autoritätsglauben], sentimental mysticism, gnostic fantasy into the 
free science of thinking. The unity of philosophy, the wholeness of 
any world outlook, is torn apart into a most unsatisfactory 
dualism, the contradiction which makes up the world-historic 
significance of Christianity is raised to the principle of philosophy 
as well. Right from the start, therefore, we must protest against 
this division. Moreover, we shall see how invalid it is when we 
follow the train of thought with which Schelling seeks to justify his 
inability to grasp the universe as reasonable and whole. He 
proceeds from the scholastic dictum that in things the quid is to be 
distinguished from the  quod,  the what from the that. Reason 
teaches what things are, experience proves that they are. If one 
were to deny this distinction by maintaining the identity of 
thinking and being, this would be a misuse of the postulate. The 
result of the logical thought process is merely the thought of the 
world, not the real world. Reason is simply impotent to prove the 
existence of anything, and in this respect must accept the tes­
timony of experience as sufficient. Philosophy, however, deals also 
with things which transcend all experience, with God, for exam­
ple; hence the question is whether reason is capable of providing 
proof of their existence. To be able to answer this question, 
Schelling enters into a lengthy discussion which is here quite 
superfluous since the above premises do not admit any other 
answer than a decisive No. This is also the result of Schelling's 
discussion. Hence according to Schelling it necessarily follows that 
in pure thought reason has not to deal with really existing things, 
but with things as possible, with their essence, not with their being; 
so that its subject is God's essence, but not His existence. For the 
real God, therefore, a different sphere must be looked for than 
that of pure reason, the presupposition of existence must be 
granted to things which only later, a posteriori, have to show 
themselves as possible or reasonable and as accessible to experi­
ence in their consequences, that is, as real. 
8-384 

=====第224页=====
202 Frederick Engels 
Here the contrast to Hegel is already set forth in all its 
sharpness. In that naive belief in the Idea to which Schelling is so 
superior, Hegel maintains that anything which is reasonable is also 
real; Schelling says, however, that what is reasonable is possible, 
and thus safeguards  himself,  for in view of the known extensive 
range of possibility, this proposition is irrefutable. But at the same 
time he thereby already proves what will be manifest later, namely, 
his unclarity concerning all purely logical categories. I could, 
indeed, at once point out the gap in the above battle order of 
conclusions through which the wicked enemy of dependence stole 
into the ranks of free thoughts, but I shall save this for a later 
occasion so as not to repeat  myself,  and shall at once go on to the 
content of the pure science of reason as Schelling construed it for 
his hearers to the great amusement of all Hegelians. It is the 
following: 
Reason is the infinite power of cognition. Power is the same as 
ability (Kant's ability to know). As such it appears without any 
content, but nevertheless it has one, and indeed, without its own 
doing, without action on its part, for otherwise it would, of course, 
cease to be power, since power and action are opposites. This 
content, which is thus necessarily immediate, innate, can only be 
the infinite power of being, corresponding to the infinite power of 
cognition, since to every cognition there corresponds something 
which has being. This power of being, this infinite ability to be, is 
the substance from which we must derive our concepts. To be 
occupied with it is pure, self-immanent thinking. This pure ability 
to be is not just a readiness to exist but the concept of being  itself, 
that which by its nature is eternally passing over into concept, or 
that which is about to pass over into being, that which cannot be 
prevented from being and is therefore passing over from thinking 
into being. This is the mobile nature of thinking, according to 
which it cannot stop at mere thinking but must constantly pass 
over into being. This is, however, no passing over into real being 
but only a logical passing over. So instead of the pure power there 
appears something that logically is being. But since the infinite 
power stands in the relation of the prius to that which itself 
originates in thinking by passing over into being, and since only 
everything that really is being corresponds to the infinite power, 
reason possesses as its integral content the power to assume an a 
priori attitude to being and thus, without having récourse to 
experience, to arrive at the content of everything that really is 
being. That which occurs in reality reason has recognised as 
logically necessary possibility. It does not know whether the world 

=====第225页=====
Schelling  and  Revelation 203 
exists;  it only knows that  if it  does,  it must  be of  such  and  such  a 
nature. 
Hence,  the  fact that reason  is power compels  us to  regard  its 
content also  as potential. Hence  God  cannot  be the  immediate 
content  of reason,  for He is  something real,  not  merely potential, 
possible.  In the  power  of being  we first discover  the  possibility  to 
pass over into being. This being takes away from  the  power  the 
domination over  itself.  Before,  the  power dominated being;  it 
could pass over into  it or not. Now it has  fallen  to being,  is under 
its sway. This  is being without mind, without concept,  for mind  is 
power over being. This conceptless being  is no  longer  to be  found 
in nature,  it has  already  all been taken possession  of by  form;  but 
it is easy  to see  that this condition  was  preceded  by a  blind, 
boundless being, which lies  at its  basis  as matter.  But  power  is this 
freedom, this infinity, which  can  pass over into being  or not, so 
that the two  contradictory opposites  in it,  being  and  not-being,  are 
not mutually exclusive. This second ability—also  not to  pass over 
into being—is  the  equal  of the  first,  as long  as the  first remains 
power. Only when that which  is immediately able  to be  actually 
passes over into being  is the  other excluded from  it. The 
indifference  of the two in the  power then ceases,  for now the  first 
possibility posits  the  second outside  itself. The  ability  to realise 
itself  is given  to this second only  by the  exclusion  of the  first.  As in 
the infinite power  the  ability  to pass over  and the  ability  not to 
pass over  do not  exclude each other,  so also they  do not  exclude 
that which hovers freely between being  and  not-being. Thus  we 
have three powers.  In the  first  a direct relation  to being,  in the 
second  an  indirect relation, which  is able  to be  only  by the 
exclusion  of the  first.  So we now  have  1) that which inclines  to 
being;  2) that which inclines  to not-being;  3) that which hovers 
freely between being  and  not-being. Before  the act of  passing 
over,  the  third  is not  distinct from  the  direct power  and so  will 
only become being when  it is  excluded  by the  first  two; it can  only 
come  to be  when  the  first  two  have passed over into being. With 
this ail possibilities  are  completed  and the  inner organism  of 
reason  is exhausted  in this totality  of powers.  The  first possibility 
is only that before which there  can  only  be the  infinite power 
itself.  There  is something which, when  it has  left the  realm  of 
possibility,  is only  one, but  until  it has  decided  to do so, it is  instar 
omnium,  the  directly imminent, also that which resists, which offers 
resistance  to the  other that  is destined  to succeed  it. By  yielding  its 
position  it transfers  its might  to another, raising  it to  power.  To 
this other that  is raised  to power  it will subordinate itself  as 
8* 

=====第226页=====
204 Frederick Engels 
relative not-being.  At first there appears that which  can be in the 
transitive sense, which  is therefore also  the  most accidental,  the 
least substantiated, which  can  find  its basis only  in the  subsequent, 
not in the  preceding. Only  in subordinating itself  to this subse­
quent,  in becoming,  by comparison,  a relative not-being, does  it 
obtain substantiation, only thus does  it become something, since 
alone  it would only  be lost. This first  is the  prima materia  of all 
being, itself arriving  at determined being  by placing above itself 
something higher.  The  second thing with  the  ability  to be is  only 
posited  and  raised into  its power  by the  above exclusion  of the 
first from  its placidity; that which  in itself  is not yet  able  to be, 
now becomes something able  to be  through  the  negation. From  its 
original indirect ability  to be, it is  posited  as placid, calm willing 
and so it  will necessarily work towards negating that  by which  it 
was itself negated,  and  thus towards returning into  its own  placid 
being. This  can  only come  to pass  by the  first being brought back 
from  its  absolute alienation into  its  ability  to be.  Thus  we 
obtain  a superior ability  to be, a  being which  has  been brought 
back  to its  ability  to be,  which  as something higher  is a  being with 
power over  itself.  Since with  the  direct ability  to be the  infinite 
power  is not  exhausted,  the  second within  it must  be the  direct 
ability only  not to be. But  that which  has the  direct ability  to be is 
already superior  to the  ability; hence,  the  second power must  be 
the direct non-ability  not to be, the  perfectly pure being,  for only 
the being  is not the  being able  to be. The  pure being  can  certainly 
be power, however contradictory this  may  seem,  for it is not  real 
being,  it has not,  like  the  latter, passed  a potentia  ad actum,  but is 
actus purus.  It is, of  course,  not  immediate power,  but  from that  it 
does not follow that  it cannot  be power  at all. It  must  be negated  in 
order  to be  realised; thus  it is not  power everywhere  and 
throughout,  but can  become power through negation.  As long  as 
that which  is immediately capable  of being remained mere power, 
it was  itself pure being;  as soon  as it  raises itself above power,  it 
presses  the  pure being  out of its own  being  so as  itself  to become 
being. Pure being, negated  as actus purus, thus becomes power.  So 
it has no  freedom  of will  but  must work  in order again  to negate 
its negation.  In this  way it  could indeed pass over  ab actu  ad 
potentiam  and  thus  be  realised outside  itself. The  first,  the 
boundless being,  was the  non-willed,  the  hyle, with which  the 
demiurge  has to  wrestle.  It is  posited  so as at  once  to be  negated 
by the  second power.  A bounded being must take  the place  of the 
boundless being,  it must  be led by  stages back into  the  ability  to 
be, and  then  is an  ability which  is self-possessing  and, at the 

=====第227页=====
Schelling and Revelation 205 
highest stage, conscious of  itself.  So between the first and the 
second possibility there lie a mass of derived possibilities and 
medium powers. These are already the concrete world. If the 
power that was posited outside itself is fully brought back into 
ability, into self-possessing power, the second power, too, will leave 
the scene, because it is only there to negate the first and in the act 
of negating the first dissolves itself as power. The more it 
overcomes the opposing being, the more it destroys  itself.  At this 
stage it is not  possible  to stop. If the being is to be completed, in place 
of the being which was entirely overcome by the second power a 
third must be posited to which the second power completely 
transfers its might. This can be neither pure ability to be nor pure 
being, but only that which in being is ability to be and in ability to 
be is being, the contradiction of power and being posited as 
identity, that which hovers freely between the two, the spirit, an 
inexhaustible source of being, which is quite free and in being 
does not cease to remain power. This cannot work directly but can 
only be made actual through the second power. Since now the 
second is that which mediates between the first and the third, the 
third is posited by that first which was overcome by the second. 
This third, which remains unconquered in being, is, posited as 
spirit, that which is able to be and which consummates, so that 
with its entry into being the consummate being is there. In the 
self-possessing ability, in the spirit, lies the consummation of 
nature. This last can also devote itself to a new, consciously 
produced movement and so form for itself a new, intellectual 
world standing above nature. This possibility, too, must be 
exhausted by science, which thereby becomes philosophy of nature 
and philosophy of spirit. 
Through this process everything that is not immanent in 
tfiinking, that has passed over into being, is eliminated and there 
remains the power which no longer needs to pass over into being, 
which no longer has being outside  itself,  whose ability to be is its 
being; the entity which is no longer subordinate to being, but is its 
being in its truth, what is called the supreme being. Thus the 
supreme law of thinking is fulfilled, power and action are together 
in one being, thinking is now by itself and hence is free thinking, no 
longer subject to an unceasing, necessary movement. Here that 
which was willed in the beginning has been reached, the  self-
possessing concept (for concept and power are identical) which, 
because it is unique of its kind, has a special name and, because it 
is that which was willed from the beginning, is called the Idea. For 
he who in thinking will not look to the result, whose philosophy is 

=====第228页=====
206 Frederick Engels 
not conscious of its purpose, is like a painter who simply goes on 
painting, and the outcome can take care of  itself. 
So far Schelling has communicated to us the content of his 
negative philosophy, and these outlines are perfectly sufficient to 
recognise the fantastic, illogical character of his mode of thinking. 
He is no longer capable of moving in pure thinking even for a 
short time; every moment the most fabulous, most bizarre phan­
toms cross his path, so that the great horses drawing his carriage 
of thought rear and shy and he himself abandons his goal to chase 
after these phantoms. That the three powers, when reduced to 
their naked thought content, are nothing but the three elements 
of the Hegelian course of development through negation, only 
torn apart, fixed in their separateness and dressed up by 
"philosophy which is conscious of its purpose" in accordance with 
that purpose, can be seen at first glance. It is a sad spectacle to 
watch Schelling drag thought down from its lofty, pure ether into 
the region of sensory perception, strike from its head the true 
golden crown and make it stagger about, drunk with the fog and 
mist of the unaccustomed, romantic atmosphere, in a crown of 
gilded paper, to be the laughing-stock of the street urchins. These 
so-called powers are no longer thoughts at all, they are nebulous, 
fantastic shapes in which the outlines of the three divine hypos­
tases already shine clearly through the veil of cloud which 
mysteriously envelops them. Indeed, they already have a certain 
self-consciousness: one "inclines" to being, the other to not-being, 
the third "hovers freely" between the two. They "yield place to 
each other", they have different "positions", they "crowd" each 
other, they "resist", they fight each other, they "seek to negate 
themselves", they "work" and "endeavour", etc. This strange 
sensualisation of thought again arises from a misunderstanding of 
the Hegelian logic. That powerful dialectic, that inner motive 
force which constantly drives the individual thought categories, as 
if it were the bad conscience of their imperfection and one-
sidedness, to ever new development and rebirth until they arise 
from the grave of negation for the last time as absolute idea in 
imperishable, immaculate splendour, Schelling has been able to 
grasp in no other way than as the self-conscioùsness of the 
individual categories, while in fact it is the self-consciousness of the 
general, of thinking, of the Idea. He wants to raise the language 
of emotion to an absolutely scientific langviage without first having 
shown us pure thought in a language that alone is suitable to it. 
On the other hand, he is equally incapable of grasping the concept 
of being in its complete abstraction, as he shows if only by 

=====第229页=====
Schelling and Revelation 207 
constantly using as synonymous the concepts of being and of that 
which is. Being is thinkable for him only as matter, as hyle, as wild 
chaos.  In addition we now already have several such matters, a 
"boundless being", a "bounded being", a "pure being", a "logical 
being", a "real being", a "placid being", and later we shall get, 
besides, an "unpremeditatable being" and a "contrary being". It is 
amusing to see how these different beings collide and crowd each 
other out, how power has only the choice of losing itself in this 
chaotic mass or remaining an empty phantom. Do not tell me that 
this is only because of the figurative language; on the contrary, 
this gnostic-oriental dream thinking, which conceives every 
thought category either as personality or as matter, is the basis of 
the whole process. Take away the mode of looking at things and 
everything collapses. Even the basic categories, power and action, 
derive from a time of confusion, and Hegel was quite right when 
he threw these hazy categories out of logic. Schelling makes 
confusion worse confused and uses this opposition by turns, as it 
suits him, for the following Hegelian categories: being in itself and 
being for  itself,  ideality and reality, force and manifestation, 
possibility and actuality, and in all this power is, moreover, a 
separate, sensory-supersensory essence. The chief meaning which 
Schelling attributes to it is, however, that of possibility, and so we 
have a philosophy based on possibility. In this respect, Schelling 
rightly calls his science of reason the "none-exclusive" science, for 
in the end everything is possible. What matters, however, is that 
thought should prove its worth by its inner force to become real. 
The Germans will decline a philosophy which drags them along a 
bumpy road through the infinitely boring Sahara of possibility 
without giving them anything real to eat and drink and without 
leading them to any other goal than where the world, according to 
it, is boarded up to reason. 
But let us give ourselves the trouble to follow the road through 
Nothing. Schelling says: Essence is for concept, being for cogni­
tion. Reason is the infinite power of cognition, its content the 
infinite power of being, as set out above. But now he suddenly 
starts actually to take cognisance of the infinite power of being 
through the power of cognition. Can he do it? No, cognition is 
actus, to actus corresponds actus, "to cognition corresponds a 
being", hence to the above actual cognition corresponds the actual, 
real being. Hence, against its will, reason would have to cognise 
real being, and in spite of all endeavour to keep to the high seas 
of possibility we would at once be thrown on the hated beach of 
actuality. 

=====第230页=====
208 Frederick Engels 
But, it is  objected,  the  power  of being  is only cognised after  its 
transition, which  is certainly  a logical  one.  Schelling himself indeed 
says that logical being  and  power  of being, concept  and  power,  are 
identical. When therefore  the  power  of cognition actually passes 
over into actus,  the  power  of being cannot  be satisfied with  a 
pretended, fictitious transition.  If the  power  of being does  not 
actually make  the  transition,  it remains power, cannot  be cognised 
by reason,  and  therefore  is not the  "necessary content  of reason" 
but, on the  contrary,  the  absolutely irrational. 
Or will Schelling call  the  activity which reason applies  to its 
content  not  cognition,  but,  perhaps, conception? Then reason 
would have  to be the  infinite power  of conception, since  in its own 
science  it would never attain  to cognition. 
On the one  hand, Schelling excludes existence from reason;  on 
the other,  he restores  it to  reason with cognition. Cognition  is for 
him the  unity  of concept  and  existence,  of logic  and the  empirical. 
Hence, contradictions  at every turn.  How is  that? 
Is reason then  the  infinite power  of cognition?  Is the eye the 
power  of seeing?  The eye,  even  the  closed  eye,  continues  to see, it 
still sees darkness even  if it  believes  it is not  seeing anything. Only 
the diseased  eye, the  curably blind,  is power  of seeing without 
being actus; only  the undeveloped  or momentarily confused reason 
is mere power  of cognition.  But  then does  it not  appear  so 
plausible  to understand reason  as power?  It is  that,  too, and not 
mere possibility,  but  absolute force, necessity  of cognition. That, 
however, must manifest  itself,  must cognise.  The  separation  of 
power  and  actus,  of force  and  manifestation, belongs only  to the 
finite;  in the  infinite, power  is itself  its actus,  the  force  its own 
manifestation.  For the  infinite does  not  tolerate  any  contradiction 
within  itself. If now  reason  is infinite power, then  by virtue  of this 
infinity  it is  also infinite actus. Otherwise  the  power itself would  be 
conceived  as finite. That  is already  the case  in naive consciousness. 
Reason which does  not get  beyond  the  power  of cognition  is called 
unreason. Only that reason  is accepted  as reason which really 
proves itself  by cognition,  the eye  only  as a  true  eye if it  sees. Here 
the contradiction between power  and  actus  is at  once seen  as 
soluble  and in the  last resort void,  and  this solution  is a  triumph  of 
Hegelian dialectic over Schelling's narrowness, which. never  got 
beyond this contradiction;  for  even where power  and  actus  are 
supposed  to coincide  in the  Idea, this  is merely asserted,  and the 
fusion  of the two  concepts  is not  shown. 
But when Schelling says: Reason  is conceiving,  and  since concept 
is power,  it is  power  to cognise, which only becomes real cognition 

=====第231页=====
Schelling and Revelation 209 
when it finds something real to cognise; on the other hand, in the 
pure science of reason, where it is concerned with the power of 
being, reason does not go beyond the power of cognition and 
merely conceives — then nobody, even apart from the above 
discussion on power and actus, will deny that the purpose of the 
power of cognition is actually to pass on to cognition, and that it is 
nothing so long as it does not do this. So it turns out that the 
content of the pure science of reason is hollow, empty, useless, 
and that reason when it fulfills its purpose and actually cognises 
becomes unreason. If Schelling admits that the essence of reason is 
unreason, I have, of course, nothing more to say. 
So from the very start Schelling has got himself so tied up with 
his powers, transitions and correspondences that the only way out 
of the confusion of logical and real being, in which he does not 
want to be entangled, is the recognition of a line of thought other 
than his own. But let us proceed. 
Reason is now to conceive in this fashion the content of all 
actual being and take up an a priori attitude towards it; it is not 
supposed to prove that something exists, but that if something 
exists it must be of such and such a nature, in contrast to Hegel's 
assertion that with thought real existence is also given. These 
statements are again downright confused. It has not occurred 
either to Hegel or anyone else to want to prove the existence of 
anything without empirical premises; he merely proves the necessi­
ty of that which exists. Schelling here understands reason just as 
abstractly as earlier he understood power and actus and is in 
consequence driven to assign to it an existence prior to that of the 
world and separated from all other existence. The conclusion of 
modern philosophy, which was at least among the premises of 
Schelling's earlier philosophy, and of which Feuerbach first made 
us conscious in all its sharpness, is that reason cannot possibly exist 
except as mind, and that mind can only exist in and with nature, 
and does not lead, so to say, a life apart, in separateness from it, 
God knows where. Schelling himself admits this when he describes 
as the aim of individual immortality not the liberation of mind 
from nature, but the proper balance of the two; also when he says 
further of Christ that he was not dissolved into the universe but was 
raised as a man on the right hand of God. (So the remaining two 
divine persons must have been dissolved in the universe after all?) 
But if reason exists, then its own existence is proof of the 
existence of nature. So the necessity exists that the power of being 
must pass over at once into the actus of being. Or, to use a very 
humdrum phrase, intelligible even without Feuerbach and Hegel: 

=====第232页=====
210 Frederick Engels 
So long as one abstracts from all existence one cannot talk about it 
at all. But if one starts from something existing it is, of course, 
possible to go on from that to other things, which, all conclusions 
being correctly drawn, must also exist. If the existence of the 
premises is admitted, the existence of the conclusion stands to 
reason. Now the basis of all philosophy is the existence of reason; 
this existence is proved by its activity (cogito, ergo sum); if therefore 
one proceeds from reason as existing, the existence of all its 
consequences follows of  itself.  No philosopher has yet denied that 
the existence of reason is a premise; and if Schelling does not 
want to admit this premise let him keep out of philosophy 
altogether. Thus Hegel could indeed prove the existence of 
nature, i.e., that it is a necessary consequence of the existence of 
reason. But Schelling, who wants to make his way into an abstract 
and empty immanence of thinking, forgets that all his operations 
are obviously based on the existence of reason and makes the 
ridiculous demand that real reason should have unreal, merely 
logical results, that a real apple-tree should produce only logical, 
potential apples. Such an apple-tree is usually called barren; 
Schelling would say: the infinite power of an apple-tree. 
If then Hegel's categories are called not only the models 
according to which, but also the generating forces through which 
the things of this world have been created, this means nothing else 
than that they deduce the thought-content of the world and its 
necessary consequence from the existence of reason. Schelling, on 
the other hand, takes reason really for something which could also 
exist outside the world organism and so places its true realm in 
the hollow, empty abstraction, in the "aeon before the creation of 
the world", which, fortunately, however, has never existed and in 
which reason still less ever found itself or even felt happy. But 
here we see how extremes meet: Schelling cannot grasp the 
concrete thought and drives it on to the most dizzying abstraction, 
which at once appears to him again as a sensory image, so that 
precisely this muddle of abstraction and conception is characteris­
tic of Schelling's scholastic-mystic way of thinking. 
We get new proofs of this when we turn to the exposition of the 
content of "negative philosophy". The power of being serves as 
the basis. The caricature of Hegelian dialectic is most obvious. The 
power can make a transition, but it can also refrain from doing so, 
as it wishes. So in the retort of reason the two chemical 
components, being and not-being, are separated from the neutral 
power. If it were at all possible to bring back the business of 
power to sound reason, here would be the place where a 

=====第233页=====
Schelling and Revelation 211 
dialectical element shows itself and Schelling seems to divine that 
the essence of power is the necessity of transition and that power 
is only abstracted from the actus of reality. But no, he becomes 
more and more entangled in the one-sided abstraction. He lets 
the power make a trial transition and discovers the great thought 
that after the transition it has forfeited the chance not to make it. At 
the same time he discovers in the power a third thing, the possibi­
lity not to do either and to hover freely between the two. These 
three possibilities or powers, it is declared, include all reasonable 
content, all possible being. 
The possibility to be becomes actual being. With that the second 
possibility, the ability also not to be, is negated. Will it seek to 
reconstitute itself? How can it do so when it is not overcome by a 
mere negation in the Hegelian sense, but is totally destroyed, 
reduced to nothing, to such radical not-being as can only occur in 
a philosophy of possibility? Crushed, swallowed, devoured, how 
should this possibility still have the strength to reconstitute itself? 
For not only the second possibility, but even the primeval power, 
the subject to which that second possibility is a mere predicate, is 
negated, and so not the latter, but the former, the primeval 
power, must seek to reconstitute  itself.  But that cannot at all be its 
intention — to stick to Schelling's way of looking at things—for it 
is bound to know beforehand that by becoming actus, it would 
negate itself as power. Such a reconstitution can occur only when 
persons, not categories, negate themselves. Only boundless misun­
derstanding, a monstrous passion for would-be improvement 
could so thoughtlessly distort the principle of Hegel's dialectic 
which is here clearly the basis. How undialectical the whole process 
is can also be shown thus: If the two sides in the power have equal 
strength, then, without an impulse from outside, it does not decide 
to make the transition at all and remains as before. Then, of 
course, the whole process would not take place, and Schelling 
would not know where to derive the prototypes of the world, of 
the spirit and the Christian Trinity. So one fails to see the 
necessity for the whole thing, it remains obscure why the power 
takes leave of its lovely potential peace, subjects itself to being, 
etc., and the whole process rests from the start on arbitrariness. If 
this happens in the "necessary" thinking, what will not occur in 
the "free"! But that is just the point: this transition must remain 
arbitrary, for otherwise Schelling would be admitting the necessity 
of the world and this does not fit into his positivism. But here 
again is proof that power is only power as actus, but without actus 
is only a hollow, empty absurdity with which even Schelling cannot 

=====第234页=====
212 Frederick Engels 
be contented. For with empty power he is left without content, this 
only appears when the power becomes actus, and so against his will 
he has to acknowledge the untruth of the opposition of power and 
actus. 
Let us return once more to the second power, of which 
Schelling makes the most wonderful fuss. We have seen above how 
it was negated, reduced to nothing. Now Schelling says further: 
Since the first is that which can be, it is its opposite, everything 
except that which can be, hence the wholly pure being, actus purusl 
This,  however, must already have lain in the primeval power, but 
how does it get there? How does that which is "averse to being, 
inclined to not-being", etc., suddenly become wholly pure being; 
how does "pure being" differ from "boundless being"; why is 
there no other possibility for that which cannot be, but to be that 
which is? To that we get no reply. Instead we are assured that this, 
the second power, leads the first, which has become boundless, 
back into the condition of ability and thereby reconstitutes and at 
the same time — destroys  itself!  Who can understand that? Fur­
thermore, this reduction process is fixed in its stages by the stages of 
nature. That nature should be the outcome is incomprehensible. 
Why, for example, is the boundless being the hyle? Because 
Schelling thought of the hyle from the start and worked towards it; 
otherwise this being could have anything else as its sensory or 
spiritual content. That the stages of nature are to be conceived as 
powers is also incomprehensible. In that way the deadest, the 
inorganic, would have to be that which has the highest degree of 
being, the organic rather that which is able to be; but one can only 
regard this as a mystical image in which all thought-content has 
been lost. 
Now instead of conceiving the third power, the spirit—for 
again we can see Schelling working towards it from afar — as the 
highest quantitative stage of the first, which has been overcome by 
the second, and in which at the same time a qualitative change 
takes place, Schelling again does not know where to derive it from. 
"Science is looking round for a third." "One cannot stop here." 
"In place of the being overcome by the second power, a third 
must be posited." These are the magic flourishes with which he 
conjures up the spirit. Now we learn how this spirit, which has 
made its entrance through generatio primitiva, is constituted. If we 
think of nature, it is, of course, evident that, given these premises, 
the spirit is to be understood as self-possessing ability to be (not 
mere ability), which, of course, is already bad enough; but if we 
abstract from this future nature, which will perhaps never even 

=====第235页=====
Schelling and Revelation 213 
come, if we keep to the pure powers, it is impossible to grasp, try 
as one may, that the first power, which has been brought back into 
ability to be by the second, can be anything but the primeval 
power. Schelling seems to have felt in Hegel the depth of the 
mediation which has passed through the negation and the opposi­
tion, but it is beyond him to achieve anything like it. With him 
there are two things, indifferent to each other, one of which 
pushes the other aside, whereupon the second reconquers its place 
and drives the first back to its original position. Nothing else than 
the initial state can possibly result. Moreover, if the first is strong 
enough to push the second aside, where does the second suddenly 
find the strength to go over, after an unsuccessful defensive, to 
the offensive and drive the first away? I will say nothing about the 
unfortunate definition of the spirit; it refutes itself and the entire 
process of which it is the result. 
So we would now have happily worked through this so-called 
process of development and could pass on to other things, if 
Schelling, after finally the spirit had concluded all, had not held 
out for us the prospect of another, intellectual world, the coping-
stone of which he calls the Idea. How Schelling, after the concrete 
nature and the living spirit, can now bring out the abstract idea (in 
this position it can indeed only be abstract), is quite incomprehen­
sible,  and Schelling should have justified this, since he rejects the 
contrary position of the Hegelian Idea. He arrives at this through 
his mania for having the absolute decidedly at the end of 
philosophy, and through his failure to comprehend how Hegel 
actually achieved this. The absolute is, however, the self-knowing 
spirit, and that, it is to be supposed, is what Schelling's Idea is too; 
but according to Schelling this spirit is to be a postulate at the end 
of the negative philosophy. But that again is a contradiction. 
History cannot come into this philosophy since it has nothing to 
do with actuality; on the other hand, it is the philosophy of spirit, 
the crown of which is the philosophy of world history; moreover, 
the negative science is supposed to "exhaust this last possibility of 
a consciously occurring process" (which can only be history). 
Where does that leave us? This much is certain, that if Schelling 
had a philosophy of history, the self-knowing spirit would appear 
to him not as a postulate, but as a result. The self-knowing spirit 
is, however, a long way from being the concept of the personal 
God, as Schelling claims for the Idea. 
When Schelling had got thus far, he claimed that it had been his 
endeavour forty years earlier to give a coherent presentation of 
the science just outlined. The philosophy of identity, he said, had 

=====第236页=====
214 Frederick Engels 
been intended only as this negative philosophy. Its slow, gradual 
elevation above Fichte had at least in part been intentional: 
"He had wished to avoid all abrupt transitions, to keep the continuity of 
philosophical development, and even flattered himself with the hope perhaps some 
time later to bring Fichte himself over to his side." 
As if we did not know Hegel's previously quoted saying or how 
little Schelling knew  himself.  The subject, which in the philosophy 
of identity comprised within itself all positive content, is now 
declared to be power. Already in this philosophy it is supposed 
that all the stages of nature are being relative to the next higher 
stages, which are themselves ability to be and, in turn, being 
relative to their higher stages, so that what is there called subject 
and object here becomes ability to be and being until the final 
outcome is no longer that which relatively has being, but that 
which absolutely has "super-being", the identity, no longer the 
mere indifference, of thinking and being, of power and actus, 
subject and object. Everything in this philosophy, however, accord­
ing to Schelling, had been stated "presupposing the pure science 
of reason", and the worst misunderstanding was that the whole 
was taken for a not merely logical but also a real process, that this 
philosophy was thought to infer from a principle that was true in 
itself,  the truth of all that followed. Only when this philosophy 
had reached its conclusion, did being, which was no longer able to 
alienate  itself,  remain stationary in its full splendour and see 
nature and spirit beneath it as its throne to which it had been 
raised; yet, for all its sublimity this was no more than a construc­
tion of thought and only to be transformed into a real process by 
a complete reversal. 
For the moment we will leave it open whether this presentation 
of the philosophy of identity has not been adapted to Schelling's 
present views, whether forty years ago he cared as little for the 
reality of his thoughts as now, and whether it would not have been 
better to remove the "greatest misunderstanding" with two words, 
which could easily have been done, instead of maintaining a 
superior silence; we shall go on directly to the judgment of the 
man who "pushed" Schelling "out of his place", without the latter 
hitherto having been able to "negate that which has negated him". 
Schelling says that while almost everybody understood the 
philosophy of identity wrongly and superficially, Hegel rescued its 
fundamental thought and acknowledged it to the last, as testified 
by his Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der Philosophie. Hegel erred in 
that he took the philosophy of identity for the absolute philosophy 
and did not acknowledge that there are things which go beyond it. 

=====第237页=====
Schelling and Revelation 215 
Its limit was the ability to be; he went beyond that and drew being 
into its compass. His basic error was that he wished to turn it into 
an existential system. He believed the philosophy of identity had 
the absolute for its subject not merely in essence, but in existence. 
By bringing existence into it, he leaves the sphere of development 
of pure reason. So he is consistent when he begins his science with 
pure being and thereby denies the prius of existence. Thus it 
came about that he was only immanent in the non-immanent, for 
being is that which is non-immanent in thinking. Then he claims 
to have demonstrated the absolute in logic. So he had the absolute 
twice, at the end of logic, where it is derived in exactly the same 
way as at the end of the philosophy of identity, and at the end of 
the whole process. This shows, therefore, that logic is not to be 
premised as the first part of the development but should rather 
pervade the whole process. Hegel defines logic as a subjective 
science in which thinking is in and with itself alone, prior to and 
outside all actuality. And yet thinking is supposed to have the 
actual, real idea as its terminal point. While with its first step the 
philosophy of identity is within nature, Hegel throws nature out of 
logic and thereby declares it illogical. The abstract concepts of 
Hegel's logic do not belong to the beginning of philosophy; they 
can enter it only when consciousness has absorbed the whole of 
nature, for they are mere abstractions from nature. So there can 
be no question of objective logic in Hegel, for just where nature, 
the object, begins, logic ceases. So in logic the Idea is in the 
process of becoming, but only in the thought of the philosopher; 
its objective life only begins when it has arrived at consciousness. 
But as actually existing, it is already at the end of logic—hence it 
is impossible to continue with it. For the Idea as absolute 
subject-object, as ideal-real, is complete in itself and incapable of 
further progress; how then can it still pass over into the other, into 
nature? Here it becomes clear that in the pure science of reason 
there can be no question of an actually existing nature. What 
concerns actual existence must be reserved for positive philosophy. 
The error of this presentation rests mainly on the naive belief 
that Hegel did not advance beyond Schelling's standpoint and 
that, moreover, he misunderstood it. We have seen that, try as he 
will, Schelling cannot get away from existence, and therefore there 
is hardly any need to justify Hegel for not making this claim of 
abstract ideality. Even if Schelling could abide by the pure power, 
his own existence should convince him that the power has made 
the transition, hence that all consequences of mere logical being 
now belong in the real, and hence the "absolute" exists. After 

=====第238页=====
216 Frederick Engels 
that,  why  does  he still need positive philosophy?  If the  logical 
absolute follows from  the  logical world,  the  existing absolute 
follows from  the  existing world.  But  that Schelling cannot  be 
content with this  and now in  addition assumes  a positive 
philosophy  of faith shows  how  strongly  the  empirical, extra-
mundane existence  of the  absolute contradicts  all reason,  and how 
strongly Schelling himself feels this. Because Schelling  now  seeks 
to pull down  to his own low  level  the Hegelian Idea, which stands 
infinitely high above  the  absolute  of the  philosophy  of identity 
since  it is  what  the  other merely pretends  to be, he  cannot grasp 
the relation  of the  Idea  to nature  and  spirit. Schelling again 
conceives  the  Idea  as an  extra-mundane being,  as a  personal  God, 
a thing which never occurred  to Hegel.  For  Hegel  the  reality  of 
the Idea  is nothing but—nature  and  spirit. That  is also  why  Hegel 
does  not  have  the  absolute twice.  At the end of  logic  the  Idea  is 
there  as ideal-real,  but for  that very reason  it is, of  course, also 
nature.  If it is  only expressed  as Idea  it is  merely ideal, merely 
logically existing.  The  ideal-real absolute, complete  in itself, is 
nothing  but the  unity  of nature  and  spirit  in the  Idea. Schelling, 
however, still conceives  the  absolute  as absolute subject,  for, 
although  it is  filled with  the  content  of objectivity,  it still remains 
subject without becoming object,  i. e., the  absolute  is for him  real 
only in the  shape  of the  personal  God. He  should leave  him out 
altogether  and  keep  to the  pure definition  of the  concept  in which 
it is not a  question  of personality.  So the  absolute  is not  real 
outside nature  and  mind.  If it  were, they would,  of course, both 
be superfluous. Hence,  if in  logic  it was a  question  of the  ideal 
definitions  of the  Idea  as real  in nature  and  mind,  it is now a 
question  of this reality  itself, of the  demonstration  of these 
definitions  in existence, which  is the  final test  and at the  same time 
the highest stage  of philosophy.  So an  advance  out of  logic  is 
indeed  not  only possible  but  necessary,  and in the  self-conscious, 
infinite mind this very advance returns  to the  Idea.  So we can see 
the nullity  of Schelling's assertions that Hegel declares nature 
illogical (which Schelling,  by the way, at  once declares  the  whole 
world  to be),  that  his logic,  the necessary, self-active development 
of thought,  is "subjective science,  and  that objective logic cannot 
exist  at all  since  it is  philosophy  of nature  and  this philosophy  has 
been thrown  out of  logic".  As if the  objectivity  of science consisted 
in its regarding  an external object  as such!  If Schelling calls logic 
subjective, there  is no  reason not3  to declare  the  philosophy  of 
a There  is an  obvious misprint here  in the  German text, where nicht  (not) is 
missing.—  Ed. 

=====第239页=====
Schelling  and Revelation 217 
nature also subjective,  for the  same subject which thinks here 
also thinks there,  and it  does  not  matter,  of course, what 
content  is under consideration. Hegel's objective logic, however, 
does  not  develop  the  thoughts,  it lets them develop them­
selves,  and the  thinking subject  is, as  mere spectator, quite acci­
dental. 
Passing  on to the  philosophy  of  spirit, Schelling  now 
proceeds from those utterances  in which Hegel's philosophy  is at 
war with  his  personal inclinations  and  prejudices.  The  religious-
philosophical side  of the  Hegelian system gives  him  occasion  to 
point  out  contradictions between premises  and  conclusions which 
have long since been discovered  and  acknowledged  by the  Young 
Hegelian school. Thus  he says quite correctly: This philosophy 
wants  to be  Christian,  to which, however, nothing whatever 
compels  it; if it  maintained  its original attitude  as science  of 
reason,  it would have  its truth  in itself.— He  then concludes  his 
remarks  by acknowledging Hegel's statement that  art,  religion  and 
philosophy  are the  ultimate forms  of achieving  the  absolute. Only 
since  art and  religion transcend  the  pure science  of reason, this 
philosophy—and this  he takes  for the  dialectical point  of the 
statement—would also have  to do so and be a  second philosophy, 
different from  the  former  one. But  where does Hegel  say this?  At 
the end of the  Phänomenologie, where  he has the  whole  of logic 
before  him as a  second philosophy. Phenomenology, how­
ever— here stands  out the  very opposite  of Schelling's interpreta­
tion—was  not the  pure science  of reason,  but  only  the  path  to it, 
the raising  of the  empirical,  of sensory consciousness  to the  level 
of the  pure science  of reason.  Not  logical,  but  phenomenological 
consciousness finds these three before  it as  ultimate "possibilities 
to assure itself  of the  existence  of the  absolute super-being". 
Logical, free consciousness sees quite different things, with which, 
however,  we  need  not  concern ourselves  for the  moment;  it has 
the absolute already  in itself. 
So the difficult step will have been taken  and the  apostasy from 
pure reason openly pronounced. Since  the  scholastics, Schelling  is 
the first  to have dared this step;  for  Jacobi  and his  like  do not 
count, since they represented their time only  in certain aspects, 
never  in its  wholeness.  For the  first time  for five hundred years  a 
hero  of science stands  up and  declares science  the servant  of faith. 
He has  done it—the consequences  be on his  head.  We can  only  be 
glad that  the man who was a  representative  of his  time like  no one 
else, in whom  his century came  to self-consciousness, that this  man 
is declared also  by Schelling  the  finest flower  of the  science  of 

=====第240页=====
218 Frederick Engels 
reason.  Let him who  believes  in the  omnipotence  of reason take  to 
heart this testimony  of an  enemy. 
Schelling describes positive philosophy  as follows:  It is  quite 
independent  of negative philosophy  and  cannot start with  the end 
of this philosophy  as something existing,  but  must itself first 
demonstrate existence.  The end of the  negative philosophy  is in 
the positive philosophy  not a  principle  but a  task;  the beginning  of 
the positive philosophy  is absolute through  itself. The  unity  of the 
two has  never existed,  nor  could  it be  achieved either  by 
suppressing  one or by  mixing  the two. It can be  proved that  the 
two have always been  in conflict with each other. (Here follows  the 
attempt  at such  a demonstration from Socrates  to Kant,  in whom 
empiricism  and  apriorism  are  claimed  to be  again sharply sepa­
rated.  We  must pass over this, since  it remains without  any  result.) 
Now positive philosophy  is, however,  not  pure empiricism, least  of 
all of the  kind which  is based  on  inner, mystic-theosophical 
experience;  it has its  principle  in that which occurs neither  in 
mere thinking  nor in  experience,  but in the  absolutely transcen­
dental, which goes beyond  all experience  and all  thinking  and 
precedes both. Hence  the  beginning must  not be a  relative prius, 
as in pure thinking, where  the  power  has the  transition before  it, 
but the  absolute prius,  so that  we proceed  not  from concept  to 
being  but  from being  to concept. This transition  is not  necessary, 
like the first,  but is the  consequence  of a  free  act which overcomes 
being  and is  proved  a posteriori empirically.  For if it can be 
immaterial  to negative philosophy, which rests  on logical consisten­
cy, whether there  is a  world  and  whether this world agrees with  its 
construction, positive philosophy progresses through free thinking 
arid so must find  its confirmation  in experience, with which  it has 
to keep pace.  If negative philosophy  is pure apriorism, positive 
philosophy  is a  priori empiricism. Since  in it a  free thinking,  i.e., a 
thinking with volition,  is presupposed,  its proofs  are  also only  for 
the willing,  and the  "wise";  one  must  not  only understand  it but 
have  the  will  to feel  its power.  If revelation  is also among  the 
objects  of  experience, then  it belongs  as much  to positive 
philosophy  as to  nature  and  mankind,  and has  therefore  no other 
authority  for  this philosophy than  for  anything else;  as for 
astronomy,  for example,  the  movements  of the  planets  are  indeed 
authorities with which  the  calculations have  to agree.  If it is 
claimed that without preceding revelation philosophy would  not 
have arrived  at this result, this  is correct,  of course,  in a way, but 
now philosophy  can  also  do it by itself.  Just  as there  are  people 
who,  when they have once discerned small fixed stars with  the 

=====第241页=====
Schelling  and  Revelation 219 
telescope,  can  afterwards  see  them also with  the  naked  eye and 
hence  are no  longer dependent  on the  telescope. Philosophy must 
take in Christianity, which  is as  much reality  as are  nature  and 
mind,  yet not  only revelation,  but the  inner necessity  of the  merely 
logical philosophy forces  it to  transcend  itself.  Negative philosophy 
brings everything only  to the  point  of cognisability  and  then hands 
it over  to the  other sciences; only  the one  ultimate thing  it cannot 
bring  to this point  and  that  is the  thing most worthy  of cognition; 
this it must take  up again  in a new  philosophy which  has the  task 
to demonstrate precisely this ultimate thing  as existing. Thus 
negative philosophy becomes philosophy only  in relation  to posi­
tive philosophy.  If negative philosophy were alone,  it would have 
no real result,  and  reason would  be void;  in positive philosophy  it 
triumphs; reason, which  in negative philosophy  was  bowed down, 
again stands erect. 
I hardly need  say  anything  in elucidation  of these Schellingian 
propositions; they explain themselves.  But if we  compare them 
with the  promises Schelling made  in the  beginning, what  a 
difference  is revealed! Philosophy  was to be  revolutionised,  a 
teaching  was to  develop which would  put an end to the  negative 
philosophy  of recent years,  the  reconciliation  of faith  and  knowl­
edge  was  approaching,  and in the end  what  is the  outcome?  A 
teaching which  has no  foundation either  in itself  or in  anything 
else that  has  been proved. Here,  it is  based  on a  thinking freed 
from  all  logical necessity, that  is, an  arbitrary, empty thinking; 
there,  on something  of which precisely  the  reality  is in  question, 
and of which  the  claims  are  disputed, namely, revelation. What  a 
naive demand that  in order  to cure oneself  of doubt  one  must cast 
away doubt! "Well,  if you  don't believe, there  is no  help  for you!" 
What  did  Schelling come  to Berlin for? Instead  of his  positive 
treasure  he should have brought with  him a  refutation  of Strauss' 
Leben Jesu,  of Feuerbach's Wesen  des  Christentums,  etc.;  then  he 
might have done something;  as it is, the  Hegelians prefer  to 
remain stuck  in the  notorious "blind alley" rather than "place 
themselves  at his  mercy";  and the  positive theologians will also 
prefer  to continue  to work from revelation rather than steep 
themselves deeper  in it.  Then,  too, his  admission, repeated  day 
after  day  since  the New  Year, that  he wishes  to give neither proof 
of Christianity  nor any  speculative dogma  but  merely  a contribu­
tion to the  explanation  of Christianity, falls into place.  The  need 
of negative philosophy  to transcend  itself, as we  have seen,  has not 
much  to it  either.  If the  assumption  of the  transition  a potentia  ad 
actum leads necessarily  to the  logical  God  dependent only  on this 

=====第242页=====
220 Frederick Engels 
assumption, the empirically demonstrated real transition leads to 
the real God, and positive science is superfluous. 
Schelling takes the transition to positive philosophy from the 
ontological proof of the existence of God. God cannot exist by 
chance, hence "if He exists", He exists of necessity. This clause 
inserted in the gap of the argument is quite correct. So God can 
only be that which is in and before itself (not for  itself;  Schelling is 
so furious with Hegel that he even thinks he must criticise his 
expressions as misuse of language and improve on them), i.e., He 
exists before  Himself,  before His divinity. So He is blind being, 
prior to all thinking. But since it is doubtful whether He exists, we 
must proceed from that blind being, and see whether we cannot 
arrive at the concept of God from there. Hence, if in negative 
philosophy the principle is the thinking which precedes all being, 
in positive philosophy it is the being which precedes all thinking. 
This blind being is the necessary being; God, however, is not this 
being but that which of necessity "is necessary"; the necessary 
being alone is the ability to be of the supreme being. Blind being 
is that which requires no substantiation, since it precedes all 
thinking. Thus positive philosophy begins with something al­
together beyond concepts so as to make it a posteriori, as God, 
conceivable and the immanent content of reason. Here only is the 
latter free and has escaped from the realm of necessary thinking. 
This "blind being" is hyle, the eternal matter of earlier 
philosophy. That it develops itself into God is at least new. Up to 
now it has always been the dualistic principle opposed to God. But 
let us consider further the content of positive philosophy. 
This blind being, which can also be called "unpremeditatable 
being", is the purus actus of existence and the identity of essence 
and being (which in the case of God is described as aseity). But 
this, it seems, cannot serve as the basis of a process, since it lacks 
all motive force, which lies only in power. But why should the 
actus purus be denied all possibility of subsequently also becoming 
power; it does not follow that the being which is cannot post actum 
also be that which has ability to be. Unpremeditatable being can 
afterwards be given the possibility — nothing stands in the 
way — of letting a second being emerge from  itself.  Blind being 
thereby becomes power, for it receives something which it can will 
and so becomes master of its own blind being. If it releases this 
second being, the first blind being is only potentia actus purus and is 
thus self-possessing being (but all this is only hypothesis which has 
to be proved by success); only by differentiation from the second 
does it become conscious of itself as necessary by its nature; blind 

=====第243页=====
Schelling and Revelation 221 
being appears as accidental because it is not foreseen, and so has 
to prove itself necessary by overcoming its opposite. This is the 
ultimate ground of the being which stands in opposition to it, and 
hence the ultimate ground of the world. The law that everything 
must become clear and nothing remain hidden is the supreme law 
of all being; not, of course, a law that stands above God, but one 
which first sets Him free, and is therefore already itself a divine 
law. This great world law, this world dialectic, is simply unwilling 
that there should be anything undecided. It alone can solve the 
great riddles. Nay, God is so just that He acknowledges that 
opposed principle to the very end and until all contradiction is 
exhausted. All involuntary, unpremeditatable being is unfree; the 
true God is the living God who can become something other than 
the unpremeditatable. Otherwise it must either be assumed with 
Spinoza that everything emanates from the divine nature necessar­
ily, without it doing anything towards it (bad pantheism), or that 
the concept of creation is one that cannot be grasped by reason 
(shallow theism which cannot overcome pantheism). Thus unpre­
meditatable being becomes the power of the opposite, and since 
potentiality is for it something intolerable, it will necessarily want 
to work towards its restoration into actus purus. So the second 
being must again be negated by the first and be led back into 
power. So it becomes master not only of the first power, but also 
of the second, the power to transform its unpremeditatability into 
a being and thereby to remove it from itself and thus give up its 
entire existence. In this also lies its essence, which hitherto was 
concealed by being; the pure being, which through resistance has 
received a power into  itself,  is now independent as essence. Thus 
the master of the first possibility has also been given the possibility 
to reveal itself as  itself,  as free from necessary being, to posit itself 
as spirit; for spirit is that which is free to work or not to work, 
which in being is master of itself and remains in being even when 
it does not manifest  itself.  But this is not that which is directly able 
to be, nor that which must be, but that which, being able to be, must 
be. These three moments appear to the unpremeditatable being as 
that which properly should be, so that there is nothing outside these 
three moments and everything which is of the future is excluded. 
The train of thought in positive philosophy is, as we see, very 
'.'free".  Schelling does not conceal that he proposes only hypoth­
eses which have yet to be proved by success, i.e., by agreement 
with revelation. It is a consequence of this free, willing thinking 
that he lets the "unpremeditatable being" behave exactly as if it 
were already that which has yet to be developed from it, namely, 

=====第244页=====
222 Frederick Engels 
God. The unpremeditatable being can, of course, not yet see, will, 
release, or lead back. It is nothing but a naked abstraction of 
matter which is most remote precisely from anything personal, 
self-conscious. It is not possible by any kind of development to 
introduce self-consciousness into this rigid category unless it is 
understood as matter and develops through nature to spirit, like 
the "boundless being" in negative philosophy from which it is 
distinguished only by the empty attribute of unpremeditatability. 
This unpremeditatability can only lead to materialism and at most 
to pantheism, but never to monotheism. Cuvier's saying here also 
proves correct: 
"Schelling puts metaphors in the place of arguments, and instead of developing 
concepts he changes images and allegories according to his needs." 
Moreover, the method of argument in which every advance is 
rejected with "there is no reason why this should not happen, there 
is no logical necessity that this should not be possible", etc., has 
never been encountered in philosophy, at least up to now. In this 
way the Chinese and Otaheitan* religions can also be deduced out 
of the "unpremeditatable being", and that, too, is justified since 
they are just as much facts as Christianity. But as for the newly-
discovered world law that everything must become clear, it cannot 
be denied that here at least very little becomes clear and very much 
remains hidden. Here we only see clarity of thought sink into the 
dark abyss of fantasy. But if that law means that everything must 
justify itself to reason for its existence, then this again is one of 
Hegel's basic thoughts and, moreover, it is not applied by 
Schelling  himself.  Considerable time may still be spent in a vain 
endeavour to bring the conclusion of the above presentation with 
its "can", "must", and "should" to a point where everything 
becomes clear. Above all, we must ask: In what relation do the 
three positive powers stand to the three negative ones? Only one 
thing becomes clear, that they are indeed possibilities which should 
be, but not possibilities which, being able to be, must be. 
This "most thoroughgoing" dialectic, Schelling maintains, alone 
makes it possible to advance from Spinoza's necessarily-existing 
actu to the necessarily-being natura sua. For this is all he could 
have wanted to do, since he did not want to prove the existence of 
the divine, but only the divinity of that which exists (Young 
Hegelian philosophy does precisely the same), namely, the divinity 
of that which exists actu, eternally, of  itself.  But who then will 
prove to us that anything exists from eternity? That which is actu, 
" Otaheite — former name of the island of Tahiti.— Ed. 

=====第245页=====
Schelling and Revelation 223 
of itself,  can only lead to the eternity of matter, if one argues 
logically. And illogical conclusions have no validity, even if 
revelation agrees with them. 
"If, in accordance with a weak dialectic, we were to say: God only assumes the 
power of the opposed being so as to transform the blind affirmation of His 
existence into one mediated by negation, the question is why does He do so? Not 
for His own sake, for He knows His might; only for the sake of others can He 
make the being which differs from Himself into the object of volition. Only in this 
being-away-from-Himself lies God's essence, His beatitude; all His thoughts are 
only outside  Himself,  in creation. Thus it is, indeed, a process of suspension and 
restoration, but in between there lies the whole world." 
How ridiculous is here the arrogance with which this caricature 
of a most thoroughgoing dialectic looks down upon its "weak" 
original! It has not even understood it sufficiently to present it 
correctly. According to Schelling, even Hegel thinks in this 
speculative manner; Schelling makes him reason something like 
this: Here is God. He creates the world. It negates Him. Why? 
Because it is evil? God forbid, only because it exists. It takes up all 
space for  itself,  and God, who does not know where to turn, finds 
Himself compelled to negate it again. Then He must destroy it, of 
course. The profundity, however, according to which the negation 
necessarily follows from what exists yet only in  itself,  as the 
unfolding of the innermost essence, as the awakener of conscious­
ness,  until in its supreme activity it must negate itself again out of 
itself and brings forth as product the developed, that which stays 
with itself,  the free—of that Schelling can have no idea, for his 
God is free, i.e., acting arbitrarily. 
God or the unpremeditatable being has now posited the world 
or the contrary being. This exists only in God's will and depends 
on it. His justice does not allow it to be destroyed in one blow for 
the sake of His restoration, for the contrary being now has, as it 
were, a right, a will independent of God. Hence it is brought back 
through the two last powers, gradually and according to a 
principle which determines the stages of the process. If then the 
first power was the cause which started the whole movement and 
the cause of the contrary being, the second was the one posited ex 
actu, which, realising itself by overcoming the first and acting on 
the contrary being, subjected this to the third power, so that the 
contrary being stepped between the three powers as a concrete 
thing. These now prove to be: causa materialis, ex qua; causa effi­
cient, per quam; causa finalis, in quam (secundum quam) omnia fiunt* 
a Material cause from which, efficient cause through which, final cause in 
conformity with which (according to which) everything happens.— Ed. 

=====第246页=====
224 Frederick Engels 
If now unpremeditatable being is a condition of divinity, so with 
the creation God exists as such, as lord of being who has it in His 
power to realise or not to realise those possibilities. He remains 
outside the whole process and goes beyond that triad of causes as 
causa causarum. So as not to make the world appear as an emana­
tion of His essence, it was for God to try all possible positions of 
the powers relative to one another, i.e., to let the future world 
pass before Him as in a vision. For mere omnipotence and omni­
science does not ensure this by  itself,  but the works are present 
as visions of the creator. Hence that primeval power, that prime 
cause of the contrary being, has always been specially glorified; 
it is the Indian Maja (akin to the German Macht, power), which 
spreads out the nets of mere appearance so as to move the 
creator to real creation, like Fortuna primigenia at Praeneste. 125 
I will not add a word so as not to rub off the mystic butterfly 
dust of this vision. 
Now it cannot be proved a priori that God really creates, it is 
explained by the sole need which can be attributed to God, the 
need to be known, which is precisely a quality most inherent in the 
noblest natures. The God of creation is not just the single God, 
but the single God in a plurality, and since this plurality (these 
powers) is self-contained, the creator is the All-One, and this is 
monotheism. Since He precedes everything He can have no equal, 
for powerless being is  capable  of absolutely nothing [kann überhaupt 
nicht](!). God, of whom it is said only in passing that He is the sole 
one, is merely the God of the theists; monotheism demands the 
soleness without which God is not God, while theism stops at 
infinite substance. The advance from here to that which is God in 
relation to things is pantheism; in it, the things are determinants 
of God. Only monotheism contains God as the real, living God, 
where the unity of substance has disappeared in the power and 
has been replaced by a supersubstantial unity, so that God is the 
unconquerable One against three. Though several, they are not 
several gods, but only one God, not several in divinity. Monotheism 
and pantheism are thus advances over theism, which is the last 
expression of the absolute in negative philosophy. In monotheism 
there is the transition to Christianity, for the singleness finds its 
definite expression in the Trinity. 
However much one may try to grasp this Trinity, there always 
remain three against one, one against three. If God is the unity of 
three, He can be so only as a fourth, or else there remain three 
gods.  If only divinity is their unity, then humanity is likewise the 
unity of all human beings and just as we have only one God, so we 

=====第247页=====
Schelling and Revelation 225 
have only one human being. But the many can no more be done 
away with than the three, and three persons will never make one. 
The old contradiction of the Trinity lies bare, and we are amazed 
at Schelling's boldness in claiming it has been solved. That only 
the Trinity is the true expression of unity is again taken from 
Hegel, but as usual made shallow to the point of sheer emptiness. 
With Hegel the Trinity remains a succession of the stages of God's 
development, if one insists on having a god in his system. Here, 
however, the three moments are conceived as standing side by side 
as personalities, and the original proposition is advanced that the 
true personality of one person is that it is three persons. 
Up to now we have indeed only the one person, the Father. For 
if a prior being removes from itself something belonging to it, so 
that the latter necessarily realises  itself,  this is rightly called pro­
creation. If now in this process of realisation the contrary being 
(B) is actually overcome, the second power, like the first, is master 
over it, and hence the divinity of the Son is equal to that of the 
Father. So,  too,*  the third power, which, as essence free of being, 
can only return into being after overcoming B, but then has the 
same glory and personality as the first two and appears as the 
Holy Ghost. So in the end there are three personalities, but not 
three gods, since being is one, and hence also the glory of it is 
only one (as though the two Spartan kings, because their rule was 
one, had been only one king!). In the powers, while they are in 
tension, we only see the natural side of the process ("tension" 
appears to be the process of negative philosophy) as the genesis 
of the world; only with the persons is there opened up the world 
of the divine and the divine significance of that process in which 
being, originally as possibility in the Father, is given to the Son and 
by him returned to the Father as overcome. Besides being given 
to the Son, it is also given to the Holy Ghost, by Father and Son, 
and it has only that being which is common to them both. The 
tension of the powers pervades all nature, and is present in a 
certain proportion in everything. Everything that arises is a fourth 
between the powers, but man, in whom the tension becomes fully 
resolved, already has a relationship to the personalities as such, 
for in him that last moment of realisation is expressed in which 
the powers become real personalities. This process, then, is a process 
of creation for things, and a théogonie process for the personalities. 
Thus,  out of the abyss of unpremeditatable being Schelling has 
conjured up for us into the light of day not only the personal but 
also the triune God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, though the third 
has indeed only been accommodated with difficulty, and then the 

=====第248页=====
226 Frederick Engels 
arbitrarily created world, dependent on arbitrariness and there­
fore hollow and void; and he has thus the basis of Christianity. It 
cannot be my intention to show up one by one the inconsistencies, 
the arbitrary judgments, the rash claims, the gaps, leaps, assump­
tions and confusions of which Schelling is guilty here; if things 
were already bad enough in the necessary thinking, in the free 
thinking one must reckon with an even greater confusion of 
scholasticism and mysticism — that is the essence of neo-
Schellingianism. The reader can neither demand such superhu­
man patience of me, nor I of the reader such interest in the 
matter. Moreover, what lies on the surface does not first have to 
be uncovered. My purpose is merely to follow the train of thought 
in general, only to show how between Hegel and Schelling 
precisely the opposite occurs of what Schelling affirms. Now, on 
the ground of Christianity, we can let the facts speak for 
themselves even more. Firstly, Schelling declares his inability to 
understand the world insofar as he is unable to understand evil. 
Man could, or could not, remain in God; that he did not do so was 
an act of free will on his part. He thereby put himself in God's 
place and, where everything seemed ordered, jeopardised every­
thing again. Separated from God, the world was exposed to 
externals, and the element in an ordered system [Moment] lost its 
position as such. The Father was "as it were" pushed out of his 
place (later, the "as it were" is omitted). 
But the Christian Trinity was still not there, and the Son's will, 
his own, independent of the Father's, was not yet pronounced. But 
now, at the end of the creation, there appears something new, the 
B which possesses itself in Man. He can choose whether to be or 
not to be one with God. He does not want to be and thereby 
pushes the superior power back into potentiality, which now, 
separated from the Father by the will of Man, is as much the Son 
of Man as the Son of God (this is the significance of the expression 
in the New Testament) and has a being both divine and 
extra-divine. Now the superior power can follow being into extra-
divinity and lead it back to God. The Father is now turned away 
from the world and no longer acts in it with his will but with his 
unwillingness (this is the true significance of the wrath of God). So 
the Father did not destroy the evil world, but preserved it in view 
of the Son, as it is written. In him, i. e., in view of him, all things 
are made. So we have here two periods: the age of the Father, 
where being (the world) still lay in the Father as power and the 
Son was not yet independent, and the age of the Son, the time of 
the world, whose history is that of the Son. This age again has two 

=====第249页=====
Schelling and Revelation 227 
periods; in the first man is entirely under the sway of the contrary 
being, the B, the cosmic powers. Here the Son is in the state of 
negation, of the deepest suffering, of passivity, at first excluded 
from being (i. e., from the world), unfree, outside human 
consciousness. It can only work in a natural way towards the 
conquest of being. This is the time of the old covenant, where the 
Son strives for dominion over being not according to his will, but 
according to his nature. So far this significance of that time has 
been missed in science, nobody has grasped it yet. It is most 
definitely indicated in the Old Testament, namely, in Chapter 53 
of Isaiah, which speaks of the present suffering of the Messiah. The 
second period only begins with the strengthening of the second 
power, with the achievement of dominion over being, when it 
acts freely and with will. This is the time of its appearance in 
Christ, the time of revelation. This is the key to Christianity; with 
this Ariadne's thread it is possible "to find the way through the 
labyrinth of my trains of thought".— Through the rebellion of 
man the personalities that arose through the overcoming of B in 
creation become again mere possibilities, pushed back into poten­
tiality and excluded from consciousness, posited outside God. 
Here now is the cause of a new process which takes place in the 
consciousness of man and from which the divinity is excluded, for 
in their tension the powers are extra-divine. This process of the 
subjugation of consciousness to the dominion of the powers took 
place in paganism as mythological development. The deeper 
historical precondition of revelation is mythology. We must now 
trace in the philosophy of mythology the individual powers in the 
mythological consciousness and the consciousness of them in the 
Greek mysteries. 
The question arises whether this influence of man on the 
self-development of God — for it can only be called that—which 
Schelling affirms, is Christian? For the Christian God is one who 
has been complete from all eternity, whose composure suffers no 
change even through the Son's temporary life on earth. In 
general, according to Schelling the creation ends ignominiously. 
The house of cards of the "intermediate powers, the relatively 
being and able to be", has no sooner been built and the three 
powers are on the point of becoming personalities than stupid 
man plays a silly trick and all the ingenious architectonics come 
tumbling down and the powers remain powers as before. It is just 
as in the fairy-tale, where a treasure, surrounded by brightly 
shining phantoms, is conjured up from the depths; already the 
coveted treasure is seen rising over the edge of the abyss — then a 

=====第250页=====
228 Frederick Engels 
rash word is spoken, the phantoms dissolve, the treasure sinks and 
the depths close over it forever. Schelling's God could have done 
His job a little more cleverly, and He would then have saved 
Himself much trouble and us the philosophy of revelation. 
Schelling's mysticism, however, comes to its finest flowering in the 
Son's state of suffering. This obscure, mysterious relationship of 
divine extra-divinity, conscious unconsciousness, active inactivity, 
unwilling will, this spate of crowding contradictions is for Schelling 
indeed a priceless gold-mine of conclusions, for anything can be 
derived from it. Still more unclear is the relationship of this power 
to man's consciousness. All powers here act as cosmic, natural 
powers, but how? What are cosmic powers? Not a single one of 
Schelling's pupils, not even Schelling  himself,  can give a rational 
answer. This is again one of those confused, mystical thought-
categories in which he has to take refuge in order to arrive, even 
"with free, self-determined thinking", at revelation. 
"The mythological concepts cannot be explained in any other way than as the 
necessary product of consciousness which has fallen under the sway of the cosmic 
powers." 
But the cosmic powers are the divine powers in their state of 
tension, the divine as non-divine. In this way, then, we are to 
explain also the relation of mythology to nature, to obtain entirely 
new facts and to supply a content to the prehistoric period of 
mankind, namely, by the "immense agitation of the mind and 
heart in begetting concepts of gods". 
We can spare ourselves the presentation of the "philosophy of 
mythology" since it is not directly part of the philosophy of 
revelation and, moreover, Schelling will treat of it in greater detail 
next term. This part of the lectures, incidentally, was by far the 
best and contains much that should not be rejected — once it is 
freed from the mystical, distorting outlook — even by him who 
considers these phases of consciousness from a free, purely human 
standpoint. The question is only how far this is really Schelling's 
property, and whether it does not in fact originate with Stuhr. 
The chief fault of Schelling's presentation is that he does not 
conceive the mythological process as the free self-development of 
consciousness within world-historic necessity, but constantly in­
troduces superhuman principles and forces, and does so in the 
most confused manner, so that these powers are at one and 
the same time the "substance of consciousness" and yet again 
something more. Resort to such means becomes indeed necessary 
once absolutely superhuman influences are stipulated. So I gladly 
concede to Schelling his main results of mythology in relation to 

=====第251页=====
Schelling and Revelation 229 
Christianity, only in a different way, inasmuch as I understand 
both phenomena not as having been brought into consciousness 
from outside, supernaturally, but as innermost products of consci­
ousness, as purely human and natural. 
Now at last we arrive at the revelation, prepared by mythology. 
This is Christianity as a whole. Hence its philosophy does not have 
to be concerned with dogma, etc.; it does not itself intend to 
establish a doctrine, but only to explain the historical fact of 
Christianity. We shall see, however, how the whole dogmatic 
system gradually emerges. We shall see how Schelling regards 
"Christianity only as a fact, as also paganism". The facts of 
paganism, as they appeared, he did not regard as true; he did not 
take Dionysus, for instance, for a real God; those of Christianity, 
by contrast, are to him absolute; when Christ declares himself the 
Messiah, when Paul claims this or that, Schelling believes him 
unconditionally. Schelling explained the mythological facts, at least 
in his own fashion; those of Christianity he asserts. And with all 
this he flatters himself 
"to have won the love of youth by his straightforwardness and frankness, nay, 
not only its love, but also its enthusiasm". 
In order to explain revelation he proceeds from a passage in 
Paul's Epistle to the Philippians, Ch. 2: 6-8, which I here quote: 
"[Christ Jesus], being in the form of God [Iv ftopipîj  öeoö],  thought it not 
robbery [äpjKryfxa] to be equal with God: But made himself of no reputation 
[ixeVQXJe],  and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness 
of men: And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled  himself,  and became 
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross." 
Without entering into the extensive exegetical discussions with 
which Schelling accompanied his philosophical explanation I will 
here merely recount in Schelling's own manner the fact told by 
Paul. In his state of suffering Christ had gradually become master 
of consciousness through the mythological process. He posses­
sed his own world independently of the Father and could do 
with it what he wished. He was the God of the world, but not 
the absolute God. He could persist in this extra-divine-divine 
state.  Paul calls this: being in the form of God, ivnopcfj deoö. But 
he did not want this. He became man, divested himself of his 
glory to surrender it to the Father and thus to unite the world 
with God. Had he not done so, there would no longer have been 
any possibility for the world to unite with God. This is the true 
significance of Christ's obedience. The story of the temptation is 
also to be explained in this sense. The adversary, the blind cosmic 
principle, has been brought to the point where he offers his realm 

=====第252页=====
230 Frederick Engels 
to Christ, if he will worship him, i. e., will himself remain cosmic 
power, iv fiopcpîj deoû. Christ, however, rejects this possibility and 
surrenders his being to the Father by making it creature-like and 
becoming man. 
"God preserve me from deducing as Christian philosophical 
doctrines of which Christianity knows nothing," Schelling con­
cluded this deduction. To dispute about the Christianity of these 
doctrines would be a luxury, for even if it were proved, nothing 
would yet be gained for Schelling. In my view, however, they 
contradict the entire basic outlook of Christianity. It is no great art 
to prove the most abnormal thing by single passages from the 
Bible, but this is in no way the point here. Christianity is nearly 
two thousand years old and has had time enough to come to  itself. 
Its content is expressed in the church, and it is impossible that any 
other positive content of significance is still concealed in it, or that 
its true meaning has only now been understood. In any case it 
would now be too late. But apart from that, there is still enough 
that is edifying in the above explanation. Was it a free act of 
Christ to surrender himself to the Father? Impossible, it was a 
natural necessity. We cannot stipulate the possibility of evil in 
Christ without destroying his divinity. He who can do evil can 
never become God. How in any case can one become God? But 
supposing now that Christ had kept the world for himself? One 
cannot imagine so absurd, comical a state of affairs as that which 
would have resulted. Here is Christ living gloriously and joyfully 
in his beautiful world, the flower of Hellenism in heaven and on 
earth, and there is the old God, lonely and childless, grieving over 
the failure of the trick against the world. The main fault of 
Schelling's God is that He has more luck than intelligence. 
Everything went well in fact, but it could have turned out very 
differently. Altogether, Schelling's doctrine of God is thoroughly 
anthropopathic. If the devil had offered the dominion of the 
world to Christ before he became man, he would at least have had 
the prospect of winning him, and who knows what would have 
happened; but once Christ had become man he had thereby 
already entered into his submission to God, and all hope was lost 
for the poor devil. Besides, had not Christ already gained the 
dominion of the world in the mythological process; what then 
could the devil still offer him? 
Herewith the gist of what Schelling says in explanation of 
Christianity has been given. The rest consists partly of quotations 
and their interpretations, partly of detailed analysis of the deduc­
tions.  Of these I will give the more important. 

=====第253页=====
Schelling and Revelation 231 
According to the earlier doctrine of the succession of the powers 
in the dominion of the world, it can be explained how each time 
the dominating power is the herald of the next. Thus in the Old 
Testament the Father prophesies the Son, in the New, the Son 
prophesies the Spirit. In the prophetic books this is reversed, and 
the third power foretells the second. Here a progression of the 
powers with time is now revealed, in particular in the "Jehovah of 
Malachi", the "Angel of the Lord" who, although not directly the 
second person, is yet the second power, the cause of the appear­
ance of the second power in B. He is a different one at different 
times,  so that the age of each book can be judged by the manner 
of his appearance, and thus from the progression of the powers 
the most "amazing" results can be achieved, surpassing everything 
yet accomplished by criticism. This determinant is "the key to the 
Old Testament from which the reality of the concepts of the Old 
Testament is to be demonstrated in their relative truth". 
The Old Testament has its basis and its premises in common 
with paganism. Hence the pagan element in so many Mosaic 
customs. Thus circumcision is evidently merely a milder form of 
castration, which plays such a great part in the most ancient 
paganism and mimically and symbolically represents the conquest 
of Uranus, the oldest God, by the subsequent stage. So also the 
food taboos, the institution of the Tabernacle, which recalls 
Egyptian sanctuaries just as the Ark of the Covenant recalls the 
sacred chest of the Phoenicians and Egyptians. 
The appearance of Christ is not accidental, but predestined. 
The Roman era was the dissolution of mythology, for it absorbed 
into itself all religious concepts of the world even to the oldest 
Oriental religions without itself offering any new elements, and 
thus showed that it was incapable of producing anything new. At 
the same time, there arose out of the emptiness of these moribund 
forms a presentiment that something new must come. The world 
remained still and awaited the things to come. From this outward 
Roman world empire, from this destruction of the nations, there 
arose the inner kingdom of God. When the time was fulfilled, God 
sent his Son. 
Christ, divesting himself of iiop<pü Oeoü, the extra-divine being 
as divine, became man, thereby exercising most brightly and 
brilliantly the divinity which continued in him. That Christ became 
poor for our sakes does not mean his parting with his divinity, the 
non-usus of the latter, but the discarding of the nopcp-rj ôeoô, 
the form of God. The divine essence remains in him. Only he could 
mediate, because he was from God and in human consciousness. 

=====第254页=====
232 Frederick Engels 
Through his effect on paganism and Judaism the principle which 
hampered mankind and might possibly have negated it was not 
negated; only the symptoms, not the cause of the disease, were 
removed by the repeated sacrifices. The ill will of the Father 
could only be overcome by another will, stronger than it, than 
death, than any other will. No physical, only the moral overcoming 
of this will was admissible, and that through the greatest voluntary 
submission of the mediator in place of man. Man's greatest 
voluntary submission was never wholly voluntary, that of the 
mediator, however, was free, without his will or his guilt free over 
against God. Hence the process through paganism so that the 
mediator could appear as the representative of consciousness. The 
taking of this decision was the greatest marvel of the divine mind. 
The physical side of the incarnation can, of course, not be made 
clear down to the smallest detail. The material possibility for this 
lies in  himself.  To be material means to serve as substance to a 
superior power, to be subject to it. When Christ thus submits to 
God, he becomes material over against Him. But only as a 
creature has he the right to be outside God. So he must become 
man. That which in the beginning was with God, and which 
dominated consciousness in paganism in the form of God, is given 
birth in Bethlehem as a man by a woman. The reconciliation had 
always been only subjective, hence subjective facts were sufficient. 
But here it was necessary to overcome the ill will of the Father, 
and this could only be achieved by an objective fact, the incarna­
tion. 
With this the third power now enters as mediating personality. 
Christ is conceived of, i. e., by the power of, the Holy Ghost, but is 
not his Son. The demiurgic function passes over to the third 
power; its first manifestation is the material man Jesus. The 
second power is substance, the third that which gives it form. The 
process in question is extraordinary, materially inconceivable, but 
it can be grasped by a loftier comprehension. Christ took the 
substance of the incarnation from  himself.  This first form, the 
nature of which does not further concern us here, was received 
into the organic process of the mother. To ask more questions 
would be more than micrology. 
When God works anywhere with His will, that is a miracle. In 
nature nothing has will. Neither has Christ. The demiurgic 
function belongs to him natura sua, without his will, hence he 
cannot discard it when he is man; here this function becomes the 
guide of his will. It depends on the will of the Father that the Son 
with his will is in nature, hence the Son works the miracles by 

=====第255页=====
Schelling and Revelation 233 
virtue of the Father. He who reads the New Testament after these 
lectures, will find there much that he has not previously seen. 
The death of Christ had been decided even before the incarna­
tion and approved by Christ and Father. It was then no accident, 
but a sacrifice demanded by the divine mind. It was necessary in 
order to deprive the evil principle of all its might, to overcome it 
in its power. Only the mediating power could achieve this, but 
not by counterposing itself as a purely natural power to the 
former. But since God Himself desired that principle to be 
overcome, the second power had to submit to it. For in the eyes of 
God the second power, being natural, is worth no more than that 
which negates God, even if it did not become natural through its 
own fault, but through the fault of man. This last circumstance 
also gives it a certain right thus to be outside God. God is so just 
that He does not unilaterally annul the opposing principle, nay, 
He is so human that He loves this basically merely accidental 
element which gave Him the possibility to be as God more than 
He loves the necessary element, the power out of  Himself.  He is as 
much the God of the contrary principle as that of the second 
power. This is His nature, which stands even above His will. This 
singleness of all principles is His divine majesty and this does not 
allow that principle to be unilaterally broken. If it is to be 
annulled, it is necessary for the second power to precede it and in 
its extra-divine being to submit to God completely. Here the 
incarnation could not yet suffice. Immediately after the Fall, 
Christ followed man into estrangement from God and placed him­
self between the world and God. By taking up a position on the side 
of the contrary principle, he opposed the Father, came into tension 
with him, shared the guilt of that being and as guiltlessly guilty, as 
guarantor of the being estranged from God, had to suffer the 
punishment. Christ atoned in death for thus placing himself on a 
level with the contrary principle by taking upon himself the sins of 
the world. This is the reason for his death. Other men indeed die 
too, but he died a very different death from theirs. This death is a 
miracle which we would not dare believe at all were it not so 
certain. All humanity was present in its representatives at his 
death: Jews and pagans attended it. The principle of the pagans 
had to die the death of the pagans, the death on the cross —in 
this, of course, nothing special is to be seen. The crucifixion was 
the solution of the prolonged tension3 in which Christ had found 
a In the German text there is a pun on the words Ausspannung (stretching out) 
and Spannung (tension).— Ed. 
9-384 

=====第256页=====
234 Frederick Engels 
himself in paganism, as it is written that by death he was relieved 
of the judgment and the fear (i. e., the tension). This is the great 
secret which to this day is a scandal to the Jews (the moralists) and 
a folly to the pagans (the merely rational). 
The resurrection of Christ has always been regarded as a 
guarantee of personal immortality. On this teaching, apart from 
the resurrection of Christ, the following must be remarked. In this 
life nature dominates spirit, and it therefore presupposes another, 
in which this state of affairs is compensated for by the domination 
of spirit over nature, and a third and last in which the two 
elements balance each other and are in harmony. So far 
philosophy has had no satisfying purpose for immortality; here, in 
Christianity, it is given. 
The resurrection of Christ is itself proof of the irrevocability of 
his incarnation. In it human being is again accepted by God. Not 
any single deed of man displeased God, but the entire condition in 
which man found  himself,  and therefore also the individual, even 
before he had sinned. Hence no human will, no deed could be 
really good until the Father was reconciled. In Christ's resurrec­
tion this condition is acknowledged by God, joy is restored to the 
world. Hence the justification was only completed in the resurrec­
tion inasmuch as Christ was not dissolved in the universe but sits as 
man on God's right hand. The resurrection is a stroke of lightning 
from inner history to outer. Whoever takes it away has only the 
external without divine content, without that transcendental which 
alone turns history into history; he has a mere fact of memory 
and stands there like the great mass before the events of the 
day whose inner workings are unknown to him. Moreover, he 
goes to hell, i. e., "the moment of dying stretches for him into 
eternity". 
In the end, the Holy Ghost comes and concludes all. He can 
only descend after the Father is completely reconciled and his 
coming is the sign that this has taken place. 
Here Schelling interpolated his judgment on the latest criticism 
since Strauss. It had never been able, he said, to tempt him into 
any sort of polemic, as he had proved by always giving these 
lectures in the same way, without additions, since 1831. He dated 
the philosophy of mythology even farther back. Then he spoke of 
the "trivial, eminently philistine mind" of these people, of their 
"schoolboyish treatment of incomplete propositions", of the "im­
potence of their philosophy", etc. By contrast, he had nothing to 
say against pietism and purely subjective Christianity, except that 
it was not the only kind nor the highest. 

=====第257页=====
Schelling and Revelation 235 
Shall I also give excerpts from the satanology? The devil is 
neither personal nor impersonal, he is a power; the evil angels are 
powers, they are such as should not be.but were posited by the fall 
of man; the good angels are also powers, they are such as should 
be and through the fall of man are not. That is enough for the 
present. 
The church and its history have developed from the three 
apostles Peter, James (with his successor Paul) and John. Neander 
is of the same view. The Catholic Church, the conservative, the 
Jewishly-formal, is that of Peter, the Protestant that of Paul, and 
the third, still to be expected and presumably prepared by 
Schelling, that of John, who combines in himself the simplicity of 
Peter with the dialectical acumen of Paul. Peter represents the 
Father, Paul the Son, John the Holy Ghost. 
"To those whom the Lord loves he gives the task of completion. If I had to 
build a church, I would build it for St. John. Some day, however, a common 
church will be built for all three apostles, and that will be the true Christian 
pantheon." 
That is the main content of Schelling's lectures, as far as it could 
be made out by comparing three notebooks. I am conscious of 
having proceeded with the greatest sincerity and candour. Here 
we have the entire dogma: the Trinity, the creation from nothing, 
the fall of man, original sin and the impotence to do good, the 
reconciliation through the death of Christ, the resurrection, the 
descent of the Holy Ghost, the community of the Saints, the 
resurrection of the dead and eternal life. Thus Schelling himself 
negates the separation of fact and dogma which he had stipulated. 
But if we look at the matter more closely, is this Christianity still 
the old one? If you approach it without prejudice you will have to 
say: Yes and No. The irreconcilability of philosophy and Christian­
ity has gone so far that even Schelling falls into a still worse 
contradiction than Hegel. The latter had at least a philosophy, 
even if the outcome was only an apparent Christianity; by contrast, 
what Schelling produces is neither Christianity nor philosophy, 
and his passing it off for both is the measure of his "straight­
forwardness and frankness", of the merit that "to those who asked 
him for bread he gave real bread, not a stone, while saying it was 
bread".  That Schelling does not know himself in the least is again 
proved by the speech from which these words are taken. Such a 
doctrine again really brings home to one how weak are the 
foundations on which modern Christianity rests. 
If we once more review this doctrine in its entirety, in addition 
to what has already been said we obtain also the following results 
9* 

=====第258页=====
236 Frederick Engels 
for the definition of the neo-Schellingian manner of thinking. The 
confusion of freedom and arbitrariness is in full flower. God is 
always conceived as acting in a humanly arbitrary fashion. This is 
indeed necessary so long as God is conceived as single, but it is not 
philosophical. Only that freedom is genuine which contains necessi­
ty, nay, which is only the truth, the reasonableness of necessity. 
Therefore Hegel's God cannot now or ever be a single person, 
since everything arbitrary has been removed from Him. Therefore 
when he speaks of God, Schelling has to employ "free" thinking, 
for the necessary thinking of logical inference excludes any kind 
of divine person. The Hegelian dialectic, this mighty, never resting 
driving force of thought, is nothing but the consciousness of 
mankind in pure thinking, the consciousness of the universal, 
Hegel's consciousness of God. Where, as with Hegel, everything 
produces  itself,  a divine personality is superfluous. 
Furthermore, another contradiction is revealed in the division of 
philosophy. If the negative philosophy is without all reference to 
existence, "there is no logical necessity" that it should not also 
contain things which do not occur in the real world. Schelling 
admits this when he says of it that it is not concerned with the 
world, and that if the world agrees with its constructions, this is 
accidental. In this way, however, negative philosophy becomes 
quite empty and hollow, wandering around in the most arbitrary 
possibility and flinging its doors wide open to fantasy. On the 
other hand, however, if it contains only what is real in nature and 
spirit, it, of course, includes reality and the positive philosophy is 
superfluous. This is to be seen also from the other side. Nature 
and spirit are for Schelling all that is rational. God is not rational. 
So here also it is shown that the infinite can only rationally exist in 
reality when it appears as finite, as nature and spirit, and that any 
other-worldly, extra-mundane existence of the infinite must be 
relegated to the realm of abstractions. That particular positive 
philosophy depends entirely on faith, as we have seen, and exists 
only for faith. If now a Jew or Mohammedan accepts Schelling's 
premises in the negative science, he will necessarily also have to 
fashion for himself a Jewish or Mohammedan positive philosophy. 
Indeed, it will differ even for Catholicism and for the Anglican 
Church. All are equally justified, for "it is not dogma that matters, 
but fact". And the so beloved "free" thinking allows everything to 
be construed as absolute. Particularly in Mohammedanism, the 
facts are far better construed than in Christianity. 
So we have come to the end of Schelling's philosophy and can 
only regret that such a man should have become so caught in the 

=====第259页=====
Schelling and Revelation 237 
snares of faith and unfreedom. He was different when he was still 
young. Then there arose from the ferment of his brain forms as 
radiant as Pallas, of which many a one forged to the front also in 
later struggles; then freely and boldly he sailed into the open sea 
of thought toa discover Atlantis, the absolute, whose image he had 
so often seen rising from the distant horizon of the sea like a 
dreamily shimmering fata morgana; then all the fire of youth broke 
from him in flames of enthusiasm; a prophet drunk with God, he 
foretold a new era; carried away by the spirit which came over 
him, he often did not know himself the meaning of his words. He 
tore wide open the doors to philosophising so that the breath of 
nature wafted freshly through the chambers of abstract thought 
and the warm rays of spring fell on the seed of the categories and 
awakened all slumbering forces. But the fire burnt itself out, the 
courage vanished, the fermenting new wine turned into sour 
vinegar before it could become clear wine. The bold ship dancing 
joyfully through the waves turned back and entered the shallow 
haven of faith, ran its. keel so fast into the sand that it is still stuck 
there. There it lies, and nobody recognises in the old, frail wreck 
the old ship which went out with all sails spread and flags flying. 
The sails have long since rotted, the masts are broken, the waves 
pour in through the gaping planks, and every day the tides pile 
up more sand around the keel. 
Let us turn away from this, waste of time. There are finer things 
for us to contemplate. No one will want to show us this wreck and 
claim that it alone is a seaworthy vessel while in another port an 
entire fleet of proud frigates lies at anchor, ready to put out to the 
high seas. Our salvation, our future, lies elsewhere. Hegel is the 
man who opened up a new era of consciousness by completing the 
old. It is curious that just now he is being attacked from two sides, 
by his predecessor Schelling and by his youngest follower Feuer-
bach. When the latter charges Hegel with being stuck deeply in 
the old, he should consider that consciousness of the old is already 
precisely the new, that the old is relegated to history precisely 
when it has been brought completely into consciousness. So Hegel 
is indeed the new as old, the old as new. And so Feuerbach's 
critique of Christianity is a necessary complement to the specula­
tive teaching on religion founded by Hegel. This has reached its 
peak in Strauss, through its own history the dogma dissolves 
objectively in philosophical thought. At the same time Feuerbach 
reduces the religious categories to subjective human relations, and 
a In the pamphlet there is a misprint: und (and) instead of urn (to).— Ed. 

=====第260页=====
238 Frederick Engels 
thereby does not by any means annul the results achieved by 
Strauss, but on the contrary puts them to the real test and in fact 
both come to the same result, that the secret of theology is 
anthropology. 
A fresh morning has dawned, a world-historic morning, like the 
one in which the bright, free, Hellenic consciousness broke out of 
the dusk of the Orient. The sun has risen greeted with smiles by 
sacrificial fires on all the mountain peaks, the sun, whose coming 
was announced in ringing fanfares from every watch-tower, whose 
light mankind was anxiously awaiting. We are awakened from long 
slumber, the nightmare which oppressed us has fled, we rub our 
eyes and look around us in amazement. Everything has changed. 
The world that was so alien to us, nature whose hidden forces 
frightened us like ghosts, how familiar, how homely they now 
are! The world which appeared to us like a prison now shows 
itself in its true form, as a magnificent royal palace in which we all 
go in and out, poor and rich, high and low. Nature opens up 
before us and calls to us: Do not flee from me, I am not depraved, 
I have not fallen away from the truth; come and see, it is your 
own inmost and truest essence which gives also to me the fulness 
of life and the beauty of youth! Heaven has come down to earth, 
its treasures lie scattered like stones on the road-side, whoever de­
sires them has but to pick them up. All confusion, all fear, all divi­
sion has vanished. The world is again a whole, independent and 
free;  it has burst open the doors of its dank cloister, has thrown 
off its sackcloth and chosen the free, pure ether to dwell in. No 
longer does it have to justify itself to unreason, which could not 
grasp it; its splendour and glory, its fulness and strength, its life 
is its justification. He was surely right who eighteen hundred years 
ago divined that the world, the cosmos, would one day push him 
aside, and bade his disciples renounce the world. 
And man, the dearest child of nature, a free man after the long 
battles of youth, returning to his mother after the long estrange­
ment, protecting her against all the phantoms of enemies slain in 
battle, has overcome also the separation from  himself,  the division 
in his own breast. After an inconceivably long age of wrestling and 
striving, the bright day of self-consciousness has risen for him. 
Free and strong he stands there, confident in himself and proud, 
for he has fought the battle of battles, he has overcome himself 
and pressed the crown of freedom on his head. Everything has 
become revealed to him and nothing had the strength to shut 
itself up against him. Only now does true life open to him. What 
formerly he strove towards in obscure presentiment, he now 

=====第261页=====
Schelling and Revelation 239 
attains with complete, free will. What seemed to lie outside him, in 
the hazy distance, he now finds in himself as his own flesh and 
blood. He does not care that he has bought it dearly, with his 
heart's best blood, for the crown was worth the blood; the long time 
of wooing is not lost to him, for the noble, splendid bride whom 
he leads into the chamber has only become the dearer to him for 
it; the jewel, the holy thing he has found after long searching was 
worth many a fruitless quest. And this crown, this bride, this holy 
thing is the self-consciousness of mankind, the new Grail126 round 
whose throne the nations gather in exultation and which makes 
kings of all who submit to it, so that all splendour and might, all 
dominion and power, all the beauty and fulness of this world lie at 
their feet and must yield themselves up for their glorification. 
This is our calling, that we shall become the templars of this Grail, 
gird the sword round our loins for its sake and stake our lives 
joyfully in the last, holy war which will be followed by the thousand-
year reign of freedom. And such is the power of the Idea that he 
who has recognised it cannot cease to speak of its splendour or to 
proclaim its all-conquering might, that in gaiety and good heart he 
gives up all else at its bidding, that he sacrifices body and soul, life 
and property in order that it and it alone shall triumph. He who 
has once beheld it, to whom in the nightly stillness of his little 
room it has once appeared in all its brightness, can never abandon 
it, he must follow where it leads, even to death. For he knows that 
it is stronger than everything in heaven and on earth, that it fights 
its way through against all enemies. And this belief in the 
all-conquering might of the Idea, in the victory of eternal truth, 
this firm confidence that it can never waver or yield, even if the 
whole world were to rise against it, that is the true religion of 
every genuine philosopher, that is the basis of the true positive 
philosophy, the philosophy of world history. This is the supreme 
revelation, that of man to man, in which all negation of criticism is 
positive. This press and storm of nations and heroes over which 
the Idea hovers in eternal peace and at last comes down into the 
midst of the turmoil and becomes its inmost, most living,  self-
conscious soul, that is the source of all salvation and all deliver­
ance;  that is the realm in which each one of us in his place has to 
work and act. The Idea, the self-consciousness of mankind, is that 
wonderful phoenix who builds for himself a funeral pyre out of 
all that is most precious in the world and rises rejuvenated from 
the flames which destroy an old time. 
So let us carry to this phoenix on the funeral pyre all that is 
most dear to us and most beloved, all that was sacred and great 

=====第262页=====
240 Frederick Engels 
for us before we were free! Let us not think any love, any gain, 
any riches too great to sacrifice gladly to the Idea — it will repay us 
everything a thousandfold! Let us fight and bleed, look undis­
mayed into the grim eye of the enemy and hold out to the end! 
Do you see our flags wave from the mountain peaks? Do you see 
the swords of our comrades glinting, the plumes on the helmets 
fluttering? They are coming, they are coming, from all valleys, 
from all heights they are streaming towards us with song and the 
call of trumpets; the day of the great decision, of the battle of the 
nations, is approaching, and victory must be ours! 

=====第263页=====
SCHELLING, PHILOSOPHER IN CHRIST, 
OR THE TRANSFIGURATION 
OF WORLDLY WISDOM 
INTO DIVINE WISDOM 
For Believing Christians Who Do Not 
Know the Language of Philosophy127 

=====第264页=====
Written in early 1842 Printed according to the pamphlet 
First published as an anonymous Published in English for the first 
pamphlet in Berlin in 1842 time 

=====第265页=====
"I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that 
repenteth, more than over ninety and nine just persons, which need no repen­
tance" (Luke 15:7). 
This word of the Lord may easily come to mind when one 
speaks of Schelling; for in him have wonders of God's mercy been 
manifested, so that the name of the Lord should be exalted. For 
He has shown mercy to him as once He showed mercy to Paul, 
who also, before he was converted, went and made havoc of the 
churches and breathed out threat and slaughter against the 
disciples of the Lord. But as he was on his way to Damascus, 
suddenly there shone around him a light from heaven and he fell 
to the earth; but the Lord spake to him and drew him to Him so 
that he became a believer at that very hour, let himself be baptised 
and bore the name of the Lord before all nations and became a 
chosen vessel of the Lord. So also the grace of the Saviour has 
imposed its hand on Schelling, and when the time had come a 
great light shone for him. For who could ever have foretold 
according to human understanding that the man who at the 
beginning of the century, with his friend of that time, the 
notorious Hegel, laid the foundations of that vile worldly wisdom 
which now no longer prowls in the dark but whose darts spoil at 
midday — that this man would yet take up his cross, and follow 
Christ? But that is how it has come to pass. The Lord, who guides 
the hearts of men like runnels of water, had elected him too in 
His grace and only waited for the right hour to draw him to Him. 
And now He has done so, He has enlightened him and made him 
one of His fighters against unbelief and godlessness. There is no 

=====第266页=====
244 Frederick Engels 
longer any doubt; he himself calls from the rostrum to the 
believers: Come and see, and praise the mercy which the Lord has 
done to me! Nay, the guardian in Israel neither sleeps nor 
slumbers, the old God is still alive, in spite of all the mockers, and 
still gives signs and works wonders for all who want to see. They 
make a clamour, the godless, and say in their hearts, there is no 
God, but He who dwells in heaven laughs at them, and the Lord 
pours scorn on them. He has triumphed over them as long as the 
world has stood and will triumph over them in all eternity. With 
His strong arm He has held His regiment and has awakened 
vessels for Himself in all places to glorify His name. And now He 
has once more brilliantly triumphed over the philosophers who 
have been an abomination to Him at all times, since He has raised 
the best and cleverest of them, the true founder of their doctrine, 
out of their midst and made him His servant. For that formerly 
Schelling himself was most pitiably deep in this so-called pan­
theism,, in this deification of the world and of  himself,  is as clear as 
daylight from his earlier books. He had not yet seen everything 
rightly in its connection and did not rightly know where this road 
would lead. May he thank the Lord that He has taken him from 
this road and guided him along the narrow path which leads to 
heaven, and thereby has proved on him most clearly His might 
over all enemies of faith. Now they can no longer say: Where is 
your God? What does He do? Where does He roam? Why does 
He no longer work wonders? For here He is, His arm strikes 
down like lightning in their own flock and makes fire out of water, 
white out of black, just out of unjust. Who can still deny that this 
is God's hand? 
But that is not all. By calling Schelling the Lord has prepared 
for us another triumph over the ungodly and blasphemous. He 
has elected none other than Schelling since he, being familiar with 
the wisdom of this world, was best suited to refute the proud and 
haughty philosophers, and in His immeasurable grace and love He 
has opened a way for them by which they can come to Him again. 
Can one ask more from Him? To those who curse Him, who rage 
against His existence, who are His most furious, most raving, most 
impenitent enemies, instead of rooting them out from the earth 
and casting them into the deepest abyss of hell, He offers again 
and again a rescuing hand to draw them up to the light out of the 
abyss of corruption wherein they lie; nay, the grace of God is as 
wide as the heaven from sunrise to sunset, and there is no end to 
His mercy. Who could resist such forbearance and love? But their 
hearts are so impenitent and hardened in sin that even now they 

=====第267页=====
Spelling, 
tet ty1>iiofopb in e^vifto« 
ober 
bet SSeUwdSUH  jut iBotteiwel^dt. 
Svx $imbx$t Cljriäflt 
Otrlfn,  19«. 
SBetUg con tt. <?yff«n}at5t. 
Title-page of Engels' pamphlet Schelling, 
Philosopher in Christ 

=====第268页=====

=====第269页=====
Schelling, Philosopher in Christ 247 
reject the hand that wants to save them; so dazzled are they by the 
lusts of this world and the devil of their own pride. They dig for 
themselves wells with holes and scorn the source of life which runs 
in the blood of Christ. They shut their ears against the salvation 
which comes from above, they lust for that which displeases the 
Lord. 
"The shew of their countenance doth witness against them; and they declare 
their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. Woe unto their soul! for they have rewarded 
evil unto themselves" (Isaiah 3:9). 
But still the Lord has not ceased to call them to Him, so that 
they have no excuse. Through Schelling He has shown them how 
weak and vain is human reason. If they are not converted now, it 
is their fault alone, and they cannot say that they did not know the 
Gospel. 
Since now God has done such a great thing and has given such 
a comforting sign to all Christendom that He is close to it and will 
not abandon it in need or in the struggles of this world, so it must 
be near to the heart of every believer to announce the glad tidings 
to his fellow Christians. And since Schelling has now professed his 
belief in Christ in his lectures, this, on the one hand, became 
known to only a few, on the other, is couched in such a difficult, 
artificial, philosophical language that only those can understand it 
who have occupied themselves with worldly wisdom for a long 
time;  in the third place, however, much is meant for philosophers 
and other things for believers, so that the simple Christian would 
have difficulty in finding his way. Hence the writer of these lines, 
not to stand idle in the Lord's vineyard, did not think it entirely 
superfluous to present this in short, simple words, for all those 
who have neither the time nor the inclination to enter into the 
fruitless study of worldly wisdom and yet would like to know what 
there really is to the famous Schelling. May the Lord give His 
blessing to it so that it may prosper to the benefit and advantage 
of His kingdom. 
But first it must be remarked that for all he has done for true 
Christianity, Schelling cannot quite get rid of his old, perverse 
wisdom. He still has various views which make us believe that he 
cannot entirely suppress the arrogance of his own reason and that 
he still hesitates a little to face the world and confess his complete 
conversion in all gladness and gratitude to Christ. We will not 
blame him too much for this; He who made grace break through 
in him so splendidly will wash away these stains too; He who 
began the work will bring it to completion. But let the courageous 

=====第270页=====
248 Frederick Engels 
fighter for truth of whom we speak remember this thorn in his 
flesh when the devil of pride comes over him and tempts him. 
May he put away all pride in his former philosophy, which has 
borne only ungodly children, and only take pride in Him who in 
His free, immeasurable grace has saved him from this corruption. 
The first thing Schelling did here on the rostrum was that he 
immediately and with open visor attacked philosophy and cut away 
its ground, reason, from under its feet. With the most striking 
arguments, taken from its own armouries, he proved that natural 
reason is incapable of proving the existence of even a blade of 
grass;  that all its demonstrations, arguments and conclusions do 
not hold water and cannot lead up to the divine, since in its 
heaviness it always remains prostrate on the earth. Now we have, 
of course, known this for a long time, but the hardened 
philosophers have never been told it so well and clearly. This he 
has done in a whole lengthy system of so-called negative 
philosophy, where he demonstrates to them as clearly as daylight 
that their reason can only comprehend possibilities and nothing 
actual, least of all God and the mysteries of Christianity. The 
trouble to which he went over such a fruitless subject, the airy 
phantoms of worldly wisdom, deserves the highest thanks for the 
sake of the kingdom of God. For so long as these philosophers 
could still presume on their reason, nothing could be done with 
them. Now, however, when they have been convinced from their 
own standpoint that their reason is altogether unfit to cognise 
truth and can bring to the surface only empty, hollow phantoms, 
which have no right whatever to exist, it would really need a 
hardened head, grown grey in sin, to persist in the pagan 
doctrine, and it is quite possible that with the aid of divine grace 
one or the other of them will be converted from his evil ways. It is 
very true and must always be repeated that the darkened reason 
of man is altogether incapable and lacks the fame it should have 
before God, for that is the main bulwark of the unbelievers that 
their reason tells them other things than the word of God. But it is 
an outrage against the Almighty to want to comprehend Him, the 
enemy of all sin, with reason that is stained with sin and blinded, 
nay, to set this reason which is subject to all the lusts of this world, 
all the temptations of Satan, above God  Himself;  and yet that is 
what the worldly wise do when they criticise the word of God with 
that corrupt reason, throw out whatever does not please them, 
nay, lay their wicked hands on and deny not only the holiness of 
the Bible, but even the existence of God Himself so as to make 
themselves God in His place. These are the natural consequences 

=====第271页=====
Schelling, Philosopher in Christ 249 
of setting reason upon the throne of God, like that whore of old 
in the gory days of the French Revolution, and presuming to 
criticise the dispositions of the Almighty Lord of the world. Here 
it is that we must heal, not on the surface, but at the root of the 
evil. Do men put a piece of new cloth unto an old garment? How 
does Christ come to terms with Belial? It is not possible, and it is 
blasphemy to try and grasp by natural reason the Lord's death of 
salvation, the resurrection and the ascension. Then let us set to 
work in earnest with Schelling, and cast reason out of Christianity 
into paganism, for there it belongs, there it can rise against God 
and take as divine the world with its lusts and desires which we 
have renounced, excuse all sins and vices, the abominations of 
gluttony and lasciviousness as virtues and service to God, and 
present as models for mankind the suicide of a Cato, the 
unchastity of a Lais and Aspasia, the parricide of a Brutus, the 
Stoicism and Christian-persecuting rage of a Marcus Aurelius. 
Then, of course, it frankly opposes Christianity and everybody 
knows where he is with it. But it has been a chief stratagem of the 
adversary to smuggle it into Christianity, where it thereupon has 
given birth to such choice bastards as Pelagianism and Socinian-
ism, rationalism 128 and speculative theology. 
"But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise" 
(1 Corinthians  1:27);  hence "the natural man receiveth not the things of the 
Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him and must be spiritually dis­
cerned" (1 Corinthians 2 : 14). 
So it is a truly Christian endeavour when Schelling, in the pure 
science of reason, which is, of course, the negative philosophy, 
deeply humbles and humiliates reason instead of allowing it any 
measure of presumption, so as to bring it to acknowledge its 
weakness and sinfulness and make it turn in penance to grace, for 
only this can sanctify and enlighten it and let it be born again so 
that it becomes capable of knowing God. To crucify reason is 
harder, and therefore more, than to crucify the flesh. For the 
latter is subject to conscience, which has been given even to the 
pagans to restrain their lusts and be the internal judge of their 
sins;  reason, however, raises itself above it and even gets on with it 
quite well, and it is only given to Christians to submit it to the mild 
yoke of faith. But that is what Scripture demands of us, and there 
can be no objections or subterfuges here: either let your reason 
surrender to faith or go over to the left side, to the goats (for the 
worst of these self-worshippers call themselves as in mockery: the 
left side), there you are in your place! 

=====第272页=====
250 Frederick Engels 
With that Schelling has now cleared the ground for  himself.  All 
the survivals of paganism which in our time are being brought out 
again and are supposed to be the new truth, all the misshapen 
abortions of unchaste, lascivious reason have been removed, and 
his hearers are now ready to receive the milk of the Gospel. That 
is the right way. The pagans could be got hold of by their worldly 
lusts and desires; but our philosophers pretend, at least today, that 
they still want to acknowledge Christian morals. Hence, if the 
apostles demanded of the pagans a penitent, sorrowing, battered 
and contrite heart, so a penitent, humble, battered reason must be 
demanded of the proud worldly-wise men of our time before 
they are ready to enjoy the grace of the Gospel. So also Schelling 
could only now really judge his former comrade in godlessness, 
the notorious Hegel. For this Hegel had such a pride in reason that 
he expressly declared it to be God when he saw that with it he 
could not come to another true God, higher than man. Hence also 
Schelling frankly declared that he wanted nothing more to do with 
this man and his doctrine and no longer bothered with him. 
Since reason has now humbled itself and shows the desire to 
accept salvation, it can be exalted again and enlightened by the 
spirit of truth. This happens in positive philosophy, where by a 
free,  that is, enlightened, thinking with the aid of divine revelation 
it is admitted to the grace and favour of Christianity. Now that the 
understanding of the higher world has been opened up to it, it at 
once discerns the whole marvellous connection in the history of the 
kingdom of God, and what formerly was incomprehensible to it is 
now clear and comprehensible as if it could not be otherwise. For 
only the eyes which the Lord has enlightened are true eyes and 
seeing; but where darkness reigns and the lusts and desires of this 
world have their way, nobody can see anything. Schelling expresses 
this effect of grace when he says that this philosophy is only for 
the willing and the wise, and that it finds its proof in revelation. 
Hence this philosophy is not for him who does not believe in 
revelation. In other words, this thing is not a real philosophy at 
all, and this name has only been chosen for the sake of the worldly 
wise,  as it is written: "Be ye therefore wise as serpents, and 
harmless as doves" (Matthew 10:16); for the rest, however, it is a 
right and real Christianity, as we shall soon see. Schelling has 
brought back the good old times when reason surrenders to faith, 
and worldly wisdom, by becoming the handmaid of theology, of 
divine wisdom, is transfigured into divine wisdom. 
"And whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased; and he that shall humble 
himself shall be exalted" (Matthew 23: 12). 

=====第273页=====
Schelling, Philosopher in Christ 251 
Along this road of enlightened thinking the dear man of whom 
we are speaking comes at once to the true fundamental doctrine 
of all Christianity, namely, the Trinity of God. The godfearing 
reader cannot be expected to accompany him on this road, for he 
knows and believes that this road only can lead to truth; this is 
only said for the unbelievers to show them how they can come to 
truth and how much their reason must be purified and sanctified 
to be able to discern and comprehend salvation in Christ Jesus. 
Hence we shall pass over these things which have no value for the 
discernment of salvation by the faithful. Schelling then describes 
according to Scripture how God created the world from nothing 
and how man, seduced by Satan in the shape of the serpent, lost 
his first way of life and became the slave of the Prince of 
Darkness. Thereby he tore the whole world from God and 
brought it into the power of Satan. All the forces which before 
were kept together by divine unity now fell apart and came into 
savage hostility, so that Satan could play havoc in the world to his 
heart's delight. One must not be dazzled by the philosophical 
manner of expression of our theologians. In our ungodly times 
the worldly wise no longer understand the simple language of 
Holy Scripture inspired by God  Himself;  they must be taught in 
their own way until they are again ripe for the understanding of 
the Bible, for it is written: 
"I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these 
things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes" (Matthew 
11:25). 
Hence Schelling calls the "angels which kept not their first estate, 
but left their own habitation" (Jude 6), calls the devil and his 
godless hosts cosmic powers, which means as much as princes of 
this world. Now God can, of course, have no further pleasure in 
the world. In His justice He rejects it, and where He works in it 
He does so in His wrath and without His full free will. But the 
Eternally Merciful cannot let go of it; the word through which "all 
things were made and without which was not any thing made that 
was made" (John 1:3), the only begotten Son of God with his 
immeasurable love and grace remains in the poor, rejected world. 
His state of suffering begins with the fall of man and not just with 
his becoming man under Herod, for with the fall he is completely 
thrust out of mankind, in which he lived still more than the 
Father. Nay, by placing himself between the angry God and the 
fallen world, which the former wanted to destroy, and taking its 
side,  he separated himself from the Father and so was in a sense 

=====第274页=====
252 Frederick Engels 
jointly guilty and could not claim any part of the divine splendour 
so long as the Father was not reconciled. This great work of 
reconciliation, the struggle against the prince of this world, he now 
began in this form, neither divine nor human, in this separation 
from the Father which makes up his suffering and his pain. That 
this interpretation is founded on Holy Scripture is most clearly 
shown in Chapter 53 of the Prophet Isaiah, which speaks of 
a present, not future suffering. This great struggle is now begin­
ning both among the Jews and the pagans. How the Lord 
subjugates the Jews unto Himself is shown in the history of 
the people of Israel in the Old Testament, and the splendid 
guidances by which the Lord led His people are well known to 
Christians. But among the pagans? Was not the devil precisely 
the God of the pagans? We shall try to answer this as clearly 
as possible without deviating from the pronouncements of Holy 
Scripture. 
Everybody will have already heard that among the pagans, too, 
in the books of the Sibyls 129 and elsewhere, there were prophecies 
about Christ. Here we see already that they were not quite so 
forsaken by God as is the usual view, for the prophecies are of 
divine origin. But now this is not enough. Why should the Lord in 
His mercy let them go so far astray and fall into the devil's 
clutches? He lets rain fall on good and evil alike and the sun shine 
on the just and the unjust! Nay, if the pagans had been so entirely 
without God's protection and guidance in the power of the evil 
enemy, would their sins not have been greater and more outra­
geous than they actually were? Would not then all the shameful lusts 
and unnatural desires, the sins of the flesh and other sins, 
murder, adultery, fornication, thieving, roguery, unchastity have 
cried to high heaven so that God would have had to exterminate 
them without hesitation? Nay, would they themselves not have 
slain and devoured each other? It already follows from this that 
God must have had mercy even on the pagans and given them 
some light from above; and this consists in their having been led 
gradually and without noticing it through all stages of idolatry to 
the worship of the true Christ, but without their knowing that 
their God and that of the Christians was one and the same, and 
that He who was hidden in paganism was now revealed in 
Christianity. Now those who failed to realise this when the Gospel 
was preached to them no longer worshipped the hidden Christ, 
since they persecuted the revealed one, but their god was now the 
enemy of Christ, the devil. It is Schelling's great merit that he is 
the first to devote himself to tracing the guidance of God among 

=====第275页=====
Schelling, Philosopher in Christ 253 
the pagans and so prepares new praise of the love of Christ for 
sinful men. 
Since now the Jews consciously and the pagans without knowing 
it and in a false form were brought to the knowledge of the true 
God, when the proud palaces of the Greeks lay in ruins and the 
iron hand of the Roman Emperor lay upon the whole world, the 
time was fulfilled and God sent His Son so that all who believe in 
Him should not perish but have eternal life. This happened in the 
following manner. Since Christ had subjected paganism unto 
himself, he was its God, but not the true God, which he could not 
be without the Father. So he had wrested the world from the devil 
and could do with it what he wished; he could keep it for himself 
and rule over it alone in this form of God; but out of free 
obedience he did not do so, but handed it over to his Father by 
divesting himself of the form of God and becoming man. 
"...Who,  being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God: 
But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and 
was made in the likeness of men: And being found in fashion as a man, he 
humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross" 
(Philippians 2:6-8). 
There are many other passages in Holy Scripture which declare 
this interpretation to be the right one and prove it; moreover, one 
can in this way take everything quite simply and literally, without 
need for a lot of subterfuges and erudition. 
For what is great in Christ's obedience is that the Saviour could 
have possessed the whole world for himself and dissociated 
himself from the Father, and that he did not want this, but laid 
the world he had wrested from the devil at his Father's feet and 
suffered death for the sake of atonement for many. 
Here we also see the meaning of the story of Christ's tempta­
tion. Had it not been in Jesus' free choice to submit or not to 
submit himself to the Father, the devil could not have tempted 
him at all, for he must have known that it would be in vain. Hence 
the above interpretation by Schelling is certainly correct. 
Thus we have heard that Christ is the true God, and now our 
authority passes on to the second nature of the same Christ, the 
human. He also is of the firm belief that Christ was truly a true 
man and not, as many heretics think, a mere apparition or the 
Spirit of God which had descended on an already existing man. 
In representing the world before God, standing surety for it, 
Christ stepped out of God and confronted Him. So long as the 
world was not reconciled again with God, Christ was not God, but 
in a middle state which took the form of God through the 

=====第276页=====
254 Frederick Engels 
conquest of paganism, but was not itself the true state of divinity. 
To put himself back into this, Christ had to hand over to his 
Father the world he had wrested from the devil, divest himself of 
the form of God and submit humbly to the Father, so as to take 
upon himself the punishment for the iniquity of the world. This 
humility he showed by becoming man, born of woman, and being 
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. No purifications 
or sacrifices could reconcile God; they were merely preludes to the 
one great sacrifice in which not only evil was extirpated, but God's 
wrath reconciled. The latter could only be reconciled by the 
greatest, most freely rendered, most humble submission, and that 
could only be done by the Son, not by a man compelled to 
submission by fear and the torment of conscience, the threatening 
wrath of God. Christ could now also represent the people before 
God, since he had become their Lord, their defender, through the 
worship they paid him without knowing it. So as now really to 
bear punishment in place of man, who had deserved it, he became 
man; the decision to become man is a miracle of the divine spirit. 
So he who in the beginning was with God, nay, was God  Himself, 
and after the Fall was in the "form of God", was now born in 
Bethlehem as man, namely, of Mary through the Holy Ghost 
without the agency of any man. 
Who would have dared hope that in the year 1842 a 
philosopher, nay, the founder of the new school of blasphemy, 
would make such a pleasing conversion and acknowledge so gladly 
the main doctrines of Christianity? That which was always the first 
to be attacked by doubt, which half-Christians have always rejected 
and which is nevertheless the corner-stone of the Christian faith, 
the birth of Christ by Mary without the agency of any man — the 
fact that this too has been asserted by Schelling as his conviction, is 
one of the most gratifying signs of the times, and the favourite of 
God who has had the courage to do this has a claim to the 
gratitude of every believer. But who does not recognise here the 
hand of the Lord in this marvellous, wonderful dispensation? Who 
does not see that He is giving a sign to His Church that He has 
not forsaken it and remembers it day and night? 
On the death of the Lord Schelling pronounces himself in a no 
less truly Christian and edifying manner. This is said to have been 
decided from the beginning of the world in the Council of the 
Guardians and to be a sacrifice demanded by the divine spirit. 
God is said to be just even to Satan and so fully to have allowed 
him his rights that He delivered His own Son up to death so that 
all who believed in Him should not perish but should have eternal 

=====第277页=====
Schelling, Philosopher in Christ 255 
life, so that the devil should not have even the slightest grounds 
for saying he had been overthrown by the greater might of God, 
and unjustly. It is the majesty and splendour of the Lord Himself 
which does not tolerate even the least semblance of such a 
blemish. For this reason Christ had to become man and had to 
take upon himself the iniquity of mankind forsaken by God and 
suffer the death on the cross so that through the death of one 
many would come to life. For this reason the Lord in his grace 
and mercy had to sacrifice himself for us, to stand surety for the 
sinners to his Father and to pay our debt, so that we might again 
have access to the throne of grace. The other men also, it is true, 
are one and all delivered over to death, but none has died like the 
Lord, none has suffered such a death of salvation as Jesus Christ. 
And so also this crown of faith, the purification from sin in the 
blood of Christ, is once again marvellously saved from the claws of 
the old dragon who now roams in the form of worldly wisdom 
and the odious spirit of the times, and the Lord has once again 
kept the precious promise that the gates of hell shall not prevail 
against His Church. Further, Schelling says of Christ very beauti­
fully: this death is such a great miracle that we would never dare 
believe it were we not so certain of it. At his death all mankind 
was represented; Jews and pagans were present, and they were the 
two sides of the whole human race. The principle of the pagans, 
as Christ had become in paganism through his struggle with Satan, 
had to die the death of the pagans, the death on the cross. His 
crucifixion is only the resolution of the prolonged tension in which 
he found himself among the pagans, that is, the extra-divine 
position of the Lord was resolved and by death he again became 
one with God, as it is written: 
"He was taken from prison and from judgment: and who shall declare his 
generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living: for the transgression of 
my people was he stricken" (Isaiah 53:8). 
But of the Lord's resurrection Schelling says it was proof that 
Christ had not taken on his humanity for appearance's sake but 
had become man in earnest and forever, and that God had again 
accepted into grace the human form and the human essence, and 
indeed not the humanity in Christ alone, but the whole of 
humanity, of whom Christ had merely been the representative. 
For not the individual sin displeased God so much that He 
therefore had to abandon mankind, the worst was rather the 
whole iniquitous state of all mankind, sold to the evil one, and 
therefore God finds displeasure in man even before he has sinned, 

=====第278页=====
256 Frederick Engels 
so that before God it was equivalent to a sin to be human. Hence 
no goodwill pleasing to God, not a single good deed that was just 
in the eyes of God, could be found in the world before Christ had 
died, and hence even now only believers can do good works and 
be of goodwill. But by the resurrection of the Lord the human 
state is vindicated before God and recognised by God as purified 
from sin, and so the vindication is completed only by the 
resurrection. So Christ has been raised up to heaven and sits on 
the right hand of God the Father as true man and true God, 
representing mankind before the Father. 
The resurrection is further a proof to us of the immortality of 
our own soul and the resurrection of the flesh. Schelling acknowl­
edges this also and adds that if during this life the flesh 
dominates the spirit, then a second must follow, where the spirit 
has overcome the flesh, and finally an equalising of both sides is 
necessary. This accords wholly with the teaching of Scripture, for 
the last state after the resurrection and the Last Judgment, after 
the transfiguration of the body, is nothing but what Schelling calls 
the equilibrium between soul and body. About the condition of the 
impenitent and damned who have passed away in  unbelief, 
hard-heartedness and sin, Schelling offers a surmise too. He holds 
the second, eternal death for an eternal dying without ever being 
able to come to real death. It seems better to refrain from 
pondering over this and to leave it to the Lord to decide how He 
wishes to punish and torment His contemners and blasphemers. 
Finally, the dear Schelling delivers the following priceless tes­
timony to the resurrection of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ: 
This resurrection is a stroke of lightning from inner history to 
outer. Whoever denies such facts, to him the history of the 
kingdom of God remains a mere series of external, accidental 
occurrences without any divine content, without the transcendental 
(which goes beyond reason), which alone is history proper. 
Without it history is merely a matter of superficial memorising, 
not true, complete knowledge of the events.— That is a beautiful 
and Christian word, but the talk of the worldly wise about God 
being in the history and development of the consciousness of the 
species is sheer filth and blasphemy. For if these proud seducers 
of youth have their god in the history of all human sins and 
crimes, how can God remain outside those sins? These mockers 
will not understand that the entire history of the world is a jostling 
succession of all kinds of injustice, malice, murder, adultery, 
fornication, thieving, blasphemy, profanation, anger and rage and 
drunkenness; they would without fail hurl themselves into hell and 

=====第279页=====
Schelling, Philosopher in Christ 257 
the whole world with them if one did not see everywhere the 
saving hand of God, which restrains and prevents the evil; and 
this shameful scene of blasphemy is their heaven, their whole 
immortality, they have said so frankly themselves. But these are 
the fine consequences of casting all divine action out of history. 
God avenges Himself on them by closing their minds against His 
true essence and letting them make a god for themselves who is 
even less than a deaf idol of wood and straw, who is a vague 
phantom of air, a so-called world spirit and spirit of history. We 
have seen what is the outcome of such a view of history, of which 
the chief preacher is that Hegel, who is in evil repute with all good 
Christians; let us hold against that the picture of history outlined 
by a man of God like Schelling. 
Among the Twelve, Schelling says, who were always near the 
Lord and whom He appointed apostles, there were in particular 
three whom he favoured before the others at every opportunity, 
Peter, James and John. In these three the models of the whole 
Christian Church are given if we substitute as successor for James, 
who was earlier killed for the sake of Christ, Paul, who was 
converted at about the same time. Peter, Paul and John are the 
rulers of three different periods of the Christian Church, as in the 
Old Testament Moses, Elijah and John the Baptist were the three 
representatives of three periods. Moses was the lawgiver through 
whom the Lord laid the foundation; Elijah the fiery spirit who 
brought the inert, apostate people back to life and activity; John 
the Baptist was the accomplisher who led the Old Testament into 
the New. So also for the Church of the New Testament, Peter was 
Moses, the founder, through whom the Jewish essence of the 
times was represented in the Christian Church; Paul the driving, 
fiery Elijah who did not let the faithful become lukewarm and fall 
asleep and who represented the essence of paganism, culture, 
learning and worldly wisdom—insofar as it submitted to faith; but 
John will again be the accomplisher, the one who points to the 
future, for to those whom the Lord loves He gives the task of 
completing. So John in his lifetime, already pointing to the future, 
wrote the Revelation. The Church of the apostle Peter is now the 
Catholic Church, whose ceremonial service as well as its teaching 
of good works corresponds to the Jewish Law; and it cannot be 
denied that the word of the Lord: "Thou art Peter, and upon this 
rock I will build my Church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail 
against it",a refers to the Church he founded. As he thrice denied 
a Matthew 16:18.— Ed. 

=====第280页=====
258 Frederick Engels 
the Lord, so it can be shown that the Roman Church thrice denied 
the Lord. First, when it strove for worldly domination, then when 
it used worldly power for its own purposes, and lastly, when it lent 
itself to the worldly power as a means to its ends. The second 
Church, that of the apostle Paul, is now the Protestant Church, in 
which prevail erudition and all godly wisdom, that is, the essential 
spirit of those Christians who came over from paganism, and into 
which, instead of the established permanence of the Catholic 
Church, there enters the driving, partisan life of the Evangelical 
Church, split into many sects. Who knows whether the thoughts 
and aspirations of these pagan Christians will not in the end be 
more beneficial to the kingdom of God than those of the Jewish 
Christians! 
But neither of these two parties is the true, last Church of the 
Lord; this will be only the one which from Peter's foundation will 
penetrate through Paul to John and so prepare the last times. This 
last Church is the Church of love, as John was the messenger of 
love,  the consummation of the Church, in whose times will be the 
great apostasy which has been foretold for the end, to be followed 
by the Last Judgment. Many churches have been built for all the 
apostles, but relatively very few for St. John. If I had to build a 
church I would consecrate it to him; one day, however, a church 
will be built for all three apostles, and this will be the last, the true 
Christian pantheon. 
These are the words with which the first truly Christian 
philosopher concluded his lectures, and so we will have followed 
him to the end. The author of these lines believes that he has 
sufficiently shown what a chosen vessel the Lord has awakened for 
His Church in this worthy man. This is the man who will drive out 
the pagans of the modern world who there pursue their practices 
in many forms, as men of the world, Young Germans,130 
philosophers, and what else they may call themselves. Indeed, 
when one entered the hall where Schelling was lecturing, and 
heard these people mock and make fun of the Elect among the 
worldly wise, one had to think of the apostle Paul when he 
preached in Athens. It is just as if history were repeating  itself,  as 
it is told in The Acts of the Apostles 17:16 ff. where it says the 
following: 
"Now while Paul waited for them at Athens, his spirit was stirred in him, when 
he saw the city wholly given to idolatry. Therefore disputed he in the synagogue 
with the Jews, and with the devout persons, and in the market daily with them that 
met with him. Then certain philosophers of the Epicureans, and of the Stoicks, 
encountered him. And some said, What will this babbler say? other some, He 

=====第281页=====
Schelling, Philosopher in Christ 259 
seemeth to be a setter forth of strange gods: because he preached unto them Jesus, 
and the resurrection." 
Well might Schelling, too, grow angry, here in Berlin, since he 
saw the city so wholly given to idolatry. For where is there more 
worshipping of things of the earth, of Mammon and the honour 
of this world, of one's own dear Ego, and where is the true God 
more thrust aside, than precisely here? Where has the life of the 
world with its opulence, its luxury and its hollow, vain pomp, with 
its glittering vices and embellished sins, reached a higher pitch 
than precisely here? Did not your scholars, your shallow un­
Christian writers wish to flatter you when they compared your city 
so often to Athens? Oh, what bitter truth they told you! Yes, 
Athens, full of pagan, proud culture and civilisation which blinds 
your eyes to the simple truth of the Gospel; Athens, full of 
brilliance and glamour and earthly splendour, full of the life of 
pleasure and comfortable idleness which stretches and yawns on a 
soft bed of dissoluteness and finds the word of the cross much too 
boring and penance much too strenuous; Athens, full of voluptu­
ous, wild ecstasy and intoxication of the senses, in which the loud 
voice of conscience is shouted down and drowned, the inner 
unrest and pain concealed beneath a bright covering. Yes, indeed, 
Athens, full of proud worldly-wise men who rack their brains over 
Being and Nothing and other stale things and have long finished 
with God and the world but who laugh at the word of humility 
and poverty of spirit as a folly and curiosity of past times; Athens, 
full of accomplished scholars who know by heart all the kinds of 
infusoria and all the chapters of Roman Law but forget the eternal 
salvation which is the bliss of the soul. There a Schelling might well 
get angry as once Paul did when he entered such a city. And when 
he arrived there the worldly wise spoke just as once the 
Epicureans and Stoics did in Athens of old: What will this babbler 
say? They already spoke ill of him before he opened his mouth, 
they reviled him even before he entered their city. But let us see 
what Holy Scripture reports further: 
"And they took him, and brought him unto Areopagus, saying, May we know 
what this new doctrine, whereof thou speakest, is? For thou bringest certain strange 
things to our ears: we would know therefore what these things mean. (For all the 
Athenians and strangers which were there spent their time in nothing else, but 
either to tell, or to hear some new thing.)" a 
Now, is that not the Berliners to the very life? Are they not also 
bent on nothing but to hear and see some new thing? Just go into 
your coffee-houses and pastry shops and watch the new Athenians 
a The Acts of the Apostles 17 :  19-21.—  Ed. 

=====第282页=====
260 Frederick Engels 
running after the newspapers while the Bible lies at home 
gathering dust, and nobody opens it; listen when they gather 
together whether their greetings are anything but: What is the 
news? Nothing new? Always something new, always something that 
never happened before, otherwise they are bored to death with all 
their culture, their pomp and their enjoyments. Whom do they 
think amiable, interesting and notable? Him who is most en­
lightened by the Holy Ghost? No, him who always has the most news 
to tell. What worries them most? Whether a sinner has been 
converted, at which the angels of God rejoice? No, what scandals 
have occurred during the night, what has been reported from 
Berlin in the Leipziger Allgemeine Zeitungl Above all the brood of 
vipers of politicians and beer-parlour orators is the worst and most 
obsessed by news. These hypocrites interfere most loudly in the 
government instead of leaving unto the King what is the King's 
and never for a moment do they worry about the salvation of their 
immortal souls; they want to remove the mote from the eye of the 
government, and will not notice the beam in their own, unbeliev­
ing eye which is blind to the love of Christ. These most especially 
are like the Athenians of old, who also spent all day lounging 
around in the market-place and ferreting out news while the old 
truth was lying untouched in their closets. What did they want of 
Schelling but to hear something new, and how they turned up their 
noses when he gave them nothing but the old Gospel! How few 
were they who were not looking all the time for something new, 
but only demanded from Schelling the old truth, the word of 
salvation through Christ Jesus! 
And so it is with the whole of history, as there with Paul so here 
with Schelling. They listened to his sermon with critical faces, now 
and then gave a superior smile, shook their heads, exchanged 
meaningful glances and then looked pityingly at Schelling, "and 
when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked" 
(The Acts of the Apostles 17 : 32). Only a few took his side. For as 
it was in Athens so it is today: the resurrection of the dead is their 
chief stumbling-block. Most of them are honest enough not to 
want to know anything about any immortality; the minority admits 
a very uncertain, vacillating, nebulous immortality of the soul, but 
leaves the body to rot forever, and they are all unanimous in 
scorning the real, definite and open resurrection of the flesh and 
in holding it to be a matter of impossibility, as if it were not 
written: for God nothing is impossible. 
It still remains for us to make one more remark if we return to 
the history of the Church of Christ presented to the believing 

=====第283页=====
Schelling, Philosopher in Christ 261 
reader as it is typified in the three apostles Peter, Paul and John. 
It follows from this that it is a most grievous wrong and a sin 
against the ordinance of God Himself if we, as many do even 
today, were to despise and disparage the Catholic Church in 
comparison with ours. For it is pre-ordained in the divine counsel, 
just as the Protestant Church, and we have much to learn from it. 
The Catholic Church still has the old Apostolic Church discipline, 
which with us has been completely lost. We know from the 
Scriptures that the apostles and the churches expelled from the 
communion of the Holy Ghost unbelievers, false teachers and 
sinners who were a cause of offence to the church. Does not Paul 
say in 1 Corinthians 5 : 3-5: 
"For I verily, as absent in body, but present in spirit, have judged already, as 
though I were present, concerning him that hath so done this deed, in the name of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together, and my spirit, with the 
power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such an one unto Satan for the 
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus." 
Did not Christ say to Peter: 
"And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever 
thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose 
on earth shall be loosed in heaven" (Matthew 16:19). 
Did he not say after the resurrection to all the disciples: 
"Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose soever 
sins ye retain, they are retained" (John 20 :23). 
Such passages in Holy Scripture point to strong church discipline, 
as it flourished in the Apostolic Church and still persists among 
Catholics, and if the Apostolic Church is our model and Holy 
Scripture our guide, we also must endeavour to assert again that 
ancient institution, and considering the fury with which the evil 
enemy today persecutes and attacks the Church of the Lord, we 
would do well to be armed not only inwardly with faith and hope, 
but also outwardly through the strengthening of the community in 
spirit and the expulsion of false prophets. The wolf must not be 
allowed to come among the flock without being driven out again. 
Moreover, the celibacy of Catholic priests is also not to be entirely 
condemned. It is written in Matthew 19:10-12: 
"His disciples say unto him, If the case of the man be so with his wife, it is not 
good to marry. But he said unto them, All men cannot receive this saying, save 
they to whom it is given. For there are some eunuchs, which were so born from 
their mother's womb: and there are some eunuchs, which were made eunuchs of 
men: and there be eunuchs, which have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom 
of heaven's sake. He that is able to receive it, let him receive it." 

=====第284页=====
262 Frederick Engels 
Again, 1 Corinthians 7 deals from beginning to end with the 
advantages of the unmarried over the married state, and I will 
only quote from it a few passages: 
7 :1-2. "It is good for a man not to touch a woman. Nevertheless, to avoid 
fornication, let every man have his own wife, and let every woman have her own 
husband." 
7:8. "I say therefore to the unmarried and widows, It is good for them if they 
abide even as I." 
7:27. "Art thou loosed from a wife? seek not a wife." 
7:32-33.  "He that is unmarried careth for the things that belong to the Lord, 
how he may please the Lord: But he that is married careth for the things that are 
of the world, how he may please his wife." 
7:38 ff. Finally, "he that giveth her in marriage doeth well; but he that giveth 
her not in marriage doeth better. The wife is bound by the law as long as her 
husband liveth; but if her husband be dead, she is at liberty to be married to whom 
she will; only in the Lord. But she is happier if she so abide, after my judgment: 
and I think also that I have the Spirit of God." 
These utterances are surely clear enough, and it is difficult to 
understand how, with such precepts, the single state could come so 
much into disrepute among Protestants. So we see that the 
Catholic Church is in many respects closer to the Scriptures than 
we, and we have no cause to despise it. On the contrary, our 
brethren in the Catholic Church, insofar as they are believing and 
godfearing, are closer to us than the apostate and un-Christian 
Protestants, and it is time for us to begin to prepare the Church of 
John by uniting with the Catholics against the common foes who 
threaten the whole of Christendom. It is no longer the time to 
quarrel over the differences between the various denominations, 
we must leave that to the Lord, since we humans have been un­
able here to reach clarity in three hundred years; we must watch 
and pray and be prepared always, 
"having our loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate of 
righteousness; And our feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace; 
Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith we shall be able to quench all the 
fiery darts of the wicked. And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the 
Spirit, which is the word of God" (Ephesians 6:14-17). For the times are evil, and 
"the adversary ... as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour" 
(1 Peter 5:8). 
And if the author may be allowed to express his humble opinion 
where so many godly and enlightened men could speak, then he is 
of the opinion that the Church of John, and with it the last days, 
are at the door. Who has watched the events of the last years with 
These quotations are slightly modified.— Ed. 

=====第285页=====
Schelling, Philosopher in Christ 263 
the Lord in view and has not noticed that great things are 
approaching and the hand of the Lord commands the affairs of 
kings and countries! Since the dreadful French Revolution a 
wholly new, devilish spirit has entered a great part of mankind 
and godlessness raises its insolent head so impudently and proudly 
that one is forced to think the prophecies of Scripture are about to 
be fulfilled. But let us see again what Scripture says about the 
godlessness of the last times. The Lord Jesus says in Matthew 
24:11-14: 
"And many false prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many. And because 
iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold. But he that shall endure 
unto the end, the same shall be saved. And this gospel of the kingdom shall be 
preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end 
come." And in 24: "For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall 
shew great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it were possible, they shall deceive 
the very elect." And Paul says, in 2 Thessalonians 2:3 ff.: "that man of sin shall be 
revealed, the son of perdition; Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is 
called God, or that is worshipped; ... after the working of Satan with all power and 
signs and lying wonders, And with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them 
that perish; because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be 
saved. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie: 
That they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in 
unrighteousness." And in 1 Timothy 4:1. "Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that 
in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, 
and doctrines of devils." 
Is that not as if the Lord and Paul saw our time before their 
eyes,  large as life? The general falling away from the kingdom of 
God is ever increasing, the godlessness and blasphemy is daily 
becoming more impudent, as Peter says, 2 Peter 3:3. 
"Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after 
their own lusts." 
All enemies of God are coming together and attacking the 
believers with all possible weapons; the indifferent ones who 
indulge in the lust of this world and to whom the word of the 
cross was too boring, pricked by conscience, are uniting with the 
atheist worldly wise and by their doctrine are trying to lull the 
worm within to sleep; the latter, for their part, deny with 
barefaced impudence everything that cannot be seen with the eyes, 
God and all life after death, and so, of course, it follows that for 
them this world is supreme, this world with its enjoyments of the 
flesh, with feasting, boozing and whoring. They are the worst 
pagans who have made themselves hardened and stiff-necked 
against the Gospel and of whom the Lord says that the Last 
Judgment would be more tolerable for the people of Sodom and 

=====第286页=====
264 Frederick Engels 
Gomorrah than for them. It is no longer an indifference and 
coldness in respect of the Lord, nay, it is open, declared hostility, 
and instead of all the sects and parties we now have only two: 
Christians and Anti-Christians. But he who has eyes to see, let him 
see and not blind them; for now is not the time to sleep and resort 
to subterfuges; where the signs of the times speak so clearly, there 
is need to pay heed to them and to search in the words of the 
prophecy, which has not been given us for nothing. We see the 
false prophets in our midst, 
"and there has been given unto them a mouth to speak great things and 
blasphemies: and they open their mouths in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme 
his name and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven. And it is given unto 
them to make war with the saints and" (it almost seems) "to overcome them." 
Revelation 13:5-7. 
All shame and respect and reverence have vanished out of them 
and the abominable mockeries of a Voltaire are child's play 
compared with the horrible earnestness and the deliberate blas­
phemy of these seducers. They roam about in Germany and want 
to sneak in everywhere, they preach their satanic doctrines in the 
market-places and carry the devil's standard from city to city, 
enticing the poor youths after them, to cast them into the deepest 
abyss of hell and death. Temptation abounds as never before, and 
it cannot be without special purpose that the Lord permits it. Shall 
it be said even of us: 
"O ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky; but can ye not discern the 
signs of the times?" Matthew 16:3. 
Nay, we must open our eyes and look about us; the times are 
important and it is meet to watch and pray, so that we enter not 
into temptation and the Lord, who will come like a thief in the 
night, may not find us sleeping. Great trouble and temptation will 
befall us, but the Lord will not forsake us, for He has said, 
Revelation 3:5: 
"He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in white raiment; and I will not 
blot out his name out of the book of life, but I will confess his name before my 
Father, and before His angels." And in 3:11: "Behold, I come quickly: hold that 
fast which thou hast, that no man take thy crown." 
Amen! 

=====第287页=====
aS3-ss W§tw!\$t getorog  -^ 
tl" 102. Köln,  Tmftwi  >m 12. «W 1842 
NORTH- AND SOUTH-GERMAN 
LIBERALISM I31 
Berlin, March. Until quite recently the south of our Fatherland 
was thought to be the only part of it capable of strong political 
convictions; Baden, Württemberg and Rhenish Bavaria seemed to 
be the only three altars on which could be kindled the fire of the 
only patriotism worthy of the name, independent patriotism. The 
north seemed to have sunk back into inert indifference, a limp, if 
not servile, torpor, in which it sought recovery from the truly 
grand and unusual exertion of the wars of liberation, in which the 
south took no part. With that deed the north seemed to feel it had 
done enough and now deserved some rest, so that the south soon 
began to look down on it, chide its lack of interest and be scornful 
of its patience. The events in Hanover 132 were also amply 
exploited by the south to vindicate its superiority over the north. 
While the latter seemed to be quieter, less active, the former was 
triumphant, preening itself on its developing parliamentary life, its 
speeches in the chambers, its opposition, which had to give 
support to the north while the south knew its own existence 
assured even without  it. — This has all changed. The movement of 
the south has gone to sleep, the cogs on its wheels which used to 
engage so firmly and keep them revolving have gradually become 
ground down and no longer interlock properly; one voice after 
another falls silent and the younger generation has no desire to 
follow the path of its predecessors. The north, on the other hand, 
although external circumstances were not nearly so favourable for 
it as for the south, although the platform, when not entirely 
lacking, could never rise to the significance of that of South 
Germany, has nevertheless for some years possessed a store of 
10-384 

=====第288页=====
266 Frederick Engels 
solid political conviction, of firmness of character combined with 
lively energy, of talent and journalistic activity such as the south was 
never able to accumulate in the period of its finest flowering. 
Moreover, North-German liberalism is incontestably more 
thoroughly developed and versatile and possesses a firmer histori­
cal and national basis than the liberalism of the south could ever 
achieve. The standpoint of the former far transcends that of the 
latter. Why so? The history of the two phenomena provides the 
clearest answer. 
When in the year 1830 political consciousness began to awaken 
all over Europe and the interest of the state began to come to the 
fore,  the events and stimulations of that year, colliding with the 
reawakening dreams of Germanisation, gave rise to the new 
phenomenon of South-German liberalism. Born of immediate 
practice, it remained true to it and made it the basis of its theory. 
The practice out of which its theory was constructed was, however, 
as we know, very varied: French, German, English, Spanish, etc. 
Hence it came about that the theory, the real content of this 
movement, also ended up as something very general, vague and 
blurred, which was neither German nor French, neither national 
nor definitely cosmopolitan, but simply abstract and incomplete. 
There was a common purpose, the legalisation of liberty, but 
generally two diametrically opposed means of achieving it; thus, 
constitutional guarantees were desired for Germany and, in order 
to achieve this, one day greater independence of the princes from 
the Federal Diet 133 would be proposed and the next, greater 
dependence but a popular chamber alongside the Federal Diet: 
two equally impractical means in the prevailing circumstances. One 
day the great purpose was to be achieved through greater unity of 
Germany, and the next through greater independence of the small 
princes in relation to Prussia and Austria. Hence, always united on 
the purpose but never on the means, the by far more powerful 
party was soon overtaken by the government and realised its 
imprudence too late. Moreover, its strength was dependent on a 
momentary excitement, on the effect of a purely external event, 
the July revolution, and when this abated, it also had to go to 
sleep. 
During this period things were much quieter in North Germany 
and outwardly less active. Only one man poured forth all the 
ardour of his vitality in living flames, and he was worth more than 
all the South Germans put together. I am speaking of Börne. In 
him, who with all the energy of his character rose above their 
half-heartedness, this one-sidedness carried on the fight to its 

=====第289页=====
North- and South-German Liberalism 267 
conclusion and so overcame  itself.  In him theory wrested itself 
free from practice and revealed itself as the latter's most beautiful 
flower. Hence he adopted the standpoint of North-German 
liberalism firmly, becoming its precursor and prophet. 
This movement, whose domination of Germany can no longer 
be disputed, has gained a fuller content and more enduring 
existence through its basis. From the start it linked its being not to 
an individual event but to the whole of world history, and 
especially German history; the source from which it flowed was 
not in Paris, but in the heart of Germany; it was the newer 
German philosophy. Hence the North-German liberal is distin­
guished by a high degree of consistency, a definiteness in his 
demands, and a consonance of means and purpose, for which the 
South-German liberal has hitherto always striven in vain. Hence 
his conviction appears as a necessary product of national aspira­
tions and itself national, because it wants to see Germany equally 
worthily placed in internal and external matters and cannot fall 
into the ludicrous dilemma of whether to be liberal first and then 
German, or German first and then liberal. Hence it knows itself to 
be equally safe from the one-sidedness of both parties and is free 
of the quibbles and sophistries into which they were driven by 
their own inner contradictions. Hence it can launch a resolute, 
vigorous and successful battle against each and every form of 
reaction, such as South-German liberalism never could, and hence 
its eventual victory is certain. 
Nevertheless, South-German liberalism is not to be regarded as 
a lost outpost or an unsuccessful experiment; through it we have 
achieved results which are not to be disregarded. Above all, it was 
South-German liberalism that founded a German opposition, 
thereby making political convictions possible in Germany and 
awakening parliamentary life; that did not allow the seed which 
lay within the German constitution to fall asleep and rot, and that 
extracted from the July revolution the profit to be won from it for 
Germany. It proceeded from practice to theory and failed; so let 
us begin the other way round and try to penetrate from theory 
into practice—I will wager anything that in the end we shall get 
farther this way. 
Written in March 1842 
First published in the Rheinische Zeitung 
No. 102, April 12, 1842 
Marked with the sign X 
10* Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第290页=====
DIARY OF A GUEST STUDENT 
I 
[Rheinische  Zeitung No. 130, May 10, 1842] 
In a city like Berlin a stranger would be committing a real crime 
against himself and against good taste if he did not inspect all the 
sights. Yet the most remarkable thing in Berlin, that which 
distinguishes the Prussian capital above all others, remains all too 
often unnoticed by him; I am speaking of the University. I do not 
mean the imposing façade on the Opera Square, or the anatomy 
and mineralogy museums, but the many lecture-halls with witty 
and pedantic professors, with students young and old, gay and 
serious, with freshmen and old-stagers, lecture-halls in which 
words have been spoken and are still spoken daily that spread 
beyond the frontiers of Prussia and even beyond the bounds 
within which German is spoken. Berlin University enjoys the 
reputation, like no other, of standing in the mainstream of 
contemporary thought and of having made itself such an arena of 
intellectual battles. How many other universities, Bonn, Jena, 
Giessen, Greifswald, and even Leipzig, Breslau and Heidelberg, 
have withdrawn from these battles and sunk into that learned 
apathy which has at all times been the bane of German science! 
Berlin, on the other hand, numbers representatives of all trends 
among its academic staff and thus allows a lively polemic which 
gives the students an easy, clear overall picture of present-day 
trends. In such circumstances I was tempted to take advantage of 
the now commonly granted privilege to sit in at lectures, and so I 
went in one morning, just as the summer term was beginning. 
Several lecturers had already begun their courses, most were 
beginning that day. Of all the lectures open to me the most 
interesting was the start of Marheineke's course on the introduction 

=====第291页=====
Diary of a Guest Student 269 
of Hegelian philosophy into theology. In general, the first lectures 
by the local Hegelians this term were of very particular interest 
because with several of them one could be sure in advance of 
direct polemics against Schelling's philosophy of revelation, while 
others could be expected not to hesitate in saving the honour of 
Hegel's offended manes. Marheineke's course was too evidently 
directed against Schelling not to attract special attention. The 
lecture-hall was filled long before his arrival; young men and old, 
students, officers and goodness knows who else, sat and stood 
packed closely together. At last he enters; the talk and hum of 
voices cease instantly, hats fly off as if by command. A firm, 
strong figure, the serious, resolute face of a thinker, the high 
forehead wreathed in hair gone grey in the hard toil of thinking; 
during the lecture itself a noble demeanour, nothing of the 
scholar who buries his nose in the notes from which he is reading, 
no histrionic gesticulation; a youthful, upright posture, the eye 
fixed firmly on the audience; the delivery itself calm, dignified, 
slow but always fluent, plain but infinitely rich in striking thoughts 
which follow close one upon the other, each more penetrating 
than the preceding one. On the rostrum Marheineke impresses 
you by his sureness, imperturbable firmness and dignity, and also 
by the freedom of mind which radiates from his entire personality. 
Today, however, he stepped onto the rostrum in a very special 
mood, impressing his audience far more powerfully even than 
usually. If for a whole term he had patiently endured Schelling's 
unworthy utterances on the dead Hegel and his philosophy, if he 
had quietly listened to Schelling's lectures to the end — and for a 
man like Marheineke that is indeed no trifle — the moment had 
now come when he could reply to the attack, when he could lead 
proud thoughts into the field against proud words. He began with 
general remarks in which he described in masterly strokes the 
present attitude of philosophy to theology, referred appreciatively 
to Schleiermacher, saying that his pupils had been led to phi­
losophy by his thinking which stimulated thinking, and that any 
who took a different path had themselves to blame for it. 
Gradually he passed to Hegelian philosophy and soon made a 
clear allusion to Schelling. 
"Hegel," he said, "desired above all else that in philosophy one should rise 
above one's own vanity and not behave as if one had divined something special and 
here the matter could now rest; in particular he was not the man to come out with 
grand promises and dazzling words, but was content to let the philosophical deed speak 
for him. He has never been the miles gloriosus* of philosophy who boasted much 
a Bragging liar.— Ed. 

=====第292页=====
270 Frederick Engels 
about  himself.  — Now, of course, nobody thinks himself too ignorant or too limited 
to pass adverse judgment on him and his philosophy; and nobody can fail to make 
his fortune if he has a thorough refutation of it in his pocket; for how easily he 
could insinuate himself with it can be seen from those who merely promise a 
refutation and afterwards do not keep their  word." 
At these last words the applause of the audience, of which there 
had already been single outbursts, broke into stormy acclamation, 
which, being new at a theological lecture, greatly surprised the 
lecturer, and in its fresh spontaneity offered a striking contrast to 
the dry cheers barely produced by subventions at the end of the 
lectures which Marheineke was attacking. He quietened the ap­
plause with a gesture and continued: 
"This desired refutation is nevertheless not yet available, nor will it be, as long 
as irritation, ill humour, entry and passion generally are employed instead of calm, 
scientific examination; as long as gnosticism and fantasy are considered sufficient to 
dethrone philosophical thought. The first condition of this refutation is, of course, 
to understand the opponent correctly, and here many of Hegel's enemies are like 
the dwarf who fought against the giant, or the still better known knight who tilted 
against windmills." 
This is the main content of Marheineke's first lecture as far as it 
may be of interest to the wider public. Marheineke has once more 
shown how courageous and calm he always is on the field of battle 
when it is a matter of defending the freedom of science. By virtue 
of his character and acumen he stands out far more as Hegel's 
successor than Gabler, to whom this title is usually given. The 
grand, free vision with which Hegel surveyed the entire realm of 
thought and grasped the phenomena of life is also Marheineke's 
inheritance. Who will condemn him if he is not prepared to 
sacrifice his long-held conviction, his hard-won achievement, to a 
development which has only come about in the last five years? 
Marheineke has advanced with the times long enough to be 
entitled to a scientific summing-up. It is a great quality in him that 
he feels at home even in the most outlying areas of philosophy 
and makes its cause his own, as he has done every day from Leo's 
Hegelingen to Bruno Bauer's dismissal. 134 
Incidentally Marheineke intends to have these lectures printed 
when they are completed.135 
II 
[Rheinische Zeitung No. 144, May 24, 1842] 
A few students were sitting scattered in a spacious lecture-hall 
waiting for the lecturer. The notice on the door said that 
Professor von Henning was at this hour to» begin a public lecture 

=====第293页=====
Diary of a Guest Student 271 
on the Prussian financial system. Attracted by the subject, put on 
the order of the day by Bülow-Cummerow, a and the name of the 
lecturer, one of Hegel's older pupils, I was surprised that it did 
not appear to arouse more interest. Henning entered, a slim man 
in his "prime", with thin fair hair, and began to present his 
subject in rapidly flowing, perhaps rather too detailed discourse. 
"Prussia," he said, "stands out among all other states by having a financial 
system based entirely on the modern science of political economy, and having had 
the hitherto unique courage to apply in practice the theoretical results of Adam 
Smith and his followers. England, for instance, where the modern theories 
originated, is still up to the eyes in the old system of monopoly and prohibition, 
France almost more so, and neither Huskisson in the former country nor Duchâtel 
in the latter has been able to overcome private interests by his more reasonable 
views,  to say nothing of Austria and Russia; whereas Prussia has firmly recognised 
the principle of free trade and free industry and has abolished all monopolies and 
prohibitive customs duties. This aspect of our political system, therefore, places us 
high above states which in another respect, the development of political freedom, 
are far ahead of us. If our government's achievement in respect of finance has 
been so extraordinary, it must also be admitted, on the other hand, that peculiarly 
favourable conditions existed for such a reform. The disaster of 1806 b cleared the 
ground on which the new edifice could be erected; the government's hands were 
not tied by a representative system, enabling the particular interests to assert 
themselves. But unfortunately there are still old gentlemen whose narrow-minded­
ness and peevishness make them carp at what is new and accuse it of being an 
unhistorical, unpractical, forcibly imposed construction evolved from abstract 
theory; as if history had stopped in 1806 and it were wrong for practice to conform 
with theory, with science; as if the essence of history were stagnation or movement 
in a circle, and not progress, as if there could really be practice devoid of all 
theory." 
I may be permitted to look more closely at these last points, with 
which public opinion in Germany, and particularly in Prussia, will 
surely declare itself in accord; it is high time to oppose resolutely 
the eternal talk of a certain party about "historical, organic, 
natural development", about the "natural state", etc., and publicly 
expose these dazzling visions. If there are states which must 
indeed take the past into consideration and are obliged to advance 
more slowly, this does not apply to Prussia. Prussia cannot advance 
quickly enough, cannot develop rapidly enough. Our past lies buried 
under the ruins of pre-Jena Prussia, it has been swept away by the 
flood of the Napoleonic invasion. What fetters us? We no longer 
have to drag on our feet those medieval balls and chains which 
hamper the progress of so many states; the dirt of past centuries 
a Bülow-Cummerow, Preussen, seine Verfassung, seine Verwaltung, sein Verhältnis 
zu Deutschland. — Ed. 
The defeat at Jena. — Ed. 

=====第294页=====
272 Frederick Engels 
no longer sticks to our soles. How then can anyone talk about 
historical development here without meaning a return to the 
ancien régime} A retreat which would be the most shameful there 
ever was, the most cowardly denial of the most glorious years of 
Prussian history, treason—conscious or unconscious—against the 
Fatherland, since it would necessitate another catastrophe like that 
of 1806. No, it is clear as daylight that Prussia's salvation lies solely in 
theory, in science, in development through the intellect. Or to see it from 
another angle, Prussia is no "natural" state, but one which has 
come into being through politics, through purposeful action, 
through the intellect. From the French side the attempt has 
recently been made to represent this as our state's greatest 
weakness; on the contrary, this circumstance is our main strength, 
provided that it is rightly used. Prussia, if it so wants, can raise 
itself as high above the "natural" states as the conscious intellect 
stands above unconscious nature. Since provincial differences in 
Prussia are so great, the system must grow purely from thought in 
order that no province shall be wronged; a gradual fusion of the 
different provinces will then take place of  itself,  the separate 
peculiarities all dissolving in the higher unity of a free state 
consciousness, whereas otherwise several centuries would not 
suffice to bring about the internal legislative and national unity of 
Prussia, and the first violent blow would be bound to have such 
consequences for the internal cohesion of our state against which 
no man could offer reliable guarantees. The road which other 
states have to take is determined in advance by a definite national 
character; we are free from this compulsion; we can make of 
ourselves what we will; dismissing all other considerations, Prussia 
can follow solely the inspiration of reason; it can, as no other state, 
learn from the experience of its neighbours; it can stand — which 
no other country can — as the model state for Europe, at the 
height of its time, and represent in its institutions the complete 
state consciousness of its century. 
This is our vocation, this is what Prussia has been created for. 
Should we barter away this future for the sake of a few hollow 
phrases from a dead trend? Shall we not listen to history  itself, 
which entrusts us with this vocation of bringing the flower of all 
theory to life? Prussia's basis, I say it once more, is not the ruins of 
past centuries, but the eternally young spirit which becomes 
conscious in science and creates for itself its own freedom in the 
state.  And if we were to give up the spirit and its freedom, we 
should be denying ourselves, we should be betraying our most 
sacred possession, we should be murdering our own living strength 

=====第295页=====
Diary of a Guest Student 273 
and should not be worthy any longer to stand in the ranks of the 
European states. Then history would pronounce its terrible death 
sentence on us: "Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found 
wanting." a 
Written between May 2 and 10, 1842 Printed according to the news-
First published in the Rheinische Zeitung P P er 
Nos.  130 and 144, May 10 and 24, 1842 Published in English for the first 
a Daniel 5:27.— Ed. 

=====第296页=====
RHENISH FESTIVALS156 
Berlin, May 6. There are certain times of the year when the 
Rhinelander gadding about abroad is seized by a very special 
longing for his beautiful homeland. This longing comes particular­
ly in spring, around Whitsun, the time of the Rhenish music 
festival, and is a really dreadful feeling. Now, he knows it only too 
well, everything on the Rhine is in bud; the transparent waves of 
the river ripple in the spring breeze, nature puts on its Sunday 
best, and at home they are getting ready for the song outing, 
tomorrow they will set off, and you are not there! 
Oh, it is a fine festival, the Rhenish music festival! The visitors 
come pouring in from all sides, on crowded steamers decorated 
with greenery and flags flying, to the accompaniment of horn and 
song, in long railway trains and lines of stage-coaches, with 
flourishing of hats and waving of kerchiefs, cheerful men, young 
and old, beautiful women with even more beautiful voices, all 
Sunday people with laughing Sunday faces. There's pleasure for 
you! All cares, all business are forgotten; not a single serious face 
is to be seen in the dense crowd of arrivals. Old acquaintances are 
renewed, new ones made; the young folk laugh and flirt and 
chatter incessantly, and even the old, forcibly persuaded by their 
dear daughters to take part in the festival, despite gout and 
podagra, cold and hypochondria, are infected by the general 
merriment and have to be cheerful since they have come along. 
Everybody is preparing for the Whitsun holiday, and a festival 
that derives from the general emanation of the Holy Spirit cannot 
be more worthily celebrated than by surrendering to the divine 
spirit of bliss and enjoyment of life, the innermost kernel of which 

=====第297页=====
Rhenish Festivals 275 
is enjoyment of art. And of all the arts none is so well suited as 
music to form the centre of such a convivial provincial parliament 
where all the educated people of the area come together for the 
mutual renewal of the joy of living and youthful gaiety. If with the 
ancients it was the presentation of comedy and the contest of 
tragic poets that attracted the people to the Panathenaean festi­
vals I37 and bacchanalia, in our climatic and social conditions music 
alone can play the same role. For just as music which is merely 
printed and does not speak to the ear can give us no enjoyment, 
so tragedy remained dead and strange to the ancients unless it 
spoke from the thymele* and orchestra* through the living mouths 
of the actors. Today every town has its theatre where plays are 
performed daily, while for the Hellenes the stage came alive only 
at great festivals; today printing spreads every new play through­
out Germany, while among the ancients only a few could read the 
written tragedy. Hence, drama can no longer serve as the centre 
for great assemblies, a different art must help, and only music can 
do that; for it alone admits of the participation of a great 
multitude and even gains considerably thereby in power of 
expression; it is the only art where enjoyment coincides with live 
performance and where the range of effect is as wide as that of 
ancient drama. And well may the German celebrate and foster 
music, in which he is king above all nations, for just as he alone 
succeeded in bringing the highest and holiest, the innermost secret 
of the human heart, to light out of its hidden depth and in 
expressing it in sound, so it is given to him alone to respond 
fully to the power of music, to understand the language of instru­
ments and song through and through. 
But here music is not the main thing. What is then? The music 
festival. Just as the centre cannot form a circle without a 
periphery, so music is nothing without the gay, convivial life which 
forms the periphery to this musical centre. The Rhinelander is 
thoroughly sanguine by nature; his blood flows as freely through 
his veins as newly fermented Rhine wine, and his eyes always look 
cheerfully and merrily upon the world. Among the Germans he is 
Sunday's child to whom the world always looks more beautiful and 
life more cheerful than to others. He sits laughing and chattering 
among the vines and over his goblet has long forgotten all his 
cares while others argue for hours whether they should go and do 
the same, losing the best time. One thing is certain, no Rhineland-
a Raised section of the orchestra in the ancient Greek theatre.— Ed. 
b Space for the chorus in the ancient Greek theatre.— Ed. 

=====第298页=====
276 Frederick Engels 
er has ever let slip an opportunity to enjoy life, or he is thought 
the biggest fool. This sprightly blood keeps the Rhinelander young 
years after the real North German has passed into a sedate and 
prosaic philistinism. All his life long the Rhinelander loves gay, 
high-spirited pranks, youthful larks, or, as wise, sedate people say, 
mad tomfooleries and all sorts of crazy things; the gayest and 
liveliest universities have always been Bonn and Heidelberg. And 
even the old philistine, soured by worry and work, and the 
dreariness of everyday life, may give his boys a good hiding for 
their mischievous pranks in the early morning, yet tell them 
gleefully in the evening over a pint about the old tricks he himself 
played in his youth. 
With the Rhinelander's eternally cheerful nature, with such an 
open, unaffected, carefree temperament, it is no wonder that 
almost everybody at the music festival wants something more than 
to hear and be heard. There is a gaiety, a freedom and movement 
of life, a freshness of enjoyment which one would search for long 
elsewhere. Gay, good-tempered faces, friendship and cordiality for 
all who take part in the general enjoyment; the three days of the 
festival slip by like hours in drinking, singing and jesting. And on 
the morning of the fourth day, when all the pleasure has been 
enjoyed and the time has come to part, everybody is already 
looking happily forward to next year, arranging to meet then and, 
still gay and filled with new life, going on their way and about 
their everyday work. 
Written on May 6, 1842 Printed according to the news-
First published in the Rheinische Zeitung " " 
No. 134, May 14, 1842 Published in English for the first 
Marked with the sign *x* tlme 

=====第299页=====
MARGINALIA TO TEXTS OF OUR TIME 
Four Public Lectures Given in Königsberg 
by Ludwig Walesrode. Königsberg, H. L. Voigt, 1842 a 
It is now several years since Königsberg in Prussia acquired an 
importance which must be gratifying to all Germany. Formally 
excluded from Germany by the Federal Act, 138 the German 
element there has rallied its strength and claims to be recognised 
as German and respected as Germany's representative vis-à-vis the 
barbarism of the Slavonic East. And, indeed, the East Prussians 
could not represent Germany's culture and nationhood vis-à-vis 
the Slavs better than they have done. Intellectual life, political 
awareness have there reached a height of animated activity, a 
loftiness and freedom of standpoint as in no other city. Rosenkranz 
with his versatile and lively intelligence represents German 
philosophy there in a most gratifying manner, and even if he has 
not the courage of ruthless consistency, his knowledge and talent 
combined with a fine sense of tact and an unprejudiced approach 
rank him very high. Jachmann and others discuss the questions of 
the day in a liberal spirit and now we are presented in the above 
publication with new proof of the high degree of culture which 
the public there possesses. 
It consists of four humorous lectures given to a large audience 
on subjects taken from the immediate living present, which the 
talented author has brought together here. Truly, they reveal such 
a gift for genre-painting, such ease, elegance and clarity of 
presentation, such sparkling wit that one cannot deny the 
author's considerable talent as a humourist. He has an eye which 
a Glossen und Randzeichnungen zu Texten aus unserer Zeit. Vier öffentliche 
Vorlesungen, gehalten zu Königsberg von Ludwig Walesrode. Königsberg, H. L. 
Voigt, 1842.— Ed. 

=====第300页=====
278 Frederick Engels 
seizes on that aspect of current events through which they can be 
shown most effectively, and he introduces his innumerable refer­
ences and allusions so cleverly that even the person who is their 
butt has to smile; moreover, allusions follow in quick succession 
and in the end no one can take offence at the mockery because 
everybody has had his share of it. The first lecture, Die Masken des 
Lebens, introduces us to Munich, Berlin, the German Michel, the 
hollowness of the hereditary aristocracy, the disunion, and a party 
of German celebrities from the description of which I have taken 
the following passage: 
"Sitting at a table not far from us is a young man drinking his wine from a 
heavy silver goblet. Once, with a single song, he dismantled twenty French batteries 
aimed against the free nymphs of the green, free Rhine, and with his four-foot 
iambics drove back in headlong flight to Thionville several cavalry regiments of the 
French advance guard who had already got as far as Andernach. For this bold 
deed he was rewarded with a silver goblet and a participial construction even 
bolder than his song, so marvellously gigantic that all the grammar schoolteachers 
in Germany blenched and the third-formers jumped up from their seats and 
shouted jubilantly: 'Now we can have hot weather holidays!'" 3 
A little further on it says: 
"Then a censor's mask approaches us. Should it discover an uncensored 
ink-stain on our fingers, we should be lost. A censor looks like any other human, 
but his post is more than human. He judges the spirit and the thoughts and carries 
the scales which only eternal justice should hold. In literature he is employed to 
execute the pharaonic law that all mafe-born literary infants must be killed or at 
least abelarded. The censorship in ancient Rome consisted in strict moral 
judgment on the citizens of the Republic; it came to an end when, as Cicero says, it 
could do no more than make a man blush. Our censorship can only come to an 
end when the entire nation can blush for it as one manl"c 
The second lecture, Unser goldenes Zeitalter, discourses in the 
same light vein on the moneyed aristocracy; the third, Literarisches 
Don-Quixote-Tournier, tilts with lance in rest at all kinds of 
absurdities of our time, first and foremost German political style. 
"The German language," it says in this lecture, "was born free and republican; 
it scales the highest Alpine peaks and glaciers of poetry and thought, to soar with 
the eagle to the sun. But, like the Swiss, it also enrols in the bodyguard of 
despotism. What the King of Hanover told his people in the worst German could 
not have been expressed in the best English. In short, our language, like Morison's 
pills,  is good and usable for everything: but it lacks something which it needs very 
badly: political style  I Of course, in times of greatest peril, when Cologne Cathedral 
mirrors itself in the Rhine, which usually it does only in very serious circumstances, 
a L. Walesrode, Glossen und Randzeichnungen,, S. 15-16.— Ed. 
Castrated. An allusion to Pierre Abélard.— Ed. 
L. Walesrode, Glossen und Randzeichnungen, S. 16-17.— Ed. 
Ernst August. — Ed. 

=====第301页=====
Marginalia to Texts of Our Time 279 
it takes on a sort of political verve, with high official approval; every potato patch is 
then called a Gau, and respectable small townsfolk are promoted to Mannen, and 
every seamstress is suddenly transformed overnight into a German  Maid.  But that is 
only the style of political defensive and is usually mobilised at the same time as the 
people's militia; taking offensive action is something our language has yet to learn. 
When a German wants to assert his simplest political right, which is pledged to him 
by a stamped paper as legally as his wife is by the marriage contract, he wraps his 
demand in so many clauses, legal flourishes, incidental expressions of high esteem, 
exclamation marks of respect, and assurances of undying love and loyalty that one 
might take the whole thing for a ceremonious love letter from a tailor's apprentice 
rather than a just demand. For the German has not enough courage — to have the 
right, and therefore he begs pardon a thousand times for having dared believe, 
think, suppose or even merely suspect that he had a political demand outstanding 
with a high customer. Do not most of the petitions for freedom of the press, for 
example, recall exactly the Marquis Posa, completely rigged out from the theatrical 
wardrobe, throwing himself at the feet of King Philipp with the words: 'Sire, give 
us freedom of thought!' 3 Is it any wonder, then, that such supplications are 
likewise dismissed with King Philipp's words: 'Curious dreamer! and laid aside ad 
acta} The few Germans who had the courage as their Fatherland's advocates to put 
forward its political rights in the clear and terse language becoming to real men, 
have only the cowardice of our political style to thank for the fact that they fell 
victim to the state inquisition. For where cowardice is the norm, courage is a crime! 
It could very easily happen that for mere stylistic sins, for having let his words and 
thoughts be seen in naked truth, not clothed in the costume prescribed by the 
master of ceremonies, a political writer of our time would be gently broken on the 
wheel from top to toe, and that in the name of the law. Just as German style is as 
cowardly as a eunuch when it has to assert political rights, so it is no less clumsy 
when it swings the censer round the ears of the high and mighty. If somewhere a 
prince says: 'I shall do right and justice' whole swarms of newspaper phrases at 
once descend on the speck of honey like wild bees and buzz with delight at the 
precious find on the desolate political wasteland. But is there anything more 
insulting for a prince than when the mere expression of the intention to execute a 
ruler's prime duty, without which his name would have to be equated with Nero 
and Busiris, is trumpeted through all the newspapers as an extraordinary, 
unheard-of princely virtue? And this happens in official gazettes, under the eyes of 
the censors, under the auspices of the Federal Diet! Should not paragraph 92 of 
the Criminal Law be applied to such clumsy eulogists in all its severity?" c 
The fourth lecture gives Variationen über beliebte Zeit- und 
Nationalmelodien which include Ein Ordenskapitel, beginning as 
follows: 
"Princes are the peoples' shepherds, as Homer has already said, and therefore 
the peoples are, of course, the princes' sheep. And the shepherds love their sheep 
very much and lead them on gay, silken leading-strings, so as not to lose them, and 
the sheep in turn are pleased with the pretty iridescent ribbon and don't notice that 
this decoration is at the same time their fetter, because they are mere sheep", etc. 
a Schiller, Don Carlos, Act III, Scene 10.— Ed. 
b Ibid.— Ed. 
c L. Walesrode, Glossen und Randzeichnungen, S. 48-50.— Ed. 
d Ibid., S. 70.— Ed. 

=====第302页=====
280 Frederick Engels 
With these four lectures Walesrode has demonstrated his ability 
as a humourist. But that is not enough. So long as they fulfil their 
purpose as lectures, such things have the right to be loosely 
constructed, disjointed, without unity; the genuine humourist, 
however, would have given even more stress than Walesrode has 
done to the background of a great, positive vision of the world in 
which all mockery and all negation are completely and satisfyingly 
dissolved. In this respect, Walesrode has taken a duty upon 
himself by publishing the above small work; he must as soon as 
possible justify the expectations which he has aroused here and 
prove that he can equally well concentrate and work his views into 
a whole as he has here allowed them separate expression. And 
that is all the more necessary as his derivation from Börne, his 
vision of the world and his style are evidence of close kinship with 
the authors of the Young Germany of yore; almost all the authors 
who belonged to that category, however, have failed to justify the 
expectations they aroused and have sunk into lethargy, the 
inevitable consequence of a fruitless striving for inner unity. The 
inability to produce something whole was the rock on which they 
were wrecked, since they themselves were not whole people. 
Walesrode, on the other hand, gives us a glimpse here and there 
of a higher, more perfect standpoint and so justifies the demand 
that he bring his individual judgments into balance with each 
other and with the height of the philosophy of his time. 
For the rest, we must congratulate him on the audience, which 
was able to appreciate such lectures, and on the censor, who did 
not prevent them from being published. We cherish the hope that 
such handling of censorship as evidenced by this book will 
overcome all other, vacillating principles in its application, at least 
for Prussia, and win general approval; that censorship may 
everywhere be exercised by such people as in Königsberg, where, 
our author says, the censors are men 
"who have taken on the most hateful of all offices in painful self-sacrifice so 
that it should not fall into the hands of those who would take it on with pleasure".3 
Written in late April and early May 1842 Printed according to the news-
First published in the Rheinische Zeitung paper 
No. 145, May 25, 1842 Published in English for the first 
time 
Signed: F. O. 
a L. Walesrode, Glossen und Randzeichnungen, S. VIII.— Ed. 

=====第303页=====
[POLEMIC AGAINST LEO] 
From the Hasenheide, May. What Hegelian philosophy, according 
to the enlightened judgment of the Literarische Zeitung, has been 
unable to achieve, namely, construct a system of natural sciences 
based upon its principles, the Evangelische Kirchen-Zeitung is now 
undertaking most successfully from its standpoint. On the occasion 
of a book by Professor Leupoldt in Erlangen, an essay in its latest 
issues signed H. L. (Leo) develops the programme of a total 
revolution in medicine the consequences of which are not yet 
foreseeable. 139 As always, Leo begins here with the Hegelings, 
although without naming them, speaks of the pantheistic, heathen 
trend which is said to have taken hold of modern natural science, 
and the "philosophical fondling of nature and subtle reconciliation 
of systems", castigates the anatomistic view which would cure the 
individual man instead of whole generations and nations, and 
finally comes to the conclusion 
"that sickness is the wages of sin, that physically connected generations answer 
jointly for their sins, and even spiritually, unless  belief,  given through God's mercy, 
breaks the chain of punishment. Just as the individual is not, through his 
conversion, physically freed from punishment for the sin committed, e. g., if he has 
lost his nose as a result of sinful debauches he will not get it back through his 
conversion, so even today the teeth of the grandchildren quite naturally are set on 
edge by the sour grapes which their grandparents have eaten, and where firm 
belief does not intervene, not even the spiritual punishments cease. How often has 
a man, who lived in opulence and sin and withal appeared to have a happy end, 
left his son and grandson the seed of the most nerve-destroying morbidity which 
continued to rage in them until, in the most depressive stage of the abdominal 
disease, the great-grandson, in whom no word of mercy had yet found fertile soil, 
seized the razor in despair and executed on his own throat the punishment which 
the originator of his sufferings, his great-grandfather, deserved". 

=====第304页=====
282 Frederick Engels 
Were it not for these views, the history of the world would seem 
to be the most crying injustice.— Leo then continues: 
"The repentant noseless sinner can see in his mutilation only a memorial to 
God's justice, and that which for the unbeliever was a punishment, becomes for the 
believer a new foundation for his faith." 
It is the same with nations: 
"Spiritual as well as bodily diseases and disorders of the age are from a certain 
standpoint divine judgments, today just as much as in the age of the prophets." 
These are the philosophical—I meant to say religious principles 
on which Leo, who would be worthy to fraternise with a Ringseis, 
bases his new medical practice. What use is all that petty, 
piecemeal curing of single individuals, nay, of the single limb? 
Whole families, whole nations must be cured by the lump! If 
grandfather has a fever, the entire family, sons, daughters, 
grandchildren with wife and child, must swallow Peruvian bark! If 
the king has pneumonia every province should send a delegate to 
be bled, if you don't prefer to take an ounce of blood per head 
from the entire population of so and so many millions straight­
away as a precaution! And what results might this not have for the 
sanitary police! Nobody is to be allowed to marry who does not 
produce a doctor's certificate that he is healthy, and that all his 
ancestors back to his great-grandfather were of sound constitution, 
and a certificate from the preacher saying that he and his 
ancestors, back to his great-grandfather, have kept strictly to a 
Christian, godfearing and virtuous way of life, so that, as Leo says, 
it shall not come to pass that 
"the sins of the fathers are visited on the children down to the third and fourth 
generation!" 
Hence, the doctor has 
"a position most dreadful in its responsibility and most terrifying in its 
consequences, for he can equally well be a messenger of God to the individual who 
exempts him as far as possible from joint suffering for sin, or a servant of the devil 
who with his power seeks to oppose God's punishment and to make it ineffective". 
Again results for the state! The prescribed philosophical course 
for medical men must be abolished and replaced by a theological 
one;  before his examination the medical student must submit a 
testimonial of his faith, and the practice of Jewish medical men, if 
it is not to be completely abolished, must at least be limited to 
their fellow believers. Leo goes on: 
"The sick man, like the criminal, is sacer, the holy hand of God lies upon 
him — he who can heal, let him do sol But let him not fear the red-hot steel or the 

=====第305页=====
Polemic Against Leo 283 
sharp iron, or the fierce hunger, where these alone can help. Feeble help is as 
harmful in medicine as in civil society." 
So cut and burn with a will! Where they used to do a miserable 
trepanning we now help by simply cutting the head off; where a 
heart condition is revealed, which is usually punishment for sins of 
love committed by the sick man's mother, and thé blood causes too 
much pressure on the heart, we provide an outlet for it by a stab 
with a knife in the heart; if someone is suffering from stomach 
cancer, we cut out his whole stomach — the old doctor Eisenbart of 
whom the people sing was really not so bad, it was only that his 
age did not understand him. It is the same, Leo concludes, with 
criminals; they are not alone culpable, but the nation is responsible 
with them, and the punishments which our easy-going time metes 
out are not harsh enough; there must be more beheading and 
torturing, otherwise we shall have more criminals than there is 
room for in the workhouses. Quite right! If a man murders, his 
whole family must be rooted out and every citizen of his home 
town receive at least twenty-five strokes with the rod for his joint 
culpability in this murder; where a brother lives in sin, all his 
brothers must be c with him. And nothing but good can come 
from making punishments more severe. Now that beheading, as 
we have seen above, is no longer a punishment but merely a 
medical amputation to save the body, this manner of death must 
be deleted from the criminal codes and replaced by breaking on 
the wheel, quartering, piercing with the spit, burning, pinching 
with red-hot tongs, etc. 
Thus Leo opposes a system of medicine and jurisprudence that 
has become heathenish with a Christian one, which will indubitably 
soon prevail everywhere. We all know how, in accordance with the 
same principles, he introduced Christianity into history and thus, 
for example, made the Hegelings, whom he sees as the children of 
the men of the French Revolution, responsible for the blood shed 
in Paris, Lyons and Nantes,140 even for the actions of Napoleon 
himself,  and I only mention it here to demonstrate the delightful 
many-sidedness of the indefatigable man. We understand that a 
German grammar based on Christian principles is soon to be 
expected from him. 
Written between May 7 and 11, 1842 Printed according to the news­
paper 
First published in the Rheinische Zeitung 
No. 161, June 10, 1842 Published in English for the first 
, „ time 
Marked with the sign x 

=====第306页=====
&eutft$e Ctobrbücbcr 
fut 
SÔtffenfc&aft uni Jlititfk 
iV? 160. 9.3 un. 184«. 
ALEXANDER JUNG, "LECTURES ON MODERN 
GERMAN LITERATURE" 3 
Danzig, 1842. Gerhard 141 
[Deutsche  Jahrbücher No. 160, July 7, 1842] 
The more gladdening the powerful intellectual movement by 
which Königsberg seeks to place itself at the centre of German 
political progress, and the freer and more developed the form in 
which public opinion manifests itself there, the more peculiar does 
it seem that this should be the place where a certain juste-milieu, 
which is obviously bound to come into conflict with the majority of 
the local people, is attempting to assert itself in the philosophical 
field. And whereas Rosenkranz still has many aspects that command 
respect, although he lacks the courage to be consistent, all the 
flabbiness and paltriness of the philosophical juste-milieu is re­
vealed in the person of Herr Alexander Jung. 
In every movement, in every ideological struggle, there is a 
certain species of foggy mind which only feels comfortable in 
confusion. As long as the principles have not yet been worked out, 
such people are tolerated; as long as everyone is striving for 
clarity, it is not easy to discern the predestined lack of clarity of 
such people. But when the elements become separated, and 
principle is counterposed to principle, then it is high time to bid 
farewell to these useless people and definitively part company with 
them, for then their emptiness becomes appallingly obvious. 
Herr Alexander Jung is also one of these people. It would be 
best if his above-mentioned book were ignored; but since, in 
addition, he publishes a Königsberger Literatur-Blatt, in which he 
also brings his boring positivism 142 before the public every week, 
Alexander Jung, Vorlesungen über die moderne Literatur der Deutschen. — Ed. 

=====第307页=====
Alexander Jung, "Lectures on Modern German Literature" 285 
the readers of the Jahrbücher* will forgive me if I fix my sights on 
him and characterise him in rather more detail. 
In the bygone days of Young Germany, he came out with his 
letters on recent literature .b  He had joined this youthful trend and 
now, without wishing to, became with it part of the opposition. 
What a position for our conciliator! Herr Alexander Jung on the 
extreme left! One can easily imagine his discomfort and the 
stream of assurances he poured forth. Yet he had a particular 
liking for Gutzkow, who at that time was regarded as the 
arch-heretic. He wanted to unburden his full heart, but he was 
afraid, he did not want to cause offence. How was he to find a 
way out? He resorted to a method altogether typical of him. He 
wrote an apotheosis of Gutzkow, but without mentioning his 
name, and then entitled it: "Lines on an Unnamed Person". 
Permit me to say it, Herr Alexander Jung, that was downright 
cowardly! 
[Deutsche Jahrbücher No. 161, July 8, 1842] 
Later Jung came out again with a conciliatory and confused 
book: Königsberg in Preussen und die Extreme des dortigen Pietismus. 
What a title! He allows pietism as such, but its extremes must be 
fought, just as now a struggle is being waged in the Königsberger 
Literatur-Blatt against the extremes of the Young Hegelian trend, 
for all extremes are evil in general, and only his beloved 
conciliation and moderation are of any value. As if extremes were 
not consistency pure and simple! Incidentally, this book was 
reviewed at the time in the Hallische Jahrbücher. lii 
Now he comes forward with the above-mentioned book and 
pours forth a whole bucketful of vague, uncritical assertions, con­
fused judgments, empty phrases and ludicrously narrow views. 
It is as if he had been asleep ever since his Briefe appeared. Rien 
appris, rien oublie! 144 Young Germany has passed away, the Young 
Hegelian school has emerged, Strauss, Feuerbach, Bauer, and the 
Jahrbücher now command universal attention, the battle over prin­
ciples is at its height, it is a question of life or death, Christianity is 
at stake, the political movement embraces everything, and yet the 
good Jung still cherishes the naive belief that "the nation" has 
nothing better to do than wait agog for a new play by Gutzkow, a 
novel promised by Mundt, an oddity to be expected from Laube. At 
Deutsche Jahrbücher für Wissenschaft und Kunst. — Ed. 
A. Jung, Briefe über die neueste Literatur. — Ed. 

=====第308页=====
286 Frederick Engels 
a time when the cry of battle resounds throughout Germany, 
when the new principles are being debated at his very feet, Herr 
Jung sits in his study, chews his pen and ruminates over the con­
cept of the "modern". He hears nothing, sees nothing, for he is 
up to his ears in a pile of books, the contents of which are now of 
no interest to anyone, and he labours to arrange the various 
items precisely and neatly into Hegelian categories. 
On the threshold of his lectures, he sets up as sentry the bogey 
of the "modern". What is the "modern"? Herr Jung says that his 
point of departure for it is Byron and George Sand, and that for 
Germany the most immediate basic elements of the new world 
epoch are Hegel and the writers of what is called Young 
Literature. — Is there anything for which poor Hegel has not been 
made responsible? Atheism, the omnipotence of self-consciousness, 
the revolutionary theory of the state, and now Young Germany as 
well. But it is perfectly ridiculous to connect Hegel with this 
coterie. Is Herr Jung not aware that Gutzkow has long been 
engaged in a polemic against Hegelian philosophy, that Mundt 
and Kühne understand practically nothing at all about the subject, 
that Mundt, in particular, in the Madonna and elsewhere has said 
the most senseless things about Hegel, shown the greatest misun­
derstanding of him and is now an avowed opponent of his 
teaching? Does he not know that Wienbarg, too, has spoken out 
against Hegel, and that Laube in his history of literature 21 has 
continually made incorrect use of Hegelian categories? 
Herr Jung then passes on to the concept of the "modern" and 
tortures himself over it for six pages, without being able to master 
it. Of course! As though the "modern" could ever become 
"elevated to the rank of a concept"! As though such a vague, 
empty, imprecise expression which superficial minds everywhere 
put forward with a certain air of mystery, could ever become a 
philosophical category! What a distance there is between the 
"modern" of Heinrich Laube, which smacks of aristocratic salons 
and is personified only in the shape of a dandy, and "modern 
science" in the title of Strauss' book on dogma b! But all that is of 
no avail; Herr A. Jung regards this title as proof that Strauss 
acknowledges the modern, the special Young-German modern, as 
a power above him, and instantly puts him and Young Literature 
in the same category. In the end he defines the concept of the 
a H. Laube, Geschichte der deutschen Literatur. — Ed. 
D. F. Strauss, Die christliche Glaubenslehre in ihrer geschichtlichen Entwicklung und 
im Kampfe mit der modernen Wissenschaft. — Ed. 

=====第309页=====
Alexander Jung, "Lectures on Modern German Literature" 287 
modern as the independence of the subject from all merely 
external authority. We have long known that the striving towards 
this is the main element of the movement of the present day, and 
no one will deny that the "moderns" are connected with this 
striving; but what is very conspicuously revealed here is the 
absurdity of Herr Jung's desire to present a part as the whole, an 
outlived, transitional epoch as a period of full flower. At all costs, 
Young Germany must be made the embodiment of the whole 
spirit of the times, and incidentally Hegel, too, must come in for 
his share. One can see that, so far, Herr Jung was divided in two; 
he kept one half of his heart for Hegel and the other for Young 
Germany. Now, in writing these lectures, he was compelled to 
bring the two together. What a problem! The left hand caressed 
philosophy, the right hand superficial, iridescent unphilosophy 
and, in good Christian fashion, the right hand did not know what 
the left hand was doing. Where was he to turn? Instead of 
honestly rejecting one of his two incompatible favourites, he made 
a bold stroke and deduced unphilosophy from philosophy. 
To this end, thirty pages are devoted to throwing light on poor 
Hegel. A pompous, high-faluting apotheosis gushes in a turbid 
flood over the grave of the great man; then Herr Jung is at pains 
to prove that the fundamental feature of the Hegelian system is 
the assertion of the free subject as opposed to the heteronomy of 
rigid objectivity. But one need not be particularly knowledgeable 
about Hegel to know that he laid claim to a far higher standpoint, 
that of the reconciliation of the subject with objective forces; that 
he had a tremendous respect for objectivity, that he regarded 
reality, the actually existing, as far higher than the subjective 
reason of the individual, and demanded that precisely the latter 
should recognise objective reality as rational. Hegel is not, as Herr 
Jung supposes, the prophet of subjective autonomy, which is seen 
in the form of arbitrariness in Young Germany. Hegel's principle 
is also heteronomy, subordination of the subject to universal 
reason, and sometimes, for instance in the philosophy of religion, 
even to universal unreason. What Hegel despised most of all was 
the intellect, and what is that but reason petrified in its subjectivity 
and isolation? But Herr Jung will reply to me by saying that that 
was not what he meant, that he was speaking only of purely external 
authority, that he, too, wants to see no more in Hegel than merely 
the reconciliation of both sides, and that, in his opinion, the 
"modern" individual desires no more than to regard himself as 
governed "by his own insight into the rationality of what is 
objective". But then I, in turn, will insist that he should not lump 

=====第310页=====
288 Frederick Engels 
Hegel with the Young Germans, whose essence lies precisely in 
subjective arbitrariness, whims and oddities; for then the "modern 
individual" is merely another expression for a Hegelian. In the 
presence of such boundless confusion Herr Jung will have to look 
for the "modern" also within the Hegelian school, and it is correct 
that the Left trend of the latter is pre-eminently called upon to 
fraternise with the Young Germans. 
Finally, he comes to "modern" literature, and now a flood of 
universal recognition and eulogising is let loose. Here there is no 
one who has not achieved something to his credit, no one who does 
not represent something worthy of notice, no one to whom litera­
ture does not owe some of its progress. These endless compli­
ments, these conciliatory efforts, this passion to play the literary 
procurer and broker, are intolerable. What concern is it to litera­
ture that some writer or other has a bit of talent, that here or 
there he achieves some trifle, if he is otherwise worthless, if his 
whole trend, his literary character, his achievements as a whole, 
are of no value? In literature a writer's value does not depend on 
himself,  but only on his position in relation to the whole. If I were 
to adopt that kind of criticism, I would have to deal more indul­
gently with Herr Jung  himself,  since perhaps five pages of this 
book are not badly written and reveal some talent.— A mass of cu­
rious statements flows from his pen with extraordinary ease and 
even with a certain hauteur. Thus, in speaking of Pückler's harsh 
treatment at the hands of the critics, he rejoices that they 
"pronounce their judgment without regard for person or rank. This truly 
testifies to the high, independent standpoint of German criticism." 
What a poor opinion Herr Jung must have of the German nation 
to consider that sort of thing so greatly to its credit! As though 
incredible courage were required to criticise the literary works of 
a sovereign! 
I shall pass over this drivel which claims to be a history of 
literature and which, in addition to its inner emptiness and 
incoherence, also has limitless omissions; thus there is no mention 
of the poets Grün, Lenau, Freiligrath, and Herwegh, or the 
dramatists Mosen and Klein, etc. Finally, the author arrives at 
what he has been working up to from the outset — his precious 
Young Germany, which for him is the acme of the "modern". He 
begins with Börne. Actually, Börne's influence on Young Germany 
has not been so great; Mundt and Kühne said he was mad, Laube 
thought him too democratic, too categorical, and only on Gutzkow 
and Wienbarg did he exercise a more sustained influence. Gutz­
kow, in particular, owes a great deal to Börne. The latter's greatest 

=====第311页=====
Alexander Jung, "Lectures on Modern German Literature" 289 
effect lay in his quiet influence on the nation, which preserved his 
works as sacred objects and drew strength and support from them 
during the troubled times of 1832 to 1840, until the true sons of 
the author of the Briefe aus Paris" appeared in the form of the 
new, philosophical liberals. Without the direct and indirect influ­
ence of Börne it would have been far more difficult for the free 
trend proceeding from Hegel to take shape. Then all that needed 
to be done was to clear out the silted-up paths of thought between 
Hegel and Börne, and that was not so difficult. These two men 
stood closer to each other than it seemed. Börne's directness and 
healthy outlook proved to be the practical side of what Hegel had 
in mind, theoretically at least. Naturally, Herr Jung does not see 
this either. True, for him Börne is to a certain extent a respectable 
person, even a man of character, which is obviously very valuable 
in the circumstances; he has undeniable merits, as perhaps 
Varnhagen and Pückler have also, and he wrote in particular good 
dramatic criticism, but he was a fanatic and terrorist, and from 
such may the good Lord deliver us! Shame on such a vapid, 
faint-hearted conception of a man who by his mode of thought 
alone became a standard-bearer of his time! This Jung, who 
wishes to construct Young Germany and Gutzkow's personality out 
of the absolute concept, is not even capable of understanding such 
a simple character as Börne; he does not see how inevitably and 
logically the most extreme, the most radical pronouncements arise 
from Börne's innermost being, that Börne was a republican by his 
very nature, and that truly the Briefe aus Paris are not written in too 
strong terms for such a man. Or has Herr Jung never heard a 
Swiss or a North American talking about monarchical states? And 
who would reproach Börne for "considering life only from the 
political point of view"? Does not Hegel do the same? Is not for 
him, too, the state in its transition to world history, and therefore 
in the conditions of home and foreign policy, the concrete reality 
of the absolute spirit? And — ludicrously enough — confronted by 
this direct, naive outlook of Börne, which finds its completion in 
the wider Hegelian outlook and often coincides with it in the most 
surprising way, Herr Jung nevertheless concludes that Börne 
"outlined a system of politics and happiness of the peoples", a sort 
of abstract, cloudy conception which, in his view, must explain 
Börne's one-sidedness and obduracy! Herr Jung has not the 
slightest idea of Börne's importance, his iron, unyielding charac­
ter, his imposing will-power, precisely because he himself is such 
a Ludwig Börne. — Ed. 

=====第312页=====
290 Frederick Engels 
an insignificant, soft-hearted, helpless, obsequious little man. He 
does not know that as a personality Börne is unique in German 
history; he does not know that Börne was the standard-bearer of 
German freedom, the only real man in the Germany of his day; he 
cannot imagine what it means to rise up against forty million Ger­
mans and proclaim the realm of the idea; he cannot understand 
that Börne is the John the Baptist of the new period, who preaches 
repentance to the self-satisfied Germans and tells them that 
already the axe is laid to the root of the tree and that one mightier 
will come, who will baptise with fire and mercilessly sweep away 
the chaff from the threshing-floor. Herr Jung should see himself 
as part of this  chaff.  Finally, Herr A. Jung arrives at his beloved 
Young Germany and begins with a tolerable, but much too 
detailed criticism of Heine. The others are then dealt with in turn; 
first Laube, Mundt, and Kühne, then Wienbarg, to whom homage 
is paid as he deserves, and finally almost 50 pages are devoted to 
Gutzkow. The first three receive the usual juste-milieu tribute, 
much approval and very modest censure; Wienbarg is given 
definite prominence, but only four pages are allotted to him; and 
finally, with shameless servility, Gutzkow is made the standard-
bearer of the "modern", his image is constructed in accordance 
with the Hegelian scheme of concepts, and he is treated as a 
personage of the first rank. 
If such judgments had been put forward by a young, budding 
author, one would let it pass; there are many who for a time set 
their hopes on the Young Literature, and with an eye to the 
expected future considered its works with more indulgence than 
they could otherwise have justified to themselves. In particular, 
anyone whose own mind has passed through the recent stages of 
the development of German thought will at some time have had a 
special liking for the works of Mundt, Laube, or Gutzkow. But 
since then progress beyond this trend has gone on much too 
vigorously, and the emptiness of most of the Young Germans has 
become horribly obvious. 
Young Germany extricated itself from the unclearness of dis­
turbed times, but itself remained tainted by this unclearness. Ideas 
which at that time were fermenting in people's minds in a still 
shapeless and undeveloped form and which only later were 
consciously perceived with the help of philosophy, were used by 
Young Germany to play a game of fantasy. Hence the vagueness, 
the confusion of concepts, which prevailed among the Young 
Germans themselves. Gutzkow and Wienbarg knew better than the 
others what they wanted, Laube least of all. Mundt pursued social 

=====第313页=====
Alexander Jung, "Lectures on Modern German Literature" 291 
whims; Kühne, in whom something of Hegel was visible, made 
schemes and classifications. But in view of the general unclearness 
of thought nothing of value could come of it. The idea of the 
justification of sensuality was conceived, following Heine's exam­
ple, in a crude and shallow way; liberal political principles differed 
among various personalities and the position of women gave rise 
to the most sterile and confused discussions. No one knew where 
he stood in relation to another person. The measures adopted by 
the various governments against these people should also be 
ascribed to the universal confusion of the period. The fantastic 
form in which these views were propagated could only promote 
further confusion. Thanks to the outward brilliance of the Young 
Germans' works, to their witty, piquant and lively style, the 
enigmatic mysticism in which the main slogans were clothed, and 
thanks also to the revival of criticism and enlivening of the literary 
journals under their influence, the Young Germans soon attracted 
a mass of younger writers, and it was not long before each of 
them, with the exception of Wienbarg, had his own following. The 
old, flabby  belles-lettres  had to give way under pressure from the 
young forces, and the "Young Literature" took possession of the 
field it had conquered, divided it up—and disintegrated in the 
course of this division. Thus, the inadequacy of principle was 
disclosed. They had all been mistaken about one another. Princi­
ples vanished; it was now only a matter of personalities. Gutzkow 
or Mundt, that was the question. The periodicals began to be filled 
with the doings of the cliques, squabbles, and disputes about 
nothing at all. 
The easy victory had made the young masters overbearing and 
vain. They regarded themselves as characters of world-historic 
importance. Whenever a new author appeared a pistol was 
immediately levelled at his heart and his unconditional subordina­
tion demanded. Each claimed to be the sole god of literature. 
Thou shalt have no other gods before me! The slightest censure 
aroused deadly enmities. Thus this trend lost all the intellectual 
content it might still have had and degenerated into sheer 
squabbling, which culminated in Heine's book about Börne 3 and 
developed into infamous baseness. Of the individual personalities, 
undoubtedly the noblest is Wienbarg —a true, forceful man, like a 
statue of brightly shining bronze cast in a single piece, without a 
speck of rust. Gutzkow is the clearest, the most intelligent; he has 
written more than the others and, next to Wienbarg, has provided 
a H. Heine, Über Ludwig Börne. — Ed. 

=====第314页=====
292 Frederick Engels 
the most definite evidence of his mode of thought. However, if he 
wishes to remain in the sphere of drama, he should look for better 
and richer ideological material than he has chosen so far, and 
proceed not from the "modern", but from the true spirit of the 
present day. We demand greater ideological content than is to be 
found in the liberal phrases of Patkul or the tender sensitivity of 
Werner.a  Where Gutzkow has great talent is as a publicist; he is a 
born journalist, but there is only one means by which he can hold 
his own: if he masters the latest philosophical developments on 
religion and the state, and if he unreservedly devotes his Tele-
graph b — which, it is said, he intends to revive — to the great 
movement of the present time. If he allows the degenerate type of 
belles-lettres  to gain the upper hand over him his journal will be no 
better than others of the same kind, which are neither fish nor 
fowl, abound in boring stories, are scarcely glanced at and, in 
general, as regards content and the opinion of the public, have 
sunk lower than ever before. Their day is past, they are gradually 
being absorbed by the political newspapers, which are quite able to 
cope with the little bit of literature that appears. 
In spite of his bad qualities, Laube is still likeable to a certain 
extent, but his untidy scribblings, devoid of principle — one day a 
novel, the next day a history of literature, and the day after 
criticism, drama, etc.— his vanity and shallowness prevent him 
from coming to the fore. He has as little spirit of freedom as has 
Kühne. The "tendencies" of the "Young Literature" of yore have 
long been forgotten, both of them are wholly in the grip of empty, 
abstract literary interests. On the other hand, with Heine and 
Mundt indifference has become open apostasy. Heine's book on 
Börne is the most vile that has ever been written in the German 
language; Mundt's latest writings in Der Pilot deprive the author of 
the Madonna of the last trace of respect in the eyes of the nation. 
Here in Berlin people know only too well what Mundt aims to 
achieve by such self-abasement, viz., a professorship; all the more 
disgusting is this servility which has suddenly taken possession of 
Herr Mundt. Let Herr Mundt and his henchman, F. Radewell, 
continue to cast suspicion on recent philosophy, to grasp the 
sheet-anchor of Schelling's revelation and make themselves ridicu­
lous in the eyes of the nation by their nonsensical attempts at 
independent philosophising. Free philosophy can calmly allow 
their infantile philosophical writings to go unrefuted; they collapse 
a The heroes of Gutzkow's plays of the same name.— Ed. 
Telegraph für Deutschland. — Ed. 

=====第315页=====
Alexander Jung, "Lectures on Modern German Literature" 293 
of themselves. Everything that bears the name of Herr Mundt is 
branded, like the works of Leo, with the mark of apostasy. 
Perhaps he will soon acquire a new vassal in Herr Jung; the latter 
bids fair to become one, as we have already seen and shall see 
again later. 
[Deutsche Jahrbücher No. 162, July 9, 1842] 
Having achieved the actual aim he set himself in his lectures, 
Herr Jung is irresistibly impelled in conclusion to make himself 
once again the laughing-stock of the nation. From Gutzkow he 
passes on to David Strauss and ascribes to him the outstanding 
merit of having combined in himself "the conclusions of Hegel 
and Schleiermacher and of the modern style" (is that perhaps an 
example of the modern style}), but at the same time bitterly 
complains of the abominable, eternal negation. Yes, negation, 
negation everywhere! The poor positivists and people of the 
juste-milieu see the wave of negation rising ever higher and higher; 
they cling fast to one another and cry out for something positive. 
And now we have someone like Alexander Jung moaning over the 
eternal movement of world history, calling progress negation, and 
finally setting himself up as a false prophet who predicts "a great 
birth of the positive", which he describes in advance with the most 
involved phrases, and which will conquer Strauss, Feuerbach and 
everything connected with them by the sword of the Lord. In his 
Literatur-Blatt, too, he preaches the coming of the new "positive" 
Messiah. Can there be anything more unphilosophical than such 
unconcealed dislike, such open dissatisfaction with the present? 
Can one behave in a more unmanly and feeble manner than Herr 
A. Jung does? Can one imagine a worse fantasy — apart from 
neo-Schellingian scholasticism — than this pious faith in a "positive 
Messiah"? Was there ever a greater and, unfortunately, also more 
widespread confusion than that which now prevails in regard to 
the concepts "positive and negative"? One has only to take the 
trouble of looking more closely at the disparaged negation and it 
will be found that it is itself entirely positive. Of course, for those 
who declare that the rational, thought, is not positive because it 
develops instead of standing still, and whose feeble ivy-like minds 
need an old ruined wall, a fact, to cling to, for them, of course, all 
progress is negative. In reality, however, thought in its develop­
ment alone constitutes the eternal and positive whereas the factual, 
the external aspect of what is taking place, is precisely what is 
negative, evanescent and vulnerable to criticism. 

=====第316页=====
294 Frederick Engels 
"But who will unearth this infinite treasure reposing so close to 
us?"  continues Herr Jung with heightened pathos. Yes, who will 
be the Messiah who will lead the weak, wavering souls out of the 
exile of negation, out of the dark night of despair, back into the 
land flowing with milk and honey? 
"Perhaps Schelling} We place great, sacred hopes on Schelling precisely 
because He trusted solitude for so long, precisely because he has discovered that 
throne of peace at the fountain-head of thought and creativity, that throne of 
power which makes time cease to be time!", etc. 
Yes, this is a Hegelian speaking, and he continues (Königsberger 
Literatur-Blatt No. 4 a): 
"We expect an extraordinary amount from Schelling. Schelling, we hope, will 
stride through history with the same beacon of a new, as yet unseen light as he once 
strode with through nature", etc. 
Then in No. 7 — a tribute to Schelling's unknown god. The 
philosophy of mythology and revelation is construed as necessary, 
and Herr Jung basks in the consciousness that already from afar 
with his inspired eye he is able to divine the paths of thought of 
Schelling, the great Schelling. This Jung is such a spineless, 
dreamy soul that he finds satisfaction only in submission to 
someone else, in subordination to another's authority. There is not 
a hint of independence about him; as soon as the support to which 
he clings is removed he breaks down and sheds bright tears of 
yearning. He even debases himself before something he does not 
yet know and, in spite of the fairly exact information that was 
available about Schelling's philosophy and the specific content of 
his lectures even before he spoke in Berlin, Herr Jung knows no 
greater bliss than to sit in the dust at Schelling's feet. He does not 
know how Schelling spoke of Hegel in the preface to Cousin's 
book 145 or, rather, he knows it full well and yet he, a Hegelian, 
dares to cringe to Schelling, he dares after such antecedents to go 
on mentioning Hegel's name and to refer to him when opposing 
the most recent developments! And to crown his self-degradation, 
in No. 13 he once more piously prostrates himself before Schel­
ling, bestowing on the latter's first lecture the adulation of his full 
admiration and reverence. Yes, he finds here confirmation of 
everything about Schelling that he, 
"not only presupposed, but knew — that wonderfully fresh penetration, perfect 
also in form, into all scientific, artistic and ethical elements which, in such a 
combination of the ancient and Christian world, can consecrate one thus glorified 
into a totally different priest of all that is highest and its revelation, such as priests of 
a Of October 27,  1841.—  Ed. 

=====第317页=====
Alexander Jung, "Lectures on Modern German Literature" 295 
a lower order and laymen can only dream of". Of course, some will be so vile "that out 
of envy they will even deny the greatness which reveals itself here to all as pure 
and clear as sunlight". "Schelling's full greatness, his superiority over all the 
excellence of merely one-sided trends, sheds its splendid lustre on us in his first 
lecture." ... "One who can begin in this way must continue powerfully, must end as 
victor, and if they should all grow weary and droop because they are unaccustomed 
to such flights, and no one can any longer follow and understand what is spoken by 
You, who are inspired from of old, nevertheless You are sure to be heard by the 
shade of one who is Your equal, the most faithful, the most glorious of Your 
friends, You are heard by the shade of old HegeR"* 
What could Herr Jung have had in mind when he put this wild 
enthusiasm, these romantic flights on paper! Our pious "priest" 
has not the slightest inkling of what everyone, at least here in 
Berlin, knew beforehand or could conclude with certainty. But 
what sort of "revelations" this "priest of all that is highest" 
preached to us, what the "greatness", the "destiny to reveal all 
that is highest to mankind", the "powerful flight", consisted in, 
how Schelling "ended as victor"—the whole world now knows. In 
the pamphlet Schelling und die Offenbarung* of which I hereby 
acknowledge myself to be the author, I have given a completely 
objective description of the content of the new revelation. Let 
Herr Jung use it to prove that his hopes have been realised, or at 
least let him have the sincerity and courage to admit his egregious 
error. 
Without going on to the criticism of Sealsfield with which Herr 
Jung ends his book, since I have already strayed far enough from 
the field of  belles-lettres,  I will conclude by examining a few more 
passages from the Königsberger Literatur-Blatt to demonstrate Herr 
Jung's faint-heartedness and empty pomposity here also. Already 
in No. 1 reference is made to Feuerbach's Wesen des Christentums, 
although in a very restrained manner; in No. 2 attacks are made, 
although still in a respectful form, on the theory of negation of 
the Jahrbücher, in No. 3 homage is paid to Herbart, as previously to 
Schelling; in No. 4 homage is paid to both of them and at the 
same time a protest voiced against radicalism; No. 8 begins an 
extensive criticism of Feuerbach's book, in which the half-hearted 
juste-milieu attempts to assert its superiority over decisive radical­
ism. And what are the convincing arguments employed here? 
Feuerbach would be quite right, says Jung, if the earth were the 
whole universe; from the terrestrial point of view his whole work 
is splendid, convincing, excellent, irrefutable; but from the univer-
" Königsberger Literatur-Blatt No. 13, December 29,  1841.—  Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 189-240.— Ed. 

=====第318页=====
296 Frederick Engels 
sal, the global point of view, it is worthless. A fine theory! As if 
twice two were five on the moon, as if stones were alive and ran 
about on Venus, and plants could talk on the sun! As if a 
different, new kind of reason began beyond the earth's atmos­
phere, and the nature of the mind were to be measured by its 
distance from the sun! As if the self-consciousness at which the 
earth arrives in mankind did not become world consciousness the 
very moment it recognises its own position as an element of the 
latter! As if such an objection were not merely an excuse to banish 
the vexatious reply to an old question into the bad infinity of 
space! Does it not sound curiously naive when Jung smuggles into 
his main line of argument the phrase: "reason, which goes beyond 
the bounds of any merely spherical definitiveness"  ? How can he 
then, having admitted the consistency and rationality of the 
disputed position from the terrestrial point of view, make a 
distinction between the latter and the "universal" one? It is, 
however, quite worthy of such a fantast and emotional dreamer as 
Herr Jung to lose himself in the bad infinity of the starry sky, and 
to concoct all kinds of curious hypotheses and wonderful day­
dreams about thinking, loving, romanticising beings on other 
celestial bodies. Moreover, it is ludicrous how he warns against the 
shallowness of directly accusing Feuerbach and Strauss of atheism 
and unconditional denial of immortality. Herr Jung does not see 
that these people make no claim to any other viewpoint at all. To 
continue: in No. 12 Herr Jung already threatens us with his an­
ger; in No. 26 an interpretation of Leo is given, and because of 
Leo's undoubted talent his actual views are totally forgotten and 
glossed over; Ruge, too, is dealt with just as incorrectly as Leo. 
No. 29 approves Hinrichs' worthless criticism of the Posaune' in the 
Berliner Jahrbücher, and speaks out even more definitely against the 
Left; No. 35 gives in full a long, appalling article about F. Baader, 
whose somnambulistic mysticism and unphilosophy are moreover 
put to his credit; finally, No. 36 complains about an "unfortunate 
polemic", in other words, obviously, about E. Meyen's article in 
the Rheinische Zeitung, 146 in which for once Herr Jung is told the 
truth — it is most peculiar! Herr Jung sinks into such a state of 
torpor and day-dreaming that he imagines he is our "comrade-
in-arms", and "defends the same ideas", and that although "it is 
true there existed differences" between him and us, "nevertheless 
the identity of principles and aims is firmly established". It is to be 
a B. Bauer's anonymous book Die Posaune des jüngsten Gerichts über Hegel den 
Atheisten und Antichristen. — Ed. 

=====第319页=====
Alexander Jung, "Lectures on Modern German Literature" 297 
hoped that he has now realised that we are neither inclined nor 
able to fraternise with him. Such miserable amphibians and 
double-dealers are useless for the struggle, which was started by 
resolute people and can be carried through only by men of 
character. In the course of the above article he further discredits 
himself by indulging in the most trivial talk about the literary 
despotism of the liberals and defending his own freedom. Let him 
keep it; everyone will be quite ready to let him go blathering on 
for all eternity. But let him permit us to thank him for his support 
and to tell him honestly and frankly what we think of him. 
Otherwise, he would indeed be the literary despot, and he is 
somewhat too soft-hearted for that. The same issue closes worthily 
with an appeal for help against "the self-seeking, vain clamour 
which ravingly elevates self-consciousness to be God" — and the 
Königsberger Literatur-Blatt even dares to reproduce these horrify­
ing exclamations: "Down with Christianity, down with immortality, 
down with God!!" However, it consoles itself by the fact that "the 
coffin-bearers stand ready on the threshold to carry out those who 
still have such fine voices as dumb corpses". a Once again, there­
fore,  the impotence of an appeal to the future! 
I have not yet seen any later issue of Jung's paper. I think the 
evidence given above will suffice to justify the exclusion of Herr 
Jung from the camp of the resolute and "free"; he himself is now 
in a position to see what people object to in him. Permit me yet 
another remark. Herr Jung is, undoubtedly, Germany's most 
spineless, helpless and confused writer. What is the origin of all 
this, whence the devotional form which he displays everywhere? Is 
it perhaps connected with the fact, as rumour has it, that Herr 
Jung must have formerly been devotional ex officio? 147 
Written about June 15, 1842 
First published in the Deutsche Jahrbücher 
für Wissenschaft und Kunst Nos. 160, 161 
and 162, July 7, 8 and 9, 1842 
Signed: Friedrich Oswald 
* Königsberger Literatur-Blatt No. 36, June 8, 1842.— Ed. Printed according to the journal 
Published in English for the first 
time 
11-384 

=====第320页=====
PARTICIPATION IN THE DEBATES 
OF THE BADEN CHAMBER OF DEPUTIES 
Berlin, June 21. The more our political awareness develops and 
the more freely and loudly the public voice of Prussia makes itself 
heard, the more we feel at one with the other German races, and 
the greater the interest with which we view the manifestations of 
their state life. This is irrefutable testimony that the barriers which 
have existed so long in public opinion between Prussia and 
constitutional Germany have fallen, and that the national division 
resulting, on the one hand, from the arrogant self-sufficiency of 
many Prussians and, on the other, from the South-German 
liberals' distrust of our government, no longer exists. Last year the 
reconciliation between the North-German and the South-German 
representatives of progress already found expression in the recep­
tion which Welcker was given in Berlin as well as in the rest of 
North Germany,148 but it is only since the freer censorship in 
Prussia149 that the two great halves of our Fatherland began to 
merge ever more visibly in the single striving for freedom. The 
Prussians have unexpectedly departed from their self-sufficiency, 
from their vainglorious boasting that their institutions are fault­
less; in less than half a year defects have been -discovered whose 
very existence the majority of our fellow citizens had refused to 
imagine. The South Germans, on the other hand, owing to the 
independent-minded and often directly oppositional Prussian 
press,  have got rid of the last remnants of their prejudices against 
the Prussian people and the latter's degree of political education. 
In such circumstances it is understandable that the proceedings of 
the Baden Chamber of Deputies are being followed by us with the 
liveliest interest. After the Prussians had shown in the press that 

=====第321页=====
Participation in the Debates of the Baden Chamber of Deputies 299 
they had come of age politically, it was expected that the South 
Germans would do their utmost so as not to lag behind us. The 
Württemberg Chamber, however, showed only too clearly in its 
debates on judicial procedure how greatly it lacks the old 
coryphaei of  1833. 150 From Baden, on the other hand, one could 
have expected that after what happened in the dissolved 
Chamber151 political life would not so easily go to sleep. The 
powerful movements during the elections were a welcome sign of 
alertness and interest in domestic affairs; and although the press 
was not permitted to let us participate in these from afar and in 
thought, nevertheless they found expression in the election de­
bates in the Chamber and now come into full evidence before our 
eyes.  These debates, together with the hints that the press here 
and there contained about the celebrations prepared for individual 
deputies, gave us a clear picture of those days of tension and 
struggle. It was shown also, again in the most conspicuous way, in 
connection with the Schwetzingen-Philippsburg election among 
other things, that nothing is more harmful to governments 
anywhere than exaggerated zeal on the part of officials. The 
machinations resorted to here to secure votes for Rettig are 
unprecedented in Baden's constitutional history. The simple fact 
that a constituency, which for twenty years in succession was always 
represented by von Itzstein, should now all at once have dropped 
him after he has often enough given evidence of his frame of 
mind and elected a deputy from the governmental party, suffi­
ciently proves that this election was not a free one. The more 
welcome therefore was the reparation made to von Itzstein by the 
Chamber.152  There one was glad to hear the veterans of free 
thought, Itzstein and Welcker, as well as representatives of the 
younger generation, Rindeschwender and others, speak in the old 
familiar way. The fact that the election of Mathy as deputy was 
secured in spite of all hostility, makes an all the better impression 
since in general he is the first journalist in Germany to have a seat 
in a Chamber. 
s 
Written on June 21, 1842 Printed according to the news-
First published in the Rheinische Zeitung " " 
No. 176, June 25, 1842 Published in English for the first 
* * time 
Marked with the sign x 
11« 

=====第322页=====
THE LIBERALISM 
OF THE SPENERSCHE ZEITUNG 
Berlin, June 22. The other day, the Spenersche Zeitung' bestowed 
upon  itself,  since so far no one else has taken on the job, the 
praise which it feels it deserves. 15S A "review" of its activity over 
the past six months is sufficient for it to arrive at the important 
discovery that it is the paper which has pioneered the movement 
for a free press. It is amusing to see how, with a solemn air of 
heightened self-confidence, its frock-coat brushed fit for Sunday, 
it steps before its public, before the foreign newspapers, and 
places on its head the civic crown of liberalism. The Spenersche 
Zeitung claims that but for it or rather for the *, which stands for 
the article in question, but for this * no Prussian newspaper would 
to this day have attained the present standpoint of liberalism. For 
as soon as the censorship circular appeared 154 the * proceeded to 
sound out how tar one might go in the opposition business; it 
knocked, softly, and lo! it was admitted. And naturally so, for 
these quiet, bowing, well-intentioned, humble, tame articles would 
eventually have been passed even before. The* should at least 
trust its censor to be able to tell a domestic animal from a wild 
one.  But God forbid! This isolated philistinism is so limited that it 
takes the most trivial idea that crosses its mind for original, 
inspired by genius, unique of its kind. The censorship circular 
appears; now every writer must, of course, instantly change his 
manner of writing, give it freer rein. Our asterisk man, however, 
considers himself the only person in the world with an intellect 
capable of reaching this conclusion, and he wants to rub it under 
a The reference is to the newspaper Berlinische Nachrichten von Staats- und 
gelehrten Sachen. — Ed. 

=====第323页=====
The Liberalism of the  Spenersche Zeitung  301 
the noses of other journalists that they may now write more freely. 
But that is not enough. He thinks himself liberal. He has a certain 
flair for publicity. Perhaps in the most secret, hidden corner of his 
heart slumbers a little thought of the development of estate 
relations.— So what does he do then? He writes a series of articles 
which represent a complete range of liberalism; today the tamest is 
sent in, tomorrow the one which is half a grain less tame, and so 
on. But at the stage where the tameness and the so-called 
liberalism balance, he stops. Our asterisk man calls this "pioneer­
ing"!? The other Prussian editorial boards will no doubt take the 
trouble to read the  Spenersche  Zeitung so as to learn from it the 
meaning of liberalism! Moreover, it is odd that our politicaster 
cannot understand why he does not cause as big a sensation with 
his articles as certain newspapers do with theirs; why he, the 
standard-bearer of Prussian liberalism, the great pioneer, finds 
himself nevertheless derided in all foreign newspapers, and must 
console himself with the thought that he is misunderstood. 
Written on June 22, 1842 
First published in the  Rheinische Zeitung 
No. 177, June 26, 1842 
Marked with the sign *x* Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第324页=====
THE END OF THE CRIMINALISTISCHE ZEITUNG 
Berlin, June 25. On July 1 the local Criminalistische Zeitung will 
"cease to appear for the time being". Hence, its tirades against the 
jury system do not seem to have found the desired approval of the 
public. It was a juste-milieu paper in the juristic sphere. It favoured 
public and oral proceedings, but for God's sake no juries. The 
half-heartedness of such a tendency is fortunately being more and 
more recognised, and supporters of the jury system multiply daily. 
The Criminalistische Zeitung established the principle that no 
branch of executive power must be given directly into the hands 
of the people, hence not judicial office either. That would be all 
very fine if judicial power were not something quite different 
from executive power. In all states where the separation of the 
powers has been really instituted, judicial and executive powers 
are quite without any connection. This is the case in France, 
England and America; the mixing of the two leads to the most 
unholy confusion, and its most extreme consequence would be to 
unite the chief of police, investigating officer and judge in one 
person. But it has long been proved, not only in principle but by 
history, that judicial power is the direct property of the nation, 
which exercises it through its jurors. I remain silent on the 
advantages and guarantees offered by the jury system; it would be 
superfluous to waste words on that. But there are the inveterate 
jurists, the sticklers for the letter, whose slogan is: fiat justitia, 
pereat mundusl a The free jury system naturally does not suit them 
for not only would they be pushed out of their position as judges, 
a May justice take its course even if the world perishes.— Ed. 

=====第325页=====
The End of the Criminalistische Zeitung 303 
but the sacred letter of the law, dead, abstract law, would be 
jeopardised. And that must not be lost. It is their palladium, and 
hence the gentlemen cry blue murder when for once a jury in 
France or England acquits a poor proletarian who, driven to 
desperation by hunger, has stolen a pennyworth of bread, al­
though the case was proved by witnesses and confession. Then 
they shout triumphantly: You see, that comes of the jury system, 
the safety of property, of life itself is undermined, lawlessness is 
sanctioned, crime and revolution are openly proclaimed!—We 
hope that for the time being the Criminalistische Zeitung will not 
start again to appear "for the time being". 
Written on June 25, 1842 
First published in the Rheinische Zeitung 
No. 181, June 30, 1842 
Marked with the sign x Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第326页=====
ON THE CRITIQUE 
OF THE PRUSSIAN PRESS LAWS156 
Berlin, June. Two ways are open to the Prussian for the 
publication of his thoughts. He can either have them printed in 
his own country, in which case he has to submit to the domestic 
censorship; or, should he meet with objections here, outside the 
frontiers of his own state he can still either place himself under 
the censorship of another state in the Confederation or take 
advantage of press freedom in foreign countries. In any case the 
state retains the right to take repressive measures against possible 
breaches of the law. In the first case, such measures will, in the 
nature of things, be applicable only very rarely, since as a rule the 
censorship deletes too much rather than too little and least of all 
does it pass anything liable to penalties. But with publications which 
have been effected under foreign press laws confiscation of the 
work and prosecution of the author can occur much more readily 
and frequently. To form a judgment on Prussian press legislation 
as a whole it is most important that legal measures of repression 
should not be disregarded. 
Since we still lack a special repressive statute on the press, the 
laws relating to this are scattered under various headings in the 
Prussian Law.156  We can for the moment disregard the penal laws 
against libel, indecency and the like, since we are in the main 
concerned only with political offences, and here we find the 
relevant data under the headings of high treason, insolent and 
disrespectful criticism or mockery of the laws of the land, and 
lèse-majesté. As will be seen presently, these laws are, however, 
formulated so vaguely and, in relation to the press in particular, 
subject to such wide and undeniably arbitrary interpretation that 

=====第327页=====
On the Critique of the Prussian Press Laws 305 
any judgment on them must essentially depend only on the 
practice of the courts. For if it is correct to assume that the spirit 
of every* legal system comes to life in theb administrators of 
justice, the latter's customary interpretation of particular provi­
sions must form an important complement to them, and previous 
practice does indeed influence the verdict considerably in doubtful 
cases. 
The present author is now in a position to supplement his 
judgment on the Prussian press laws with an extensively motivated 
verdict by a Prussian court which lies before him. The author of a 
paper on domestic affairs printed outside Prussia was charged 
with all the offences listed above and, although unconditionally 
acquitted of the charge of high treason, was found guilty of 
insolent and disrespectful criticism, mockery of the laws of the 
land, and also  lèse-majesté. 157 
The Prussian Penal Code defines the crime of high treason as 
follows (§ 92): 
"An action aimed at a violent overthrow of the state system or against the life or 
liberty of its head is high treason." 
It can be assumed that for the present conditions this legal 
definition will be recognised as sufficiently general. This point is 
fairly unimportant for the press since it is not to be expected that 
such enterprises will be started by the press or by the kind of 
people whom our justice can reach. The clear word "violent" is 
sufficient protection against judicial arbitrariness or illiberality. 
Another point is, however, of the greatest importance for the 
press,  namely, the one which refers to the unauthorised statement 
of opinions regarding the laws of the land. The legal definitions 
concerned are the following: Penal Code, § 151: 
"Whosoever causes dissatisfaction by insolent, disrespectful criticism or mockery 
of the laws of the land and government edicts shall incur the penalty of detention 
in prison or fortress from six months to two years." 
The Edict0 of October 18, 1819, is relevant here, which lays 
down under XVI, Clause 2, 
"that with insolent, disrespectful criticism and mockery of the laws of the land 
and government edicts, the issue shall not be held to be merely whether displeasure 
or dissatisfaction has been caused, but whether the above penalty has been incurred 
by such culpable utterances themselves".15 
It is, however, clear even at first glance how indefinite and 
a In the  Rheinische  Zeitung:  our.— Ed. 
b In the  Rheinische  Zeitung:  our.— Ed. 
c In the  Rheinische  Zeitung:  Censorship Edict.— Ed. 

=====第328页=====
306 Frederick Engels 
inadequate these legal provisions are. What do insolent and 
disrespectful mean? Obviously either the first or the second part of 
the paragraph in the Penal Code is superfluous. Insolent criticism 
or mockery of the laws of the land is as good as declared 
synonymous with provocation of displeasure, and the Edict of 
October 18, 1819, directly expresses the identity of these concepts. 
The legal stipulation is, therefore, to be understood thus: whoever 
makes himself guilty of insolent, disrespectful criticism or mockery 
of the laws of the land and government edicts seeks to provoke 
displeasure and dissatisfaction with them and has, therefore, 
incurred the penalty in question. 
Only now is it possible to view the law clearly. To place the 
concepts insolent and disrespectful side by side was a blunder on the 
part of the legislator liable to cause the greatest confusion. It is 
possible to be disrespectful without being insolent. Disrespect is a 
deficiency, an act of negligence, a mistake made in haste, which 
can happen to the best of people; insolence presupposes the 
animus injuriandi, the malicious intent. And now, to crown it all, 
mockery! What a far cry from "disrespect" to "mockery"! And yet 
both carry the same penalty. These two concepts are not merely 
quantitatively different, not merely different degrees of one and 
the same thing—they are essentially different in quality, quite 
incommensurable. If someone is approaching me to whom I am 
under an obligation, and I notice him and give him a wide berth 
so as not to greet him, that is disrespectful; if I look him boldly in 
the face, pull my hat down over my eyes and in passing dig my 
elbow into his side, that is insolent; but if I thumb my nose in his 
face and make grimaces, that is mockery. Certain people even 
consider it disrespectful not to notice them.a And are these 
different things to be put under the same heading in a law? In 
any case, "disrespectful" should be deleted here and put in a 
separate paragraph or, rather, omitted entirely. For displeasure 
and dissatisfaction can never be intended by disrespectful criticism 
since disrespect is always committed unintentionally, unwittingly, or 
at least without ill intent. Hence, if the word disrespectful is kept 
here,  it is thereby pronounced that each and every criticism of the 
state affairs seeks to provoke dissatisfaction and is therefore 
punishable. But this would be in complete contradiction to our 
present censorship conditions. In short, the whole confusion is 
caused by the word disrespectful being taken over from the 
censorship instructions, where it belongs, into the law. In censor-
a In the Rheinische Zeitung the last two sentences are omitted.— Ed. 

=====第329页=====
On the Critique of the Prussian Press Laws 307 
ship cases it may be left to the judgment of the censor as a police 
officer, as long as censorship is a police measure, whether he 
considers something to be "disrespectful" or "well-intentioned"; 
censorship is an exception, and more precise definitions will 
always be impossible here. But such a vague concept, such latitude 
for subjective interpretation should not be present in the Criminal 
Code, least of all where difference of political views is bound to 
come into play and where the judges are not jurymen but servants 
of the state. That this critique of the law is correct, that the charge 
of confusion of concepts is well founded, may be best demon­
strated by the practice of the courts. I cite the above-mentioned 
verdict, dated 5th April of this year2 and already published. 
The authorb of the printed paper in question outlines in it a 
description of the censorship as exercised, be it noted, in Prussia 
towards the end of 1840, the following passages from which were 
found incriminating: 
"As is known, neither the smallest newspaper article nor writings of more than 
twenty printed sheets may be published here without examination by the censor; if 
the subject is political, the examination devolves in most cases on a police agent, 
who,  the stipulations of the censorship regulations (of October 18, 1819) being so 
vague, has to be guided solely by the special instructions of the minister. 
Completely dependent on the minister and responsible to him alone, this censor is 
compelled to delete everything which is not agreeable to the individual views and 
intentions of his superiors. If the author lays a complaint against him, he meets, as 
a rule, with rejection or obtains his due after such a long time that he can no 
longer make use of it. How else can one explain the fact that since the praise 
accorded to decent publicity in 1804 not the slightest criticism of the procedure of 
the most subordinate official can be found in any Prussian newspaper or in any 
book printed here, that even the remotest reference to the public interest must first 
flee beyond the Prussian borders in order to be published (of course, no one will 
include here the Home Affairs column of the Staatszeitungc). 
"And even here it is not safe from that autocracy of officials which causes so 
much concern and which Frederick William III rightly described as the inevitable 
consequence of suppressed publicity; in order that no unfavourable judgment of 
the actions of officials, no outspoken comment of any kind on our conditions may 
come into Prussia through such foreign papers, they are either prohibited or their 
editorial boards made amenable by well-known methods. We are not, unfortunate­
ly, exaggerating! French newspapers are indeed permitted, but most of them are 
not allowed to enter Prussia as printed matter, so that one copy of such a paper 
would cost more than 400 talers a year in postage; only the appearance is 
preserved, in reality such permission is tantamount to prohibition. A different 
method is used with German newspapers. If their editors are not already on their 
guard in their own well-understood interest, if they accept an article about Prussia 
a In the Rheinische Zeitung the words "dated 5th April of this year" are 
omitted.— Ed. 
Johann Jacoby.— Ed. 
c Allgemeine Preussische Staats-Zeitung. — Ed. 

=====第330页=====
308 Frederick Engels 
or Prussian officials which causes displeasure in Berlin, rebukes and complaints are 
brought against them by the Prussian Government (we are prepared to prove this 
to any doubters with documents), the names of their correspondents are demanded 
under threats, and the profitable Prussian market is kept open to them only on 
humiliating conditions."1 
After this description the accused remarks that censorship 
exercised in this fashion becomes arrogant tutelage, virtual sup­
pression of public opinion, and eventually leads to a highly 
questionable autocracy of officials, equally dangerous to king and 
people. 
Now, what is to be said about this passage? Would not a book 
written in this tone today receive the Prussian imprimatur} Do not 
all Prussian newspapers pass exactly the same judgment on the 
censorship of that time? Have not much stronger things already 
been said about still existing institutions? And what does our 
verdict say? 
"A subject must not express himself in such a way on the laws and government 
edicts; the assertions that even the remotest reference to the public interest must 
flee beyond the Prussian borders in order to be published, that the censorship as 
exercised in Prussia involves arrogant tutelage, virtual suppression of public 
opinion, contain insolent criticism in word and spirit and violate the respect due to 
the state. The allegation, moreover, that a highly questionable autocracy of officials, 
equally dangerous to king and people, is promoted thereby, clearly proves the 
tendency to cause displeasure and dissatisfaction with the institutions so described. 
During the present proceedings the accused tried to prove that his judgment on 
the administration of the censorship is founded on fact, and in this respect he has 
referred to a number of special cases in which articles of journalistic content have 
been refused the imprimatur. He has also referred to a correspondence which took 
place between Chief Government Privy Councillor Seyffert and the editor of the 
Leipziger Allgemeine Zeitung as proof that this newspaper was indeed under the 
influence of the Prussian Government. 1" 
"These references are, however, clearly irrelevant; for, without mentioning the 
fact that isolated examples prove nothing whatever about the value or otherwise of 
a state institution, even assuming the correctness of the judgment formed by the 
accused, the form in which he has expressed it would leave intact the charge of 
insolence and disrespect. He does not judge in a manner of calm consideration, but 
condemns with expressions which, were they directed against persons, would 
indubitably have to be regarded as insults." c 
Further on it reads: 
"The accused remarks about the municipal legislation: 'Above all, the Municipal 
Order of the year 1808 must be clearly distinguished from the revised one of the 
a Vt«r Fragen beantwortet von einem Ostpreussen, S. 8-10.— Ed. 
b In the Rheinische Zeitung this last sentence is omitted.— Ed. 
c J. Jacoby, Meine weitere Verteidigung wider die gegen mich  erhobene  Beschuldigung 
der Majestätsbeleidigung und des frechen unehrerbietigen Tadels der Landesgesetze, S. 13, 
16, 20, 33-34.— Ed. 

=====第331页=====
On the Critique of the Prussian Press Laws 309 
year 1831. The first bears the liberal character of that time and respects the 
independence of citizens; the second is favoured in all cases by the present 
government and urgently recommended to the cities.' This opposition of the words 
'liberal character of that time' and 'the present government' contains the insolently 
critical assertion that the present government is not only illiberal, but also that it in 
general has no respect for the independence of citizens(??). The dishonest intention 
and the reprehensible tendency of his publication are, however, made particularly 
manifest in the examples which the accused submits as proof of the parallel he has 
drawn, since the regulations which he instances from the two municipal orders are 
herein reproduced in part incorrectly, in part incompletely and in distorted 
fashion." a 
I can pass over the excerpts which follow and which lead into 
too great detail all the more so because, even admitting the 
incorrectness and incompleteness of the incriminating description, 
this would by no means be proof of "dishonest intention" and 
"reprehensible tendency". I will quote only the conclusion: 
"When one considers that inter-estate dealings are given no publicity whatever, 
that, in consequence, at elections and on all other occasions the educated classes 
display an obvious indifference, and finally that the liberal Rhenish-Prussian estates 
twice rejected this kind of municipal legislation, in 1826 and in 1833, one will 
hardly be inclined to accept the much vaunted Prussian municipal order as 
representing the counterweight of the independent consciousness of the people 
against ministerial arbitrariness, still less as a substitute for constitutional represen­
tation."15 
On these words the verdict comments: 
"This passage, too, obviously contains mocking criticism and likewise betrays the 
tendency to provoke dissatisfaction and displeasure. He who is only concerned to 
be useful to the Fatherland will not strive to prove that previously a line was 
followed which was more beneficial to the people and which is now increasingly 
being abandoned and replaced by a tendency harmful to the common good. Such a 
comparison of the earlier, allegedly better, condition with the present one is 
perfectly unnecessary for revealing the supposed deficiencies of the present system; 
it can therefore have no other purpose than to encourage the view that the 
well-being of the nation is not in such good shape now as formerly, in order thus 
to provoke displeasure and dissatisfaction." c 
Enough of excerpts, which, by the way, I could multiply 
tenfold!d Practice confirms only too well what has been said above 
about the law. The concept of disrespect, which belongs within the 
competence of the police, of censorship, here shows its detrimental 
effects. By transplanting it to the field of the law the latter is made 
a J. Jacoby, Vier Fragen beantwortet von einem Ostpreussen, S. Il; J. Jacoby, Meine 
weitere Verteidigung..., S. 13-20.— Ed. 
b J. Jacoby, Vier Fragen..., S. 8-10.— Ed. 
c J. Jacoby, Meine weitere Verteidigung..., S. 13-20.— Ed. 
In the Rheinische Zeitung this sentence is omitted.— Ed. 

=====第332页=====
310 Frederick Engels 
dependent on censorship, which at the given time may be more 
severe or more lenient. If censorship happens to be oppressive, as 
in 1840, the slightest criticism is disrespectful. If it is lenient and* 
humane, as now, that which was formerly deemed insolent is today 
barely disrespectful. Hence the contradiction that in the Rheinische 
and Königsberger Zeitung h things receive the Prussian imprimatur 
which in 1840 were not only forbidden but even punishable. 0 
Censorship must by its nature be fluctuating; the law must, 
however, stand firm until it is repealed; it must be independent of 
variations in police practice. 
And now, to crown it all, the "provocation of displeasure and 
dissatisfaction"! That is, indeed, the purpose of all opposition. 
When I criticise thisd legal stipulation I do indeed intend to 
provoke dissatisfaction with it, and not onlye in the people but 
even if possible in the government. How can one criticise anything 
without intending to convince others of the — to put it mild­
ly— imperfection of that which is being criticised, that is, to 
awaken dissatisfaction with it? How can I criticise here and praise 
there, how can I think something to be bad and good at the same 
time? It is downright impossible. I am also honest enough to say 
straight out that I have every intention of provoking discontent and 
displeasure against §151 of the Prussian Penal Code with this 
article, and yet I cherish the conviction that I am not criticising it 
"insolently and disrespectfully", as this paragraph says, but "de­
cently and with good intent", as the censorship circular159 says. 
The censorship circular has, however, sanctioned this right to 
provoke dissatisfaction and, to the glory of the Prussian nation, 
everything possible' has already been done since then to awaken 
dissatisfaction and displeasure. This part of the paragraph has 
thereby in effect been repealed and the culpability of "disrespect­
ful criticism" significantly limited. Proof enough that the para­
graph contains a mixture and confusion of heterogeneous legisla­
tive and press-police definitions. 
This is to be explained quite simply by the period in which the 
laws of the land were codified, by the conflict between the liberal 
enlightenment of that epoch and the Prussian ancien régime of the 
time.  To entertain discontent with the government, with state 
a In the Rheinische Zeitung the words "lenient and" are omitted.— Ed. 
b Königlich Privilegirte Preussische Staats- Kriegs- und Friedens-Zeitung. — Ed. 
c In the Rheinische Zeitung this sentence is omitted.— Ed. 
In the Rheinische Zeitung: a.— Ed. 
' In the Rheinische Zeitung: and not indeed.— Ed. 
In the Rheinische Zeitung: a great deal.— Ed. 

=====第333页=====
On the Critique of the Prussian Press Laws 311 
institutions, was then not much better than high treason and, at 
the very least, a crime on which it was possible to base a nice little 
investigation and sentence. 
Lèse-majesté has little interest for us. The Prussian journalists have 
up to now had the tact to leave the person of the king out of it. 
This is anticipation of the constitutional principle of the inviolabili­
ty of the royal person and can only be approved. 
The above paragraph is herewith highly recommended to the 
Commission for Revision of the Laws; in the meantime we 
propose to continue in the well-intentioned and decent fashion 
here indicated to awaken more than a little discontent and 
dissatisfaction with all obsolete and illiberal survivals in our state 
institutions. 
Written in June 1842 
First published in the Supplement to the 
Rheinische Zeitung No. 195, July 14, 1842 
Marked with the sign x Printed according to the manu­
script, checked with the newspaper 
text 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第334页=====

=====第335页=====
THE INSOLENTLY THREATENED 
YET MIRACULOUSLY RESCUED BIBLE 
OR: 
THE TRIUMPH OF FAITH 
To Wit, the Terrible, Yet True and Salutary 
History of the Erstwhile Licentiate Bruno Bauer; 
How the Same, Seduced by the Devil, Fallen 
from the True Faith, Became Chief Devil, 
and Was Well and Truly Ousted in the End 
A Christian Epic in Four Cantos 

=====第336页=====
Written in June-July 1842 Printed according to the pamphlet 
First published as an anonymous Published in English for the first 
pamphlet in Neumunster, time 
near Zurich, in December 1842 

=====第337页=====
CANTO THE FIRST 
Spread out your pinions, O my soul, and humbly rise 
To praise in stately song Faith's glory to the skies. 
Faith's triumph — no! For am I not a broken reed? 
Another gives the vigour that I need: 
The ability, the will. O you believers, pray 
That gracious blessings may be showered my way. 
Raise a great roar, you Leo* of the Saale strands. 
Fold, Hengstenberg, your more-than-once triumphant hands. 
Prodigious likewise at the lectern and the lyre, 
Sack, lend my pen those powers of yours, lend me your fire. 
Krummacher, man of God, rock of believers true, 
0 guide me how to preach the Word as well as you. 
Dear, pious Knapp, your flaming brands of poetry 
1 bear into the dark dens of iniquity. 
And you, that to the tribe of mockers bold and free 
Held out the holy Cross, O Klopstock, stand by me! 
What would I be without you, Theologian John\ 
If you will help, I'll start and boldly carry on. 
With your assistance too, David and Ezekiel, 
I'll tear up by the roots all blasphemy most vile. 
Strong pillars of the Faith, come close and rally round, 
Shield me from Mockery, and Slander's jeering sound. 
Lift up your pious hands towards the throne of Grace, 
That to God's glory I may run my arduous race. 
What suddenly disturbs the chorus of Hosannas? 
What's happened to the angel hymns that fell like Manna? 
Heinrich Leo. — Ed. 

=====第338页=====
Frederick Engels 
Woe!  Has the Devil's cunning somehow sneaked up there? 
Has his pestiferous stench turned joy into despair? 
Where only praise and jubilation should resound, 
What means all that distress, that sad funereal sound? 
Who up in highest Heaven makes that dismal moan? 
It is the pious souls, they are the ones that groan: 
"O Lord, O hear, hear Lord, O hear our desperate cry! 
How long wilt Thou let Faith endure such agony? 
How long before Thou wilt avenge the Faithful blood 
So long spilt by the insulting and blaspheming brood? 
Oh, shall the boasts of overweening arrogance 
Prosper down there on Earth in all magnificence? 
Shall each philosopher insist that 'I am I'? 
Shall the free-thinking mob Thy very Name deny? 
Their arrogant jeering still more wantonly resounds. 
O call the Judgment Day, O let the Last Trump sound!" 
The Lord placated them: "The measure is not full. 
Wait till the carrion stink blows even still more foul. 
My soldiers I have yet to train in verve and dash, 
So that they flee not Satan in the final clash. 
Below there in Berlin, I am indeed much sought, 
But others, fettered by the chains of arrogant thought, 
They won't have Faith in me, they want to understand, 
And seek to gird me round with thought's tight metal band. 
Take Bruno Bauer: he believes, but thinks as well; 
His flesh may well be willing, but his spirit's frail. 
But wait awhile till all those dregs have finished sinking, 
And Satan after that will never catch him thinking. 
He'll find me in the end, if he but seeks me truly, 
And spurns the idle vanities he loves unduly. 
Thought's folly, that has torn his senses all apart, 
He'll see as wind; the Light once more shall flood his heart. 
Philosophy he'll deem nought but an empty fraud, 
Grace shall break through. He'll know again that God is 
God." 
Now at these words great was the Angels' joy on high, 
And pious praises of the Almighty filled the sky: 
"Let power and might and glory evermore redound 
To Thee that set the stars of Heaven whirling round. 
Thy wrath shall smite the wicked ones in every land, 
Exalting those that truly serve at Thy command." 
Then further spake the Lord: "In that last battle, he 
Shall lead the Faithful ones to final victory. 

=====第339页=====
frcd) 6cStäut», 
feboo) wunbertot befreite 
©ibd. 
toter«. 
$e? îriumpt)  &e$ ©Mend. 
£«* ift: 
©cfirtiUd)«, 
Historia 
son tent  tofilanfc  ÄUenuaien 
Jprmw  flauer; 
«I» JtlWgrt 
vom Stufet «erfû|)tet, 
vom teincn (Stauten abgefallen, 
jbbetteufel gerootben 
f rfiftialUfe entftftct  iff. 
ttfjriftlidjeâ $elfcctt0efe($t 
fn sUc  ©tfângtn. 
HenmunfUc  bei $üri<jj 
Ärudi«  uni  eertegt« 30$.  St. $«6 
184*. 
Title-page of Engels' pamphlet The Insolently Threatened Yet 
Miraculously Rescued Bible 

=====第340页=====

=====第341页=====
The Insolently Threatened Yet Miraculously Rescued Bible 319 
When all the brimming vials of my wrath are shed 
Upon the sinful Earth, and when the seas turn red, 
When well-springs shoot black fountains in the deep ravine, 
And swarming locusts in their shimmering hosts are seen, 
When all Earth thunders to a clanging hail of fire, 
And when the ground heaves up, and cliffs are smashed 
entire, 
Then on that day shall Bruno Bauer never falter 
To raise the standard of my hosts for Throne and Altar." 
These words were greeted with felicity up there, 
And jubilant hymns to praise the Almighty filled the air: 
"Sing Hallelujah! Let the incense ever rise!" 
But lo! while Heaven's vaults still echoed to the song, 
With stench and roaring tumult Satan swept along, 
Black writhing flames of Hell-rage from his eyeballs bursting, 
His tongue to taste the blood of God's own children thirsting. 
He stepped towards the Throne on sacrilegious feet, 
Towards the Angels clustered round the Almighty's Seat, 
Then he, in thunderous tones: "How long must you 
postpone, 
And in your cowardly peace keep me cooped up at home? 
Or do you simply fear that Doomsday, when we meet 
And battle at last is given 
For this world's crown, shall signal your defeat, 
As I invade your tent of Heaven? 
But if you dare, then hurry up, give battle, 
And let the trumpet sound to engage. 
I'll muster all my savage hosts to try your mettle. 
Oh, how I burn to charge in the fierce war we'll wage 
As through your heavenly spheres I rage!" 
And then the Lord: "Have patience, for the time is 
nigh 
When you shall learn indeed who is the Lord on High. 
Look down below on Earth. See you the portents there 
At which men tremble and stand deathly pale with fear? 
See war and revolution, pestilence and fire, 
Law held to scorn, religion trampled in the mire. 
There, blasphemy's triumphant, mocked is piety. 
But wait awhile. Soon things shall ten times better be, 
For as my servant true I've chosen in my need 
One who shall preach my Kingdom to the godless breed. 
A target he shall be of ridicule and scorn; 
But that is all I need to get things quickly done. 

=====第342页=====
320 Frederick Engels 
The measure's not yet full, but very soon will be, 
If they still treat the light of Grace with mockery." 
The Devil: "Who's the one that's chosen for this feat?" 
The Lord: "It's Bruno Bauer." 
"The Licentiate?" 
"The same." 
"You've picked a most unusual servant there. 
He gives his soul no sustenance of hymn or prayer, 
And he demands from you your very loveliest stars. 
To apprehend them  — that is what he loves the best. 
Even the very finest speculative cores 
Of dogma do not help to soothe his troubled breast." 
The Lord: "Although his service may be inconsistent, 
I shall clear up his mind's confusion in due season, 
And if in thinking he still dares to be persistent, 
You may be sure he'll very quickly lose his Reason." 
The Devil: "What's the use of that? I'll lure him down. 
That precious stone of yours shall sparkle in my crown. 
And since he still has Hegel running round his brain, 
You watch—that's where I'll get him by his hairy mane!" 
The Lord: "Go on, then! You can have him as your 
prize! Go, drag him from his Saviour. Take him far away. 
Yes, you may catch him, if you can, with cheating lies. 
Laugh as you take him with you down your Hell-bound way, 
Then stand ashamed and make admission on your part: 
For all his Speculation, the believer still 
Sticks to the straight and narrow pathway in his heart." 
The Devil laughed. "Go on! You can't scare me, you 
know! 
Watch out! As your man, Bauer hasn't long to go!" 
Then out of Heaven with raging tempest force he broke, 
And left the bright domain still billowing with his smoke. 
Now while the Fiend with God in business was engaged, 
The legions of the damned in Hell had all rebelled. 
An angry, howling mob, they rioted and raged, 
"Where are you, Satan, Satan, where are you?" they yelled. 
Their leader, Hegel, swung two torches in the air. 
Whirling a fiery flail, behind him came Voltaire. 
Danton was shouting with them, Edelmann was howling. 
"Charge, charge, you scum of Hell!"  Napoleon  was bawling. 
All through the gloomy pit of fire the dark shades poured, 
Snorting about with fury, shouting for their Lord. 

=====第343页=====
The Insolently Threatened Yet Miraculously Rescued Bible 321 
Then down from Heaven's heights he plummeted amain 
Into his sea of fire, into his tomb of flame. 
"What's this?" he roared at them. "What do you want, you 
rabble? 
You dare to mock the wrath and power of the Devil? 
Are you not hot enough in Hell-fire's blazing flood? 
Do I not slake your thirst full well with righteous blood?" 
"No,  no, you good-for-nothing Devil!" screamed Voltaire. 
"Have I been sowing doubt here, there, and everywhere 
Merely that through the whole of speculative night 
The word 'philosophy' should be decried outright, 
And that the French should trust their priests instead of me— 
And that you, Satan, you should let this come to be?" 
Said Danton: "Did I guillotine them all in vain, 
That Reason ousted God, but God is back again? 
Now nonsense reigns supreme, and high-born fops once more 
In league with crack-brained priests their kingdom can 
restore." 
The furious Hegel, who'd been speechless all along, 
Forthwith rose üke a giant and finally gave tongue: 
"To Science I've devoted every hour, 
And I've taught Atheism with all my power. 
Self-consciousness upon the Throne I seated, 
And thought that God had thereby been defeated. 
But foolish misconception's all that's used me, 
And certain craven minds have much abused me, 
Out of pure nonsense building pseudo-structures, 
Enslaving Speculation with their strictures. 
At last, a truly brave man came to hand, 
Straws, who had half begun to understand. 
And yet when Zurich offered him a Chair, 
They simply wouldn't let him lecture there.161 
Shame, that the world condemns to banishment 
The instrument I had the wit to invent, 
The freedom-fighter, bravest ever seen, 
Woe,  woe, I cry, they've banned my guillotine! 
Say, Devil, have I lived to no avail? 
Is my philosophy, then, doomed to fail? 
When will the right man come, and come apace, 
To chop the heads off all the pious race?" 
The Devil heard him out, with gentle malice grinning: 
"Peace, most devoted servant, you can stop that whining. 
Do you not know your Devil, then? I have a plan. 

=====第344页=====
Frederick Engels 
The very man has long been found. Found is the man." 
"Who,  who? We're all agog to know!" the rabble cried. 
"His name is Bruno Bauer," the Arch-Fiend then replied. 
Howling with mirth, the sinful host all turned away, 
Hegel, ablaze with fury, was provoked to say: 
"You mock us still, you sneerer of the vilest sort! 
Why Bruno Bauer, who brings Reason's cause to 
nought, 
And drags all Science up to trial in Faith's High 
Court?' 
"Oh, Hegel, are you blind?" the Lord of Hell replied. 
"You think the fruits of Faith will keep him satisfied? 
His thirst is much too great, and they are not enough. 
Who fights as hard as he does, won't run out of  puff. 
It won't be long before he doffs Faith's beggar cloak, 
And then I'll clinch it with him at a single stroke." 
Said Hegel, finally relieved: "I bow to you!" 
And all the gang of Hell roared out a wild "Halloo!" 
They saw their master to the door with many a joyous yell, 
And he, assured of triumph, floated up from Hell.— 
A house of pious people and a dingy room 
Stacked high with books, and Bauer pondering in the gloom, 
The Pentateuch in front of him, the Devil behind, 
A tug of war twixt Faith and Doubt within his mind. 
"Did Moses write this book, and is it true for sure? 
Philosophy, your meaning is so oft obscure! 
I've studied matters Phenomenological, 
Theological also, to my distress, 
Aesthetical too, Metaphysical, Logical, 
Not entirely without success. 
I'm Doctor and Licentiate, 
I lecture in college early and late, 
I've married, by Speculation astute, 
Faith and the Concept Absolute. 
Nought is beyond me, no mystery 
Can stand the test of my scrutiny. 
Name me the dogma I haven't been into — 
Creation, Redemption, Original Sin, too. 
I've grasped with absolute perfection 
Even the Immaculate Conception, 
Lock, stock and barrel — but all that stuff 
Still doesn't prove the Pentateuch is not a  bluff. 
O who will help me, who will get me off the rack? 

=====第345页=====
The Insolently Threatened Yet Miraculously Rescued Bible 323 
O who will give the bread of knowledge that I lack? 
What if that most mysterious book 
Inscribed in Philip's own true hand 
Became my trusty guide and took 
Me through Doubt's ever-labyrinthine land? 
I break it open. I can see the light — 
A spring of Categories rushes into sight. 
Oh, see them! Up and down they climb, 
Passing gold buckets all the time! 
What high ecstasy! 
Faith and Science, I see, 
Have signed an armistice 
With sanctified kisses! 
Deep under me is Nature's mighty power! 
Ah, what a sight!—but show, nothing more! 
When shall the veil e'er lifted be 
That hides the source of the Pentateuch from me? 
Philip, appear!" 
The wall divides, and then a shadow, triple-crowned, 
Steps through the cleft to raise a bony warning hand: 
"O Bauer, Bauer, mind you stray not from the path 
That Hegel's Logic has marked out for you to follow! 
For, in that work, the Concept absolutely clear 
Shines forth. So do not let Imaginative Thinking 
Ever defy the Spirit there, which stands for Freedom." 
"But can you tell me how authentic is this Book? 
Oh, do not turn away from me! Speak, answer, talk!" 
"You're like the Spirit that you understand, not me!"a 
"Not you? Oh, do not vanish! Stay with me, my friend!" 
He shouts, jumps up, and lo! before him stands the Fiend! 
"Ha haha haha haha haha haha! 
There stands the Theologian! There you are! 
You thought yourself so shrewd, not even apprehending 
That you were running round in circles never-ending?" 
Here Bruno reaches for his Bible, mad with fear. 
"Pah!" says the Devil, laughing. "That old primer there? 
Pah! We've left all that junk a long, long way behind, 
Think you that I believe such trash can ease your mind? 
Think you that, when within these musty walls you strain 
Concocting categories in your fevered brain, 
a Goethe, Faust, Part One, Scene  1.—  Ed. 

=====第346页=====
Frederick Engels 
Or mixing Fire and Water—when you choose 
To try and slake the Spirit's thirst with filthy brews, 
The free-willed Spirit that would burst its bonds and flee 
The foul confining dungeon of captivity— 
Think you such torture can e'er satisfy your urge? 
Did Hegel ever teach you Hill and Vale to merge, 
Or Black and White, or fiercely flaming Fire and Water? 
Consider Hegel now, that unabashed God-hater, 
Who,  without thinking further, flung Fact overboard 
And, choosing Reason, cast away Tradition's Word." 
"O Satan, what you say indeed sounds fine—a well 
Of Heaven's purest light; thus shines the smoke of Hell. 
But still I won't be led astray; for Speculation 
Has long included you within its comprehension. 
And since all Being by my Spirit's permeated, 
Are you alone from understanding, then, exempted? 
With fair appearance and dissembling words you please us: 
You lead us gently on, then suddenly you seize us, 
Pledging free Spirit for our lovely world of Fact, 
To lure us to that narrow realm of the Abstract. 
With your free Spirit to the far Extreme I'll go, 
Because 'I am' is all I claim to think and know. 
They don't delude me, Friend, those stark and chilly heights, 
Where what the Spirit grasps, the Spirit also blights. 
Your Spirit is a Moloch racked with hunger's pangs, 
And at the Positive it ever bares its fangs. 
Full well I know you and I know your ways, you see; 
Phrases and empty words are all you've given me. 
See if I positively grasp this Pentateuch, 
I grasp the concept 'Judaism' like this book." 
The Devil laughs and jeers. "How very funny! Must 
You try to polish up what's old and thick with rust? 
How the Lord's finger is discerned in one small louse,* 
And how the Lord will guide the building of a house,** 
And how the Lord's design is seen in Measure, Weight 
And Pledge  ***—  on suchlike things you choose to speculate? 
You waste yourself on them, and get no joy or rest. 
Just try your strength with Faith, and see who comes off best! 
Up there, the Spirit feels its power and majesty. 
No more a worm that crawls through old putridity, 
* 2 Moses 8:19.—  Note  by Engels. 
** 5 Moses  22:8.—  Note  by Engels. 
*** 5 Moses  25.—  Not«  by Engels. 

=====第347页=====
The Insolently Threatened Yet Miraculously Rescued Bible 325 
It reigns triumphant on its throne; its high Law sees 
Faith, slave of Prejudice, down on its bended knees." 
"O Devil, with what ease you utter all the things 
I've hardly dared to in my wild imaginings. 
Now I'm a man obsessed, a man tormented by 
His very inmost being's agonising cry: 
'Your life has come to nought!'" 
"Don't waste your time in vain. 
If the desire is there, you can be born again!" 
"Then where do I begin?" 
"Think you that in this spot, 
Berlin, this trué-believing, sandy vacant lot, 
That here you'll ever reach the lofty heights, attain the bliss 
Of dealing Faith once and for all the  coup  de grâce? 
To Bonn I'll take you, 162 to the Rhine so proud and green; 
Of superstition's slime you'll wash your notions clean. 
You'll live a life of joy and beauty all the time, 
Refreshed by union with the true juice of the vine; 
Where all is Victory, where every breast heaves high, 
Where every vein's a-throb with Freedom's radiancy!" 
"Lead on! I'll follow you!" 
"Where in full clarity 
The pure Truth rises from the Spirit struggle free— 
There, high upon the wrecks of barriers devastated, 
Triumphant build a shrine to Free Thought consecrated!" 

=====第348页=====
CANTO THE SECOND 
Oh, woe to thee, Bonn, woe, most pious of Faculties! 
Put on sackcloth and ashes, pray on bended knees! 
Upon that Chair of erstwhile pious reputation 
Mad Bauer lectures through the Devil's ministration. 
He stands and foams with rage; a demon on his back 
Goads him and sets him on the Theologians' track. 
Just like a hydrophobic dog, he howls and bays; 
Through his blaspheming mouth the Adversary says: 
"Let not the Theologians fool you with their guiles, 
Or rank hypocrisy, or low, perfidious wiles. 
See how they twist the sense of every word by force, 
And slither through the darkness on their evil course. 
Oh, see those letter-slaves in all their filthy fright, 
And how they savage one another when they fight. 
All unctuous torture, cunning Jesuitical, 
All tinselled pious fraud and arts sophistical! 
As the schoolmaster, when the village children run 
Away from school to romp and have themselves some fun, 
Comes raging with his stick to fetch the truants in, 
And they, with jeers and catcalls, flee ahead of him— 
Such is the Theologian, very soon perplexed 
When trapped between the Contradictions of the Text. 
See how he twists, turns, dodges, stretches, wriggles in it, 
Forgetting everything he said that very minute. 
Just watch him cooking in his kitchen filled with steam, 
Until the Contradictions flee him with a scream. 
How he runs after them! Oh, how he starts to scold! 
Will you come back again! Will you do as you're told! 

=====第349页=====
The Insolently Threatened Yet Miraculously Rescued Bible 327 
With what insensate rage he plies Faith's holy cane, 
Hitting the godless freaks again and yet again! 
He pops them in the witches' cauldron, pokes them down, 
Until the wretched things asphyxiate and drown! 
They're all the same, including these Evangelists; 
They'll never change as long as there are men of Christ's. 
The one Evangelist misapprehends the other, 
He wriggles, writhes, distorts the meaning even further; 
Caught in the hopeless toils of endless Contradictions, 
He cannot help but multiply his misconstructions. 
He tears to shreds the writings of the other one, 
And then, to crown it all, there is the work of John. 
Just look!"—The mob of Faithful, past endurance, bellows: 
"Away with that blasphemer, hang him on the gallows! 
Away! Enough abuse from that once worthy Chair, 
Sing Hallelujah, then, and get him out of there!" 
The others shout: "Hurrah, and long live Bruno Bauer] 
Free Science's support, Free-thinking's mightiest power! 
Hush, pious hypocrites! If your God's help is strong, 
Then fight, and let the outcome prove you right or wrong." 
"Out with the liar!" all the Right-wing voices cry. 
"Out with the Faithful!" comes the impious Left's reply. 
"Atheists, silence!" "Pious sheep, keep your mouths shut! 
Or else you'll soon find out how billy-goats can butt!" 
"Christ here!" —"And Bauer here!" 
Making a thund'rous sound, 
With all their weight the wielded sticks come crashing down 
To echoing battle-cries the tussle grows amain, 
As desks are overturned and benches split in twain. 
To thwart the Christian troops, the Atheist forces bold 
Pile up the desks and build themselves A Safe Stronghold. 
United in a closely welded mass, they throw, 
Instead of bombs, ink-horns and Bibles at the foe. 
In vain the Pious launch their sallies on the fort, 
They fail to take it, even at the third onslaught. 
Heads bleed, and many fighters of the Pious band 
Collapse upon the bench, felled by an Atheist hand. 
Then the blasphemers bring the walls a-tumbling down, 
Lastly to drive the foe clean off the battleground. 
Snarling, they hurl themselves on God's chaste warriors, who 
Flee in blind panic from the wild and horrid crew. 
The field is clear, at last.— 
Swift speeds the pious band 

=====第350页=====
Frederick Engels 
Along the passage to the gates, and makes its stand. 
The Lord sends proctors round to rescue them, and then 
The Rector comes, and Senators, and Clergymen. 
They want to mediate, ask what's behind it all, 
But they themselves are soon entangled in the brawl. 
The fight breaks out again, all join in willy-nilly; 
Many a lofty learned brow is knocked half silly, 
Many a crooked back is beaten straight again, 
Many a nose pulled down that stuck up in disdain. 
The sky grows dark with clouds of beaten-out cloth dust, 
And periwigs fly at the whim of every gust. 
Philosophers, most Positive of gentlemen,163 
Under the Atheist attack, turn tail and run. 
Great Fichte's little son, you certainly move fast! 
You're much too skinny for the Atheist repast. 
Herr Brandis, though you may be swift to flee pursuit, 
The systemrdust has all been walloped from your suit. 
Refuting Hegel hasn't done them any good, 
If they are beaten up by Hegel's crazy brood. 
Onward they press, the frenzied Atheistic horde: 
Their sticks make mockery of trusting in the Lord. 
But no, His eye is watchful; in the hour of need, 
When ignominy threatens those who hold the creed, 
To thwart the triumph of the evil ones down there, 
He sends the faithful Sack, with neatly parted hair. 
He comes straight from the vineyard of the Lord on High. 
His grey eye gleams, a star up in the Church's sky. 
His nose, it is a mighty pillar of the Faith. 
The Lord's Word and Salvation dribble from his mouth. 
His mount's a virgin ass, with tail most wondrous fair, 
And if his foot trails on the ground, he doesn't care. 
The Bible text he has invented, with God's aid, 
And tied it with her tail on to the donkey-maid. 
He sits astride her, with his head bowed all the way; 
The Spirit gently leads the beast towards the fray. 
He sees the battle rage, the godless forge ahead, 
And seeks the pious beast on other paths to lead. 
But now the she-ass, who's obeyed him faithfully, 
Begins to rear and stall and jump and buck and shy. 
"What ails you, little beast? What's getting in your way? 
Go where the bridle leads you, listen, and obey!" 
She jams him up against a wall, unheeding still. 
For the first time, he tries the stick to break her will. 

=====第351页=====
The Insolently Threatened Yet Miraculously Rescued Bible 329 
He beats and beats and beats and beats her fit to bust. 
The she-ass won't give in to him. He bites the dust. 
God opens up the donkey's mouth; she, loud and clear, 
Speaks His intention for the startled Sack to hear. 
"Why do you beat me? See, the Spirit bars my way 
And turns my bridle towards the scene of the affray. 
Where's your old courage? Up, fly to the battleground, 
Where Atheist fury pins God's faithful army down. 
Lend me your ear, O Sack, and hear the tidings new 
That through your donkey's mouth the Lord reveals to you. 
Henceforth your name is Bag and shall be Sack no more. 
Engels' caricature of "The Free", the Berlin group of Young Hegelians 
(Words in the drawing: Ruge, Buhl, Nauwerck, Bauer, Wigand, Edgar [Bauer], 
Stirner, Meyen, stranger, Koppen the Lieutenant. The squirrel in the upper 
left corner is a caricature of the Prussian Minister Eichhorn) 
12-384 

=====第352页=====
Frederick Engels 
I'm sending you, O Bag, to terminate this war." 
Then did the pious Bag to Heaven gaze and cry: 
"Lord, before Thee man's knowledge is but vanity! 
You choose a lowly beast for mouthpiece! Daring all, 
I plunge into the battle's terrors at your call!" 
He turns and speeds in haste towards the scene of horrors, 
And finds it strewn with faint, exhausted, bleeding warriors. 
Then, with a mighty shout, he bravely dives into them, 
And to a heavenly air he sings the peace-hymn to them. 
His coming has the fighters dazed on either side, 
But Brother Bag just sees the Heavens open wide. 
"Why all this Hatred, Envy, Murder, Storm and Stress, 
Where Faith's Word should resound, and hymns of holiness? 
In the full sight of God, where Heaven in twain divides, 
Have you nought else to do but tan each other's hides?" 
The faithful flock gives ear and, much abashed, withdraws, 
The Atheist mob just stares and brazenly guffaws. 
Then Brother Bag: "Down here below is tumult, gore, 
But up above there's peace and bliss for evermore. 
I see the Cherubim around the Almighty's Throne, 
I see the Lamb of God, the sole begotten son. 
I see the glory of the Lord shine down so bright, 
I see the angelic host in songs of praise unite, 
I see—oh, bliss!—the Lamb of God begins to speak 
And states its will to me, who am its servant meek: 
'I've pinned my hopes on Bruno Bauer all this while, 
But the Arch-Fiend has cheated us of him by guile. 
He who sat praying in his hermitage, alone, 
Gives sinners now my holy Word to guzzle on. 
He hounds my pious flock with desperate murderers. 
His will be done; he'll know the meaning of my curse. 
Be you the chosen one. Cross mountain, hill and valley, 
Summon the Faithful ones to arms, and do not dally. 
Go, let your trusty she-ass take you everywhere, 
Go, preach the message of the Cross, and have no fear. 
Put on the armour, armour of the Lord most high, 
Await the day of battle, for that day draws nigh. 
Then with the belt of Truth be sure your loins are girt; 
For breastplate, Righteousness shall keep you safe from hurt. 
With both legs booted, go you forth and do not yield, 
Put out the fiery darts of Hell with Faith's bright shield. 
Put on Salvation's helm that wards off mockery, 
God's Word shall be your sword; wield it courageously!' 

=====第353页=====
The Insolently Threatened Yet Miraculously Rescued Bible 331 
Yea, Lord, I follow Thee. Thy servant flies apace 
To spread Thy holy Word to all the sinful race!" 
Meanwhile, the pious crowd had gone to church to pray; 
The godless went off boozing, in the usual way. 
But Brother Bag rode forth astride his animal, 
And sang: "Praise to the Lord, praise to the Lord of All, 
And may all folk on Earth in sweet content abide!" 
His pious song was heard all over, far and wide. 
So fared he forth and gave his animal free rein 
To lead him where it would in God the Father's name. 
Meanwhile, three sit in Leipzig. Glum and taciturn, 
They've long been overdue in Satan's hell to burn. 
Wild Ruge's one of those around the table there, 
His broad fists propping up a head that's full of care. 
A valiant warrior, stout, seemingly hard to rattle; 
But sharp as rapiers are his claws, well trained in battle. 
He seems a philistine, beer-sodden, casual, 
But deep inside his breast he bears the whole of Hell. 
Laugh, Ruge, laugh! It's very nearly Judgment Day, 
And then that mask you're wearing will be torn away! 
The second eyes his glass with proud defiance—Prutz 
The sinister, who's hatching out infernal plots. 
Mere human feeling is a thing he never uses; 
Emotions, thoughts and deeds with him are all Medusas. 
Innocent, trustful hearts devoid of doubt and schism 
His sparkling rhymes corrupt with seeds of Atheism. 
Laugh, Prutz, oh, laugh! It's very nearly Judgment Day 
And then the mask you wear, too, will be torn away. 
Caressing his mustachios, the third and last 
Is Blücher-Wigand; he's a scoundrel unsurpassed. 
Thanks to his capital, the whole gang's prop is he, 
Untiring publisher of every blasphemy. 
O Wigand with the Blücher beard, laugh, laugh away! 
You'll surely be the Devil's on that Judgment Day! 
Fuming with rage they gaze into each other's eyes. 
"Has all that money gone for nothing?" Wigand cries. 
"Have I paid out so much, and done my very best, 
To see the Halle Annals* totally suppressed?" 
Growls Arnold Ruge: "Times are anything but good. 
The Censor's always out to suck my paper's blood. 
At least two-thirds of all my space he has to have, 
a Hallische Jahrbücher für deutsche Wissenschaft und Kunst. — Ed. 
12» 

=====第354页=====
Frederick Engels 
Yet still they want my paper dead and in its grave!" 
Then Prutz: "Alas, six months have passed, and here we are, 
And still the Censor hasn't passed a single par! 
Things must ease up, or else I'll starve; I'll never make it, 
Except by going back to love-songs — Devil take it!" 
"What else am I to do?" says Ruge with a roar. 
"I've got the Muses' Almanack,3 and nothing more. 
To Hell with Hegelising, then. I'll boost morale 
With dreary novelettes and posies lyrical!" 
"I'll get in touch with him at once," continues Wigand, 
"And get a new four-decker novel out of Miigge. 
Come to my heart, oh, come, O sweet Belles-Lettres, do! 
The Censor cuts Hegelian sophistries, not you! 
My wings shall shield all German bards that care to come. 
Minstrels and Tavern Fiddlers, make yourselves at home! 
Brothers, your hands! Our line is to be different. 
We're loyalists from now. Long live the Government!" 
The Devil walks straight in. "You wretched trash, for 
shame!" 
He castigates the Free164 ones with a tongue of flame. 
"You think you're heroes, while your courage quite deserts 
you 
As soon as you get banned, or when the Censor cuts you. 
I ought to be ashamed. I let you take me in, 
And never saw the Ass inside the Lion's skin. 
Well, just you wait awhile. It's going to be a pleasure 
To get you down in Hell and torture you at leisure. 
But, no, you craven trash, you're nothing but small fry! 
I'll chase you up to Heaven, up to the Lord on High!" 
"Be reasonable!" Wigand is constrained to say. 
"What, then, are we to do? Show us a better way!" 
"You miserable scum!" cries Satan, most displeased. 
"It's plain you cannot even see the wood for trees! 
For if the ban on Halle Annals bothers you, 
Just call them German? and start publishing anew. 
You leave the Censorship to me. The will to fight 
Is what you need and things will then come out all right. 
Who with the Devil makes a binding covenant, 
Must not turn tail and flee from every miscreant. 
Deutscher Musenalmanach. — Ed. 
Deutsche Jahrbücher für Wissenschaft und Kunst. — Ed. 

=====第355页=====
The Insolently Threatened Yet Miraculously Rescued Bible 333 
Courage is all you need. Now I must onwards press. 
Rave on, as always, in the name of Godlessness!" 
He speaks and disappears. And lo! all starry-eyed, 
Comes Brother Bag and sees the Heavens open wide. 
Him bears the she-ass, mouthpiece of the Almighty's Word; 
She'll take him on his last ascent to meet his Lord. 
He looks to Heav'n with God-intoxicated eyes 
And says: "Blasphemmg gang, I know your tricks and lies! 
Thus saith the Lord your God: you are the Devil's brood, 
And ever seek to slake your thirst with righteous blood. 
Once more, then, through my servant be my summons known 
That you should kneel subservient before my Throne. 
Do penance, saith the Lord, abase yourselves and crawl, 
Or down to feed the flames of Hell you'll surely fall. 
Thus saith the Lord your God: you'll either get converted 
Or else I promise you I'll have you all degutted. 
For sweet, I'll serve this gang of evil name to you, 
My faithful Hengstenberg, and Bag, my servant true. 
Their pious flesh shall be a living grave for you. 
Thus saith the Lord your God." 
And therewith he withdrew. 

=====第356页=====
CANTO THE THIRD 
What do I see? A frenzied host so glittering bright 
With Blasphemy, the very sun has lost its light? 
Who are they? See them, how they all come surging forth, 
Foregathering from East, and South, and West, and North. 
The scum of Germany, they meet in convocation 
To whip their spirits up for still more evil action. 
Already they have felt the Lord's hand moving o'er 
them, 
Already they have guessed how Satan's clutch could claw them 
Down to a dreadful doom. Knowing despair full well, 
They've felt like letting Atheism go to Hell. 
Then  Arnold*  summons all those of the Free persuasion 
To meet at Bockenheim in Hellish congregation. 
"Arise, you Free ones all! How can you sit so tight, 
When the Romantics plunge the whole world into night? 
Or when Reaction stirs and, cunning as of old, 
Almost has Science in its deadly stranglehold? 
Bauer's in peril. Of your thoughts and writings, most 
Go straight up to the raving Censor and are lost. 
Free brethren, hear my Manifesto, all of you, 
Of course, provided that the Censor lets it through: 
High time that we as diplomats discussed with weight 
The Holy Alliance in congressional debate! 
Do you see how the high Police determinedly 
Abolish everywhere one little word — that's free? 
And now the Lamb of God joins the Gensdarmerie, 
a Arnold Ruge.— Ed. 

=====第357页=====
The Insolently Threatened Yet Miraculously Rescued Bible 335 
And is about to sink to bestiality. 
So onwards, then, Free ones; to Bockenheim we'll go; 
Seeds of fresh action there united we shall sow!" 
Scarce was this Manifesto broadcast far and wide, 
When awful urges, evil cravings surge inside 
Each brazen breast to leave forthwith for Bockenheim. 
Berlin it is that sends the most devoid of shame. 
Broad Arnold heads them as they brashly march along; 
Behind him mills a lunatic and loathsome throng. 
And all that yelling gang, that Atheistic mob, 
Is much more wild than ever was the Jacobin Club. 
That's Koppen you can see there with his glasses on. 
If Ruge but allowed, he'd be a virtuous man. 
But Arnold's raving fury has him so impressed: 
He has a sword and wears it dangling from his waist; 
It's like a demon's tail, a long and rusty thing, 
And when he dances, see how bravely it can swing. 
He's wearing epaulettes and brandishing about 
A stick with which to beat the thirst for knowledge out 
Of flaming youth. Next, Maien* comes along, the Free; 
Familiar everywhere to everyone is he: 
An Atheist born, the vilest love him well: Voltaire 
Ever since birth has been his daily reading fare. 
So nice, so soft, so small—Maien, you devil, you! 
Those ruffians with you making all that hullabaloo, 
They're not your nephews? Have you lured them in as well? 
You'd take your family with you on your trip to Hell? 
Right on the very left, that tall and long-legged stepper 
Is Oswald* coat of grey and trousers shade of pepper; 
Pepper inside as well, Oswald the Montagnard; 
A radical is he, dyed in the wool, and hard. 
Day in, day out, he plays upon the guillotine a 
Single solitary tune and that's a cavatina, 
The same old devil-song; he bellows the refrain: 
Formez vos bataillons! Aux armes, citoyens!' 
Who raves beside him, with the muscles of a brewer? 
It's old Bloodlust himself in person, Edgar Bauer. 
His brown-complexioned face through bushy whiskers peers; 
And he's as old in cunning as he's young in years. 
a Eduard Meyen.— Ed. 
Pseudonym of Frederick Engels. — Ed. 
c Form your battalions! To arms, citizens! (From the Marseillaise.) — Ed. 

=====第358页=====
Frederick Engels 
Outside, a smart blue coat; inside he's black, lacks polish; 
Outside he's dandified; inside he's sansculottish. 
His shadow's with him, it's a wonder to behold it; 
His evil shadow's there, and Radge* he has called it. 
See Stirner too, the thoughtful moderation-hater; 
Though still on beer, he'll soon be drinking blood like water. 
And if the others shout a wild: à bas les rois! h 
Stirner is sure to add: à bas aussi les lois! c 
Next, baring greenish teeth, comes tripping on his way, 
His hair unkempt and tousled, prematurely grey, 
A soap-and-water-shy and blood-shy Patriot,0 
So smooth and soft inside; outside a sansculotte. 
Wild Arnold heads them, Czar of All the Atheists, 
And high upon his baton's end he twirls and twists 
Copies of Halle Annals. Next, there follow on 
The crew that Satan's picked to gorge himself upon. 
As soon as they arrive, in bursts the frantic Bauer, 
Engulfed in smoke and steam and Hell-rain's deadly shower. 
He raves, a lanky villain in a coat of green; 
Behind the leering face Hell's offspring can be seen. 
He hoists his flag aloft, and in an arc up high 
The sparks of his rude Bible criticisms fly. 
Who runs up next with wild impetuosity? 
A swarthy chap of Trier, a marked monstrosity.6 
He neither hops nor skips, but moves in leaps and bounds, 
Raving aloud. As if to seize and then pull down 
To Earth the spacious tent of Heaven up on high, 
He opens wide his arms and reaches for the sky. 
He shakes his wicked fist, raves with a frantic air, 
As if ten thousand devils had him by the hair. 
Next, from Cologne, a Youngster,1  something of a swell, 
Too bad for Heaven, too good to pass the gates of Hell. 
He's half a sansculotte, and half an aristo, 
A suave rich gentleman with pleats in his jabot. 
The pleats inside his soul add up to even more. 
His pocket lining's filled with demons by the score 
Pseudonym of Edgar Bauer.— Ed. 
Down with kings! — Ed. 
c Down with the laws as well! — Ed. 
d Ludwig Buhl.— Ed. 
e Karl Marx.— Ed. 
f Georg Jung.— Ed. 

=====第359页=====
The Insolently Threatened Yet Miraculously Rescued Bible 337 
With golden faces. Next, one who indeed disgusts, 
The dawdling Rtg* quite handy with his fists. 
He has an evil habit: constantly he smokes 
Hellish tobacco in an ell-long pipe which pokes 
Out of his mouth, and which he never once removes 
Except to give his utterance point when he reproves. 
But who comes from the South as lonely as a cloud, 
Disdaining sympathy, himself a one-man crowd, 
A one-man host of Atheists fanatical, 
A one-man treasure store of craft Satanical, 
A one-man fount of wicked blasphemy and shame? 
Help us, Saint John, it's Feuerbach of dreadful name! 
He neither raves nor bounds, but hovers in mid-air, 
An awful meteor girt by hellish vapours there. 
In the one hand he holds outstretched the cup that shines, 
And in the other one, the bread loaf that sustains. 
He sits up to his navel in a sea-shell basin, 
Trying to find a new church service for the brazen. 
Guzzling, boozing, bathing, firmly he maintains, 
Are all the truth the holy sacrament contains. 
A storm of shouts and cheers succeeds the first hurrah! 
And then he must be taken to a public bar. 
At once, all hell breaks loose; the uproar is so loud 
That nobody can gain the attention of the crowd. 
They won't sit still; they heave, and push, and shove 
around; 
The Evil Spirit keeps them whirling round and round. 
Their loathing of inaction gives them all no peace; 
And futile calls for quiet continue without cease. 
Then Koppen, that most virtuous, order-loving chap, 
Flies off into a rage. "Is this the savage steppe? 
Have you forgotten in this wild barbaric throng 
What was the purpose of our journey all along? 
O Arnold,  trusty bastion, speak, start the discussion. 
Will you not show us how to find the best solution?" 
Oswald and Edgar shout in roaring unison: 
"Now that's enough of these disgraceful goings-on!" 
Then silence fell. And  Arnold,  who, quite guiltlessly, 
Had in the meantime been consuming beefsteaks three, 
On the last mouthful seemed as if about to choke, 
Adolf Rutenberg. — Ed. 

=====第360页=====
Frederick Engels 
But managed in the end to get it down, and spoke: 
"Oh, what a lovely vision's there in Unity: Free brethren, 
ever 
Ready for battle and for death, obedient should the Idea 
command. 
Reaction holds us by the hair, it lifts the stick with 
threatening hand, 
But it can never tame us, Friends, if we stand firm as 
one together." 
Oswald and Edgar cannot wait until he's done. 
They both jump on the table, then they shriek as one: 
"Ruge, we've had enough of all this talk from youl 
What we want now is deeds, not words. We want some 
action!" 
A frenzied bravo! is the ill-advised reaction; 
Everyone keeps demanding: "Action, action, action!" 
Then with a mocking laugh shouts Arnold in reply: 
"Our actions are just words, and long they so shall be. 
After Abstraction, Practice follows of  itself." 
Meanwhile, athirst for deeds, the wildly screaming pair 
Have lifted crazy Bruno high on to a chair. 
A crowd swarms round him and he's hoisted really high. 
Aloft, he hovers like an eagle in the sky. 
With frenzied burning passion are his eyes aglow, 
And lowering black with fury is his furrowed brow. 
Oh, how he screams and raves. But opposite, alack, 
The swart monstrosity has climbed Rtg"s back. 
Hear how he raves and screams. Just hear how both are 
raving: 
"How long d'you think that words will satisfy our craving?" 
Bauer. See you, O blind one, 
See you the Pious, 
How they draw nigh us? 
Monster: Their pious corps 
Grows more and more. 
Bauer: Bag's at his tricks, 
Hoodwinking the public. 
Monster. A pity the Lord hasn't noticed how dire 
The need of the world for another Messiah. 
Bauer. It's not one Lamb we've got to impede us; 
We're faced with an actual flock of the creatures. 
Monster: The Holy Ghost, we know, 
Moves in a thousand forms below. 

=====第361页=====
The Insolently Threatened Yet Miraculously Rescued Bible 339 
Both:  We're not just plagued with the Trinity; 
The Police and the Faith have joined up in a 
Twinity. 
Monster: When they are vigilant, 
Should we be negligent? 
Bauer: When they are arming, 
Should we be yawning? 
Voices are heard all round: "We're game for battle now!" 
But Ludwig Feuerbach sparks off another row. 
He roars: "Why should we waste our time with all this talk? 
Who action seeks, let him get on and do the work. 
The Free man helps  himself,  ay, he and he alone. 
Whatever he achieves, he does all on his own!" 
His glasses gleaming, Koppen jumps up with a bound, 
His Jovian head commanding silence all around. 
"Against united action, then, you take your stand? 
But it alone stops matters getting out of hand; 
The stream of Progress flows untroubled, undiverted, 
And, best of all, the risk of bloodshed is averted!" 
Edgar and Oswald shriek: "Confounded Girondist! 
Out, feeble-minded dreamer; you're no Atheist!" 
Then Stirner, dignified: "Who binds his will around? 
Who would impose a law by shouting people down? 
You tie his will and have the nerve to say you're free; 
A lot you've done to break away from slavery! 
Down with all rules and laws, say I!" This aberration 
Has the whole Hellish congress in complete confusion. 
The ceiling splits, and Bliicher-Wigand's seen aloft 
Swooping into the hall on his own flying raft. 
A paper dragon—Oh, Satanic arts!—he flies. 
"What are you up to now?" he vigorously cries. 
"See how I soar 
On editions galore 
Of the German Yearbook. 3 
I gummed them  myself, 
I bound them  myself, 
I, Blücher, just look! 
If they can bear me through the air, 
Need you despair? 
Woe,  I cry, 
With Frankfurt nigh, 
3 Deutsche Jahrbücher für Wissenschaft und Kunst. — Ed. 

=====第362页=====
340 Frederick Engels 
Isn't everything all right? 
There is Peace and Union still, 
And the Great All-Highest Will 
For the high and for the highest, 
For the low and for the lowest, 
Is Conviction, Lodestar, Light. 
Woe,  I cry, 
From Frankfurt nigh 
Has an evil wind come blowing? 
Shall the Free ones not withstand 
The Union's165 wind throughout the land? 
Follow me and let's be going! 
To Leipzigl There I've mounted lovely batteries 
That all the Pious hosts together could not seize. 
The house in which I Hegelised of old 
Has latterly been turned into A Safe Stronghold. 
The Gutenberg and Leipzig be our rendezvous. 
The book-trade's centre shall be the State centre too." 
"Yes,  yes, to Leipzig]" cries on every side resound. 
"Let that the centre be, our forces' rallying ground!" 
They all depart, with Wigand flying in the lead, 
But Feuerbach pursues a lonely course indeed. 
But leave that show. I'm beckoned by a peaceful valley. 
The Lord's own City calls me—Halle on the Saale. 
O Town of bliss, still faithful to the Lord you are! 
To beat the Devil's craft e'er brighter gleams your star. 
Ruge poured out his pus on you to no avail; 
Thanks to your loyalty, his schemes were doomed to fail. 
He went off in a rage, nor has he since come back. 
Town, thank the Lord who gave you triumph and good luck. 
See all the Faithful, see the Chosen gathered round 
To sing His praises with a sweet and pleasant sound. 
Oh, what a fine assemblage! See that cobbler there 
Whose feverish, skinny body spurs him into prayer. 
The barman of the Temperance League is present too: 
Pay him — he'll pour pure drinking water out for you. 
God's peace shines in the moon-like face behind the bar. 
Truly, with firm-held faith a person can go far! 
That little woman there is bowed with sinfulness, 
And yet her stiff old limbs are bathed in blessedness. 
All in a soulful shriek she sings a holy lay, 
And mortifies her shrunken body night and day. 
Next, there is Leo, Lion of the Saale strand. 

=====第363页=====
The Insolently Threatened Yet Miraculously Rescued Bible 341 
His strength of faith indeed delights the angel band. 
In faith he hurled himself the Hegelings166 upon, 
In faith defended he the Altar and the Throne, 
In faith did he improve, up-end, and set aright 
Godless world history by Heaven's shining light. 
Go to the little room, O Faithful, enter in, 
And sing unto your God a gentle, gracious hymn. 
Oh, hear the little ditty sounding forth, to rise 
Towards the Throne of Grace like fumes of sacrifice: 
"Lord, we are carrion of the beast, 
A poxy stench, a raven's feast, 
A knacker's pit of sin. 
From the womb we're bad outright. 
Crush us; it would serve us right 
For all our wicked sin. 
If Thou didst, then Thou hadst blessed us, 
Thus to wrest us 
From the cancers that infest us. 
Thou lettest us ascend to Thee 
Unto Thine Angels, fair to see, 
And washest us of sin. 
The Evil One Thou'st driven out 
Who filled our hearts with fear and doubt. 
Destroy and banish him. 
Sizzling, frizzling in the horror 
Of Hell-terror 
Leave him spitted 
For the wicked sins committed!" 
And now the cobbler stands upon a chair to tell 
In fearsome tones about the sulphur lake of Hell. 
"Behold the dreadful gorge that spills its contents out, 
Fire,  pitch and sulphur over all the lands about. 
See how it stews and brews, spews demons up of fire 
To gobble up the world of Christendom entire. 
Black seeds of Hell it scatters 'mid the race of men. 
Great is the Lord thy God. The world is doomed. Amen." 
"That's true enough!" shouts Leo. "Those demons are so 
rude, 
They cover not their private parts and all go nude! 
The Great Whore comes from Babylon with its pollution, 
And that Great Whore is Reason's Goddess, Revolution! 
Bauer is Robespierre, Ruge's Danton; and worse, 
Feuerbach is Marat. O God, send down Thy curse! 

=====第364页=====
342 Frederick Engels 
Ye Faithful, watch the times, for cometh soon the Day, 
The Day of God the Father. Therefore, watch and pray!" 
He speaks. But all stand thunderstruck and goggle-eyed— 
It's Brother Bag: he sees the Heavens open wide. 
His mount's the she-ass, mouthpiece of the Almighty's Word; 
She'll take him on his last ascent to meet his Lord. 
With trust in God and strength to Heav'n he turns his eyes, 
And says: "O Pious band, your works I recognise. 
Thus saith the Lord: my servant ye shall all obey 
That I have picked to lead my host into the fray. 
Obey our Brother Bag, obey him as you ought, 
And Satan's craft and power he shall surely thwart. 
Thus spake the Lord. I fell upon my knees and said: 
But call me, Lord, I'll follow Thee where'er I'm led. 
Then left I cheerly and the Lord's Word did begin 
To spread, the Lord's good year, to all this world of sin. 
Then in through many a wealthy castle gate I went 
To visit prince, and queen, all folk of great descent. 
But they, who ever thirst for worldly goods, and choose 
To covet honours vain, received me with abuse. 
They sat around the board in rich debauchery; 
And cheek by jowl were lust of flesh and lust of eye. 
I shook the dust from off my feet. The Lord then spake, 
Stirring me in the depths of sleep till I should wake. 
'Shall the rich man see Heav'n, however much he try, 
Or shall the camel pass right through a needle's eye? 
What hath been written? On the highways thou shalt find 
The homeless wandering poor, the halt, the lame, the blind. 
Bring all the maimed ones from the alleys home to sup; 
Call those by fences, let your voice be lifted up. 
They are the faithful ones, they are my army's core. 
Collect, recruit them, multiply them more and more.' 
Thus spake the Lord. And I, I come without delay 
To you, the Faithful, for to do as He did say. 
Obey the Lord your God. Soon will come morning's light, 
When with the Devil we must fight the mighty fight. 
The Free ones mobilise; Leipzig's their destination, 
And Blücher-Wigand's house is their fortification. 
They've piled up books and bales of paper by the score, 
It's there they mean to dance the holy dance of war. 
Stout hearts and steadfastness shall aid us in that hour, 
When we go forth to storm the foul Blasphemers' tower. 
Assemble, brethren. Be ye strong in love and hope. 

=====第365页=====
The Insolently Threatened Yet Miraculously Rescued Bible 
Hold fast to Faith. I see up there the Heavens ope. 
Faith is indeed the Alpha and the Omega, 
In faith, thou'rt truly great, Halle, Hallelujah! 
In faith the Maid conceived the Son that God begat, 
In faith was Jonah from the alarmed whale's belly spat. 
In faith the Lord did promulgate the Gospel's word, 
In faith the Lord's voice in a donkey's mouth I heard. 
In faith the blind one saw the light against all hope, 
In faith do I look up and see the Heavens ope. 
In faith do I cry out: credo ut intelligam, 
In faith I cling unto the holy Cross's stem. 
In faith are all my deeds, in faith is all my hope, 
In faith do I look up and see the Heavens ope. 
Thus saith the Lord: now let my servant Leo be 
The doughty Captain of the Halle company. 
Go, visit every town and city in the land, 
Find soldiers and field surgeons there on every hand. 
By night or day allow yourself no respite, ever, 
Until the Faithful army has been brought together. 
Thus saith the Lord thy God, my refuge and my hope! 
Farewell, dear brethren, for I see the Heavens ope!" — 

=====第366页=====
CANTO THE FOURTH 
What do I see! Saint John, illuminate my vision, 
So that your poetry's power may lend me inspiration. 
Whose holy eyes saw Angel Michael in the fight 
With the great dragon, fill, O fill my soul with light! 
What do I see! It's drawing nigh, the day of doom, 
The battles' last that bears destruction in its womb. 
I see the whole horizon bounded by a ring 
Of cloud that slowly lifts, at first unhurrying, 
Then swiftly, like the lion greedy for his prey, 
Springs forward. All the hounds of Hell speed on their way, 
Hissing through misty cloud. Their tails, ablaze with fire, 
Whip all around and lash to shreds the very air. 
In a wild witches' dance with greedy rage they spin, 
Yelling with fury, mad to appease the wrath within. 
What do I see! You mount Heav'n's heights, accursed race? 
May you unpunished go along the Almighty's ways? 
You wield the lightning, hold the thunder in your hand? 
Ah, it's the desperate man of Bonn that leads your band! 
But see, God's mercy ever watches from afar, 
And when all ends, it shall be with a Gloria. 
Consumed with rage, the forces of the Free draw near; 
Soon, soon God's might shall turn their arrogance to fear. 
They come, a seething mass. As Wigand sails along, 
The others follow him, a roaring, snorting throng. 
To Leipzig city he is leading one and all, 
The "Gutenberg" he's chosen as his arsenal. 
Many a bastion's piled up high with bulging bales, 
Rampart and trench are dug for when the foe assails. 

=====第367页=====
The Insolently Threatened Yet Miraculously Rescued Bible 345 
Four ravelins are stacked up high with Bouées writings, 
With guns galore to give protection to the curtains. 
Many a text of Köppen's Friedrich* lies there, 
Many a page of Annals from a long-past year. 
The Trumpet* Feuerbach, in heavy bundles bound, 
Are stacked in serried rows to ring the fortress round. 
And as cheval de frise, there's Ruge's Novelist, 0 
To mop the sweat up, there's The Faded Pietist.d 
As last resort, there is a little nook of Hell  — 
The house, that's now become a mighty citadel. 
They've walled the windows, barricaded up the door, 
The attic has been made an ammunition store, 
And when the Pious party moves to the attack, 
From overhead the Free can give their skulls a crack. 
Now, drawing nearer with a wild, exultant sound, 
The Free disperse to man the bastions all around. 
On, on from Halle march God's soldiers, one and all, 
With Jacob's scaling ladder for the fortress wall. 
Flag-like, the fiery pillar proudly goes before them, 
And burning bushes light the darkling roadway for them. 
Could I but paint the pious train in colours bright, 
And richly bathe it round in beams of holy light! 
Proud, wrathful Leo is the one who takes the lead. 
Swinging along without constraint, he strides ahead, 
Five volumes of world history6  in his pious fists, 
He's otherwise unarmed, it is in Faith he trusts 
Where arrogance and self-assurance aren't enough. 
The next line's leader is indeed of Godly  stuff— 
Nerr Julius Sinck von Sinnes, 1 as the Pious know him. 
The dear man thinks to carry arms would be below him. 
With presence pure and simple does he smite the Free, 
And so the Faithful gather round him trustingly. 
And sacred songs and prayer are their only arms, 
Because when from afar the strains of heavenly psalms 
a C. F. Koppen, Friedrich der Grosse und seine Widersacher. —Ed. 
b B. Bauer's anonymous book Die Posaune des jüngsten Gerichts über Hegel 
den Atheisten und Antichristen. — Ed. 
c A. Rüge, Der Novellist. Eine Geschichte in acht Dutzend Denkzetteln aus 
dem Taschenbuche des Helden. — Ed. 
E. Meyen, Heinrich Leo, der verhallerte Pietist. —Ed. 
e H. Leo, Lehrbuch der  Universalgeschichte. — Ed. 
Julius Müller, author of Die christliche Lehre von der Sünde (The 
Christian Teaching on  Sin).—  Ed. 

=====第368页=====
Frederick Engels 
Resound, the Free forthwith take to their heels and run. 
Bonn sends a host of stalwarts, champions, every one; 
They're led by Brother Mx.a  The Swabians now draw nigh; 
The Christian Courier* is the banner that they fly. 
Brave Mallet brings the faithful folk of Bremen in, 
And Hengstenberg commands the Pious from Berlin. 
And even you, the ones who ordered Strauss away 
From Zurich, follow fearless Hirzel to the fray, 
The priest of Pfäffikon. c They come from Basel, too. 
Krummacher, man of God, from Wuppertal are you. 
The troops form up in every spacious Leipzig square, 
And sounds of exultation fill the distant air, 
Strains of upswelling song to touch the heart's own strings. 
Each asks his neighbour: Say, who can it be that sings? 
Behold, astride his she-ass (all stand goggle-eyed) 
Comes Brother Bag; he sees the Heavens open wide. 
And this is what he sings: "God's sword and Gideon here! 
Up, Brothers, and behold the Devil's earthworks there! 
However terribly they yawn, those gates of Hell, 
Onward and trust in God! Faith will acquit you well!" 
Behold the she-ass up the bastions nimbly springing, 
And, following after her, the Faithful ones all singing! 
Oh, what a fierce attack! Despair, all ye Blasphemers! 
Scream for your devil now, ye God-forsaken screamers! 
Now Brother Bag flies up that mighty wall of Pride 
That Hengstenberg may lead his pious troops inside. 
But there within, the Devil orders the defence, 
Banishes craven doubts and counsels with good sense. 
See, Blücher-Wigand stands high on the ravelin, 
Egged on by Maien. How they make their missiles spin! 
There's Stirner, see him flinging bales of books entire, 
While hordes of Pious warriors melt beneath his fire. 
See Arnold on the wall: he hardly ever misses, 
Hurling his Yearbooks down at all those pious faces. 
High on the wall of books and in the leading row, 
Mad Bauer wields The Trumpet, blow on deadly blow, 
The Patriot 6 ensconced where no missile can fly, 
Tosses his pamphlets backwards at the enemy, 
a Karl Immanuel Nitzsch.— Ed. 
Der Christen-Bote. Ein kirchlich-religiöses Sonntagsblatt. —Ed. 
c Bernhard Hirzel.— Ed. 
Ludwig Buhl. — Ed. 

=====第369页=====
The Insolently Threatened Yet Miraculously Rescued Bible 347 
While with his toad-spit furious Koppen stems the flood, 
But most humanely takes good care to shed no blood. 
The raving Edgar fights with brewer strength and valour, 
While red with blood is Oswald's coat of pepper colour. 
See the Cologne contingent. In the furious fray 
Rtg's pipe's gone out; but he feels no dismay: 
Swinging it by its long and supple tube right well, he 
Wraps the water-bowl round many a pious belly. 
Gold devils are the missiles that the Youngster' skims; 
The Monster* joins the battle flexing all his limbs. 
Yet on the Pious press, still more victorious; 
Their Hallelujahs ringing still more glorious. 
Up on the mound of books has Hengstenberg appeared. 
He seizes Bliicher-Wigand by his long blond beard. 
Raging, he pulls it out and manages to chuck 
Wigand full length into a horrid pool of muck. 
Edgar is now hard pressed, and Arnold is beset. 
Koppen has fled indoors; with him, the Patriot. 
The arrogant wall of books is almost half torn down, 
But still the frenzied Bauer stands his ground alone. 
He hurls a bale of books at Bag to seal the doom 
Of that most pious one and be a fitting tomb. 
Herr Sinck von Sinnes staggers at a blow of his. 
But Hoik's Leo still defies Hell's wild abyss. 
A Samson, he strains hard at that proud fortress wall. 
It crashes down. See Bauer, even Bauer, fall! 
Pinned helpless to the ground by his own bales he lies. 
See the Believers set on him with joyous cries! 
Bag struggles to his feet. With a triumphant cheer 
He goes across to Bauer, grips him by the ear, 
And says: "Ye Faithful, God fulfilleth all my hope! 
The Lord my refuge is. I see the Heavens ope! 
Leave Bauer in my hands. To battle, never fear! 
While you defeat the others, I shall guard him here!" 
They truss up Bauer, then, to hymns victorious, 
They set their Jacob's ladder up against the house. 
Now rocks the Gutenberg, now splits the fortress door, 
Near empty is the attic ammunition store. 
Now wrings the Patriot his hands in grief and woe, 
a Georg Jung.— Ed. 
b Karl Marx.— Ed. 

=====第370页=====
Frederick Engels 
Now Arnold's ham is wounded by a flying blow. 
Maien is bleeding from the mouth and nose as well. 
Frightened, the Devil plunges down the abyss of Hell. 
He plummets down into the depths with shrieks of 
horror. 
Ha, how the wicked ones all huddle up in terror! 
They plead, blaspheme, and threaten. Then, all trembling, he: 
"Oh, shame, the Pious have made mincemeat of the Free! 
Useless my jeers, my fetor pestilential. 
Alas,  they've beaten me with songs celestial! 
Bauer is captive, Wigand's lost his beard withal, 
And now they've stormed and occupied our book-bale wall!' 
The depths of Hell resound with dreadful shrieks of fear; 
Wild Hegets agony is horrible to hear. 
No sooner has the gang recovered from this news, 
Than Hell's mad Knights break into bluster and abuse 
In mutinous uproar. "You claim to be the Devil, 
And let things come to this!" screams forth the frenzied 
Hegel. 
"Where were your sulphur fumes, your blazing firebrands 
bright? 
Scared monster, did a mere Amen put you to flight? 
Too late we see you're much too old to keep the pace; 
Women and children are the only ones you chase. 
Up, for swift action helps, not weeping and despair. 
Up, Danton, up, Voltaire, and you too, Robespierrel 
Earth-creatures, you alone can end this infamy. 
To Heaven with the Devil! We shall devils be! 
The mythic scum was never any use at all. 
A thousand years of flame won't fire the craven soul. 
Brother Marat, arise! At last we've learned our need. 
We, who were human once, must choose a man to lead. 
The Devil was, and still remains, nought but a myth, 
He is our foe like any true son of the Faith. 
To victory, then!" 
With crazed impetuosity 
Straight out of Hell the blood-voracious Aesir flee. 
Their leader, Hegel, swings two torches in the air, 
Whirling a fiery flail, behind him comes Voltaire. 
Danton is shouting with them, Edelmann is howling. 
"Charge, charge, you scum of Hell!" Napoleon is bawling. 
Marat holds in his hands two of Hell's hairy litter; 
Depraved man-murderer, he's thirsting for the slaughter. 

=====第371页=====
The Insolently Threatened Yet Miraculously Rescued Bible 349 
Whirling along with twisted mouth flies Robespierre. 
See the crazed mob disgorged by Hell's abyss down there! 
No sooner are they out, than all that desperate shower 
Head for where Brother Bag is standing guard on Bauer. 
Bag is much shaken. Tears stream from the donkey's eyes. 
"O Lord, the end is near! Our time is come!" she cries. 
Marat lets fly a shot, and Bag, all glassy-eyed, 
Sinks to the ground. He sees the Heavens open wide. 
Hegel embraces crazy Bauer: "Yes, 'tis done! 
You've comprehended me! You are my own dear son!" 
He frees him. Then the wicked ones with great delight: 
"Bauer's our hero! He shall lead us to the fight! 
The Devil is deposed. What we need is a man!" 
And then with screams and yells they charge the pious band. 
The tables are now turned. God's folk flee, sorely tried. 
But Bag, as usual, sees the Heavens open wide. 
He's borne aloft to Heaven by his virgin ass. 
Oh, what a miracle the Lord hath brought to pass! 
Behold Elijah-Bag aloft to Heaven sailing, 
The plans of the Blasphemers gloriously foiling. 
Behind, the shining armies of the Pious rise, 
With songs of joy ascending to the very skies. 
But, with triumphant shouts, Hell's evil offspring shoot 
Straight up behind the Almighty's host in hot pursuit. 
Now fear and horror overwhelm the pious troops, 
As Hell's pack surges up with savage yells and whoops. 
Meanwhile, the Devil has for, some time been struck 
dumb 
By the rebellion which has carried every one 
Of his best men away. Hell's taken by surprise. 
All stand unmoving and regard with staring eyes 
The exit through which Hegel's host has just dispersed. 
Till from his foaming mouth the imprecations burst: 
"Fool that I am — betrayed! I now see where it leads! 
Their deed's more devilish than all my wretched deeds. 
I led the Free astray, till they became too free, 
And now they've gone and foully freed themselves from me! 
Truly, it is past help, the lowly human breed, 
Craving the most outrageous freedom in its greed. 
If all these Free hold nothing sacred any more, 
Is it my ruin, too, they're really aiming for? 
Denying God, I only fight against  myself. 
Soon, as a myth, I too shall end up on the  shelf. 

=====第372页=====
350 Frederick Engels 
To Heav'n! We'll seek the Lord up there with due 
compliance; 
United, we shall form a holy High Alliance!" 
He soars aloft. And, kneeling at God's feet, begins: 
"Lord, do not make me pay for all my wretched sins! 
I join you in the fight!" God, generous, replies: 
"For just this once we'll let your old trespasses be. 
Go, wash your wicked sins off in Blasphemers' blood, 
Return, and leave the rest to me, your gracious God!" 
Joyous, he rushes off. The battle's almost lost, 
For though assistance has gone to the pious host, 
Oh, ignominy!—with the Faith it's nearly over. 
The wicked follow up one triumph with another. 
From star to star, insane with fury, Bauer springs, 
And in his hand The Trumpet for a club he swings. 
At him come charging all the four Evangelists, 
But nothing daunts the boldest of the Atheists. 
Though Luke's BuU levels angry horns and charges at him, 
Though Mark's great Lion roars, there's nothing can affright 
him. 
He puts them all to flight. Wild Hegel in his ire 
Scorches the angel pinions with a brand of fire. 
Foul Voltaire's flail still blazes brightly like a torch, 
While raving Ruge thumps the Elders of the Church. 
Now see how Bauer plucks a star from off its course 
And sends it shooting at the fleeing pious force. 
The Devil's pole-axed by a Trumpet blow at last; 
Michael himself cannot withstand its mighty blast. 
Next, furious Hegel seizes Sirius and throws 
It straight at Hengstenberg: white as a sheet he goes. 
See how the angel host, with wings a-smouldering, flies 
Up through the misty clouds with frightened, piteous cries. 
The Lambkin braves the Monster with a Cross held high; 
The latter balls his fist and shakes it threateningly. 
Even the Virgin Mary leaves her holy place, 
To deeds of derring-do she spurs the angelic race. 
"Up,  against Bauer, up against the Titan, go! 
He tried to apprehend me, I would have you know!" 
However much she pleads, however sweet her glances, 
The army of the Free ones steadily advances. 
And now towards the Almighty's holy realm they storm, 
God's hosts are impotent against the oncoming swarm. 
Into a star the pious ass bumps with her rider; 

=====第373页=====
The Insolently Threatened Yet Miraculously Rescued Bible 351 
Head over heels she goes, with Brother Bag astride her. 
Bauer at once swoops on him with a horrid shout, 
The fatal Trumpet ready aimed to snuff him out. 
Ruge grabs Leo of the Saale: with some force 
He stuffs a page of Annals in between his jaws.— 
But what's this floating down bathed in celestial light? 
What's making Bauer shake from head to foot with fright? 
It's just a little piece of parchment, strange to say. 
What might be written on it by the heavenly ray? 
It flutters down. At Bauer's feet it comes to rest. 
Shaking, he stoops and picks it up with heaving breast.— 
Why does the cold sweat on his brow spring so abundant? 
What does he murmur, stunned? He murmurs this — 
"Redundant!" 
Hardly has Heaven's word from Hell's own mouth rung out, 
Before "Redundant!" is the universal shout. 
The Free are horror-struck, the Angels filled with glee, 
The Free take flight, the Host pursues relentlessly. 
The Free are driven down to Earth in full confusion, 
That wicked folk shall all receive due retribution. 

=====第374页=====
[F. W. ANDREA 
AND THE HIGH NOBILITY OF GERMANY] 
I will not fail to draw the attention of the Catholic nobly-born 
members of the knighthood to a poem which, though written by a 
commoner, is perhaps for this very reason the more worthy of 
being preserved as a precious pearl, as a due tribute of bourgeois 
humility. 
In the year of grace eighteen hundred and forty-two a booklet 
appeared in Erfurt published by F. W. Otto: Das Wissenswiirdigste 
der Heraldik oder Wappenkunde by F. W. Andrea, with a dedication 
which reads as follows: "Respectfully dedicated to the entire high 
nobility of Germany, by the publisher." 
"The Aristocracy by Right are loftiest in the Land, 
The Virtues of Their Forebears always ranked full high. 
Hereditary Worth has waxed and multiplied, 
In no way doth the Present yield before the Past. 
Thus Reverence greets Them humbly everywhere They go, 
On every State the richest blessings They bestow. 
"A Coat of Arms conceals a Wealth of hidden Meaning, 
How the sublimest Deeds were done in ancient Times; 
How Sovereigns gave the Nobles all Their just Deserts 
In War as well as in the palmy Days of Peace. 
Thus,  Coats of Arms as high as Royal Crowns are rated: 
Only exalted Deeds are therewith consecrated. 
"With all Humility and Deference deeply felt 
For Glory thus resplendent down the Aeons of Time, 
I dedicate this Monument of Reverence 
To the most lofty Scions of Virtue-breeding stock. 
Pray, of a great Intention take this feeble token; 
It might yet tell you what lay in my heart unspoken." 
Does the man not deserve to be knighted? 
Written about August 19, 1842 Printed according to the news-
First published in the Rheinische Zeitung pape 
No. 241, August 29, 1842 Published in English for the first 
Marked with the sign*x* time 

=====第375页=====
[BERLIN MISCELLANY] 
Berlin, August 19. I am writing to you today to report that there 
is really nothing to report from here. Heaven knows, it is now the 
silly season or gherkin time, as they say here. Nothing is 
happening, absolutely nothing! The Union of the Historical Christ 
gives no more signs of life than the Union of the Free 167; although 
officially it exists, no student really knows where it exists or who 
belongs to it. It is probably the same as with the famous torchlight 
procession six months ago for the philosopher in the Leipziger 
Strasse, 168 in which, too, no student would afterwards admit having 
taken part, and of which it was already said the day before that 
they were unfortunately mostly "philistines". The Commissions of 
the Estates have not yet materialised either, in spite of the 
Leipziger Zeitung* which, with its passion for unhatched Prussian 
eggs,  conducts interminable debates on whatever is to be placed 
before the Commissions. 169 But we console ourselves with the 
wisdom of our King,b  and leave the unhatched eggs in peace. He 
is said to have brought with him a trade treaty and a new cartel 
convention, and that will certainly not be unhatched eggs! Far 
from bothering about that, we—I mean we Berliners — envy the 
Rhinelanders the great enjoyment that will be theirs in a few 
weeks, when not only our King, but many other persons of high 
rank, including the worthy King Ludwig of Bavaria, the poet on 
the throne, author of Walhallagenossen and founder of Valhalla, 170 
will attend the laying of the foundation stone of Cologne Cathe-
a Leipziger Allgemeine Zeitung. — Ed. 
b Frederick William IV.— Ed. 

=====第376页=====
354 Frederick Engels 
dral, which is to be completed as an ornament for the German 
people. The  Walhallagenossen  caused a lively sensation in local 
educated circles, and the general, competent judgment pro­
nounces without qualification that King Ludwig has added a new 
laurel branch to his crown. Terse as Tacitus', strong and elemental­
ly forceful, the King's style can be confident of imitation and yet 
will only rarely be equalled. 
Written on August 19, 1842 Printed according to the news-
First published in the Rheinische Zeitung paper 
No. 241, August 29, 1842 Published in English for the first 
Marked with the sign  *X *  time 

=====第377页=====
CENTRALISATION 
AND FREEDOM 171 
At first sight it seems incomprehensible that in France a ministry 
like Guizot's could last so long, that indeed it could come to power 
at all. Confronted by a Chamber with full power tô appoint and 
remove ministers, by a free and influential press, by the freest 
institutions in Europe, by a concentrated public opinion strongly 
opposed to him, Guizot, Minister de l'étranger, has withstood this 
for almost two years, persecuted the press, defied public opinion, 
led the Chamber, dissolved it, convoked a new one, compromised 
France's honour in the eyes of the great powers, and achieved in 
full measure the unpopularity which he has been courting. And 
the man who has done all this, who has robbed the French people 
of two years of their history, can boast of having such a strong 
party in the Chamber that only a forced coalition of the most 
directly opposed opinions can endanger him. 
Guizot's Ministry is the period of full bloom of the July 
government, the triumph of Louis Philippe, and the bitterest 
humiliation for all those who had expected the July revolutiona to 
bring the liberation of Europe. The principles of popular 
sovereignty, of a free press, of an independent jury, of parliamen­
tary government, have practically been destroyed in France. 
Guizot's Ministry has set the crown on the reactionary tendencies 
which have succeeded in reasserting themselves in France, and has 
brought openly into view the impotence of French liberalism in 
the face of Europe's legitimate authorities. 
The fact is well established. Reaction in the whole of Europe 
rejoices over it. The liberal party has continually to hear it said 
a Of 1830.— Ed. 

=====第378页=====
356 Frederick Engels 
that France daily disavows her institutions, gives the lie to her 
history since 1789, elects Chambers the list of whose members is 
itself a lampoon on the July revolution, in short, that by every one 
of its actions the most liberal nation in Europe is betraying 
liberalism. And liberals, namely, the good-natured Germans, blush 
with shame and stammer a few uncouth excuses which they 
themselves do not take quite seriously, silently hope for a liberal 
Chamber, and secretly, quite stealthily, hope — for another July. 
The fact can not only be admitted without prejudice to the 
principle of freedom, it must even be put in the forefront for the 
very sake of this principle. It has two causes; one of them has 
already often been put forward as an argument against the 
reactionaries by the bolder independent thinkers, namely, the 
half-heartedness and ambiguity of the French constitution, in 
which the principle of freedom is never explicitly formulated and 
implemented; the other is centralisation. 
In spite of Cormenin's pamphlet,* in spite of his brilliant and 
eloquent defence of French centralisation, the latter remains the 
chief cause of the retrogression of French legislation. Cormenin 
really proves nothing at all, although almost everything in his book 
is correct and good. For he does not base centralisation on the 
general laws of reason, but excuses it on the grounds of the special 
nature of the French national spirit and of the course of history. 
Those are grounds which we can accept for the time being, for 
we have first of all to furnish the proof that such centralisation is 
irrational and therefore the cause of the effects mentioned above. 
Centralisation, in the extreme form in which it prevails in 
France at present, is the state overstepping its bounds, going 
beyond its essential nature. The state is bounded, on the one 
hand, by the individual and, on the other hand, by world history. 
Both of these are harmed by centralisation. By assuming a right 
which belongs only to history, the state destroys the freedom of 
the individual. History has eternally had and will always retain the 
right to dispose of the life, the happiness, the freedom of the 
individual, for it is the activity of mankind as a whole, it is the life 
of the species, and as such it is sovereign; no one can revolt 
against it, for it is absolute right. No one can complain against 
history, for whatever it allots one, one lives and shares in the 
development of mankind, which is more than any enjoyment. 
How ludicrous it would be if the subjects of a Nero or a Domitian 
were to complain that they had not been born in an age like ours, 
a Cormenin, De la Centralisation.— Ed. 

=====第379页=====
Centralisation and Freedom 357 
when beheading or roasting alive does not happen so easily, or if 
the victims of medieval religious fanaticism were to reproach 
history because they did not live after the Reformation and under 
tolerant governments! As if without the suffering of some, the 
others could have made progress! Thus, the English workers, who 
at present have to suffer bitter hunger, have indeed the right to 
protest against Sir Robert Peel and the English constitution, but 
not against history, which is making them the standard-bearers 
and representatives of a new principle of right. The same thing 
does not hold good for the state. It is always a particular state and 
can never claim the right, which mankind as a whole naturally 
possesses in its activity and the development of history, to sacrifice 
the individual for the general. 
Thus the centralised state, of course, commits an injustice when, 
as occurs in France and as Cormenin admits, it sacrifices the 
provinces to the centre and thus introduces an oligarchy, an 
aristocracy of locality which is no less unjust and irrational than 
the aristocracy of nobility and of money. Freedom is essentially 
conditioned by equality, and despite all égalité devant la loi, the 
difference between Parisians and provincials, as far as education, 
participation in popular sovereignty, and true, moral enjoyment of 
life are concerned, is nevertheless more than enough to obstruct 
the French institutions in their natural development towards 
complete freedom. 
The history of centralisation in France, as everywhere else, goes 
parallel to that of absolutism. Louis XI was the founder of both; 
the Huguenot wars were the last significant attempt of the 
provinces to revolt against the hegemony of Paris, and from then 
on the supremacy of the capital over France has been generally 
recognised.172 For as soon as centralisation of the state takes place 
in earnest, there is bound to be local centralisation, the hegemony 
of the centre. As long as absolutism lasted only Paris profited by it, 
the provinces had to put up with the costs of the state and His 
Majesty's arbitrariness. All culture, all esprit, all science from the 
whole of France was concentrated in Paris, existed for Paris; the 
press operated only in and for Paris; the money of the provinces, 
which the court drew towards  itself,  was squandered in and for 
Paris.  This gave rise to that great disproportion in culture between 
Paris and the rest of the country which, with the fall of absolutism, 
developed in a form extremely disadvantageous for France. 
Centralisation alone made the revolution possible, in the way in 
which it eventually happened; but centralisation also had made the 
gulf between Paris and the rest of the country so great that Paris 

=====第380页=====
358 Frederick Engels 
felt little concern for the welfare of the provinces as long as it 
itself was not affected by the general oppression. The estates of 
the realm,173  the representation of the oppressed country, not the 
city of Paris, began the work of revolution; only when the 
problems became matters of principle and the interests of the 
capital became involved did the latter take the initiative and 
dominate the course of events. But as a result the participation of 
the country slackened, and the country, and the representatives 
elected by it gave Napoleon by their apathy the opportunity to 
raise himself gradually to the imperial throne. Under the Res­
toration, when political parties developed, the same struggle 
between the country and the capital became evident; Paris soon 
achieved greater clarity of purpose and decided against the 
Bourbons and kingship by the grace of God; the country, with its 
lesser degree of education, put few liberals into the arena; it was 
largely apathetic and therefore favoured the existing regime or 
even fanatically supported the ancien regime. Hence the July 
revolution was made by Paris alone; the great mass of the 
indifferent were too indolent to rise against the capital and its new 
principle; the most uneducated regions of the country remained 
loyal to the Bourbons, but could do nothing to counter centralisa­
tion. Since then, however, almost every Chamber has allowed itself 
to be robbed of the gains of the July revolution one after another, 
and centralisation, besides other causes, was also responsible for 
this. For all parts of the country send their deputies to the 
Chambers and, in spite of controlled elections and bribery, each 
constituency demonstrates by its choice the degree of its political 
education. He who allows himself to be bribed and dictated to is 
certainly not himself free and resolute; hence he acts quite rightly 
when, by electing a ministerial deputy, he submits to the tutelage 
that falls to his lot. The contradiction between the July revolution 
and the Chambers of 1842 is the contradiction between the capital 
and the country. Through Paris, France can indeed make revolu­
tions and create free institutions at a single stroke, but she cannot 
keep them. Anyone who is unable to understand the 1842 
Chambers shows that he has confused Frenchmen and Parisians, 
that he has not realised the contradiction of centralisation. 
Let us not be unjust! The contradiction from which centralisa­
tion suffers is undeniable; but let us also allow it the historical and 
rational right that is its due! Centralisation  is — and this is its 
justification — the essence, the vital nerve, of the state. Every state 
must necessarily strive for centralisation; every state is centralised, 
from the absolute monarchy to the republic; America just as much 

=====第381页=====
Centralisation  and Freedom 359 
as Russia.  No  state  can do  without centralisation,  the  federal state 
no more than  the  developed central state;  as long  as states exist, 
each state will have  a centre, each citizen will perform  his  civic 
functions only  by virtue  of centralisation. Under this centralisation, 
communal administration, everything that affects individual citi­
zens or corporations,  can  quite well  be left free,  and  even must  be 
left free, since because centralisation  is concentrated  in a  single 
centre, because everything here forms  a single unity,  its activity 
must necessarily  be general,  its competence  and  powers embracing 
everything that  is of  general validity,  but  leaving free everything 
that concerns only this  or that particular individual. From this 
follows  the  right  of the  central power  of the  state  to promulgate 
laws,  to control  the  administration,  to appoint state officials,  etc.; 
from this follows  at the  same time  the principle that judicial power 
must  by no  means  be connected with  the centre  but  must  be in the 
hands  of the  people — courts  of law  with juries—and that,  as 
already said, communal affairs,  etc., do not  come within  the 
competence  of the  centre,  and so on. 
The central nature  of the  state does  not by the way  stipulate 
that some  one  person must  be the  central point,  as in an  absolute 
monarchy,  but  only that  an individual occupies  the  central posi­
tion,  as in a  republic  the  president  may  well  do. For it  should  not 
be forgotten that  the  main thing  is not the  person  in the  centre, 
but the  centre  itself. 
To return  to our  beginning. Centralisation  is the  principle 
underlying  the  state,  yet  centralisation necessarily compels  the 
state  to reach  out  beyond  itself, to  make itself—the particu­
lar— into something universal, ultimate  and  supreme,  and to  claim 
the authority  and  position that belongs only  to history.  The  state  is 
not, as it is  held  to be, the  realisation  of absolute freedom — other­
wise the above dialectic  of the  state concept would  be invalid —  but 
merely  the  realisation  of objective freedom. True subjective free­
dom, which  has  equal rights with absolute freedom, calls  for a 
different form  of realisation than  the  state. 
Written  in the  first half  of September Printed according  to the  news-
1842 paper 
First published  in the  Supplement  to the  Published  in English  for the  first 
Rheinische Zeitung  No. 261,  September  18,  time 
1842 
Marked with  the  sign  x 

=====第382页=====
FREDERICK WILLIAM IV, 
KING OF PRUSSIA 174 
Among the European sovereigns whose personality attracts 
attention also outside their own country there are four of special 
interest: Nicholas of Russia, because of the directness and uncon­
cealed frankness with which he strives towards despotism; Louts 
Philippe, who can be regarded as the Machiavelli of our time; 
Victoria of England, the perfect model of a constitutional queen; 
and Frederick William IV, whose frame of mind, which has been 
unmistakably and clearly revealed during the two years of his 
reign, is to be the subject of closer examination here. 
What we have to say is not dictated by the hatred and desire for 
revenge of a party slighted and abhorred by him, and oppressed 
and ill-treated by his officials, nor by the bitter resentment 
engendered by the censorship, which uses freedom of the press to 
spread scandalous tales and Berlin city gossip. Der deutsche Bote is 
occupied with other matters. But in view of the dishonourable and 
base flattery which the newspapers daily lavish on the German 
sovereigns and peoples, it is absolutely essential that the rulers 
should for once be seen from a different point of view, and their 
actions and frame of mind judged as impartially as we judge those 
of any other person. 
In the last years of the previous king,a reaction in the state 
administration began to join forces with clerical reaction. Owing to 
the development of opposition to absolute freedom, the orthodox 
state,  like the orthodox church, found itself compelled to return to 
its initial premises and assert the Christian principle with all its 
a Frederick William III.— Ed. 

=====第383页=====
Friedrich Wilhelm IV, King of Prussia 361 
consequences. Thus, Protestant orthodoxy reverted to Catholicism, 
a phase which finds its most consistent and worthy representatives 
in Leo and Krummacher, and the Protestant state to the consistent 
Christian-feudal monarchy in the form in which Frederick William 
IV seeks to establish it. 
Frederick William IV is altogether a product of his time, a figure 
wholly and solely to be explained by the development of free 
thought and its struggle against Christianity. He represents the 
extreme consequence of the Prussian principle, which is seen in 
him in its latest garb but at the same time in its complete 
impotence in the face of free self-consciousness. With him the 
ideological development of the former Prussia has come to an 
end; a new version of it is not possible, and if Frederick William 
succeeds in carrying through his system in practice, Prussia must 
either adopt an entirely new principle — and this can only be the 
principle of free thought—or it must collapse, if it lacks the 
strength for such progress. 
The state which Frederick William IV is striving to establish is, 
according to his own words, the Christian state. The form which 
Christianity assumes when it wishes to appear scientific is theology. 
The essence of theology, especially in our day, is the reconciliation 
and glossing over of absolute opposites. Even the most consistent 
Christian cannot fully emancipate himself from the circumstances 
of our time; the latter compels him to introduce modifications into 
Christianity. Christianity contains premises which, if developed, 
could lead to atheism. Hence arises that form of theology which 
has found its critic in Bruno Bauer and which with its inherent 
falsehood and hypocrisy permeates our whole life. In the sphere 
of the state, this theology has its counterpart in the present system 
of administration in Prussia. That Frederick William IV has a 
system is undeniable. It is a fully developed system of romanticism 
which is the necessary consequence of his point of view; for if one 
wants to organise a state from this point of view, one must have 
something more than a few scrappy, disconnected ideas at one's 
disposal. Hence, as a preliminary, the theological nature of this 
system would have to be elaborated. 
By undertaking to put into effect the principle of legitimacy 
with all its consequences, the Prussian King not only allies him­
self with the historical school of law, but develops it even further, 
almost as far as Haller's "restoration".3 First of all, in order to 
realise the Christian state, he has to imbue the rationalist, bu-
a A reference to the book: K. Haller, Restauration der Staatswissenschaft.... — Ed. 
13-384 

=====第384页=====
362 Frederick Engels 
reaucratic state, which has become almost heathen, with Christian 
ideas,  give the cult a higher status, and seek to promote partici­
pation in it. Nor has he neglected to do so. Here we find the meas­
ures to increase church attendance in general and by officials in 
particular, stricter observance of Sunday, the planned tightening 
of the laws on divorce, the purging of the theological faculties 
which has already partially begun, the priority given at theology 
examinations to firm belief even if coupled with poor knowledge, 
the appointment primarily of believers to many official positions, 
and many other generally known facts. They may serve as proof 
of how intensely Frederick William IV is striving to re-introduce 
Christianity directly into the state, and to institute state legislation 
on the basis of the precepts of biblical morality. But these are only 
the first, most immediate measures. The system of the Christian 
state cannot rest content with this. The next step is the separation 
of the church from the state, a step that goes beyond the Protes­
tant state. In the latter the King is summus episcopus* and com­
bines in his person supreme ecclesiastical and state power; the final 
aim of this form of state is the fusion of state and church, as He­
gel expressed it. But just as the whole of Protestantism is a conces­
sion to secularity, so also is the episcopate of the sovereign. It is a 
confirmation and justification of the papal primate in that it 
recognises the need for a visible supreme head of the church; on 
the other hand, however, it declares the earthly, secular power, 
state power, to be absolutely supreme and subordinates ecclesiasti­
cal power to it. It is not an equation of the secular and the 
spiritual, but the subordination of the spiritual to the secular. For 
the sovereign was a sovereign before he became summus episcopus, 
and remains primarily the sovereign afterwards as well, without 
ever being invested with a spiritual character. The other aspect of 
the matter, of course, is that the sovereign now combines all 
power, earthly and heavenly, in his own person and, as an 
earthly God, is the consummation of the religious state. 
Since, however, such subordination is contrary to the Christian 
spirit, it is absolutely necessary for a state that claims to be 
Christian to restore to the church its independence of the state. 
This reversion to Catholicism is now quite impossible; the absolute 
emancipation of the church is equally impossible to carry out 
without undermining the fundamental basis of the state; hence it 
is necessary to resort to an intermediate system. That is precisely 
a Head of the Evangelical Church.— Ed. 

=====第385页=====
Frederick William IV, King of Prussia 363 
what Frederick William IV has already done in relation to the 
Catholic Church. As regards the Protestant Church, here also 
obvious facts reveal his views on this matter; in particular, one 
should mention the abolition of compulsory union and the freeing 
of the Old Lutherans from the oppression they had to suffer.17* In 
the Protestant denomination a very special situation has now 
arisen. It has no visible supreme head, and in general no unity; it 
is divided into numerous sects, and therefore the Protestant state 
cannot give it freedom in any other way than by regarding the 
various sects as corporations, and thus affording them absolute 
freedom for their internal affairs. Nevertheless, the sovereign does 
not relinquish his episcopate, but reserves for himself the right 
of confirmation and sovereignty in general, whereas, on the 
other hand, he recognises Christianity as a power over himself and 
consequently must also yield to the church. Thus, not only do the 
contradictions in which the Protestant state develops remain in 
force, despite all apparent resolution of them, but there also arises 
an intermixture with the principles of the Catholic state, which is 
bound to lead to an astonishing confusion and lack of principle. 
And that is not theological. 
By the action taken against the Archbishop of Cologne," the 
Protestant state declared, through Altenstein and Frederick 
William III, that a devoted Catholic cannot be a useful citizen. 176 
This thesis, confirmed by the whole history of the Middle Ages, is 
valid not only for the Protestant state, but for any state at all. A 
person who makes his whole being, his whole life, a preparation 
for heaven cannot have the interest in earthly affairs which the 
state demands from its citizens. The state claims to be everything 
to its citizens; it does not recognise any authority over itself and, in 
general, presents itself as an absolute power. But the Catholic 
recognises God and his institution, the church, as something 
absolute and can therefore never adopt the standpoint of the state 
without inner reservation. This contradiction cannot be resolved. 
Even the Catholic state must, in the opinion of the Catholics, 
subordinate itself to the church, otherwise the Catholic will 
disassociate himself from it; how much more, therefore, will he be 
at variance with the non-Catholic state? In this respect, the action 
taken by the previous government was perfectly consistent and 
well founded; the state can only allow the freedom of the Catholic 
denomination to be undiminished so long as the latter obeys the 
' Clemens August Freiherr von Droste-Vischering.— Ed. 
13* 

=====第386页=====
364 Frederick Engels 
existing laws.— This state of affairs could not satisfy the Christian 
King. But what was to be done? The Protestant state could not lag 
behind the Catholic Hohenstaufens, and in view of the height of 
consciousness which the state and church had attained, a definite 
solution was possible only by the subordination of one or the 
other, a subordination which for the submitting side would be 
tantamount to self-destruction. The problem had become one of 
principle, and in the face of principles the isolated case as such 
had to take second place. What did Frederick William IV do now? 
In true theological fashion, he ignored the impertinent, inconven­
ient principles, concentrated exclusively on the actual case in 
question, which divorced from principles became completely con­
fused, and tried to dispose of it by means of a compromise. The 
curia stood firm, and therefore it was the state that was defeated. 
This is what the renowned glorious solution of the Cologne 
discord amounts to, reduced to its true content. 
These same only superficially concealed contradictions which 
Frederick William IV evoked in the attitude of the state to the 
church, he tried to arouse also in the internal relations of the 
state.  Here he could rely on the already existing theories of the 
historical school of law, and so he had a fairly easy task. The 
course of history had made the principle of absolute monarchy 
dominant in Germany, destroyed the rights of the old feudal 
estates, and elevated the King into a divinity in the state. 
Moreover, in the period between 1807 and 1812, the vestiges of 
the Middle Ages were resolutely attacked and for the most part 
swept away. And no matter how much the old was later restored, 
the legislation of that time and the Prussian Law drawn up under 
the influence of the Enlightenment remained the basis of Prussian 
legislation. Such a state of things was bound to be intolerable. 
Therefore Frederick William IV seized on all vestiges of the 
Middle Ages wherever they were to be found. The nobility with 
the right of primogeniture was shown special favour and their 
ranks strengthened by the investiture of new members on condi­
tion that they established the right of primogeniture. The burgh­
ers, as distinct from the nobility and peasants, were regarded 
and treated as a special social estate representing trade and 
industry. Separation of the corporations, the isolation of individual 
crafts and their approximation to the guild system were encour­
aged, etc. In general, from the outset, all the King's speeches and 
actions showed his special predilection for the system of corpora­
tions,  and it is precisely this that is the best indication of his 
medieval standpoint. This coexistence of privileged associations, 

=====第387页=====
Frederick William IV, King of Prussia 365 
which in their internal affairs can act with a certain freedom and 
independence, each of them being closely knit by similar interests, 
but which fight among themselves and try to outdo one 
another—this disintegration of the state forces to the extent of 
the complete collapse of the state, typical of the German Empire, 
is one of the most significant features of the Middle Ages. It goes 
without saying, however, that Frederick William IV does not 
intend to lead the Christian state to this pass. It is true that he 
believes himself called upon to restore the truly Christian state, 
but actually he wants only the theological appearance of the same, 
the brilliance and splendour of the Christian state but not its 
misery, oppression, disorder and self-destruction, in short, he 
wants a juste-milieu Middle Ages, just as a person like Leo wants 
from Catholicism only the resplendent cult, the church discipline, 
etc., but not the whole of Catholicism hook, line and sinker. Hence 
Frederick William is also not absolutely illiberal and despotic 
in his endeavours — God forbid — he wants to allow his Prussians 
all possible freedoms, but actually only in the form of unfreedom, 
monopoly, and privilege. He is not an out-and-out enemy of a free 
press,  he will grant it, but again as a monopoly primarily of the 
learned professions. He does not wish to abolish representation 
or refuse it, he merely objects to representation of the citizen 
as such; he is aiming at representation of the social estates as 
already partially carried out in the Prussian provincial diets. 177 
In short, he does not recognise any universal, civic, or human 
rights, he admits only corporate rights, monopolies, privileges. 
He will bestow a multitude of these, as many as he can with­
out his absolute power being restricted by positive legal pro­
visions. Perhaps he will go even further. It is possible that 
already now, despite the Königsberg and Breslau assurances, 178 
he has the secret intention — when he has carried his theological 
policy far enough — to crown his labours by inaugurating a 
medieval constitution based on the social estates of the realm, and 
thereby bind the hands of his successors, who may possibly have 
other views. That would be consistent, but whether his theological 
standpoint would permit it remains to be seen. 
We have seen how vacillating and unfounded, how inconsistent 
this system is already in  itself;  its introduction in practice must 
inevitably give rise to new vacillations and inconsistencies. The 
cold Prussian bureaucratic state, the system of control, the strident 
state machine, do not want to know anything about splendid, 
shining, trustful romanticism. The nation as a whole is still at too 
low a level of political development to be able to see through the 

=====第388页=====
366 Frederick Engels 
system of the Christian King. Nevertheless, hatred of the 
privileges of the nobility, and of the claims of the clergy of all 
denominations, is too deep-rooted for Frederick William not to 
meet with failure here if he acts quite openly. Hence the cautious 
system of taking soundings that he has hitherto practised, by 
which he first explored public opinion and then always left himself 
sufficient time to withdraw any too obnoxious measure. Hence 
also the method of putting his ministers into the forefront and 
disavowing them if they acted too forcefully. The remarkable 
thing is that a Prussian minister should tolerate this and not offer 
his resignation. It has already happened to Rochow, and it will 
shortly be Herr Eichhorn's turn, although quite recently the King 
awarded him a title of honour and applauded his actions. Without 
such theological devices, Frederick William IV would long ago 
have lost the affection of the people, which he has managed to 
retain so far only because of his frank, jovial nature, his great 
kindness and affability, and his unrestrained wit, which is said not 
to spare even crowned heads. Moreover, he takes great care not to 
flaunt the obnoxious or even unavoidably bad aspects of his 
system; on the contrary, he speaks of it as though it were nothing 
but splendour, glory and freedom, and he lets himself go only on 
topics where his system gives the appearance of being more liberal 
than the existing Prussian system of tutelage; where, however, he 
would appear illiberal, he wisely restrains  himself.  Furthermore, 
while always applying to ordinary constitutionalism such flattering 
epithets as superficial and vulgar he has nevertheless mastered its 
terminology and uses it very skilfully in his speeches—should one 
say to express his ideas or conceal them? That is exactly how the 
modern theologians of compromise behave, who are likewise fond 
of using political terminology, imagining that by so doing they are 
adapting themselves to the demands of the time. Bruno Bauer 
bluntly calls this hypocrisy. 
As for the financial administration under Frederick William IV, 
he has not been able to keep to the kind of civil list which his 
father established for  himself,  who laid down by law that 2V2 
million talers annually should be allocated to the King and his 
household out of the revenue from the domains, and that the 
remainder, together with other revenues, should be used for state 
requirements. Even if the King's private income is taken into 
account it can be reckoned that he spends more than 2V2 
million — yet this sum is also supposed to cover the maintenance 
of the other princes. In addition, Bülow-Cummerow has proved 
that the so-called financial accounting of the Prussian state is 

=====第389页=====
Frederick William IV, King of Prussia 367 
absolutely illusory.* In general, it remains a complete mystery how 
the state revenues are administered. The much-talked-of reduction 
of taxes hardly deserves mention; it could have been carried out 
long ago under the previous King had he not feared that he 
would be compelled to raise them again. 
I think I have now said enough about Frederick William IV. In 
view of his undoubtedly kind-hearted nature, it stands to reason 
that in matters not related to his theory, he honestly does what 
public opinion demands and what is really good. The question still 
remains whether he will ever be able to put his system into effect. 
To this, fortunately, the reply can only be in the negative. Since 
last year, since the time when allegedly greater freedom was 
accorded to the press, which at the present moment has again 
become the most unfree, the Prussian people has achieved an 
advance which is out of all proportion to the insignificance of that 
measure. The oppression of the censorship in Prussia shackles 
such an extraordinary mass of forces that the smallest relief 
evokes an incomparably powerful reaction on their part. Prussian 
public opinion is centring more and more round two questions: 
representative government and, especially, freedom of the press. 
The latter, whatever the attitude of the King, will be wrung from 
him as a preliminary, and once this is achieved it must be followed 
within a year by a constitution. But should a representative system 
be established, it is quite impossible to foresee what course Prussia 
will then take. One of the first consequences will be the annulment 
of the alliance with Russia, if the King has not already been 
compelled by then to abandon this consequence of his principle. 
However, there is much more that could follow, and Prussia's 
present situation closely resembles that of France before ... but 
I refrain from any premature conclusions. 
Written about October 1842 Printed according to the collection 
Fir« published in the Einurdtwaruig Published in English for the first 
Bogen oui der Schiwvz., hrsg. v. Herwegh, . ° 
Zurich and Winterthur, 1843 
Signed: F. O. 
* Bülow-Cummerow, Preussen, seine Verfassung, seine Verwaltung, sein Verhältnis 
zu Deutschland. — Ed. 

=====第390页=====
THE ENGLISH VIEW 
OF THE INTERNAL CRISES 
London, November 29. If one engages for a time in a quiet study 
of English conditions, if one comes to understand clearly the weak 
foundation on which the entire artificial edifice of England's social 
and political well-being rests, and then suddenly finds oneself 
amidst the hustle and bustle of English life, one is astonished at 
the remarkable calm and confidence with which everyone here 
looks to the future. The ruling classes, whether middle class or 
aristocracy, whether Whigs or Tories, have now ruled the country 
for so long that the emergence of any other party seems to them 
an impossibility. No matter how much one may point out to them 
their sins, their inconsistency, their vacillating policy, their blind­
ness and obduracy, and the precarious state of the country which 
is the outcome of their principles, they remain unshaken in their 
assurance and confident in their ability to lead the country to a 
better position. And if a revolution in England is impossible, as 
they at least assert, they have indeed little to fear for their rule. If 
Chartism has the patience to wait until it has won a majority in the 
House of Commons, it will have to go on for many a year to come 
holding meetings and demanding the six points of the People's 
Charter180; the middle class will never renounce its occupation of 
the House of Commons by agreeing to universal suffrage, since it 
would immediately be outvoted by the huge number of the 
unpropertied as the inevitable consequence of giving way on this 
point. Therefore Chartism has not yet been able to gain any hold 
among educated people in England and will remain unable to do 
so for some time yet. When people here speak of Chartists and 
radicals, they almost always have in mind the lower strata of 

=====第391页=====
The English View of the Internal Crises 369 
society, the mass of proletarians, and it is true that the party's few 
educated spokesmen are lost among the masses. 
Moreover, irrespective of political interests, the middle class can 
only be Whig or Tory, never Chartist. Its principle is the 
preservation of the status quo; in England's present condition, 
"legal progress" and universal suffrage would inevitably result in a 
revolution. It is therefore quite natural that the practical English­
man, for whom politics is a matter of arithmetic or even a com­
mercial affair, pays no attention at all to the power of Chartism, 
which is quietly growing to formidable proportions, since it cannot 
be expressed in numbers, except perhaps in such as, in relation to 
the government and Parliament, would be noughts after the deci­
mal point. But there are things which are beyond numerical calcu­
lation, and it is here that the super-cleverness of English Whig-
gery and Toryism will suffer a debacle, when the time comes. 
Written on November 29, 1842 Printed according to the news-
First published in the Rheinische Zeitung paper 
No. 342, December 8, 1842 Published in English for the first 
., , , ... * * time 
Marked with the sign x 

=====第392页=====
THE INTERNAL CRISES 
[Rheinische Zeitung No. 343, December 9, 1842] 
London, November 30. Is a revolution in England possible or 
even probable? This is the question on which the future of 
England depends. Put it to an Englishman and he will give you a 
thousand excellent reasons to prove that there can be no question 
at all of a revolution. He will tell you that at the moment certainly 
England is in a critical situation, but thanks to her wealth, her 
industry and her institutions, she has the ways and means to 
extricate herself without violent upheavals, that her constitution is 
sufficiently flexible to withstand the heaviest blows caused by the 
struggle over principles and can, without danger to its founda­
tions,  submit to all the changes forced on it by circumstances. He 
will tell you that even the lowest class of the nation is well aware 
that it only stands to lose by a revolution, since every disturbance 
of the public order can only result in a slow-down in business and 
hence general unemployment and starvation. In short, he will 
offer you so many clear and convincing reasons that finally you 
will believe things are really not so very bad in England, and that 
people on the Continent are indulging in all kinds of fantasies 
about the situation of this state, which will burst like soap-bubbles 
in face of obvious reality and a closer acquaintance with the facts. 
And this is the only possible opinion if one adopts the national 
English standpoint of the most immediate practice, of material 
interests, i. e., if one ignores the motivating idea, forgets the basis 
because of the surface appearance, and fails to see the wood for 
the trees. There is one thing that is self-evident in Germany, but 
which the obstinate Briton cannot be made to understand, namely, 
that the so-called material interests can never operate in history as 

=====第393页=====
The Internal Crises 371 
independent, guiding aims, but always, consciously or unconscious­
ly, serve a principle which controls the threads of historical 
progress. It is therefore impossible that a state like England, which 
by virtue of its political exclusiveness and self-sufficiency has 
finally come to lag some centuries behind the Continent, a state 
which sees only arbitrary rule in freedom and is up to the neck in 
the Middle Ages, that such a state should not eventually come into 
conflict with the intellectual progress that has been made in the 
meantime. Or is that npt the picture of the political situation in 
England? Is there any other country in the world where feudalism 
retains such enduring power and where it remains immune from 
attack not only in actual fact, but also in public opinion? Is the 
much-vaunted English freedom anything but the purely formal 
right to act or not to act, as one sees fit, within the existing legal 
limits? And what laws they are! A chaos of confused, mutually 
contradictory regulations, which have reduced jurisprudence to 
pure sophistry, which are never observed by courts of law since 
they are not in accord with our times; regulations which allow 
an honest man to be branded as a criminal for the most in­
nocent behaviour, as long as public opinion and its sense of 
justice sanctioned it. Is not the House of Commons a corporation 
alien to the people, elected by means of wholesale bribery? 
Does not Parliament continually trample underfoot the will of 
the people? Has public opinion on general questions the slightest 
influence on the government? Is not its power restricted mere­
ly to isolated cases, to control over the courts of law and admin­
istration? These are all things which even the most obdurate 
Englishman cannot totally deny, and can such "a state of things 
persist? 
But let us leave aside questions of principle. In England, at any 
rate among the parties which are now contending for power, 
among the Whigs and Tories, people know nothing of struggles 
over principles and are concerned only with conflicts of material 
interests. It is only fair, therefore, to do justice to this aspect as 
well. England is by nature a poor country which, apart from her 
geographical position, her iron and coal mines and some lush 
pasture-land, has no fertility or other natural riches. She is, 
therefore, entirely dependent on trade, shipping and industry, 
and through them she has succeeded in rising to her present 
heights. By the very nature of things, however, a country which 
has adopted this course can remain at the heights it has reached 
only by constantly increasing industrial output; any halt here 
would be a step backward. 

=====第394页=====
372 Frederick Engels 
Further, a natural consequence of the premises of the industrial 
state is that, in order to protect the source of its wealth, it has to 
keep out the industrial products of other countries by means of 
prohibitive import duties. But since the home industry raises the 
prices of its products in step with the import duties on foreign 
products, this makes it necessary also to increase import duties 
constantly, in order that foreign competition shall continue to be 
eliminated, in accordance with the accepted principle. Hence the 
result would be a two-sided process going on to infinity, and this 
alone reveals the contradiction inherent in the concept of the 
industrial state. But we do not need these philosophical categories 
to show the contradictions in which England is enmeshed. Other 
people besides the English industrialists have something to say on 
the question of the two kinds of increase — production and import 
duties — that we have just considered. In the first place, there are 
the foreign countries, which have their own industry and do not 
need to turn themselves into an outlet for English products; and 
then there are the English consumers, who refuse to reconcile 
themselves to this endless increase in import duties. That is 
precisely how matters stand as regards the development of the 
industrial state in England. Foreign countries do not want English 
products since they themselves produce what they need, while 
English consumers unanimously demand the abolition of the 
protective tariffs. From the above, it is clear that England is caught 
in a twofold dilemma which the industrial state as such is 
incapable of solving; this is also confirmed by direct observation of 
the existing state of affairs. 
First of all, on the question of import duties, it is admitted even 
in England that the lower grades of almost all types of goods are 
produced better and more cheaply by German and French 
factories; the same holds good for numerous other commodities 
where the English lag behind the Continent. If the system of 
protective tariffs were abolished, England would immediately be 
flooded with them, and English industry would thereby be dealt a 
fatal blow. On the other hand, the export of machinery from 
England is freely permitted at present, and since England so far 
has no rivals in the manufacture of machinery, the Continent, with 
the help of English machines, is becoming increasingly capable of 
competing against England. Further, the system of protective 
tariffs has undermined England's state revenue, and for this 
reason alone the tariffs must be abolished. Is there any way out of 
this situation for the industrial state? 

=====第395页=====
The Internal Crises 373 
[Rheinische  Zeitung No. 344, December 10, 1842] 
As regards the market for English products, Germany and 
France have stated sufficiently clearly that they are no longer 
ready to sacrifice their own industry to please England. German 
industry especially has in any case made such progress that it has 
nothing to fear from English industry. The continental market is 
lost for England. Only America and her own colonies remain for 
her, and only in the latter is she safeguarded against foreign 
competition by her navigation laws.181 But the colonies are far 
from being large enough to consume all the products of England's 
immense industry, while everywhere else English industry is being 
increasingly ousted by the German and French. The blame for 
this, of course, does not lie with English industry, but with the 
system of protective tariffs, which has made the prices of all prime 
necessities, and with them wages, disproportionately high. But 
these wages also make the prices of English products extremely 
high compared with those of continental industry. Thus, England 
cannot escape the necessity of restricting her industry. But this is 
as little realisable as the transition from the system of protective 
tariffs to free trade. For although industry makes a country rich, it 
also creates a class of unpropertied, absolutely poor people, a class 
which lives from hand to mouth, which multiplies rapidly, and 
which cannot afterwards be abolished, because it can never acquire 
stable possession of property. And a third, almost a  half,  of all 
English people belong to this class. The slightest stagnation in 
trade deprives a considerable part of this class of their bread, a 
large-scale trade crisis leaves the whole class without bread. When 
such a situation occurs, what is there left for these people to do 
but to revolt? By its numbers, this class has become the most 
powerful in England, and woe betide the wealthy Englishmen 
when it becomes conscious of this fact. 
So far it is not conscious of the fact. The English proletarian is 
only just becoming aware of his power, and the fruits of this 
awareness were the disturbances of last summer.182 The nature of 
these disturbances was quite misunderstood on the Continent. At 
any rate, people wondered whether the matter might not take a 
serious turn. But there was no question of that for anyone who 
saw the events on the spot. In the first place, the whole thing was 
based on an illusion; because a few factory owners wanted to 
reduce wages, all the workers in the cotton, coal and iron areas 
thought that their position was endangered, which was not the 
case at all. Moreover, the whole affair was unprepared, unorgan-

=====第396页=====
374 Frederick Engels 
ised and without leadership. The strikers had no definite aim, still 
less were they united on the nature and method of the action to 
be taken. Hence, at the slightest resistance on the part of the 
authorities they became irresolute and unable to overcome their 
respect for the law. When the Chartists took over the leadership of 
the movement and proclaimed the People's Charter3 to the assem­
bled crowds, it was already too late. The only guiding idea 
vaguely present in the minds of the workers, and of the Chartists 
as well, with whom it had, in effect, originated, was that of 
revolution by legal means — in itself a contradiction, a practical 
impossibility—in their efforts to achieve which they failed. The 
very first measure jointly undertaken by all—stopping the fac­
tories—  was forcible and illegal. In view of the inconsistent 
character of the whole undertaking, it would have been sup­
pressed at the very outset if the administration, for whom it came as a 
complete surprise, had not been equally irresolute and resource-
less. Nevertheless, insignificant military and police forces sufficed 
to hold the people in check. In Manchester one saw thousands of 
workers trapped in the squares by four or five dragoons, each of 
whom blocked one of the exits. The "legal revolution" had 
paralysed everything. Thus the whole thing fizzled out; every 
worker returned to work as soon as his savings were used up and 
he had no more to eat. However, the dispossessed have gained 
something useful from these events: the realisation that a revolu­
tion by peaceful means is impossible and that only a forcible 
abolition of the existing unnatural conditions, a radical overthrow 
of the nobility and industrial aristocracy, can improve the material 
position of the proletarians. They are still held back from this 
violent revolution by the Englishman's inherent respect for the 
law; but in view of England's position described above there 
cannot fail to be a general lack of food among the workers before 
long, and then fear of death from starvation will be stronger than 
fear of the law. This revolution is inevitable for England, but as in 
everything that happens there, it will be interests and not 
principles that will begin and carry through the revolution; 
principles can develop only from interests, that is to say, the 
revolution will be social, not political. 
Written on November 30, 1842 Printed according to the news-
First published in the Rheinische Zeitung ™" 
Nos.  343 and 344, December 9 and 10, Published in English for the first 
1842 time 
Marked with the sign *x* 
a The words "People's Charter" are in English in the original.— Ed. 

=====第397页=====
THE POSITION 
OF THE POLITICAL PARTIES 
from Lancashire, December 19. Complicated as the present 
situation in England seems if one sticks, as the Englishman does, 
to what is most immediate and close at hand, the external practical 
aspect, it is nevertheless simple if one reduces externals to the 
underlying content. In England there exist only three parties of 
any importance: the landed aristocracy, the moneyed aristocracy, 
and radical democracy. The first, the Tory party, is by its nature 
and historical development the purely medieval, consistent, reac­
tionary party, that of the old nobility, which fraternises with 
the "historical" school of law in Germany183  and forms the pillar 
of the Christian state. The kernel of the second party—the 
Whigs — consists of the merchants and manufacturers, the majo­
rity of whom form the so-called middle class. This middle class — 
which includes everyone who is a gentleman, i. e., has a decent 
income without being excessively wealthy—is, however, a middle 
class only compared with the wealthy nobility and capitalists; 
in relation to the workers its position is that of an aristocracy, 
In a country like England, which lives only by industry and 
therefore has a multitude of workers, people will be much more 
conscious of this than, for example, in Germany, where the middle 
class comprises the craftsmen and peasants, and where such an 
extensive class of factory workers is unknown. As a result, the 
Whig party will be forced into the ambiguous position of the 
juste-milieu as soon as the working class begins to be conscious of 
itself.  And this is taking place now. The working class is daily 
becoming more and more imbued with the radical-democratic 
principles of Chartism and is increasingly coming to recognise 

=====第398页=====
376 Frederick Engels 
them  as the  expression  of its  collective consciousness. However,  at 
present this party  is only  in process  of formation  and  therefore 
cannot  yet act  with full vigour. 
Needless  to say, in  addition  to these three main parties there  are 
all kinds  of transitional shades,  and at the  moment  two of  them 
are of some importance, although devoid  of any  basic principles. 
The first stands halfway between Whiggism  and  Toryism;  its 
representatives  are  Peel  and  Russell,  and it is  sure  of a  majority 
in the  House  of Commons  in the  near future  and  therefore  of 
forming  the  government.  The  other,  the  "radical" shade,  is half­
way between Whiggism  and  Chartism;  it is  represented  by half-
a-dozen Members  of  Parliament  and a few  periodicals,  in 
particular  The  Examiner,  and its  principles, although  not  formally 
expressed,  are the  basis  of the  National Anti-Corn  Law  League.3 
With  the  further development  of Chartism  the  first group  is 
bound  to gain  in importance, since  it represents  the  unity  of Whig 
and Tory principles against Chartism,  a unity which  the  latter 
expressly stresses.  As a  result,  the  second group  is bound  to come 
to nothing.  The  position  of these parties  in relation  to one  another 
is shown most clearly  in their attitude  to the  Corn Laws.184  The 
Tories will  not  budge  an inch.  The  nobility knows that  its power, 
apart from  the  constitutional sphere  of the  House  of Lords, lies 
mainly  in its  wealth. With free import  of corn,  the  nobility would 
be forced  to conclude  new  contracts with  the  tenant farmers  on 
less advantageous terms.  All its  wealth  is in  landed property,  the 
value  of which bears  a fixed relation  to rent  and  falls with  the 
latter. Rents  are now so  high that even with  the  present import 
tariff  the  tenant farmers  are  being ruined; free import  of corn 
would bring down rents,  and  with them  the  value  of landed 
property,  by a  third. Sufficient reason  for the  aristocracy  to hold 
fast to its  long-standing right, which ruins agriculture  and  reduces 
the poor  in the  country  to starvation.  The  Whigs, always  a perfect 
juste-milieu, have proposed  a fixed import tariff  of 8  shillings  per 
quarter; this  is just  low  enough  to let in  foreign corn  and  spoil  the 
market  for the  tenant farmer,  and  just high enough  to deprive  the 
tenants  of any  grounds  for  demanding  new  terms  of lease  and to 
establish  in the  country  an average price  for bread just  as high  as 
it is at  present. Thus  the  wisdom  of the  juste-milieu  is ruining  the 
country even more surely than  the  obduracy  of consistent reaction. 
On this question,  the  "radicals"  are  truly radical  for once  and are 
a Here  and  below  the  name  of the  League  is in  English  in the  original.— 
Ed. 

=====第399页=====
The Position of the Political Parties 377 
demanding free import of corn. But The Examiner only summoned 
up the courage to do so eight days ago, while the Anti-Corn Law 
League from the outset confined itself so emphatically to the 
struggle against the existing Corn Laws and the sliding-scalea  that 
up to the last moment it continued to support the Whigs. 
Gradually, however, absolutely free import of corn and "free trade" 
in general have become the battle-cry of the radicals, and the 
Whigs obligingly shout with them for "free trade", which they 
understand to mean "juste-milieu" import tariffs. It goes without 
saying that the Chartists are totally opposed to import tariffs on 
corn. But what will come of all this? That corn imports are bound 
to become free is as certain as that the Tories are bound to be 
overthrown, by peaceful or by forcible means. One can only argue 
about the manner in which this change will come about. Probably 
the very next session of Parliament will bring Peel's renuncia­
tion of the sliding-scale and, with it, of full-blown Toryism. The 
nobility will give way on everything that does not compel it to 
lower its rent charges, but no further. In any case, the Peel-Russell 
coalition, the Parliamentary centre, has the most immediate chance 
of forming a government, and by its juste-milieu measures it will 
delay a decision on the corn question as long as possible. How 
long, however, depends not on it, but on the people. 
Written on December 19, 1842 Printed according to the news-
First published in the Rheinische Zeitung ° " 
No. 358, December 24, 1842 Published in English for the first 
, » time 
Marked with the sign x 
Here and below the term "sliding-scale" is in English in the original.— Ed. 

=====第400页=====
THE CONDITION 
OF THE WORKING CLASS IN ENGLAND 
From Lancashire, December 20. The condition of the working 
class in England is becoming daily more precarious. At the 
moment, true, it does not seem to be so bad; most people in the 
textile districts have work; for every 10 workers in Manchester 
there is perhaps only one unemployed, the proportion is probably 
the same in Bolton and Birmingham, and when the English 
worker is employed he is satisfied. And he can well be satisfied, at 
any rate the textile worker, if he compares his lot with the fate of 
his comrades in Germany and France. The worker there earns just 
enough to allow him to live on bread and potatoes; he is lucky if 
he can buy meat once a week. Here he eats beef every day and 
gets a more nourishing joint for his money than the richest man 
in Germany. He drinks tea twice a day and still has enough money 
left over to be able to drink a glass of porter at midday and 
brandy and water in the evening. This is how most of the 
Manchester workers live who work a twelve-hour day. But how 
long will it last? The slightest fluctuation in trade leaves thousands 
of workers destitute; their modest savings are soon used up and 
then they are in danger of starving to death. And a crisis of this 
kind is bound to occur again in a few years' time. The same 
expanded production which is now giving work to "paupers" and 
is counting on the Chinese market is bound to create a huge mass 
of commodities and a slump in sales, which will again result in 
general destitution among the workers. For the moment the textile 
workers are in the best position. In the pits the coal-miners have 
to perform the heaviest and most unhealthy work for low wages. 
As a result this section of the working class harbours far more 
wrath against the wealthy than other working men, and for this 
reason is especially noted for robbery, assaults against richer 
people, etc. Thus, here in Manchester there is real fear of the 

=====第401页=====
The Condition of the Working Class in England 379 
"Bolton people"3 who also proved to be the most determined of 
all during the summer disturbances.185 The iron-workers have a 
similar reputation, as in general do all those engaged in hard 
physical labour. If all these are only just able to exist now, what 
will become of them if there is the slightest slump in business? 
True,  the workers have organised their own mutual benefit funds, 
which are augmented by weekly contributions and are intended to 
support the unemployed; but these only suffice when the factories 
are working well, for even then there are always enough destitute. 
When unemployment becomes general, even this source of relief 
dries up. At the moment the scapegoat is Scotland, where the 
factories are coming to a standstill, for when English industry 
expands, there is always some region or other which suffers. 
Unemployment is increasing daily all round Glasgow. In Paisley, a 
relatively small town, there were 7,000 unemployed a fortnight 
ago; now there are already 10,000. The grants from mutual 
benefit funds, small enough in any case, have been cut by  half, 
because funds are running out. At a meeting of the noblemen and 
gentlemen of the county it was decided to organise subscriptions 
which are expected to yield £3,000; but this method, too, is 
already outworn and the gentlemen themselves secretly admit that 
they do not expect to collect more than £400. What all this boils 
down to is that England with her industry has burdened herself 
not only with a large class of the unpropertied, but among these 
always a considerable class of paupers which she cannot get rid of. 
These people have to rough it on their own; the state abandons 
them, even pushes them away. Who can blame them, if the men 
have recourse to robbery or burglary, the women to theft and 
prostitution? But the state does not care whether starvation is 
bitter or sweet; it locks these people up in prison or sends them to 
penal settlements, and when it releases them it has the satisfaction 
of having converted people without work into people without 
morals. And the curious thing about the whole story is that the 
sagacious Whig and the "radical" are still unable to understand 
where Chartism comes from with the country in such a state, and 
how the Chartists can possibly imagine they have even the slightest 
chance in England. 
Written on December 20, 1842 Printed according to the news-
First published in the Rheinische Zeitung P P 
No. 359, December 25, 1842 Published in English for the first 
Marked with the sign *x* tlme 
a The words "Bolton people" are in English in the original.— Ed. 

=====第402页=====
THE CORN LAWS 
From Lancashire, December 22. The end of the existing Corn 
Laws is rapidly approaching. The people are in a real fury about 
the "corn tax", and no matter what the Tories do, they cannot 
withstand the pressure of the exasperated masses. Sir Robert Peel 
has prorogued Parliament until February 2 — six weeks for the 
opposition to fan the anger still more. When the new session 
opens,  Peel will have to state his position on the sliding-scalea at 
the very outset; it is generally believed that he has at least begun 
to waver in his attitude towards it. If he decides to drop it, the 
more extreme Tories will undoubtedly resign from the govern­
ment and make room for the moderate Whigs, and then the 
Peel-Russell coalition will have come into being. In any case, the 
aristocracy will defend itself stubbornly, and I, for my part, do not 
think it can be induced to agree voluntarily to the free import of 
corn. The English nobility allowed the Reform Bill and Catholic 
emancipation to go through, but the effort that this cost it would 
be nothing compared with that which abolition of the Corn Laws 
would entail.186 What is a weakening of the aristocracy's influence 
at parliamentary elections compared with a 30 per cent reduction 
in the property of the whole English nobility? And if even the two 
above-mentioned Bills have evoked such struggles, if the Reform 
Bill was passed only with the aid of popular risings and stones 
thrown at the windows of the aristocracy, cannot the nobility be 
a This term is in English in the original.— Ed. 

=====第403页=====
The Corn Laws 381 
relied upon to test whether the people has enough courage and 
strength to ensure that its will is carried out? The summer 
disturbances certainly showed the nobility how ineffectual the 
English people is when it revolts." I am firmly convinced that this 
time the aristocracy will remain adamant until the knife is at its 
throat. There can be no doubt, however, that the people will not 
go on much longer paying the aristocracy a penny (10 Prussian 
pfennigs) on every pound of bread it eats. The Anti-Corn Law 
League1" has seen to that. Its activity has been tremendous; I 
intend to write a more detailed report about it.187 Suffice it to say 
that one of the most important results due partly to the Corn 
Laws,  partly to the League, is the freeing of the tenant farmers 
from the moral influence of their aristocratic landlords. Up to 
now, no one has been so indifferent to political issues as the 
English tenant farmers, i. e., the entire agricultural section of the 
nation. As a matter of course, the landlord was a Tory and evicted 
every tenant who voted against the Tories at the parliamentary 
elections. The result was that the 252 Members of Parliament 
which the agricultural districts in the United Kingdom have to 
elect were, as a rule, almost all Tories. Now, however, due to the 
effect of the Corn Laws and the publications of the League, 
distributed in hundreds of thousands of copies, the tenant farmer 
has been awakened to political consciousness. He has realised that 
his interests are not identical with those of the landlord, but are 
directly opposed to them, and that to no one have the Corn Laws 
been more unfavourable than to  himself.  Hence a considerable 
change has taken place among tenant farmers. The majority of 
them are now Whigs, and since the landlords may now find it 
difficult to exert a decisive influence on the tenant farmers' vote at 
the elections, the 252 seats held by the Tories will probably soon 
pass to the same number of Whigs. Even if this change-over only 
affected half the seats, it would already alter the character of the 
House of Commons considerably, since as a result the Whigs 
would be assured of a majority there for good. And that is bound 
to happen. Particularly if the Corn Laws were repealed, for then 
the tenant farmer would become completely independent of the 
landlord, because tenancy agreements would have to be concluded 
under quite new conditions after the repeal. The aristocracy 
thought that it had achieved a remarkably clever stroke of business 
by passing the Corn Laws; but the money it has obtained as a 
a See this volume, pp. 373-74.— Ed. 
The name of the League is in English in the original.— Ed. 

=====第404页=====
382 Frederick Engels 
result by no means outweighs the disadvantage which these laws 
have caused it. And this disadvantage lies precisely in the fact that 
from now on the aristocracy is no longer the representative of 
agriculture, but of its own selfish interests. 
Written on December 22, 1842 Printed according to the news-
First published in the Supplement to the P Per 
Rheinische Zeitung No. 361, December 27, Published in English for the first 
1842 time 
Marked with the sign x 

=====第405页=====
LETTERS 
August 1838-August 1842 

=====第406页=====

=====第407页=====
1838 
l 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
IN BARMEN 
Bremen,188 Aug. 28, 1838 
Dear Marie, 
As soon as I saw your letter I realised at once that it was from 
you although I don't know your handwriting. Because the letter is 
just like you — written in a terrible hurry, everything in a lovely 
confusion, sermons that are not a bit seriously meant: how are 
you, your health, news about Emilchena and Adelinchen,b acci­
dents,  all mixed up together. We had an accident here too, a 
house painter—the second in a week—fell from the scaffolding 
and died immediately. 
It is a great surprise to hear that Emilchen and Adelinchen are 
leaving. The Treviranuses at any rate were quite astonished; they 
all thought that Karlc was bringing them up. 
August 29 
It's a very good thing that you want to go to Xanten and you 
should really go there if Mother d promised Auntie" and 
Grandmother' that you would. You must arrange to go there 
during the grape season, for then you will be able to eat all you 
can manage. We have grapes in our garden here too, but they are 
" Emilie Engels.— Ed. 
b Adeline Engels.— Ed. 
c Karl Engels.—Ed. 
d Elisabeth Engels.— Ed. 
e Friderike von Griesheim. — Ed. 
f Franciska van Haar. — Ed. 

=====第408页=====
386 Frederick Engels 
not ripe yet. But we have apples which are ripe—Paradise apples; 
they are much more delicious than those on the big tree in 
Caspar's* yard, the one they have now cut down. 
Just think, Marie, we've got a broody hen here with seven 
chicks hardly eight days old and when there's nothing to do at the 
office, we go down to the yard and catch flies, gnats and spiders 
and then the old hen comes and takes them out of our hands and 
feeds them to the chicks. But there's a black chick, the size of a 
canary, which gobbles up the flies out of our hands. And all these 
little creatures will become hens with croups and have feathers 
growing on their feet. I wager that you would be delighted with 
this hen and her chicks. You are a chicken  yourself,  just like them. 
You must tell Mother that next year she too should place some 
eggs under a hen. There are also pigeons here, not only at the 
Treviranuses' but also at the Leupolds', crested pigeons and 
pouters, which are called crown pigeons (because they have a crest 
on their fronts which is called a crown here). The crested ones are 
particularly handsome. We— Eberlein and I — feed these every 
day. They don't eat vetch, which doesn't grow here, but they will 
eat peas or very small beech nuts, which are no bigger than peas. 
You should see some time, when the market is full in the 
morning, what remarkable costumes the peasant women wear. 
Their caps and straw hats are especially remarkable. If I can only 
get a quiet look at one of them some time, I'll try and draw her 
and send it to you. The girls wear very small red caps over their 
hair, which is coiled up in a bun, while old women have big 
close-fitting winged bonnets which hang over their foreheads, or 
big velvet caps trimmed with black frilled lace in front. It looks 
quite odd. 
The window of my room looks out on an alley which is 
uncanny. If I'm still up late of an evening, round about eleven 
o'clock, things begin to get noisy in the alley and the cats squeal, 
the dogs bark, the ghosts laugh and howl and rattle the windows 
of the house opposite. But it's all quite natural because the 
lamplighter lives in the alley and he goes on his rounds at eleven 
o'clock. 
Now I have written two full pages and if I wanted to do what 
you do, I would now write: "Now you will probably be satisfied 
because I have told you so much. Next time I shall tell you just as 
much." This is the way you do it; you write me two pages, with 
a Caspar Engels. — Ed. 

=====第409页=====
To Marie Engels, August 28-29, 1838 387 
the lines set very far apart, and you leave the other two pages 
quite empty. But so that you can see that I don't do the same as 
you and do not give tit for tat, I shall do my best to fill up four 
closely written pages for you. 
This morning a barber came round and Herr Pastor" wanted 
me to have a shave for he said I looked quite revolting. But I do 
not do so. Father b said that I should leave my razors locked up 
until I need them and he left a fortnight ago today and my beard 
certainly cannot have grown so much in that time. And now I shall 
not shave until I have a moustache as black as a raven. And you 
know, Mother told Father to give me a razor to take with me and 
Father answered that would be tempting me to start shaving, and 
he would buy me some himself in Manchester, but I don't use 
them on principle. 
I have just come back from the parade which takes place every 
day on the  Domshof.  There the great Hanseatic army, composed 
of about 40 soldiers and 25 bandsmen as well as 6 to 8 officers, 
does its exercises, and (if I leave out the drum major) they all have 
as much moustache between them as one Prussian hussar. Most of 
them have no beard at all; others just a suspicion of one. The 
parade lasts the whole of two minutes. The soldiers arrive, line up, 
present arms and go off again. But the music is good (very good, 
wonderful, beautiful, say the Bremen people). Yesterday one of 
these Hanseatic soldiers, who had deserted, was brought in. This 
fellow was a Jew and was taking religious instruction with Pastor 
Treviranus and wanted to be baptised. Then he deserted, without 
leaving the town, but wrote a letter to Pastor Treviranus saying he 
was in Brinkum and had been persuaded by a relative to go there. 
He asked the Pastor to intercede for him so that his punishment 
might be mitigated. The Pastor wanted to do this too, when the 
fellow was suddenly arrested near Bremen yesterday and it came 
out where he was. He will now probably get a stretch or sixty 
strokes, for the soldiers always get whipped here. 
No Jews at all live in Bremen, only a couple of Jews with 
permits in the suburbs, but none can move into the town. 
It has been raining again all day long today. Yesterday week it 
did not rain at all for once, otherwise it has rained every day even 
though often only a little. It was very hot on Sunday and yesterday 
too the air was somewhat oppressive although the sky was 
frequently overcast, but as for today, really it's unbearable. You 
Georg Gottfried Treviranus.— Ed. 
Friedrich Engels. — Ed. 

=====第410页=====
388 Frederick Engels 
get soaking wet as soon as you put your nose out of doors. What is 
it like in your place? Now I am going to write to Mother.— Have 
you made it up again with the Kampermanns, old geese? 
Adieu, Marie. 
Your brother 
Friedrich 
First published in: Marx/Engels, Printed according to the original 
Gesamtausgabe,  Abt. l, Bd. 2, 1930 Published in English for the first 
time 
2 
TO FRIEDRICH AND WILHELM GRAEBER 
IN ELBERFELD 
[Bremen] September 1 [1838] 
To the Graeber brothers, of Barmen, now in Elberfeld. 
Acknowledging receipt of the esteemed letter of your Herr 
F. Graeber, I am taking the liberty to send you a few lines. Thunder 
and lightning, things are looking up. We will now begin right away 
with the plastic arts. Namely with my fellow lodger by the name of 
George (pronounced as in English) Gorrissen, the greatest Ham­
burg fop that ever existed. Take the mean between 
the two drawings you see here, place it on a slim 
trunk and long legs, give the eyes a real boorish look, 
a speech exactly like Kirchner's, only in the Ham­
burg dialect, and you have the most complete picture 
of this lout that you can get. I wish I could only draw 
him as well as last night when I drew him on a board, 
and it was so like him that everybody recognised him, 
even the maids. Even a painter" who lives in our 
house and otherwise doesn't think much of anything 
found it very good.— This G. Gorrissen is the most 
boorish fellow on earth; he is busy with some new 
nonsense every day and is inexhaustible in commonplace and 
boring ideas. The fellow already has on his conscience at least 
twenty hours that he has bored me. 
a G. W. Feistkorn.— Ed. 

=====第411页=====
To Friedrich and Wilhelm Graeber, September 1, 1838 389 
The other day I bought myself Jacob Grimm's defence; it is 
extraordinarily good and is written with a rare power. I read no 
less than seven pamphlets about the Cologne affair in one book­
shop.189—  N. B. I have read things here and come across 
expressions—I am getting good practice especially in lite­
rature— which one would never2 be allowed to print in 
our parts, quite liberal ideas, etc., arguments about the 
old Hanoverian he-goat,b really wonderful. 
There are some sheets with very fine satirical drawings 
here.—  One I saw was rather badly drawn but the faces are very 
characteristic. A tailor on a goat is being stopped by his master 
and the cobblers are looking on. What happens is expressed in 
the text underneath: 
"Old master, don't stop my charger!" 
But about that next time, for I cannot now get this [...] because 
the Principalc is sitting here. Otherwise he's a terribly nice fellow, 
oh so good, you can't imagine. 
Excuse me for writing so badly, I have 
three bottles of beer under my belt, hurrah, 
and I cannot write much more because this 
must go to the post at once. It is already 
striking half-past three and letters must be 
there by four o'clock. Good gracious, thunder 
and lightning, you can see that I've got some 
beer inside me. [...]d 
Please have the goodness to scribble me 
something in reply right away; Wurm knows 
my address, and you can give it to him. Oh 
dear, what shall I write? Oh dear, oh dear, oh 
dear. What a lamentable state! The old man, 
i. e., the Principal, is just going out and I am all 
mixed up, I don't know what I'm writing. 
There are all sorts of noises going on in 
my head. Give my greetings to P. Jonghaus and Roland, the knight 
F. Plümacher, and tell them to write, and I will of Bremen 
bore them shortly with my scribbling too. Can 
you read my scrawl? 
a From here up to the words "I've got some beer inside me", Engels writes in 
red ink across the first page, which is written in black ink.— Ed. 
h Ernst August.— Ed. 
c Heinrich Leupold.— Ed. 
6 One sentence is indecipherable because the paper is damaged.— Ed. 

=====第412页=====
390 Frederick Engels 
What will you give me for a pound of muddlement? I have 
heaps in store. Oh dear. 
Your devoted 
Your Honour's devoted 
F. Engels 
First published slightly abridged in the Printed according to the original 
book: F. Engels, Schriften der Frühzeit, Published in English for the first 
Berlin, 1920, and in full in: Marx/Ehgels, ^me 
Gesamtausgabe, Abt. l, Bd. 2, 1930 
3 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
IN BARMEN 
[Bremen] Sept. 11 [1838] 
Dear Marie, 
"Hoping to receive another four-page letter from you, I remain, 
etc."  Yes, you little goose, you shall have four pages but they are 
according to the saying that with the same measure as you 
measure will it be measured unto you,a  and even that is too much 
for you. For I manage to get as much on a small page like this as 
you do on a big one, and I forbid such a waste of paper in future; 
when Fatty writes so spread out, that's a different matter. Do you 
understand me, little Mamsell? — If you don't go to Xanten this 
year, you must say: 
Console yourself with Job 
And anoint the monk with syrup. 
I can't help it, they say here in Bremen. You can imagine to 
yourselves that you have already been there, and don't you, Marie, 
know how Hermannb  went on when he had a glass of wine? He 
drank it very slowly so as to have the pleasure of it for a long 
time.  So you should say to yourselves: If we were at Xanten now, 
we would not be able to be glad that we were still to go there, but 
now we have a whole hopeful year ahead of us and we can be glad 
to our fill. See, that's the political way, Socrates and Eulenspiegel 
would say just the same thing. Remember this for the future. You 
see, I can lecture you just as well as you me. And when you write 
a Cf. Matthew 7:2.— Ed. 
Hermann Engels. — Ed. 

=====第413页=====
To Marie Engels, September 11, 1838 391 
to me again, don't begin every paragraph with "Just imagine". 
How did you get such a noble habit? How can you say "I don't 
know what else to write about" when you have not yet told me 
what kind of school report you and Anna* have and who worked 
out your programme this year. Fatty must also have cracked a joke 
or two during the eight weeks I've been away, couldn't you 
perhaps have written to me about that? How much else may have 
happened that I cannot know anything about? Tell me, what kind 
of excuse is "I don't know what else to write about". I don't know 
what to write about either. When I begin a line, I don't yet know 
what to put in the following one, but something always comes to 
me, and I hope that what I write to you will be useful and of no 
little profit to you. But when you have filled two pages with lines 
wide apart, you immediately think you have performed a colossal 
Herculean labour, but what about me? When I have finished this 
letter to you, I must still write three others and they must be ready 
for posting tomorrow or the day after. And I have not much time, 
for the Panchita is being sent off to Havana this afternoon and so I 
have to copy letters instead of writing some of my own. I am 
expecting a letter from Striicker at midday today and then he'll be 
wanting an answer too, and I can't write exactly the same thing to 
one as I have written to the other. So, you see that it would be 
right if you wrote me six pages and should not complain if I only 
wrote you one-sixth of a page? However, this lecture is already as 
long as your whole letter and so that you can see that I can also 
write about other things I will now make so free as to tell you that 
if I have brushes before this letter goes off, I will enclose a few 
drawings of Bremen peasant fashions.— But now you are right, I 
don't know what else to write about, but I just want to see if I get 
anything more to do. The four pages will be filled, and quite 
honestly too. What is very unpleasant is that in the evenings the 
city gates are closed when it gets dark and whoever wants to go 
out or come in has to pay a toll and it now starts at seven o'clock, 
when you have to pay two groats, and this increases as it gets later. 
You pay three groats after nine and six groats at ten and twelve 
groats at eleven. If you are on horseback you have to pay even 
more. I too have had to pay toll once or twice.— The Consulb  is at 
this moment talking to Herr Grave about the letters which have to 
be written this afternoon. I am listening with the greatest excite­
ment like a rascal who sees the jury return and is waiting to hear 
a Anna Engels. — Ed. 
b Heinrich Leupold.— Ed. 

=====第414页=====
392 Frederick Engels 
"Guilty" or "Not guilty". Once Grave starts writing, before I know 
where I am I have six, seven, eight or even more letters to copy, 
each of which may be of one, two or perhaps three pages. During 
the time I have been here I've already copied forty pages, forty 
pages in a huge copy-book. Another letter for Baltimore is lying in 
front of me now, and look—the four pages are full, it is 11.30 
and I shall go to the post under the pretext of collecting the 
Consul's letters but really to see if there is a letter from Strücker. 
Adieu, dear Marie, I'm looking forward to four big pages. 
Your brother 
Friedrich 
First published in: Marx/Engels, Printed according to the original 
Gesamtausgabe, Abt. l, Bd. 2, 1930 Published in English for the first 
time 
4 
TO FRIEDRICH AND WILHELM GRAEBER 
IN BARMEN3 
[Bremen, September 17-18, 1838] 
September 17. First the black ink, then the red ink from the 
beginning again .b 
Carissimi! In vostras epistolas haec vobis sit respondentia. Ego enim 
quum hngiter latine non scripsi, vobis paucum scribero, sed in ger-
manico-italianico-latino. Quae quum ita sint, c you will not get one 
more word in Latin, but only pure, unalloyed, unadulterated, 
perfect German. And now to deal at once with a matter of 
considerable importance, I want to tell you that my Spanish 
romance has been a failure; the fellow seems to be an anti-romantic 
and he looks like one too. But a poem of my own—The 
Bedouind—a copy of which I enclose, was inserted in a different 
paper; only the fellow went and changed the last verse and so 
created the most hopeless confusion. He does not seem to have 
understood "Your desert robes do not belong with our Parisian 
a The back of the letter bears the inscription: "Herr Friedrich Graeber. c/o Herr 
Pastor Graeber. Barmen. Post-paid." — Ed. 
The letter of September 17 is written in black ink while that of September 18 
is written in red ink, across the text of the first letter.— Ed. 
c My dearest ones, let this be an answer to your letters. As I haven't written in 
Latin for a long time, I shall write you only a little, but in German-Italian-Latin. 
This being  so....—  Ed. 
See this volume, pp. 3-4.— Ed. 

=====第415页=====
To Friedrich and Wilhelm Graeber, September 17-18, 1838 393 
coats and vests, nor with our literature your song", because it 
appears to be baroque. The main idea is to contrast the Bedouin, 
even in their present condition, and the audience, who are quite 
alien to these people. For this reason the contrast must not be 
expressed only by the bare description given in the two clearly 
distinguishable parts, but comes really to life only at the end 
through the contrast and the conclusion drawn in the last verse. 
There are also a number of other details expressed in the poem: 
1) Delicate irony at the expense of Kotzebue and his supporters 
with Schiller counterposed as the good principle for our theatre; 
2) grief over the present condition of the Bedouin as contrasted 
with their former condition. These two incidentals run parallel in 
the two main contrasts. Take the last verse away, and the whole 
thing falls apart. But if the editor wishes to make the conclusion 
less striking and ends with: "They jump at money's beck and call, 
and not at Nature's primal urge. Their eyes are blank, they're 
silent, all, except for one who sings a dirge", then, first of all, this 
ending is feeble because it consists of previously used rhetorical 
phrases, and secondly, it destroys my main idea by replacing it 
with the subsidiary one—sorrow over the present condition of the 
Bedouin and the contrast with their former condition. So he has 
done the following damage: he has completely destroyed 1) the 
main idea, 2) the cohesion of the poem. However, this will cost the 
fellow an additional groat (=1/2 silver groschen) for he will get an 
answer from me in the form of a sermon. By the way, I wish I 
had never written the poem. I have completely failed to express 
the idea in a clear, pleasant form. Str.'s" fine phrases are simply 
phrases. Dattellandh  and Bled-el-Djerid are one and the same 
thing, so one idea is expressed twice with the same words, and 
what dissonance— "schallend Lachen zollt" and "Mund gewandt"! It 
gives one a peculiar feeling to see one's verses in print like this. 
They have become something strange and one sees them with a 
much clearer eye than when they are handwritten. 
I had a good laugh when I saw myself thus made public, but I 
soon lost any desire to laugh. As soon as I saw the changes I 
became very angry and raged in a most barbaric fashion.— Satis 
autem de hac re locuti sumus! c 
I found a quite peculiar book this morning in an antiquarian's 
shop — an extract from the Acta Sanctorum, unfortunately only for 
a This probably means Strücker, Engels' comrade.— Ed. 
Land of date-palms.— Ed. 
c But we have said enough about  this!—Ed. 
14-384 

=====第416页=====
394 Frederick Engels 
the first half of the year, with portraits, lives of the saints and 
prayers, but all very short. It cost me twelve groats, six silver 
groschen, and I paid the same for Wieland's Diogenes von Sinope, 
oder2(ùXQâtr)ç fiaivd/xevoç .a 
1 doubt my ability and my productivity as a poet more and 
more every day since I read Goethe's two essays Für junge Dichter* 
in which I find myself described as aptly as could be, and from 
which it has become clear to me that my rhyming achieves nothing 
for art. All the same, I want to go on rhyming because, as Goethe 
says,  it is "a pleasant addition" and I shall also probably get a 
poem or two published in some journal because other fellows also 
do so who are just as big if not bigger asses than I am, and be­
cause my efforts will neither raise nor lower German literature. But 
when I read a really good poem then fury seizes my soul to think 
that I couldn't have done that. Satis autem de hac re locuti sumus! 
My cari amici, how much I miss you! When I remember how I 
often entered your room and there sat Fritz, so comfortable 
behind the stove, with his short pipe in his mouth, and Wilm 
rustled around the room in his long dressing-gown, could not 
smoke anything but four-pfennig cigars and cracked jokes which 
shook the whole room, and then the mighty Feldmann rose like 
Çavôôç MEVEX«OÇ C and entered, and then Wurm came in in his 
long coat and with his stick in his hand, and then we all caroused 
and all hell was let loose — and now we have to make do with let­
ters—  it's outrageous. But that you write to me a lot from Berlin too 
is constat and naturaliter; letters there only take a day longer than to 
Barmen. You know my address, but it doesn't matter if you don't 
for I have struck up such a close acquaintance with our postman 
that he always delivers my letters to the office. But still, honoris 
causa, you might put St. Martini Kirchhof No. 2 on the envelope if 
necessary. This friendship with the postman comes from our 
names being similar, his is Engelke.— Letter-writing is a bit hard 
for me today. The day before yesterday I sent off a letter to 
Wurm at Bilk and today I posted one to Strücker — the first was 
eight pages long, the second seven, and now you too want your 
ration. If you receive this letter before you go to Cologne, please 
do the following for me. When you get there will you find 
Streitzeuggasse and go to Everaert's the printers at number 51 and 
buy me Volksbücher. I have Siegfried, Eulenspiegel and Helena. The 
a The raging Socrates.— Ed. 
b The reference is to Goethe's articles "Für junge Dichter" and "Noch ein 
Wort für junge Dichter". — Ed. 
c Fair Menelaus. —Ed. 

=====第417页=====
To Friedrich and Wilhelm Graeber, September 17-18, 1838 395 
ones I need most are Octavianus, Die Schildbürger (incomplete in 
the Leipzig edition), Die Haimonskinder, Dr. Faust and any of the 
others which are illustrated with woodcuts. If there is anything mys­
tical there buy it as well, especially the Sibyllenweissagungen. You 
can go up to two or three talers in any case. Then send the books 
on to me by express post, tell me how much they come to and I shall 
send you a letter of credit drawn on my Old Man, who will gladly 
pay it. Or, better still, you can send the books to my Old Man, to 
whom I'll explain the whole business and he can give them to me as 
a Christmas gift or as he likes.— A new subject of study for me is 
Jacob Böhme. He is a dark but deep soul. But most of it must be 
studied terribly hard if one wants to understand any of it. He is 
rich in poetic ideas and a very allegorical man, his speech is quite 
original, for he gives all words a different meaning from the usual 
one. Instead of "essence" [Wwen], "substance" [Wesenheit], he says 
"torment" [Quat]. He calls God a "non-cause" [Vngrund] and a 
"cause" [Grund] because He has no cause or beginning of His exis­
tence, but is Himself the cause of His own and all other life. So far 
I have been able to find only three of his books—admittedly enough 
to begin with.— But here I want to insert my poem about the 
Bedouin. 
Now the bell rings, and suddenly 
The silken curtain swift ascends, 
And all in hushed expectancy 
Wait for the evening to commence. 
No Kotzebue commands the scene 
To set the merry audience roaring. 
No Schiller of the earnest mien 
Steps forth, his golden words outpouring. 
Sons of the desert, proud and free, 
Walk on to greet us, face to face; 
But pride is vanished utterly, 
And freedom lost without a trace. 
They jump at money's beck and call 
(As once that lad from dune to dune 
Bounded for joy). They're silent, all, 
Save one who sings a dirge-like tune. 
The audience, amazed and awed 
By what these acrobats can do. 
Applauds them, just as it applauds 
The trumperies of Kotzebue. 
Fleet nomads of the desert lands, 
You've braved the sun's fierce noontide rays 
Through harsh Morocco's burning sands, 

=====第418页=====
396 Frederick Engels 
Through valleys where the date-palms sway. 
And through the garden paradise 
Of Bled-el-Djerid once you swept. 
You turned your wits to bold forays. 
Your steeds to battle proudly stepped. 
You sat there, where moon lustres spill 
By rare springs in a palm-tree grove, 
And lovely lips with gracious skill 
A fairy-story garland wove. 
Sleeping in narrow tents you lay 
In loves warm arms, with dreams all round, 
Till sunrise ushered in the day 
And camels made their bellowing sound. 
Go home again, exotic guests! 
Your desert robes do not belong 
With our Parisian coats and vests, 
Nor with our literature your song! 
[September] 18th 
Cur me poematibus exanimas tuis* you will be shouting. But I am 
going to torture you still more with them or rather because of 
them. Guilelmusb  has still got an exercise book of my verse, just as 
I wrote it. I'm now asking for this exercise book back and you can 
send it in the following way: you can cut out all the blank paper 
and you can then enclose a few sheets with every letter you write: 
it won't increase the postage. If need be you can also add one or 
two bits of reading matter if you pack it cunningly and press the 
letter well, for instance, laying it for a night between a couple of 
dictionaries before you send it, so they won't notice any­
thing.— See that Blank gets the sheet I've enclosed for him. I am 
getting a terribly extensive correspondence, with you in Ber­
lin, with Wurm in Bonn, and similarly with Barmen and Elberfeld. 
But if I didn't have it, how would I kill the endless time I have to 
spend at the office without being allowed to read? The day before 
yesterday I spent with the Old Man, c id est principalis—his wife is 
called the Old Woman [Altsché] (the elk,  alee  in Italian, pronounced 
just like that) — in the country where his family lives, and I 
enjoyed it very much. The Old Man is an excellent fellow, he 
always scolds his boys in Polish. You Ledshiaks, you Kashubs, he 
shouts. On the way back I tried to give a philistine who was also 
there some idea of the beauty of Low German, but saw it was 
impossible. A philistine like that is really an unhappy soul yet 
a Why do you torture me with your poems? — Ed. 
b Wilhelm Graeber.— Ed. 
c Heinrich Leupold.— Ed. 

=====第419页=====
To Friedrich and Wilhelm Graeber, September 17-18, 1838 397 
over-happy nonetheless in his stupidity, which he regards as the 
greatest wisdom. I went to the theatre the other evening. They 
were playing Hamlet, but in a quite horrifying manner. So I would 
rather say nothing at all about it.— It's good that you are going to 
Berlin. There will be more art there than you are likely to get at 
any other university except Munich; the poetry of nature, on the 
other hand, is lacking—sand, sand, sand! It is far better here. 
The roads outside the town are mostly very interesting and very 
charming with their groups of various trees. But the mountains, 
the mountains, that's what you miss. What is also lacking in Berlin 
is the poetry of student life, which is at its best in Bonn, and to 
which the wandering about in the poetic surroundings contributes 
not a little. Well, you too will be going to Bonn one day. My dear 
Wilhelm, I would madly love to answer your witty letter with one 
equally witty, if it were not for the fact that I don't feel at all witty and 
especially at the moment I am lacking precisely in that desire which 
one cannot give oneself and without which everything is forced. 
But I feel as if for me the end were near, as if my head no longer 
held a single idea, as if my life were being stolen away. The tree of 
my mind of its leaves is stripped, my witticisms too fine are clipped, 
the kernel out of the shell has been nipped. And my Makamas 190 
hardly merit the name, while yours robbed Rückert of all his fame; 
those here written with gout are smitten, they limp, they totter, fall, 
nay, have fallen to the bottom of the pit of oblivion, not climbed 
the peaks of readers' opinion. Oh doom, here I sit in my room, and 
even if I hammered my head sore, only water would come out with 
a roar. That helps not a louse, it does not bring wit into the house. 
When I went to bed last night I banged my head and it sounded 
just like when you knock against a bucket of water and the water 
splashes against the other side. I had to laugh at the way my nose 
was properly rubbed in the truth. Yes, water, water! My room is full 
of spooks. Last night I heard a death-watch beetle in the wall. In the 
alley near me there is a noise of ducks, cats, dogs, hussies and people. 
And incidentally I expect a letter from you just as long if not longer 
than this one, et id post notas —let there be no mistake about it. 
The most marvellous hymn book in existence is undoubtedly 
the one used here. a It contains all the famous names in German 
poetry: Goethe (the song, Der Du von dem Himmel  bist h), Schiller 
(Drei Worte des Glaubens), Kotzebue and many others. Also songs 
against cow-pox and all kinds of other nonsense. It is sheer 
a Christliches Gesangbuch zur Beförderung öffentlicher und häuslicher Andacht. — Ed. 
b Initial words from Goethe's poem Wandrers Nachtlied. —Ed. 

=====第420页=====
398 Frederick Engels 
barbarism unequalled anywhere. One must see it to believe it. It is 
an appalling spoiling of all our beautiful songs, a crime which 
Knapp also made himself guilty of in the Treasury of Songs. 3— 
The occasion of our sending a cargo of hams to the West Indies 
reminds me of an extremely interesting story. Somebody once 
sent a cargo of hams to Havana. The letter with the bill did not 
arrive till later, and the recipient, who had already noticed that 
trje cargo was 12 hams short, saw reckoned up in the bill: "Loss 
through rats—12 pieces." But those rats were the young office 
lads who had helped themselves to the hams. That's the end of 
the story.— While I take the liberty to fill the remaining space 
with artistic renderings of outward appearances chosen at random 
(Dr. He), I must confess that I shall hardly be able to tell you 
much about my trip for I promised both Strücker and Wurm they 
would hear about it first. I even fear that I shall have to write 
about it to them twice over, and to go through all that tedious 
stuff three times, mixed up with all kinds of other nonsense, 
would really be too much. But if Wurm cares to send you the 
exercise book, which he is hardly likely to receive before the end 
of the year, that's all right with me. Otherwise I can't do anything 
for you until you go to Bonn yourselves. 
Your most humble 
Servant 
A genius à la mode A fathead à la mode 
Greetings to P. Jonghaus. He can enclose a letter with yours. I 
would have written to him too but the fellow is certainly away. 
Reply soon. Your Berlin address!!!!!!! ^ 
First published considerably abridged in Printed according to the original 
?Q,rU/ *".n/¥lr.' 9YHe^lueriini , Published in English for the first 
1913,  and in full in the book: F. Engels, .• 6 
Schriften der Frühzeit, Berlin, 1920 
A. Knapp, Evangelischer Liederschah, für Kirche und Haus. — Ed. 

=====第421页=====
To Marie Engels, October 9-10, 1838 399 
5 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
IN BARMEN 
Bremen, Oct. 9, 1838 
Dear Marie, 
At last four full pages! Well, I shall have to praise you till you 
can no longer bear it, as they say. Riding is now over unfortunate­
ly, so I am mostly at home on Sundays, but I enjoy myself quite a 
lot. Either I listen to somebody playing or singing or I write, and 
in the evening we do all kinds of crazy things. The day before 
yesterday, which, as you know, was Sunday, we put a ring in a 
cup of flour and then played the well-known game of trying to get 
it out with your mouth. We all had a turn — the Pastor's wife,3 
the girls, the painterb and I too, while the Pastor0 sat in the corner 
on the sofa and watched the fun through a cloud of cigar smoke. 
The Pastor's wife couldn't stop laughing as she tried to get it out 
and covered herself with flour over and over again, and when the 
painter's turn came, he blew with all his might so that the flour 
puffed out right and left and descended like a cloud on his green 
and red dressing-gown. Afterwards we threw flour in each other's 
faces.  I blackened my face with cork, at which they all laughed, 
and when I started to laugh, that made them laugh all the more and 
all the louder. Then I laughed, ha ha ha ha ha, so loudly that all the 
others followed suit with he he he he he and ha ha ha ha ha, until it 
was just like in the story where the Jew has to dance in the bramble 
bush, and at last they all begged me to stop for heaven's sake. 
You are still a real goose if you let that Jettchen Troost bore 
you. Why don't you tell her to go away? 
Now the goose is starting to lecture me; that is touching. Tell 
me, goose, don't you know the saying—I shall behave to you as 
you behave to me? Don't you know that no matter how small you 
write, I still write twice as small? But let's settle the matter once 
and for all. If you write me four pages then you shall get four 
pages back and there's an end of it. Besides, if you only knew how 
many letters I've already written this week and how many I still 
have to write, you would have pity on me and be satisfied with two 
pages.  Ask Strücker some time how much I've written to him. Ask 
Wurm some time — but he's not there, so I shall tell you — at least 
a Mathilde Treviranus.— Ed. 
b G. W. Feistkorn.— Ed. 
c Georg Gottfried Treviranus.— Ed. 

=====第422页=====
400 Frederick Engels 
twelve pages just like these and as much again across the page in 
red ink. But he writes just as much to me in reply. And I have 
also to write to Mother, Hermann,a August,b  Rudolf, c what do you 
think that adds up to? I think that as you can read the other 
letters you'll be fair and only expect half as much from me as you 
write to me.— You say that I praise Annad to the skies, no, so god 
over nit, dat do ek nit* but if she writes me four pages and you only 
write three, isn't she better than you? Apart from all this I'll gladly 
admit that you are a loyal soul and write to me most diligently. 
But you must not presume to start such rows and quarrels with 
me and imagine all the right is on your side when you really ought 
to be on your knees begging forgiveness.— You complain about 
the shoulder-brace, but oh, my little goose, hold yourself straight 
and then they won't put one on you.— We had the same weather 
here as you describe but now it's horrible; it rains and drizzles 
continuously, sometimes it pours down and then we have a bit of 
blue sky every 24 hours and a ray of sunshine every half-year. 
You want me to write what I would like for Christmas? Well, 
you needn't make me what I've already got and you know what I 
haven't got, so what shall I write? Embroider a cover for a cigar 
box or—I don't know what, but you can keep nagging Mother a 
little every two or three days to send me the Goethe for Christmas 
Day. I really need it very badly, for you can hardly read anything 
without there being some reference to Goethe. Who was this man 
Goethe? Herr Riepe: Children, he was...! 
Your drawing of the poultry-yard I could comprehend quite 
easily and it is very practical—cats or polecats can't get in and the 
hens can't get out. 
Last Friday I went to the theatre. They were playing Nachtlager 
in Granada, 1 an opera which is very nice. Tonight they are giving 
Die Zauberflöte? I must go to it. I really must manage to see what it is 
like. I hope it will be really good. 
October 10. I went to the theatre. I liked Die Zauberflöte very 
much. I should like you to be able to come and see it with me 
some time, I bet you would like it very much.— Yes, Marie, what 
shall I write about now? Shall I grumble a bit for want of anything 
a Hermann Engels. — Ed. 
August Engels, Engels' cousin.— Ed. 
c Rudolf Engels.— Ed. 
d Anna Engels. — Ed. 
e But not so good, I don't do that.— Ed. 
1 An opera by Kreutzer. — Ed. 
g Mozart's The Magic Flute.— Ed. 

=====第423页=====
To Marie Engels, October 9-10, 1838 401 
*tS better? I can't think of anything better and you will certainly be 
satisfied if the four pages are filled, no matter what is in them. 
Here in Bremen the merchants' houses are all built in a very 
remarkable way. They are not built with their long sides facing 
the street like ours but with their short sides, so 
that the roofs are very close together, and the hall 
is very large and high, just like a small church.  tlfttW, 
They have hatches above and below, one on top 
of the other, which are closed by trapdoors and through which a 
hoist can move up and down. Up in the attic is the store-room and 
coffee, linen, sugar, whale-oil, etc., are brought up by the hoist. 
All halls have thus two rows of windows one above the 
other.— The Consul's wife has now moved into town again with 
her four small children; they make an awful uproar. Luckily two 
of them, Elisabeth and Loin (really Ludwig), go to school, so one 
does not have to listen to their noise all day long. But when Loin 
and Siegfried are together they make such a row that you just can't 
stand it. The other day they started dancing on 
the linen chests, each armed with a gun and a 
sword; they challenged each other to a duel and 
Loin blew on his trumpet so loudly that it made 
your ears ring. I have a very nice place, in front of 
my desk there is a big window giving on to the 
hall and so I can see everything that happens. 
Since you drew me trie poultry-yard I'm 
drawing you the church as seen from the  < 
office. Farewell." 
First published in: Marx/Engels, 
Gesamtausgabe, Abt. 1, Bd. 2, 1930 Your brother 
Friedrich 
Printed according to the original 
Published in English for the first 
a This word is in English in the original.— Ed. 

=====第424页=====
402 Frederick Engels 
6 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
IN BARMEN" 
Bremen, Nov. 13, 1838 
Dear Marie, 
Both your letters gave me very great pleasure and I will see 
what I can do, time and space permitting, to tell you something. It 
is now past three o'clock and the letter must be posted by four. 
But I really don't know anything much to tell you. Nothing out of 
the ordinary happens here, apart from the fact that the Bremen 
people have mounted their two splendid cannon at the main 
guardhouse again, that instead of saying "footstool" they say 
"footboard" here, that very many people are now wearing 
macintoshes here, that it was immensely cold last night and 
ice-ferns were formed on the window-panes and that the sun is 
now shining, and the like. Something else occurs to me that you 
should mention to Mother, namely, that I wrote to the Graebers at 
the end of September saying that when they went to Cologne they 
should send me Volksbücher and get the money from Father. b But 
as they never got to Cologne, they have written to their cousin, so 
if he sends some per mezzo Pastor Graeber it would be fine, and 
I'm sure Father would do me the favour of settling the bill for me. 
If he doesn't send any that will be all right too and you won't be 
bothered with it. I would have written about this before now, but 
was only given noteworthy information of the correct procedure 
today. Wilhelm Graeber also writes to me — and this is certainly 
something for you — that there are no lavatories properly so-called 
in Berlin, only commodes, and these have to be hired separately 
and cost five silver groschen a month; as the sons of a pastor, 
however, they are exempted from this as from other taxes. They 
also tell me a great deal about their walking tour through the 
Harz Mountains and up the Blocksberg, and how they travelled 
from Magdeburg to Berlin with a very tall Guards N. C. O. If you 
come to visit me some time I shall read you the whole story as well 
as that of the lovely Dorothée, which happened in Siebertal, in the 
Harz country, where a very, very rich man fell in love with a little 
a The back of the letter bears the inscription: "Fräulein Elise Engels, c/o Herr 
Friedrich Engels and Co., Barmen." —Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 394-95.— Ed. 

=====第425页=====
To Marie Engels, end of December 1838 403 
girl of seven and gave her father a ring, telling him that he would 
come back and marry her when the ring fitted her, and how, 
when he did come back after ten years, the girl had already been 
dead for a year, and the gentleman himself also died of sheer 
boredom, about which Fritz Graeber composed a moving song, 
etc. But now the page is almost full and I shall just copy another 
letter which must go with it, and take them both to the post. Are 
you writing to Idaa ? Herr Holler took a great liking to Julchen b in 
Mannheim, but Karlc was very cross because he visited her so 
often. But don't tell that to anyone else. Adieu, dear Marie. 
Yours, 
Friedrich 
First published in: Marx/Engels, Printed according to the original 
Gesamtausgabe, Abt. 1, Bd. 2, 1930 _ ... , , . „ ,. , , , .. 
° Published in English for the first 
time 
7 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
IN BARMEN 
[Bremen, end of December 1838] 
Dear Marie, 
Well, you really are making a good thing out of being ill, lying 
in bed most of the time, you lazy-bones. You'll have to get out of 
that habit. You must be up and about by the time you get this 
letter, do you hear? Thank you for the nice cigar-box cover. I can 
assure you that it has met with the most complete approval, not 
only for the choice of pattern, but also for the execution, from 
that most severe of critics, Herr G. W. Feistkorn, painter. Marie 
Treviranus also embroidered one for me but she took it back 
again and is now going to send it to Herr Pastor Hessel in 
Münster am Stein near Kreuznach, to whom she also promised 
one. She is making me a basket for cigars instead. The Pastor's 
a Ida Engels.— Ed. 
b Julie Engels.— Ed. 
c Karl Engels. — Ed. 

=====第426页=====
404 Frederick Engels 
wife a has crocheted a purse for me, and Leupold's boys got a rifle 
that fires caps, as well as swords, and the Old Manb keeps calling 
them — Old Soldiers, Kashubsl I can't make out that riddle of 
yours about the pond but I'll ask you one  myself.  Do you know 
what a Ledshiak is? (I don't know  myself.  It's a term of abuse which 
the Old Man uses very often.)c If you can't find the answer then 
hold this up against a mirror and then you will be able to read it. I 
have just heard that there has been an addition to the Leupold 
family—a little girl. 
I should also like to tell you that I have now started composing 
and am working on chorals. But it is terribly difficult. The 
measure and the sharps and the chords give one a lot of trouble. I 
haven't got very far yet but I am sending you a specimen. It's the 
first two lines of Ein' feste Burg ist unser Gott. d 
I have not yet been able to do it for more than two voices, for 
four voices is still too hard. I hope I have not made any mistakes 
in the score, so try and play it some time. 
Adieu, dear Marie. 
Your brother 
Friedrich 
First published in the Deutsche Revue, Printed according to the original 
Stuttgart and Leipzig. Bd. 4, 1920 Published in English for the first 
a Mathilde Treviranus.— Ed. 
Heinrich Leupold.— Ed. 
c The bracketed sentence is in mirror writing in the original.— Ed. 
First line of a hymn by Martin Luther.— Ed. 

=====第427页=====
18 3 9 
8 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
IN BARMEN 
[Bremen] Jan. 7, 39 
Dear Marie, 
I hope you have now had that tooth extracted or that it was not 
necessary.— The riddle about the pond is very nice but you ought 
to be able to solve it  yourself.  Listen, composing is hard work; you 
have to pay attention to so many things — the harmony of the 
chords and the right progression, and that gives a lot of trouble. 
I'll see if I can't send you something again next time. I am now 
working on another choral, in which the bass and soprano voices 
alternate. Have a look at this. 
The accompaniment is still missing, and I'll probably make some 
changes too. It is obvious that most of it, except the fourth 
line, has been stolen from the Hymn Book. The text is the well-

=====第428页=====
406 Frederick Engels 
known Latin Stabat mater  dolorosa  juxta crucem  lacrymosa  Dum pendebat 
filius. 
The Pastora killed a pig in the wash-house at midday today. At 
first his wifeb would not have anything to do with the whole 
business, but he said he wanted to make a gift of it to her, so she 
had to take it. And the pig didn't scream at all. Once it was dead 
all the females in the family came in. But the old granny would 
not let anyone take her place stirring the blood and it looked quite 
strange. They will be making the sausage tomorrow, that is really 
the thing for her. 
You say you saw a monkey and that it was you. Do you know 
that on the wafer with which you sealed your little letter there was 
written: Je dis la vérité} 
It also has a mirror drawn on it. 
Tell Mother that she should not write "Treviranus", she can 
leave out the Herr Pastor from the address altogether, the 
postman knows where I live anyway, as I fetch the letters from the 
post every day; besides, he might be tempted not to bring my 
letters to the office but to me at the Treviranus' and there I only 
get them a couple of hours later when I come home. 
Strücker wrote me that on the Sunday before New Year 
Hermann 0 acted all sorts of things, including a waiter, etc. He 
must write to me about it.— Strücker was full of praise for his 
skill, saying that Hermann played the part of the waiter as well as 
if he had worked in a restaurant for three years. Is he growing a 
lot? 
Tell Mother not to show my composition to Schornstein or he 
will say again — that is the end of everything. You see, I learn 
everything that happens. Next time I am in Barmen again I shall 
become the consul for Bremen like the Old Man. d 
Addiôs mi hermana." 
Yours, 
Friedrich 
a Georg Gottfried Treviranus.— Ed. 
Mathilde Treviranus.— Ed. 
c Hermann Engels. — Ed. 
Heinrich Leupold.— Ed. 
e Good-bye, my sister.— Ed. 

=====第429页=====
To Friedrich Graeber, January 20, 1839 407 
Please excuse all the mistakes I have made in the bass part. I am 
not used to writing music. In case you could not read the last line 
but one, I am writing it out again for you. 
£**+*** 
First published slightly abridged in the 
Deutsche Revue, Stuttgart and Leipzig, Bd. 
4, 1920, and in full in: Marx/Engels, 
Gesamtausgabe, Abt. 1, Bd. 2, 1930 Printed according to the original 
Published in English for the first 
TO FRIEDRICH GRAEBER 
[Bremen, January 20, 1839] 
To Fritz Graeber 
Florida 
I 
The Spirit of Earth speaks: 
Three hundred years have rolled by since the hour 
When the proud white folk came from far away 
Across the seas, where their great cities tower. 
The islands soon became the strong men's prey; 
I lifted up my clenched fist from the ocean 
To see how far their arrogant feet might stray. 
Woods clothed the land and flowers grew in profusion; 
Through the deep valleys wandered by the score 
My faithful tribesmen of the brown-skinned nation. 
The Eternal Father mild saw fit to pour 
Abundant blessings down. The White Men came; 
Their ship, its course erratic, neared the shore. 
The land seemed fair to them. They made their claim, 
And seized it, like the islands, in their greed, 
Sowing among my people serfdom's shame. 

=====第430页=====
408 Frederick Engels 
The borders marked by furrows they denied, 
And with their quadrants measured out my Hand, 
Drawing strange lines across from side to side. 
Ere long had passed, they swarmed across the land; 
Only one finger did they fear to try. 
Who ventured there was doomed to meet his end. 
Upon this one remaining finger, I 
Have placed a ring my brown-skinned folk compose. 
They stand with spears poised, ready to let fly. 
And if their shields in compact, serried rows 
Fail me, if White Man's arrogance breaks the ring, 
This Hand, with White and Brown, I then propose 
To plunge into the waters weltering. 
II 
The Seminole speaks: 
Peace to my brethren I shall not proclaim; 
War be my first word, battle be my last. 
And when your eyes blaze up in sudden flame, 
As forest fire is fanned by hurricane's blast, 
Then shall I say that you were truly right 
To call me Word's Sun, that Night flees fast. 
E'en as your hunter's lust flamed at the plight 
Of innocent creatures that you forced to flee 
From arrow following arrow in swift flight, 
So would the White Men hunt you ruthlessly. 
But let your speeding arrows make it clear 
That they're the quarry, and the hunters—.we. 
They envy us our red skins; and in fear 
That their revolting white may be discerned, 
They swathe themselves in many-coloured gear. 
Our country they have named the floral strand, 
For flowers here in great profusion grow. 
But blue, or white, or yellow, through the land 
Into red raiment soon they all must go, 
Bespattered with the White Man's own red blood. 
Flamingo bird shall not more crimson glow. 
As slaves, we proved to be of little good. 
They brought the cowardly Blacks across the sea: 
They'll learn the strength and courage of our brood! 

=====第431页=====
To Friedrich Graeber, January 20, 1839 409 
Come then, White Man, if your desire it be, 
And you shall get the homage that's your due. 
From every bed of reeds, from every tree, 
Seminole arrows wait to ambush you! 
Ill 
The White Man speaks: 
Well, then! And so for the last time I will 
Offer my brow to cruel Destiny 
And freely turn to face the murderous steel! 
O vengeful Fate, you are well known to me! 
Always you've turned my joy in life to gall. 
You think I ever knew Love's ecstasy? 
Mocking, she broke my heart, whom I did fall 
In love with. Thenceforth, seeking consolation, 
I fought for Freedom. Kings themselves have all 
Trembled before our League. In trepidation, 
Princes have seen how German youth can stand 
As one. In seven years of expiation 
I've fully paid my debt in iron bonds. 
In a swift ship they bring me o'er the sea 
To Liberty — but on an alien strand. 
The coastline beckons! But at a cliff's foot,  see!  — 
The ship is wrecked. The folk on board all spring 
Into the foaming waves. A plank bears me 
Safely to shore, though bruised and shivering. 
For the first time, my luck goes favourably. 
In sand-choked seas the rest lie weltering. 
But can I not escape my destiny? 
The savages surround me, bind my limbs. 
They seek to gain revenge by killing me. 
For me, new Freedom, so I hoped, begins. 
But Freedom fighters seek my murder here. 
So must I expiate my brothers' sins. 
But what comes floating to the beach down there? 
A crucifix! In my Redeemer's eye 
Such tenderness! I miss His Word so dear. 
As I lie here upon the hot sands dying, 
He comes to me with bounteous clemency. 
While I complain, God, with Hell's fury vying, 
Has now Himself become a corpse for me! 

=====第432页=====
410 Frederick Engels 
Here is my contribution to the next little party. I saw that there 
had been one at our place again and I was very sorry that I didn't 
send anything in for it. Now in reply to your letter.— Aha! Why 
don't you read the newspaper? If you did you would have seen 
what was and what was not printed about the business. It's not my 
fault if you make a fool of  yourself.  The paper only contained 
official reports issued by the Senate and they were really what was 
to be expected. Plümacher's comedy must be very good. I have 
written asking for it twice, but he has not uttered a word about it. 
As far as Jonghaus and his love are concerned, I have something 
to settle with him about that. You fellows always let yourselves be 
put off writing by "this and that". Tell me, can't you write to me 
for half an hour each day after you get a letter from me? Then 
you'd be finished in three days. I have all these letters to 
write — five of them — and I write much closer than you do and 
still I have them finished in four or five days. Yes, it's terrible. 
You can have eight days, but on the ninth day after you receive 
my letter you must post your reply. There's no other way. If I 
have made other arrangements with Wurm I herewith change 
them. You have eight days, otherwise the penalties that Wurm is 
threatened with come into force — no verses and you'll be kept 
waiting just as long as I am. 
Postman: Herr Consul, a letter for you! Engels: Nothing for me? 
Consul: Aha! Good. Postman: No. 
Here is a woodcut, à la Volksbücher, which shows you plainly how 
I'm on the look-out for you, that is, for your letters. I thought I 
would have got my letters off today (Sunday, Jan. 20) but it's 

=====第433页=====
To Friedrich Graeber, January 20, 1839 411 
striking half past four and the post goes at five today. So my plans 
have gone awry again. Well, it has its good side anyway for now I 
can shit in peace and then write to you in peace. I have not yet 
been able to start a letter to Peter Jonghaus. Damn, there's 
somebody sitting in the lavatory and I am bursting. 
It's remarkable that if you consider our greatest writers, they 
always seem to go in pairs, one complementing the other as, for 
example, Klopstock and Lessing, Goethe and Schiller, Tieck and 
Uhland. But now Rückert is quite on his own and I'm curious 
whether he is going to be joined by anybody or whether he'll die 
off first; it almost looks like it. As a love poet, he could be paired 
with Heine, but unfortunately the two of them are otherwise so 
heterogeneous that you can't possibly unite them. Klopstock and 
Wieland are at least contrasts, but Rückert and Heine have not the 
slightest other similarity and each stands absolutely on his own. 
The Berlin party of Young Germany 191 are a fine lot indeed! 
They want to transform our time into one of "conditions and 
subtle relations", which is as much as to say: we write something 
for the whole world, and to fill up the pages we describe things 
that don't exist, and we call them "conditions", or we dish up a 
hotch-potch and that goes under the name of "subtle relations". 
This Theodor Mundt scribbles up something for the whole world 
about Demoiselle Taglioni, who "dances Goethe", embellishes it 
with fine phrases from Goethe, Heine, Rahel a and Stieglitz and 
talks the most priceless nonsense about Bettina, b but all in so 
ultramodern a fashion that it must be a delight for any empty-
headed dandy or a young, vain, lascivious lady to read the like. 
This Kühne, Mundt's agent in Leipzig, is editor of the Zeitung für 
die elegante Welt and it now looks like a lady whose figure was built 
for a crinoline and who is now stuck into a modern dress so that 
at every step you can see her charming bandy legs through the 
clinging dress. It is exquisite! And this chap Heinrich Laube! He 
daubs without stopping about characters that don't exist, writes 
travel stories c which are nothing of the sort, nonsense upon 
nonsense; it's terrible. I don't know what is going to happen to 
German literature. We have three men of talent: Karl Beck, Ferd. 
Freiligrath and Julius Mosen. The last is certainly a Jew and in his 
Ahasver, he makes the Wandering Jew defy Christianity on all 
accounts. Gutzkow, who is amongst the most reasonable of all, 
a Rahel Varnhagen von Ense.— Ed. 
Bettina von Arnim. — Ed. 
c Laube's collections of short stories entitled Reisenovellen and Neu« 
Reisenovellen. — Ed. 

=====第434页=====
412 Frederick Engels 
reproaches him because, he says, Ahasuerus is a mean character, a 
real haggling Jew192 ; Theodor Creizenach, likewise a juif,  has now 
laid hold of Gutzkow in the Zeitung für die elegante Welt l9i in the 
most violent way, but Gutzkow stands too high above him. This 
Creizenach, a run-of-the-mill hack writer, praises Ahasuerus to 
high heavens as a crushed worm and abuses Christ as a self-willed, 
proud God Almighty; he also says that in the Volksbuch, it is true, 
Ahasuerus is nothing but a vulgar fellow, but that in the 
blotting-paper books of the fair pedlars Faust also is not much 
more than a common sorcerer, whereas Goethe has endowed him 
with the psychology of several "centuries". This last'is clear to be 
nonsense (if I'm not mistaken, that is quite a Latin construction), 
but I am concerned with it only because of the Volksbücher. Of 
course, if Theodor Creizenach damns them they must be very, 
very bad indeed, nevertheless I make bold to say that there is 
more depth and poetry in the Volksbuch Ahasuerus than in the 
whole of Th. Creizenach plus all his worthy companions. 
I am now at work on a number of epigrams and I'm sending 
you those I have finished. 
The periodicals 
1. Telegraph* 
You call yourself a quick writer, so who can doubt quick-written 
stuff is what your pages are filled with? 
2. Morgenblattb 
If you read me through in the morning, by evening you'll have 
forgotten whether it was blank or printed pages you saw. 
3. Abend-Zeitung 
If you cannot sleep at night, just take in your hand this paper 
and lovely slumber will come to you soon. 
4. Literatur-Blatt 
These leaves are the most critical in the whole literary forest. 
But how dry they are. The wind blows them down. 
3 Telegraph für Deutschland. — Ed. 
b Morgenblatt für gebildete Leser. —Ed. 

=====第435页=====
To Friedrich Graeber, January 20, 1839 413 
I can't think of any more at the moment and so must stop now. 
As I have just noticed, I really must hurry up if I am to get the 
letters off tomorrow, malefactor that I am. We shall be having 
company any moment now, and tomorrow there will be an awful 
lot of running about and copying, so that it will not be out of 
place to write very fast. 
I am now reading Kaiser und Papst by Duller, a novel in four 
volumes. Duller has an undeserved reputation. His Wittelsbach 
romances, many of which are included in Hüllstett's book, are 
terribly bad. 194 He wanted to imitate a popular style but became 
familiar. His Loyola is an abominable mix-up of all the good and 
bad elements of a historical novel warmed up in the sauce of a bad 
style.  His Leben Grabbes is horribly distorted and one-sided. 195 The 
novel I am reading is better; some of the characters are well 
described, others at least not too badly, isolated situations are 
pretty well handled, and the people he has invented are interest­
ing. But to judge by the first volume, he is quite lacking in any 
sense of proportion in the importance given to the secondary 
characters, and in any new, original views on history. It is nothing 
to him to kill off his best-drawn character at the end of the first 
volume, and besides he has a great preference for peculiar kinds 
of death. Thus, one of the characters dies of rage at the very 
moment when he is about to plunge his dagger into his enemy's 
breast, and this same enemy is standing on the edge of the crater 
of Etna, where he wants to poison  himself,  when a crevasse opens 
in the mountain and he is buried in a stream of lava. The volume 
ends after a description of the following scene: The waves of the 
ocean close over the sun's head, parting and all." A very piquant, 
but thoroughly trite and silly ending. That must also be the end of 
my letter. 
Addio,  adieu, adios, adeus.h 
Yours, 
Friedrich Engels 
First published in part in Die neue 
Rundschau, 9. Heft, Berlin, 1913; slightly 
abridged in the book: F. Engels, Schriften 
der Frühzeü, Berlin, 1920, and in full 
in: Marx/Engels, Gesamtausgabe, Abt. 1, 
Bd. 2, 1930 Printed according to the original 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a E. Duller, Kaiser und Papst, Erster Theil, S. 284.— Ed. 
b Good-bye (in Italian, French, Spanish and Portuguese).— Ed. 

=====第436页=====
414 Frederick Engels 
10 
TO FRIEDRICH GRAEBER 
[Bremen, February 19, 1839] 
Et Tu, Brute? Friderice Graeber, hoc est res quam nunquam de te 
crediderim! Tu jocas ad cartas? passionaliter? O Tempores o moria! Res 
dignissima memoria! Unde est tua gloria? 3 Where is your honour and 
your Christianity? Est itum ad Diaboluml Quis est, qui te seduxit? 
Nonne verbum meum fruxit (has borne fruit)? O fili mi, verte, b 
otherwise I'll beat you with rod and switch, cartas abandona, fac 
multa bona, et vitam agas integram, partem recuperabis optimam! Vides 
amorem meum, ut spiritum faulenzendeum egi ad linguam latinam et die 
obstupatus: quinam fecit Angelum ita tollum, nonsensitatis vollum, 
plenum et, plus ancora much: hoc fecit c excessive card-playing. 
Recollect  yourself,  you evil-doer, think what is the purpose of your 
existence! Robber, think of how you are sinning against everything 
sacred and profane! Cards! They are cut from the skin of the 
devil. O you terrible people. I think of you only with tears or 
gnashing of teeth. Ha, I am filled with inspiration. On the 
nineteenth day of the second month of 1839, on the day when 
midday is at twelve o'clock, a storm seized me and carried me afar 
and there I saw them playing cards, and then it was time to eat. 
To be continued. 
And behold, there arose from the Orient a dreadful thunder­
storm, so that the windows rattled and the hailstones came beating 
down, but still they went on playing. Thereat a quarrel arose and 
the King of the Orient marched into battle against the Prince of 
the Occident and midnight echoed with the cries of the combat­
ants.  And the Prince of the Sea rose up against the lands in the 
Orient and a battle took place in front of his town, the like of 
which was never before seen by men. But they went on playing. 
And seven spirits came down from heaven. The first wore a long 
coat and his beard came down to his chest. He was called Faust. 
And the second spirit had a venerable fringe of grey hair round 
his bald head and he called out "Woe, woe, woe!" He was called 
a And you, too, Brutus? Friedrich Graeber, this is a thing I should never have 
believed of you. You play cards? passionately? O times, O customs! Thing most 
worthy of being remembered. Where is your honour?—Ed. 
Gone to the devil! Who is it that has led you astray? Have my words borne no 
fruit? O my son, turn back.— Ed. 
c Leave the cards, do much good, and if you live a pure life you will win back 
the best part. You see my love in that I have driven the spirit of idleness to Latin, 
and say in stupefaction: who then has made the angel so mad, so full of folly and 
other things? This has been done by....— Ed. 

=====第437页=====
To Friedrich Graeber, February 19, 1839 415 
Lear. And the third spirit was of great stature and enormous to 
behold and his name was Wallenstein. And the fourth spirit was 
like the children of Anak" and he carried a cudgel like to the 
cedars of Lebanon. He was called Hercules. And the fifth was 
made of iron through and through and his name was written on his 
brow — Siegfried — and by his side strode a mighty warrior whose 
sword gleamed like lightning. He was the sixth and his name was 
Roland. And the seventh spirit carried a turban on the point of his 
sword and swung a banner over his head on which was written — 
Mio Cid. And the seven spirits knocked on the door of the players, 
but they paid no heed. And behold, there arose from midnight a 
great brightness which spread over the whole earth like an eagle, 
and when it was gone I saw the players no more. But written in 
black letters on the door was TÏ'"'?! b And I was struck dumb. 
If my letter to Wilhelm 196 was not sufficient proof of my 
madness, I hope that it will not occur to any of you now to doubt 
it. If this is not the case, I am willing to give you even more 
convincing  proof. 
Future of the five card-players 
I have just seen in the Telegraph a review of the poems of 
Winkler, the Barmen missionary.1'7  They are trounced terribly 
and a mass of extracts are given which have a distinct missionary 
flavour. If the paper comes to Barmen, that will be the end of 
Gutzkow 's reputation there, which is already low. These extracts 
are really infinitely revolting—Pol is an angel by comparison. 
Lord Jesus, heal the issue of blood of my sins (an allusion to the 
a Sons of Anak—aboriginal giants reported in the Old Testament to have 
inhabited Southern Palestine.— Ed. 
b Berlin! — Ed. 

=====第438页=====
416 Frederick Engels 
well-known story in the Gospela ) and a lot more like this. I am 
despairing more and more about Barmen. It is finished as far as 
literary matters are concerned. What is printed there is, at best, 
piffle, with the exception of the sermons. Religious things are 
usually nonsense. Truly, it is not without justification that Barmen 
and Elberfeld are cried down as obscurantist and mystic. Bremen 
has the same reputation and resembles them in many ways. 
Philistinism linked with religious zealotry, with, moreover, in 
Bremen's case, a vile constitution, hinders any uplifting of the 
spirit, and one of the most outstanding hindrances is F. W. 
Krummacher.— Blank is complaining so terribly about the Elber­
feld preachers, especially Kohl and Hermann, that I should like to 
know whether he is right. He attacks them for their dryness 
more than anything else, with the sole exception of Krum­
macher.—What the missionary writes about love is extremely 
comical. Look, I shall give you something like it. 
The Pietist Declares His Love 
Respected maiden, after struggling hard and long 
Against all worldly joys, because their lure was strong, 
I come to Thee to ask if Thou wouldst not wish me 
In honour bound Thy lawful wedded Spouse to be. 
Although I love Thee not—that were too much to ask— 
I love in Thee the Lord, who — 
No — it won't do. You can't go making satires on things like this 
without dragging in the most sacred things behind which these 
people hide themselves. I should like to see a marriage in which 
the man does not love his wife but Christ in his wife; and is it not 
an obvious question there whether he also sleeps with Christ in his 
wife? Where can you find nonsense like this in the Bible? In the 
Song of Songs it says—"How fair and how pleasant art thou, O 
love,  for delights!"b  But, to be sure, any defence whatever of 
sensuousness is attacked nowadays in spite of David, Solomon and 
God knows whom. I can get terribly annoyed over this kind of 
thing. In addition, these fellows pride themselves on having the 
true teaching and they damn anybody who does not so much 
doubt what is in the Bible, as interpret it in a different way from 
them. It is a pretty business. If anyone should dare to say that this 
or that verse is an interpolation, then they'll soon go for you. 
Gustav Schwab is the finest chap in the world, and even orthodox, 
a Luke 8:43.— Ed. 
b The Song of Solomon 7:6.— Ed. 

=====第439页=====
To Hermann Engels, March 11-12, 1839 417 
but the mystics do not think anything of him because he is not 
always playing them religious songs in the style of: You say I am a 
Christian, and in one of his poems hints at a possible understand­
ing between rationalists and mystics." As far as religious poetry is 
concerned, it is at an end for the time being until someone comes 
along who can give it a new impetus. With both Catholics and 
Protestants everything goes on in the same old humdrum way. 
The Catholics compose hymns about the Virgin Mary, the Protes­
tants sing the old songs with the most prosaic words in the world. 
These horrible abstractions— sanctification, conversion, justifica­
tion and lord knows what loci communes* and hackneyed flour­
ishes.  Out of anger at present-day religious poetry, out of very 
piety, that is, one might well go over to the devil. Is our time 
so shabby that it is impossible for anyone to set religious poetry on 
to new paths? Incidentally, I think that the most contemporary 
kind is that which I have used in my Sturm and Florida, 0 con­
cerning which I ask you for the most detailed review on pain 
of not-receiving-any-more-poems. It is inexcusable of Wurm to 
hold on to the letters. 
Yours, 
Friedrich Engels 
First published in part in Die neue Printed according to the original 
Rundschau, 9. Heft Berlin 1913, and in Published in English for the first 
full in the book: F. Engels, Schriften der  tjme 
Frühzeit, Berlin, 1920 
11 
TO HERMANN ENGELS 
IN BARMEN 
Bremen, March ll,d 1839 
Dear Hermann, 
I request Your Honour not to plague me in future with 
beginnings of letters such as you learned from Herr Riepe and 
only permit myself for the moment to remark that it is winter with 
In the original letter follow the words: Von Tieck.— Ed. 
b Platitudes.— Ed. 
c See this volume, pp. 407-09.— Ed. 
The original is mistakenly dated February  11.—  Ed. 

=====第440页=====
418 Frederick Engels 
us every morning and summer every midday. For in the morning 
the temperature is minus five degrees, while it is plus ten degrees 
at midday. I continue to practise my singing and composing 
regularly. Here is a sample of the latter: 
fhtyiJi|,jirtnfr|iri| iu.ii.i -MU 
You can sing The Blind Man to that melody or you can leave it. 
March 12.a I'm very glad that you will soon be getting your dog. 
What is the breed of the mother and what does the animal look 
^v « , 'ike? His Antiquity, Herr Leu-
JJet- »JTCnv*»^/ /fitbtttjitl. p0id> is  now arriving at the of­
fice and I will have to strike 
a more serious tone, as the 
great Shakespeare says. A new 
newspaper has just come out 
called the Bremer Stadtbote,h 
edited by Albertus Meyer, 
who is a very great blockhead. 
He used to lecture on the hap­
piness of peoples, child edu­
cation, and other topics, and 
when he wanted to get his 
lectures printed the worthy 
authorities would not agree, 
saying it would be far too non­
sensical. He has the nature 
of a china merchant and has 
been in conflict with the Un-
terhaltungsblattc ever since his first issue. The way they go for 
each other would make you die laughing. Continuation in letter 
to Marie. Walking in front of the Bremer 
Stadtbote is a man who looks like 
this 
Your loving brother 
First published in: Marx/Engels, 
Gesamtausgabe, Abt. 1, Bd. 2, 1930 Friedrich Engels 
Printed according to the original 
Published in English for the first 
a The original is mistakenly dated February 12.— Ed. 
The Bremen Courier.— Ed. 
c Bremisches Unterhaltungsblatt.— Ed. 

=====第441页=====
To Marie Engels, March 12, 1839 419 
12 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
IN BARMEN 
Bremen, March 12, 1839 
Dear Marie, 
(Continuation of my letter to Hermann.) The Stadtbote is full of 
absolute nonsense and I am writing poems about it at the office 
which ridicule it by always praising it to the skies, just incoherent 
twaddle, and I send it to the paper signed Th. Hildebrandt and 
they print it in all innocence. I have got one in my desk at this 
very moment which I am going to send in. It runs like this: 
Book Wisdom3 
He is not wise who from his reading draws 
Nothing but floods of useless erudition. 
For all his learning, life's mysterious laws 
Are a closed book beyond his comprehension. 
He who acquires a thorough textbook grounding 
In Botany, won't hear the grass that grows. 
Nor will he ever teach true understanding 
Who tells you all the dogma that he knows. 
Oh, no! the germ lies hid in man's own heart. 
Who seeks the art of life must look within. 
Burning the midnight oil will not impart 
The secret of emotion's discipline. 
The man is lost who hears his own heart's voice 
And spurns it, wilfully misapprehending. 
Of all your words so noble and so wise 
The most profound is human understanding. 
So it goes, on and on, all mockery. Usually, when I am not quite 
sure what to send, I get hold of the Bote and scrape something 
together from that. The other day I sat Karl Leupold at my desk 
a See this volume, p. 6.— Ed. 

=====第442页=====
420 Frederick Engels 
and dictated to him a rude letter to the Bote,198 which they 
received and printed with the most fantastically stupid comments. 
But I must go out now. So I remain 
Your loving brother 
Friedrich 
First published in: Marx/Engels, Gesamt- Printed according to the original 
ausgäbe,  Abt. 1, Bd. 2, 1930 Published in English for the first 
time 
13 
TO FRIEDRICH GRAEBER 
[Bremen] April 8 (nisi erro"), 1839 
My dearest Fritz, 
This letter —  yes, you think you are going to be greatly amused 
by it, but no, not so much. You, who not only by making me wait 
so long, but by desecrating the holiest mysteries which ever 
remained hidden from the human genius, have clouded my vi­
sions,  angered and enraged me, must suffer a special punishment. 
You shall be bored, and how? With an essay. And about what? 
About that much-talked-about sheep—contemporary literature. 
What did we have before 1830? theodor Hell and his associates, 
Willibald Alexis, an aged Goethe and an aged Tieck, c'est tout. 
Then, like a thunderclap, came the July revolution, the most 
splendid expression of the people's will since the war of liberation. 
Goethe dies, Tieck goes to seed more and more, Hell goes to 
sleep,  Wolfgang Menzel goes on writing stodgy criticism, but a 
new spirit arises in literature — with Grün and Lenau above all 
among the poets. Rückert acquires a new verve, Immermann 
acquires importance, Platen the same, but that is not enough. 
Heine and Börne were already fully formed characters before the 
July revolution, but only now are they acquiring importance and 
upon them is arising a new generation, which turns to its account 
the lives and literatures of all peoples, Gutzkow leading. In 1830, 
Gutzkow was still a student and worked first of all for Menzel on 
the Literatur-Blatt, but not for long; they did not agree in their 
views.  Menzel turned churlish; Gutzkow wrote the notorious Wally 
(die Zweiflerin), and Menzel made a terrible uproar about it, 
accusing Gutzkow of himself holding the views expressed by Wally 
a If I am not mistaken—Ed. 

=====第443页=====
To Friedrich Graeber, April 8-9, 1839 421 
in the novel, and actually succeeded in getting the harmless book 
banned.199  Gutzkow was joined by the admittedly unimportant 
Mundt, who in order to make money started all kinds of 
undertakings, publishing other people's articles cum suibus.* Beur-
mann, a shrewd chap and fine observer, soon joined them, and 
then Ludolf Wienbarg and F. Gustav Kühne, and for these five 
writers {nisi erro, anno 1835) Wienbarg invented the name Junges 
Deutschland. 200 Opposing them was Menzel, who would have done 
better to stay at home, since it was for that very reason that 
Gutzkow demolished him, and then the Evangelische Kirchen-
Zeitung, which sees idolatry in every allegory and original sin in 
every expression of sensuousness (perhaps Hengstenberg was so 
named on the principle of lucus a non lucendo, h i.e., perhaps he is 
gelded, castrated, a eunuch? 0). These noble people accused Young 
Germany of wanting the emancipation of women and the restora­
tion of the flesh and wanting as a side-line to overthrow a couple 
of kingdoms and become Pope and Emperor in one person. Of all 
these charges, only the one concerning the emancipation of 
women (in the Goethean sense) had any grounds, and it could 
only be brought against Gutzkow, who later disavowed the idea (as 
high-spirited, youthful over-haste). Through their standing by one 
another, their aims became more and more sharply defined; it was 
the "ideas of the time" which came to consciousness in them. 
These ideas of the century (so Kühne and Mundt said) are not 
anything demagogic or anti-Christian as they are made out to be, 
but are based on the natural right of every man and extend to 
everything in the present conditions which conflicts with it. Thus 
these ideas include: above all, participation by the people in the 
administration of the state, that is, constitutional matters; further, 
emancipation of the Jews, abolition of all religious compulsion, of 
all hereditary aristocracy, etc. Who can have anything against that? 
The Evangelische Kirchen-Zeitung and Menzel have it on their 
consciences that they have so cried down the honour of Young 
Germany. As early as 1836-37, among these writers, who were 
bound together by unity of purpose, but not by any special 
association, the idea was clear and definite; by the high quality of 
their writing they won for themselves the recognition of the other, 
mostly wretched, writers and attracted all the young talents to 
a Along with his own.— Ed. 
b Grove from not being light; ancient Roman etymologists derived words often 
by contrast and not by resemblance.— Ed. 
c A play on the name Hengstenberg, Hengst meaning "stallion".— Ed. 

=====第444页=====
422 Frederick Engels 
themselves. Their poets are Anastasius Grün and Karl Beck; their 
critics are, first and foremost, Gutzkow, Kühne, Laube and, 
among the younger ones, Ludwig Wihl, Levin Schücking and 
others; they also try their hand at the novel, drama, etc. Recently, 
however, differences have arisen between Gutzkow and Mundt 
along with Kühne and Laube. Both have supporters — Gutzkow 
the younger people like Wihl, Schücking and others, Mundt only a 
few of the younger ones. Beurmann is keeping fairly neutral, so is 
the young, very talented Dingelstedt, but they incline very much 
towards Gutzkow. As a result of the quarrel Mundt has lost all his 
credit, and that of Kühne has fallen considerably because he is so 
contemptible that he denigrates everything Gutzkow writes. Gutz­
kow, on the other hand, behaves very nobly and dwells only on 
the great love between Mundt and Kühne, who engage in mutual 
praise. Gutzkow's latest article in the Jahrbuch der Literatur shows 
that he is a quite extraordinarily honourable fellow. 201 
We have very few active writers apart from Young Germany. 
The Swabian school202  has been passive ever since 1820. The 
Austrians Zedlitz and Grillparzer are of little interest because they 
write in such a strange fashion (Zedlitz Spanish style, Grillparzer 
antique); among the lyric poets Lenau inclines towards Young 
Germany despite his ecclesiastical material, Frankl is an agreeable 
Uhland in miniature, K. E. Ebert is quite Bohemianised. The 
Saxons—Hell, Heller, Herloßsohn, Morvell, Wachsmann, Trom-
litz—oh my God, they lack wit; the Marteau lot203 and the Berlin­
ers (to whom you do not belong) are vile, the Rhineland-
ers — Lewald is by far the best writer of entertainment literature; 
his Europa is readable, but the reviews in it are terrible—Hub, 
Schnezler and Co. are not worth much, Freiligrath will yet turn to 
Young Germany one day, you'll see, Duller too, if he does not go 
to the dogs before then, and Rückert stands there like an old 
father and stretches out his hands in benediction over everyone. 
April 9. So there is the moving essay. What shall I, poor devil, 
do now? Go on swotting on my own? Don't feel like it. Turn loyal? 
The devil if I will! Stick to Saxon mediocrity—ugittugitt (oh God, 
oh God — local expression of disgust). So I must become a Young 
German, or rather, I am one already, body and soul, I cannot 
sleep at night, all because of the ideas of the century. When I am 
at the post-office and look at the Prussian coat of arms, I am 
seized with the spirit of freedom. Every time I look at a newspaper 
I hunt for advances oi freedom. They get into my poems and 
mock at the obscurantists in monk's cowls and in ermine. But with 
their fine phrases — world-weariness, world-historic, the anguish of 

=====第445页=====
To Marie Engels, April 10, 1839 423 
the Jews, etc.— I will have no truck, for they are already outdated. 
And I'm telling you, Fritz, when you become a pastor you can be 
as orthodox as you like, but if ever you become a pietist who rails 
against Young Germany and regards the Evangelische Kirchen-
Zeitung as his oracle, then, truly, I'm telling you you'll have me to 
deal with. You must become a pastor in Gemarke* and drive out 
the damned, consumptive, sit-by-the-fire pietism which Krum-
macher has brought to such a bloom. Of course they will call you a 
heretic, but let one of them come and prove by the Bible or by 
reason that you are wrong. Meanwhile, Blank is a wicked rational­
ist and throws the whole of Christianity overboard, what will it 
lead to? Well, I have never been a pietist. I have been a mystic for 
a while, but those are tempi passati. I am now an honest, and in 
comparison with others very liberal, super-naturalist. How long I 
shall remain such I don't know, but I hope to remain one, even 
though inclining now more, now less towards rationalism. All this 
will have to be settled. Adios, Friderice, write more quickly and 
write a lot. Tuus. b 
Do hêst de mî dubbelt. c 
Friedrich Engels Friedrich Engels 
First published in Die neue Rundschau, Printed according to the original 
9. Heft, Berlin, 1913 Published in English for the first 
time 
14 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
IN BARMEN 
Bremen, April 10, 1839 
Dear Marie, 
Pardon me for not writing to you for so long. Now I'll tell you 
something nice. On Good Friday, the local Burgomaster, His 
Magnificence Dr. Groening, died and the election of a new one 
took place a week ago. The Right Honourable Senator Dr. J. D. 
Noltenius got the appointment and last Friday there was a big 
procession for his installation. First came the eight gentlemen 
a A district in Barmen.— Ed. 
h Yours.— Ed. 
c There you have me doubled.— Ed. 

=====第446页=====
424 Frederick Engels 
servants, two of whom are at the service of every Burgomaster, 
each wearing short porcelain-white breeches, fine hose and bright 
red frock-coats, swords at their sides, and tricorns on their heads. 
Following them came the Burgomasters with His Magnificence 
Dr. Smidt, the shrewdest of them all and as good as King of Bremen, 
well to the fore; then Herr Dr. Duntze, who was muffled up to his 
chin in fur and who always takes a thermometer with him to the 
meetings of the Senate. Then the senators, preachers and citizens, 
some 600-800 people, perhaps more, who all went into a house or 
several houses where they ate," that is, they were all given 
macaroons, cigars and wine, ate as much as they could hold and 
crammed their pockets full. Youngsters gathered before the doors 
and made a din, and when anyone came out they all shouted after 
him, "hêt îst, hêt îst!" b They also did this to Alderman Hase, who 
turned round majestically and said: "I am Herr Alderman Hase." 
Then they shouted: "Ollermann Hase hêt îst, Ollermann Hase hêt 
îst!" And you can imagine how this strut of the Bremen state set 
the struts of his own body in motion in order to save  himself.  Last 
Saturday a new senator was elected in Dr. Noltenius' place; Dr. 
Mohr received the honour and his tuck-in took place on Monday. 
It is the custom on these occasions that one of the new senator's 
relatives has to drink the pig [das Schwein trinken], i. e., he has to 
drink himself under the table, which difficult task was carried out 
by Herr H. A. Heineken, a broker, to the satisfaction of all. For a 
great poet says: 
To enjoy the weariness of life. with melancholy 
Is virtue and conception.0 
Marie: "But Friedrich, how can you write such stupid stuff? 
There's neither rhyme nor reason in it." Friedrich: "I can't help 
it." d I have to fill the page somehow — aha, I've just remembered 
something. Last Sunday I went out riding with Neviandt and 
Roth, and Neviandt brought along a little Englishman, the size of 
Anna.e We were hardly outside the town before the Englishman 
got hold of a whip and walloped the horse, so that it lashed out 
a Wo geist (nicht Geist) wurde. A play on the words Geist, which means "spirit", 
and geist, a dialectal word meaning "eaten".— Ed. 
b Has eaten, has eaten! — Ed. 
Paraphrased lines from Hans Adolf von Thümmel, Hofmarschall of the 
Hessen Electorate.— Ed. 
d Written in English in the original.— Ed. 
e Anna Engels. — Ed. 

=====第447页=====
To Friedrich Graeber, about April 23-May 1, 1839 425 
with forelegs and hindlegs. He remains sitting on it calmly, the 
animal jumps about in all directions, but he isn't thrown. Then he 
dismounts to pick up his whip, which he had dropped, and, oh, 
magnificent stupidity, leaves the horse all by  itself,  and the horse 
wastes no time to think before doing a bunk. He runs after it, 
Neviandt dismounts and goes after him, but returns unsuccessful, 
John and the horse are gone. We ride to Horn, have a drop, and 
have scarcely started back before Mr. John comes galloping up 
pleine carrière.* The horse had been stopped on the way, he had 
mounted, ridden it back to the stable and got himself a new whip. 
So we turn round. Neviandt and I have rather wild horses and as 
we begin to trot a little Mr. John shoots past me at a mad gallop. 
My horse gets a fancy and goes off in high style. I twigged what it 
was up to, calmly let it run and tried to slow it down now and 
again, but when I'd just got it out of its mad rush, John shot past 
me and it was worse than ever. Waving his hat he kept shouting: 
"My horse runs better than yours, hurrah!" b Finally his horse 
pulled up in front of a cart and behold, my Norma also stopped. 
If only the silly horses knew that their riders enjoy it when they 
rush off like that. I wasn't in the least afraid and managed quite 
well. Adieu. 
Yours, 
Friedrich 
First published in: Marx/Engels, Printed according to the original 
Gesamtausgabe, Abt. l, Bd. 2, 1930 Published in English for the first 
time 
15 
TO FRIEDRICH GRAEBER 
IN BERLIN 
[Bremen, about April 23-May 1, 1839] 
Fritz Graeber, I am very busy at present with philosophy and 
critical theology. When you get to be eighteen years of age and 
become acquainted with Strauss, the rationalists and the Kirchen-
a At full speed.— Ed. 
Written in English in the original.— Ed. 
15-384 

=====第448页=====
426 Frederick Engels 
Zeitung* then you must either read everything without thinking or 
begin to doubt your Wuppertal faith. I cannot understand how 
the orthodox preachers can be so orthodox since there are some 
quite obvious contradictions in the Bible. How can you square the 
two genealogies of Joseph, Mary's husband, the different accounts 
of the institution of the Eucharist ("this is my blood"; this is "the 
new testament in my blood" b), of the men possessed by the devil 
(one says simply that the devil left him, the other that he entered 
into the swine), the statement that the mother of Jesus went out to 
look for her son, whom she believed to be mad, although she had 
conceived him miraculously, etc., with the authenticity, the literal 
authenticity of the Evangelists? And the discrepancy in the "Our 
Father", in the sequence of the miracles, John's peculiarly deep 
interpretation, through which, however, the form of the narrative 
is obviously obscured — what about that? Christi ipsissima verba c of 
which the orthodox boast come out differently in every gospel. 
Not to speak of the OJd Testament. But nobody tells you this in 
dear old Barmen; there one is taught according to quite different 
principles. And on what does the old orthodoxy base itself? On 
nothing but—the old routine. Where does the Bible demand 
literal belief in its teachings, in its accounts? Where does a single 
apostle declare that everything he says is directly inspired? This is 
not surrendering reason in obedience to Christ, as the orthodox 
people affirm; no, it is a killing of the divine in man to replace it 
with the dead letter. I am therefore just as good a super-naturalist 
as I was before, but I have cast off orthodoxy. Thus I cannot now 
or ever believe that a rationalist who seeks with all his heart to do 
as much good as possible, should be eternally damned. That is at 
odds with the Bible  itself,  for it is written that no one is damned 
on account of original sin but only because of his own sins. But if 
a person resists original sin with all his might and does what he 
can, then his actual sins are only a necessary consequence of 
original sin and therefore they cannot damn him. 
April 24. Ha, ha, ha! Do you know who wrote the article in the 
Telegraph} The author is the writer of these lines ,d but I advise you 
not to say anything about it, I could get into a hell of a lot of 
trouble. I know about Kohl, Ball and Hermann almost exclusively 
from reviews by W. Blank and Striicker, which I copied almost 
a Evangelische Kirchen-Zeitung. — Ed. 
b Mark 14:24; Luke 22:20.— Ed. 
c Christ's very own words.— Ed. 
d See this volume, pp. 7-25.— Ed. 

=====第449页=====
To Friedrich Graeber, about April 23-May 1, 1839 427 
word for word. But that Kohl talks nonsense3  and Hermann is a 
feeble pietist, I know from my own ears. D. is Dürholt, office boy 
at Wittenstein's in Unterbarmen. For the rest I am pleased with 
myself for not having said anything in the article that I cannot 
prove. There is only one thing which annoys me: I haven't 
presented Stier in as important a light as I ought to have done. He 
is not to be disregarded as a theologian. Aren't you astonished at 
my knowledge of the characters, especially of Krummacher and 
Döring (what I said about his sermon I heard from P. Jonghaus), 
and of literature? The remarks about Freiligrath must have been 
really good, otherwise Gutzkow would have cut them out. But the 
style is atrocious.— By the way, the article seems to have caused a 
sensation. I put all five of you under obligation on your word of 
honour not to tell anyone that I am the author. Understood? As 
far as abuse is concerned, I heaped most of it on you and Wilhelm 
because I had the letters to you right in front of me when the 
urge to abuse somebody overcame me. F. Plümacher especially 
must not get to know that I wrote the article. What a lad that Ball 
is though! He is to preach on Good Friday, does not feel like 
studying and so learns by heart a sermon he finds in the 
Menschenfreund and gives that. Krummacher is in church, the 
sermon seems familiar to him, and it finally occurs to him that he 
had preached that sermon himself on Good Friday 1832. Other 
people, who have read the sermon, also recognise it. Ball is called 
upon to account for it and must confess. Signum est, Ballum non 
tantum abhorrere a Krummachero, ut Tu quidem dixisti. h I am very 
much obliged to you for the detailed review of Faust. The 
treatment of this piece certainly bears the stamp of that wretch 
Raupach.204 This low cur pokes his nose into everything and ruins 
not only Schiller by using his images and ideas over and over 
again in his tragedies, but also Goethe by maltreating him. I doubt 
very much if my poems will have a big sale; more likely they'll 
have a stinking one, since they are going for waste paper and 
bumf.  I could not read what you wrote in red ink, so shall send 
you neither 5 silver groschen nor cigars. This time you will get 
either the canzone or part of the comedy which I have begun but 
not finished. Now I must go to my singing lesson. Adieu. 
a In the German there is a pun on the name Kohl and the verb kohlen —to talk 
nonsense.— Ed. 
b This is an indication that Ball has not such an aversion for Krummacher as 
you indeed said.— Ed. 
15» 

=====第450页=====
428 Frederick Engels 
April 27 
FRAGMENTS OF A TRAGICOMEDY 
HORNED SIEGFRIED 
I 
The Palace of King Sieghard 
Council Meeting 
Sieghard 
So you are gathered here again, 
Strong members of our wide domain, 
Around our lofty royal throne, 
And all are present, save our son. 
He's in the woods on the rampage; 
It's time he learned to be his age. 
He comes not to this cabinet 
Where morning, noon and night we sweat. 
Instead of hearing wise men's words, 
He goes and listens to the birds; 
Instead of studying state affairs, 
He's after wrestling bouts with bears. 
The only thing he wants us for 
Is to demand we start a war. 
We would have yielded to his plea 
Had God, in His sagacity, 
Not given us to realise 
Such rashness would be most unwise. 
Why let the country go to pot 
By humouring the silly clot? 
Councillor 
All that Your Majesty has said 
Hits it, as usual, on the head. 
But grant your simple servant leave 
To speak and say what I believe. 
The ways of men are manifold; 
The boy is but eighteen years old. 
He has the urge to hunt and fight; 
Wisdom will come with time all right. 

=====第451页=====
To Friedrich Graeber, about April 23-May 1, 1839 429 
Young courage ever seeks to roam, 
But Wisdom quietly stays at home. 
Young courage all too soon is tamed, 
Its pride and strength are quickly lamed. 
Then it returns to Wisdom's door 
And there finds happiness once more. 
So let him, with your royal compliance, 
Go fight with dragons and with giants. 
The years will catch him up and get 
The better of him anyway; 
And so will life: they'll teach him yet. 
He will heed Wisdom's words one day. 
Siegfried  {entering) 
And must I bid farewell, 
O Forest, to your trees? 
No king's fare can excel 
Your sylvan luxuries. 
Where but in wooded valleys 
Can wild game run so free? 
This very golden palace 
Envies your greenery. 
You'd scold me, Sire, as I can see 
For roaming far afield once more. 
Must I endure such misery 
Each time I chase the fleeting boar? 
Since sports and hunting both are banned, 
Give me a charger and a sword 
That I may fare to some far land, 
As I so often have implored. 
Sieghard 
Do you persist in this obsession? 
When will you ever show some sense? 
Clearly, you'll never learn discretion 
Until you curb your insolence. 
But since 'tis best to be compliant 
And let you have your will, it seems — 
Go: let the cudgel of some giant 
Awake you from your foolish dreams. 
Take sword and steed, and get you hence. 
Don't come back till you've learnt some sense. 

=====第452页=====
Frederick Engels 
Siegfried 
What do I hear? A sword and steed! 
Why ask for helm and coat of mail? 
Why ask for pages? All I need 
Is bold intent that cannot fail. 
Swift through the forest's wild ravine 
The boisterous mountain torrent roars; 
And, laying low the helpless pine, 
He cuts himself his lonely course. 
Like to that mountain stream I'll be, 
Taking my course alone and free. 
Councillor 
Sire,  be not heavy in your heart 
That our young hero must depart. 
The torrent comes to level ground, 
And trees no longer crash all round. 
Across the plain it finds its way 
To fecundate the thirsty land. 
The torrent's fury turns to play 
And ends by sinking in the sand. 
Siegfried 
Must I needs tarry longer 
These castle walls about? 
A trusty blade hangs yonder, 
A charger neighs without. 
Come, you stone pillar, yield 
That shining blade so true. 
I hasten far afield. 
Father, farewell to you! 
(Exit.) 
II 
A Forge in the Forest 
Enter Siegfried. Enter the Master Smith 
Master Smith 
This is the mighty forge that makes 
That lovely thing, the Long Short Story. 
With poems, it fills the Almanacks 
In all its celebrated glory. 

=====第453页=====
To Friedrich Graeber, about April 23-May 1, 1839 
And here we hammer magazines 
Where verse and criticism unite. 
The fire-glow of our smithy shines 
Unceasing, morning, noon and night. 
But first, take food, and wine, and rest. 
Apprentice, pray escort our guest. 
(Exit Siegfried with  Apprentice.) 
Master Smith 
Now, Journeymen, I'm right behind you. 
To work, and raise a goodly din! 
Strike on the anvil true, and mind you 
Beat those novellas long and thinl 
Heat up those lyrics in the forge; 
On living fire let them gorge, 
Then turn them out in one big mess — 
The public's maw is bottomless. 
And if there isn't iron enough, 
A tip from one who knows his  stuff; 
Three heroes of Scott's, three women of Goethe's, 
A knight from Fouqué with his steely-hard strength, 
Are more than sufficient for twelve story writers 
To spin out novellas of suitable length. 
For lyrics, Uhland's verse affords 
A treasure-store of flowery words. 
So hammer with a right good zest: 
Who turns the most out is the bestl 
Siegfried (returning) 
Master, my thanks! The wine was good. 
I quaffed twelve measures from the wood. 
Master 
(Damned scoundrel!) Kind of you to say 
How much you liked my good Rhine wine. 
Please be so kind to step this way 
And meet this gallant team of mine. 
Now here we have the very best; 
He churns out tales, at my behest, 
Both lewd and moral; his praises sang 
None other than the great Wolfgang 
Menzel, who in Stuttgart sits; 
His name, it is Herr von Tromlitz. 

=====第454页=====
432 Frederick Engels 
And here is one almost as good; 
He also is of noble blood: 
The "C" of Wachsmann — a big one, mind — 
His equal would be hard to find. 
There's not a single almanack 
In which he hasn't left his tracks. 
Composing tales at breathless pace 
He flings them in the public's face. 
A man of sweated toil is he, 
He hasn't done a thing for verse, 
But thanks to him, as most agree, 
The public's taste was never worse. 
Taste I regard with trepidation, 
For taste could mean our ruination. 
Third, Robert Heller: famous due to 
A shine as on 1 plate of pewter. 
The public think it's silver plate; 
We don't mind if they learn too late. 
He sets himself a slower pace 
And strives for characterisation. 
He's dealt a right smack in the face 
To mystics—his abomination. 
You know, the 4 Evangelists 
Were only silly pietists. 
He's brought them down a peg or two, 
And stripped a halo off or two, 
And made them tea-time fare for us. 
Just read The Sisters of Lazarus. 
He also writes with grace and charm, 
His prickly Roses1 will confirm. 
Now here is one whose chief attainment 
Is in scholastic entertainment. 
Friedrich Nork, hair-splitter, poet, 
The greatest—thinks the world should know it. 
He tells his lies in lovely songs 
And proves, from Oriental tongues, 
That you're an Ass, Elijah the sun, 
And East was where all speech began. 
But don't look for anything sensibly logical, 
Thoroughly reasoned or etymological. 
Next is honest Herloßsohn, 
a An allusion to the journal Rosen. Eine Zeitschrift für die gebildete Welt 

=====第455页=====
To Friedrich Graeber, about April 23-May 1, 1839 433 
Truly deserving of a throne: 
A novelist and lyric-writer, 
Piffle's panegyric-writer. 
His Comet Star* is something rare, 
And read by nitwits everywhere. 
Next, under Winkler's guiding hand, 
The Abend-Zeitung's noble band. 
Von Grosscreutz, Faber, and Thuringus — 
What magic thrills those names can bring us! 
But what more need have I to praise? 
The public, with its curious ways, 
Has long since raised them heaven-high 
To join the stars up in the sky. 
There are some others, absentees; 
They're gathering deadwood from the trees. 
No need to name the apprentice swarm: 
They're all still rather weak of arm. 
I hope they will, in time, make good, 
Given one drop of novelist's blood. 
Siegfried 
Good Master Smith, who may you be? 
Master 
Saxon literature's spirit you see 
Incarnate in my nothingness. 
If you would know what I can do, 
Observe this arm's sinewiness 
And how I hammer hard and true. 
You look a likely lad, no shirker. 
Why don't you join us for a spell? 
Siegfried 
Done, Master! It would suit me well 
To join you as a common worker. 
Master 
You can be one of Theodor Hell's. 
Go, try your hand at 2 nouvelles. 
Siegfried 
Ha! With bare fists I brought 
The oak-trees to the ground; 
a An allusion to the newspaper Der Komet. Ein Unterhaltungsblatt für die gebildete 
Lesewelt. — Ed. 

=====第456页=====
434 'Frederick Engels 
Before my fierce onslaught, 
The savage bear went down; 
Wrestling the bull in rut, 
I brought him to his knees; 
Why, then, should I not 
Swing at this art with ease? 
No learner's tasks for me— 
No, not at any price! 
Apprentice I won't be. 
Here is my masterpiece. 
Hand me those bars, there. Neatly 
I've snapped them, every one. 
They're pulverised completely, 
My blacksmith's work is done! 
Theodor Hell 
Here, steady! What's the big idea? 
I'll hit you like that iron, d'you hear! 
Siegfried 
Why make that babbling sound? 
Why take it all so ill? 
Stop rolling on the ground. 
Stand up, man, if you will! 
Theodor Hell 
Oh, help, oh, help! 
Master 
Young journeyman, 
You strike your fellow hands, I see. 
Quick march! Get moving—understand? 
Unless you want your hide well tanned. 
Siegfried 
You're clearly just the man for me! 
(Throws him down.) 
Master 
Ah, woe, woe! etc. 
(Siegfried is sent into the forest, slays the dragon and, on returning, the Master; scatters 
the journeymen in all directions, and goes away.) 

=====第457页=====
To Friedrich Graeber, about April 23-May 1, 1839 435 
III 
In the Forest 
Siegfried 
O'er yonder, where that coppice grows, 
I hear two men exchanging blows. 
They're drawing near — such foolish pother; 
They'll never silence one another! 
I thought them giants in all their strength 
With lances of a pine-tree's length, 
Not two Professors, all skin and bones, 
Pelting each other with learned tomes. 
(Enter Leo and Michelet.) 
Leo 
Stand up and fight, Hegelian whelp! 
Michelet 
Not with you, Bigot — you're past all help! 
Leo 
Here, take the Bible — smack on the head! 
Michelet 
Take Hegel, miserable drip, instead! 
Leo 
Blasphemer, I throw your Hegel back! 
Michelet 
This Bible will give you a pain in the neck! 
Leo 
What more do you want, you old corpse in the attic! 
Michelet 
You mean  yourself,  unbridled fanatic! 
Siegfried 
Pray tell me how this quarrel began. 

=====第458页=====
Frederick Engels 
Leo 
Why, that foul-mouthed Hegelian 
Would get the Bible in disgrace. 
He really must be taught his place. 
Michelet 
Unpolished boor, and liar too, 
He won't let Hegel have his due! 
Siegfried 
And so you throw at one another 
The very books that cause the bother? 
Leo 
It's all the same. No Christian he. 
Michelet 
As good and better, believe you me. 
It's arrant nonsense, what he says. 
Siegfried 
Why don't you go your separate ways? 
Who started off this quarrel here? 
Leo 
I did. I say so without fear. 
I fought for God and in God's name. 
Siegfried 
Well, then, the horse you rode was lame. 
He will never kill Christianity, 
You won't rescue it from calamity. 
Let him pursue his chosen bent: 
You may teach something different. 
No more the Almighty's name misuse 
In your blind rage and wild abuse. 
Now you go this way, you go that, 
And stop exchanging tit for tat! 
(Exeunt Leo and Michelet in different directions.) 
Siegfried 
Although they're peaceful, learned men, 
I've never seen such fierce defiance; 

=====第459页=====
To Marie Engels, April 28, 1839 437 
They fight with all their might and main, 
Though schooled in many a noble science. 
But hunger plagues me now, and so 
Down to the valley I shall go 
To look for house or castle there, 
Or failing them, my trusty bow 
Will furnish me with ample fare. 
That is as far as I've got. I have left out the bits of narration 
and only copied out the introduction and the satires. This is the 
last piece. Now it is the turn of the King of Bavaria3  to be dealt 
with — but here it comes to a standstill. The thing lacks complexity 
and rounding off. Please ask Wurm to see about the poems for 
the Musenalmanach} 1 I must finish now, the post is going. 
May 1, 39 Yours, 
Friedrich Engels 
First published in part in Die neue Printed according to the original 
Rundschau, 9. Heft, Berlin, 1913 and in Published in English for the first 
full in the book: F. Engels, Schriften 
der Frühzeit, Berlin, 1920 Urne 
16 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
IN BARMEN 
[Bremen] April 28, 1839 
Dear Marie, 
You too are only going to get a little from me today so that I 
can get on to my comedy which I want to send you.c It is quite true 
that the gentlemen ate six crates of macaroons. You can believe it 
or not, just as you like, but there were about 600 people. 
Serves you right that you've got nettle-rash. Your fingers are 
always itching because you want to do something silly. Now you've 
got something to itch about. You are an old itching machine, and 
always will be. 
a Ludwig I.— Ed. 
b Deutscher Musenalmanach. — Ed. 
The comedy given below was written later on separate sheets of paper.— Ed. 

=====第460页=====
438 Frederick Engels 
And I advise you not to leave any empty spaces in your letter, 
otherwise I'll fill them with caricatures so as not to get out of 
practice. 
Dios* my dear Marie. 
<£ 6-, «v A  o-S;  (y w 
Dios, my dear Marie. Your brother 
Friedrich 
This scrawl is called stenography. 
The Dressing-up. Comedy in 1 act, for Marie 
Scene 1 
(The living-room. Mother is sitting by the table and helping Emil and Hedwig. 0 
Marie is sitting by the stove reading;  Rudolf*  is running about annoying 
everybody.) 
Mother. Marie, stop reading. That's not a book for you. All the 
stuff you read, it can't be good for you. 
Marie: Oh Mother. Just this one story, then you can have the 
book back. 
Emil: Mother, what does the word Kewatroze mean? 
Mother: Oh, you mean quatorze —fourteen. You learnt that a 
long time ago. You mustn't always forget everything 
again. Hedwig! Really, the child is running up to Marie 
and fighting with  Rudolf.  Hedwig, will you do your 
work? You're all naughty today. 
(Enter Anna* and Laura Kampermann.) 
Anna: There. Mother, we've done our work and now we are 
going upstairs to dress up. That's what we're going to 
do. 
Mother: All right, but don't make too much noise. 
Farewell.— Ed. 
Emil Engels. — Ed. 
Hedwig Engels. — Ed. 
Rudolf Engels.—Ed. 
Anna Engels. — Ed. 

=====第461页=====
To Marie Engels, April 28 1839 439 
Hedwig: Mother, I can't get this sum right. 
Mother. Oh, just think a bit. I already did it with you once. Don't 
be so scatter-brained! 
Hedwig (starts to cry): But I still can't get it right. 
Anna: Mother, do you want to dress up as well? 
Mother: What did you say? Go away. Leave me in peace. Always 
Mother this and Mother that. It's unbearable. 
Anna: Tell me, Mother, do you want to? 
Mother. Yes, yes. Go on, away, with you. 
(Exeunt Anna and Laura with shouts of delight.) 
Marie: Here is the book, Mother. I've finished the story. I want 
to dress up too. Tell me, what shall I put on? 
Mother: Oh, I've just been telling Anna to be quiet, are you 
starting now? 
Rudolf (falls down and shouts): Oh Mother, o-oh Mother. 
Mother: What's the matter?  (Goes to him.) 
Emit Mother, what does this sentence mean? 
Hedwig: Mother, here's a very funny figure. 
Mother. Will you be quiet? All of you going on at once. I can't 
bear it! 
Emit Mother, tell me. Won't you help me? Oh Mother, 
Mother, I must go to the A. B. C.a 
Mother: Then go. 
Marie: Is it true, Mother, that you want to dress up? 
Mother: Nonsense. Does it still hurt, Rudolf? 
Hedwig: Yes, Mother. He has a big bruise on his head. What is 
this figure, Mother? 
Marie: But you must dress up. 
(Enter Anna.) 
Anna: Mother, Laura is in the A. B. C. and Emil is standing 
outside brawling and banging on the door. 
Mother: You too? I've got no time now. 
Luise: (Enter Luise.) 
Madam, Wendel is going to Gemarke. b Have you got 
anything for him? 
Euphemism for W. C.— Ed. 
A district in Barmen.— Ed. 

=====第462页=====
440 Frederick Engels 
Mother. Yes, let me think. Be quiet, all of you.  Rudolf,  stop 
whining. 
Anna, didn't Mother say she wanted to dress up 
too? 
Yes, Mother, you did. 
Will you all be quiet. Out you go. 
Emil (enters crying): Oh Mother, Laura wouldn't let me into the 
lavatory and so I've ... I've done something 
in.... 
He's done something in his trousers! 
That's all I needed. Can't we have a moment's peace? 
All of you shouting at once. (Takes a horsewhip.) 
There, Emil, one, two, three, Anna, Marie, out with 
you. Tell Wendel to come  himself. Marie: 
Anna: 
Mother: 
All: 
Mother: 
Mother: (Enter two masked figures, a man and a woman.) 
What's this? Here's something else now. 
(The man runs to Mother and takes the horsewhip gently away from her. All leap  about  for 
joy. The woman stands near Mother and places a pince-nez on her nose.) 
Mother: Nonsense! But you can't help laughing at it. ({Enter 
Wendel.) Wendel, here's a letter for the post. And this 
for the Cleners. Here's the money for Hühnerbein 
the tailor. That's all. (Exit Wendel. Mother sits down 
wearing  the pince-nez.) Emil, you go first and get washed. 
(The masked figures  seize  Emil, who is standing  there  with his mouth open, and  chase  him out  of 
the room with shouts and blows.) 
Hedwig: Oh Mother, now I see I've done two more sums than I 
am supposed to. Hurray! 
Marie: Listen, Mother. Will you dress up now too? 
Mother: Oh, nonsense! 
Marie: But listen, Mother, I want to tell you something. 
(Says something in Mother's ear.) 
Mother: No, it's impossible. 
Marie: No, it's not. You'll see. (Exeunt all.) 
(Two hours later. Hedwig is wearing Rudolf's  clothes  and Rudolf is wearing Hedwig's, and 
both are wearing masks which  they  undo for  each  other.  The others  follow one after  the other,  all 
very curiously disguised.) 

=====第463页=====
To Marie Engels, April 28, 1839 441 
Hermann3: Oh August,b I have surely got the longest nose! Look, 
boy, I even have a beard like the one our Fritz once had! 
August: But I have such nice green cheeks and a grey beard, and 
my nose is also much redder! 
Marie: Look, Laura, I'm a nice boy, aren't I? You are such a 
tiny thing under the hat, I am much bigger than you 
are, and my fancy paper hat is also bigger! 
(Enter Mother in an old dressing-gown with Father's fur dressing-gown over it, and a 
peaked nightcap on top of her bonnet, and the pince-nez on her nose.) 
a Hermann Engels. — Ed. 
b August Engels. — Ed. 

=====第464页=====
442 Frederick Engels 
All shout: Oh Mother, Mother. 
Hermann: August, that's not my mother. 
Mother. Will you be quiet, boy, and sit down at the table, all of 
you, until he comes. 
(Pause. Enter Father, looks round astonished until at last all take their masks off and the 
children run about shouting and screaming for joy. Finale: a gigantic feast.) 
I could have gone on with it but time will not allow. The post goes 
in half an hour, so I'll close. 
Your brother 
Friedrich 
First published in: Marx/Engels, Printed according to the original 
Gesamtausgabe, Abt. l, Bd. 2, 1930 Published in English for the first 
rime 
17 
TO WILHELM GRAEBER 
IN BERLIN 
[Bremen, about April 28-30, 1839] 
Guglielmo carissimo! TTJV aoö ènwtéiïjv sopTjxa sv totg TÔ>V 
éxépœv, xat -rjôà jisv ^v è)iol TO aù-coû prjjia. Tô &è JtxaatTQpwv xwv 
Trévxê UTOupicisury, xal tijv aùtSv xpiatv où äuvajiat yivoiaxêiv ^ 
aöftevxixTJv ^ xofiTTStsvtrjV.— 'Eoxtv y^P X^P'S  Î>TT' èjioô, sî ôtôoojit 
not-ijjiaTa èv xaîç eîç ojjiäe èrciaxoiatç. a 
Since you don't wish to criticise St. Hanor, Florida and Sturm, you 
don't deserve to get any more verses. Your assertion debilitatis 
ingenii abhörtet ab usata tua veriloquentia. Meam quidem mentem ad 
juvenilem Germaniam se inclinare, haud nocebit libertati; haec enim 
classis scriptorum non est, ut  schola  romantica, demagogia, et cett, societas 
clausa, sed ideas saeculi nostri, emancipationem judaeorum servorumque, 
constitutionalismum generalem aliasque bonas ideas in succum et san-
a My very dear Wilhelm, I found your letter amongst those of the others and its 
words were sweet to me. But I cannot accept as either authentic or competent the 
judgment and the sentence passed by the five students.— For it is an act of 
kindness on my part when I enclose poems in my letters to you.— Ed. 

=====第465页=====
To Wilhelm Graeber, about April 28-30, 1839 443 
guinem populi Teutonici intrare volunt tentantque. Quae quum ideae 
hand procul sint a directione animi mei, cur me separare? Non enim est, 
quod tu dicis*: surrendering oneself to a tendency,  sed h: joining it; 
sequitur0 a continuation in my room, and, in writing a polyglottic 
letter, I will take now the English language,*1  ma no, il mio bello 
Italw.no , dolce e soave, come il zefiro, con parole, somiglianti alle flori 
del più bel gtardino, y el Espanol, lengua como el viento en los  ârboles,  e 
o Portuguez, como as olas da mar em riba de flores e prados, et le 
Français, comme le murmure vite d'un font, très amusant, en de 
hollandsche tool, gelijk den damp uijt eener pijp Tobak, zter gemoedlijk': 
but our beloved German — that is all at once. 
Like to the long, long waves of the sea is the language of 
Homer; 
Aeschylus into the valley hurls one rock after another. 
Tongue of the Romans — thus mighty Caesar addresses the 
legions, 
Grasping the words that lie in profusion like angular boulders 
Scattered around; from them there soars a Cyclopean building; 
Whereas the new Italian tongue is graceful and charming, 
Setting the poet in the middle of Earth's most beautiful garden; 
Petrarch filled cornucopias; Ariosto wove his bay-wreath. 
Language of Spain: oh, hear how aloft in the leaves of the tree-top 
Reigns the tremendous wind, and tremendous songs of the 
ancients 
Swell and resound in its roar, and the grapes that hang from the 
vine-branch 
Climbing the trunk of the tree, all swing to and fro in the leafage. 
Of intellectual weakness is in contradiction to your customary veracity. It will 
do no harm to liberty if my mind inclines towards Young Germany, for this is not a 
group of writers, like the romantic, demagogic and other schools, not a closed 
society; what they want and work for, is that the ideas of our century—the 
emancipation of the Jews and of the slaves, general constitutionalism and other 
good ideas—shall become part of the flesh and blood of the German people. Since 
these ideas are not far from the trend of my own mind, why should I hold aloof? 
For it is not as you say.— Ed. 
b But.— Ed. 
c Follows.— Ed. 
The original (after sequitur) is written in English.— Ed. 
e But no, my beautiful Italian, lovely and pure as the zephyr, with words like 
flowers from the loveliest of gardens, and Spanish, a language like the wind in the 
trees,  and Portuguese, like the rustling of the sea on a shore of flowers and 
meadows, and French, like the quick murmur of a fountain, very amusing, and 
Dutch, like the smoke from a pipe of tobacco, very cosy.— Ed. 

=====第466页=====
444 Frederick Engels 
Portugal's language — the murmur of waves on the flower-studded 
coastline, 
Where in the reeds may be heard how Syrinx sighs with the 
Zephyr. 
Hark to the tongue of the Franks: it runs, an exuberant streamlet, 
Merrily taking its course and smoothing the obstinate sandstone 
Under the rippling flow of its chattering, garrulous wavelets. 
Language of England, all this time weather-beaten and grass-grown 
Monument of great giants, that the brambles covered for all that, 
Round it screams and howls the storm that would topple it over. 
Ah, but the German tongue, it booms like the surf of the breakers 
Washing the jagged-edged coral that carries the fairest of islands; 
Towards it thunder the long, long waves of the music of Homer; 
There, too, crash the gigantic rocks that Aeschylus tumbled; 
There you will see the Commander-in-Chief's Cyclopean building; 
There you will see the fragrant garden of beautiful flowers; 
Mighty the sounds that swell from the midst of the leaves in the 
tree-top; 
Syrinx is heard in the reeds, and the rivulets polish the sandstone; 
Many a giant building stands with the wind screaming round it: 
Such is the German language, eternal and woven with wonders. 
I wrote down these hexameters ex tempore, and I hope they'll 
make the nonsense on the previous page, out of which they came, 
more bearable to you. But discuss them as something extemporary. 
April 29. To proceed with your letter in consistent continuation, 
the weather is marvellous today so that you, posito caso aequalitatis 
temporalis," are probably and rightly cutting all your lectures today. 
I wish I were with you.— I have probably already written to you 
that I have been venting my wit on the Bremer Stadtboteb  under the 
name of Theodor Hildebrand; I have given it up now with the 
following letter. 
Dear Bremen Courier, 
Please don't be offended 
If I've made you the laughing-stock of town. 
Remember, friend, that folk have always tended 
To ridicule what's patently unsound. 
Your sunshine days have very nearly ended 
In the three months that you've been trotting round. 
a Assuming similarity of weather.— Ed. 
See this volume, p.  5.—  Ed. 

=====第467页=====
To Wilhelm Graeber, about April 28-30, 1839 445 
Have you been saying things you didn't ought, 
To give yourself such food for afterthought? 
My poems cost little effort when I did them; 
The donkey work was almost wholly done. 
I took your articles and parodied them; 
The subject-matter came from you alone. 
Simply subtract the rhyme-schemes and the rhythm — 
The image that remains is all your own. 
Rage, if you like, at your respectful and 
Obedient servant, 
Theodor Hildebrand* 
You, too, should begin to write a little, either in verse or in 
prose, and then send things to the Berliner Conversationsblatt, if it 
still exists, or to the Gesellschafter. Later, you take it up more 
seriously, write short stories, which you get printed in magazines, 
then by themselves, you get a reputation, are acclaimed as a gifted, 
witty narrator. I see you all again, Heuser a great composer, 
Wurm writing profound studies on Goethe and the developments 
of the time, Fritz becoming a famous preacher, Jonghaus compos­
ing religious poems, you writing witty short stories and critical 
essays, and me — becoming the town poet of Barmen to replace 
Lieutenant Simons of shabbily treated memory (in Cleve).— As a 
further piece of poetry for you, there is also the song on the sheet 
for the Musenalmanach? which I don't feel like copying 
out again. Perhaps I'll write another one besides. Today (April 
30), because of the magnificent weather, I sat in the garden from 
7 in the morning to half past 8, smoked and read the Lusiade c 
until I had to go to the office. There's no better way of reading 
than in a garden on a clear spring morning, with a pipe in your 
mouth, and the rays of the sun on your back. This afternoon I'll 
continue this pursuit with the Old German Tristan, and his sweet 
reflections on love. Tonight I'm going to the Ratskeller* where 
our Herr Pastor' is treating us to the Rhine wine which he has 
a See this volume, p. 26.— Ed. 
b Deutscher Musenalmanach. — Ed. 
c Luiz Vaz de Camôes, Os Lusiadas. —Ed. 
d Beer cellar under the town hall.— Ed. 
Georg Gottfried Treviranus.— Ed. 

=====第468页=====
446 Frederick Engels 
been given — in duty bound — by the new Burgomaster." In such 
stupendous weather I always get an immense longing for the 
Rhine and its vineyards, but what can I do about it? Write a 
couple of verses at most. I am willing to bet that W. Blank has 
written telling you that [I] wrote the articles in the Telegraph* and 
that's why you were all so angry about it. The scene is in Barmen 
and you can imagine what it is.— I have just had a letter from 
W. Blank in which he says that the article is causing a frantic uproar 
in Elberfeld. Dr. Runkel attacks it' in the Elberfelder Zeitung, 
accusing me of falsehood. 0 I want to let him be given a hint that 
he should point out to me just one single falsehood, which he 
cannot, because everything I wrote was based on proven data 
which I have from eye-witnesses and ear-witnesses. Blank sent me 
the paper, which I at once dispatched to Gutzkow with the 
request to go on keeping my name secret. Krummacher declared 
recently in a sermon that the earth stands still and the sun rotates 
around it, and the fellow dares to trumpet this to the world on 
this April 21, 1839, and then he says that pietism does not lead 
the world back to the Middle Ages! d It is scandalous. He should be 
a J. Daniel Noltenius.— Ed. 
b "Letters from Wuppertal". See this volume, pp. 7-25.— Ed. 
c See this volume, pp. 27-28.— Ed. 
d See this volume, p. 29.— Ed. 

=====第469页=====
To Marie Engels, May 23, 1839 447 
expelled, or one day he will yet become Pope before you know, 
and then may a saffron-yellow thunderstorm strike him dead. Dios 
lo sabe, God knows what will become of Wuppertal. Adios. Yours, 
expecting a speedy reply or not sending any more poems, 
First published in part in Die neue 
Rundschau, 9. Heft, Berlin, 1913, and in 
full in the book: F. Engels, Schriften der 
Frühzeit, Berlin, 1920 Friedrich Engels 
Printed according to the original 
Published in English for the first 
time 
18 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
IN BARMEN 
Bremen, May 23, 1839 
Dear Marie, 
Now I ride out every Sunday in the country with R. Roth. Last 
Monday we went to Vegesack and Blumenthal and just when we 
wanted to have a look at the famous Bremer Schweiz (this is a very 
small strip of land with small 
sand-hills), an enormous pall 
of haze came down like a 
cloud and in five minutes it 
was almost quite dark, so that 
we were unable to enjoy the 
so-called beautiful view.— But 
on Whit Monday it is really 
lively in these parts. Every­
body goes out of town and it is I / • cl }k 
dead quiet in Bremen, but 
at the town gates you see 
procession after procession 
of carriages, riders and walk­
ers. And such a dust, it is 
terrible. For the roads are 
covered with sand to a 
depth of half a yard and of 
course it all goes up into the 
air. A broker called Jan Krus-
becker has just arrived and 
I'll draw him for you. Jan Krusbecker 

=====第470页=====
448 Frederick Engels 
He looks exactly like this. He has eyes like rockets and an always 
half-melancholy, half-smiling air. Adieu. 
Your brother 
Friedrich 
First published in the Deutsche Revue, Printed according to the original 
Stuttgart and Leipzig, Bd. 4, 1920 „,,,,• ^ ,• , r L *• 
s r  ° Published m English for the first 
time 
19 
TO WILHELM GRAEBER 
IN BERLIN 
[Bremen, May 24-June 15, 1839] 
My dear William,3 
Today is May 24, and still not a line from any of you. You are 
again qualifying for non-receipt of poems. I don't understand you. 
Nevertheless, you shall have contributions on present-day litera­
ture. 
Collected Works of Ludwig Börne. Vols. 1 and 2. Dramaturgische 
Blätter.— Börne, the great fighter for freedom and justice, is 
concerned here with questions of aesthetics. And here too he is in 
his element; what he says is so precise and clear, coming from 
such a true feeling for beauty and demonstrated so convincingly, 
that there can be no question of contradiction. It is all flooded in a 
sea of the most exuberant wit, and here and there, the firm and 
sharp ideas of freedom rise out of it like rocks. Most of these 
reviews (for that is what the book is made up of) were written at 
the time when the plays discussed had just appeared, that is, at a 
time when critical judgments on them were still blindly and 
hesitatingly groping about. But Börne's vision penetrated to the 
innermost threads of the action. The most excellent are his 
criticisms of Schiller's Tell, an essay which for more than twenty 
a Written in English in the original.— Ed. 

=====第471页=====
To Wilhelm Graeber, May 24-June 15, 1839 449 
years has opposed the usual view without being refuted, precisely 
because it is irrefutable.208 —Immermann's Cardenio and Hof er, 
Raupach's hidor und Olga, Clauren's Wollmarkt, with which other 
interests are connected, Houwald's Leuchtturm and Bild,  his 
criticism of which is so devastating that nothing, absolutely 
nothing, remains, and Shakespeare's Hamlet. He reveals him­
self throughout as a great man who stirred up a controversy 
the consequences of which are still not to be foreseen, and 
these two volumes would already ensure Börne a place alongside 
Lessing. But he became a Lessing in a different field; may 
Karl Beck follow him as his Goethe! 
Nächte. Gepanzerte Lieder by Karl Beck 
I am a Sultan, driven by storms that blow, 
My warrior hosts are armoured forms of song, 
And grief has laid a turban on my brow 
With many mysteries its folds among.* 
If such images are already contained in the second verse of a 
prologue, what will the book itself be like? If a youngster of 
twenty has such ideas, what kind of song will the mature man 
sing?—Karl Beck is a poetic talent without equal since Schiller. I 
find a remarkable affinity between Schiller's Räuber and Beck's 
Nächte, the same ardent spirit of freedom, the same unrestrained 
fantasy, the same youthful exuberance, the same mistakes. Schiller 
strove for freedom in the Räuber, which was an earnest warning to 
his servile age. But at that time such a striving could not yet take a 
definite form. In Young Germany, we now have a definite, 
systematic trend. Karl Beck comes forward and calls loudly to his 
age to recognise this trend, and to join it. Benedictus, qui venit in 
nomine Domini! b 
Der fahrende Poet. Poems by Karl Beck. The first work of the 
young poet has hardly appeared before he presents us with a 
second, which in power of expression, wealth of ideas, lyrical verve 
and depth is not a whit inferior to the first, but infinitely surpasses 
it in excellence of form and in its classicism. What an advance 
from Schöpfung in the Nächte to the sonnets on Schiller and 
Goethe in Der fakrende Poet\ Gutzkow thinks that the sonnet 
a From Karl Beck's poem Der Sultan.  See this volume, p.  41.—  Ed. 
b Blessed is he who cometh in the name of the Lord.— Ed. 

=====第472页=====
450 Frederick Engels 
form is harmful to the effect of the work as a whole, but I would 
maintain that this Shakespearean sonnet is precisely the me­
dium between the epic stanza and the individual poem which 
this peculiar type of poetry requires. Of course, it is not an 
epic poem but a purely lyrical one with a loose epic thread 
running through it, still looser than in Byron's Childe  Harold. 
But it is a good thing for us Germans that Karl Beck was 
born. 
Blasedow und seine Söhne. A comic novel by Karl Gutzkow. Vol. 1. 
This novel in 3 volumes is based on the idea of a modern Don 
Quixote — an idea which has already been frequently used but 
generally has been badly adaptated, and by no means exhausted. 
The character of this modern Don Quixote (Blasedow, a country 
parson), as Gutzkow originally conceived him, was splendid, but 
something is clearly wanting in the execution. At any rate, this 
novel by the barely thirty-year-old Gutzkow (and which, moreover, 
is said to have been finished three years ago) is very inferior to 
Cervantes' presentation which, of course, is the work of a mature 
man. On the other hand, the secondary characters — Tobianus 
seems to correspond to Sancho Panza — the situations and the 
language are excellent. 
So much for my reviews. I shall continue when you have 
written.— Do you know when your letters arrived? On June 15! 
And the ones before came on April 15! That makes exactly two 
months! Is that right? I herewith decree that, on pain of not being 
sent any more poems, Wurm's influence on the dispatch of letters 
be totally withdrawn. And if Wurm does not get his letter finished 
by the proper time, then send yours off without his. Isn't 14 days 
long enough to write me two quarto-size pages? It is scandalous. 
You put no date on your letter again, I don't think that's right, 
either.— The article in the Telegraph 3 is my own indisputable 
property, and pleased W. Blank enormously. It was also ap­
plauded very much in Barmen and, in addition, was quoted with 
praise in the Nuremberg Athenäum. 206 There may be individual 
exaggerations in it, but on the whole it gives a correct picture 
if seen from a reasonable standpoint. However, if read with 
the preconceived opinion that it is a jumbled botch, it must ap­
pear to be precisely that.— What you say about the comedy is 
justum. b 
a "Letters from Wuppertal". See this volume, pp.  7-25.—  Ed. 
b Correct.— Ed. 

=====第473页=====
To Wilhelm Graeber, May 24-June 15, 1839 451 
Justus judex ultionis, 
Donum fac remissionis." 
You have not made the slightest mention of the canzone. This 
to be rectified. 
Candidates of Musenalmanach 
With regard to Leo and Michelet, I only know about the matter 
from Leo's Hegelingen 207 and a number of works written against it, 
and from these I have learned: 1) that, according to his own 
statements, Leo has abandoned all philosophy for the past 11 years 
and therefore cannot pass any judgment; 2) that only his extrava­
gant and boastful brain made him believe he had a vocation for it; 
3) that he attacked conclusions which, by the specific character of 
the Hegelian dialectic, necessarily follow from generally accepted 
premises instead of attacking the dialectic  itself,  and failing which 
he should have let these conclusions stand; 4) that he resorted 
only to coarse exclamations and indeed abuse to refute what was 
written against him; 5) that he regards himself as being far 
superior to his opponents, puffs himself up, and then on the very 
next page smirks with an infinite humility; 6) that he only attacks 
four persons, though by so doing he attacked the whole school, 
which cannot be separated from them, for although Gans, etc., 
may indeed have dissociated themselves from them on particular 
a Upright judge who punishes, grant me indulgence.— Ed. 
Deutscher Musenalmanach. — Ed. 

=====第474页=====
452 Frederick Engels 
points, they belonged so closely together that Leo was least of all 
capable of showing the points of difference between them to be 
important; 7) it is the spirit of the Evangelische Kirchen-Zeitung, 
which anticipated Leo, that is dominant in his whole libellous 
attack; conclusion: Leo would have done better to keep his mouth 
shut. What were those "most bitter experiences" which forced Leo to 
break away? Had he not attacked them already in his pamphlet 
about Görres,* and even more violently than in his Hegelingen? 
Anyone with the requisite knowledge (has Leo got it?) may 
participate in a scientific controversy, but whoever wishes to 
indulge in condemnation had better take care. And did Leo do 
that? Does he not, along with Michelet, also condemn Marheineke, 
whose every word, as though he were under police surveillance, 
the Evangelische Kirchen-Zeitung scrutinises to see if it is orthodox. 
If he had been consistent in his conclusions, Leo would have had 
to damn a number of people beyond counting, but for that he 
lacked the courage. Whoever wishes to attack the Hegelian school 
must himself be a Hegel and create a new philosophy in its place. 
And despite Leo, the school is spreading from day to day. As for 
the attack of the Hirschberg Schubarth b on the political side of 
Hegelianism, doesn't this come like the verger's "Amen" to the 
popish Credo of the Lion of Halle, a lion which indeed does not 
disavow its cat-species? A propos, Leo is the only academic teacher 
in Germany who zealously defends the hereditary aristocracy. Leo 
also calls W. Menzel his friend!!! 
Your true friend 
Friedrich Engels, Young German 
Weren't you at Gans' funeral? Why don't you write anything 
about him? 
First published considerably abridged in Printed according to the original 
Die neue Rundschau, 9. Heft, Berlin, 1913,  ,,.,,.„,.,  r , r-
and in full in the book: F. Engels, Schrift- Published m Enghsh for the first 
en der Frühzeit, Berlin, 1920 time 
a H. Leo, Sendschreiben an J.  Gbrres.—  Ed. 
K. Schubarth, Ueber die Unvereinbarkeit der Hegel'schen Staatslehre.... — Ed. 

=====第475页=====
To Friedrich Graeber, June 15, 1839 453 
20 
TO FRIEDRICH GRAEBER 
IN BERLIN 
[Bremen, June 15, 1839] 
Fritz Graeber: Gentlemen, here you see modern characters and 
conditions.3 
y«/»j»éu 
June 15. Your letters arrived today. I 
decree that Wurm must never again post 
the letters. To come to business, I was 
already aware of the gist of what you say 
about Joseph's family trees and have the 
following to say in reply: 
1) Where can you find in any genealogi­
cal table in the Bible a son-in-law in 
similar circumstances being called a son? 
Unless you can mention one I can only 
regard this as a forced, unnatural expla­
nation. 
2) Why did Luke, who wrote in Greek 
for Greeks, who could not know this 
a Cartoons (left to right): Weltschmerz (World-weariness), Moderne Zerrissenheit 
(Modern stress and strain), Kölner Wirren (Cologne discord), Der noble, moderne 
Materialismus (The noble, modern materialism), Frauenemancipation (Emancipation 
of women), Zeitgeist (Spirit of the times), Emancipation des Fleisches  (Emancipation of 
the flesh).—Ed. 

=====第476页=====
454 Frederick Engels 
Jewish custom, not expressly say for their benefit that it was as you 
state? 
3) What is the point of Joseph's genealogical table at all? It is 
superfluous since all three synoptic gospels expressly declare that 
Joseph was not the father of Jesus. 
4) Why does a man like Lavater not resort to this explanation, 
but rather let the contradiction stand? Finally, why does even 
Neander — who after all is more erudite than Strauss — say that 
this is an insoluble contradiction, responsibility for which should 
be laid on the Greek scholar who worked on Matthew's Hebrew 
manuscripts? 
Furthermore, I do not propose to be dismissed so easily with my 
other points, which you call "miserable hair-splitting". The teach­
ing of literal inspiration is carried by the Wuppertalers to such a 
degree that God is supposed to have invested each word with a 
particularly deep meaning, as I have heard often enough from the 
pulpit. I can well believe that Hengstenberg does not share this 
view, for it is obvious from the Kirchen-Zeitung that he has no clear 
opinions whatever, but at one moment concedes to one of the 
orthodox something which the next moment he holds up as a 
crime when it is said by a rationalist. But how far does the 
inspiration of the Bible go? Certainly not so far that one 
Evangelist can make Christ say "This is my blood" a and another 
"This cup is the new testament in my blood"  .b Why then did God 
who surely foresaw the dispute between Lutherans and Reformers 
not prevent this wretched conflict by such a very small interven­
tion? If there is inspiration, then only two things are possible: 
either God did it deliberately in order to cause the conflict, 
something which I should not like to impute to God, or God 
overlooked it, which is ditto inadmissible. One cannot say that this 
dispute has brought forth any good, and it would be completely 
unwarranted and contrary to all probability to suppose that, after 
having divided the Christian Church for 300 years, it will have a 
good effect in the future. It is precisely the passage about the 
Lord's Supper which is important. And if there is a contradiction 
here,  then all faith in the Bible is destroyed. 
I want to tell you quite plainly that I have now reached a point 
where I can only regard as divine a teaching which can stand the 
test of reason. Who gives us the right to believe blindly the Bible? 
Only the authority of those who did so before us. Yes, the Koran 
a Mark 14:24.— Ed. 
b Luke 22:20.— Ed. 

=====第477页=====
To Friedrich Graeber, June 15, 1839 455 
is a more organic product than the Bible, for it demands belief in 
its entire, continuous content. But the Bible consists of numerous 
parts written by different authors, many of whom do not even 
themselves make any claim to godliness. Are we supposed to believe 
it against our reason, simply because our parents tell us to do so? 
The Bible teaches that rationalists will be eternally damned. Can 
you imagine that a man who has striven for union with God all his 
life (Börne, Spinoza, Kant), indeed that someone like Gutzkow, 
whose highest aim in life is to find the meeting point between 
positive Christianity and the culture of our time, that after death 
people like these should be banished from God for ever and ever 
and suffer God's wrath physically and mentally without end in the 
most fearful torments? We must not torment a fly for stealing our 
sugar, yet God is supposed to torment such men, whose errors are 
equally unconscious, ten thousand times more cruelly and for all 
eternity? Further, a rationalist who is sincere — does he sin by his 
doubting? Not at all. He would then have to suffer the most 
terrible pangs of conscience all his life; if he strives for truth, 
Christianity would have to overwhelm him with incontestable 
truth. Does this happen? Further, how ambiguous is the position 
of orthodoxy with regard to modern education? It is claimed that 
Christianity has brought education with it everywhere. And now 
all of a sudden, orthodoxy orders that education shall be brought 
to a halt in the middle of its progress. What is the point of all 
philosophy, for example, if we believe the Bible, which teaches 
that God cannot be known through reason? Yet, despite this, 
orthodoxy finds a little philosophy, only not too much of it, quite 
useful. If geology brings results different from what Mosaic 
primeval history teaches, then it is decried (see the miserable 
article in the Evangelische Kirchen-Zeitung entitled "Die Grenzen 
der Naturbetrachtung" 1); if it brings results which seem to be the 
same as in the Bible, then it is appealed to. For example, it is 
appealed to if a geologist declares that the earth and the fossilised 
bones prove that there was once a great flood; but if another 
geologist finds evidence that these things belong to different ages 
and proves that these floods took place at different times in 
different places, then geology is damned. Is that honest? Further­
more: here we have the Leben Jesu by Strauss, an irrefutable book; 
why does not someone write a devastating refutation? Why is this 
truly honourable man decried? How many have come out against 
him in the manner of a Christian, like Neander, and he is not one 
a Evangelische Kirchen-Zeitung, March 20, 23 and 27, 1839.— Ed. 

=====第478页=====
456 Frederick Engels 
of the orthodox. Yes, truly, there are doubts, grave doubts, which 
I cannot refute. Then take the teaching about salvation. Why do 
we not draw from this the moral that if someone freely gives 
himself up for somebody else he should be punished? All of you 
would regard this as unjust; but shall what is unjust in the eyes of 
men be the highest justice in the eyes of God? Again, Christianity 
says:  I free you from sin. That is what the rest of the world, the 
rationalist world, is also striving to bring about, and now Christian­
ity steps in and forbids it to go on striving on the grounds that the 
path of the rationalists leads still further away from the goal. If 
Christianity could show us one single person whom it has made so 
free in this life that he no longer sins, then it would have some 
right to speak in this way; but until then, truly none at all. Again: 
Petera speaks of the reasonable, pure milk of the Gospel.b  I do not 
understand it. They tell me: This is enlightened reason. Now show 
me an enlightened reason to whom this is clear. So far I have not 
come across one; even to the angels it is a "high mystery".— You 
think too well of me, I hope, to attribute all this to a sacrilegious 
scepticism or to boastfulness. I know that I am going to get into 
the greatest unpleasantnesses through this, but what forces itself 
on me so convincingly, I cannot drive away, no matter how much 
I might like to. If I should perhaps have hurt your conviction by 
my strong language, then I ask your pardon from the bottom of 
my heart. I only spoke as I think and as things have forced 
themselves on me. It is with me as with Gutzkow; when I come 
across someone who arrogantly dismisses positive Christianity, then 
I defend this teaching, which derives from the deepest needs of 
human nature, the longing for salvation from sin through God's 
grace; but when it is a matter of defending the freedom of reason, 
then I protest against all compulsion.— I hope to live to see a radi­
cal transformation in the religious consciousness of the world — if 
only I was clear about it  myself!  Still, that will come in due course, 
if only I have time to develop undisturbed and in peace. 
Man is born free, he is free! 
Your true friend 
Friedrich Engels 
Printed according to the original 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a Paul in the original.— Ed. 
b 1 Peter 2:2.— Ed. First published abridged in Die neue 
Rundschau, 10. Heft, Berlin, 1913, 
and in full in the book: F. Engels,  Schrif­
ten der Frühzeit, Berlin, 1920 

=====第479页=====
To Friedrich Graeber, July 12-27, 1839 457 
21 
TO FRIEDRICH GRAEBER 
IN BERLIN 
[Bremen, July 12-27, 1839] 
Fritzo Graebero. July 12. Really, you could condescend to write 
to me. It will soon be five weeks since I received your last 
letter.— I chucked a mass of sceptical bricks at you when I last 
wrote; I would have understood the thing differently had I then 
been acquainted with Schleiermacher's teaching. For that is still a 
reasonable kind of Christianity. Everybody finds it clear even if 
one does not actually accept it, and one can recognise its value 
without feeling obliged to adopt it. I have already accepted the 
philosophical principles which I found in the teaching. But I am 
not quite clear about his theory of salvation and I will guard 
against accepting it immediately as a conviction so that I may not 
soon have to change again. But I will study it as soon as I have the 
time and the opportunity. If I had come into contact with this 
teaching before, I would never have become a rationalist, but 
where do you hear about things like this in our Muckertal 3? I feel 
a blazing anger at this kind of thing, and will fight against pietism 
and literal belief as long as I can. What is this nonsense? What is 
rejected by science, the development of which now includes the 
whole of church history, should no longer exist in life either. 
Pietism may have been an historically justified element in the 
development of theology in former times. It obtained its lawful 
right, it lived and should not now refuse to make way for 
speculative theology. It is only out of this latter that any certainty 
can be developed. I cannot understand how one can still try to 
maintain literal belief in the Bible or defend the direct influence 
of God, since this cannot be proved anywhere. 
July 26. So here you are. To business. It is quite remarkable 
how in your letter you cling to orthodoxy and yet manage to 
concede some points to a rationalising trend, thus providing me 
with a weapon. Joseph's family tree. To my first objection you 
reply: "Who knows whether we have not often read son instead of 
son-in-law or nephew in the genealogical tables in the Bible?" Are 
you not destroying the whole credibility of the biblical genealogical 
tables when you say this? I cannot at all understand how the law is 
supposed to prove anything here.— To my second objection you 
a Muckertal —valley of bigots; an allusion to Wuppertal. — Ed. 
16-384 

=====第480页=====
458 Frederick Engels 
reply: "Luke wrote for Theophilus." Dear Fritz, what kind of 
inspiration is that which has such consideration for the level of 
knowledge possessed by the one into whose hands the book 
happens to come first? If there is not also consideration for all 
future readers, then I cannot acknowledge any inspiration at all. 
In general, you do not as yet seem to be clear about the concept of 
inspiration. 3) How Joseph's genealogical table demonstrates the 
fulfilment of the prophecy, I am incapable of understanding. On 
the contrary, the Evangelists should have been above all concerned 
not to present Jesus as the son of Joseph, to destroy this view, and 
not at all to honour Joseph by thus presenting his genealogical 
table.— "To say that Jesus was a son of Mary and that Mary was a 
daughter of Elijah would have been quite contrary to custom." 
Dear Fritz, can custom have the slightest influence here? Make 
sure whether by talking like this you are not once more going 
against your conception of inspiration. Really, I cannot regard 
your explanation as anything but so completely forced that if I 
were in your place I would rather conclude that one or the other 
was wrong.— "Insoluble doubts must confront Christianity, and 
yet we can arrive at certainty through God's mercy." I doubt this 
influence of God's mercy on the individual in the form in which 
you have it. I well know the feeling of happiness everyone has, 
rationalist or mystic alike, who places himself in a close, heartfelt 
relationship with God; but make yourself clear about it, think 
about it without using biblical phrases, and you will find that it is 
the consciousness that mankind is of divine origin, that you, as 
part of this mankind, can never be lost and that after all the 
countless struggles in this world, as in the next, you must return, 
divested of all that is mortal and sinful, to God's bosom; that is my 
conviction, and I am at rest with it. To this extent, I can also tell 
you that God's Spirit gives me testimony that I am a child of God 
and, as I have said, I cannot believe that you could say it in any 
other way. To be sure, you are much calmer about it, while I am 
still threshing around with all kinds of opinions and cannot let my 
conviction remain in its present undeveloped state; but because of 
that I can indeed acknowledge the difference quantitatively but 
not qualitatively.— I readily admit that I am a sinner and that I 
have a deep-rooted propensity to sin and I refrain completely 
from any justification by works. But I do not admit that this 
sinfulness lies in the will of man. I readily admit that though the 
possibility of sinning is not inherent in the idea of humanity, it 
must necessarily be inherent in its realisation. I am therefore certainly 
as penitent as anyone can possibly demand, but, my dear Fritz, no 

=====第481页=====
To Friedrich Graeber, July 12-27, 1839 459 
thinking person can believe that my sins can be remitted by the 
merits of a third party. When I think about this independently of 
all authority, then I find, like the new theology, that the sinfulness 
of man lies in the necessarily imperfect realisation of the idea, that 
it must therefore be the striving of everyone to realise in himself 
the idea of humanity, i.e., to make himself the equal of God in 
spiritual perfection. That is something quite subjective. How can 
the orthodox theory of salvation, which posits a third, something 
objective, accomplish this subjective development? I admit that I 
deserve to be punished, and if God wishes to punish me, let Him 
do so, but eternal banishment even of the least part of the Spirit 
from God — this I find it quite impossible to conceive or to believe. 
It is, of course, true that it is God's mercy that He accepts us. 
Everything God does is mercy, but everything He does is likewise 
necessity. The unity of these contradictions constitutes an essential 
part of the essence of God. What you say later about God not 
being able to deny  Himself,  etc., sounds to me as if you wanted to 
evade my question. Can you believe that a man who strives for 
union with God ought to be rejected by God for all eternity? Can 
you? You can't, so you beat about the bush. Is it not very base to 
believe that God would inflict further punishment for past 
wickedness, in addition to that already contained in the wicked 
deed itself? Alongside eternal punishment you must also set 
eternal sin, and alongside eternal sin eternal possibility of believing 
and, therefore, of being saved. The teaching of eternal damnation 
is terribly inconsistent. Furthermore: historical belief is for you a 
great essential of  belief,  without it belief is unthinkable. But you 
will not deny that there are people for whom it is quite impossible to 
have this historical  belief.  And should God require such people to 
do the impossible? Dear Fritz, just think—this would be nonsense 
and God's reason is certainly higher than ours, but still not of a 
different kind, for otherwise it would no longer be reason. The 
biblical dogmas also are to be understood by using reason.— Not 
to be able to doubt, you say, is freedom of the mind? It is the 
greatest enslavement of the mind. He only is free who has 
overcome every doubt concerning his conviction. And I am not 
even demanding that you refute me. I challenge all orthodox 
theology to refute me. Christian scholarship is now all of 1,800 
years old and has been unable to bring forward any counter­
arguments against rationalism, and has only repulsed a few of its 
attacks; nay, it shies away from the fight in the purely scientific 
field and prefers to drag the personalities of its opponents in the 
mud — what is a man to say to that? Indeed, is orthodox Christian 
16* 

=====第482页=====
460 Frederick Engels 
teaching capable of being purely scientific? I say no. What more 
can it do than engage in a little classifying, explaining, disputing? I 
advise you to read some time Darstellung und Kritik des modernen 
Pietismus by Dr. C. Märklin, Stuttgart, 1839. If you can refute it 
(that is, not what is positive, but what is negative in it), you will be 
the world's leading theologian.— "The simple Christian can rest 
quite content with this; he knows that he is a child of God, and it 
is not necessary for him to be able to give answers to all apparent 
contradictions." Neither the simple Christian nor Hengstenberg 
can give answers to the "apparent contradictions", for they are 
real contradictions; but truly, whoever rests content and prides 
himself on his faith, has in reality no basis whatever for his faith. 
True,  feeling can confirm, but it can most certainly not furnish a 
basis — that would be like wanting to smell with one's ears. What 
makes Hengstenberg so detestable to me is the really scandalous 
editing of the Kirchen-Zeitung. 3 Nearly all the contributors remain 
anonymous and the editor, therefore, has to be responsible for 
them; but if somebody who has been attacked in the paper takes 
him to task, then Herr Hengstenberg denies all knowledge of the 
matter, will not reveal the name of the author, but also disclaims 
all responsibility. This has already happened to many a poor devil 
who has been attacked by God knows what miserable lout in the 
Kirchen-Zeitung and the only answer he got from Hengstenberg 
when he approached him about it was that it was not he who wrote 
the article. The Kirchen-Zeitung still enjoys a big reputation among 
the pietist preachers because they do not read anything opposed 
to it, and so it keeps going. I have not read the latest issues, 
otherwise I would quote you examples. You cannot imagine how 
abominably the Kirchen-Zeitung slandered and abused Strauss in 
connection with his Zurich affair, 209 while all reports are unanim­
ous in saying that he behaved quite nobly over the whole business. 
Why, for example, is the Kirchen-Zeitung so very eager to bracket 
Strauss with Young Germany? And unfortunately many people 
regard Young Germany as something terribly wicked.— You un­
derstood me quite wrongly with regard to the poetry of  belief.  I 
did not believe because of the poetry. I believed because I realised 
that I could no longer live only for the day, because I repented of 
my sins, because I needed communion with God. I gladly gave 
away immediately what I most loved, I turned my back on my 
greatest joys, my dearest acquaintances, I made myself look 
ridiculous to everybody everywhere. It was an immense joy to me 
Evangelische Kirchen-Zeitung. — Ed. 

=====第483页=====
To Friedrich Graeber, July 12-27, 1839 461 
when I found in Pliimacher someone with whom I could talk 
about it, and I gladly put up with his fanaticism concerning 
predestination. You know yourself that I was in earnest, in dead 
earnest. I was happy then, that I know, and I am still just as 
happy; I had trust and joy when I prayed; I have them now too, I 
have them even more because I am struggling and need to be 
strengthened. But I have never experienced anything of that 
ecstatic bliss I heard so much about from our pulpits. My religion 
was — and  is — quiet, blessed peace, and if I have it after my death 
then I shall be satisfied. I have no reason to believe that God will 
take it from me. Religious conviction is a matter of the heart and 
is only concerned with dogma insofar as dogma is or is not 
contradicted by feeling. Thus the Spirit of God may convince you 
through your feeling that you are a child of God — that is quite 
possible; but it most certainly cannot so convince you that you are 
a child of God through the death of Christ; otherwise feeling 
would be capable of thinking and your ears of seeing.— I pray 
daily, indeed nearly the whole day, for truth, I have done so ever 
since I began to have doubts, but I still cannot return to your 
faith. And yet it is written: "Ask, and it shall be given you."a I 
search for truth wherever I have hope of finding even a shadow 
of it and still I cannot acknowledge your truth as the eternal truth. 
And yet it is written: "Seek, and ye shall find. Or what man is 
there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he give him a 
stone?...  how much more shall your Father which is in Heaven?" b 
Tears come into my eyes as I write this. I am moved to the core, 
but I feel I shall not be lost; I shall come to God, for whom my 
whole heart yearns. And this is also a testimony of the Holy Spirit 
and I live and die by it, even if the Bible says the opposite ten 
thousand times over. And don't deceive  yourself,  Fritz, you may 
seem to be so sure, but a doubt will come before you know it, and 
the way your heart decides often depends on the merest coinci­
dence.— But I know from experience that dogmatic faith has no 
influence whatever on one's inner peace. 
July 27 
If you did what it says in the Bible, you should have nothing 
more to do with me. In the Second Epistle of John (if I'm not 
mistaken) it says that one should not greet the unbeliever, not 
even say Xa'Pe  c to nmi- There are many such passages in the Bible 
a Matthew 7:7.— Ed. 
b Matthew 7:9-11.—Ed. 
c I greet you.— Ed. 

=====第484页=====
462 Frederick Engels 
and they have always angered me. But you do not do all it says in 
the Bible by a long way. Incidentally when orthodox evangelical 
Christianity is called the religion of love, that sounds to me like 
the most monstrous irony. According to your Christianity, nine-
tenths of mankind will be eternally unhappy and only one-tenth 
happy. Fritz, and do you call that God's infinite love? Just think 
how small God would appear if that was what His love amounted 
to. It is therefore clear that if there is a revealed religion, its God 
must indeed be greater than but not different from the one who is 
shown by reason. Otherwise all philosophy is not only empty but 
even sinful. Without philosophy there is no education; without 
education there is no humanity; without humanity, again, there is 
no religion. But even the fanatical Leo does not dare to revile 
philosophy in this way. And that is another of the inconsistencies 
of the orthodox. I could reach an understanding with men like 
Schleiermacher and Neander, for they are consistent and have 
pure hearts. I look in vain for these qualities in the columns of the 
Evangelische Kirchen-Zeitung and other pietist journals. Especially 
for Schleiermacher I have enormous respect. If you are consistent 
you must, of course, consign him to damnation, for he does not 
teach the word of Christ in your sense, but rather in that of 
Young Germany, of Theodor Mundt and Karl Gutzkow. But he 
was a great man, and I only know one man now living who has 
equal intelligence, equal power and equal courage — and that is 
David Friedrich Strauss. 
I was very pleased that you should rise up with such vigour to 
refute me, but one thing made me angry and I shall tell you 
straight out what it is. It is the contempt with which you speak of 
the striving of the rationalists for union with God, of their 
religious life. To be sure, you lie comfortably in your faith as in a 
warm bed, and you know nothing of the fight we have to put up 
when we human beings have to decide whether God is God or not. 
You do not know the weight of the burden one feels with the first 
doubt, the burden of the old  belief,  when one must decide for or 
against, whether to go on carrying it or to shake it off. But I tell 
you again, you are not so safe from doubt as you think, so do not 
delude yourself with regard to those who doubt. You could 
become one of them  yourself,  and then you too would ask for fair 
treatment. Religion is an affair of the heart and whoever has a 
heart can be devout; but those whose devoutness is rooted either 
in their understanding or in their reason have none at all. The 
tree of religion sprouts from the heart, overshadows the whole 
man and seeks its nourishment from the air of reason. But its 

=====第485页=====
To Friedrich Graeber, after July 27, 18S9 463 
fruits,  which contain the most precious heart-blood, are the 
dogmas, and what goes beyond them is of the Evil one. This is 
what Schleiermacher teaches and I stand by it. 
Adieu, dear Fritz. Think carefully about whether you really want 
to send me to hell and write me my sentence soon. 
Yours, 
Friedrich Engels 
First published abridged in Die new Printed according to the original 
Rundschau,  10. Heft, Berlin, 1913, and in 
full in the book: F. Engels,  Schriften  der Published in English for the first 
Frühzeit, Berlin, 1920 time 
22 
TO FRIEDRICH GRAEBER 
IN BONN 
[Bremen, after July 27, 1839] 
Dear Fritz, 
Recepi litteras tuas hodie, et jamque tibi responsurus sum. 3 I cannot 
write very much to you — you are still in my debt, and I am 
expecting a long letter from you. Is your brother Wilhelm on 
holiday too? Is Wurm now studying with you in Bonn? God bless 
fat Peter b in his studia militaria. A little poem written on July 27c 
may give you practice in liberalism and in reading ancient metre. 
Otherwise there is nothing in it. 
GERMAN JULY DAYS 1839 
How the waves mount up in the roaring gale, how the storm 
comes relentlessly onwardsl 
Tall as a man are the foaming waves, and the skiff goes rising and 
falling; 
From the Rhine there blows a whirling wind that musters the 
clouds in the heavens, 
a I received your letter today, and I am already about to answer  you.—  Ed. 
Peter Jonghaus.— Ed. 
c That is, on the anniversary of the July 1830 revolution in France.—  Ed. 

=====第486页=====
464 Frederick Engels 
That splits up oaks and whips up dust and lashes the waves in its 
fury. 
Of you I think in my tossing  skiff,  you German kings and you 
princes. 
How the patient people bore on their heads the gilded throne you 
ascended, 
In triumph carried you through the land and sent the bold 
conqueror fleeing.3 
Brazenly arrogant then you became, you betrayed all the promises 
given. 
Now a storm blows up out of France, and the people rise up in 
their masses, 
And your throne is rocked like the skiff in the storm and your 
hand loses hold of the sceptre. 
You above all, Ernst August, I challenge with angry 
defiance. 
Despotic and reckless, you flouted the law — now hark to the 
storm as it rises! 
The people look up with piercing eyes and the sword barely rests 
in the scabbard. 
Speak! Are you safe on your golden throne, as I in my boat on the 
waters? 
The business about the high waves on the Weser is quite true, 
also that I was sailing on it on the great day of the July revolution. 
Give my regards to Wurm and tell him that he must write me a 
lot. 
Yours, 
Friedr. Engels 
First published in full in the book: Printed according to the original 
F. Engels, Schriften der Frühzeit, Berlin, Published in English for the first 
19x20 time 
23 
TO WILHELM GRAEBER 
IN BERLIN 
Bremen, July 30, 1839 
My dear Guglielmo, 
What foul ideas you have about me! There can be no question 
either of the buffoon or of the loyal Eckart (or Eckkardt, as you 
spell  it), 210 but only of logic, reason, consistency, propositio major et 
a An allusion to Napoleon I.— Ed. 

=====第487页=====
To Wilhelm Graeber, July 30, 1839 465 
minor, etc. Yes, you are right. We won't get anywhere with 
gentleness here, these pigmies — servility, aristocratic rule, censor­
ship,  etc.— have to be driven away with the sword. Of course, I 
ought now to be really bullying and raging,but since it is you I am 
writing to, I'll go easy with you so that you will not have to "cross 
yourself"  when the "wild gallop" of my unruly poetic prose 
overtakes you. First of all I protest against your insinuations that I 
have been giving the spirit of the times one kick after another in 
the hindquarters in order to speed its progress. My dear man, 
what a mug do you think I really am with my poor snub nose! No, 
I'm leaving it well and truly alone; on the contrary, when the spirit 
of the times comes along like a hurricane and pulls the train away 
on the railway line, then I jump quickly into a carriage and let 
myself be pulled along a little. Yes, a man like Karl Beck—the 
mad idea that he is finished as a poet originates most certainly 
from that depraved Wichelhaus, about whom Wurm has 
thoroughly informed me. The idea that a young man of twenty-two 
who has written such ravishing poetry should suddenly stop — no, 
really, I have never come across such nonsense before. Can you 
believe that Goethe stopped being a poet of genius after he had 
written Götz, or Schiller after he had written the Räuber? Apart 
from which, history is supposed to have avenged itself on Young 
Germany! God preserve me. Indeed, if world history has been 
entrusted by the dear Lord God to the Bundestag as its hereditary 
fief, then it has avenged itself on Gutzkow by putting him in jail 
for three months. 211 But if, as we no longer doubt, it lies with 
public opinion (i. e., here, literary opinion), then it has avenged 
itself on Young Germany to the extent that it has allowed itself to 
be won by Young Germany fighting with the pen, and now Young 
Germany is enthroned as queen of modern German literature. 
What was Bôrne's fate? He died like a hero in February 1837, and 
in his last days he had the joy of seeing his successors — Gutzkow, 
Mundt, Wienbarg, Beurmann — rise so powerfully; to be sure, the 
black clouds of disaster still hung over their heads and a long, 
long chain was drawn around Germany which the Bundestag 
mended whenever it threatened to snap. But he is laughing even 
now at the princes, and perhaps he knows the hour when the 
stolen crowns will fall from their heads. I will not vouch to you for 
Heine's happiness — anyhow the fellow has been wallowing in the 
mud for quite a while now. Nor for Beck's for he is in love and 
fretting over our dear Germany. I am with him in regard to the 
latter, apart from which I still have a lot of fighting to do. But 
never mind, our good Lord God has given me an excellent sense 

=====第488页=====
466 Frederick Engels 
of humour, which is a great comfort to me. Are you happy, 
manikin?—Keep your views about inspiration to  yourself,  other­
wise you will never be a preacher in Wuppertal. If I had not been 
brought up in the most extreme orthodoxy and piety, if I had not 
had drummed into me in church, Sunday school and at home the 
most direct, unconditional belief in the Bible and in the 
agreement of the teaching of the Bible with that of the church, 
indeed, with the special teaching of every minister, perhaps, I 
would have remained stuck in some sort of liberal supranaturalism 
for a long time. There are plenty of contradictions in the 
teaching—as many as there are biblical authors, and the Wupper­
tal faith has accordingly absorbed a dozen different individualities. 
As for Joseph's family tree, Neander, as you know, attributes the 
one in Matthew to the Greek translator of the Hebrew original. If 
I am not mistaken, Weisse in his Life of Jesus a came out against 
Luke in much the same way as you do. Fritz's explanation finally 
depends on such unnatural possibilities that it can't be called an 
explanation at all. I am certainly a irp6|iapt;,b but of the liberal 
party, not the rationalists. The contradictions are taking shape, the 
views stand in sharp opposition. Four liberals (who are also 
rationalists), one aristocrat who came over to us but, fearing to 
offend against his family's hereditary principles, immediately ran 
back again to the aristocracy, an aristocrat with good expectations, 
as we hope, and various blockheads, this is the circus within which 
the disputes rage. I do my championing as an expert on antiquity, 
the Middle Ages and modern life, as a boor, etc., but the 
championing is already no longer necessary; my young fellows are 
coming along quite well. Yesterday I explained to them the 
operation of historical necessity during the period 1789-1839 and, 
in addition, learned to my astonishment that I was supposed to be 
rather superior to all the local prima pupils in debating. I had 
beaten two of them in an argument some time before and they 
had then sworn to get me involved with the cleverest among them 
so that he could beat me; but unfortunately for them, he was 
tremendously enamoured of Horace at the time, so I beat him 
hollow. Then they became terribly afraid. This erstwhile 
Horaceomane is now on very good terms with me and told me all 
about it yesterday evening. You would be immediately convinced 
of the correctness of my book reviews if you read the books they 
a Ch. H. Weisse, Die evangelische  Geschichte.... — Ed. 
Champion.— Ed. 

=====第489页=====
To Wilhelm Graeber, July 30, 1839 467 
deal with. K. Beck is an enormous talent, more than that, he is 
a genius. He produces images like 
One hears the thunder's voice proclaim aloud 
What's written by the lightning on the clouds" 
in enormous profusion. Listen to what he says about Börne, 
whom he adores. He is speaking to Schiller: 
Your Posa was no airy fantasy; 
For did not Börne perish for us all? 
He scaled the summits of humanity; 
A Tell, he sounded Freedom's clarion call. 
Up there, he calmly whet his arrow-head 
Took aim and shot. And Freedom's arrow sped 
Into the apple, into the round Earth.b 
And how he describes the misery of the Jews and student life! It 
is capital, and now the Fahrende Poetl Man, have some sense and 
read him. Look, if you refute Börne's essay on Schiller's Tell then 
you can have all the royalties I am hoping to get for my 
translation of Shelley. 212 I'll forgive you for pulling my Wuppertal 
article 0 to pieces so thoroughly, for I read it again recently and 
was astonished at the style. I haven't written nearly so well since. 
Don't forget Leo and Michelet next time. As I have said before, 
you are very much mistaken in thinking that we Young Germans 
want to support the spirit of the age. But just think for a 
moment—when this itvet5jtad  blows and blows right for us, 
would we not be fools if we did not set our sails? It will not be 
forgotten that you were at Gans' funeral. 213 I'll get it mentioned in 
the Elegante Zeitung' soon. The way you all afterwards beg so 
nicely for forgiveness for the little bit of rumpus you kicked up 
strikes me as very funny. You still can't curse and swear, but here 
they all come: Fritz sends me to hell, accompanies me to the gate 
and pushes me in with a low bow so that he himself can then fly 
back to Heaven. You see everything double through your spar 
spectacles and take my three friends for spirits from the Venus-
2 From the poem Gang urn Leipzig (K. Beck, Nächte. Gepanzerte Lieder. Erstes 
Märchen. Dritte Nacht). — Ed. 
b 
From the poem Schillers Haus in Gohlis (K. Beck, Nächte. Erstes Märchen. 
Fünfte Nacht).— Ed. 
c "Letters from Wuppertal". See this volume, pp. 7-25.— Ed. 
d Wind.— Ed. 
c Zeitung für die elegante Welt. — Ed. 

=====第490页=====
468 Frederick Engels 
berg.— Manikin, why are you calling for the loyal Eckart? Look, 
there he is, a little chap with a sharp, Jewish profile. His name is 
Börne and only give him a free hand and he will clear out all the 
Venus Servilia crowd. Then you also will make your most humble 
farewells — look, Mr. Peter 3 is coming too, smiling with one side of 
his face and snarling with the other, turning towards me first the 
snarl and then the smile. 
In our dear Barmen literary feeling is beginning to stir now. 
Freiligrath started a play-reading society in which, since his 
departure, Striicker and Neuburg (a clerk at Langewiesche's) are 
the up6|Aapt b  of liberal ideas. Now Herr Ewich has made the 
following sharp-witted discoveries: (1) that the spirit of Young 
Germany haunts this society, (2) that the society in pleno composed 
the "Letters from Wuppertal" in the Telegraph. He has also 
suddenly discovered that Freiligrath's poems are the dullest stuff 
in the world and that Freiligrath stands far below de la Motte 
Fouqué and will be forgotten within three years. Precisely what 
was once asserted by Beck. 
O Schiller, Schiller, ever-vibrant spirit, 
O greatest heart that beat in warmest breast, 
Forever young, to us you were the Prophet 
Who carried Freedom's flag before the rest. 
When all the world had stolen from the fray, 
And the faint-hearted could do nought but pray, 
Oh, you were truly prodigal of your blood; 
Your warmest life, your deepest life you threw 
Before the world in sacrifice from you. 
Contented, cold, the world misunderstood, 
All heedless of your heart's deep misery, 
And only heard the music of the spheres, 
When to its ears came waves of poetry 
That you had swelled with your own blood-red tears. 
Who wrote that? — It is from Karl Beck's Der Fahrende Poet c with 
all his powerful verse and magnificent imagery, but also with his 
obscurity, his extravagant hyperboles and metaphors. For it is now 
settled that Schiller is our greatest liberal poet. He sensed the new 
era which would dawn after the French Revolution, which Goethe 
did not, even after the July revolution, and when it came too near 
to him so that he almost had to believe that something new was 
coming, he retired into his room and shut the door so as to 
remain comfortable. That detracts from Goethe a great deal; but 
a Peter Jonghaus.— Ed. 
b Champions.— Ed. 
c Dritter Gesang. Gedicht  52.—  Ed. 

=====第491页=====
To Marie Engels, September 28, 1839 469 
he was forty years old when the revolution broke out, and a made 
man, so one cannot reproach him with it. To finish I'll draw you 
something.3 
I enclose masses of poems. Share them between you. 
Yours, 
Friedrich Engels 
First published in part in Die neue Printed according to the original 
Rundschau, 10. Heft, Berlin, 1913, and in 
full in the book: F. Engels, Schriften der Published in English for the first 
Friihzeit, Berlin, 1920 time 
24 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
IN BARMEN 
Bremen, Sept. 28, 1839 
Dear Marie, 
It was high time your ladyship wrote to me at last; it has gone 
on long enough, Mamsell. But I'll forgive you your great crimes 
and tell you something. Tomorrow it will be two weeks since we 
rode out to Delmenhorst. This is a small Oldenburg country town 
" Cartoons (left to right): Gemeinheit (Common trash); Eine Karrikatur von Goethe 
(A caricature of Goethe); L'homme (Man); K. Gutzkow; Kön. Preuss. Soldat (Soldier 
of the King of Prussia); Nichts (Nothing).— Ed. 

=====第492页=====
470 Frederick Engels 
with a menagerie, so called because the people of Oldenburg and 
Bremen are always going there, and when we had seen it, we rode 
back—and came home, you think? Yes, but after several adven­
tures.  In the first place, I sat half the way in the carriage and 
when we reached the place where I was to pick up my horse 
again, the riders had not yet arrived and so we had to go in, drink 
bad beer and smoke bad cigars. Finally, the riders turned up and 
by now it was eight o'clock and pitch dark. Once I had found my 
horse we rode on, paid the gate toll and rode through Neustadt. 
Then round the corner and riding directly at us came eight 
drummers beating a tattoo, all in a row, and our horses jumped 
about all over the place. The drummers beat louder and loud­
er, and the noble street arabs of Bremen shouted, so that we 
soon got separated from one another. R. Roth and I were the tirst 
to find each other again, and we rode on to the other end of the 
town where we had to pay toll again because the philistine who 
hires out horses lives just outside the gate. Here we met the 
others, whose horses had run away with them, and we then made 
for home and had to pay toll a third time. Isn't that an inter­
esting story? You won't be able to deny it, especially when you hear 
that since it was too late to eat at home, I went into the Club, ate 
beefsteak and eggs and heard a very entertaining conversation 
which was going on near me, about young dogs and dead cats. 
Indeed, very interesting, very amusing. 3 I am now at the Club, 
which is the same kind of place as the Concordia or institute for 
improvement in Barmen. The best thing about it is the many 
newspapers — Dutch, English, American, French, German, Turk­
ish and Japanese. This gave me the opportunity to learn Turkish 
and Japanese, so I now understand 25 languages. All this is, of 
course, of the greatest interest to a young lady who wants to go to 
a boarding-school in Mannheim. Jacob Schmitt was here too, and 
he will be back again next week and will go to the wine cel­
lar with me. That is undoubtedly the best institution in Bremen. 
We also have a theatre again, but I haven't been there yet. 
Farewell, my dear, b 
Yours for ever,0 
Friedrich 
First published in the Deutsche Revue, Printed according to the original 
Bd. 4, Stuttgart and Leipzig, 1920 Published in English for the first 
time 
* This sentence is written in English in the original.— Ed. 
Written in English in the original.— Ed. 
c Written in English in the original.— Ed. 

=====第493页=====
To Wilhelm Graeber, October 8, 1839 471 
25 
TO WILHELM GRAEBER 
IN BERLIN 
[Bremen] October 8, 1839 
O Wilhelm, Wilhelm, Wilhelm! So at last we are hearing from 
you. Now, manikin, now you're going to hear something: I am 
now an enthusiastic Straussian. Just you come here, I have now 
got arms, shield and helmet; now I am secure, just you come here 
and I'll give you such a drubbing, despite all your theologia, that 
you won't know where to run. Yes, Guillermo, jacta est alea? I am 
now a Straussian; I, a poor, miserable poet, have crept under the 
wing of the genius David Friedrich Strauss. Just hear what a fellow 
he is! There lie the four gospels in a crisp and colourful chaos; 
mysticism lies in front of them and adores them — and behold, in 
comes David Strauss like a young god and brings the chaos out 
into the light of day and — Adios faith! It is as full of holes as a 
sponge. He sees too much myth here and there, but only in 
unimportant matters, otherwise he is a man of real genius. If you 
can refute Strauss—eh bien, I'll become a pietist once again.— I 
could also have learned from your letter that Mengs was an 
important artist, if, unfortunately, I had not already known it for 
a long time. With Die Zauberflöte (music by Mozart) it is exactly the 
same. The reading-room is splendidly arranged, and among the 
most recent literary productions I draw your attention to König 
Saul, a tragedy by Gutzkow; Skizzenbuch by the same author; 
Dichtungen by Th. Creizenach (a Jew); Deutschland und die 
Deutschen by Beurmann; Die Dramatiker der Jetztzeit, Vol. 1, by L. 
Wienbarg, etc. I am very anxious to hear your opinion about Soul. 
Beurmann quoted extracts from my article in the Telegraph 21* in 
his Deutschland und die Deutschen, in which he speaks about 
Wuppertal. — On the other hand, I warn you against the Geschichte 
des polnischen Aufstands (1830-31) by Smitt, Berlin, 1839, which was 
undoubtedly written on the direct order of the King of Prussia. b 
The chapter about the beginning of the revolution is headed with 
a motto from Thucydides which runs something like this: But we, 
who were unprepared for anything untoward, were suddenly 
invaded by them without any cause!'.!!!! Oh, what gigantic non­
sense! Splendid, on the other hand, is the history of this glorious 
uprising by Count Soltyk, which was published in German in 
a The die is cast.— Ed. 
b Frederick William III.— Ed. 

=====第494页=====
472 Frederick Engels 
Stuttgart in  1834 215 — in your place, of course, it will have been 
banned, like everything good. Another important piece of news 
is that I am writing a short story which will be printed in 
January, always provided, of course, that it is passed by the censor, 
which is an annoying dilemma. 
I really don't know whether or not I should continue sending 
you poems, but I think I did send you my Odysseus Redivivus216 
lately and I beg you to let me have your criticisms of the last 
consignment. We have a novice here from your part of the coun­
try, someone called Müller, who is going to sail to the South 
Seas as a ship's preacher. He is staying at our house and has the 
most extravagant views about Christianity, which you will un­
derstand when I tell you that he has spent his time recently 
under the influence of Gossner. It is not easy to have more ex­
alted views about the efficacy of prayer and direct divine inter­
vention in life. Instead of saying that one can sharpen one's 
senses, one's hearing, one's sight, he says that when the Lord gives 
me a duty to fulfil, He is also bound to provide me with the power 
to fulfil it; of course there must be fervent prayer and hard work 
for one's own part too, otherwise there is nothing doing. And so 
he restricts to believers only this familiar fact that holds for all 
men. Even a Krummacher would have to grant me that such an 
outlook is really too childike and childish.— I am very pleased to 
hear that you have a better opinion of my Telegraph article. It was, 
of course, written in haste, as a result of which it has a style such 
as I only hope my short story will have, but also some one-
sidednesses and half-truths. Krummacher, as you probably know, 
got to know Gutzkow in Frankfurt am Main and is said to be 
making up mirabMa* about it—proof of the correctness of 
Strauss' views about myths. I am now taking to the modern style, 
which is without doubt the ideal of all style. Models for it are 
Heine's writings, but especially Kühne and Gutzkow, although 
Wienbarg is its real master. Among earlier elements that have had 
a particularly favourable influence on it are Lessing, Goethe, Jean 
Paul and, above all, Börne. Oh, Börne — he writes a style that 
surpasses everything. Meißel, der Franzosenfresser is stylistically the 
best piece of work in German and likewise the first one that sets 
out to annihilate an author completely; and in your place it is also 
banned to make sure that no better style shall be written than 
what is turned out in the royal offices. The modern style unites in 
itself every excellence of style — compact brevity and pregnancy 
Curious stories.— Ed. 

=====第495页=====
To Wilhelm Graeber, October 8, 1839 473 
which hits the mark with a word, alternating with epic, calm 
description; simple language alternating with shimmering images 
and brilliant sparks of wit, a Ganymede with the strength of youth, 
roses twined round his head and in his hand the weapon that slew 
the python. At the same time, the greatest freedom is left to the 
author's individuality, so that despite affinity none imitates the 
other. Heine writes dazzlingly, Wienbarg with cordial warmth and 
radiance, Gutzkow with a razor-sharp precision over which there 
sometimes plays a comforting sunlight. Kühne is pleasantly de­
scriptive with rather too much light and too little shade. Laube 
imitates Heine and now Goethe as well, but in a wrong manner, 
for he imitates the Goethean Varnhagen, and Mundt likewise 
imitates Varnhagen. Marggraff still writes rather too generally and 
with too much puffing out of his cheeks, but that will pass, and 
Beck's prose has not yet got beyond studies.— If you combine Jean 
Paul's ornateness with Börne's precision then you have the 
essentials of the modern style. Gutzkow has been able to assimilate 
the brilliant, light but dry style of the French most fortunately. 
This French style is like a thread of gossamer, the modern 
German like a wisp of silk (this image has unfortunately gone 
somewhat awry). My studies of Goethe's divine songs show that I do 
not forget the old in my enthusiasm for the new. But one must study 
them musically and best of all in different musical settings. Here, 
for example, I reproduce Reichardt's tune for the Bundeslied.' 
I have forgotten the bars again; get Heuser to put them in for 
you. The melody is marvellous and through its always harmonious 
a Engels has copied out the first stanza of Goethe's Bundeslied under the melody 
of Reichardt's setting for this song. The text is as follows: 
"In hours of exaltation 
That Love and Wine both bring, 
This song with inspiration 
United we shall sing I 
God binds us all together, 
Who come here at His call. 
Keep our flames burning ever; 
He lit them for us  all."—Ed. 

=====第496页=====
474 Frederick Engels 
simplicity it is better suited than any other to the poem. Wonder­
fully effective is the rise at v. 6 from E by a seventh to D, and the 
sudden fall at v. 8 from B by a ninth to A. I shall write to Heuser 
about Leonardo Leo's Miserere. 
In the next few days I shall send you a good friend, Adolf 
Torstrick, who is going to study there. He is jolly and liberal and 
understands Greek very well. The other Bremen people who are 
coming are not up to much. Torstrick will have letters from me to 
you. Receive him well, I hope you get to like him. Fritz has not yet 
written to me, the vermicle" was going to write to me from 
Elberfeld but didn't do so out of laziness — for which please give 
him a dressing down. If Heuser — whom I cannot write to in 
Elberfeld for fear I miss him — should arrive, tell him he may 
hope for something from me soon. 
Yours, 
Friedrich Engels 
First published in part in Die neue Printed according to the original 
Rundschau, 10. Heft, Berlin, 1913, and in 
full in the book: F. Engels, Schriften der Published in English for the first 
Frühzeit, Berlin, 1920 tlme 
26 
TO WILHELM GRAEBER 
IN BERLIN b 
[Bremen, October  20-21,  1839] 
October 20. To Herr Wilhelm Graeber. I am quite sentimental; it 
is a difficult case. I remain here deprived of all merriness. With 
Adolf Torstrick, the bearer of this, the last merriness leaves. How 
I celebrated October the 18th can be read in my last epistle to 
a An allusion to Gustav Wurm. — Ed. 
The back of the letter bears the inscription: "To Herr Wilhelm Graeber 
Berlin, Mittelstrasse, 3rd floor." — Ed. 

=====第497页=====
To Wilhelm Graeber, October  20-21,  1839 475 
Heuser. Today beer-guzzling, tomorrow boredom, the day after 
tomorrow Torstrick is leaving, on Thursday the student men­
tioned in the above-mentioned epistle will return, whereupon 
there will follow two merry days and then a lonely, horrible 
winter. Not a soul in this place can be moved to come on the 
booze, they are all philistines. Here I sit with all that is left of my 
jolly songs, and my cocky, would-be student air, alone in the great 
desert, without boozing companions, without love, without any 
fun, alone with tobacco, beer and two acquaintances who can't 
drink. "My son, here is my spear, drink with it my beer. When 
you drink comme il faut, it pleases your old father so," 217 I want to 
sing, but to whom shall I give my spear, and I haven't got the tune 
right, either. Only one hope remains for me, to meet you in 
Barmen in a year's time, when I go home, and then, if too much 
of the pastor has not got into you and Jonghaus and Fritz, to go 
on the spree with you. 
21st. Today has been a dreadfully boring day. Half-dead from 
slaving in the office. Then choir practice, enormous enjoyment. 
Now I must see that I write you something more. Verses at the 
next opportunity, I have no time left to copy them. Didn't even 
have anything interesting to eat, all boring. And it's so cold you 
can't bear it in the office. Thank God, tomorrow we have hopes 
of getting some heating. I should be getting a letter from 
your brother Hermann soon; he wants to test my theology and 
massacre my conviction. That comes of being a sceptic; the 
thousand hooks with which one hung on to the old come loose 
and hook on to something else, and then there are arguments. 
The devil take Wurm, don't get a word from the fellow, he is 
becoming worse and worse every day. I suppose he is taking to 
drinking brandy. Now give Torstrick a friendly welcome, make 
him tell you about me if it interests you, and put good beer before 
him. 
Farewell." 
Yours, Friedrich Engels 
First published in the book: F. Engels, Printed according to the original 
Schriften der Frühzeit, Berlin, 1920 -.,.,_•_•• T* I- •_ r ._ r . 
' Published in English for the first 
time 
a Written in English in the original.— Ed. 

=====第498页=====
476 Frederick Engels 
27 
TO FRIEDRICH GRAEBER 
[Bremen, October 29, 1839] 
My dear Fritz, 
I am not of the same mind as Pastor Stier. — On October 29, 
after a jolly fair, and one involving a difficult, dreadful correspon­
dence, which by chance went to Berlin, and after a letter to 
W. Blank, who had to wait a long time, I am at last free for a good 
friendly tussle with you. You seem to have dashed off your essay 
on inspiration in a bit of a hurry, for it is hardly to be taken 
literally when you write: The apostles preached the Gospel in its 
purity and that ceased after their death. Among the apostles you 
must in that case also count the author of the Acts of the Apostles 
and of the Epistle to the Hebrews and prove that the Gospels were 
actually written by Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, whereas in 
respect of the first three the opposite is established. Further you 
say: I don't believe that we must look in the Bible for any other 
inspiration than when the apostles and prophets came forward 
and preached to the people. Good; but does it not again require 
inspiration to record those sermons correctly? And if you concede 
to me in this sentence that there are uninspired passages in the 
Bible, where will you draw the line? Take the Bible and 
read — you won't want to have a line missing except where there 
are real contradictions; but these contradictions entail a mass of 
consequences; the contradiction, for instance, that the stay of the 
children of Israel in Egypt only lasted four generations, while Paul 
in the Epistle to the Galatians (nisi erro*) gives 430 years, b which 
even my pastor,0  who is eager to keep me in the dark, admits is a 
contradiction. You will not tell me that Paul's words don't count as 
inspired because he mentions the matter incidentally and is not 
writing history — what do I care for a revelation in which such 
superfluous and useless things occur. But if the contradiction is 
acknowledged both may be equally wrong, and Old Testament 
history appears in an ambiguous light, as in general — everybody 
admits it, except Pastor Tiele in Oberneuland near Bremen — bib­
lical chronology is hopelessly lost as far as inspiration is con­
cerned. This ranks Old Testament history even more in the realm 
If I am not mistaken.— Ed. 
b Galatians 3:17.— Ed. 
c Georg Gottfried Treviranus.— Ed. 

=====第499页=====
To Friedrich Graeber, October 29, 1839 477 
of mythology, and it will not be long before this is generally 
acknowledged in the pulpits.— As regards Joshua's making the sun 
stand still, the most telling argument you can use is that when 
Joshua said this, he was not yet inspired, and that later when, 
being in a state of inspiration, he wrote the book, he only told the 
story. The doctrine of redemption.—"Man is so fallen that of 
himself he can do nothing good." Dear Fritz, please drop this 
hyperorthodox and not even biblical nonsense. When Börne, who 
himself had barely enough to live on in Paris, gave all the fees -for 
his writings to poor Germans, for which he did not even get any 
thanks, that was, I hope, something good? And Börne had 
certainly not been "born again".— You don't need this sentence at 
all, provided you have original sin. Christ does not know it either, 
like so much else from the teaching of the apostles.— The doctrine 
of sin is what I have thought least about, but nevertheless it is 
clear to me that sin is necessary for mankind. Orthodoxy rightly 
perceives a connection between sin and earthly deficiencies, 
disease, etc., but it errs in presenting sin as the cause of these 
deficiencies, which occurs only in isolated cases. The two, sin and 
deficiency, condition each other, one cannot exist without the 
other. And since the powers of man are not divine, the possibility 
of sin is a necessity; that it actually had to occur was given in the 
crude stage of the first human beings, and that it has not ceased 
since is again quite psychological. Nor can it cease on earth since 
it is conditioned by all earthly circumstances, and God would 
otherwise have had to create men quite differently. But since He 
has created them thus He cannot demand of them to be absolutely 
without sin, but only to fight against sin; that this fight would 
suddenly cease with death and a dolce far niente would ensue, only 
the neglected psychology of earlier centuries could conclude. 
Indeed, if these premises are granted, moral perfection can be 
achieved only with the perfection of all other spiritual powers, 
with a merging into the world soul, and there I am with the 
Hegelian doctrine, which Leo attacked so violently. This last 
metaphysical sentence is, by the way, the kind of conclusion of 
which I do not yet know myself what to think.— Further, accord­
ing to these premises the story of Adam can only be a myth, since 
Adam either had to be equal to God if he was created so free 
from sin, or had to sin if he was created with otherwise human 
powers.— That is my doctrine of sin, which is indeed still enor­
mously crude and incomplete; but what need have I here of a 
redemption?— "If God wanted to find a way out between punitive 
justice and redeeming love, the only means left was substitution." 

=====第500页=====
478 Frederick Engels 
Now just take a look at yourselves and see what sort of people you 
are. You reproach us with lowering our critical sounding lead into 
the depths of divine wisdom, and here you are actually setting 
limits to divine wisdom. Herr Professor Philippi could not have 
gone back on himself more flagrantly. And even granted the need 
of it as the only means — does substitution cease to be an injustice? 
If God is really so severe with men He must be severe here also 
and not turn a blind eye. Work this system out for yourself in 
sharp,  definite terms, and the sore points will not escape 
you.— Then comes a really pompous contradiction to "substitution 
as the only means" when you say: "A man cannot be mediator 
even if by an act of God's omnipotence he  were  freed of all sin." So there 
is another way after all? If orthodoxy has no better representative 
in Berlin than Professor Philippi it is indeed in a bad way.— 
Throughout the entire deduction tacitly runs the principle that 
substitution is justifiable. That is a murderer whom you have 
hired for your purposes and who afterwards stabs you to death 
yourselves. Nor do you really want to tackle the job of proving 
that this principle does not contradict divine justice and, be honest 
and admit it, you yourselves feel that you would have to prove this 
against your innermost conscience; so you whisk past the principle 
and silently take the fact, dressed up in fine words about merciful 
love,  etc., for granted.—"The Trinity is a condition of redemp­
tion." That again is one of those half-true conclusions of your 
system. Two hypostases, of course, it would be necessary to 
assume, but the third only because it is traditional to do so. 
"But in order to suffer and to die God had to become man, for 
apart from its being metaphysically unthinkable to postulate in 
God as such a capacity to suffer, there was also the ethical 
necessity conditioned by justice."—But if you admit that it is 
unthinkable that God should be able to suffer, then it was not the 
God who suffered in Christ, but only the man, and "a man could 
not be mediator". You are still so reasonable that unlike so many 
here you do not push the conclusion to the extreme point: "hence 
God must have suffered", and hold fast to that. And what exactly 
this has to do with "ethical necessity conditioned by justice" also 
remains to be seen. If once the principle of substitution is to be 
granted, it is not necessary that the sufferer should be a man, if he 
is only God. But God cannot suffer—ergo we are no further than 
we were before. That is just the trouble with your deduction, at 
every step I must make new concessions to you. Nothing develops 
fully and entirely out of what has gone before. So here again I 
must concede to you that the mediator had also to be man, which 

=====第501页=====
To Friedrich Graeber, October 29, 1839 479 
has not yet been proved at all; for if I didn't concede it I couldn't 
accept what follows. "But the incarnation could not have taken 
place by means of natural procreation, for even if God had united 
Himself with a person born to a mother and father and freed 
from sin by His omnipotence, He would only have united Himself 
with that person and not with human nature.— In the body of the 
Virgin Mary Christ only assumed human nature, the person-form­
ing power lay in his divinity."—Do please see, this is sheer 
sophistry and is forced on you by the attacks on the necessity of 
supernatural generation. In order to put this matter in a different 
light, the professor interposes a third thing: personality! That has 
nothing to do with it. On the contrary, the union with human 
nature is the more intimate the more the personality is human and 
the spirit which animates it divine. A second misunderstanding 
here lies hidden in the background. You confuse the body and the 
person; that emerges even more clearly from the words: "On the 
other hand, God could not make Himself human quite so abruptly 
as He did the first Adam, otherwise He would not have stood in 
any connection with the substance of our fallen nature." So it is a 
question of the substance, of the palpable, the corporeal? But the 
best of it is that the finest reason for the supernatural generation, 
the dogma of the impersonality of the human nature in Christ, 
is merely a gnostic consequence of the supernatural generation. 
(Gnostic, of course, not in reference to the sect but to Yv")<î^ a  in 
general.) If the God in Christ could not suffer, then still less could 
the impersonal man, and that is what comes of being profound. 
"So Christ appears without a single human trait." That is a 
random assertion; all four Evangelists give a definite picture of the 
character of Jesus which in most of its features is the same in all of 
them. Thus we can maintain that the character of the apostle John 
was nearest to that of Jesus; but now if Christ had no human trait, 
this implies that John was the most excellent; and that might be a 
questionable assertion. 
Thus far the reply to your deduction. I have not succeeded very 
well with it, I had no college notebooks, only invoice and account 
books. So please excuse unclarities here and there.— Your 
brotherb  has not yet been heard of by letter. Du reste, if you 
acknowledge the honesty of my doubt, how will you explain such a 
phenomenon? Your orthodox psychology must necessarily rank 
me among the most wicked, obdurate sinners, especially as I am 
a Gnosis.— Ed. 
b Wilhelm Graeber.— Ed. 

=====第502页=====
480 Frederick Engels 
now wholly and utterly lost. For I have taken the oath to the flag 
of David Friedrich Strauss and am a first-class mythic; I tell you, 
Strauss is a grand fellow and a genius, and with powers of 
discernment such as nobody else has. He has taken away the 
ground from under your views, the historical foundation is lost 
beyond recall, and the dogmatic foundation will go down after it. 
Strauss cannot be refuted, that is why the pietists are so furious 
with him; Hengstenberg is making tremendous efforts in the 
Kirchen-Zeitung' to draw false conclusions from his words and to 
combine with that spiteful attacks on his character. That is what I 
hate in Hengstenberg and company. Strauss' personality is no 
concern of theirs; but they strain themselves to blacken his 
character so that people should be afraid to join him. The best 
proof that they are unable to refute him. 
But now I have theologised enough and will turn my eyes 
elsewhere. How splendid are the discoveries which the Deutsche 
Bund has made of demagogy and all so-called conspiracies is to be 
gathered from the fact that they could be printed on seventy-fiveb 
pages.  I have not yet seen the book,218  but have read excerpts in 
newspapers which show me what precious lies our damned 
administration dishes out to the German people. The Deutsche 
Bund alleges with the most brazen effrontery that the political 
criminals were sentenced by their "legitimate judges", although 
everybody knows that everywhere, especially where a public 
judicature exists, commissions were instituted, and what happened 
there under cover of darkness nobody knows, for the defendants had 
to swear not to say anything about the hearing. That is the justice 
which exists in Germany — and we have nothing, but nothing to 
complain of! — About six weeks ago there appeared an excellent 
book: Preussen und Preussenthum by J. Venedey, Mannheim, 1839, in 
which Prussian legislation, state administration, tax distribution, 
etc., are subjected to strict scrutiny, and the results are convincing: 
favours for the money aristocracy against the poor, endeavours to 
perpetuate absolutism, and the means to do this: suppression of 
political education, stupefying of the mass of the people, utilisation 
of religion; outward brilliance, restraintless bragging and a pre­
tence of favouring education. The Deutsche Bund at once took care 
to ban the book and to confiscate the copies in stock; the last is 
only a pretence, since the booksellers are at most asked if they 
have any copies, to which, of course, every decent fellow says: 
a Evangelische Kirchen-Zeitung. — Ed. 
The original mistakenly has "eighty-five".— Ed. 

=====第503页=====
To Wilhelm Graeber, November 13-20, 1839 481 
No.—  If you can get hold of the book there, do read it, for it isn't 
just rodomontades, but adduces proofs from the Prussian 
Law.— What I would like best of all is if you could get Börne's 
Menzel, der Franzosenfresser. This work is without doubt the best we 
have in German prose, both in respect of style and of power and 
wealth of thought; it is marvellous; anyone who doesn't know it 
will not believe that our language possesses such power . a 
First published in the book: F. Engels, Printed according to the original 
Schriften der  Frühzeit,  Berlin, 1920 „ ,,. , , . ,. ,. , , , r-
Published m English for the first 
time 
28 
TO WILHELM GRAEBER 
IN BERLIN 
[Bremen, November 13-20, 1839] 
Nov. 13, 1839. Dearest Guilielme, why don't you write? You all 
belong to the category of idlers and loungers. But I am a different 
fellow! Not only do I write to you more than you deserve, not only 
am I acquiring an exceptional acquaintance with all literatures of 
the world, I am also quietly making for myself in short stories and 
poems a memorial of glory which, unless the censor's breath turns 
the bright gleam of steel to ugly rust, will shine in brilliant, 
youthful radiance through all German lands, Austria excepted. In 
my breast it ferments and boils, in my sometimes drunken head it 
glows quite exceptionally; I long to find a great thought which will 
clear the ferment and blow the glow into a bright flame. A 
splendid subject, compared with which all my previous ones are 
mere childishness, is working upwards in my mind. What I want 
to do is to reveal in a "fairy story" or something like that those 
foreshadowings of the modern world that showed themselves in 
the Middle Ages; I want to uncover those spirits who knocked 
under the hard crust of the earth for release, buried beneath 
the foundations of churches and dungeons. I want to try and re­
solve at least part of Gutzkow's task: the true second part of 
Faust—Faust no longer an egoist but sacrificing himself for 
a The end of the letter is missing.— Ed. 

=====第504页=====
482 Frederick Engels 
mankind—has yet to be written. There is Faust, there is the 
Wandering Jew, there is the Wild Huntsman, three types of the 
anticipated spiritual freedom which can easily be placed in 
connection and relation with Jan Huss. What a poetic background 
is given to me there, against which these three demons work their 
will! The idea of the Wild Huntsman, formerly begun in metre, has 
merged into it.-r-These three types (why don't you write, you 
fellows? Nov. 14) I shall treat in a most original manner; I 
promise myself a particular effect from the interpretation of 
Ahasuerus and the Wild Huntsman. To make the subject more 
poetic and the details more significant I can easily weave in other 
things from German tradition — but there is time for that yet. 
While the short story I am working on at present is more of a 
mere study in style and character portraying, this is to be the 
real thing on which I found my hopes for my name. 
Nov. 15. No letter today either? What shall I do? What shall I 
think of you? I can't understand you. Nov. 20. And if you don't 
write today I shall geld you in thoughts and make you wait as long 
as you do me. An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, a letter for a 
letter. But you hypocrites say: Not an eye for an eye, not a tooth 
for a tooth, not a letter for a letter, and fob me off with your 
damned Christian sophistry. No, better a good pagan than a bad 
Christian. 
Poets of world-weariness 
A young Jew has arisen, Theodor Creizenach, who writes most 
excellent poems and even better verses. He has written a comedy* 
in which W. Menzel and company are ridiculed in the most 
priceless fashion. Everybody is now flocking to the modern school 
a Th. Creizenach, Der schwäbische  Apoll. —Ed. 

=====第505页=====
To Wilhelm Graeber, November 13-20,  1839 483 
and building houses, palaces  or little huts  on the  foundation  of 
the great ideas  of the  time. Everything else  is going  to the  dogs, 
sentimental little songs  die  away unheard,  and the  ringing horn 
waits  for a  huntsman  to sound  it for the  hunting  of tyrants;  and 
God's storm rustles  in the  tree-tops  and the  youth  of Germany 
stand  in the  grove, clashing their swords  and  raising high their 
brimming cups; from  the  mountain-tops  the  burning castles blaze, 
thrones shake, altars tremble,  and if the  Lord calls  in storm  and 
thunder: Forward, forward!  who  will resist us?a 
•ftër ot«h»rev> Pt*t  U Jlrem  e^  K\a)hs kellt*  wtj frivUtoC 
^ ZECHER 
^.hun  &nS uni J« mijTVn fcUen^fraoiMCnien, ®t«n»ir/'Vn/ 
bèjflijù^t&ji  Out $.<f^$f~* u*/' T 
tiUkidrtjt flot, ^>A; &Cj&>y4/)<d+>»JtaiAv~, /ttu*/*^ 
(*eotlan>u*J-  «**I/I«»K  Coi*ptb<t*6ock 
3*««. jiul diuS+Z*  f*UJJ.  du,, tfhcÉ?  ' 
In Berlin lives  a young poet, Karl Grün,  of whom  I have these 
days read  a Buch  der  Wanderungen which  is very good.  But he is 
said to be  twenty-seven already,  and at  that  age he  should  be able 
to write better.  Now and  again  he has  very striking thoughts,  but 
often dreadful Hegelian phrases. What does this mean,  for 
a Further comes  the  following joking text:  "We,  Friedrich Engels, supreme poet 
in the  Bremen town-hall cellar  and  privileged boozer, announce  and  make known 
to all and  sundry, past, present, absent  and  future, that  you are all  asses, lazy 
creatures,  who are  wasting away from disgust with your  own  existence, scoundrels 
who don't write  to me, and so on, and so on.  Written  on our  office stool  at a  time 
when  we had no  hangover. Friedrich Engels." — Ed. 

=====第506页=====
484 Frederick Engels 
instance: "Sophocles is the highly moral Greece which lets its 
titanic outbursts break against the wall of absolute necessity. In 
Shakespeare the concept of absolute character made its appear­
ance."  a 
The night before last I had a great booze-up in the wine cellar 
on two bottles of beer and two and a half bottles of 1794 Rü-
desheimer. My prospective publisher and diverse philistines were 
with me. Specimen of an argument with one of these philistines 
on the Bremen constitution: I: In Bremen the opposition to the 
government is not of the right kind since it consists of the money 
aristocracy, the aldermen who oppose the aristocracy of rank, the 
Senate. He: You cannot really maintain that, can you? I: Why not? 
He: Prove your assertion. — That sort of thing passes for argu­
ment here! Oh, you philistines, go and learn Greek, and come 
again. Anyone that knows Greek also knows how to argue rite. I 
can argue six such fellows to death at once, even if I am 
half-seas over and they are sober. These people cannot follow a 
thought through to its necessary conclusions for three seconds, but 
everything goes in spasms; you only need let them speak for half 
an hour, throw in a few seemingly innocent questions, and they 
contradict themselves splendidamente. They are dreadfully stolid 
people, these philistines; I began to sing, but they resolved 
unanimously against me that they would eat first, and then sing. 
They stuffed themselves with oysters, while I went on angrily 
smoking, drinking and shouting without taking any notice of 
them, until I fell into a blissful slumber. I am now a large-scale 
importer of banned books into Prussia; Börne's Franzosenfresser in 
four copies, the Briefe aus Paris by the same, six volumes, 
Venedey's Preussen und Preussenthum, most strictly prohibited, in 
five copies, are lying ready for dispatch to Barmen. The last two 
volumes of the Briefe aus Paris I had not yet read; they are 
magnificent. King Otto of Greece is given a terrible going-over; 
thus he says on one occasion: 
"If I were God I would have great fun: I would let all the great Greeks rise 
again one night." b 
Then comes a very fine description of how these Hellenes 
walk about in Athens, Pericles, Aristotle and others. Then it 
is announced: King Otto has come. Everybody gets up, Dio-
a Buch der Wanderungen. Ostsee und Rhein, Cassel und Leipzig, 1839, S. XXV. 
(Grün's book was published under the pseudonym of Ernst von der Haide.) — Ed. 
L. Börne, Briefe aus Paris, Brief 89.— Ed. 

=====第507页=====
To Wilhelm Graeber, November 13-20, 1839 485 
genes trims his lamp, and all hurry to Piraeus. King Otto has 
landed and is making the following speech: 
"Hellenes, look up. The sky has taken on the Bavarian national colour." (This 
speech is really too good, I must copy it out in full.) "For in the most ancient 
times Greece belonged to Bavaria. The Pelasgians lived in the Odenwald, and 
Inachus was born in Landshut. I have come to make you happy. Your dem­
agogues, seditionists and journalists have brought your beautiful land to ruin. 
The fatal freedom of the press has thrown everything into confusion. Just see what 
the olive-trees look like. I would have come to you long ago, but I could not do so, 
for I have not yet been long in this  world.  Now you are a member of the Deutsche 
Bund;  my ministers will inform you of the latest decisions of the  Bund.  I shall know 
how to safeguard the rights of my crown and by and by make you happy. For my 
civil list" (salary of the king in a constitutional state) "you shall annually give 
me 6 million piastres, and I allow you to pay my debts." a 
The Greeks become confused, Diogenes shines his lamp in the 
king's face, and Hippocrates has ordered six cartloads of hellebore 
to be fetched, etc., etc. This whole ironical poem is a masterpiece 
of biting satire and written in a style that is divine. The reason 
why you like Börne less is because you are reading one of his 
weakest and earliest works, the Schilderungen aus Paris. The Drama­
turgische Blätter, the criticisms, the aphorisms, but above all the 
Briefe aus Paris and the marvellous Franzosenfresser stand infinitely 
higher. The description of the collection of paintings is very bor­
ing, there you are right. But the grace, the Herculean strength, 
the depth of feeling, the devastating wit of the Franzosenfresser 
are unsurpassable. I hope we shall meet at Easter or else in the 
autumn in Barmen, and then you shall get a better idea of 
this Börne. — What you write about Torstrick's duel is indeed 
different from his own version, but in any case he is the one 
who had the most unpleasantness from it. He is a good fel­
low, but he lives in extremes, now drunk, then a little pedantic. 
Continuation. If you are of the opinion that German literature 
has gradually fallen asleep, you are greatly mistaken. Don't think 
that because you hide your head from it like an ostrich and don't 
see it, it has ceased to exist. Au contraire, it is developing quite 
appreciably, as would be clear to you if you paid more attention to 
it and didn't live in Prussia, where the works of Gutzkow, etc., 
first require a special and rarely granted permission.— You are 
equally mistaken in thinking I should return to Christianity. Pro 
primo,  it is ridiculous to me that I no longer count with you as a 
Christian, and pro secundo, that you think anyone who for the sake 
of the Idea has stripped off what is fantastical in orthodoxy could 
a Ibid.— Fd. 

=====第508页=====
486 Frederick Engels 
submit to that strait jacket again. A true rationalist can perhaps do 
so by acknowledging that his natural explanation of miracles and 
his shallow moralising are insufficient; but mythicism and specula­
tion cannot again descend from their dawn-reddened snow-capped 
peaks into the misty valleys of orthodoxy.— For I am on the point 
of becoming a Hegelian. Whether I shall become one I don't, of 
course, know yet, but Strauss has lit up lights on Hegel for me 
which make the thing quite plausible to me. His (Hegel's) 
philosophy of history is anyway written as from my own heart. Do 
see that you get hold of Strauss' Charakteristiken und Kritiken, the 
essay on Schleiermacher and Daub is wonderful. 219 Nobody else 
writes so penetratingly, clearly and interestingly as Strauss. By the 
way, he is not at all infallible; even if his entire Leben Jesu should 
be discovered to be a collection of sheer sophistries, still the first 
thing that makes this work so important is its basic idea of the 
mythical in Christianity; and the discovery would not damage this 
idea, for it can always be applied anew to biblical history. And that 
he has not only conceived the idea but also carried it out with such 
undeniable excellence raises Strauss' merit still higher. A good 
exegetist may be able to convict him here and there of a mistake 
or of falling into extremes, just as Luther was in detail open to 
criticism; but that, of course, does not matter. If Tholuck has ever 
said anything good about Strauss a that is either a sheer accident or 
an apt reminiscence; Tholuck's scholarliness is too diffuse and 
with that he is merely receptive, not even critical, much less 
productive. The good ideas Tholuck has had can easily be 
counted, and he himself destroyed any belief in the scientific 
character of his polemics as far back as ten years ago by his 
controversy with Wegscheider and Gesenius. Tholuck's scientific 
effect has in no way been lasting, and his time is long past. 
Hengstenberg did at least once have an original, even if absurd 
thought: that of the prophetic perspective.— It is incomprehensi­
ble to me that you care for nothing that goes beyond Hengsten­
berg and Neander. With all due respect for Neander, he is not 
scientific. Instead of setting intellect and reason solidly to work in 
his writings, even if at some point he should come into opposition to 
the Bible, whenever he fears that might happen he lets science take 
care of itself and comes out with empiricism or pious sentiment. 
He is much too pious and amiable to be able to oppose Strauss. Pre­
cisely by these pious outbursts in which his Leben Jesu abounds 
he blunts the point even of his genuinely scientific arguments. 
A. Tholuck, Die Glaubwürdigkeit der evangelischen Geschichte. —Ed. 

=====第509页=====
To Friedrich Graeber, December 9, 1839-February 5, 1840 487 
A propos—a few days ago I read in the paper that Hegelian 
philosophy has been banned in Prussia, that a famous Hegelian 
lecturer in Halle has been induced by a ministerial rescript to 
suspend his lectures and that it has been intimated to several 
junior Halle lecturers of the same colour (presumably Ruge, etc.) 
that they cannot expect appointments. It is said that by this same 
rescript the definitive ban on the Berlin Jahrbücher für wis­
senschaftliche Kritik has been decided. I have not yet heard 
anything further. I cannot believe even the Prussian Government 
capable of such an unheard-of act of violence, although Börne 
prophesied it as long as five years ago, and Hengstenberg, an 
intimate friend of the Crown Prince, 3 as well as Neander, is said to 
be a declared enemy of the Hegelian school. If you hear anything 
of the business, write to me about it. Now I'll study Hegel over a 
glass of punch. Adios. Expecting a letter from you soon, 
Friedrich Engels 
First published in part in Die neue Printed according to the original 
Rundschau, 10. Heft, 1913, and in full in _ ... , , . _ ,. . t .._ (- „, 
, , , _ _ , „ . .,' . _ -, .. Published m English tor the nrst 
the book: F. Engels,  Schriften  der Fruhzeit,  . ° 
Berlin, 1920 tUne 
29 
TO FRIEDRICH GRAEBER 
IN BERLIN 
[Bremen, December 9, 1839-February 5, 1840] 
December 9. 
My dear fellow, your letter has just arrived; it is amazing how 
long one has to wait for you people. Nothing has been heard from 
Berlin since your and Heuser's letter from Elberfeld. One ought 
to give oneself up to the devil if only his existence were proved. 
But you have now arrived and that is good. 
Imitating you, I leave theology to the last as a worthy crowning 
to the pyramid of my fetter. I busy myself very much with literary 
work; since I received Gutzkow's assurance that my contributions 
are welcome I have sent him an essay on K. Beckb; then I am 
composing a lot of verses, which, however, badly need polishing 
a The future King Frederick William IV.— Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 41-46.— Ed. 

=====第510页=====
488 Frederick Engels 
up, and also writing prose pieces to practise my style. The day 
before yesterday I wrote "Eine Bremer Liebesgeschichte", yester­
day "Die Juden in Bremen"; tomorrow I think I shall write "Die 
junge Literatur in Bremen", "Der Jüngste" 3 (namely, the office 
boy) or something else of the kind. In a fortnight, if one is in the 
mood, one can thus easily scribble up to five sheets, then one 
polishes up the style, puts in verses here and there for variety, and 
publishes it as Bremer Abende. My prospective publisher came to 
see me yesterday; I read him Odysseys Redivivus, 220 which delighted 
him exceedingly; he will take the first novel from my factory and 
yesterday wanted desperately to have a small volume of poems. 
But unfortunately there aren't enough of them, and — the censor­
ship!  Who would pass Odysseys? Incidentally, I don't allow the 
censorship to keep me from writing freely; let them cross out as 
much as they like afterwards, I don't commit infanticide on my 
own thoughts. Such censorship cuts are always disagreeable, but 
also honourable; an author who reaches the age of thirty or writes 
three books without cuts by the censor is not worth anything. 
Scarred warriors are the best. You must be able to tell by looking 
at a book that it has come out of a battle with the censor. By the 
way, the Hamburg censorship is liberal; in my last Telegraph essay 
on the German Volksbücher there are several pieces of very bitter 
sarcasm about the Bundestag and the Prussian censorship, but not 
a letter has been crossed out. 
December 11. Oh, Fritz! For years I have not been so lazy as I am 
at this moment. Ha! it is beginning to dawn on me what I 
need—I must visit the tertium locum. 
December 12. Really, what asses — I meant 
to say what good people — the Bremen people 
are! In this present weather the streets are 
terribly slippery, and they have strewn sand 
in front of the town-hall cellar so that the 
drunks will not fall. 
The fellow on the side here suffers from 
world-weariness, he visited H. Heine in Paris 
and caught it from him; then he went to 
Theodor Mundt and learnt certain phrases 
indispensable for world-wearinessing. Since then he has become 
visibly thinner and is going to write a book on world-weariness as 
the only sure remedy against corpulence. 
a "A Bremen Love Story", "The Jews in Bremen", "Young Literature in 
Bremen", "The Youngest".— Ed. 
bSee this volume, pp. 32-40.— Ed. 

=====第511页=====
To Friedrich Graeber, December 9, 1839-February 5, 1840 489 
January 20 [1840]. I did not want to write to you until it was 
certain whether I shall stay here or go away. Now at last I can tell 
you that for the time being I shall stay here. 
21st. I admit that I am not very keen to continue the theological 
debate. One misunderstands one another and by the time one 
replies, one has long since forgotten one's ipsissima verba which are 
the point at issue, and so no purpose is achieved. A thorough 
discussion of the matter would require much more space, and it 
often happens to me that I cannot endorse in a subsequent letter 
things I said in an earlier one because they belonged so very much 
to the category of preconception of which I have freed myself in 
the meantime. Through Strauss I have now entered on the 
straight road to Hegelianism. Of course, I shall not become such 
an inveterate Hegelian as Hinrichs and others, but I must 
nevertheless absorb important things from this colossal system. 
The Hegelian idea of God has already become mine, and thus I 
am joining the ranks of the "modern pantheists", as Leo and 
Hengstenberg say, knowing well that even the word pantheism 
arouses such colossal revulsion on the part of pastors who don't 
think. Thus today at midday I was highly amused by a long 
sermon in the Evangelische Kirchen-Zeitung against Märklin's piet­
ism. 221 The good Kirchen-Zeitung not only finds it most peculiar 
that it is counted among the pietists, but finds also other curious 
things. Modern pantheism, i.e., Hegel, apart from the fact that it 
is already found among the Chinese and Parsees, is perfectly 
expressed in the sect of the Libertines, which was attacked by 
Calvin. 222 This discovery is really rather too original. But still more 
original is its development. It is already very difficult to recognise 
Hegel in what the Kirchen-Zeitung passes off as his views, and that 
again has a very far-fetched similarity with a most vaguely 
expressed proposition of Calvin's on the Libertines. The proof was 
enormously amusing. The Bremer Kirchenbote puts it even better 
and says that Hegel denies the truth of history! It's stupendous 
what nonsense sometimes comes out when somebody labours to 
make out that a philosophy which stands in his way and which he 
can no longer get round, is un-Christian. People who know Hegel 
only by name and have only read the notes in Leo's Hegelingen 
want to overthrow a system which, being cast in a single mould, 
needs no clamps to hold it together.— This letter is presided 
over by an eminently unlucky star. God knows, I no sooner get 
down to it than the devil is let loose. I am always given office 
work. 
17-384 

=====第512页=====
490 Frederick Engels 
These are two puppets which are so stiff contrary to my will. 
Otherwise they would be men. 
Have you read Strauss' Charakteristiken und Kritiken? See that 
you get it, the essays in it are all excellent. The one on 
Schleiermacher and Daub is a masterpiece. From the essays on the 
Württemberg demoniacs an enormous amount of psychology can 
be learnt. 223 Equally interesting are the other theological and 
aesthetic essays.— In addition I am studying Hegel's Ge­
schichtsphilosophie* an enormous work; I read out of it dutifully 
every evening, the tremendous thoughts grip me terribly.— Re­
cently Tholuck's old gossip sheet, the Literarische Anzeiger, fatu­
ously raised the question why "modern pantheism" had no lyric 
poetry, though the ancient Persian, etc., had. 224 The Literarische 
Anzeiger can just wait until I and certain other people have got to 
the bottom of this pantheism, the lyric poetry will come all right. 
It is very fine, by the way, that the Literarische Anzeiger accepts 
Daub and condemns speculative philosophy. As if Daub did not 
also adhere to Hegel's principle that humanity and divinity are in 
essence identical. There you have this dreadful superficiality; 
whether Strauss and Daub agree in principle they care little, but 
that Strauss does not believe in the marriage at Cana 22S while 
Daub does, suffices for them to elevate one into heaven and 
declare the other a candidate for hell. Oswald Marbach, the 
a G. F. W. Hegel, Vorlesungen über die Philosophie der Geschichte, Berlin, 
1837.—  Ed. 

=====第513页=====
To Friedrich Graeber, December 9, 1839-February 5, 1840 491 
Volksbücher publisher, is the most confused of men, but especially 
(cum—turn) of the Hegelians. How a pupil of Hegel can say, 
Heaven is also here on Earth. I can 
Distinctly feel the God in me becoming Man, 
is to me utterly incomprehensible, since Hegel distinguished the 
totality very sharply from the incomplete individual.— Nobody has 
done Hegel more harm than his pupils; only a few of them, like 
Gans,  Rosenkranz, Rüge and others, were worthy of him. But an 
Oswald Marbach is truly the non plus ultra of all misunderstanders; 
such a godly fellow! — The Rev. Pastor Mallet, in the Bremer Kir­
chenbote, has declared Hegel's system to be "loose talk". 226 That 
would be serious, for if these blocks, these granite thoughts, fell 
apart, a single fragment of this Cyclopean building could kill not 
merely Pastor Mallet but all Bremen. If, for example, the thought 
that world history is the development of the concept of freedom 
were to fall with all its weight on the neck of a Bremen 
pastor — what sort of sigh would he give? 
February 1. Today this letter must go off, come what may. 
The Russians are beginning to become naive; 
they claim that the war against the Circassians 
has not yet cost as many human lives as one of 
Napoleon's lesser battles. I should not have 
credited a barbarian like Nicholas with such 
naivety. 
The Berliners, I hear, are terribly furious 
S^with  me. I have belittled Tholuck and Neander 
to them and I have not put Ranke among the 
superos, and that has made them mad. In 
Let him tell you addition i have  writt en to Heuser divinely 
his life story himself ., , ' 
extravagant stuft about Beethoven.— I have 
read a very pretty comedy, Weh dem, der lügt!* by Grillparzer in 
Vienna, which is a long way above the present common run of 
comedies. There shines through it now and then a free noble 
spirit to which the Austrian censorship is an intolerable burden. 
One can see how much trouble it cost the author to draw an 
aristocratic nobleman in such a fashion that the noble censor raises 
no objection. O tempores, o moria, Donner und Doria, b today the fifth 
of February is here and it's a scandal that I am so lazy, but I 
a Woe to him who  lies!  — Ed. 
b The well-
German.— Ed. The well-known Latin O tempora, o mores is here distorted to rhyme with the 
17* 

=====第514页=====
492 Frederick Engels 
cannot help it,a  God knows, I am doing nothing now. I have 
started several essays but they are not progressing, and whenever I 
want to write verses in the evening I have always eaten so much 
that I can't prevent myself from falling asleep. — This summer I 
terribly want to make a journey into the Danish country, Holstein, 
Jutland, Zealand, Rügen. I must see that my Old Man sends my 
brother b here, then I'll take him with me. I have an enormous long­
ing for the sea, and what an interesting travel journal I could 
make of it; then it could be published with a few poems. We are 
having such divine weather now, and I can't go out, I want to so 
terribly, it's bad luck. 
This is a fat sugar broker who is just 
leaving the house and whose standing 
phrase is "In my opinion". When he has _, 
spoken to somebody at the stock exchange -/y.[^f 9M y 
and is going away, he invariably says: "You j*£ I "\ 
fare well!" His name is Joh. H. Bergmann. 
There are touching people here. So I'll immediately draw you 
another picture from life: 
This old fellow is drunk every morning 
and he then steps in front of his door and 
shouts, thumping his chest: "Ick bin Bor­
ger" , i.e., I thank Thee, God, that I am not 
like these Hanoverians, Oldenburgers, or 
worse, Frenchmen, but a Bremen Borger 
tagen bâren Bremer  Kind! c 
The expression on the faces of the local 
old women of all classes is really horrid. In 
particular the one on the right with the snub 
nose is genuine Bremen. 
The speech of Bishop Eylert 
at the festival of the Order227 
has one great merit: now we 
know what to think of the 
Kingd and his perjury is offi­
cial. The same king who in 
A. D. 1815, when he was 
feeling afraid, promised his subjects in a cabinet decree that if 
a "But I cannot help it" is written in English in the original.— Ed. 
b Hermann Engels. — Ed. 
c A burgher of Bremen, a true-born child of Bremen.— Ed. 
d Frederick William III.— Ed. 

=====第515页=====
To Friedrich Graeber, December 9, 1839-February 5, 1840 493 
they got him out of the mess they should have a constitution, this 
same shabby, rotten, goddamned king now has it announced thro­
ugh Eylert that nobody is going to get a constitution from him, 
for "All for one and one for all is Prussia's principle of govern­
ment" and "No one puts old cloth on a new garment". Do you 
know why Rotteck's fourth volume3 is banned in Prussia? Because 
it says that in 1814 our majestic snotnose of Berlin recognised the 
Spanish constitution of 1812 and yet in 1823 sent the French into 
Spain to do away with that constitution and bring back to the Spa­
niards the noble gift of the Inquisition and torture.228 In 1826 Ri-
poll was burnt at Valencia on instructions from the Inquisition, 
and his blood and that of 23,000 noble Spaniards who languished 
to death in prison for their liberal and heretic views is on the con­
science of Frederick William III """the Just""" of Prussia. I hate 
him, and besides him I hate only perhaps two or three others; 
I hate him with a mortal hatred, and if I didn't so despise him, 
the shit, I would hate him still more. Napoleon was an angel com­
pared with him, the King of Hanoverb is a god if our King is a 
man. There never was a time richer in royal crimes than that of 
1816-30; almost every prince then ruling deserved the death pe­
nalty. The pious Charles X, the vicious Ferdinand VII of Spain, 
Francis of Austria, that machine that was only good for signing 
death sentences and dreaming of Carbonari229 ; Dom Miguel, who 
is a greater scoundrel than all the heroes of the French Revolu­
tion taken together, and whom nevertheless Prussia, Russia and 
Austria gladly recognised when he bathed in the blood of the best 
Portuguese, and the parricide Alexander of Russia, as also his 
worthy brother Nicholas on whose abominable deeds it would be 
superfluous to waste another word — oh, I could tell you killing 
stories about how the princes love their subjects—I expect any­
thing good only of that prince whose ears are boxed right and 
left by his people and whose palace windows are smashed by the 
flying stones of the revolution. Farewell. 
Yours, 
Friedrich Engels 
First published in part in Die neue Printed according to the original 
Rundschau, 10. Heft, Berlin, 1913 and in Published  in  Eng iish  for  the first 
full in the book: F. Engels, Schriften der • ° 
Frühzeit, Berlin, 1920 
a C. Rotteck, Allgemeine Weltgeschichte für alle Stände....— Ed. 
b Ernst August. — Ed. 

=====第516页=====
1840 
30 
TO LEVIN SCHÜCKING 
IN MÜNSTER 
Bremen, June 18, 1840 
Dear Herr Schücking, 
Once again my warmest thanks for your kindly reception and 
for the beautiful souvenir from Münster 230! I read it through in 
Osnabrück at one sitting with great enjoyment, and I envy the 
poet 3 for her original and tender images of nature, the many 
hidden splendours, the kinship with Byron, which you also, if I am 
not mistaken, stressed in your review.231 It is a shame that these 
poems should have come and gone without making any impres­
sion; but what does this depth of feeling mean to the shallow 
reading public of our days? At the first opportunity I shall 
publicly do justice to the book.b —Where is there a more beautiful 
ballad of its kind than Der Graf von Thai} 
Now concerning our Shelley-plan,232  I had a talk with 
Schünemann straight away yesterday; at the mention of the fee 
of ten talers he shrank back as if struck by lightning and said at 
once he could not take it on. He is just back from the Fair where 
he himself inspected his masses of unsold books of every kind, 
pietistic novels, descriptions from Belgium, Spanish readers and 
other rubbish; in addition, he was foolish enough to make 
contracts in Leipzig for works on theology and on world and 
literary history at a low fee, so that he has his hands full. These 
stupid bookseller people believe they risk less on a commentary on 
the epistles of John, which costs perhaps two talers in fees and is 
badly produced, and will perhaps be bought by 20 students at 
most, than on Shelley, for which production and fees may cost 
a Annette Elisabeth Freiin von Droste-Hülshöff. — Ed. 
b See this volume, p.  101.—  Ed. 

=====第517页=====
To Levin Schücking, June 18, 1840 495 
relatively three times as much, but in which the whole nation will 
take an interest. Just now I was with Schünemann again to hear 
from his own mouth the final statement that on these conditions 
he cannot take it on; one sheet of poems, he said, contains only a 
quarter as much as a sheet of prose, so that the fee for a sheet 
would really come to 40 talers. I told him it was not child's play to 
translate Shelley, and if he did not want it then he should leave it 
alone, for heaven's sake; and that by the way he was standing in 
his own light. He: If only we would first give him a small 
specimen, he would print it, and then one could see what could be 
done. I: Schücking and Püttmann are not the people to agree to 
give specimens, and what specimens do for other people, their 
names do for them. Will you or won't you? He: Not on these 
conditions.— Muy bien; to beg was beneath our dignity, so I 
left.—  1 am now of the opinion that this failure should by no 
means discourage us; if one will not do it, another will. Püttmann, 
who translated the first canto of Queen Mab, has sent it to 
Engelmann in Leipzig, and if he accepts, it will be easy to get him 
to take on the whole thing. Otherwise Hammerich in Altona and 
Krabbe in Stuttgart would perhaps be the ones we should 
approach first. But just now, immediately after the Easter Fair, is 
a very unfavourable moment for making our offers. If it were 
January I am sure Schünemann would have grabbed it with both 
hands.  I want to go to him once more and ask him for a joke what 
kind of conditions he can offer us. 
Friend Schünemann evaded my visits by flight; he is on an 
outing to the country. He would probably have offered five talers 
a sheet and asked, as he always loves to do, for a little specimen of 
three to four sheets in advance. The whole thing is the fault of 
none other than the pietist Wilh. Elias of Halle, on whose novel 
Glauben und Wissen, published by Schünemann, the latter loses 
about 2,000 talers. If I catch the fellow I'll challenge him to 
scimitars. 
What do you say to all this? I shall write to Püttmann straight 
away today. I think it is too good a project simply to drop it. Any 
bookseller with a smattering of education (Schünemann is a 
blockhead) will take on the publication with pleasure. 
I am eagerly looking forward to hearing your opinion on the 
matter, and in the meantime commend myself to your friendly 
goodwill. 
Respectfully, 
Friedrich Engels 

=====第518页=====
496 Frederick Engels 
What do you say to Gutzkow's challenge to the Hallische 
Jahrbücher in the Telegraph} 233 Gutzkow seems to want to renew 
Menzel's and Milliner's critical terrorism; let him take care that the 
younger ones do not outgrow him! 
First published in the Wissenschaftliche 
Zeitschrift der Friedrich Schüler-Universität, 
Jena, Jg. 7, Heft 4, 1957-58 
31 
TO LEVIN SCHÜCKING 
IN MÜNSTER 
My dear Friend, 
Your kind lines of the 22nd of last month reached me 
unfortunately only on the 26th, which was very disagreeable to me 
since the previous evening, asked by a local bookseller of whom I 
made inquiries about reasonable publishers, I had written to 
Hammerich in Altona and offered him the publication of the 
Shelley." So I received his reply only today, which was a rejection, 
since he says he is overwhelmed with publishing work. 
As concerns G. C. A. Meyer senior, I am of the opinion that we 
should let him go in any case. Firstly, the fellow and his factory 
workers (Brinckmeier, Bärmann and Co.) are too common; sec­
ondly, Püttmann would never consent to write for his publishing 
house; thirdly, Meyer pays terribly low fees, and fourthly, we 
would get involved in a horrible mass of demand notes and other 
vexations to rake in the fees. I am at the moment myself having to 
send him demand notes for the fee for my articles in the 
Mitternachtzeitung, b which he does not want to fork out; and 
although in this case there is the middleman Brinckmeier between 
us, I could on no account make the offer. I am unfortunately still 
without a reply from Püttmann and hence cannot take any 
energetic steps. Moreover, Meyer will already have distributed 
a See this volume, p,  495.—  Ed. 
"Modern Literary Life. I. Karl Gutzkow as Dramatist. II. Modern Polemics". 
See this volume, pp.  71-93.—  Ed. Printed according to the facsimile 
of the original reproduced in the 
journal 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第519页=====
To Levin Schücking, July 2, 1840 497 
everything to his subordinates and will not be able to let us have 
anything from Shelley. These publishers are used to having the 
pens in their service absolutely at then disposal, and which of us 
would put up with that? 
I think the best is to give Püttmann, who in this respect is 
probably the most experienced among us, unrestricted authority to 
enter into a contract; he will no doubt carry the matter through 
to the satisfaction of us all and at all events with greater ease 
than I could. Moreover, he has already offered Queen Mab to 
W. Engelmann, who would be the right publisher for us. And one 
thing is of great importance here: you, like me, have so far written 
only for journals; Püttmann, on the other hand, has already had 
one work printed and another announced. 234 The infamous 
publishers pay attention to this kind of thing. 
When your letter arrived, Schünemann had just started on a 
journey from which he is not yet back. I shall make him accept 
Coleridge, at any rate 235; in a champagne fog at the Gutenberg 
festival, which was celebrated here with splendour, I drank 
brotherhood with him, by which he felt much honoured. If you 
have the manuscript so far ready, please send it to me. 
The spiteful abuse of the Hallische Jahrbücher is in No. 97 or 98 
of the Telegraph,* which reaches us by post and therefore much 
earlier than it can you. I have again sent Gutzkow something and 
am curious to see how he receives it after the article in the 
Mitternachtzeitung ("Moderne Polemik"). 236 
From Barmen I have just received a letter which incomprehensi­
bly contains nothing about Püttmann. If you agree to Püttmann 
looking after the publishing side, I shall write to him immediately 
I hear from you and pass everything on to him. Also, please tell 
me how matters stand with the fee from the Rheinisches Jahrbuch; 
in a few days I shall send something to Freiligrath. In this case I 
don't care so much about the money, but I would like to know in 
advance how I stand. 
Your translation of Shelley and Coleridge in Pfizer's Blätter h I 
have read with pleasure 237; today I shall finish Shelley's Sensitive 
Plant and shall send it also to him. This splendid poem is written 
in a spirit which is still more akin than Byron to Droste's works. 
These continue to give me great pleasure and I thank you for 
them once more. 
a See this volume, p. 496.— Ed. 
Blätter zur Kunde der Literatur des Auslands, — Ed. 

=====第520页=====
498 Frederick Engels 
With the assurance of my sincere respect I commend myself to 
your kind remembrance. 
Yours most truly, 
Fr. Engels Bremen, 2/7.40 6 
First published in the Wissenschaftliche Printed according to the original 
Zeitschrift derFrkdrich Schiller-Universität, pushed in English for the first 
Jena, Jg. 5, Heft 4-5, 1955-56 üme  6 
32 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
IN MANNHEIM" 
Dear Marie, 
Things will soon be too bad with you; you were going to 
write to me as soon as you arrived in Mannheim, and now I have 
been sitting here three weeks already and still no letter from you. 
If that goes on I shall have to make up my mind to write di­
rect to Fräulein Jung so that you will be more or less made to 
prove.your sisterly love for me. 
I hope you are having better weather than we are, nothing 
but storm and rain, as in September and November. At sea ships 
are going down like flies which drop into a glass of water, and 
the Norderney steamer was barely able to get there. The day 
before yesterday I was in Bremerhaven, 11 and there also it rained 
all morning. I was on the ships which take emigrants to America; 
they lie all together in the steerage, which is a large space as 
wide and long as the whole ship, the berths (that is what the 
beds are called) in sets of six side by side, and above them 
another six. There they all lie, men, women and children, and 
how horrible this stuffy place is, where there are often 200 peo­
ple lying, especially during the first days of seasickness, you can 
well imagine. The air is in any case suffocating. Cabin passengers 
are better off, however, they have more room and a very elegant­
ly furnished cabin. But when a storm breaks and the waves 
come over the ship, they are worse off; for the cabin has a 
glass skylight through which the light comes in; and when it is 
a The back of the letter bears the inscription: "Fräulein Marie Engels im 
grossherzoglichen Institut, frei. Mannheim." — Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 112-20.— Ed. 

=====第521页=====
To Marie Engels, July 7-9, 1840 499 
hit by a heavy wave, the glass comes ringing most politely into 
the cabin and the water after it. Then the whole cabin gen­
erally gets full of water, but the beds are so high that they 
remain dry. Just as we were leaving again at midday a great 
three-master called Marie, like you, and coming from the island 
of Cuba, sailed into the roads. Because of the low tide it could not 
enter the port and anchored in the roads. We went close to it in 
our steamer, and took off the captain; but there were already 
beginning to be waves in the roads, and the ship pitched a little. 
At once all the ladies grew pale and made faces as if they were 
going to be drowned; we had a couple of pretty tailor's daughters 
on board to whom we behaved extremely gallantly, and with the 
straightest face in the world I made the geese believe the rolling 
and pitching would go on as far as Brake, which we were to reach 
only in an hour and a  half.  Unfortunately, however, it stopped 
again directly after Bremerhaven. Three unripe hats blew off into 
the water and were probably carried away to America, as well as a 
whole lot of empty wine and beer bottles. Apart from that I did 
not see much that was remarkable except a dead cat in the Weser 
which was making a voyage to the United States all on its own. I 
spoke to it, but it was rude enough not to reply. 
Here you have a hasty sketch of Bremerhaven. On the left is the 
fort which guards the harbour, an old brick-built thing which the 
wind will soon blow over; next the locks through which ships are 
let into the harbour, which is a long narrow canal a little wider 
than the Wupper; behind that is the town, and farther to the right 
the Geest, a kind of river, and the church spire above it in the air, 
that is the church which has yet to be built. On the right in the 
distance is Geestendorf. 
A few days ago I made the acquaintance of a man whose father 
is a Frenchman born in America, his mother a German, he himself 
was born at sea and his native tongue, since he lives in Mexico, is 
Spanish. So what is his Fatherland? 
We now have a complete stock of beer in the office; under the 
table, behind the stove, behind the cupboard, everywhere are beer 

=====第522页=====
500 Frederick Engels 
bottles, and when the Old Mana is thirsty he borrows one and has 
it filled up again for us later. That is now done quite openly, the 
glasses stand on the table all day and a bottle nearby. In the 
right-hand corner are the empty bottles, in the left the full ones, 
next to them my cigars. It is really true, Marie, the young people 
are getting worse and worse every day, as Dr. Hantschke says; who 
would have thought 20 or 30 years ago of such terrible wickedness 
as drinking beer in the office? 
What is most convenient for you, shall I pay the postage for our 
correspondence and frank my letters and also pay for yours, 
which you will then send unf ranked? If you have already written 
before this letter arrives, I shall not write to you again until you 
write me a sensible, long letter in reply to this one. 
Adieu. 
With true love, 
Your brother 
Friedrich Bremen, July 7, 40 
Fortunately, this letter has again been left lying around and thus 
gives me the opportunity to reply to your letter, which has just 
arrived. "I wish I too could play as well as she does! If I practise 
very hard, I shall get that far too?" You? Play a sonata of 20 
pages? Goose that you are! Schornstein would, of course, be 
pleased. What wishes have I for Christmas? I have lost my cigar 
case,  and if I don't find it soon, can you make a new one for me? 
Thank Adab for her greetings and greet her heartily from me; tell 
her she is the first to call me amiable, and I am not at all a cousin, 
but at most her very respectful kinsman. — When you write again, 
don't address the letter to Treviranus, as I then get it later, but to 
F. E., Bremen, Martini No. 11. Then it will be brought to me in 
the office. 
Farewell.0 
Yours, Friedrich Bremen, July 9, 1840 
First published in: Marx/Engels, Gesamt- Printed according to the original 
ausgäbe, Abt. l, Bd. 2, 1930 Published in English for the first 
time 
Heinrich Leupold.— Ed. 
Adeline Engels. — Ed. 
Written in English in the original.— Ed. 

=====第523页=====
To Marie Engels, August 4, 1840 501 
33 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
IN MANNHEIM" 
Dear Marie, 
Now I must tell you at once that for the future I shall not stand 
for any lessons from your pen. You must not think, my dearest 
little goose, that now you are at a boarding-school you can at once 
try to be wise and, besides, if I want any, I can get piles of books 
full of good instructions from the Pastor.b The beer stays in our 
office until it has been drunk, and since your arguing against it 
our beer trade has only improved, for we have firstly brown ale 
and secondly pale ale. That's what comes of saucy little board­
ing-school misses interfering in the affairs of their gentlemen 
brothers. 
So I shall not frank my letters. Only address yours: Herr F. E. 
in Bremen, that is enough. But leave the parson out of the 
address. Recently, from July 27th to 30th, we celebrated the July 
revolution which broke out ten years ago in Paris; we spent one 
evening in the town-hall cellar and the others in Richard Roth's 
tavern. The fellow is still not back. There we drank the finest 
Laubenheimer in the world and smoked cigars — if you had seen 
them you would have learnt to smoke just for their sake. My cigar 
case has still not turned up again. Also, an acquaintance of mine 0 
has come back, who has been in Pinselfahnien and Kaltermoria 
and has seen Mister Sippi (this should read Pennsylvania, Balti­
more and Mississippi). This fellow is from Solingen, and the 
Solingen people are the most unfortunate in the world, for they 
cannot get rid of their Solingen German. The lad still says: im 
Sohmer is es sehr schön Wätter, d and for Karoline he always says 
Kalinah. 
It is sad, I have barely a groat left in my pocket and a mass of 
debts,  both my own and cigar-shop debts. Now I am being 
pestered by the man from whom I bought plums for you, which I 
have not yet paid for, and the bookbinder has not been paid yet, 
a The back of the letter bears the inscription: "Fräulein Marie Engels im 
grossherzoglichen Institut zu Mannheim." —Ed. 
b Georg Gottfried Treviranus. — Ed. 
c Höller.— Ed. 
Dialectal pronunciation of im Sommer ist es sehr  schönes  Wetter (in summer the 
weather is very fine).— Ed. 

=====第524页=====
502 Frederick Engels 
then the three months after which I had to pay for the cigars I 
bought have long gone by, and Striicker does not send bills of 
exchange, and the Pastor is away travelling and cannot give me 
any money. But tomorrow he will be back, and then I shall put six 
louis d'or in my purse, and when I have eaten three groats' worth 
of cake in a coffee-house I shall throw a double pistole on the 
counter: "Can you give me change?" And then he will say, 
"Unfortunately not", then I shall turn out all my pockets for the 
three groats and go out of the door proud of my double pistoles. 
When I am back in the office I shall toss a pistole on the 
ginger-headed junior's desk: "Derkhiem, see if you can get 
change", and the fellow will be extremely happy, for- it gives him 
an opportunity to stay away from the office for an hour and to 
lounge around, which innocent pleasure he likes very much. For 
small change is very scarce here, and anyone who has five talers' 
worth of change in his pocket is vastly content. 
Recently, a pricelessly funny incident occurred here. In the 
paper there was an advertisement for a cook. A sturdy girl comes 
into the editorial office and saysa : "Hört Se mol, do hebb' ick in der 
Zeitung lesen, dat se 'ne Köksche sökt." b "Jowol,"c  says the clerk. "Wat 
mot de wol können?" d asks the girl. "Jo, de mot Kloveer speelen un 
danzen un Französch, un singen, un neien un  sticken  — dat mot se all 
können."' e "Donnerstag," says the girl, "dat kann eck nit." f But when 
she sees the whole office laughing, she asks: "Se wêt mek wol torn 
besten hebben? Donnerslag, ick lote mi nich mokeeren!" g And with that 
she goes for the clerk and wants to give him a good hiding; of 
course, she was gently put outside the door. The other day the 
Old Manh  threw a driver out of the door. The fellow wanted 
Prussian gold and would not take louis d'or at the rate of 5 5/12 
talers.  We were having a row with him, when the Old Man came 
in: "What is going on here, confound it", and took the fellow by 
the chest and threw him in the gutter. Thereupon the driver came 
a The following conversation is in Low German.— Ed. 
"Listen, I have read in the paper that you are looking for a cook." — Ed. 
c "Yes, indeed."—Ed. 
"What must she be able to do?"— Ed. 
"Well, she must play the piano and dance and speak French, and sing, and 
sew, and embroider — she must be able to do all  that."—Ed. 
1 "Blast it, I can't do  that."—Ed. 
"Are you trying to make a fool of me? I don't let people make fun of me, 
blast it!"— Ed. 
Heinrich Leupold.— Ed. 

=====第525页=====
To Marie Engels, August 20-25, 1840 503 
quietly back and said: "So wer et nich meent, jetz will eck de Lujedor 
woll nehmen." a 
At the moment I have no envelope for my letter except this 
scribbled-over coffee bill, which will surely be welcome to you as a 
true coffee-sister. 
Farewellb and write soon 
to your brother 
Friedrich 
Bremen, Aug. 4, 40 
First published slightly abridged in the Printed according to the original 
Deutsche Revue, Stuttgart and Leipzig, Bd. 
4, 1920, and in full in: Marx/Engels, Published in English for the first 
Gesamtausgabe, Abt. 1, Bd. 2, 1930 nme 
34 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
IN MANNHEIM 
My very dear Soeur, 
I have just received your letter, and since I have nothing to do 
at the moment, I shall scribble you a few lines. Our office has 
been considerably improved. Up to now it was always very 
annoying to have to dash straight to the desk from a meal, when 
you are so dreadfully lazy, and to remedy this we have fixed up 
two very fine hammocks in the packing-house loft and there we 
swing after we have eaten, smoking a cigar, and sometimes having 
a little doze. I am convinced you will find this arrangement most 
suitable. Today I also had a letter from Roth, he will be back next 
Sunday [after] an absence of 4 months. So that you know: 1,700 
marks banco at 137 per cent are 776 talers 24 groats louis d'or. I 
have checked it, it is quite correct. Herewith an engraving. 
a "I did not mean it like that, I will take the louis d'or now all 
right."—Ed. 
b Written in English in the original.— Ed. 

=====第526页=====
504 Frederick Engels 
An old connoisseur of wines who has been given sour wine to 
drink. The one next to him is the commercial traveller from 
whom he bought the sour wine. I will also draw you a picture of 
the hair style for young gentlemen here: 
The fellows look like calves 
Confound it! When I had written this I went home to eat, and 
when I came back I lit a cigar to lie down in the hammock. But it 
immediately broke down under me and when I went to hammer 
new nails in, the infamous Derkhiem called me, and now I can't 
get away from the office again. 
Thank God, I did have my siesta after all. I stole out of the 
office and took cigars and matches with me and ordered beer; 
then I went to the upper packing-house loft and lay down in the 
hammock and swung very gently. Then I went to the middle 
packing-house loft and packed two cases of platillas, and at the 

=====第527页=====
To Marie Engels, August 20-25, 1840 505 
same time I consumed a cigar and a bottle of beer and sweated 
profusely, for it is so warm today that in spite of barely having got 
rid of a cold I want to go swimming in the Weser again. The other 
day I bathed and had a fellow row after me, and thus I swam four 
times across the Weser in one go, which no one in Bremen will so 
easily imitate. 
Confound it! For two reasons: first, it is raining, second, my 
amiable young principal3  simply will not leave the office, and so I 
must let my cigar go out again. But I will chase him away all right. 
Do you know how I do it? I go into the kitchen and call out very 
loud: "Kristine, a cork-screw!" Then I open a bottle of beer and 
pour out a glass for  myself.  If then he has but half a groat's worth 
of honour in him, he must go out, for that means as much as "Be 
off, Don Guillermo!" 
So you now speak English so splendidly? Just wait, when you 
come home again I will teach you Danish or Spanish so that you 
can speak with me in a language the others don't understand. 
Danske Sprag fagre Sprag, y el Espanol es lengua muy hermosa. b Or 
would you prefer Portuguese? 
O portugues he huma lengoa 
muito graçosa, e os Portuguezes 
saô naçaô muito respeitavel. c 
But since you have not yet 
got so far I will spare you 
that. 
Here you can see my ham­
mock, containing myself smok­
ing a cigar. 
I have just heard that an­
other 500 cases of sugar, 
that is, 250,000 lbs., have 
been sold. That can sweeten 
many a cup of coffee. Who knows whether the sugar in your cup 
won't come from the same case from which I had to take samples! 
But all your sugar on the Rhine comes from Holland, where it is 
made from lumps, lumps of sugar, not of cotton-rag. 
Soon there will be big manoeuvres in Falkenberg, 3 hours from 
a Wilhelm Leupold.— Ed. 
Danish is a charming language, and Spanish is a most beautiful lan­
guage.— Ed. 
c Portuguese is a most graceful language, and the Portuguese are a most 
respectable nation.— Ed. 

=====第528页=====
506 Frederick Engels 
here,  where the Bremen, Hamburg, Lübeck and Oldenburg 
troops, a whole regiment all together, will show their tricks. They 
are poor, pathetic things, three of them together have not as much 
moustache as I have when I have not had a shave for three days; 
one can count every thread in their coats and they have no sabres, 
but Speckääle. A Speckaal is a smoked eel, but in soldiers' language 
it is a leather scabbard for the bayonet which they carry instead of 
a sabre. For if they put the bayonet on the end of the rifle, these 
poor creatures would be very likely to run each other through the 
mug with it when they were marching, so they are sensible enough 
to carry it on their backs. They are miserable fellows, Kashubs and 
Ledshaks. 
I just can't think what else to write about. 
God knows, my matter's melted all away, 
Yet I must fill this page up anyway, 
Although it takes me pliers to pull it out; 
And since by writing verses one can say 
Little, and make it go a long, long way, 
I end with rhyming doggerel, though I fear 
That Pegasus, outraged, will surely rear 
And throw me forcibly upon the sand. 
The sun is setting. Darkling lies the land, 
Save where through Western cloud-veils, bright and 
clear 
Blazes the sunset's incandescent brand. 
It is a solemn, holy fire up there, 
Flaming upon the tombstone of a day 
That brought us many a thing so loved and dear, 
Now dead and gone from us. The night holds sway 
And gently draws her star-shot mantle over 
Earth's territories, near and far away. 
And silence reigns. Birds in their nests seek cover, 
Beasts hide in brushwood on the forest floor. 
The midges' dizzy evening dance is over; 
Closed for the night is Life's enchanting door. 
As on the Third one of the Seven Days, 
When only trees had been created for 
Earth's ornament, and beasts were yet to graze 
In the green fields — so, 'midst the leaves again 
Only the wind intones his hoary lays. 
It is the Almighty's Spirit, who doth rain 
On Earth a torrent of tremendous song. 

=====第529页=====
To Marie Engels, September 18-19, 1840 507 
He drives the storm on wings of cloud and rain, 
He blows eternally, forever young, 
But me, I've puffed the rhymes out of my lungs. 
Full stop. If you understand it you are educated and can put a 
word in. 
Adios, yours, 
Friedrich 
Bremen, Aug. 20, 40 
Aug. 25. Roth came back the day before yesterday. 
First published in the Deutsche Revue, Printed according to the original 
Stuttgart and Leipzig, Bd. 4, 1920 
Published in English for the first 
time 
35 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
IN MANNHEIM 
[Bremen] Sept. 18, 1840 
My most precious! 
At the moment the equinoctial gales are raging frightfully; in 
our house a window was blown in last night and the trees are 
creaking most pitiably. Tomorrow and the day after there will be 
news of shipwrecks coming in! The Old Mana  is standing by the 
window and pulling a wry face because the day before yesterday a 
ship went to sea in which he has 3,000 talers' worth of linen which 
is not insured. You don't say anything about the letter to Ida b 
which I enclosed in my previous letter; or did I forget to put it 
in? — I am now really staying here till Easter, which for various 
reasons is most welcome to me. So Ida has gone now; that will be 
very awkward for you. 
We have quite a good camp here too, almost 3,000 men strong, 
Oldenburg, Bremen, Lübeck and Hamburg troops. I went there 
a Heinrich Leupold.— Ed. 
b Ida Engels.— Ed. 

=====第530页=====
508 Frederick Engels 
the other day, it was great fun. Right in front of the tent (a tavern 
owner has put up a big refreshments tent) sat a French­
man, he was quite sozzled and could no longer stand on his 
feet. The waiters hung a big wreath round him, and he began to 
shout: Wreathe in gree-en the flo-owing bowl.3 Afterwards they 
dragged him to the mortuary, that is, the hayloft, where he stayed 
on his back and fell asleep. When he was sober again, he 
borrowed a horse from somebody, mounted it and kept galloping 
up and down the camp. All the time he was on the point of falling 
off most agreeably. We had plenty of good fun there and 
especially fine wine. Last Sunday I rode to Vegesack, during which 
tour I had the pleasure of being drenched with rain four times, 
but I had so much inner heat that every time I dried immediately. 
But I had a dreadful horse with a terribly hard trot so that one's 
bones were jarred to the marrow. — At this moment another 6 
bottles of beer are being carried in for us, and they will at once 
enter upon the process of being lit—I was thinking of cigars, that 
should read of being emptied. — One bottle I have almost finished 
already and with it I smoked a cigar; presently, our Don 
Guillermo,b the young principal, will go out again, and then we 
shall start anew. 
Sept. 19, 1840. You have a more boring life than we do. 
Yesterday afternoon there was no more work to do, and the Old 
Man was out, and Wilhelm Leupold did not show up often either. 
So I lit a cigar, first wrote the above to you, then took Lenau's 
Faust from my desk and read some of it. Afterwards I drank 
a bottle of beer and at half past seven went to Roth's; we 
went off to the Club, I read Raumer's Geschichte der Hohenstaufen 
and then ate beefsteak and cucumber salad. At half past ten I 
went home and read Diez's Grammatik der romanischen Sprachen 
until I felt sleepy. Moreover, tomorrow is Sunday again and 
Wednesday is a day of penance and prayer in Bremen, and so we 
carry on gradually into the winter. This winter I shall take dancing 
lessons with Eberlein so as to accustom my stiff legs to a little 
graceful movement. 
Here you have a scene in the Schlachte, i. e., the street which 
has the Weser on one side and where the goods are unloaded. 
The fellow with the whip is the waggoner who is about to drive 
away the sacks of coffee lying in the background; the fellow with 
the sack on the right is the Schlachte pirate who is loading them 
a Matthias Claudius, Rheinweinlied. — Ed. 
b Wilhelm Leupold.— Ed. 

=====第531页=====
To Marie Engels, September 18-19, 1840 509 
on the cart; by his side a cooper who has just taken a sample and 
is still holding it in his hand, and next to him is the bargeman 
from whose barge the sacks were unloaded. You won't be able to 
deny that these figures are most interesting. When the waggoner 
drives he mounts the horse without saddle, stirrup or spurs, and 
keeps digging his heels into its ribs, like this: 
Now it is raining again quite improperly for a Saturday evening, 
it should really rain only during the week, but from midday 
Saturday it should be fine. Do you know what superfine medium 
good ordinary Domingo coffee is? That again is one of those 
profound concepts which occur in the philosophy of the commer-

=====第532页=====
510 Frederick Engels 
cial profession and which your mental powers cannot understand. 
Superfine medium good ordinary Domingo coffee is coffee from 
the Island of Haiti which has a slight touch of green, is otherwise 
grey, and in which with ten good beans you get into the bargain 
four bad ones, six bits of stone and an eighth of an ounce of dirt, 
dust, etc. Now you will have grasped it. One pound of this now 
costs 9V2 groats, that is 4 silver groschen and  8I23/i37  pfennigs. I 
should not really betray these trade secrets, since one does not tell 
tales out of school, but because it is you I shall make an 
exception. — Just now our workman is saying: Herr Derkhiem, wann 
Se sek met de Jungens gemein mokt, so met Se sek en beten mehr en 
Respekt hohlen, sons krigt Se dat Volk ganz unner de Föte, Heinrich, dat 
es en slimmen Jung, do hebb' ick manch' en Tuck med har'd,  Se met nich 
so veel dornet speelen, Se möt se gliks wat achter de Ohren geven, anners 
helpt nich, un wann Se no'n Ohlen goht, de dait de Jungens ok nix, de 
segt man blot*: Don't bother me with the fellow. There you can 
practise our Low German a little. For the rest I am your most 
devoted 
Friedrich 
Bremen, 19.9.40 
First published in the Deutsche Revue, Printed according to the original 
Stuttgart and Leipzig, Bd. 4, 1920 Published in English for the first 
time 
36 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
IN MANNHEIM 0 
Dear Marie, 
Next time don't write to me via Barmen again; Mother leaves 
the letters lying there until she writes  herself,  and that is often a 
long time. But what I wanted to write to you — only you must not 
write this home, for I want to surprise them with it next 
a Herr Derkhiem, if you make yourself cheap with the boys you must have a bit 
more self-respect, otherwise they will walk over you. That Heinrich, he is a bad lad, 
I have had a lot of trouble with him, you must not play so much with him but 
immediately give him a smack behind the ears, there is no help for it, and if you go 
to the Old Man, he won't do anything to the boys but only say....— Ed. 
The back of the letter bears the inscription: "Fräulein Marie Engels im 
grossherzoglichen Institut zu Mannheim." —Ed. 

=====第533页=====
To Marie Engels, October 29, 1840 511 
spring—I now have an enormous moustache and shall presently 
add to it a Henry IV and goatee beard. Mother will wonder when 
suddenly such a long, black-bearded fellow comes across the lawn. 
Next year, when I go to Italy, I too must 
look like an Italian. 4^&r.aSL£^9^ 
This is written by little Sophie Leupold 
who has just been to visit me in the office, 
while the Old Man3  and Eberlein, who eats 
here in the house, are at a big dinner. Oh, I 
could tell you interesting things about this 
dinner, of engagements which are not yet 
public and of stolen kisses, but that is not 
for a girl in a boarding-school. You will 
learn it soon enough when we are back at 
home. Then I shall sit in the garden and 
you'll bring me a big mug of beer 
and a sausage sandwich, and then I shall say: See, my dear sister, 
because you have brought the beer out to me and because it 
is such a fine summer evening, I will tell you of a big dinner 
which was celebrated in the year 1840, on the twenty-ninth of the 
month of October, in Bremen, Martini number eleven, in the 
Royal Saxon Consulate. But now I can tell you only this much, 
that quite enormous quantities of Madeira, Port, Pouillac, Haut 
Sauternes, and ßhine wine will be drunk this lunchtime. For 
although there are only five gentlemen, they are all very good 
drinkers, almost as good as I. — At the moment there is a Free 
Market here, and although I have not the honour to be intro­
duced to Her Royal Highness, a Grand Duchess, and many Most 
Serene Princesses, we still have our fun. I am fortunately so 
short-sighted that I do not even know what the several exalted, 
more exalted, and most exalted personages look like who had the 
honour to drive past me. When next time such a most gracious 
lady is introduced to you, do tell me whether she is pretty, 
otherwise such personages don't interest me at all. Our noble 
town-hall cellar is now so well fitted out it couldn't be better; you 
sit so comfortably between the barrels. Last Sunday we had a 
moustache evening there. For I had sent out a circular to all 
moustache-capable young men that it was finally time to horrify all 
philistines, and that that could not be done better than by wearing 
moustaches. Everyone with the courage to defy philistinism and 
wear a moustache should therefore sign. I had soon collected a 
a Heinrich Leupold.— Ed. 

=====第534页=====
512 Frederick Engels 
dozen moustaches, and then the 25th of October, when our 
moustaches would be a month old, was fixed as the day for a 
common moustache jubilee. But I had a shrewd idea what would 
happen, bought a little moustache wax and took it with me; it was 
then found that one had a truly very fine but unfortunately quite 
white moustache, while another had been instructed by his 
principal to hack the criminal thing off. Enough, that evening we 
had to have at least a few, and those who had none had to paint 
themselves one. Then I got up and proposed the following toast: 
Moustaches always were the pride 
Of gallant gentlemen far and wide. 
Brave soldiers faced their country's foes 
In brown or black mustachios. 
So, in these times of martial glory, 
Moustaches are obligatory. 
Philistines shirk the burden of bristle 
By shaving their faces as clean as a whistle. 
We are not philistines, so we 
Can let our mustachios flourish free. 
Long life to every Christian 
Who bears his moustaches like a man. 
And may all philistines be damned 
For having moustaches banished and banned. 
To this doggerel glasses were clinked with great enthusiasm, and 
then somebody else got up. His principal would not give him a 
key, and so he had to be home by ten o'clock, or he would not be 
let in. That is the plight of many a poor devil here. He said: 
A plague befall 
Principals all 
Who won't hand over the key of the door. 
May flies and strands of hair infest 
Their supper plates for evermore 
And may their nights give them no rest. 
Thereupon there was more clinking of glasses. So it continued 
until ten o'clock, then those without keys had to leave, but we, the 
fortunate ones with keys, remained seated and ate oysters. I ate 
eight, but could not manage any more, I still don't enjoy the things. 
Since you are so fond of calculations and even want to reward 
me for them with the Order of the Yellow Envelope, I shall 

=====第535页=====
To Wilhelm Graeber, November 20, 1840 513 
graciously regale you with the remark that Courant now stands at 
IO6V2 P er cent, while a year ago it stood at 114. The louis d'or are 
falling so that anyone here in Bremen who had a million talers a 
year ago now only has 900,000, that is, 100,000 talers less. Isn't 
that tremendous? 
You still don't write me anything of the screed for Ida,a did you 
get it and have you passed it on or not? It would be awkward for 
me if I had not sent it and it had been left lying around and got 
into the hands of the Old Man.b  So write to me and make it the 
long six-page letter you promised me. I shall return the compli­
ment. Here on the envelope you shall again be regaled with a few 
calculations which you may take to heart. That I had to copy this 
letter out again is the fault of Herr Timoleon Miesegans in 
Bremen, the same one whom the Old Man once threw out of the 
house two years ago. Your respectful and devoted 
Bremen, Oct. 29, 1840 Friedrich 
First published slightly abridged in the Printed according to the original 
Deutsche Revue, Stuttgart and Leipzig, _ ... , . . _ .. . , , ,. 
•DA A man j • r 11 • »* /r i Published in English for the first 
Bd. 4, 1920, and in full in: Marx/Engels, . 6 
Gesamtausgabe, Abt. l, Bd. 2, 1930 
37 
TO WILHELM GRAEBER 
IN BARMEN 
Bremen, Nov. 20, 1840 
My dear Wilhelm, 
It is now at least six months since you wrote to me. What shall I 
say to such a friend? You don't write, your brother0  does not 
write, Wurm does not write, Grel does not write, Heuser does not 
write, not a line from W. Blank, I am still less aware of anything 
from Plümacher, sacré tonnerre, 6 what am I to say? When I last 
wrote to you, my roll of tobacco still weighed seven pounds, now 
there is barely a cubic inch of it left, and still no reply. Instead you 
a Ida Engels.— Ed. 
b Heinrich Leupold.— Ed. 
c Friedrich Graeber.— Ed. 
d Confound it.— Ed. 

=====第536页=====
514 Frederick Engels 
lead a gay life in Barmen — wait, you fellows, as if I didn't know 
of every glass of beer that you have since drunk whether you 
drank it in one draught or several. 
You in particular should be ashamed to inveigh against my 
political truths, you political sleepyhead. If you are left to sit 
quietly in your rural parsonage, for you will hardly expect a 
higher position, and to go out for a walk every evening with Frau 
Pastor and eventually with the young little Pastors and nobody 
fires off a cannon-ball under your nose, you are blissfully happy 
and don't trouble yourself about the sinful F. Engels who argues 
against the established order. Oh you heroes! But you will yet be 
drawn into politics, the current of the times will come flooding 
over your idyllic household, and then you will stand like the oxen 
before the mountain. Activity, life, youthful spirit, that is the real 
thing! 
By now you will already have heard of the grandiose fun stirred 
up here by our mutual friend Krummacher.3  It is now practically 
over, but it was a bad business. The Panielites formed up in 
battalions, stormed the militia arsenal and marched through the 
town with a large tricolour. They sang: "Free is the life we lead" 
and "Vivat Paniel, long live Paniel, Paniel is a worthy man!" The 
Krummacherians gathered in the Cathedral precincts, occupied 
the town hall, where the Senate was just in session, and plundered 
the armoury. Armed with halberds and spiked clubs they formed 
a square in the Cathedral precincts, aimed the two cannons which 
stand near the main guard post (though they had no powder) at 
Obernstrasse, from which the Panielites were coming, and so 
awaited the enemy. But when the latter arrived in front of the 
cannons, they entered the market from the other side, and 
occupied it. The 600-strong cavalry occupied the Grasmarkt, 
directly opposite the Krummacherians, and awaited the command 
to charge. At this point Burgomaster Smidt came out of the town 
hall. He stopped between the parties, planting his feet firmly on 
the stone on which Gottfried, a woman guilty of poisoning, was 
executed and which stands exactly half an inch above the pave­
ment, and, turning to the Krummacherians, said: "You men of 
Israel!" Then he turned to the Panielites: ""Av&psç 'A$7jVaioi! »b 
Then turning, now to the right, now to the left, he made the 
following speech: "Since Krummacher is an alien, it is not fitting 
that a quarrel which he has stirred up should be fought out within 
a Friedrich Wilhelm Krummacher (see this volume, pp.  155-60).—  Ed. 
b "Men of Athens!"— Ed. 

=====第537页=====
To Wilhelm Graeber, November 20, 1840 515 
our good town. Therefore, I suggest to the honoured parties that 
they repair to the Burghers' Common, which offers a most 
suitable terrain for such scenes." 
This was approved, and the parties marched out by different 
gates,  after Paniel had armed himself with Roland's stone shield 
and sword. The supreme command over the Krummacherians, 
who were 6.239V2 men strong, was taken over by Pastor Mallet, 
who took part in the campaign of 1813; he ordered powder to be 
bought and a few small cobbles to be taken along to load the 
cannons. Arriving on the Burghers' Common, Pastor Mallet gave 
orders to occupy the churchyard which adjoins it and is sur­
rounded by a wide ditch. He mounted the memorial to Gottfried 
Menken and ordered the cannons to be driven on to the cemetery 
mound. But for want of horses it had not been possible to bring 
out the cannons. In the meantime it was nine o'clock in the eve­
ning and pitch dark. The armies bivouacked, Paniel in Schwach­
hausen, a village, Mallet in the suburb. The headquarters was in 
the riding school before the Herdentor, which, however, was 
already occupied by a troup of exhibition riders; but when Pastor 
Kohlmann of Horn held an evening service in the school, the 
riders ran away. This happened on October 17th. In the morning 
of the 18th, the two armies took the field. Paniel, who had 4,267 3/4 
foot and l,689'/4 horse, attacked. A column of infantry led by 
Paniel himself attacked Mallet's first battle-line, which consisted of 
the pupils of his catechism class and a few women zealots. When 
three old women had been speared and six catechumens shot, the 
battalion scattered and was driven by Paniel into the roadside 
ditch. On Paniel's right wing stood Pastor Capelle with three 
cavalry squadrons formed by young office employees, who out­
flanked Mallet and attacked him from behind; he occupied the 
suburb and deprived Mallet of his operational base. Paniel's left 
wing, under the command of Pastor Rothe, advanced on the Horn 
highway and pressed the Young Men's Union, who did not know 
how to handle halberds, back on the main body of Mallet's army. 
Then we, six of us, heard the shooting in the fencing lesson and 
rushed out in fencing jackets, gloves, masks and helmets; the gate 
was locked, an attack on the guard gave us the keys, and so we 
arrived on the scene of the battle, rapier in hand. Richard Roth of 
Barmen re-formed the scattered Young Men's Union, while Höller 
of Solingen threw himself into a house with the remnants of the 
catechumens; three others and I unseated a few Panielites from 
their horses, mounted them and, supported by the Young Men's 
Union, threw back the enemy cavalry; Mallet's main army ad-

=====第538页=====
516 Frederick Engels 
vanced, our rapiers spread cartes, tierces, terror and death, and in 
half an hour the rationalists were destroyed. Now Mallet came to 
thank us, and when we saw for whom we had been fighting, we 
looked at each other in astonishment. 
Se non è vero, è come spew ben  trovato. 3- But now write soon! And 
urge Wurm to write to me. 
Fr. Engels 
First published in Die neue Rundschau, Printed according to the original 
10. Heft, Berlin, 1913 D ,,. , , . .-, .. , , . ,. 
Published m English for the first 
time 
38 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
Most humble letter of thanks 
of F. Engels, who has most graciously been awarded 
the Order of the Yellow Envelope 
Your Ladyship! Most respected Fräulein! 
Your most obedient servant, whom Your Ladyship has most 
graciously condescended to invest most undeservedly with the 
Order of the Yellow Envelope, fails not most humbly to lay his 
most devoted thanks at Your Most Noble Highness' exalted feet. 
Nor could the same most obedient servant fail to admire the 
supreme grace with which Your Most Noble Highness allowed the 
covering note to reach Your most submissive servant open and 
accessible to all the world* so that everybody could convince 
himself of the lofty favour which Your Exalted gentleness and 
comprehensive wisdom have condescended to accord to me. 
In conclusion, in most profound submission before Your Most 
Noble Highness, Your humble and most obedient servant com­
mends himself to Your most gracious memory. 
Fr. Engels 
Bremen, Dec. 6, 1840 
* I received your letter open. The wretched wafer had come  off.—  Note by 
Engels. 
If it is not true, I trust it is well invented.— Ed. 
The back of the letter bears the inscription: "Fräulein Marie Engels im 
grossherzogl. Institut, Mannheim." — Ed. 

=====第539页=====
To Marie Engels, December 6-9, 1840 517 
Dear Marie, 
To fall out of the style which I chose for the first page of this 
letter, I am not in the least grateful to you for the poor wafers 
with which you seal your letters and which come off halfway. It is 
all the same to me which Order of the Envelope you want to 
honour me with, but for goodness' sake stick a proper seal on 
them so that the thing does not come apart by the time it gets to 
Mainz. The day before yesterday, or was it yesterday, I am not 
sure,  it was Anna's3  birthday, I celebrated it yesterday in Schwach­
hausen with a cup of coffee, cost me six groats, is that not 
brotherly love? Last Saturday week, when I became 20, I cele­
brated my birthday with a toothache and a swollen cheek, which 
was fiendishly painful. You will also have heard that Napoleon's 
body has arrived in France, b hey, that is going to be a row! I wish 
I were in Paris now, what fun! Do you read the newspaper? Did 
you believe there was going to be a war? What do you think of the 
Guizot-Soult Ministry? Do you also sing the bad song: "They shall 
not have it"c? while, if you have good eyes, you can see the French 
border on the other side of the Rhine. We now have fencing 
lessons, I fence four times a week, today at midday too. On the 
other side of the page you can see how I lay about me. 
a Anna Engels. — Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 153-54.— Ed. 
c Here Engels gave the first notes of the song, Der deutsche Rhein by N. Becker, 
but crossed them out again.— Ed. 

=====第540页=====
518 Frederick Engels 
Dec.  8th. Yesterday I had a hellish lot to do, and this morning 
too. Now I shall close this letter to you, and then I hope I shall be 
able to have a cup of coffee. Listen, for Christmas make me a new 
cigar case, in black, red and gold,3 those are the only colours I 
like. 
Oh, red as love then be our brethren's token, 
And pure as gold the purpose of our quest, 
And that in death our spirit be not broken, 
Black be the riband worn around the breast. 
From a banned student song. Here some blockheads have 
founded an association where they make speeches, and I am to be 
a guest and nolens volens make a speech. Oh dear, that will be a 
fine do! Incidentally, I can preach very well even without having 
studied beforehand, and when it is a matter of lying, there is no 
stopping me, I go on and on. If I were in the Landtag I would let 
nobody else get a word in.— Now I have had my portrait painted, 
with my moustache, and so that you can see what I look like, I 
copy the picture: 
You see, I was painted 
when I was furious be­
cause the cigar would 
not draw. At that mo­
ment I looked so intel­
ligent that the painterb 
implored me to let my­
self be painted like that. 
I put aside all the bad 
cigars and smoked one 
of the awful things at 
every sitting. That was 
the worst torment for 
me. 
Be glad that you have 
nothing to do with sample boxes, it is first-class stupidity and 
muddle, there you can stand all day by the open window in the 
packing-house loft in this cold weather and pack linen, it is 
something dreadful, and in the end nothing comes of it but 
nonsense. 
Colours symbolising the unity of Germany.— Ed. 
G. W. Feistkorn. — Ed. 

=====第541页=====
To Marie Engels, December 21-28, 1840 519 
My dear sister, I am your devoted 
Friedrich 
December 9, 1840 
First published in the Deutsch« Revue, Printed according to the original 
Stuttgart and Leipzig, Bd. 4, 1920 Published in English for the first 
time 
39 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
IN MANNHEIM 
[Bremen] Dec. 21, 40 
Dear Marie, 
I cannot refrain from thanking you for the beautiful cigar 
case — the only thing wrong with it is that it is not black, red and 

=====第542页=====
520 Frederick Engels 
gold. It accidentally came into my possession already today and 
was put to use at once.— Here it has been terribly cold, through 
the whole of December it has been freezing without interruption 
and it is still freezing. The Weser is frozen from here to Vegesack, 
four hours from here, which looks most remarkable. Recently 
some people from Barmen were here, and we had a jolly good 
time,  visited all the taverns, kept the glasses going and at times felt 
a bit tipsy. Enclosed you will find a demand note 3 from my former 
Spanish teacher; if you can understand it I'll make you a present 
of a new hat. Perhaps there is somebody in your boarding-school 
who understands so much Spanish, and here the thing is get­
ting in my way.— I must say, I hardly know what to write 
to you; a sugar refinery has burnt down here, and the Old 
Manb will not leave the office, although I am really dying for 
a cigar. 
23rd. Yesterday evening we were having a fencing lesson when 
the nice news came that there was another fire and this time in 
Neustadt. We went there out of a sense of duty, and when we got 
there it was already out. That is what one gets for one's trouble. 
You should always stay nicely at home until it is burning under 
your nose. Mother has sent me for Christmas an order for 
Goethe's collected works; I went at once yesterday to fetch the first 
volumes that have appeared and last night read the Wahlver­
wandtschaften till midnight with great enjoyment. He is a fellow, 
Goethe! If you wrote German as he does I would excuse you from 
all foreign languages. Incidentally, it is quite unnecessary for you 
to leave a margin when you write to me, the octavo pages are 
narrow enough as it is, and I will not hear of this comfortable way 
of writing pages full and not writing much. Please note! says 
Professor Hantschke. 
24th. You will now be in tremendous excitement, I can imagine, 
and in grand hopes. I am curious what will come of it. You will, 
of course, acquaint me by the first post with this important pro­
ceeding? I shall see that it gets into the newspaper here at 
once. 
Here, in passing, are a few strokes, flourishes and signatures, 
with which I proved the skill of my hand to my junior,c who 
prides himself on his rectangular strokes. 
a The "demand note" was written in Spanish as a joke by Engels  himself.—  Ed. 
Heinrich Leupold.— Ed. 
c Wilhelm Leupold.— Ed. 

=====第543页=====
To Marie Engels, December 21-28, 1840 521 
Dec.  28th. The Weser is now completely frozen over, so that peo­
ple are driving on it in coaches. I believe one could skate as far as 
Vegesack, which is five hours by the Weser. In the afternoon all 
the beau monde goes for walks on it and the ladies slide on the ice 
so as to be lifted off by the gentlemen, which always gives them 
great pleasure. The trees look as if they were made of snow, they 
are so thickly covered with a white crust.— The Pastor's wife a has 
embroidered a black, red and gold purse for me for Christmas 
and Marieb has made me a black, red and gold tassel for my pipe, 
which is smashing. Today we have 9 degrees below freezing-point, 
what a life! I like nothing better than this cold, ineffective sua 
which rises over the winter-hard earth. No clouds in the sky, no 
dirt on the earth, everything as hard and solid as steel and 
diamond. The air is not so flabby and consumptive as in summer, 
you feel it now when you go out of doors. The whole town is full 
of glaciers, people no longer walk, they fall from one street into 
the other. Now one can't help noticing that it is winter. I hope that 
a Mathilde Treviranus.— Ed. 
b Marie Treviranus.— Ed. 
18-384 

=====第544页=====
522 Frederick Engels 
in Mannheim, among other useful accomplishments, you will also 
learn to skate, so that you don't come home a shivering, stay-
at-home, not-to-be-moved-out-of-doors little lady, which I refuse to 
stand for. But if you do arrive afraid of the cold I shall tie you on 
a sleigh, put a burning sponge in the horses' ears and chase you 
like that out into the open. Or I'll tie skates under you and carry 
you out to the middle of the pond and leave you to crawl on your 
own. 
My very dear sister, if my hopes are not disappointed you will 
get this letter on New Year's Day. On this holiday, greatly looked 
forward to by me and you too, I imagine, I wish you everything 
you desire, since this wish costs me nothing, and hope that your 
wishes for me will be at least equally Christian. May Mannheim be 
as much to your liking in the New Year as, to judge by your 
letters, it was in the old. (This I write in case this letter has first to 
be censored before it comes into your hands.) 
Yours, 
^ „„ .« Friedrich 
Bremen, Dec. 28, 40 
First published in the Deutsche Revue, 
Stuttgart and Leipzig, Bd. 4, 1920 Printed according to the original 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第545页=====
184 1 
40 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
IN MANNHEIM* 
Dear Marie, 
This time you shall get a really heavy letter. At first I even 
wanted to write to you on cardboard so that you would have to 
fork out quite a sum for postal charges, but unfortunately I could 
not get a piece with a smooth surface and so I must write on the 
heaviest paper to be found in our paper store. Ir  you don't know 
what a Paukstunde is.that proves that in culture you have remained 
shamefully backward, but that you did not see it from the enclosed 
drawing proves also natural dullness, and one sees that not only 
the hops of education but even the malt of mother wit are lost on 
you. In your bad German a Paukstunde is the same as a fencing 
lesson. I have now also acquired a couple of rapiers and gloves, 
the only gloves I have, for I don't care for kid-gloves, etc. 
Concerning the Stabat mater  dolorosa 13 et cetera, it occurs to me, 
please look up whether this thing was composed by Pergolese. If 
so, please get me if possible a copy of the score; if instruments are 
included, I don't need them, only the voices. But if it is by 
Palestrina or somebody else I don't need it. 2S8 The day after 
tomorrow we are going to perform Paulus by Mendelssohn, the 
best oratorio written since Handel's death. You will know it. I go 
to the theatre only rarely since the local one is terribly bad; I go 
occasionally, only when a new play is being shown, or a good 
opera I don't know yet. 
The back of the letter bears the inscription: "Fräulein Marie Engels im 
grossherzoglichen Institut zu Mannheim." —Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 405-06.— Ed. 
18» 

=====第546页=====
524 Frederick Engels 
Since my last letter we have had a fine flood here. At 
Treviranus' the water stood 12 to 14 inches deep in my room, and 
I had to flee to the Old Man,a  who with his usual kindness 
accommodated me for nearly a fortnight. But then the fun really 
started properly. There was a foot and a half of water at the front 
door, and to prevent it getting into the cellar, which has a hatch, 
we walled this up with cow-dung. But the malicious water then 
flowed from the neighbour's cellar into ours through the wall, and 
so that it should not drown our fine barrels of rum and our 
potatoes, and above all the Old Man's well-stocked wine cellar, we 
had to pump day and night for four nights running, and 
I pumped through all four of them. Wilhelm Leupold and I usu­
ally stayed up together, sat on the settee behind the table, with a 
few bottles of wine, sausage and a big piece of the finest Ham­
burg smoked meat on the table. We smoked, talked and pumped 
every half hour. It was most entertaining. At five o'clock the Old 
Man would come and relieve one of us. There were some 
touching incidents during the flood. In a house outside the town 
which was full of water up to the ground floor windows, people 
suddenly saw an enormous host of rats swimming along, which 
went in through the windows and occupied the whole house. 
Besides, there was no man in the house, only a lot of females 
terrified of rats, so that in spite of their fear, the delicate 
ladies had to resolve to attack the wild horde with sabres and 
sticks,  etc. In a house lying quite close to the Weser the of­
fice clerks were just sitting at breakfast when a large block 
of ice came drifting along, charged through the wall and 
poked its immodest head into the room, followed by a good 
portion of water. Now I shall tell you a piece of news. You 
remember that I wrote you once very mysteriously about a big 
dinner given in the Royal Saxon Consulate at which great secrets 
were broached . b Now I can tell you that the person who was the 
guest of honour at that dinner was the dame souveraine des pensées, 
the donna amada mais que la vida c of my second principal, the 
above-mentioned Wilhelm Leupold. During the flood he told me 
officially that his engagement would be announced at Easter, and 
I tell you this relying on your discretion; but you must not breathe 
a word about it, as it will only be made public at Easter. You see 
how I trust you, for if you talked about it, it could spread here to 
Bremen in three days, since there are gossiping females 
a Heinrich Leupold.— Ed. 
See this volume, p.  511.—  Ed. 
Supreme lady of thoughts, lady loved more than life.— Ed. 

=====第547页=====
To Friedrich Graeber, February 22, 1841 525 
everywhere. And then I would be in a fine fix.— The name of 
W. Leupold's fiancée isThereseMeyer, daughter of the Stick-Meyer 
in Hamburg; he is called Stick-Meyer because he has a walking-
stick factory by which he has made a pile of money. She wears a 
blue spencer and a light-coloured dress, is 17 years old and as slim 
as you, if you have not put on weight in Mannheim. She is not 
even confirmed yet, isn't that terrible? 
Today I have shaved my moustache off again and buried the 
youthful corpse with much wailing. I look like a woman; it is 
shameful; and if I had known that without a moustache I should 
look such a sight I would not have hacked it off. As I stood before 
the mirror, scissors in hand, and had shorn off the right side, the 
Old Man came into the office and had to laugh out loud, when he 
saw me with half a moustache. But now I shall let it grow again, 
for I cannot show myself anywhere. In the Academy of Singing I 
was the only one with a moustache and always used to laugh at the 
philistines who could not marvel enough that I had the audacity to 
go so unshaven into decent society. The ladies, incidentally, liked 
it very much, and so did the Old Man. Only last night at the 
concert six young dandies stood around me, all in tail-coats and 
kid-gloves, and I stood among them in an ordinary coat and 
without gloves. The fellows made remarks all evening about me 
and my bristling upper lip. The best of it is that three months ago 
nobody knew me here and now all the world does, just because of 
the moustache! Oh, the philistines! 
Yours, 
Friedrich 
Bremen, Feb. 18, 41 
First published in the Deutsche Revue, Printed according to the original 
Stuttgart and Leipzig, Bd. 4, 1920 „,..,,. _ .. , , , .. 
° r ° Published in English for the first 
time 
41 
TO FRIEDRICH GRAEBER 
Reverend Sir in spe, 
You have done me the favour, habuerunt gratiam of writing to 
me mihi scribendi sc. literas. Multum gaudeo, tibi adjuvasse ad 
gratificationem triginta thalerorum, speroque, te ista gratijicatione usum 
esse ad bibendum in sanitatem meam. XaTps, <I>(iAa$  TOO  Xp'.jTLav.ajJio^, 

=====第548页=====
526 Frederick Engels 
]ik^a.ç. XxpauaaojidaxtS, à'oxpov  X-TJÇ  àpdoêoSia;, Ttaûat; X7]çxûv ntexioxwv 
jilmr,;, paatieùi;  XTJQ  s^yYioeo)!;!;!;!; 
I V T - V *  ' - T - V • V T - ' V 
orrivK rçni1  hovered over F. Graeber, when he did the impossible 
and proved that twice two are five. O great hunter of Straussians, I 
beseech you in the name of all orthodoxy to destroy the whole infa­
mous nest of Straussians and to pierce all the half-hatched Straussian 
eggs with your St. George's lance. Sally forth into the desert of 
pantheism, brave dragon-slayer, engage Ruge rugiens b Leo, Ruge, 
who is wandering about looking for someone to devour, destroy 
the damned Straussian brood and plant the banner of the cross on 
the Sinai of speculative theology! Be moved by our entreaties, see, 
the faithful have now been waiting for five years for him who will 
crush the head of the Straussian snake. They have exhausted 
themselves, thrown stones and filth, yes, even dung at it, yet its 
poison-spurting head rises ever higher. Since you find it so easy to 
refute that all fine buildings collapse of their own accord, arise 
and refute Das Leben Jesu and the first volume of Dogmatik c for 
the danger is becoming more and more imminent; Das Leben Jesu 
has already gone through more editions than all the works of 
Hengstenberg and Tholuck put together and it is becoming 
common practice to throw everyone who is not a Straussian out of 
literature. And the Hallische Jahrbücher is the most widely read 
journal in North Germany, so widely read that His Prussian 
Majesty d can no longer ban it, however much he would like to. The 
banning of the Hallische Jahrbücher, which heaps the grossest 
insults on him every day, would change a million Prussians who do 
not yet know what they should think about the King, into a million 
enemies overnight. And it is high time for you to act, otherwise 
you will be reduced to eternal silence by us despite the pious views 
of the King of Prussia. You should screw up a little more courage 
so that the battle can really begin. But you write in such a calm 
and detached fashion, as if the Orthodox-Christian shares stood at 
a Have done  me the  favour  of writing  to me a  letter.  I am  very glad that  I was 
able to help  you get a  gratuity  of thirty talers  and hope  you  have used  the money 
to drink  my health.  Greetings,  guardian  of Christianity,  great hunter  of Straussians, 
star of orthodoxy,  comforter  of grieving  pietists,  King  of Exegesis!;!;! In the 
beginning, God  created Heaven  and  Earth,  and the  spirit  of God....—  Ed. 
h Censuring.— Ed. 
c The  title  of the  main section  in Strauss'  work,  Die  christliche Glaubenslehre  in 
ihrer geschichtlichen  Entwicklung.... — Ed. 
d Frederick William  IV.— Ed. 

=====第549页=====
To Friedrich Graeber, February 22, 1841 527 
a premium of 100 per cent, as if the stream of philosophy flowed 
as calmly and peacefully between its ecclesiastical banks as it did in 
the time of the scholastics, as if the insolent earth had not thrust 
itself into a frightful eclipse between the moon of dogmatism and 
the sun of truth. Have you not noticed that the storm is raging 
through the forest and hurling down all the dead trees, that 
instead of the old ad acta devil, the critical-speculative devil has 
arisen and has an enormous following? We challenge you every 
day, insolently and derisively, to come out and fight; let it 
penetrate your thick skin for once — true it is 1800 years old and 
has become somewhat leathery — and mount your war-horse. But 
all your Neanders, Tholucks, Nitzsches, Bleeks, Erdmanns, and 
whatever they're called, are such weak, sensitive fellows on whom 
daggers would seem ludicrous; they are all so quiet and cautious, 
so fearful of scandal, that you can't do anything with them. 
Hengstenberg and Leo do have some courage but Hengstenberg 
has been thrown from his saddle so often that he is quite crippled, 
and in the latest scuffle with the Hegelings, 239 Leo had his beard 
plucked out altogether so that he cannot really show himself 
decently in public. In any case, Strauss has not compromised 
himself in the slightest for if he still believed a couple of years ago 
that his Leben Jesu would not harm the church's teachings, he could, 
of course, without abandoning any of his principles, have read a 
"System of Orthodox Theology" in the same way as many an 
Orthodox Christian reads a "System of Hegelian Philosophy". But 
even if he really believed — as his Leben Jesu indicates — that 
dogmatism would not be harmed by his opinions, everyone knew 
in advance that he would soon abandon such ideas once he had 
begun to tackle dogmatism seriously. He says straight out in his 
Dogmatik what he thinks of the teaching of the church. However, 
it is a very good thing that he has moved to Berlin — this is where 
he ought to be and his spoken and written word can be more 
effective there than they would in Stuttgart. 
The idea that I have gone to the dogs as a poet is being widely 
disputed and, in any case, Freiligrath refused to print my verses3 
not because of the poetry but because of the views and lack of 
space. First of all, he is not such a liberal, and secondly, they 
arrived too late. Thirdly, there was so little space that many 
important poems intended for the last folios had to be left out. 
However, Das Rheinlied by N. Becker is really a very indifferent 
piece and has fallen into such bad odour that one can no longer 
a See this volume, p. 497.— Ed. 

=====第550页=====
528 Frederick Engels 
praise it in any magazine. But the Rhein by R. E. Prutz 240 is quite a 
different kind of poem. And other poems by Becker are also 
much better. The speech he made at the torchlight procession was 
one of the most muddled things I have ever come across. The 
marks of honour bestowed by kings I decline with thanks. What's all 
that about? A decoration, a golden snuff-box, a beaker from a king, 
these are a disgrace rather than an honour these days. We all de­
cline such things with thanks and are pretty safe, thank goodness, 
for since my article about E. M. Arndt was printed in the Tele­
graph*  it would not occur even to the mad King of Bavaria b to 
present me with such a fool's cap and bells or to print the stamp of 
servility on my backside. The more scoundrelly, more cringing, more 
fawning a person is these days the more decorations he gets. 
I am now fencing furiously and will soon hack you all to pieces. 
I have had two duels here in the last four weeks. The first fellow 
has retracted the insulting words of stupid boy which he said to 
me after I gave him a box on the ear, and the slap is still 
unexpiated. I fought with the second fellow yesterday and gave 
him a real beauty above the brow, running right down from the 
top, a really first-class prime. 
Farewell.0 
Yours, 
F. Engels 
Bremen, 22.2.41 
First published in Die neue Rundschau, Printed according to the original 
10. Heft, Berlin, 1913 ,_,. , J . .„ ,. u  r u „ 
Published in English for the first 
time 
42 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
IN MANNHEIM 
Bremen, March 8, 1841 
Dear Marie, 
"Your most respectful and obedient", these were the last words 
I wrote in a business letter as I finished my work at the office 
a See this volume, pp. 137-50.— Ed. 
b Ludwig I.— Ed. 
c This word is in English in the original.— Ed. 

=====第551页=====
To Marie Engels, March 8-11, 1841 529 
today so as — so as — now how can I express it most delicately? Oh 
well, the verses won't flow today, so I'd better say it straight out: 
so as to write to you. However, as I am still digesting my lunch, I 
haven't got time to think much and must write whatever comes 
into my head. But my first thought is a cigar, which I shall now 
proceed to light since His Majesty has taken himself off, His 
Majesty being, of course, the Old Mana  who has been given this 
title because we have decided to carry on as if we were at Court. 
For it is now quite certain and sure that the 
whole Leupold counting-house will soon be 
transformed and have ministers and confi­
dential gentlemen-in-waiting once again. 
You will be amazed when you see me with a 
golden key hanging from my black tail-coat — 
I will, of course, be as stuck-up as I have 
always been — and I'm not cutting off my 
moustache to please any king. It is now in 
full flower again and growing and when 
I have the pleasure — as I don't doubt I 
shall — of boozing with you in Mannheim 
in the spring, you will be amazed at its glory. 
Richard Roth left here a week ago for a 
grand tour of South Germany and Switzer­
land. Thank God that I too am leaving this 
dreary hole where there is nothing to do 
but fence, eat, drink, sleep and drudge, 
voilà tout. I don't know if you have heard 
that Father and I shall probably be going to 
Italy at the end of April, b in which case I 
shall do you the honour of visiting you. If 
you behave properly I may even bring you 
something, but if you are high and mighty, 
stiff and haughty, then you will be in for trouble. Nor will you 
escape just punishment if you write any more such nonsense as 
you did in your last letter but one, teasing me about the fencing 
lesson. I was very glad to hear that the Stabat materc is by 
a Heinrich Leupold.— Ed. 
b See this volume, p. 532.— Ed. 
c See this volume, pp. 405-06 and  523.—  Ed. 

=====第552页=====
530 Frederick Engels 
Pergolese. You must in any case get me a 
copy of the piano arrangement containing 
all the vocal parts with the score showing 
the singing parts above those which have 
to be played, as in a piano arrangement of 
an opera. It occurs to me that there are 
no tenor or bass parts in Pergolese's Stabat 
mater. There are probably more sopranos 
and altos instead. Never mind. 
If I really do go to Milan in the spring I shall meet Roth, and 
Wilhelm Blank from Elberfeld, and we'll have a high old time 
there with Turkish tobacco and Lacrime di Christo. Six months 
after we've gone, the Italians should still be talking about the three 
jolly Germans, so famous do we intend to make ourselves. 
I was very much amused to read your description of your 
innocent carnival. I should like to have seen you. Nothing very 
amusing has happened here, apart from a couple of boring 
fancy-dress balls which I didn't go to. In Berlin, too, the carnival 
was a terribly flat affair. They're still best at that sort of thing in 
Cologne. 
There is one thing in which you are less fortunate than I. You 
cannot hear Beethoven's Symphony in C Minor today, Wednesday, 
March 10, while I can. This and the Eroica are my favourites. 
Practise Beethoven's sonatas and symphonies well, so that I shan't 
be ashamed of you later on. I am going to hear them not just in 
the piano arrangement, but played by the full orchestra. 
March 11. What a symphony it was last night! You never heard 
anything like it in your whole life if you don't know this wonderful 
work. What despairing discord in the first movement, what elegiac 
melancholy, what a tender lover's lament in the adagio, what a 
tremendous, youthful, jubilant celebration of freedom by the 
trombone in the third and fourth movements! Besides this I also 
heard a wretched Frenchman sing yesterday and it went some­
thing like this: 
and so on, no melody or harmony and a pathetic French text and 
the whole joke was called L'Exilé de France. If all French exiles 
indulge in such caterwauling then nobody will want to have them 
anywhere. This boor also sang a song called Le toréador, which 

=====第553页=====
To Marie Engels, April 5, 1841 531 
means the bull-fighter, with the refrain, every other second, of Ah 
que j'aime  l'Espagne! This was even more pitiful—if that were 
possible :—sometimes with leaps of fifths, sometimes twisting about 
in chromatic passages as if to signify an attack of stomach-ache. If 
it hadn't been followed by the tremendous symphony I would 
have run away and left the crow to squawk in his miserable, thin 
baritone. Meanwhile see that the next letters you send are folded 
better. This way  f""^^^"^  is very unpractical and in bad 
taste,  it must be like this  r\%^"/or  like this ^aÇT , please note. 
Semper Tuus 
Friedrich 
First published in: Marx/Engels, Printed according to the original 
Gesamtausgabe, Abt. I, Bd. 2, 1930 _ ... . , . „ ,. , . , ,. 
° Published in English for the first 
time 
43 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
IN MANNHEIM 
Why didn't you write to me in Bremen? You really don't 
deserve to hear from me again, but this time I shall make an 
exception and write you a few lines to cheer your lonely time in 
Mannheim. I have been installed in the room next to my old one, 
which is now the music room, where I have buried myself under a 
mass of Italian books, and emerge now and again for a turn at 
fencing with Hermann3 or  Adolf. b I have just finished a few 
rounds with August,0  Hermann and Bernhard and as a result my 
hand is a bit shaky, so today as well my writing is very bad and 
learned-looking. When we went to Vohwinkel yesterday, I met 
nearly everyone who was at the gymnasium with me. 
The weather is splendid here but today I have to go on a 
miserably boring visit to the Wemhöners. I'll remember you to 
Emil. d Luise Snethlage has linked up with Hermann Siebel and 
a Hermann Engels. — Ed. 
b Adolf von Griesheim. — Ed. 
0 August Engels. — Ed. 
Emil Wemhöner. — Ed. 

=====第554页=====
532 Frederick Engels 
seems to be enjoying it. For the rest, Barmen is still the same old 
place, and all I ask of you is to fulfil your duty to me as quickly as 
you possibly can. 
Yours, 
Friedrich 
Barmen, 241 April 5, 41 
First published in: Marx/Engels, Printed according to the original 
Gesamtausgabe, Abt. 1, Bd. 2, 1930 ,,,,., • • ^ i- L r i «•• 
Published in English tor the first 
time 
44 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
IN MANNHEIM 
[Barmen, about the beginning of May 1841] 
Dear Marie, 
I started a letter to you last night but got no further than three 
lines when Annaa  came and cut it off to use the rest of the paper 
herself.  I got both your letters, including the one sent to Bremen, 
which made quite a journey before it reached me. Well, it's pretty 
dry in these parts except for an occasional dinner with some May 
wine or a student drinking bout, or carousal or rainy weather. The 
best thing about the whole business is that I smoke the whole day 
long and this is undoubtedly a great and priceless pleasure. I 
received some very nice things in my trunk which arrived here 
from Bremen — a little cigar basket, ash-tray, tassel for my pipe, 
etc. Father has gone to Engelskirchen and I am sitting in his 
dressing-gown on his stool with his long pipe, puffing out smoke 
like anything. We'll be off to Milan 242 in eight or ten days and all 
we wish for is good weather. It's raining cats and dogs here today. 
I am curious to know how you have developed in Mannheim — 
whether you are still the same silly, skinny chick you used to be, 
or whether you have picked up any new crazy ideas. Anna also 
gets up to daft tricks now and again and indulges in all kinds of 
silliness — with every third word she exclaims "Og, Drikes!"b Her­
mannc is developing a real talent as a hypochondriac and can 
often sit all day with a face utterly indifferent to the world, his 
a Engels' sister.— Ed. 
b "What nonsense!"—Ed. 
c Engels' brother.— Ed. 

=====第555页=====
To Marie Engels, about the end of August 1841 533 
mouth drooping, not uttering a word. If he suddenly gets into a 
tantrum, he can't snap out of it. Emila  is still great at misunder­
standing things. Hedwig b is not developing much character apart 
from a touch of obstinacy.  Rudolf 0 is just like Hermann was, he 
wanders about dreaming half the day and gets up to silly tricks the 
rest of the time. What he likes best is when I give him a rapier 
and then knock it out of his hand. Little Elise d will become 
important but for the time being she's still unimportant. She shows 
signs of amiability and will put you all in the shade in the end. 
And what about me? I might look interesting if, instead of my 
present young moustache, I still had the one I had in Bremen and 
my long hair. 
You've had enough for today. I'll write to you from Milan — if 
it's raining there. 
Yours, 
Friedrich 
First published in: Marx/Engels, Printed according to the original 
Gesamtausgabe, Abt. 1, Bd. 2, 1930 „ ,,. , , . _ ,. . , , r. 
0 Published in English for the first 
time 
45 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
IN MANNHEIM e 
[Barmen, about the end of August 1841] 
Dear Marie, 
If I have really got to write to you I must tell you in advance 
that it will not come to much, for nothing ever happens here. 
Weddings, parties, why yes, I go to them, I eat and drink, but 
afterwards I find it impossible to write a lot of tittle-tattle about 
them. And anyway you are not used to that kind of thing from 
me. I now sit in my little room upstairs nearly all day long, read 
and smoke like a chimney-stack, fence until the swords nearly 
crack, and amuse myself as best I can. This disgracefully bad 
weather is nearly driving me to desperation, you can't go to 
Elberfeld without the risk of getting soaked three times over. 
Engels' brothers and sisters.— Ed. 
' The back of the letter bears the inscription: "To Miss Mary Engels, Mann­
heim."— Ed. 

=====第556页=====
534 Frederick Engels 
Unfortunately there's only one halt between here and Elberfeld 
where one can stop if it gets too bad, namely, the Bierkirche. And 
you have to pay two silver groschen for a glass of beer there. 
Apart from this, nothing moves forward here, only backwards. I 
have not heard anything more about my departure for Ber­
lin— there's still plenty of time. I don't bother about anything and 
let the others worry. If you want more letters from me, let's hear 
from you, and write me something nice. 
Your brother 
Friedrich 
First published in: Marx/Engels, Printed according to the original 
Published in English for the first 
time Gesamtausgabe, Abt. l, Bd. 2, 1930 
46 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
IN MANNHEIM 
Dear Marie, 
Mother says I didn't write you a letter last time, only a mere 
scrawl which was not worth answering, and since you have not 
replied to it, I am almost forced to believe, to my very great 
sorrow, that you agree with her. Still, I must tell you that I am 
very hurt, not to say insulted, by such treatment and I am writing 
to you tonight only because I am in a good mood and have no 
wish to start quarrelling with you, for you certainly don't deserve a 
letter. Apart from which I am doing Mother a favour, so now you 
know whom you have to thank for these lines. I have now been 
here about six weeks, have smoked a great deal of tobacco and 
have studied hard although there are some in the higher regions 
who maintain that I have been doing nothing. However, I shall be 
leaving for Berlin in a week or a fortnight to do my duty as a 
citizen, i. e., to do what I can to evade conscription243 if possible 
and then come back to Barmen. We shall have to wait and see how 
this turns out. 
We had arranged a trip to Altenberg for Saturday and Sunday 
but nothing will come of it because Blank and Roth cannot 
manage it. I must see whether we can organise something else. It 

=====第557页=====
To Marie Engels, September 9, 1841 535 
has just occurred to me that I might go to the Beienburg again, as 
I have not been there for a long time. 
Mother went to August's3  for coffee yesterday and noticed that 
Fräulein Julie Engels was very quiet but Fräulein Mathilde 
Wemhöner was very talkative. You can draw your own conclusions 
from this. 
Apart from this I have found Annab very jolly, Emilc  making 
progress as a humorist, Hedwig d becoming very cheeky and 
Rudolf going the same awkward way as Hermann £ did at his age, 
and, for the rest, that Elise g gives herself airs. 
The letter you wrote to Father in English, which I have read 
today, is good on the whole, with only a few serious mistakes. 
Du reste 
Barmen, Sept. 9, 41 Your brother 
Friedrich 
First published in: Marx/Engels, Printed according to the original 
Gesamtausgabe, Abt. l, Bd. 2, 1930 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a Engels' uncle.— Ed. 
*** Engels' sisters and brothers.— Ed. 

=====第558页=====
1842 
47 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
IN MANNHEIM 
Berlin, January 5, 1842 
My dear Marie, 
Your letter reminded me, to my enormous shame, how much I 
have neglected my duty to write to you. It was really disgraceful of 
me and there is no excuse whatever for this crime. So I'm setting 
to work immediately and replying to your nice letter which I 
received the day before yesterday. I had a dose of cannon fever 
yesterday. What happened was this: I was very unwell and felt 
really weak the whole morning and was then ordered to artillery 
practice and was nearly laid out at the gun, so I left and had a 
shocking fever all the afternoon. I felt a bit better this morning 
but still was not quite up to the mark at the gun-fire practice, 
although I have now almost recovered and have got myself two 
days sick-leave on account of catarrhal cannon fever, after which I 
hope I shall be able to handle the sponge properly again. 
Incidentally, don't write home about this, it won't be of any use. 
Do you know what the doctor prescribed for my cannon fever? 
A glass of punch before going to bed, isn't that splendid medicine? 
You can see from this that an army surgeon is worth much more 
than, say, a Dr. Reinhold, with all his plasters, Spanish flies, 
leeches, etc., although he doesn't need to know nearly as much. 
But we only apply powerful remedies here, genuine medical heavy 
artillery, bombs and shells and 24-pounders. Our prescriptions are 
very simple and I always cured myself that way in Bremen. First 
of all, beer; if that doesn't help, then punch; if that doesn't help 
either, then a swig of rum — that's bound to help. That's artillery 
medical treatment for you. But I'm sure you would laugh yourself 
sick if you saw me in my jerkin, standing beside the six-pounder, a 
long, thick sponge in my hand, and jumping around the gun-
carriage. My uniform, incidentally, is very fine, blue with a black 

=====第559页=====
To Marie Engels, January 5-6, 1842 537 
collar adorned with two broad yellow stripes, and black, yellow-
striped facings together with red piping round the coat tails. 
Furthermore, the red shoulder-straps are edged with white. I 
assure you the effect is most impressive and I'm worthy to be put 
on show. Because of this the other day I shamefully embarrassed 
Riickert, the poet, who is here at present. I sat down right in front 
of him as he was giving a poetry reading and the poor fellow was 
so dazzled by my shining buttons that he quite lost the thread of 
what he was saying. Apart from all this, as a soldier I enjoy the 
privilege of not having to knock at anyone's door when I go to see 
them, nor having to say good day or pay them any other 
compliments. Someone once came to our Captain's quarters and 
accidentally banged against the door with his scabbard. He got a 
week's arrest, because the Captain insisted that he had knocked on 
the door. You see what kind of cutthroat I am. On top of it I shall 
soon be promoted to bombardier, which is a sort of non-commis­
sioned officer, and I shall get gold braid to wear on my facings. So 
you must treat me with proper respect. Because once I'm a bombar­
dier, I shall have all the privates in the whole Prussian army under 
my command and they will all have to salute me. 
Why do you talk so much nonsense in your letter about old Fritz 
Wilma and about young Fritzchen Wilmchen b? You women should 
not interfere in politics, you don't understand anything about it. 
But since you so much want to hear something about your beloved 
Majesty, I can tell you that His Supreme Royal Highness will leave 
for London on the 16th of this month in order to act as godfather 
to His Royal Highness, the little English prince,0 and will perhaps 
visit Paris on the return journey but most certainly Cologne, and 
in the spring he is going to Petersburg to celebrate the silver 
wedding of his noble brother-in-law, the All Highest Tsar of 
Russia,0  then return to amuse himself in Potsdam in the summer, 
to spend the autumn on the Rhine and then to amuse himself in 
Charlottenburg during the winter. Now I must go to a lecture. 
Jan. 6, 1842 
This morning I moved out of the front room into the back 
room, because the front one has been let to a man from my part 
of the country, a jurist from the Cologne area; in any case, it is 
a Frederick William III.— Ed. 
b Frederick William IV.— Ed. 
c Edward.— Ed. 
d Nicholas I.— Ed. 

=====第560页=====
538 Frederick Engels 
badly heated. This is curious, for the back room is larger than the 
front one but it is always warm from a little heating while the 
front one is as cold as ice. Whatever I did, I could never get the 
ice-ferns on the windows in the front room to melt, but here at 
the back, it is a pleasure to watch the ice, which has frozen finger-
thick during the last week, melting away as in spring, and the bright 
blue sky, which I was unable to see from my former room for so 
long, is gaily looking in. And I can once again see the barracks 
of the 2nd Guards Regiment of Mudlarks (as we call the Infantry) 
and the Veterinary School and everything attached to it. 
We've got a Rhinelandish restaurant here where all our favour­
ite home dishes — which are otherwise quite unknown here — are 
served. Every Saturday night we have fried potato cake along with a 
jug of coffee. Yesterday I had apple and potato. Our good old duck 
soup,  which you know well, has a distinguished place there. And 
lots of other things which do not come to my mind. There is pork 
and sauerkraut for lunch today, which I'm looking forward to. 
The other day he was going to treat us to Pannhas* but it didn't 
come off because there is no buckwheat flour to be had, so we 
can't have yeast pancakes either, which we have long been languish­
ing for. 
Splendid! The sun is beginning to shine well and truly, which I find 
most delightful, and so I shall go for a walk after dinner, and since 
Schelling is not lecturing tonight, I shall have the whole evening 
to myself and be able to work seriously and without interruption. 
The local theatre is very fine — magnificent 
sets, splendid actors, but mostly bad singers. So 
I don't very often go to the opera. Tomorrow 
there will be a new play, Columbus by Werder. 244 
This is about Columbus who discovered Ameri­
ca and Werder is a professor at the University 
here,  the man who discovered the profundity of 
negation. Verily, verily I say unto you the 
theatre will be really full tomorrow night and I 
will be there contributing to its fullness. Two of 
the acts take place on a ship at sea, which 
should be interesting to watch. 
Here you see me in uniform with my great­
coat draped round my shoulder in a most 
romantic and picturesque fashion — but strictly 
against regulations. If I were to go out like this 
Rhenish meat dish.— Ed. 

=====第561页=====
To Marie Engels, April 14-16, 1842 539 
into the street, I should risk being arrested at any moment—which 
isn't very pleasant. For if I'm seen in the street with even one button 
on my uniform or one hook on my collar unfastened, any officer 
or N.C.O. can put me under arrest. So you see, it is quite 
dangerous to be a soldier, even in peacetime. One of the most 
delightful things is that we have to go to church every four weeks 
but I have always managed to dodge it, except once. You have to 
stand in the yard for an hour beforehand wearing your heavy 
decorated shako with its plumes and then when you are frozen right 
through, you go into the ice-cold church where you cannot even 
hear anything of the sermon, for the acoustics are so bad. Isn't that 
delightful? Write again soon. 
Your brother 
Friedrich 
The sealing-wafer isn't one of the best. 
First published in the Deutsche Revue, Printed according to the original 
Stuttgart and Leipzig, Bd. 4, 1920 Published in English for the first 
time 
48 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
IN MANNHEIM3 
Dear Marie, 
This tender little flowerb  which has lain in my portfolio for half 
a year, and which I take out now and offer to you, will, I hope, 
compensate for the long time which, I admit it with remorse, 
I have kept you waiting. Herr Hösterey delivered your little 
a The back of the letter bears the inscription: "Fräulein Marie Engels im 
grossherzoglichen Institut zu Mannheim." —Ed. 
b A pressed rose, with buds and leaves, in the top left-hand corner of the 
notepaper.— Ed. 

=====第562页=====
540 Frederick Engels 
note to me safely after His High-and-
Mightiness had hidden it in his trou-
ser pocket from the eyes of the 
Austrian customs officers, for which His 
Supreme Highness asked my pardon, 
and in delightful German indeed. My 
conscience will not allow me to keep you 
waiting any longer, so I write. What 
about? Well, I don't know yet. That I was 
on parade drill this morning from 8 till 
half past eleven? That during this I got a 
very stiff telling-off from the Lieutenant-
Colonel? That we have church parade 
next Sunday? That I have finished all my 
good cigars and that the beer at Wall-
müller's has been very bad these last few days? That I must 
go out now to collect a couple of pots of ginger which I ordered 
for the Snethlages? Well, that's all there is to say. So — till 
tomorrow. 
Today, Friday, April 15, I am going for a drive. The weather 
has greatly improved. A whole lot of carriages are lined in front of 
my house where they have taken up their quarters. The cabbies 
are usually drunk and entertain me vastly. It is very convenient 
for me if I ever want to take a trip in one of the cabs. I live very 
agreeably on the first floor, in an elegantly furnished room — the 
front wall of it is made up of three windows separated only by 
small pillars, so it is very bright and friendly. 
I was interrupted yesterday when I had written this. Today I 
can tell you the glad news that we are probably not going on 
parade tomorrow because His Most Supreme Majesty, the King,a 
has condescended to leave for Potsdam and Brandenburg. All of 
which suits me very well, for I have no desire to knock around 
that cursed palace yard tomorrow. Let us hope we shall have no 
parade at all. We now also have a most charming exercise on the 
Grützmacher, so called, which is a very large open space where 
you sink up to your knees in sand and which has the delightful 
peculiarity of being electric. When the 12th Guards Artillery 
Company, to which I belong, and which is also electric, but 
negative, arrives there, positive and negative electricity collide, 
causing confusion and chaos in the atmosphere and attracting the 
Frederick William  IV.—  Ed. 

=====第563页=====
To Marie Engels, April 14-16, 1842 541 
clouds. Otherwise I cannot think how to explain why it always 
rains or snows when our company is on the Grützmacher. 
Incidentally I have now been a bombardier for four weeks, and, in 
case you didn't know, I wear braid and piping and a blue collar 
with red edgings. You won't understand all this, but it is not really 
necessary, as long as you know that I am a bombardier, that's 
enough. 
You will certainly not have heard yet that Herr Liszt has been 
here and enchanted all the ladies by his piano playing. The Berlin 
ladies were so besotted by him that there was a free fight during 
one of his concerts for possession of a glove which he had 
dropped, and two sisters are now enemies for life because one of 
them snatched the glove from the other. Countess Schlippenbach 
poured the tea which the great Liszt had left in a cup into her 
Eau-de-Cologne bottle after she had poured the Eau-de-Cologne 
on to the ground. She has since sealed the bottle and placed it on 
top of her writing-desk to his eternal memory and feasts her eyes 
on it every morning, as can be seen in a cartoon which appeared 
about it. There never was such a scandal. The young ladies fought 
over him but he snubbed them frightfully, and preferred to go 
and drink champagne with a couple of students. But there are a 
couple of pictures of the great, charming, heaven­
ly, genial, divine Liszt in every house. I will draw 
you (a portrait of him. Here is the man with the /^fRüÜüte 
Kamchatka hair style. By the way, he must have A— nüSSlSÄ 
earned at least 10,000 talers here and his hotel f b jnuVoflft 
bill amounted to 3,000 talers — apart from what T^ MH^| 
he spent in taverns. I tell you, he's a real man. He ^^^><^\ 
drinks twenty cups of coffee a day, two ounces x-^*^ 
of coffee in every cup, and ten bottles of 
champagne, from which it can fairly safely be iszt 
concluded that he lives in a kind of perpetual 
drunken haze, which may also be confirmed. He has now gone 
off to Russia and one wonders whether the ladies there will go as 
crazy too. 
I must go out now, so I will close. Farewell and write soon. 
Your brother 
Berlin 16/4, 42 Friedrich 
First published in the Deutsche Revue, 
Stuttgart and Leipzig, Bd. 4, 1920 Printed according to the original 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第564页=====
542 Frederick Engels 
49 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
(FRAGMENT)3 
A nice story told in front of a Frenchman by that son of the 
gods,  Albert Molineus, who is courting Ida.b  Enfin, à la porte du 
ciel était Saint-Pétrus (instead of Saint Pierre) et le peintre Köttgen 
d'Elberfeld était abordé par le musicien Weinbrenner: Eh bien, Köttgen, 
vous ne dites rien, racontez-nous donc quelque chose. Enfin, Köttgen dit: 
Enfin,  j'ai eu cette nuit un fameux rêve. Enfin, dit Weinbrenner, 
qu'est-ce qu'il y avait donc? Enfin, dit Köttgen, je rêvais d'être à la porte 
du ciel. Alors il y avait tous les artistes célèbres, Meyerbeer, Horace 
Vernet etc. Enfin, Meyerbeer frappait à la porte; Pétrus dit: Qui est là? 
"Meyerbeer." Les artistes n'entrent pas ici, dit Pétrus. Enfin vint Horace 
Vernet. Qui est là, dit Pétrus. "Horace Vernet." Les artistes n'entrent pas 
ici, dit Pétrus. Enfin Weinbrenner arrivait. Qu'est-ce qu'il y a là? dit 
Pétrus. Enfin, je suis Weinbrenner. Enfin, Pétrus dit: Entrez, s'il vous 
plaît. c 
The point of the joke — ainsi, Weinbrenner n'est pas d'artiste d 
—was naturally omitted by the clever young man who spoke 
French so well. Now you know what kind of people are scrambling 
for the honour of becoming your brother-in-law. 
Friedrich 
First published in: Marx/Engels, Printed according to the original 
Gesamtausgabe, Abt." 1, Bd. 2, 1930 „_,.. , , . .„ ,. ,, , r. 
° Published in English for the first 
time 
a According to the latest findings, this is a P.S. to Engels' letter to Marie of 
September 9, 1841 (see this volume, pp. 534-35).— Ed. 
b Ida Engels.— Ed. 
c Saint Petrus was standing at the Heavenly Gate and Köttgen, the Elberfeld 
painter, was approached by Weinbrenner the musician. Now then, Köttgen, you're 
very quiet, tell us something. At last Köttgen said: I had a wonderful dream last 
night. Well, said Weinbrenner, what was it about? Well, said Köttgen, I dreamt I 
was at the Heavenly Gate. All the famous artists were there — Meyerbeer, Horace 
Vernet, etc. Then Meyerbeer knocked on the Gate and Petrus said: Who is there? 
"Meyerbeer." No artists allowed in here, said Pétrus. So then Horace Vernet 
stepped fprward. Who is there? said Pétrus. "Horace Vernet." No artists al­
lowed in here, said Pétrus. So then Weinbrenner came forward. What's going on? 
said Petrus. I am Weinbrenner. So then Pétrus says: Come in, please.— Ed. 
Consequently Weinbrenner is not an artist.— Ed. 

=====第565页=====
To Arnold Rüge, June 15, 1842 543 
50 
TO ARNOLD RUGE 
IN DRESDEN 
Dear Doctor, 
Enclosed please find an article" for the Jahrbücher}' I have put 
the Dante thing to one side for the time being. I would have sent 
it sooner if I had had anything like enough time. 
I got your letter after it had gone to a number of wrong 
addresses. Why didn't I send Schelling und die Offenbarung 0 to the 
Jahrbücher? 1) Because what I had in mind was a book of between 
5 and 6 folios and this was cut down to 3V2 folios only in the 
course of my negotiations with the publishers. 2) Because up to 
then the Jahrbücher had been a little reserved about Schelling. 
3) Because people here advised against attacking Schelling in a 
journal and told me rather to put out a pamphlet against him. 
Schelling, der Philosoph in Christo 0 is also from my pen. 
Apart from all this, I am not a Doctor and cannot ever become 
one. I am only a merchant and a Royal Prussian artillerist, so 
kindly spare me that title. 
I hope to send you another manuscript very soon and in the 
meantime I remain 
Yours sincerely, 
F. Engels (Oswald) 
Berlin, June 15, 42 
Dorotheenstr. 56 
First published in the Archiv Printed according to the original 
für die Geschichte des Sozialismus 
und der Arbeiterbewegung, Published in English for the first 
11. Jg., 1. Heft, Leipzig, 1925 tlme 
a "Alexander Jung, 'Lectures on Modern German Literature'." See this volume, 
pp. 284-97.—Ed. 
b Deutsche Jahrbücher. — Ed. 
c Schelling and Revelation. See this volume, pp. 189-240.— Ed. 
d Schelling, Philosopher in Christ. See this volume, pp. 241-64.— Ed. 

=====第566页=====
544 Frederick Engels 
51 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
IN BONN3 
Dear Marie, 
I congratulate you on your discharge from the noble Mannheim 
Institute and from Fräulein Jung's censorship of your letters. I did 
not want to write about it before so as not to make you even more 
discontented, but I can tell you now that all these boarding-schools 
are nonsense and that the girls in them, unless they have such a 
happy disposition as yours, become terribly spoiled and turn into 
empty-headed coquettes and blue-stockings. b But it's the fashion 
now in Barmen and nobody can do anything about it. Rejoice that 
you are now out of the convent and can sit at the window again 
and walk across the street and occasionally talk nonsense without 
these things being treated as crimes. But I must say one thing to 
you — don't play me any silly tricks by joining in the Barmen 
jumps, namely, the jump into engagement. The noble young folk 
are rushing headlong into marriage, as if they were mad, and so 
blindly that they are knocking each other over. It is exactly like a 
game of blindman's-buff and where two of them catch each other, 
they get engaged, marry and live in blissful contentment. Just look 
at your two cousins. There's Luise Snethlage who has caught a 
husband 0 who's not bad but his hair is grey, and pretty Idad has 
managed to get hold of one too, but I don't think much of him 
either. True, he's my brother-in-law, so I shouldn't run him down, 
but I'm vexed that they didn't ask me whether I wanted this 
Saint-Petrus," this lion, this dandy, this Albert Molineus for a 
brother-in-law, and so he'll have to pay for it. I tell you — if you 
want a suitor like that, I'll send you a dozen every day and each 
day a new dozen. It was generous of me to let the whole thing 
happen at all. I should at least have protested about it. 
Even Schornstein has got himself engaged — it's terrible! And 
Striicker definitely wants to become a husband — isn't that 
strange? I begin to despair of the human race; I shall become a 
a The back of the letter bears the inscription: "Fräulein Marie Engels im 
grossherzoglichen Institut. Bonn." —Ed. 
This term is in English in the original. — Ed. 
c Hermann Siebel.— Ed. 
d Ida Engels.— Ed. 
e See this volume, p. 542.— Ed. 

=====第567页=====
To Arnold Rüge, July 26, 1842 545 
misanthrope if you, Marie, you too—But no, you would not cause 
your brother such pain. 
It's raining very boringly again. I have been soaked at least four 
times this week in the service of the Fatherland — twice from rain 
and twice, to use a delicate expression, from perspiration. I'm now 
going to the reading-room to look at the newspapers; surely I shall 
not get wet there for the fifth time, shall I? 
Adieu. 
Your brother 
Friedrich 
Berlin, July 2, 42 
First published in: Marx/Engels, Printed according to the original 
Gesamtausgabe, Abt. l, Bd. 2, 1930 Published in English for the first 
time 
52 
TO ARNOLD RUGE 
IN DRESDEN 
Dear Sir, 
This time I am writing to inform you that I shall not be sending 
you anything. 
I have decided to abandon all literary work for a while in order 
to devote more time to studying. The reasons for this are fairly 
plain. I am young and self-taught in philosophy. I have learnt 
enough to form my own viewpoint and, when necessary, to defend 
it, but not enough to be able to work for it with success and in the 
proper way. All the greater demands will be made on me because 
I am a "travelling agent" in philosophy and have not earned the 
right to philosophise by getting a doctor's degree. I hope to be 
able to satisfy these demands once I start writing again — and 
under my own name. In addition I must not try to do too many 
things now, as I shall soon be again more fully occupied with 
business matters. Regarded subjectively, my literary activities have 
so far been mere experiments from the outcome of which I was to 
be able to learn whether my natural capacities were such as to 
enable me to work fruitfully and effectively for progress and to 
participate actively in the movement of the century. I can be 

=====第568页=====
546 Frederick Engels 
satisfied with the results and now regard it as my duty to acquire 
by study, which I now continue with redoubled zest, also more and 
more of that which one is not born with. 
When I return home to the Rhineland in October245 I hope to 
be able to meet you in Dresden and to discuss this with you 
further. In the meantime my good wishes and think of me now 
and again. 
Yours, 
F. Engels 
Berlin, 26.7.42 
Have you read Jung's reply 246 ? I think it is the best thing he has 
written so far. In the meantime, the other Jung," of the Rheinische 
Zeitung in Cologne, has arrived here and will look you up on his 
return journey in a few weeks' time. 
First published in Die Internationale, Printed according to the original 
Jg. 2, Heft 26, Berlin, 1920 ^ ... , , . „ .. , , , r. 
Published in English tor the tirst 
time 
53 
TO MARIE ENGELS 
IN OSTENDE 
Berlin, August 2, 1842 
Dear Marie, 
I was very pleased with your long letter but since there were so 
many pages, all written criss-cross, I read your sermon of 
disapproval very quickly and do not really know what you are 
reproaching me about. I can quite understand that Fräulein Jung 
must have pulled a nasty face when she read the true name given 
by Hermann b to her beloved Institute—a convent—and that she 
called him a frivolous fellow. Fortunately, not everybody has such 
a bad opinion of frivolity as your erstwhile Head Sin Recorder. 
And this is a good thing. Otherwise what would become of us 
a Georg Jung.— Ed. 
b Hermann Engels. — Ed. 

=====第569页=====
To Marie Engels, August 2-8, 1842 547 
both, I ask you? I too have to suffer being growled and shouted at 
by my Captain3 and think to  myself:  who cares, and cock a snook 
at him. And when he makes things too hard for me, as he did last 
Wednesday when everyone was dismissed except me, simply 
because my orderly had not got me excused, and I had to go to 
the artillery range at 12 noon just to see some impossible piece of 
nonsense not carried out — in such cases I just report sick, this 
time with toothache, and so save myself a night march and a 
two-hour exercise. Unfortunately, I have to report back for duty 
again today. However, I go for a stroll if I feel like it. Berlin is a 
big place and only three officers in our company know me, so it is 
highly unlikely that they'll bump into me. The only thing that 
could happen is that they might send the company doctor to see 
me, but that would take time and the worst that could happen if 
he didn't find me at home would be that I would get a good 
telling off. Who cares! 
You seem to have an enormous talent for making acquaintances. 
The girl is in Bonn for four weeks and already knows the names 
of half the University and has found herself an interesting lame 
student whom she encounters six times a day. The interesting 
lame student with the spectacles and fair beard! He undoubtedly 
had his legs shot up in a duel. Only why does he still limp when 
walking? Does he limp in an interesting way or ordinarily, like 
other lame people? Which foot is lame — the right one or both? 
Does he wear a hat with a red cock's feather? Could he not be the 
diable boitewP? I'd like to know a great deal more about this 
interesting, lame, bearded, bespectacled, sharp-eyed student. 
Have you continued to make friends in Ostende? Isn't there an 
interesting lame Fleming there who meets you on the beach six 
times a day? Look: 
Happily the Convent leaving, 
Free to move again am I. 
I can laugh and I can chatter, 
In the window I can lie! 
With Duennas watching round me, 
Oh, what agony of mind, 
Sitting at the daily lessons, 
Cribbed and cabined and confined! 
a Von Wedell.— Ed. 
b Limping devil (an allusion to the title character of Le Sage's novel).— Ed. 

=====第570页=====
548 Frederick Engels 
Oft I heard those Heidelbergers 
Singing outside merrily; 
Could not even reach the window 
All the gallant lads to see! 
Now I'm free at last, and want to 
Taste my new-found liberty. 
There's a new life waiting after 
All that grey monotony! 
I'll look out my newest clothes and 
Dress as pretty as I please. 
I'll be off to see the poshest 
Of the posh Academies! 
Poppelsdorf and Königswinter! 
Rolandseck and Drachenfels! 
Goggle at my so sparkling eyes 
And my sparkling teeth as well! 
And I'll bet that though our fellow 
Students may be quite a host, 
Getting our address will take them 
Eight days at the very most. 
Landlord Stamm be truly grateful 
That your lodging-house we chose. 
Tippling students throng your garden, 
And the money really flows. 
Best of all, when I'm out walking, 
How I'm crowded round and courted! 
See the poor Professors' daughters 
All alone and unescorted! 
Bottle-heroes Count d'Alviella, 
Von Szczepansky come and linger: 
See me twist those gallant fellows 
Round and round my little finger! 
Herr von Diest, the truly love-lorn, 
Runs my errands all the while. 
Chapeau plays his fife for dancing, 
Bunsen sings to make me smile. 

=====第571页=====
To Marie Engels, August 2-8, 1842 549 
But there's something always haunts me 
When I leave the busy throng, 
And it is a handsome student 
Limping painfully along. 
While the others are so busy 
Doing all that I want done, 
How am I to meet that handsome 
Lame and interesting one? 
Now I've left my town of Bonn 
For the North Sea's level shore. 
No more rousing student ditties, 
Just the ocean's mighty roar. 
With the French and with the Belgians 
I go strolling by the seas, 
Just as in the Convent, I must 
Speak French only, if you please. 
Once again, crowds of admirers 
Follow me along the strip, 
Follow me into the briny 
When I take my morning dip. 
Otherwise, it's just like Bonn, 
And I have no cause to grumble. 
Food and lodgings both are decent, 
And the landlord's tolerable. 
Yet, for all those bathers, someone's 
Missing, when all's said and done. 
Woe is me! I just can't find that 
Lame and interesting one! 
This describes you perfectly, don't you think? I want to set it to 
music for you so you can sing it. But you'll only get the score 
when I answer your next letter, otherwise I would spoil you by 
sending such a magnificent gift. I have other things to do than to 
praise you in song — that can only be permitted as a reward for an 
especially long letter. 

=====第572页=====
550 Frederick Engels 
You must try to learn the Flemish or Netherlandic dialect while 
you are in Ostende. It is a very clumsy language, but it has its 
advantages and anyway it is very comical. If you know Low 
German, you'll probably be able to understand Flemish. 
I now have a dog whom I got from August Bredt of Barmen 
when he left here. It's a handsome young spaniel, much bigger 
than our dear Mira and quite crazy. He has a great talent for 
boozing and if I go to a restaurant in the evening, he always sits 
near me and has his share, or makes himself at home at everybody 
else's table. He's also remarkable for an invisible collar. He is an 
excellent swimmer but too crazy to learn any tricks. I have taught 
him one thing. When I say "Namenloser"' (that's his name) — 
"there's an aristocrat!" he goes wild with rage and growls hideously 
at the person I show him. 
While everybody has been forecasting that the Rhine wine will 
be splendid this year, the Grüneberger has turned out to be 
disgracefully bad. Do you know Grüneberger? Grüneberger is a 
Lausitz vine which only grows in sand and never produces good 
grapes except in a very wet year. When the hardness of the grapes 
turns from stone to wood, i. e., when you can cut into them with a 
knife, then they are ripe. They are pressed by steam-engine and 
people reckon that it takes a twelve horse-power machine working 
for an hour to press a hundred grapes. The best year for 
Grüneberger was '40. It cannot be put into casks because it splits 
the wood. When it is good you should eat a dozen pins, then drink 
a glass of Grüneberger, and if the pins are not dissolved or 
destroyed in five minutes it means the wine is no good. It is a very 
long-lasting wine for if you take a swig, your throat is sore for 
four weeks. It has a very fine bouquet and only a connoisseur can 
tell the difference between it and vinegar. A mixture of nitric acid 
and wine-vinegar comes closest in taste to this noble wine. Well, 
you've had enough now, and I still have to write to Mother. 
Adieu. 
Your brother 
Friedrich 
Berlin, Aug. 8, 42 
First published in: Marx/Engels, Printed according to the original 
Gesamtausgabe, Abt. l, Bd. 2, 1930 Published in English for the first 
time 
a Nameless one.— Ed. 

=====第573页=====
EARLY LITERARY EXPERIMENTS 
(1833-1837) 

=====第574页=====
'A \-
vmàm **ns*nHH*|s 
The house in Barmen where Engels was born 

=====第575页=====
TO MY GRANDFATHER 
Barmen, December 20, 1833 
O you dear Grandfather, who always treat us so kindly, 
Always helping us when our work isn't going so smoothly, 
While you were here, you told me many a beautiful story 
Of Cercyon and Theseus, and Argus the hundred-eyed monster, 
The Minotaur, Ariadne, and Aegeus drowned in the ocean, 
The Golden Fleece, the Argonauts and Jason defiant,247 
Mighty Hercules, Danaus, and Cadmus the hero, 
And—I can't remember all of the things that you told me; 
Well, I wish you, Grandfather, a Happy New Year and a gay one, 
Long, long years to come, with plenty of joy and no worries, 
Everything good in life that can possibly happen to people, 
All this is wished for you by your loving, affectionate grandson. 
Friedr. Engels 
First published in the book: F. Engels, Printed according to the original 
Schriften der Frühzeit, Berlin, 1920 Published in English for the first 
time 
Bernhard van Haar. — Ed. 
19-384 

=====第576页=====
POEM, 1836 
The evening sky grows dimmer 
With pictures to delight, 
As, through the clouds, stars glimmer 
With soft and gentle light. 
Now they draw near — full well 
Those forms I seem to know: 
The Archer, William Tell, 
Siegfried, the Dragon's foe; 
Then Faust, the defiant one, 
Achilles, striding free, 
The warrior-knight Bouillon 
With all his chivalry; 
Then — please, no laughing, brother  — 
On gallant steed doth ride 
Don Quixote and none other 
Across this world so wide. 
Approaching and receding, 
They float across the night, 
Who can arrest their speeding, 
Or stay them in their flight? 
Oft may these poetry-weaving 
Fair images appear, 
To put an end to grieving 
As gently they draw near. 
First published in Die Internationale, Printed according to the facsimile 
Berlin, Jg. 2, Heft 26, December 1, 1920 of the original reproduced in the 
journal 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第577页=====
POEM 
Probably Written Early in 1837 
1. Lord Jesus Christ, God's only son, 
O step down from Thy heavenly throne 
And save my soul for me. 
Come down in all Thy blessedness, 
Light of Thy Father's holiness, 
Grant that I may choose Thee. 
Lovely, splendid, without sorrow is the 
joy with which we raise, 
Saviour, unto Thee our praise. 
2. And when I draw my dying breath 
And must endure the pangs of death, 
Firm to Thee may I hold; 
That when my eyes with dark are filled 
And when my beating heart is stilled, 
In Thee shall I grow cold. 
Up in Heaven shall my spirit praise 
Thy name eternally, 
Since it lieth safe in Thee. 
3. O were the time of joy but nigh 
When from Thy loving bosom I 
Might draw new life that warms. 
And then, O God, with thanks to Thee, 
Shall I embrace those dear to me 
Forever in my arms. 
Ever, ever, ever-living, Thee abiding to behold 
Shall my life anew unfold. 
Thou earnest Humankind to free 
From death and ill, that there might be 

=====第578页=====
556 Frederick Engels 
Blessings and fortune everywhere. 
And now with this, Thy new descent, 
On Earth all shall be different; 
To each man shalt Thou give his share. 
First published in: Marx/Engels, Printed according to the original 
Gesamtausgabe, Abt. l, Bd. 2, 1930 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第579页=====
[A PIRATE TALE] 
I 
On a winter's morning in the year 1820 a ship was on the point 
of setting sail from the island of Kuluri, Salamis of old and scene 
of Athenian valour. It was a Greek merchant vessel which with its 
large crew had brought to Athens mastic, gum arabic and the like, 
but more especially Damascus blades, cedar-wood and fine cloths 
from Asia. 
Ashore all was activity. The captain was moving among the 
sailors at their work, seeing that everything was done properly, 
when one sailor whispered to another in Italian: 
"Philippo, do you see that young man standing over there? That 
is the new passenger the captain took on last night; he wants him 
to join us, and if he refuses, he'll be sent to the bottom of the sea, 
for he shall not reach Stamboul, as he intends." 
"But," said Philippo, "what manner of man is he then?" "I do 
not know, but the captain doubtless will." Just then a shot rang 
out from the ship and all made for the boats. The captain boarded 
the sloop and cried out: "Young man — ahoy, why are you 
dreaming? Come along. We want to be off." The young man to 
whom these words were addressed and who had hitherto stood by 
a column in silence, looked up: "Ah yes," he called, "I'm coming," 
and strode rapidly toward the boat. He got in, and the vessel 
pulled away from the shore with quick strokes of the oars. The 
ship was soon reached, and after a cannon had been fired, the 
ship's crew assembled on board, and soon the anchor was weighed, 
the sails set, and like a giant swan the brig flew swiftly out over the 
blue-tinted sea. 
But the captain, who had hitherto directed the work of the 
crew, now approached the handsome youth, who was leaning 

=====第580页=====
558 Frederick Engels 
sorrowfully as before on the rail of the ship and gazing gloomily at 
the peaks of Hymettus as they sank ever further into the distance. 
"Young man," he addressed him, "come down to the saloon, I 
have something to say to you." 
"Gladly," the other answered and followed in the captain's 
steps. 
When they were below, the captain bade him be seated, and 
having poured each of them a glass from a bottle of Chios wine, 
he said: 
"Listen, I have a suggestion to make to you. But first, what is 
your name? And where are you from?" 
"Leon Papon is my name and I am from Athinai. And you?" 
"Captain Leonidas Spezziotis (from Spezia). Now listen! Doubt­
less you think us honest traders? We are no such thing! Have a 
look at our cannon, both exposed and concealed, our ammunition, 
our armoury, and you will easily see that we carry on such trading 
merely as a guise. You will see that we are different, better men, 
true Hellenes, men who still have a taste for freedom — in short, 
corsairs, as the infidels, whom we harass sorely, are wont to call us. 
And now to you, for you are to my liking and remind me much of 
a dear son of mine whom the infidels shot before my eyes last 
year, I would propose that you should join us and help fight for 
the freedom of the Hellenes and harm the infidel cause, to whom 
Homer's lines could well be applied: 
"Eaasia'. ^jJiap, b\' äv TOT' o/.ci>Xr ( " Rio;  iprj, 
Kat npiajxo;, xai iaéç èujijie).!«) Ilptâjxoio. a 
But should you be disinclined to do this, I cannot answer for the 
consequences; for when my men hear what I have revealed to you, 
they will most certainly demand your death, and I shall not be 
able to save you." 
"What's that you say? Corsairs? Will I join you? Straight away! 
To be able to take revenge on my father's murderers! Oh gladly, 
gladly will I join your ranks, with fury will I fight the Moslems 
and slaughter them like cattle!" 
"So it is agreed! Leon, thus you are to my liking! Let us drink a 
bottle of Chios wine to the new alliance!" And the old imbiber 
poured the wine briskly and many a time exhorted his more 
moderate comrade with a merry "Drink up, Leon," until the 
bottle was empty. 
a In time the day will come when holy Ilion will fall, 
Priam too, and the people of the spear-brandishing king.  (Iliad,  IV.) — Ed. 

=====第581页=====
Early Literary Experiments 559 
Now he went with his new comrade through the ship and 
showed him the stores. First they went into the armoury. There 
hung magnificent garments of all kinds, close-fitting sailors' 
jackets, capacious caftans, tall hats, small Greek caps, broad 
turbans, close-fitting western breeches and baggy Turkish trousers, 
gaily embroidered Persian waistcoats, Hungarian Hussar jackets, 
and Russian fur coats, all paraded in motley array in large 
cupboards. The walls were covered with the weapons of all 
nations: every type of fire-arm from small pocket pistols to 
triple-barrelled heavy muskets, swords of every description, 
Damascus blades, Spanish rapiers, German broadswords, short 
Italian daggers and curved handjars, all carefully ordered in their 
places. In the corners were spear-stands, so that the whole space 
of the room was used. Next they entered the powder-magazine. 
Eight large barrels, each with a hundred pounds of gunpowder, 
and four small ones of ten pounds stood there; there were three 
barrels of bombs, and two larger ones of shells; the cupboards at 
the sides were full of jars and pots containing powder mixed with 
pieces of lead, stones and pieces of iron. Then they entered the 
room in which Leonidas showed him several sacks full of cannon-
balls.  They went up again to the cannons. On each side stood 
twelve cannons of large bore, and on the quarter-deck another two 
forty-eight pounders. Dotted about everywhere stood swivel guns, 
some thirty pieces of ordnance in all. In the saloon, to which they 
returned, Leonidas showed Leon three cases of musket-balls and 
two of mixed shot. 
"Our ship is in good shape, is it not?" he said to him. 
"Splendid," replied the other, "it could not be better. But now 
let me look around on deck a little more." 
He went up. However it was not long before he found him 
standing once more at the rail. They were just passing Cape 
Colonae, ancient Sunium, and Leon was again looking despond­
ently back at the peaks of Hymettus just as they were disappear­
ing from view, when Leonidas addressed him as follows: 
"Now, lad, why so melancholy? Come on to the quarter-deck 
with me and tell me about your life." 
And Leon accompanied him and told the following tale: 
II 
I shall soon be 16 years of age. My father was the merchant 
Gregorios Papon; my mother was called Diana; I am called Leon, 
my twin sister is called Zoë and my younger brother Alexis. It is 

=====第582页=====
560 Frederick Engels 
some three months since the Pasha of Athinai saw a young 
slave-girl that my father had brought up with us. He asked for her 
at once, and when my father refused to let him have her, he swore 
to be revenged and kept his oath, to our undoing. For as we were 
sitting quietly together one evening and I was singing songs to the 
cithara with Selima, the slave-girl, Zoë and Alexis, the Pasha's 
Arnauts entered, seized our dear father and Selima from among 
us and took them away; and we were turned out and left with 
nowhere to turn for help. We departed thence and at length 
arrived at the place before the gate where the old Macedonian 
fortress stood. There we found shelter in the house of compas­
sionate peasants who gave us bread and a little meat. From there 
we made our way toward Piraeus. But alas! My sister's strength 
was exhausted and she sank down half-swooning beneath an 
olive-tree. As for  myself,  I wanted to return to the city and seek 
help of our relatives. I went despite my mother's entreaties and 
when I reached the Acropolis and was about to ascend, I 
found — imagine my joy — my father. I cannot tell you how 
joyfully I embraced him and how I pictured our happiness and 
my mother's joy. Alas, all too soon I was to be disappointed! For 
hardly had we gone a few steps when we saw coming the 
commander of the Pasha's troop of Arnauts. He recognised my 
father, drew his sabre and fell upon him. My father took the 
gnarled stave which he had picked up earlier in his right hand 
and held his ground, the Turk struck and cut the stave in two; the 
blow fell upon my father's shoulder; the Turk struck again and 
caught my defenceless father about the head so that he sank to the 
ground. I seized the fallen stave and threw it into the Turk's face; 
in his fury he dropped his sabre, but drew a hammer from his belt 
and dashed it against my head so that I fell down senseless. 
When I came to myself again, my father lay beside me breathing 
his last. He said, "Leon — my son—flee — flee from here! You are 
not safe! Is your mother free?" When I confirmed it, he said: 
"Oh, go to Kuluri, and from there to Nauplia—I have friends 
there." I asked: "Father, what is the name of your murderer?" 
"Leon—his name  is — Mustapha —Bey — God have— mer — cy — 
on my poor—soul," and with these words he departed. I em­
braced the body, cried, lamented and shouted for help — but 
he remained dead and no one came to my help. At length 
I rose weeping to my feet, girt my good father's belt about 
me, thrust the murderer's sabre in it and swore to discard neither 
belt nor sabre — until my father's blood had been washed by 
Turkish blood. 

=====第583页=====
Early Literary Experiments 561 
Now I went out of the city gates—but—oh misery, my loved 
ones were no longer therel A bloody dagger, my mother's 
blood-stained veil and Alexis' cap lying there testified that violence 
had been done here also. This is the cap I am wearing now; this is 
the dagger (he pointed to a fine Turkish dagger in his belt), and 
the veil I have been wearing since then next to my heart, beneath 
my chiton.* 
Only now did I give thought to my wound. It was beginning to 
pain me; I felt it and pushed my cap back — the blood poured 
afresh over my face. I lay down beneath the tree and bound a 
cloth round my head. 
I fell asleep; and in my sleep I fancied that I saw my father 
coming towards me, fresh and blooming, and my mother at his 
side,  and Zoë and Alexis with them, and they lifted me up, but 
then the Turks came, and my father's murderer fell screaming at 
our feet — I awoke and found myself lying on a cart — an old man 
stood before me and told me to be calm, and drove me away. 
He took me to St. Nicholas, where he restored me to health. I 
stayed four weeks with him, then he gave me money and took me 
to Kuluri in his own boat. There I parted from him, and we 
divided a piastre as a keepsake. I remained here several days, 
there being no opportunity for departure. The rest you know. 
Ill 
Such was the burden of young Papon's tale. Leonidas at once 
took him by the hand, went with him into the armoury and bade 
him select his outfit. For clothing he took some light Greek 
breeches and a short blue coat. For arms he chose a short 
double-barrelled rifle, two brace of double pocket pistols and a 
hammer. Leonidas said, "Well, take a sabre too! Or at least a 
scabbard for it." "No," he said, "I shall not be parted from this 
sabre! And it will remain bare until I have won myself a scabbard 
for it." 
Meanwhile it began to grow dark. They reached the isle of Ceos. 
They did not land, but nonetheless they took in all sail and sent a 
rocket up from the top of the main mast. At once a boat with a 
cross upon its prow drew near. In it sat six armed men who 
moored the boat at the stern and boarded. Leonidas introduced 
the new comrade to them, and they welcomed him heartily. 
Thereupon Leonidas said: 
* Tunic. The undergarment worn by the Greeks: X'twu or xidcôu .— Note by 
Engels. 

=====第584页=====
562 Frederick Engels 
"Well, Stephanos, what have you hunted out?" 
Stephanos: "There in the city harbour lies a Turkish merchant 
ship.  I was there disguised as a tradesman. But whom do you 
think I saw, Leonidas? Just imagine, our old comrade Dukas was 
there as a slave. I got him out in a chest. The ship has only three 
cannons, but the crew is large and well armed; there are some 
thirty Turks aboard. But I have won over two Greek passengers, 
who are travelling to Athinai. They will occupy the powder-
magazine." 
Leonidas: "Ah, splendid! You stay here and wait a little." 
He hurried down to the saloon, returned with three bottles of 
wine and emptied them with Leon and the six newcomers. In the 
course of this he said: 
"We are now — wait—you six, twenty men on board, Leon, 
myself,  that makes twenty-eight, two Turks as passengers to 
Serpho, one of whom is a Janissary.— Notos!" 
The man thus summoned came. 
"Take Protos and Taras with you to the saloon, disarm the 
Turks and bring them up." He went. 
Leonidas called again: "Mykalis!" 
"Here," cried the latter, at the double. 
"Load the cannons for firing, prepare the swivel guns, load 
three with shot and balls, and the rest with lead, glass, stones and 
iron! Fetch up sixty shells, two bombs and a case of balls! Every 
man is to arm  himself!"  His command was carried out. "And now, 
my son," as he turned to Leon, "now you will have the chance to 
try your first battle with us. Fight bravely. As soon as the ship 
engages with us, stay by me and do as I do. Do not venture to 
board before I do; it could well cost you your life." 
"Yes,"  said Stephanos, "I know that. Imagine, Leon, I jumped 
on board the enemy ship with two young fellows like  yourself;  the 
enemy chopped off the hooks and there we were in their hands. 
We fought, but after my two companions had died, I was all but 
crushed in the throng and took a sharp blow on the head; the scar 
is still visible; and I would certainly have lost my life, if our side 
had not meantime again grappled fast." 
Then Notos came with the two Turks, one of whom wore his 
arm bandaged. Notos said to Leonidas: 
"Here, I have them now. They fought desperately. Our Janis­
sary here dealt poor Protos a blow such as he will scarcely recover 
from. He was repaid by me with a broken arm, while Taras seized 
the other Turk around the body and threw him to the ground." 
"Yes,"  said the Janissary, "that was a skilful feat indeed, 

=====第585页=====
Early literary Experiments 563 
overwhelming us as we sat peacefully in the saloon! But they paid 
dearly for it and that consoles me." 
"Oh," answered Leonidas, "I never doubted your bravery. But 
you shan't be without your reward; if you wish, I shall disembark 
you tomorrow morning on Thermia; but each of you shall give me 
fifty piastres ransom." They were glad to do so and were escorted 
back to the saloon, where they stayed under Notos' guard, while 
Leonidas went to Protos, who was lying in a hammock. He 
examined the wound and saw it was a blow from a handjar right 
across the skull, which had been damaged in one place. It was a 
deadly wound; yet there was still hope. He applied a plaster and 
retired along with Leon to bed. To the latter he allotted a couch 
alongside his own. 
In the middle of the night they were woken. Stephanos was 
standing before them. 
"Make haste, arise, there is a sail in sight to the north. You may 
see it by its lamp." In a moment both were armed. Leonidas 
opened a cupboard and gave Leon a bag of musket-balls, one of 
shot, and a fine large powder-horn. He also furnished himself 
with ammunition and both went on deck. 
"Mykalis," said the captain, "where are the swivel cannons?" 
When these were pointed out, he placed himself by one, Leon 
by the second and Stephanos by the third. 
The crew gathered on deck. Leonidas bade them assemble and 
numbered them off. Counting himself there were twenty-six. He 
ordered Notos to be relieved, and the latter came and placed 
himself by one of the forty-eight pounders, Mykalis by the other. 
The swivel guns were hard by. 
All eyes were directed at the lamp. They were drawing nearer to 
it. Then it went out, and they had to steer on in the direction they 
had taken. Several times it reappeared, but eventually they quite 
lost it. 
Day came. The sea was covered with fog patches, which 
gradually dispersed. Then Stephanos, who was up the mast, cried 
out: "I see the ship! It is the same one as I saw in the harbour at 
Ceos." 
Leonidas also saw it through his telescope. Stephanos came 
down. At once all sail was raised to catch it, and soon it was visible 
to them all. They ran up the Turkish flag and drew near to it. 
After some three hours they were so near that it was only a little 
out of firing range. Then Leonidas ordered the Turkish flag to be 
taken down and the black and red one with the white cross run 
up. The Turkish ship had however already turned to the north-

=====第586页=====
564 Frederick Engels 
west and put on all sail to gain Makronisi. But soon Leonidas was 
hard upon it, and a cannon-ball sped at his command through the 
enemy rigging. The Turks replied at once, but then withdrew. 
Then Leonidas called: "Here, Mykalis with your fifteen men, go 
and row your hardest! We must have it! Notos! You go to the 
bows and fire on the enemy when we are at half range! Taras and 
his five men are to stay here." 
The ship flew faster. Nearer and nearer they approached their 
prey. Meanwhile Leonidas commanded: 
"Taras,  as soon as Mykalis returns, go to the starboard cannon; 
Stephanos is in charge of the stern cannon; Leon stays by me!" 
Then Notos fired from his twelve-pounder, another five can­
nons roared, and one of the enemy's sails fell with its mast-top and 
hung from the ropes! A cry of delight issued on the spot; the 
cannon fired once more and the ship's bowsprit was shattered. 
The Turks could not escape. The ship came nearer, and quickly 
Leonidas and Leon gave fire with their swivel guns. Several men 
fell; yet the shots had achieved but little. Mykalis returned; they 
were quite near the Turks now, with salvoes flying right and left; 
but the Turks were also firing bravely; then Leonidas gave a full 
salvo and moved close in to the enemy. The swivel guns banged; 
as the enemy's deck cleared somewhat, the Greeks grappled. 
Mykalis and his band, Leonidas and Leon stood by the grappling-
hooks; they fired their muskets amongst the enemy, hauled at 
the hooks, and in a flash Mykalis and Leon were there with the 
enemy. Leon pulled a pistol and shot down the first comer; his 
cutlass flashed this way and that—and one Turk fell upon the 
other. Then Mykalis fell; but Leonidas was there, and the Hellenes 
advanced; a furious struggle developed, but the Greeks who were 
still on their ship fired valiantly away, and in a short while some of 
the Turks laid down their arms. Then a gigantic Arnaut leapt on 
to the deck, swung his cutlass and shouted: 
"What's this, Moslems? Do you intend to let yourselves be 
slaughtered by the infidels? Seize your cutlasses and cut down 
these dogs!" 
He leapt forward and cut down one of the Hellenes. "Where is 
your leader?" he called. "Here," shouted Leonidas and pushed 
forward. They fought. Leonidas remained cool in the face of the 
heavy, furious blows of his enemy. In a blind, mad fury the latter 
rushed forward, struck and managed to hit his opponent's left 
arm. Leonidas gripped his broadsword hard and shattered his 
enemy's cutlass, struck again and blood welled up from the Turk's 
breast. But another Turk rushed up to Leonidas and dealt him 

=====第587页=====
Early Literary Experiments 565 
such a blow across the face that he fell. Leon saw him fall, struck 
the assassin dead, held back the enemy, and the latter now laid 
down their arms. 
But the wounded leader with ten men was just landing in his 
boat on Makro  nisi. 
IV 
Now he surveyed the scene of battle. Twelve Turks lay there 
dead. Eight were wounded; ten had laid down their arms, and ten 
had escaped. 
But four Greeks lay there dead too; Mykalis lay dying; Notos 
had a shot in his thigh; the captain had his cutlass wound, and 
three more were slightly wounded. Leon too had his head grazed 
by a bullet and a cut on his left arm. 
Stephanos went up to him. "You fought bravely, Leon; but you 
must come to Leonidas. What, are you bleeding?" 
"It is nothing, just a trifle. What vexes me most is that the 
cursed Arnaut escaped us. I would gladly have quite done for 
him." 
He went to Leonidas. The captain said: "Leon, I now give 
Notos' command to you until he is recovered. Stephanos is 
commander-in-chief until I can resume my office. Go to Mykalis 
and see how he fares." 
He obeyed. "He is very weak; he has a shot in the breast and a 
stab in the thigh. But Taras still has hope." 
Stephanos returned. "The ship is loaded with cotton for Athinai 
and ammunition for Nauplia. Also dates, coco-nuts, figs and all 
manner of provisions in superfluity, for occasional sale." 
"Bring over everything that is of value in the ship and order 
course for Porto Raphthi," said Leonidas. "Leon, go over with 
Stephanos. Question the prisoners; note everything they say." 
He went. The gist of the prisoners' statements was as follows: 
the ship was a merchantman and belonged to a merchant in 
Ismir,* named Murad. His brother Ali had been in command of 
the ship and was the very man whom Leon had wounded. They 
had reached Sykia where they had received news that there were 
corsairs in that vicinity. For this reason they had taken on ten 
more men for Athinai the previous night. Then they had seen the 
ship and been attacked. To the question of where the Greek 
passengers were, they said one had fallen into the sea and the 
* Smyrna.—  Note  by Engels. 

=====第588页=====
566 Frederick Engels 
other had been killed by AH when the corsair ship had been 
recognised. 
Then the ship was searched through. Besides the goods already 
cited, much weaponry and ammunition was found, along with 
cloth and clothing. Best of all were three bags of gold, with  5,000 
piastres in each. These were brought to the saloon of the Greek 
ship. 
Between Sunium and the Argolis peninsula lies an islet,* rocky 
and deserted. To this Leonidas steered. They landed the following 
morning. But as they wanted [to secure themselves] against Ali 
and the Turks, who would certainly persuade the Pasha of Eyribos 
or Athens to send a ship against the pirates, they set down the 
Turks there, gave them some provisions, two cutlasses and a 
musket with ammunition, so that they might provide for them­
selves by hunting hares and the like, which abound on such 
islands. 
They were about to depart—but Leon was missing. He had 
gone off to hunt; they searched — then a shot was heard, they 
hastened in that direction and — there lay Leon in his own blood, 
beside him a Turk who had been shot dead, and another with 
Leon's bloody cutlass in his hand stood by. Stephanos, who was 
there first, leapt in and attacked the Turk. After a short struggle 
he dashed the cutlass from his enemy's hand, hurled him to the 
ground and struck off his head. 
Then several others appeared. Leon was laid upon a stretcher of 
boughs and carried back. Taras, who examined the youth, found 
that the Turk had dealt him a blow across the head, another 
across the thigh and a slight scratch across the arm. 
At length the wounded man regained his senses. "Where is my 
cutlass?" was his first question. When it was shown to him he said, 
"Where is the Turk who struck me?" 
"I have killed him," said Stephanos. "But be calm, you are 
dangerously wounded." 
The head wound was dangerous; the journey by ship could only 
do harm, so it was resolved to capture the Turks and set them 
down on the coast of the Morea; and to leave Leon, Mykalis, who 
was also in danger, Notos and Leonidas here with three men to 
tend them. Stephanos would pick them up again a few weeks later. 
The Turks were again assembled, only one was still missing; but 
as they sighted a Turkish ship in the distance, the corsairs' ship set 
sail with Stephanos. Apart from the wounded and Taras with his 
* Called San Giorgio di Aspara.— Note by Engels. 

=====第589页=====
Early Literary Experiments 567 
two helpers another five remained behind, who were to get the 
Turkish ship to Epina and departed the following day. 
Leon's condition improved visibly. After six days he could 
already get up and walk around a little. The following week 
Mykalis too stepped out of the door of the little hut they had built. 
Leonidas and Notos were already almost completely recovered and 
had often been hunting. One day Notos returned and said: 
"I have seen a Turk. But he ran away quickly. Let us be on our 
guard." 
The following day he again went hunting with Leonidas. They 
met a wild goat. Then they separated. Notos was walking through 
the woods when a shot rang out, Notos fell, and the Turk, with a 
pistol in his left hand and a dagger in his right, dashed forward, 
bent down, and swung the dagger, at which moment the wounded 
man rose, drew a pistol and shot the Moslem down. Before long 
all the Greeks gathered. The Turk was dead; his shot had entered 
Notos' breast, but the handle of his dagger had deadened the shot 
and there was no danger. 
Notos was borne home and suffered another week before he 
could rise again. Then they were all recovered; but the provisions 
were exhausted and the isle provided little from hunting. 
V 
They had been on the island for four weeks when Stephanos 
came and took them off. He had sold the Turkish ship to an 
English merchant in Thessalonica for 10,000 piastres; likewise the 
cotton to another for 4,000 piastres. The corsairs' ship was newly 
equipped, three new cannons, ammunition replenished threefold, 
muskets and other arms in abundance. The well-rewarded pirates 
were also in better condition. Now the ship set sail for Candia. But 
when they were within view of Milos, a ship of Turkish appear­
ance hove in sight. At once Leonidas fell in behind and pursued it 
into the bay of Milos, across the mouth of which several small 
islands are scattered. Here the ship fled, protected by the cannons 
of the harbour naval yard. Now it became evident that it was an 
Egyptian galley. A furious battle developed. The Greeks fired 
away bravely; but then a Turkish ship — a small  man-of-
war— sailed into the bay and attacked the Hellenes from the rear. 
Leonidas grappled with the Turks — sent Stephanos on board, and 
after a short struggle the ship was won. 
Meantime a salvo from the fort had hit the Greek ship and it 
was sinking. So it was hastily steered to the shore on to a sandbank 

=====第590页=====
568 Frederick Engels 
where it grounded. But the men climbed aboard the captured 
Turkish ship, pressed the galley hard and grappled. Leon leapt 
across and was followed by others; Stephanos went too, without 
delay, and attacked. Leon, always in the lead, bathed his sword in 
Moslem blood; he laid on furiously, Stephanos followed him, and 
they pushed far ahead. Then Leon was faced by the enemy leader, 
a gigantic Egyptian. He fought with him but neither could 
overcome the other; at length Leon dealt his opponent a rapid 
blow on the left arm; then the latter drew a pistol, fired it, but 
instead of Leon hit another Hellene and fell beneath the blows of 
his valiant adversary. With his fall the ship was won. The few 
Turks laid down their arms and were put on land, where Taras 
approached the fort in Turkish costume to negotiate the restora­
tion of the ship. The avaricious Pasha was persuaded by a gift of 
three hundred piastres, but secretly sent a boat to Siphanto where 
several ships of the Turkish fleet lay. It found them and at once 
all three sailed up. Notos and Taras had gone out to the mouth of 
the bay in their boat when they sighted the ships and brought the 
news to Leonidas. The latter swiftly dispatched some of his men 
aboard the Turkish ships where he had also sent ammunition for 
small arms and several cannons; most of them, however, he 
ordered aboard his own ship, to which also went some thirty 
newly-hired fellows from Milos. Leon, who was in command of the 
little naval brig, stationed himself at the entrance to the bay. Then 
the Turks came. One ship entered first. Thereupon Leon gave it a 
full salvo at the bows, turned his ship, grappled and boarded with 
his whole crew. But the next ship fastened on from the other side, 
sent in its crew, and a furious battle ensued. Leon fought bravely. 
Many a Turk fell beneath his blows, but many a brave Hellene too 
was made to breathe his last beneath the swords of the Turks, and 
fortune inclined to the barbarians' side, who, however, were thrice 
as numerous. Then Leon saw his father's murderer. Rage seized 
him as he saw the big Arnaut, who was at that moment felling an 
old Hellene. "Hunkiar!" (Murderer) he cried, "turn and face 
younger men!" And at once he turned and fought, in strength 
twice the Hellene's equal but inferior to him in fury. They fought 
furiously. Blow fell upon blow.— Then the Turk dropped his 
cutlass as Leon gave him a blow on the hand. But he snatched the 
familiar hammer from his belt and, raging with fury and pain, 
bore down on Leon, and soon the broad surface of the hammer 
descended a second time on Leon's brow, and Leon fell beneath 
the Turk's incessant heavy blows. 

=====第591页=====
Wt 
û&Odt 
Iren 
FR.ENGELS. 
Cover  of Engels' history exercise book 

=====第592页=====
_ 
Drawing by Engels from his history exercise book 

=====第593页=====
Early Literary Experiments 571 
"The devil has him now!" he cried. "Now for the others." But 
these were already almost all dead, and only a few, deprived of 
their arms, had been taken prisoner. 
Meantime the two other ships had sailed into the harbour and 
were pursuing Leonidas, who threw himself with all his crew and 
the money on to the galley and, escaping the enemy's pursuit, left 
the harbour safely for the open sea and sailed for Belo Paulo, 
from where he meant to obtain news of Leon and the rest. 
Written in 1837 Printed according to the original 
First published in Russian in: Marx and Published in English for the first 
Engels,  Works  (first Russian edition), time 
Vol. II, 1929, and in German in: 
Marx/Engels,  Gesamtausgabe,  Abt. 1, 
Bd. 2, 1930 

=====第594页=====
THE SINGLE COMBAT OF ETEOCLES 
AND POLYNICES248 
Why do the companies of the Greeks and their swift horses 
march through the great city of the mighty sons of Gadmus? And 
why throughout the plain do men with white shields move in 
polished arms around the long walls? 
There comes against the city of the stout son of Agenor an army 
of Argive men for a mighty prize, there come the leaders of the 
Danaans, bringing war to Thebes, Tydeus, Capaneus and Parth-
enopaeus, King Amphiaraus, the godlike might of Hippomedon, 
King Adrastus, and Polynices, king of men; all march together 
with horse and car. 
There glitter in the field iron lances and bossy shields and 
silver-studded swords. Just as when a serpent suddenly coils round 
a sheep and envelops it, enclosing all its limbs, so did the Danaans 
surround the seat of Thebe. 
But when all the ranks had taken up their position, spear in 
hand, men came out from the city, helmeted in flashing bronze, 
and among them was Eteocles, the stout son of Oedipus and 
a bold warrior. And when the leaders of the Boeotians and 
the soldiers of the Argives met together, they clashed together 
their shields, their spears and the might of bronze-breastplated 
men: and there arose a dreadful din. Bloody flowed the 
stream of famous Dirce, bloody the Ismenus, as man threw down 
man. 
And in the forefront raged Eteocles with his bronze spear; and 
many were the warriors who fell to the ground, vanquished by his 
keen shaft. And the son of Agenor, descrying mighty Polynices 

=====第595页=====
Early Literary Experiments 573 
striding among the Argives, prayed to Athena: "Pallas, daughter 
of aegis-bearing Zeus, Atrytone, hear me. If ever I have burned 
for you fat thighs of oxen and of goats, grant me this prayer. Let 
me sink my long-shadowing spear in the breast of that man, of the 
race of famed Oedipus who, though he is my brother, goodly 
Polynices, yet has come from thirsty Argos with the rulers of the 
Argives to devastate his native land." 
So he spoke, and then addressed winged words to his brother: 
"Son of Oedipus, Polynices of the loud voice, it is with thee that 
my heart within my breast bids me fight: come hither as champion 
of all against the godlike Eteocles." 
So he spoke; and his brother prayed to the lady Hera: "Hear 
me, Hera, sister and spouse of Zeus, for thine I now am, since I 
have wedded an Argive woman, the daughter of Adrastus, who 
rules over the Argives, grant me now to slay with my spear stout 
Eteocles, because he did not respect his oath of loyalty in Thebes." 
So he spoke, and then Eteocles, king of men, came over into the 
mid field, held back the ranks in the field. And to both sides he 
spoke such words: "Listen to me, Danaans and well-greaved 
Achaeans, that I may tell you what my spirit within my breast bids 
me. The Argives and the peoples of Boeotia are dying in 
hard-fought strife. And the business is not accomplished. My spirit 
bids me fight with my brother. This I declare and may Zeus be my 
witness. If he overcomes me with his long-bladed bronze, so let 
him rule over the Cadmeians among the people. But if I overcome 
him, and Athena gives me her spear, mine will be the dignity and 
the kingdom of my father, and you Argives may go back again to 
your home." 
So he spoke. And Achaeans and Boeotians rejoiced, and they 
drew up their horses in ranks, and dismounted themselves, and 
took off their suits of armour and laid them on the ground near 
one another, and there was little space round about. 
Now Eteocles hurls his long-shadowing spear, and the lordly son 
of Agenor, seeing it approaching, avoided black Death, and the 
bronze spear flew over him. 
And the godlike Polynices, swiftly drawing his gold-studded 
sword, rushed upon his adversary, and they clashed together 
like two savage lions, brothers and siblings of one blood. And as 
he hastened, by his golden belt darkness. And he pressed 
upon him, relying on his heavy hand. At once black blood 
began to flow from the wound. And at the same time the 
keen sword of Polynices, king of men, drove through breast­
plate and breast of Eteocles. And they both fell to the ground, 

=====第596页=====
574 Frederick Engels 
and darkness covered their eyes. They lay there, brother 
having slain brother with long-bladed bronze. So perished the 
race of noble Oedipus. 
Written in September 1837 Printed according to the original 
First published in: Marx/Engels, Translated from the ancient 
Gesamtausgabe, Abt. l, Bd. 2, 1930 Greek 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第597页=====
APPENDICES 

=====第598页=====

=====第599页=====
BIRTH CERTIFICATE 
OF FRIEDRICH ENGELS 
BARMEN, DECEMBER 5, 1820, 
EXTRACT FROM THE BARMEN REGISTER OF BIRTHS, 
DEATHS AND MARRIAGES 
No. 659. Birth of Friedrich Engels, November 28, 1820. 
In the year one thousand eight hundred and twenty, on 
December 5 at half past three in the afternoon, there appeared 
before me, Peter Wichelhausen, Deputy of the Parish of Barmen, 
the merchant Herr Friedrich Engels domiciled in Brucher Rotte to 
notify that on Tuesday, the 28th day of November at nine o'clock 
in the evening, a child of the male sex, to whom he gave the first 
name of Friedrich, was born to him by his wife, Elisabeth Francisca 
Mauritzia, née van Hoar. 
Witnesses to this proceeding were: Herr Peter Gottfried Schmits, 
twenty-six years of age, secretary, domiciled in Gemarke, and Herr 
Johann Jacob Helmes, thirty-two years of age, secretary, domiciled in 
Werther Rotte. 
After this had been read to them the declarants signed: 
(signed) Friedrich Engels, Jac. Schmits, J. Helmes 
The Deputy (signed) Wichelhausen 
First published in Russian in: Marx and Printed according to the original 
vTlV S l^„ RUrlar„diti0n)> ™>Hshed * *ngHsh «« the first Vol. II, 1929, and in German 
in: Marx/Engels, Gesamtausgabe, Abt. 1 
Bd. 2, 1930 tune 

=====第600页=====
FRIEDRICH ENGELS SENIOR 
TO KARL SNETHLAGE 
IN BERLIN 
Barmen, December l, 1820 
Rejoice with me, dearly beloved Karl, that the good Lord has 
heard our prayer and last Tuesday evening, the 28th,a at 9 
o'clock presented us with a babe, a healthy well-shapen boy. We 
thank and praise Him from the fullness of our hearts for this 
child, and for the merciful assistance and care for mother and 
child during the confinement. True, everything ended happily, 
but it was a difficult birth. O God, what I felt when I saw my 
poor wife endure such suffering is impossible to describe. Often 
I felt that I could not bear to witness it any longer, and yet 
the same love prevented me from leaving the scene of her  suf­
fering even for a moment, in case there was any alleviation I 
could help to procure. The Lord be praised that this period of 
anxiety is over! And not only over, but replaced by joy when 
we saw what a healthy baby boy we had. 
Since then my good Elise has been quite well again in the 
circumstances, except that last night she had strong stomach pains, 
probably due to flatulence, but they soon disappeared after some 
prescription from the doctor. The little boy nearly always sleeps 
quietly, which is a very good thing, for God gives strength to 
sleeping babes. His little dwelling-place is beside me, with its 
sweetly slumbering inhabitant, and it fills me with an utterly new, 
great joy whenever I look at it. May the good Lord keep both my 
dear ones under His holy protection. May He be to the child as 
kind a Lord and Father as He has been to me, and grant that we 
shall yet rejoice before His throne at this birth. But may He also 
a A mistake in the original: 29th.— Ed. 

=====第601页=====
Appendices 579 
grant us the wisdom to bring it up well and in fear of Him, and to 
give it the best teaching through our example! That is now my 
daily prayer. I had intended to write to you on Wednesday 
immediately after my dear wife's confinement, but everything was 
in such turmoil here that first morning and there were so many 
claims on my activity that it was impossible. 
You will, of course, tell your dear parents and your brothers 
and sisters today's glad news, and be so kind as to give them 
sincerest greetings from my Elise and myself. 
I received your kind letter of November 16; it made me very 
happy, although your epistolary generosity put me somewhat to 
shame. I intend to improve in this respect, however, and write 
more even if there should be more real obstacles to writing than 
have actually existed since my last proper letter. 
August3  and Louise (his wife) had a very fine trip, almost the 
same as yours, and occasionally they tell us about their adventures 
and the good people whose acquaintance they made. What should 
I reply to your question as to why Louise (ours) did not want to 
join in that fine trip? I myself have wondered at her calm 
rejection of it. But it occurs to me that at the start of the Swiss trip 
it had not yet been settled whether Papa would not still have to go 
to Berlin, it was even likely at the time, and in view of all our 
domestic circumstances no one was better qualified to accompany 
dear Papa than she; moreover, she had already heard so much 
from Elise about your remarkable city that it was no great struggle 
for her to do without Switzerland, of which she had already seen a 
good deal. 
How happy you have made my good papa by your church news, 
dear Karl! It was balm to his soul and he was thankful to the 
supreme guide in this important matter. 
Elise has just taken the little boy in her arms and is talking to 
him. Tears of joy always spring to my eyes when I see and hear it. 
God grant that, some time you too will know such joy, dear Karl. 
Well, good-bye now. We are all thinking of you and we all send 
you our warmest greetings, especially Elise and my good 
mother-in-law. 
May the Lord remain with you and yours, 
Friedrich 
First published in the Periodikum für Printed according to the journal 
wissenschaftlichen Sozialismus No. 1, ... , . „ .. r , r. 
November 1958, München Published in English for the first 
3 August Engels. — Ed. 

=====第602页=====
BAPTISM CERTIFICATE 
OF FRIEDRICH ENGELS 
EXTRACT FROM THE BAPTISM REGISTER 
OF THE ELBERFELD 
REFORMED EVANGELICAL PARISH 
1821,  January. Baptised the 18th, Unter-Barmen. 
No. 24—[Born] on November 28th at 9 o'clock in the evening 
Friedrich, legitimate son of the merchant Herr Friedrich Engels, 
domiciled in Bruch, and Frau Elisabeth Mauritzia Francisca, née van 
Haar. 
The godparents Herr Caspar Engels Senior, and Frau Francisca 
Cristina van Haar, née Snethlage. 
First published in: Marx/Engels, Printed according to the original 
Gesamtausgabe,  Abt. l, Bd. 2, 1930 
Published in English for the first 

=====第603页=====
581 
FRIEDRICH ENGELS SENIOR 
TO HIS WIFE ELISE 
IN HAMM3 
Barmen, August 27, 1835, Thursday evening 
Dear Elise, 
I have just received the letter you wrote to me yesterday from 
which I gather that your good father'sb condition is still the same 
and even seems to show a slight improvement. Let us not delude 
ourselves about his state, for even if nature appears to be rallying 
and strength to be increasing, one can very rarely hope for a 
recovery; the illness drags on, until a new attack occurs. Your 
good father is in God's hands, and it is well for him and for us 
that we can entrust him so peacefully to the Heavenly Father. 
I posted a letter to you on Sunday the 23rd. You have received 
it, I trust? You make no mention of it. I wanted to write to you 
again yesterday but was prevented. Everything is well with us, 
God be praised; the children are all in good health. I am having 
my usual trouble with Emil. The boy is somewhat unmanageable, 
he wants to be out in the street all the time, and this evening 
there was another complaint that he had jumped out of the 
window. Rudolph is sweet and good, he sits beside me at lunch 
and is a dear lad. Hedwig is cleverer than either of them, has 
now completely recovered and is knitting me a pair of socks 
which I asked her to do to help her pass the time. Hermann is 
fairly well-behaved, my sole companion at supper, and is firmly 
convinced that this week he is going to get top marks as usual. 
Little Elise is, if possible, even more lively than usual, gets up to 
her little tricks, loves her father very much and, in short, is a very 
sweet little puss. 
a The back of the letter bears the inscription: "Frau Elise Engels, c/o Herr 
Rektor van Haar Wohlgeb. in Hamm, France." —Ed. 
b Bernhard van Haar. — Ed. 

=====第604页=====
582 Appendices 
Friedrich had a pretty average report last week. 249 As you 
know, he has become more polite, outwardly, but in spite of the 
severe chastisements he received earlier, not even the fear 
of punishment seems to teach him unconditional obedience. 
Thus today I was again distressed to find in his desk a greasy 
book which he had borrowed from the lending library, a story 
about knights in the 13th century. The careless way he leaves 
such books about in his desk is remarkable. May God watch 
over his disposition, I am often fearful for this otherwise excel­
lent boy. 
I received a letter yesterday through Friedrich from Dr. 
Hantschke, written on August 22, which he prudently gave to the 
maids so late that it only reached me at half past eight in the 
evening. So he probably already had it on Sunday. Dr. Hantschke 
writes that he has been asked to take in two boarders but that he 
will decline if we prefer to leave Friedrich with him after the 
autumn. He says that Friedrich continually requires supervision, 
that the long journey is harmful to his studies, etc. I immediately 
replied that I was most grateful to him for giving me first choice 
after receiving such an advantageous request, and that I would 
ask him to keep Friedrich on, but that I should be obliged if he 
would inform me of his terms. He himself had indicated that we 
should have no difficulty in agreeing on them. I am sure that 
you too will regard this as the best course. When it is a que­
stion of our child's welfare we should not consider money, and 
Friedrich is such a peculiar and versatile lad that a secluded 
way of life, which is bound to lead him to a certain degree of 
independence, is the best thing for him. Once again, may the 
good Lord have the boy in His care so that his disposition may 
not be spoiled. So far, for all his pleasing qualities, he has 
been developing a disturbing thoughtlessness and lack of 
character. 
So much for our children here. I should be glad to hear from 
you that all is well with Anna and Marie. When are they coming 
back and is it definite that Ludwig 3 will bring them home? 
In view of your dear father's present condition I can well 
imagine that you and your good mother would like to stay there 
a few days more. Do so in God's name. I had thought that I 
would come to fetch you about Sunday the 30th inst., but now I 
will await further news. Everything here is much as usual, so your 
a Ludwig van Haar. — Ed. 

=====第605页=====
Appendices 583 
mind may be at rest. Caspar3 has left for Frankfurt with Juliusb 
and is expected back on Tuesday. 
Your instructions about clothes and linen will be faithfully 
carried, out—I should not have thought of it. I will bring the 
wine with me. 
Give warmest greetings from me as well as from the 
Griesheims to your dear mother and to your father when his 
mind is clear. God be with you all in these difficult days. 
Your 
Friedrich 
First published in: Marx/Engels, Printed according to the original 
Gesamtausgabe,  Abt. l, Bd. 2, 1930 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a Caspar Engels Jr.— Ed. 
b Julius Engels. — Ed. 

=====第606页=====
SCHOOL-LEAVING REFERENCE250 
FOR PRIMA3  PUPIL FRIEDRICH ENGELS 
(No.  713) 
Born on 28th' November, 1820, at Unter-Barmen, of the 
Evangelical faith, pupil of the Elberfeld gymnasium since the 
autumn of 1834 (October 20th) and since the autumn of 1836 
(October 17th) a member of the Prima of the same, has taken 
pains to be of very good behaviour, especially during his stay in the 
Prima form, has commended himself to his teachers particularly 
by his modesty, frankness and good-natured disposition, and 
equally displayed commendable endeavour, supported by good 
talents, to acquire the most comprehensive scientific education 
possible, for which reason also his progress has been gratifyingly 
conspicuous, as the following special compilation of the separate 
subjects shows more precisely. 
I. Languages 
1. Latin. He finds no difficulty in understanding the respective 
writers either of prose or poetry, namely, Livius and Cicero, 
Virgil and Horace, so that he can easily follow the thread of the 
longer pieces, grasp the train of thought with clarity and translate 
the text before him with skill into the mother tongue. He has been 
less successful in mastering the grammatical part with thorough 
assurance, so that his written work, although not without visible 
progress towards improvement, yet left something to be desired in 
respect of grammar and style. 
2. Greek. He has acquired a satisfactory knowledge of morpholo­
gy and the rules of syntax, in particular good proficiency and skill 
a Upper, or First, Form in German secondary schools, corresponding to the 
Sixth Form in England.— Ed. 

=====第607页=====
Appendices 585 
in translating the easier Greek prose writers, as also Homer and 
Euripides, and could grasp and render the train of thought of a 
Platonic dialogue with skill. 
3. German. His written essays, particularly in the last year, 
showed gratifying progress in general development; they con­
tained good, independent thoughts and were for the most part 
correctly arranged; the exposition was duly exhaustive and the 
expression perceptibly approached correctness. Engels showed 
commendable interest in the history of German national literature 
and the reading of the German classics. 
4. French. He translates the French classics with skill. He has a 
good knowledge of grammar. 
II. Sciences 
1. Religion. The basic doctrines of the Evangelical Church as well 
as the chief elements of the history of the Christian Church are 
well known to him. He is also not without experience in reading 
the New Testament (in the original). 
2. In history and geography he possesses sufficient lucid knowl­
edge. 
3. In mathematics Engels has on the whole attained gratifying 
knowledge; he showed in general good power of understanding 
and could express himself clearly and with precision. The same 
holds 
4. for his knowledge of physics. 
5. Philosophical propaedeutic. Engels followed the lectures on 
empirical psychology with interest and success. 
The undersigned discharges with his best blessings a dear pupil 
who,  due to private connections, stood particularly close to him 
and who in this position endeavoured to commend himself by his 
religious feeling, purity of heart, agreeable habits and other 
prepossessing qualities, on his going into business at the end of the 
school year (September 15th of this year), which he found himself 
induced to choose as his outward profession in life instead of the 
studies he had earlier intended. May the Lord bless and guide 
him! 
Elberfeld, September 25th, 1837 
Dr. J. C. L. Hantschke 
First published in the book: F. Engels, Printed according to the original 
Schriften der Frühzeit, Berlin, 1920 Published in English for the first 
time 
20-384 

=====第608页=====
FRIEDRICH ENGELS SENIOR 
TO KARL SNETHLAGE 
IN BERLIN 
(Fragment) 
Barmen, October 5, 1842 
I found your letter on my return from Engelskirchen, where I 
spent a while and where I am thinking of going again tomorrow. I 
thank you also heartily for your letter, and in particular for what 
you told me about Friedrich. It was nothing new to me, I have 
known since childhood his tendency to extremes and was con­
vinced, although he never wrote to me about his views since he 
was in Bremen, that he would not keep to those ordinarily held. 
We had decided to deal with him exactly in the way that you 
advise. I shall make clear to him that merely for his sake or 
because of his presence I shall neither change nor conceal my 
views,  either in respect of religion or of politics; we shall continue 
entirely our former way of living and read the word of God and 
other Christian books in his presence. I shall not argue with him, 
for that would only lead to obstinacy and embitterment. His 
conversion must come from above. I know for certain that he was 
moved by pious feelings at his confirmation and I am confident 
that a person who has once felt the force of God's word in his 
heart cannot for long be satisfied with the vapid new systems. He 
may, however, have to travel a rough road before he is obliged to 
climb down from the height of his pride and submit his heart in 
humility to the powerful hand of God. But God grant that this 
time is not too far away, let us pray to Him for that! Until then it 
is hard to bear having a son in the house who is like a black sheep 
in the flock and adopts a hostile attitude to the faith of his fathers. 
By the way, I hope to be able to give him a fair amount of work, 
and wherever he may be I shall watch over him unnoticed with 
the greatest care so that he does not take any dangerous step. The 

=====第609页=====
Appendices 587 
most depressive is that the trend which Friedrich has embraced is 
becoming or seems almost to be generally prevalent. Friedrich 
himself does not suspect what influence such a fashionable trend 
has exerted over him, whom I have always found greatly inclined 
to imitation. We all often find a fashion in dress outwardly strange 
at the beginning, but as it spreads more we accustom ourselves to 
it, and in the end one can hardly understand any longer how one 
could tolerate the former fashion. And now that all are preaching 
progress and that the old faith and the old mentality are consigned 
to the rubbish heap, how easily a young and spirited heart can be 
ensnared!—Oh, this progress and this modern wisdom, where will 
they lead to! I fear our good King, 3 who is still adored, will yet 
have to hear things which will not be to his taste. In Königsberg 
they now intend to tackle your minister b in earnest; I cannot but 
warn you not to advise too strict measures in your present 
situation, for there too things will have to be left to God and time. 
I mean this kindly, and naturally expect no objection. 
First published in Archiv für Sozial- Printed according to the journal 
geschickte, Bd. IX, 1969 Published in English for the first 
Frederick William IV.— Ed. 
This apparently refers to ï 
ship,  Education and Medicine.— Ed. This apparently refers to Eichhorn, the Prussian Minister of Religious Wor-
20* 

=====第610页=====
CERTIFICATE OF CONDUCT 
FOR THE ONE-YEAR VOLUNTEER 
FRIEDRICH ENGELS 
Certificate of Conduct 
The bearer of this certificate, one-year Volunteer Bombardier 
Friedrich Engels of the 12th Foot Company of the Guards Artillery 
Brigade, born in Barmen, Elberfeld Division, Düsseldorf Govern­
ment District, aged twenty-one years and ten months, having 
served one year, has conducted himself very well during his period 
of service in respect both of morals and service, as is herewith duly 
certified by 
v. Wedell, 
Captain and Company Commander 
Berlin, October 8th, 1842 
First published in: Marx/Engels, Printed according to the original 
Gesamtausgabe, Abt. 1, Bd. 2, 1930 _ ... , , . _ .. , , , ,. 
Published in English for the first 

=====第611页=====
NOTES 
AND 
INDEXES 

=====第612页=====

=====第613页=====
NOTES 
Th« Bedouin was Engels' first work to appear in print. He wrote it at the 
beginning of his stay in Bremen, where he worked as a clerk in a trading 
company from July 1838 to March 1841. When preparing this poem for the 
press the editors of the Bremisches Conversationsblatt changed the last stanza 
without the author's permission. The original text is cited by Engels in his letter 
to the Graeber brothers dated September 17-18, 1838 (see this volume, 
pp. 395-96). p. 3 
In this poem Engels ridiculed the heated polemic between the weekly Der Bremer 
Stadtbote and the newspaper Bremisches Unterhaltungsblatt (see Engels' letters to his 
brother Hermann of March 11-12, 1839, and to his sister Marie of March 12, 
1839,  in this volume, pp. 417-20). For fun Engels sent this poem to Der Bremer 
Stadtbote under the pen-name of Theodor H. (Hildebrand). Not realising its 
ironical character, the editors published the poem as a regular item against the 
rival newspaper. The editors of the Bremisches Unterhaltungsblatt, however, 
perceived the poem's irony directed against Der Bremer Stadtbote and reprinted it 
with appropriate comments. 
In this volume the poem is given according to the Bremisches Unterhaltungsblatt 
since the Publishers do not possess a copy of Der Bremer Stadtbote. p. 5 
As can be seen from Engels' letter to his sister Marie of March 12, 1839 (see this 
volume, pp. 419-20), this poem was sent to Der Bremer Stadtbote in a fuller version. 
The publication of Th. Hildebrandt's poem Book Wisdom was mentioned in the 
Bremer Wöchentliche Nachrichten No. 36, 2. Beilage, S. 2, for March 25, 1839. 
However, the Publishers do not possess a copy of Der Bremer Stadtbote containing 
this poem. p. 6 
4 "Letters from Wuppertal" is Engels' first journalistic work with which he started 
his contributions to the Telegraph für Deutschland, a progressive Hamburg journal 
published by the Young Germany literary group. In November 1839 Engels' 
articles began to appear there under the pseudonym of Oswald (first S. Oswald, 
then Friedrich Oswald). 
The "Letters" evoked a lively response in Barmen and Elberfeld, two 
neighbouring towns situated in the Wupper valley (in 1930 they merged to form 
one town, Wuppertal). Wilhelm Blank, a friend of Engels', wrote to Wilhelm 

=====第614页=====
592 Notes 
Graeber on May 24, 1839, that all copies of the journal containing the article had 
been bought up immediately. The Wuppertal philistines were furious with the 
anonymous author (many believed that the article had been written by some local 
celebrity, the poet Ferdinand Freiligrath in particular). For the reaction of the 
Wuppertal bourgeois to the article see also Engels' letter to Wilhelm Graeber 
written about April 28-30, 1839, in this volume, p. 446. p. 7 
5 Friends of Light—a religious trend opposed to pietism (see Note 7), which 
dominated in the official Lutheran Church. This opposition was one of the 
expressions of the dissatisfaction of the German bourgeois with Germany's 
monarchic regime, based on the estates system, in the 1830s and 1840s. p. 7 
6 After 1817, when the Lutherans were united with the Reformists (Calvinists) in a 
compulsory union, its opponents, the Old Lutherans, split away to form a 
separate trend defending the "true" Lutheran Church. p- 9 
7 This refers to pietism, a trend in the Lutheran Church that emerged in Germany in 
the 17th century. Distinguished by extreme mysticism, it rejected rites and attached 
special importance to personal religious experience. p. 10 
8 An allusion to the dispute in 1075-76 between Pope Gregory VII and Henry IV, 
Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire, the two protagonists in the struggle for 
supremacy between ecclesiastical and temporal power. p. 13 
9 After the Vienna Congress (1814-15), many members of the student gymnastic 
associations, which emerged in the course of the struggle against Napoleonic rule, 
opposed the reaction of the monarchist landowners and called for the unification 
of Germany. On October 18, 1817, on the occasion of the tercentenary of the 
Reformation and the fourth anniversary of the battle of Leipzig, the German 
students organised the Wartburg festival, which turned into a demonstration 
against the Metternich regime. In 1819, the student opposition and other 
free-thinking intellectuals were accused of "demagogy" by the Karlsbad Confer­
ence of Ministers of the Chief German States and subjected to reprisals, p. 13 
10 Hermann (Arminius)—chief of the Cherusci and other German tribes which 
defeated the Romans in the Teutoburg Woods (9 A. D.). p. 15 
11 Evangelische Kirchen-Zeitung Nos. 76-80, September 22-October 6, 1838. p. 16 
Engels is referring to the review of J. Ch. F. Winkler's book Harfenklänge 
printed in the Telegraph für Deutschland No. 208 in December 1838 under the 
title "Zeichen der Zeit". p. 17 
ls Barmen and Elberfeld were incorporated in the Kingdom of Prussia along with 
the other territories of the former Dukedom of Berg by decision of the Vienna 
Congress of 1814-15 and became parts of her Rhine Province. p. 18 
14 Roster's article entitled "Kurze Darstellung der Dichtungsarten" was published 
in the Neunter Bericht über die höhere Stadtschule in Barmen, Barmen, 1837. p. 19 
15 F. Haase's review "Übersicht über 9 lateinische Grammatiken" was printed in the 
Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung Nos. 65-70, August 1838, Jena and Leipzig, Ergän­
zungsblätter, p. 20 
J. C. H. Clausen's "Pindaros der Lyriker" was published in the Programm des 
Gymnasiums Elberfeld, 1834. p. 20 

=====第615页=====
Notes 593 
17 Rektoratsschulen was the name given to elementary five-class schools in the Rhine 
Province and Westphalia. p. 20 
Young Germany (Junges Deutschland) — a literary group that emerged in Germany in 
the 1830s and was under the influence of Heinrich Heine and Ludwig Börne. In 
their fiction and journalistic works, the writers of this group (also known as Young 
literature), Gutzkow, Wienbarg, Mundt, Laube, Jung and others, expressed the 
opposition sentiments of the petty bourgeois and intellectuals who advocated 
freedom of conscience and the press, the introduction of a constitution, the 
emancipation of women, and so on. Their political views were vague and 
inconsistent; many of them soon became ordinary liberals. 
For the demagogues see Note 9. p. 21 
Engels is referring to the owners of the Barmen trading company J. P. von 
Eynern Sc Söhne, where Ferdinand Freiligrath worked as a clerk in 1837-39. 
p. 21 
20 Engels is referring to the following reviews: Dr. F. Dingelstedt, "Ferdinand 
Freiligrath. Ein Literaturbild", published in the Jahrbuch der Literatur, 1. Jg., Ham­
burg, 1839, and Moritz Carrière, "Gedichte von Ferdinand Freiligrath, 
Stuttgart und Tübingen, 1838", published in the Jahrbücher für wissenschaftliche 
Kritik No. 8, January 1839, Berlin. p. 21 
21 Allusions to the folk-tale Die Unkenkönigin (The Frog Queen) can be found in 
Freiligrath's poem Schwalbenmärchen, and to the tale Schneewittchen (Snow-White) in 
his poem Meerfahrt. 
Below Engels mentions Freiligrath's poems printed in the following publica­
tions:  Freiligrath, Gedichte, Stuttgart und Tübingen, 1838; Prinz Eugen, der edle 
Ritter in the Rheinisches Odeon. Hg. v. I. Hub, F. Freiligrath u. A. Schnezler, 
1. Jg., Coblenz, 1836; Freiligrath, Der ausgewanderte Dichter (Bruchstücke 
eines unvollendeten Cyklus). Sechs Gedichte ohne  besondere  Überschriften, published in 
the Rheinisches Odeon, 2. Jg., Düsseldorf, 1838; Freiligrath, Der ausgewanderte 
Dichter. Weitere Bruchstücke. Fünf Gedichte ohne einzelne Überschriften, published in 
the Morgenblatt für gebildete Stände No. 218, September 10, 1836. p. 22 
A reference to the second instalment of Freiligrath's cycle of poems Der 
ausgewanderte Dichter, published in the Morgenblatt für gebildete Stände No. 218, 
September 10, 1836 (see Note 21). p. 22 
Engels gives this ironical name, Montanus Eremita (mountain hermit), to Vincenz 
Zuccalmaglio, a German writer who under the pen-name of Montanus pub­
lished, in 1836, the book: Die Vorzeit der Länder Cleve-Mark, Jülich-Berg und 
Westphalen. p. 24 
24 Engels is referring to the following publication: Johann Pol, Gedichte, 1. Teil, 
Geistliche Gesänge und Lieder, 2. Teil, Vermischte Gedichte, Heedfeld, 1837. 
p. 25 
In this poem Engels expressed his attitude to the weeklv Der Bremer  Stadtbote,  to 
which for fun he had sent several months in succession his poems (including To  the 
Enemies, see this volume, p. 5) under the signature of Theodor Hildebrand, 
passing himself off as its supporter. This poem is also quoted, with minor 
stylistic changes, in Engels' letter to Wilhelm Graeber written about April 28-30, 
1839 (see this volume, pp. 444-45). p. 26 
Expressing the attitude of the local bourgeoisie to Engels' "Letters from 
Wuppertal", the Elberfelder Zeitung on April 12, 1839, published an article by 

=====第616页=====
594 Notes 
Martin Runkel, its editor, sharply attacking the "Letters" and their author. The 
"Open Letter to Dr. Runkel" was Engels' reply to this article. 
The Elberfelder Zeitung published the "Open Letter" with the following 
footnote: "We found this article in our premises yesterday without knowing who 
had sent it in. We are printing it word for word since we wish to be impartial 
but, for our part, we would note that we shall defend our generally expressed 
statements in detail only if the Wuppertal letter-writer names  himself,  just as we 
have done." p. 27 
An allusion to Martin Runkel's poem Zu Grabbe's Bildniss printed in the 
Rheinisches Odeon, 2. Jg., Düsseldorf, 1838. 
For the Young Germany writers see Note 18. p. 27 
28 
This item was published in the Telegraph für Deutschland in the "Kleine Chronik" 
section. Engels also wrote about the sermon in question by F. W. Krummacher 
in his letter to Wilhelm Graeber on April 30,1839 (see this volume, pp. 446-47). 
p. 29 
These are the following publications: Volksbücher, hrsg. v. G. O. Marbach, 
Leipzig, 1838-39; Deutsche Volksbücher nach den ächtesten Ausgaben  hergestellt  v. Dr. 
Karl Simrock, Berlin, 1839; and Deutsche Volksbücher, neu gereimt v. K. Simrock, 
Berlin, 1839. p. 33 
Besides the above-mentioned Marbach edition, the following publications are 
referred to here: Der hörner« Siegfried. Eine wunderschöne Historie von dem 
gehörnten Siegfried. Was wunderliche Ebentheuer dieser theure Ritter ausgestanden, sehr 
denkwürdig und mit Lust zu lesen, Coin (n.d.), and Buch der schönsten Geschichten 
und Sagen für Alt und Jung wiedererzählt von Gustav Schwab, 2 Teile, Stuttgart, 
1836-37. p. 34 
31 The publication referred to is Leben und Thaten des grossen Helden Heinrich des 
Löwen, Herzog zu ßrounschuieig, Einbeck (n.d.). p. 35 
On December 10, 1835, the Federal Assembly banned the works by writers of 
the Young Germany group (see Note 18). Some of them, such as Gutzkow's 
Wally, die Zweiflerin, raised the question of women's emancipation. 
The Federal Assembly (Diet) of the German Confederation (1815-66) consisted 
of representatives of the German states and was a pillar of the conservative 
monarchical order in Germany. p. 37 
An allusion to Tieck's comedy Kaiser Octavianus which was based on a German 
popular book of the same name and published in Ludwig Tieck's Schriften, Bd. 1, 
Berlin, 1828. p. 37 
Gottfried von Strassburg's poem Tristan und Isolde was written in the early 13th 
century. p. 38 
Die neue Bibel and Das junge Palästina are the titles of the parts of Karl Beck's 
collection of poems Nächte. Gepanzerte Lieder, which appeared in Leipzig in 1838. 
p. 41 
In his article "Der Schwabenspiegel" (in the Jahrbuch  der Literatur, 1. Jg., Hamburg, 
1839),  Heine criticised the "Swabian poetical school" which comprised a number 
of poets and literary critics representative of late romanticism, including Ludwig 
Uhland, Justinus Kerner, Gustav Schwab, Wolfgang Menzel and Gustav Pfizer. 
p. 42 

=====第617页=====
Notes 595 
Song of Ludwig —a poem by an unknown medieval poet written in the late 9th 
century in the Franconian dialect. It glorifies the victory of Ludwig III, King of 
the Western Franks, over the Normans in 881. p. 42 
A reference to Gustav Kühne's book Weibliche und männliche Charaktere, 2 Teile, 
Leipzig, 1838; and to his article "Deutsche Lyrik. Karl Beck, Ferdinand 
Freiligrath" published anonymously in the Zeitung für die elegante Welt Nos. 223 
and 224, November 13 and 15, 1838. p. 42 
Engels is referring to the following passage from Ludolf Wienbarg's article 
"Ludwig" Unland als Dramatiker", included in his book Die Dramatiker der 
Jetztzeit, 1. Heft, Altona, 1839: "Gustav Pfizer has spoken in and out and 
round about on the character and talent of Uhland, as a pupil about his teacher, 
as a friend about his friend and not a word about Uhland the dramatist. What 
should one conclude from this? Simply that a certain younger writer is right in 
calling the latter mediocre. The pamphlet by Pfizer which I have in mind 
appeared about two years ago. It compares Uhland with Rückert, or rather, it 
weighs the talents of the two. Let us say it in passing, rather like a grocer" (p. 13). 
Pfizer's pamphlet Uhland und Rückert. Ein kritischer Versuch was printed in 
1837.  p. 42 
Beck's poem Schlaf wohl! included in his collection Stille Lieder was originally 
published in the Zeitung für die elegante Welt No. 126, June SO, 1838. p. 45 
Act I of Beck's Saul was published in the Zeitung für die elegante Welt Nos. 216-19 
for November 4, 5, 7 and 8, 1839.On November 25, the Allgemeine Theater-Chronik 
(No.  143) printed a review by J. P. Lyser entitled "Episoden. Carl Beck als 
Dramatiker", while the Telegraph für Deutschland, in its "Kleine Chronik" 
section, published an anonymous review of Act I with a note by Karl Gutzkow. 
p. 45 
A reference to Gutzkow's tragedy König Saul, which appeared in print shortly 
before the publication of Act I of Beck's tragedy Saul. p. 45 
45 In its issue No. 203, immediately following Engels' article, the Telegraph für 
Deutschland printed an article about Beck by Gutzkow entitled "Ergänzung" 
("Supplement") (the end of the article was published in No. 204 under the title 
"Karl Beck"). In this article Gutzkow subjected Beck's Stille Lieder to even sharper 
criticism, emphasising the "childish nature" of his poetry. p. 46 
44 A reference to the bourgeois revolution of July 1830 in France, the main events 
of which took place between July 27 and August 2. p. 50 
The Second Silesian School—a literary trend in Germany in the second half of 
the 17th century that expressed the sentiments of the feudal nobility. Its main 
exponents were Christian Hofmannswaldau and Daniel Lohenstein. p. 51 
46 Engels is referring to the following publications: Gesammelte Werke des 
Grafen August von Platen. In Einem  Band,  Stuttgart und Tübingen, 1839; 
and Gedichte aus dem ungedruckten Nachlasse des Grafen August von Platen-
Hallermünde. Als Anhang zu den bei Cotta erschienenen Gedichten Platens, 
Strassburg, 1839. p. 54 
47 
Pentarchy —Europe's political system in the period of the Restoration. It was 
based on the supremacy of the five Great Powers, England, France, Russia, 
Austria and Prussia. p. 54 
48 This is a translation into German of the poem A la invencidn de la imprenta by 
Manuel José Quintana, a Spanish poet, politician and supporter of the 42 

=====第618页=====
596 Notes 
18th-century French Enlightenment. The poem was first published in Madrid in 
1803 in Quintana's book Poesias. Engels' translation was published together with 
the original in the Gutenbergs-Album issued on the occasion of the quater-
centenary of the invention of printing (the official date of the invention is 1440). 
The anniversary was widely celebrated in Germany in June 1840. 
Engels' translation, which follows, was his first work to appear in print under 
his own name. 
Wird denn allein des Dichters Stimme singen 
Von blut'gem Ehrgeiz und von stolzen Thronen, 
Wenn die Drommeten Fama's um ihn klingen, 
Die Lippen schwellend, wo die Götter wohnen? 
Ward euch so fremd die Scham? Des Preisens Gabe, 
Des Ruhmes Strahl mit seinem hellen Lichte 
Verschwendet ihr an Männern, welchen ewig 
Fluch spendet und Verwünschung die Geschichte? 
Erwacht, erwacht! die Wolken überfliege 
Der Sang, der scheugeword'ne, 
Mit nie geseh'ner Kraft in hehrem Siege! 
Und wollt ihr, dass die Welt euch würdig halte 
Des Lorbeers, der um eure Stirne blüht, 
So sorgt, dass euer Lied 
Würdig der Welt und kräftig sich entfalte! 
In alter Zeit ward nimmermehr verschwendet 
Der Opferduft des Lobes; 
An dem Altar wohltätiger Erfindung, 
Wohltät'gen Geistes ward er stets gespendet. 
Einst kam Saturn, und mit dem mächt'gen Pfluge 
Zerteilte er der Erde Mutterbusen, 
Da sah der Mensch sich breiten 
Lebend'ge Saat rings über dürren Boden, 
Zum Himmel steigen seines Dankes Oden, 
Sie nennen ihn den Gott der goldnen Zeiten. 
Warst du nicht auch ein Gott, der dem Gedanken, 
Dem Wort du einen Leib einst hast gegeben, 
In Zeichen fesseltest der Rede Leben, 
Das sonst entfloh, gehemmt von keinen Schranken? 
Verschlungen immer wieder 
Hätt' ohne dich sich selbst die Zeit, ins Grab 
Ew'gen Vergessens sinkend, tot, hernieder. 
Du kamst, und der Gedanke 
Sah rasch erweitert seine enge Sphäre, 
Die ihn umgrenzt in seiner langen Kindheit. 
Ihn trug sein Fittich in die ferne Welt, 
Wo mit zukünft'ger Zeit die tatenschwere 
Vergangenheit gewalt'ge Zwiesprach hält. 
Erleuchter du der Blindheit! 
Erfreue dich, Unsterblicher, der Ehre, 
Des hohen Ruhmgesanges nun allein, 
Die dir gebühren, dem erhabnen Geiste! 
Und die Natur, als hätte die Erfindung 

=====第619页=====
Notes 
Allein genügt, zu zeigen ihre Macht, 
Sie hat geruht seitdem, und, geizig, nicht 
Ein gleiches Wunder mehr der Welt gebracht. 
Endlich erhebt sie sich, ein neues Zeichen 
Sich zu erschaffen, und der eis'ge Rhein 
Sah Gutenberg erstehn. „Vergebliche Mühen! 
Was hilft es euch, dass Leben ihr verleiht 
Eurem Gedanken, schreibend, 
Wenn er erstirbt, starr in der Dunkelheit 
Lethargischen Vergessens ferner bleibend? 
Kann ein Gefäss die breiten Wogen alle 
Des Ozeans, des tosenden, enthalten? 
So können nicht in einem Buch allein 
Des Menschengeistes Gaben sich entfalten! 
Was fehlt? die Kunst des Flugs? Doch wenn Natur 
Nach einem Bilde unzählbare Wesen 
Erschuf,  wohlan, ihr nach, meine Erfindung! 
Dass tausendfach im Echo eine Wahrheit 
Erschalle in gewaltiger Verkündung, 
Empor sich schwingend mit dem Flug der Klarheit!" 
Er sprach's — da ward der Druck, und sieh, Europa 
Erstaunt, bewegt, erhebt sich alsobald 
Mit lautem Brausen, wie vom Sturmeswinde 
Emporgefacht, erschallt 
Das grimme Feuer, dessen Flammen schliefen 
Verschlossen in der Erde finstern Tiefen. — 
O schlimme Burg, dem Irrtum aufgemauert 
Durch schnöde Rohheit und Tyrannenwüten! 
Es platzte der Vulkan, die Felsen glühten, 
Da bebten deine Gründe, schreckdurchschauert! 
Wer ist das Ungetüm, des bösen Geistes 
Unreine Missgeburt, die ohn' Erröten 
Auf dem verfallnen Kapitol den Thron, 
Den scheusslichen, sich gründet, und zu töten, 
Ja, zu verschlingen drohet alles schon? 
Wohl lebt es noch, doch seiner Macht Gebäude 
Bricht langsam ein; einst aber stürzt der Wipfel, 
Und weithin breiten rings sich die Ruinen. 
Also beherrscht den hohen Bergesgipfel 
Ein starker Turm auf hoher Felsenzinne; 
Des Krieges Söhne haben aufgeschlagen 
Die feste Wohnung drinne, 
Dort herrschen sie mit der geraubten Macht, 
Laut brüllend stürzen sie von da zur Schlacht; 
Verlassen bleibt er stehen, 
Der Turm, einsam im Wald, und ungesehen. 
Noch schaut er, auch gebrechlich, wie vor Zeiten, 
Mit droh'ndem Antlitz rings nach allen Seiten. 

=====第620页=====
Notes 
Einst aber kommt die Zeit, da fällt er nieder, 
Er fällt, die Felder ächzen, 
Trümmerbedeckt; bis dahin bleibt er freilich 
Popanz und Vogelscheuche aller Leute, 
Der doch ihr Schreck, ihr Ärgernis war neulich. 
Das war der erste Lorbeer, der die Schläfe 
Bekränzte der Vernunft; doch kühn erhebt 
Sich der Verstand, nach sicherm Wissen dürstend, 
Und er umarmt die Welt in ihrem Fluge. 
Kopernikus schwingt sich zum Sternenzuge, 
Den, undurchdringlich, deckte sonst ein Schleier; 
Dort schaut er, wie in ungemessner Ferne 
Der leuchtendste der Sterne, 
Der uns den Tag bringt, ruht in ew'ger Feier. 
Unter der Sohle fühlet Galileo 
Der Erde Kugel rollen, und zum Lohne 
Gibt ihm Italien einen Kerker, blind; 
Und dennoch schifft indes die Erde ohne 
Aufhören durch des Raumes Meer geschwind, 
Und mit ihr schiffen, Blitzen gleich, die Sterne, 
Die schimmernden, im Flug; da ward geschleudert 
In ihre Mitte Newtons rascher Geist; 
Er folgt, und er versteht sie, 
Bestimmend die Geleise 
Des Triebs, der sie gescheucht in ihre Kreise. 
Was hilft es dir, den Himmel zu erobern, 
Zu finden das Gesetz, das ewig regt 
Den Luftkreis und das Meer? Den Strahl zu teilen 
Des unantastbar'n Lichts, und in die Erde 
Dich zu vergraben, und des Goldes Wiege 
Und des Kristalles zu ertappen? Kehre 
Zum Menschen, Geist! — Er tat's, und warf die schwere 
Erbitterung in seine lauten Klagen. 
„Wie ist der Sinn mit Blindheit doch geschlagen, 
Wie klirrt die wilde Kette, 
Die Tyrannei in ihrer Wut geschmiedet, 
An diesem Pol und jenem um die Wette, 
Und bannt ans Totenbette 
Den Menschen, wenn der Knechtschaft er ermüdet! 
So sei's nicht mehr!" — Das hörten die Despoten, 
Da fühlten sie das Feuer und das Schwert 
In der verruchten Hand, zwei sichre Boten. 
„Unsinnige! die hohen Scheiterhaufen, 
Die schrecklich dorther droh'n mich zu verschlingen, 
Die mit der Wahrheit wollen um mich streiten, 
Leuchttürme sind's ja, die zu ihr mich leiten, 
Und Fackeln, Licht für ihren Sieg zu bringen! 
In Liebe sie verlangend 

=====第621页=====
Notes 
Betet sie an mein Herz, begeistrungstrunken, 
Mein Geist schaut sie, ihr folgen meine Schritte, 
Nicht vor dem Feu'r, nicht vor dem Schwerte bangend, 
Und dennoch sollen wanken meine Tritte? 
Kann ich zurück denn setzen 
Vielleicht den Fuss? des Tajo Wogen kehren 
Niemals zurück zu ihrer ersten Quelle, 
Wenn einmal sie zum Meer hinabgeflossen; 
Vergebens stellen Berge sich entgegen, 
Sie halten ihn in seinem Lauf nicht an; 
Ihr jagt auf raschen Wegen 
Das Schicksal brausend in den Ozean." 
Da kam der Tag, der grosse, 
An dem ein Sterblicher sich aus der Schande, 
Der allwärts gleichen, sich erhob im Grimme, 
Und mit allmächt'ger Stimme 
Vor aller Welt es  rief:  Frei ist der Mensch! 
Und enge Grenzen schlugen nicht in Bande 
Den heil'gen Ruf; auf seine Schwingen nahm 
Das Echo ihn, das Gutenberg erfunden, 
Und trug ihn wundersam, 
Dass er in einem Augenblick, beflügelt, 
Die Berge übersprang, die weiten Meere, 
Und in den Winden herrschte, ungezügelt. 
Nicht übertönt' ihn der Tyrannen Schrei, 
Und kräftig scholl und laut nach allen Seiten 
Das Jauchzen der Vernunft: der Mensch ist frei! 
Ja, frei, ja frei! o süsses Wort, die Brust 
Schwillt, höher klopfend, wenn du ihr erklungen, 
Mein Geist, von dir durchdrungen, 
Erfüllt von deiner heiligen Begeist'rung, 
Schwingt sich empor zu himmlisch heitern Wegen, 
Und reisst mich mit in feur'gen Fittichschlägen. 
Wo bleibt ihr, die ihr höret 
Auf meinen Sang, ihr Sterblichen? Von oben 
Seh ich das ehrne Kerkertor des Schicksals 
Sich öffnen, und den dichten Schlei'r der Zeiten 
Zerreissen — offen liegt vor mir die Zukunft! 
Ich sah es klar, nicht ist von nun die Erde 
Mehr der Planet, der arme, wo die Ehrsucht, 
Der Krieg geherrscht mit grimmiger Gebärde. 
Die sind auf ewig beide nun entflohen, 
Wie Pest und Sturm, die Peiniger, sich schickten 
Zur Flucht weg von der Zone, der bedrückten, 
Wenn von dem Pol her eis'ge Winde drohen. 
Die Menschen fühlten ihre Gleichheit alle, 
Mit ungezähmter Kraft die tapfern Mannen 
Erkämpften sie mit lautem Jubelschalle. 

=====第622页=====
600 Notes 
49 
50 
51 
52 Jetzt sind nicht Sklaven mehr und nicht Tyrannen; 
liebe und Friede in der Welt sich breiten, 
Liebe und Friede atmet rings die Erde, 
„Liebe und Friede!" schallt's durch alle Weiten. 
Und droben streckt auf seinem goldnen Throne 
Gott seinen Szepter über sie zum Segen, 
Und spendet Luft und Freude rings hernieder, 
Dass sie auf allen Wegen 
In Strömen rinnen, so wie vormals wieder. 
Seht ihr sie nicht? seht ihr sie nicht, die Säule, 
Die grosse, jenes Denkmal, hehr und prächtig, 
Wie hell aufblitzend es die Augen blendet? 
So sind nicht jene Pyramiden mächtig, 
Der Sklaven Werk, die scheu vor dessen Keule 
Gebebt, dem Unterdrückung Ruhm gespendet! 
Vor ihm, unabgewendet 
Dampft ew'ger Weihrauch schon, 
Den Gutenberg der Erdkreis dankbar weihet; 
Für seine grosse Wohltat kleiner Lohn! 
Ruhm dem, der die unsinn'ge Macht zerschlug 
Der pochenden Gewalt, und des Verstandes, 
Der Seele Kraft erhob zu raschem Flug! 
Ruhm dem, den im Triumph die Wahrheit trug, 
Und ewig fruchtbar machte seine Hände! 
Dem Weltwohltäter Hymnen ohne Ende! p. 55 
Hegelings was a pejorative name for the followers of the Hegelian school coined 
by their opponent Heinrich Leo, the historian and journalist. In 1838 he published 
in Halle a pamphlet entitled Die Hegelingen. Actenstücke und Belege zu der s.g. 
Denunciation der ewigen Wahrheit, which fiercely attacked the Young Hegelians. 
p. 64 
In his Kampf und Sieg Franz Carl Joel Jacoby extolled the Basques for their 
support of the Carlists in Spain and the struggle waged against the liberals by 
the ultramontane clergy in Belgium, in particular the intrigues of the Belgian 
Jesuit Order which he called the "Belgian nightingale". 
Carlists—an absolutist clerical group in Spain that supported Don Carlos, 
brother of Ferdinand VII, in his claims to the Spanish throne. The Civil War of 
1833-40 unleashed by the Carlists (known as the First Carlist War) was in fact a 
clash between the Catholic feudal and the liberal bourgeois elements in Spain and 
ended with the defeat of the Carlists. p. 64 
This article appears to have been written in connection with rumours about the 
proposed suspension of the Zeitung für den Deutschen Adel, which started 
publication in January 1840. However, the newspaper continued to appear until 
1844.  p. 66 
This refers to the attacks by Martin Luther, founder of the Lutheran Church, 
on the Catholic Church and papism in which he relied on the original Greek 
texts of the Gospels (hence Engels' comparison of them to "Greek fire"). On 
October 31, 1517, the beginning of the Reformation in Germany, Luther posted 

=====第623页=====
Notes 601 
53 
54 up on the door of the Castle Church in Wittenberg his 95 Theses refuting 
certain dogmas of medieval Catholic faith and containing the fundamentals of 
Lutheranism. An important place in his subsequent activities was occupied by 
the translation into German and corresponding interpretation of the New and 
the Old Testament. He completed his translation of the Bible in 1534. p. 66 
Engels is quoting from the "Ankündigung und Einladung zur Subscription auf 
die mit dem 1. Januar 1840 erscheinende Zeitung für den Deutschen Adel", 
published in the Sprecher oder Rheinisch-Westphälischer Anzeiger No. 69, August 
28, 1839, and other papers. p. 66 
An allusion to the leading article by Fouqué, editor of the Zeitung für den 
Deutschen Adel, published in its first issue on January 1, 1840, under the title 
"Vorwort an unsere Leser". p. 68 
55 A reference to Kant's book Zum ewigen Frieden. Ein philosophischer  Entwurf, 
Königsberg, 1795. p. 69 
This work consists of two articles. Engels published them in the Mitter-
nachtzeiiung für gebildete Leser, a liberal newspaper that appeared in Brunswick, 
because he wanted to express his views freely on Karl Gutzkow and the Young 
Germany group (see Note 18), something he could not do in Gutzkow's 
Telegraph für Deutschland. Engels apparently intended to continue the series by 
dealing with other aspects of the German literary scene in the late 1830s and the 
early 1840s, but was forced to cease contributing to the Mittemachtzeitung 
because of his differences with its editor, Eduard Brinckmeier (Engels mentions 
them in his letter to Levin Schiicking of July 2, 1840; see this volume, p. 496). 
p. 71 
Gutzkow's article "Vergangenheit und Gegenwart. 1830-1838" contained a 
criticism of German literature of that period. It was published in the first and 
only issue of the Jahrbuch der Literatur, which appeared in Hamburg in 1839. 
p. 71 
58 The première of Gutzkow's tragedy Richard Savage oder: Der Sohn einer Mutter 
took place on July 15, 1839, in Frankfurt am Main. Originally it was printed 
privately under the pen-name of Leonhard Falk. It appeared under the author's 
real name in Leipzig in 1842 in his Dramatische Werke, Bd. 1. p. 71 
59 Gutzkow's tragedy König Saul was printed in Hamburg in 1839 as a separate 
book. p. 71 
60 A reference to Gutzkow's Marino Falieri and Hamlet in Wittenberg published in a 
collection of his unfinished writings entitled Skizzenbuch, Cassel and Leipzig, 
1839.  p. 71 
61 The scene in question is from Gutzkow's Wally, die Zweiflerin, Book Two. 
P. 72 
62 In the preface to his book Die Dramatiker der Jetztzeit (see Note 39) Wienbarg 
wrote: "I shall begin with Uhland because I see in this misunderstood, original 
and simple dramatist, so childlike in his manhood, to a certain extent the pure, 
unaffected type of German dramatist" (pp. 7-8). p. 74 
Engels is referring to the anonymous article "Moderne Romane" in the 
Rheinische Jahrbuch für Kunst und Poesie, 1. Jrg., Köln, 1840, which reviewed 

=====第624页=====
602 Notes 
Gutzkow's novel Blasedow und seine Söhne, printed in Stuttgart in 1838, and other 
works by contemporary writers. p. 79 
64 Griseldis, a drama by Friedrich Halm (the pen-name of Ernst Münch-Belling-
hausen), was staged in Vienna in 1835 and was a great success. However, when 
it was published in 1837 it was sharply criticised. p. 80 
65 After the première of Gutzkow's Richard Savage in Stuttgart, the local weekly 
Deutscher Courier (No. 44, November 3, 1839) carried a review of it entitled 
"Erste Vorstellung von Richard Savage, oder der Sohn einer Mutter, Trauerspiel in 
5 Aufzügen von Karl Gutzkow". p. 80 
66 The premiere of Werner, oder Herz und Welt took place in Hamburg on February 
21, 1840. The play was published in Gutzkow's Dramatische Werke, Bd. 1, 
Leipzig, 1842. p. 80 
67 One of the reasons why Engels wrote this article, "Modern Polemics", the 
second in his series Modern Literary Life, was the publication in the Telegraph für 
Deutschland (No. 3, 1840) of the article "Haben wir einen modernen Styl?" by 
Ludwig Wihl, a representative of the Young Germany group. Below Engels 
refers to this article. p. 81 
This refers to the satirical comedy by Creizenach, Der schwäbische Apoll, 
published in 1839, which poked fun at the Swabian school (see Note 36). 
Beck's article "Literatur in Ungarn" was printed in the Zeitung für die elegante 
Welt in September 1837 (Nos. 173-81). p. 82 68 
69 An allusion to the ban in 1835 on works by writers of the Young Germany 
movement (see Note 32). p. 85 
70 Mundt has no work by this title. In all probability Engels is referring to his book 
Charaktere und Situationen. Vier Bücher Novellen, Skizzen, Wanderungen auf Reisen 
und durch die neu« Literatur, 2 Teile, Wismar, 1837. p. 86 
In the second issue of his Altona journal Freihafen for 1838, Mundt published 
an article entitled "Lebenserinnerungen von Munch", reviewing the memoirs of 
the German historian and publicist Ernst Münch-Bellinghausen which appeared 
in Karlsruhe in 1836-38. p. 86 
Gutzkow's essays Literarische Elfenschicksale. Ein Märchen ohne Anspielung, directed 
against Mundt, were printed in the Telegraph für Deutschland in February (Nos. 
31, 32, 35 and 36) and April (Nos. 65-68) 1838. The next year they were 
included in Gutzkow's Skizzenbuch under the title Die literarischen Elfen, Ein 
Märchen ohne Anspielung. p. 87 
Engels is referring to Deutschlands jüngste Literatur- und Kulturepoche, a work by 
the German writer and journalist Hermann Marggraff that appeared in Leipzig 
in 1838. p. 88 73 
74 This article was published anonymously in the Zeitung für die elegante Welt (Nos. 
192-93) for October 1-2, 1838; Kühne sharply criticised Gutzkow's literary work 
and his novels Seraphine and Blasedow und seine Söhne. p. 90 
Heine's article "Der Schwabenspiegel" was published in the Jahrbuch der Literatur 
(1839) in distorted form. In a special statement published in the Zeitung für die 
elegante Welt on February 8, 1839, Heine renounced his authorship. p. 90 

=====第625页=====
Notes 603 
76 Under the press laws in the states of the German Confederation, only books 
exceeding 20 printed sheets were not liable to preliminary censorship, p. 91 
The article criticising Gutzkow's Richard Savage was published in Kühne's Zeitung 
für die elegante Welt (No. 135) on July 13, 1839, under the title "Richard Savage, 
oder: grosse Geister begegnen sich". 
Ludwig Wihl's declaration (Zeitung für die elegante Welt No. 102, May 28, 1839) 
was directed against Heine. The same issue contained a mock reply by Kühne 
signed Hektor, Jagdhund bei Hoffmann und Campe in Hamburg. On April 18-20, 
1839,  Heine had published in Kühne's newspaper, under the title "Schriftsteller­
nöten", an open letter to Julius Campe, publisher of the Jahrbuch der Literatur, 
accusing Wihl of distorting his article "Der Schwabenspiegel", and calling him 
Campe's hound (Jagdhund). p. 91 
78 The dispute between Beck and Gutzkow started after the latter had published in 
the Telegraph für Deutschland No. 190 (November 1839), in the "Kleine 
Chronik" section, a note drawing attention to the resemblance, suggestive of 
imitation, between Beck's Saul and Gutzkow's König Saul. Beck replied with a 
sharply-worded declaration in the Zeitung für die elegante Welt of November 25, 
1839.  Concerning Gutzkow's "Supplement", written later to Engels' critical 
article "Karl Beck" (published in the Telegraph für Deutschland), see Note 43. 
p. 91 
This poem was published in the Zeitung für die elegante Welt on February 8, 
1838.  p. 94 
80 Thiersch's song Ich bin ein Preusse was published in the book: Lieder und Gedichte 
des Dr. Bernhard Thiersch, von seinen Freunden in und bei Halberstadt für sich 
herausgegeben, Halberstadt, 1833. p. 97 
81 Lot's wife was changed into a pillar of salt for having looked back regretfully at 
the condemned cities of Sodom and Gomorrah after God had warned Lot to flee 
from them with his family (Genesis 19). p. 97 
The Calvinist Synod, which met in Dordrecht (Holland) from November 13, 
1618,  to May 9, 1619, condemned the Arminian sect for its non-conformist 
views and reasserted strictly Calvinist dogmas. p. 97 
83 This refers to the second issue of the book by Ferdinand Freiligrath and Levin 
Schücking, Das malerische und romantische Westphalen, published in Barmen and 
Leipzig in 1840, some time after the publication of this article. The first issue 
appeared in 1839. p. 100 
84 The copy of the above-mentioned book with the dedication "In memory of 
Münster" ("Andenken an Münster") was presented to Engels during his travels 
round Westphalia in May 1840 by the writer Levin Schücking (see Engels' letter 
to him of June 18, 1840; this volume, pp. 494-96). 
Annette Elisabeth von Droste-Hülshoff's book Gedichte came out in Münster in 
1838 under the initials D. H. p. 101 
The review bore the title "Richard Savage in Leipzig. Correspondenz" and was 
published in Nos. 95, 97-99 of the Hallische Jahrbücher für deutsche Wissenschaft 
und Kunst for April 20, 22-24, 1840. p. 102 
86 The Gutenberg festival—the quater-centenary of the invention of printing (see 
Note 48). p. 103 

=====第626页=====
604 Notes 
89 The Customs Union (Zollverein) of German states was set up in 1834. The 
member states (originally numbering eighteen) established a common customs 
frontier. Prussia played the leading role in the Union. The Hanseatic towns of 
Bremen, Lübeck and Hamburg were not members of this Union. p. 105 
Here and below Engels plays on the titles of the following works by the Spanish 
dramatist Calderön: Mantible Bridge, Doctor of His Honour, The Daughter of the 
Air, April-and-May Morning, The Constant Prince and Life Is a Dream. p. 110 
This report was printed in the Morgenblatt für  gebildete Leser  in the summer of 1841, 
a year after it was written. As can be seen from Engels' letter to his sister Marie 
of July 7-9, 1840 (see this volume, pp. 498-500), he made an outing to 
Bremerhaven on July 5, 1840. It is evident from the report that it was written 
immediately after the outing. 
Bremerhaven —an independent town in North-West Germany, Bremen's outer 
harbour in the mouth of the Weser. In 1939 it became part of Wesermünde. 
p. 112 
Bremen, the capital of an ecclesiastic dukedom in the early Middle Ages and one 
of the leading Hanseatic ports in the 13th century, was declared a free imperial 
town in 1646, but later repeatedly came under the rule of various neighbouring 
foreign and German princes. It resumed the status of a free town by the Final 
Act of the Vienna Congress in 1815. p. 112 
Patrimonial courts were feudal courts based on the landowner's right to try and 
punish his peasants. They were not finally .abolished in Germany until 1877. 
p. 116 
The "Native Americans" party emerged in the U.S.A. in 1835. It advocated 
privileges for persons born in the United States. Under its pressure the period 
of permanent residence in the country for immigrants wishing to acquire U. S. 
citizenship was increased from 7 to 21 years. p. 117 
This refers to the struggle by the rising bourgeoisie of Bremen to abolish the 
oligarchic system of government by the old merchant aristocracy. Self-govern­
ment was not introduced in Bremen until April 1849, during the German 
revolution. It was abolished in 1854 and power again passed to 150 patrician 
merchant families. p. 119 
94 Rationalism here means the trend in Protestant German theology which enjoyed 
a considerable following in the 18th and the early 19th century. The rationalists 
sought to combine theology with philosophy and to prove that "divine truths" 
could be understood by reason. p. 127 
The Song of Anno, a poem written in the Central German dialect in the late 11th 
or the early 12th century in praise of Archbishop Anno of Cologne, subsequent­
ly canonised. p. 132 
96 Castra Vetera (ancient camp)—an ancient Roman military station, situated on the 
left bank of the Rhine, where the city of Xanten later grew up. p. 134 9S 
97 For the demagogues see Note 9. The persecution of the demagogues increased in 
the 1830s, after the July revolution in France, which had a strong impact on the 
German states. p. 135 

=====第627页=====
Notes 605 
Engels wrote this article following the publication, in Leipzig in 1840, of Arndt's 
book Erinnerungen aus dem äusseren Leben. The editors of the Telegraph für 
Deutschland provided the name of the author, F. Oswald (Engels' pen-name), with 
an asterisk referring the reader to the following footnote: "A much discussed 
publication, reviewed by the Telegraph." P- 137 
Engels is comparing Arndt to Eckart, a hero from medieval German tales, who 
in the Tannhäuser legend stands on guard at Venusberg and warns those 
approaching of the danger of Venus' charms. p. 137 
The Constitution of 1812, adopted in the interests of the liberal nobility and the 
liberal bourgeoisie, limited the king's power by diets and did away with certain 
survivals of feudalism. The return to power of the feudal and clerical forces 
after the country's liberation from Napoleon's rule led, in 1814, to the repeal of 
this constitution, which became the banner of the liberal constitutionalist 
movement in Spain and other European countries. p. 140 
This refers to the congresses of the Holy Alliance (founded by the Vienna 
Congress on September 26, 1815) held in Aachen (1818), Troppau (1820), 
Laibach (1821) and Verona (1822), at which the European monarchs and 
their ministers worked out measures for protecting "legitimist" regimes 
restored after the victory over Napoleon and for suppressing revolutionary 
and national liberation movements. p. 140 
In 1804, in France and subsequently some countries in Western and South­
western Europe which were dependent on Napoleon (Italy, the Netherlands, 
the Kingdom of Westphalia, Belgium and others), a Civil Code (Code 
Napoleon) was introduced instead of the archaic private law based largely on 
pandects, part of the Roman Code drawn up in 528-34 under Justinian I, 
Emperor of the Eastern Roman Empire. p. 141 
103 The Hallische Jahrbücher für deutsche Wissenschaft und Kunst Nos. 281 and 282, 
for November 23 and 24, 1840, carried Arnold Ruge's review of Florencourt's 
book  Politische,  kirchliche und litterarische Zustände in Deutschland. Ein journalis­
tischer Beitrag zu den Jahren 1838 und 1839, Leipzig, 1840. The review was 
entitled "Friedrich von Florencourt und die Kategorieen der politischen Praxis". 
p. 142 
104 y^e Burschenschaften (fraternities) were German student organisations that 
arose in the course of liberation war against Napoleon. They advocated 
German unification, but Right-wing nationalistic views were also current among 
them. p. 142 
105 -j-jjç historical school of law—a trend in German historiography and jurispru­
dence in the late 18th century. The representatives of this school, Gustav Hugo, 
Friedrich Karl von Savigny and others, sought to justify the privileges of the nobili­
ty and feudal institutions by referring to the inviolability of historical traditions. 
p. 146 
This refers to the London Convention concluded on July 15, 1840, between 
England, Russia, Austria and Prussia, on the one hand, and Turkey, on the 
other, on rendering military aid to the Turkish Sultan against the Egyptian 
Pasha Mohammed Ali, who was supported by France. p. 148 
107 See Note 47. p. 150 

=====第628页=====
606 Notes 
109 
no 108 .pj^  p0em  was  wrjtten on the occasion of the transfer, in 1840, of Napoleon Fs 
remains from St. Helena to Paris. p. 153 
In Greek mythology, the nymph Arethusa, daughter of Nereus and Doris, 
pursued by the river-god Alpheus fled, by swimming over the sea or crossing 
the sea bed, to Sicily where she turned into a spring. Several other springs in 
ancient Greece bore the name of Arethusa. p. 155 
"Positive  philosophy"  — a mystical religious trend (represented by Christian 
Hermann Weisse, Immanuel Hermann Fichte junior, Franz Xaver von Baader, 
Anton Günther, and Schelling in his late period) which criticised Hegel's philos­
ophy from the right. The supporters of this trend sought to subordinate philos­
ophy to religion by declaring divine revelation to be the only source of "positive" 
knowledge, and labelled as "negative" any philosophy which proceeded from 
rational knowledge. p. 157 
Bremen's basic laws dated back to the Middle Ages: the Tafel (Table) was 
drawn up in 1433 and the Neue Eintracht (New Concord) in 1534. p. 160 
This folk epic was published in Lübeck in 1498 in the Low German 
dialect (Reyneke Vos). p. 160 
Engels is referring to Reinhold Köstlin's article "Die deutschen Dichter und 
ihr Publikum", published in the journal Europa. Chronik der gebildeten Welt, 
Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1840. p. 162 
114 The words "après moi le déluge" ("after me the deluge") are attributed to Louis 
XV of France. They were also quoted by Frederick II of Prussia, in a letter to 
Prince Heinrich of Prussia dated October 18, 1782. 
The defeat of the Prussian troops by Napoleon in the battle of Jena on 
October 14, 1806, led to Prussia's surrender. p. 163 
115 On May 31, 1840, Prussia marked the centenary of Frederick II's ascent to the 
throne. By the interregnum of twenty years Engels means the period between 1786, 
the year of Frederick II's death, and 1806, when the Prussian troops were 
routed at Jena. p. 164 m 
112 
113 
116 
117 This essay describes Engels' impressions of his travels in Switzerland and Italy 
in mid-May 1841. He started from Barmen, to which he had returned in the 
middle of March 1841 after his almost three-year stay in Bremen. The essay 
was not completed. Part I was evidently to be followed by Part II, but it did not 
appear, probably because the Athenäum, the Young Hegelian weekly in which 
this article was printed, was banned in late December 1841. p. 170 
In 1839 the radical government of the canton of Zurich offered David Strauss a 
professorship at Zurich University, which caused a sharp conflict between the 
radicals and conservative-clerical circles. On September 6, 1839, Strauss' 
opponents, headed by Bernhard Hirzel, a priest from the village of Pfäffikon 
(Engels dubbed his followers "Pfäffikon guardians of Zion", i.e., guardians 
of the orthodox faith), staged an armed demonstration in Zurich. But even 
before the demonstration took place the government was compelled to 
withdraw the invitation and later resigned. p. 171 

=====第629页=====
Notes 607 
Engels is quoting Petrarch's 261st sonnet from his cycle Canzoniere ("In vita e in 
morte di Madonna Laura") in the following German translation, possibly his 
own: 
Ich schwang mich auf im Geist zur Wohnung deren, 
Die stets ich such' und finde nicht hienieden; 
Die Blicke sanft, die einst so streng mich mieden, 
So stand sie in des Himmels dritten Sphären. 
Die Hand mir fassend, sprach sie leise: Deine Zähren 
Versiegen hier, wo nie wir sind geschieden; 
Ich bin's, die lange dir geraubt den Frieden, 
Um hieher, vor der Zeit, dann heimzukehren. 
O dass ein Menschensinn mein Glück verstände! 
Dich nur erwart' ich, und den dir so lieben, 
Den Leib, den ich dort unten liess schon lange. — 
Ach, warum schwieg sie, liess mir los die Hände? 
Denn wenig fehlte bei dem süssen Klange, 
Dass ich nicht gleich im Himmel dort geblieben. p. 172 
In the Holy Roman Empire (which comprised Germany, Austria, part of Italy, 
Bohemia, Burgundy, the Netherlands and other countries, and existed from 
962 to 1806) the Emperor was elected, according to the Golden Bull of 1356, 
by the seven most powerful princes. p. 175 
This article opens a series of Engels' writings directed against Schelling. By this 
time Schelling had abandoned many rationalist elements of his former views 
and had become a prophet of the mystical religious "positive philosophy" (see 
Note 110). He was invited to Berlin by Frederick William IV of Prussia, as a 
counterweight to the Hegelian school, particularly the Young Hegelians. 
On November 15, 1841, Schelling started his course of lectures at Berlin 
University. Engels attended them as a non-matriculated student. He had come 
to Berlin from Barmen in the latter half of September 1841 and did military 
training there in an artillery brigade until August 1842. 
Excerpts from Schelling's lectures which continued until March 18, 1842, are 
quoted in Engels' works from his own notes. Only a small part of these lectures 
were printed at the time (Schelling's Vorlesungen in Berlin, Darstellung und Kritik 
der Hauptpunkte derselben, mit besonderer Beziehung auf das Verhältniss zwischen 
Christenthum und Philosophie von Dr. J. Frauenstadt, Berlin, 1842), the greater 
part being published only after the author's death in his Complete Works. See 
F. W. Schelling, Philosophie der Offenbarung. Sämmtliche Werke, II Abt., Bd. I-IV, 
Stuttgart und Augsburg, 1856-1861. p. 181 
This pamphlet is Engels' major work directed against Schelling's mystical 
religious concepts. It was written at the same time as Schelling was lecturing at 
Berlin University and is mainly a critique of the opening lectures of Schelling's 
course. 
The pamphlet was published anonymously (it was not until the summer of 1842, 
in an article against Jung which he signed Friedrich Oswald, that Engels confirmed 
his authorship; see this volume, p. 295) and soon attracted the attention of 

=====第630页=====
608 Notes 
various public circles. Schilling's followers described Engels' criticism as 
"absurd attacks" (see the Jahrbuch der deutschen Universitäten, II, Leipzig, 1842, 
S. 22), while the Young Hegelians acclaimed the pamphlet. The Deutsche 
Jahrbücher, a Young Hegelian journal, published a special article on the 
pamphlet (in Nos. 126-28, May 28,  30-31,  1842) by its editor, Arnold Ruge, 
which noted the author's spirit and lucidity in his criticism of Schelling's views. 
When Ruge learned later that the pamphlet was written by Engels he wrote to 
him inviting him to contribute to the journal and addressing him as a "Doctor" 
(see Engels' reply to Ruge of June 15, 1842, p. 543 of this volume). p. 189 
122 Engels is referring to the following publication: G. F. W. Hegel, Werte. Vollstän­
dige Ausgabe durch einen Verein von Freunden des Verewigten. 19 Bücher in 23 
Bänden, Berlin, 1831-1845. By 1841 almost all the books had been published 
except for 7 and 18. In 1887 Briefe von und an H., hrsg. von K. Hegel, 
appeared as the 19th and last book. p. 195 
123 A reference to Strauss' work Das Leben Jesu, kritisch bearbeitet, Bd. 1-2, which 
was published in Tübingen in 1835-36. p. 196 
124 Engels is presumably quoting here from Cuvier's book Discours sur les révolutions 
de la surface du globe, Paris, 1840, p. 53. p. 222 
The Temple of Fortuna primigenia, an ancient Roman deity embodying creative 
power, was at Praeneste (the ancient name for the town of Palestrina), east of 
Rome. p. 224 
126 The Holy Grail. According to medieval legend, this was a precious cup 
possessing miraculous powers. p. 239 
Engels' pamphlet Scheming, Philosopher in Christ was written, following his 
Scheming and Revelation, in response to the continued attacks on Hegel's 
philosophy and progressive philosophical trends made by Schelling in his 
Berlin lectures from the standpoint of religious mysticism. 
The conservative press sharply criticised the author: the pietist Elberfelder 
Zeitung for May 18, 1842, described him as a "young, frivolous scribbler", 
while the Augsburg AHgemeine Zeitung accused him of "cynicism" (No. 139, 
May 15, 1842). The Rheinische Zeitung, published with the active co-operation of 
Young Hegelians, came out in defence of the pamphlet (in No. 138, May 18, 
and No. 157, June 6, 1842), as did several other progressive German 
periodicals. Among other things it praised the pamphlet's original satirical 
form. The author, it wrote on May 18, 1842, had imitated the pietist tone very 
skilfully. p. 241 
128 Pe/agiantsm (after the Celtic monk Pelagius) — a Christian trend hostile to the 
official church and widespread in the Mediterranean countries in the early 5th 
century. The Pelagians affirmed the freedom of man's will. 
Socinianism (after the Italian theologian Faustus Socinus) — a religious doc­
trine widespread in Poland in the late 16th and the early 17th century, and 
later in certain other European countries. Its followers were critical of the 
dogmas of the official church and like the Pelagians affirmed the freedom of 
man's will. 
For rationalism see Note 94. p. 249 
The books of the Sibyls—a collection of oracles attributed to the legendary 
prophetess Sibyl. They were used in ancient Rome for official fortune-telling 

=====第631页=====
Notes 609 
when danger threatened the state. At the time of the Roman Empire the Jews 
and Christians also had Sibylline books. p. 252 
130 See Note 18. p. 258 
This was the first article written by Engels for the Rheinische Zeitung, an 
opposition newspaper to which he contributed until the end of 1842. Engels' 
articles were marked with a special sign *x ", as were articles written by the 
newspaper's other leading correspondents. Some of his articles were signed 
F. O. (Friedrich Oswald, Engels' main pseudonym). 
Soon after the publication of Engels' first article Marx also began to 
contribute to the Rheinisch« Zeitung (his article "Debates on Freedom of the 
Press"  was published in May 1842). After moving to Cologne in October 1842, 
he became its editor and held the post until March 17, 1843. p. 265 
1S2 -p^e events mentioned here took place in 1837 after Ernst August, the new 
King of Hanover, abrogated the moderately liberal constitution of 1833. 
Hanover's liberal circles strove to have it reintroduced. Their demand found 
expression in a protest by seven professors at Göttingen University (Albrecht, 
Dahlmann, Gervinus, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Ewald and Wilhelm Weber), 
for which they were dismissed from their posts. Jacob Grimm, Dahlmann and 
Gervinus were made to leave the country. p. 265 
133 See Note 32. p. 266 
134 In the autumn of 1841, Bruno Bauer, one of the leaders of the Young 
Hegelians, was suspended from teaching at Bonn University by Eichhorn, the 
Prussian Minister of Religious Worship, Education and Medicine. In March 1842, 
he was dismissed from his post as lecturer in theology on account of his 
atheistic views and opposition speeches. Bauer's dismissal evoked sharp protests 
from radical and liberal intellectuals. 
For Hegelings see Note 49. p. 270 
Lectures given by Philipp Konrad Marheineke in Berlin University were 
published in 1842-43 in two books: Ph. Marheineke, Einleitung tn die öffentlichen 
Vorlesungen über die Bedeutung der Hegeischen Philosophie in der christlichen 
Theologie, Berlin, 1842; Ph. Marheineke, Zur Kritik der Schellingschen Offen­
barungsphilosophie, Berlin, 1843. In the latter book the author mentions Engels' 
anonymous pamphlet Schelling und die Offenbarung (Schelling and Revelation). 
In quoting Marheineke's lectures and the lectures given by Leopold Henning, 
Engels used the notes which he made during the lectures. p. 270 
136 -j^k  art jc|e is marked with the figure I in the Rheinische Zeitung. Presumably 
Engels wanted to continue it, but this intention did not materialise. p. 274 
137 The great festivals in Athens, in honour of Athena, the tutelary goddess of the 
city. The Greater Panathenaea were celebrated with especial magnificence in the 
third year of each Olympiad and were accompanied by contests of poets and 
musicians. In other years the festival was known as the Lesser Panathenaea. 
p. 275 
138 The Federal Act was part of the Final Act of the Vienna Congress. It was signed 
on June 8, 1815, and proclaimed the German Confederation, which originally 
comprised 34 independent states and 4 free cities. The Federal Act intensified 

=====第632页=====
610 Notes 
1S9 the political disunity of Germany and preserved the absolutist feudal regime in 
the German states. P- 277 
A reference to a review of Johann Michael Leupoldt's Geschichte der Gesundheit 
und der Krankheiten (Erlangen, 1842) by Heinrich Leo, an opponent of the 
Hegelian philosophy, who called Hegel's adherents by the contemptuous name 
of "Hegelings" (see Note 49). This review was published in the Evangelische 
Kirchen-Zeitung Nos. 36 and 37, May 4 and 7, 1842. The quotations given by 
Engels are from No. 36, except for the last one, which he took from No. 37. 
p. 281 
Engels appears to be referring to the revolts against the July monarchy, which 
occurred in a number of industrial centres in France in the 1830s. In 
November 1831 the weavers of Lyons rose in a revolt which was followed, in 
June 1832, by an armed uprising of the Paris workers led by the petty-bourgeois 
republicans. A second revolt of the Lyons workers broke out in April 1834 and 
was supported by armed struggle under republican slogans in Paris, Saint-
Etienne, Grenoble, Clermont-Ferrand and other towns. Both revolts in Lyons 
were an important landmark in the history of the proletariat's struggle for 
liberation and marked a step forward in the independent class movement of 
the proletariat. p. 283 
This article about Jung's book marked Engels' final break with the Young 
Germany literary group (see Note 18), whose political and ideological views he 
had begun to question earlier. When he mved to Berlin in September 1841 
and made contact with the Young Hegelians he became increasingly convinced 
that political half-heartedness and hostility to philosophical radicalism of the 
Young Germany movement made it incapable of becoming the exponent of 
progressive ideas and the champion of consistent struggle against outdated 
institutions. In December 1841, he ceased contributing to Gutzkow's journal, 
Telegraph für Deutschland, and later decided publicly to dissociate himself from 
the Young Germany group and to subject the weak aspects of their outlook 
and literary activity to open criticism. This he did in the Deutsche Jahrbücher, a 
journal edited by the Young Hegelian Arnold Ruge. 
In reply to Engels' criticism Jung wrote a scornful article entitled "Ein 
Bonbon für den kleinen Oswald, meinen Gegner in den Deutschen Jahrbüchern" 
(Königsberger Literatur-Blatt No. 42, July 20, 1842). p. 284 
Engels is hinting at the similarity between Jung's ideological views and the 
mysticism of Schelling and other exponents of "positive philosophy" (see Note 
110).  p. 284 
A reference to Arnold Ruge's review of Jung's book, Königsberg in Preussen und 
die Extreme des dortigen Pietismus, published in 1840. The review, entitled "Die 
Restauration des Christentums", appeared in the Deutsche Jahrbücher Nos. 
153-55,  December 27-29, 1841, that is, after the journal had changed its title. 
(From July 1841 Ruge's journal Hallische Jahrbücher appeared under the title of 
Deutsche Jahrbücher.) Engels uses the old title. p. 285 
' Nothing learnt, nothing forgotten. This phrase is commonly thought to have been 
coined by Talleyrand in reference to the Bourbons. Its origin, however, goes 
back to Admiral de Panât who, in 1796, said about the Royalists: "Personne n'a su 
ni rien oublier ni rien prendre (Nobody has been able to forget anything or learn 
anything)." p. 285 

=====第633页=====
Notes 611 
149 145 
A reference to Schelling's preface to the German edition of Victor Cousin's 
Über französische und deutsche Philosophie (Stuttgart and Tübingen, 1834). In dis­
cussing Cousin's attitude to Hegel, Schelling completely ignored Hegel's role in the 
development of German and world philosophy. See p. XXIII. p. 294 
Eduard Meyen's review of Jung's Vorlesungen über die moderne Literatur der 
Deutschen appeared in the J?fc«inisc/»e Zeitung Nos.  149-51,  May  29-31,  1842. 
p. 296 
An allusion to Jung's intention to become a preacher after graduating from the 
theological faculty, an intention which did not materialise. p. 297 
In late 1841, the editors of the Athenäum, a Young Hegelian journal, gave a 
reception in Berlin in honour of Karl Theodor Welcker, a deputy of the Baden 
Provincial Diet and member of the liberal opposition in Germany. The 
reception was used as a pretext for suppressing the journal in December of 
that year. p. 298 
Engels is referring to the censorship instruction issued by the Prussian 
Government on December 24, 1841, and published in the semi-official 
Allgemeine Preussische Staats-Zeitung on January 14, 1842. In word the instruc­
tion disapproved of the restrictions imposed on literary activity, but in fact it 
preserved and even tightened government control over the press under the 
cover of phrases about liberal and moderate censorship. 
Marx criticised the instruction in his article "Comments on the Latest 
Prussian Censorship Instruction" (see present edition, Vol. 1, pp. 109-31). 
p. 298 
Engels would seem to have in mind Ludwig Uhland, Paul Pfizer, Friedrich 
Römer and Gustav Duvernoy, prominent leaders of the liberal opposition in the 
Württemberg Provincial Diet which was re-elected in 1833 after being dissolved 
the year before. p. 299 
In 1841 the Baden Chamber of Deputies was dissolved by Grand Duke 
Leopold on account of its conflict with the Baden Government over the latter's 
refusal to grant two state officials leave for executing their functions as 
deputies. The Chamber did not resume its work until after new elections held 
in January 1842. p. 299 
During the 1841-42 elections Itzstein was elected to the Second Chamber of the 
Baden Provincial Diet not from the Schwetzingen constituency, whose deputy 
he had been for many years, but from another one. p. 299 
Engels is referring to the article "Aufsätze über inländische Gegenstände. XVI. 
Ein Rückblick", which appeared in the Spenersche Zeitung Nos. 137-38, June 16 
and 17, 1842, and was marked with two asterisks. He calls its author "our 
asterisk man" and makes a play on the words Ein Rückblick (a review). 
p. 300 
See Note 149. p. 300 
In the Rheinische Zeitung this article was printed slightly abridged and revised 
by the editors. In this volume it is published in its original form, according to 
Engels' manuscript. The most important discrepancies between the manuscript 
and the newspaper version are given in the footnotes. p. 304 152 
153 
154 
155 

=====第634页=====
612 Notes 
160 156 Promulgated in 1794, the Prussian Law reflected the backwardness of feudal 
Prussia in the sphere of law and the judiciary. In his article Engels quotes excerpts 
from the Prussian Law from the publication Allgemeines Landrecht für die 
Preussischen Staaten, Berlin, 1794, Teil II, Titel 20. p. 304 
Engels is referring to Johann Jacoby, author of the anonymous pamphlet Vier 
Fragen beantwortet von einem Ostpreussen, Mannheim, 1841, in which he criticised 
the Prussian state system and called for a constitution in Prussia. This pamphlet 
resulted in legal proceedings against its author. Although in its verdict of April 
20, 1842, the Berlin court acquitted Jacoby of high treason, he was nevertheless 
sentenced to two and a half years of imprisonment for disrespectful criticism of 
the laws of the land and  lèse^majesté.  It was only the Senate of Appeal of the 
Supreme Court that unconditionally acquitted Jacoby in its ruling of January 
20, 1843. 
In 1842, during the judicial inquiry, Jacoby published a pamphlet in 
Switzerland entitled Meine weitere Vertheidigung wider die gegen mich erhobene 
Beschuldigung der Majestätsbeleidigung und des frechen, unehrerbietigen Tadels des 
Landesgesetzes, Zürich und Winterthur, 1842. Engels is quoting both pamphlets 
by Jacoby. p. 305 
158 Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten, Berlin, 1819, p. 232. 
p. 305 
159 See Note 149. p. 310 
This poem is a parody on the struggle between the Young Hegelians and the 
conservative opponents of the Hegelian philosophy (Sack and others) who took 
part in the slander campaign against Bruno Bauer. The poem was written as a 
protest against Bruno Bauer's dismissal from Bonn University in late March 
1842 (see Note 134). Engels wrote it together with Bruno's brother Edgar. 
The poem was widely commented on in the German and Swiss press. Its 
publication was announced in the radical Zurich paper Schweizerischer Repub­
likaner on December 9, 1842 (No. 98). Excerpts from it were reprinted in 
several Leipzig periodicals, among them Freikugeln No. 52, December 30, 1842. 
Comments on it appeared in the Hamburger Literarische und Kritische Blätter 
(No.  220, December 19, 1842) and the Hamburger Neue Zeitung (No. 303, 
December 31, 1842). p. 313 
Engels is referring to the fact that, under the pressure of clerical and 
conservative circles, the government of the canton of Zurich cancelled its 
invitation to David Strauss to lecture at Zurich University in 1839 (see Note 
117).  p. 321 
An allusion to Bruno Bauer's transfer as university lecturer from Berlin to 
Bonn in 1839. p. 325 
163 See Note 110. p. 328 
"The Free"—the Berlin group of Young Hegelians which was formed in the 
first half of 1842 and was led by Edgar Bauer, Eduard Meyen, Ludwig Buhl and 
Max Stirner (pseudonym of Caspar Schmidt). Its members advocated radical 
and atheistic views and condemned the half-heartedness of liberalism. 
The fact that "The Free" lacked any positive programme and ignored the 
realities of political struggle soon led to differences between them and the 161 
162 

=====第635页=====
Notes 613 
165 representatives of the revolutionary-democratic wing of the German opposition 
movement. A sharp conflict arose between "The Free" and Marx in the 
autumn of 1842, after Marx had become editor of the Rheinische Zeitung (see 
present édition, Vol. 1, pp. 393-95). 
During his stay in Berlin Engels associated closely with "The Free" but, 
unlike many of them, he held that it was necessary to go beyond purely 
atheistic propaganda and take part in the actual struggle for political liberties 
and democracy. Engels' revolutionary-democratic convictions, which found 
expression in the satirical poem The Insolently Threatened Yet Miraculously 
Rescued Bible, together with his developing materialistic outlook, led to his 
parting company with "The Free" and the Young Hegelian trend in general. 
p. 332 
An ironical allusion to the decisions of the Federal Diet (see Note 32), directed 
against the opposition movement in Germany (in particular against radical 
journalism and literature). The Federal Diet assembled in the free city of 
Frankfurt am Main. p. 340 
166 See Note 49. p. 341 
p. 353 
168 On March 18, 1842, when Schelling finished his lectures on the "philosophy of 
revelation", Berlin students organised a torchlight procession in the Leipziger 
Strasse, where the philosopher lived. p. 353 
169 -j-jjg Commissions of the Estates in the Landtags (provincial diets), to which 
Engels is referring here, were instituted in Prussia in June 1842. Elected by the 
Landtags from their deputies according to the estates principle, they formed a 
single advisory body known as the "UnitedCommissions", which the government 
intended to convene in Berlin on October 18, 1842. With the help of this body, 
which was a mockery of a representative institution, Frederick William IV hoped 
to enforce new taxes and obtain a loan. p. 353 
Valhalla (from the name given in Norse mythology to the abode of the souls of 
slain warriors) — a huge building near Regensburg erected in 1841 by Ludwig 
I, King of Bavaria. Busts of many famous Germans were collected there. 
Walhalla's Genossen, geschildert durch König Ludwig den Ersten von Bayern, dem 
Gründer Walhalla's was published in Munich in 1842; it contained biographies 
of Germans whose busts were exhibited in Valhalla. p. 353 
The problem of centralisation was discussed in the Rheinische Zeitung on several 
occasions. An article by Moses Hess, entitled "Deutschland und Frankreich in 
Bezug auf die Centralisationsfrage", appeared in the paper's supplement on 
May 17, 1842. The author discussed the problem from an abstract, nihilist 
point of view, which prompted Marx to enter into a polemic with him. Marx, 
however, did not finish the article he planned. Its beginning exists in 
manuscript (see present edition, Vol. l,pp. 182-83). 
On May 29, 1842, the Rheinische Zeitung began publishing excerpts from De 
la Centralisation, a pamphlet by Louis Cormenin which appeared in Paris in 
1842 under the pseudonym of Timon. Engels used this occasion to express his 
views on the issue and on West-European liberalism in general. p. 355 

=====第636页=====
614 Notes 
Huguenot wars—the religious wars in France between the Catholics and 
Protestant Calvinists (the Huguenots). They lasted, with intermissions, from 
1562 to 1594 and resulted in the consolidation of royal power, whose mainstay 
was the Catholic Church. During these wars Paris was the stronghold of 
Catholicism, and the southern provinces of France were the centre of the 
Huguenot movement. p. 357 
A representative body in medieval France. It consisted of representatives of the 
three estates of clergy, nobles and commons and sanctioned the levying of taxes 
and money subsidies to the king. Under the absolutist regime the states-general 
were not convened for 175 years, from 1614. They met in May 1789, at the 
time of the maturing bourgeois revolution, and on June 17 were transformed 
by the deputies of the third estate into a National Assembly, which proclaimed 
itself a Constituent Assembly on July 9 and became the supreme organ of 
revolutionary France. p. 358 
Engels wrote this article for the radical monthly Der deutsche Bote aus der Schweiz 
which Georg Herwegh planned to publish in Zurich in 1842 in place of a 
journal appearing there under the same name. Marx was also invited to 
contribute, but the new journal did not materialise and the articles intended for 
it were published in the summer of 1843 as a collection entitled Einundzwanzig 
Bogen aus der Schweiz. p. 360 
In. 1841  the government of Frederick William IV granted the right to establish 
their own church to the Old Lutherans, the faction opposing the 1817 
compulsory union between the Lutherans and the Reformists (Calvinists) (see 
Note 6). p. 363 
176 In 1837, the Archbishop of Cologne was arrested and accused of high treason 
for his refusal to submit to the demands of Frederick William III, King of 
Prussia. This arrest led to the conflict known as the "ecclesiastical discord" or 
"Cologne discord". At its root lay the controversy over the religion of children 
born into mixed Catholic and Protestant families. The conflict came to an end 
in 1841, under Frederick William IV, when the Prussian Government gave in 
to the Catholic Church. p. 363 
Provincial diets (Landtags) were instituted in Prussia in 1823. They were 
composed of the heads of princely families and representatives of the nobility, 
the towns and the rural communities. The estates principle of representation, 
coupled with a system of election based on a high tax and property qualification, 
ensured the predominance of the nobility in the Landtags. The jurisdiction of the 
provincial diets was limited to matters of local economy and administration. They 
could also express an opinion on government bills submitted for discussion. 
p. 365 
Engels is referring to the solemn promises given by Frederick William IV in 
1840 when he accepted the oath of allegiance from the deputations of various 
Prussian provinces and towns, Königsberg, Breslau and others; the King said 
he would "concern himself with the welfare of all estates and religions", p. 365 
This article was the first one sent by Engels to the Rheinische Zeitung from 
England. 
After finishing his military service as a volunteer, Engels returned from Berlin 
to Barmen about October 10, 1842. In the latter half of November he was sent 178 
179 

=====第637页=====
Notes 615 
180 to England to study commerce at a cotton mill in Manchester which was owned 
by a firm of which his father was a partner. On his way from Berlin to Barmen 
and again before his departure to England Engels visited the editorial office of 
the Rheinische Zeitung in Cologne to discuss his future work on the newspaper. 
During his second visit to Cologne, at the end of November 1842, Engels met 
Marx who was the editor of the Rheinische Zeitung at the time. This first 
personal encounter was somewhat cool since Marx disagreed strongly with the 
Berlin group of "The Free" to which Engels then belonged. This, however, did 
not prevent him from forming a high opinion of Engels as a prospective 
English correspondent of the newspaper. Engels sent his first item from 
England immediately after his arrival there. p. 368 
The People's Charter containing the demands of the Chartists was published on 
May 8, 1838, as a Bill to be submitted to Parliament. It consisted of six points: 
universal suffrage (for men of 21 and over), annual parliaments, vote by ballot, 
equal electoral areas, no property qualifications for candidates for Parliament, 
and payment for M.P.s. p. 368 
îai 
182 These laws, passed in 1651 and subsequent years, forbade the transportation of 
English goods in foreign vessels; they were repealed in 1849. p. 373 
Engels is referring to a wave of strikes which in August 1842 swept over several 
industrial districts of England, including Lancashire and Yorkshire. In some 
areas the strikers had armed clashes with troops and police. p. 373 
183 See Note 105. p. 375 
The Corn Laws (first adopted in England as far back as the 15th century) 
introduced high import tariffs on agricultural produce in order to maintain 
high prices on the home market. In 1815 the import of foreign grain was 
prohibited as long as its price in England was below 80s. per quarter (according 
to the 1822 Act—below 70s. per quarter). In 1828, a sliding-scale of duties was 
introduced according to which import tariffs on grain were raised when its 
prices on the home market fell and lowered when the price of grain went up. 
In 1838 the Manchester factory owners Cobden and Bright founded the 
Anti-Corn Lam League, which demanded the lifting of the corn tariffs and 
urged unlimited freedom of trade for the purpose of weakening the economic 
and political power of the landed aristocracy and reducing workers' wages. 
The struggle between the industrial bourgeoisie and the landed aristocracy 
over the Corn Laws ended in 1846 with their repeal. p. 376 
185 See Note 182. p. 379 
The Reform Bill, enacted on June 7, 1832, by reforming the basis of 
parliamentary representation, effectively placed political power in the hands of 
the industrial capitalists and their middle-class followers. No electoral rights 
were given to the workers and small property owners, who were the real 
driving force of the reform movement. 
Catholic emancipation—the lifting by the English Parliament in 1829 of 
restrictions on the rights of Catholics. The Catholics, most of whom were Irish, 
were granted the right to stand for election to Parliament and to hold certain 
government offices. Simultaneously, the property qualification was raised 
fivefold. 
For the struggle to abolish the Corn Laws see Note 184. p. 380 

=====第638页=====
616 Notes 
Engels did not carry out his intention at the time, but subsequently the 
struggle for the repeal of the Corn Laws in England was a frequent theme of 
his journalistic articles and major works. p. 381 
Most of the extant letters by the young Engels (to his sister Marie and his 
schoolfriends, the brothers Friedrich and Wilhelm Graeber, and other people) 
were written in Bremen. Between July 1838 and March 1841 Engels worked 
there as a clerk at a large trading house belonging to Consul Leupold. In his 
spare time he improved his education and engaged in literary and journalistic 
work. p. 385 
189 A reference to the pamphlet Jacob Grimm über seine Entlassung (published in 
Basle in 1838) written in connection with the dismissal, in 1837, of seven 
liberal-minded professors from Göttingen University (see Note 132). 
For the Cologne affair or "Cologne discord" see Note 176. p. 389 
This part of the letter is written in rhymed prose and Engels jokingly calls it 
"my Makamas", alluding to the picaresque novel in Arabic, Persian and Jewish 
literature of the Middle Ages. p. 397 
191 See Note 18. p. 411 
Engels is referring to Karl Gutzkow's review of Ahasver, a poem by Julius 
Mosen. The review was printed in the Telegraph für Deutschland No. 124, 
August 1838. p. 412 
A reference to Theodor Creizenach's article, "Gutzkow über Ahasver", pub­
lished in the Zeitung für die elegante Welt No. 189, September 27, 1838. p. 412 
A reference to a collection of ballads by Eduard Duller, published in Munich in 
1831 under the title Die Wittelsbacher, many of these ballads were included in a 
German reader compiled by G. Hüllstett, Sammlung ausgewählter Stücke aus den 
Werken deutscher Prosaiker und Dichter, zum Erklären und mündlichen Vortragen für 
die unteren und mittleren Klassen von Gymnasien, 2 Teile, Düsseldorf, 1830-1831. 
p. 413 
Engels has in mind Eduard Duller's introduction to Grabbe's play Die 
Hermannsschlacht. p. 413 
196 Engels' letter to Wilhelm Graeber mentioned here has not come to light. 
p. 415 
197 See Note 12. p. 415 
1 The issue of the newspaper Der Bremer Stadtbote in which this letter by Engels 
was published has not come to light. p. 420 
199 Wolfgang Menzel's review of Wally, die Zweiflerin, a novel by Karl Gutzkow, was 
published in the Literatur-Blatt Nos. 93 and 94 for September 11 and 14, 1835, 
and accused Gutzkow of holding immoral and blasphemous views. This review 
was one of the pretexts used by the Prussian Government for banning on 
November 14, 1835, the works by the writers of the Young Germany 
movement. On December 10, a decision to this effect was adopted by the 
Federal Diet (see Note 32). p. 421 

=====第639页=====
Notes 617 
200 See Note 18. p. 421 
A reference to Karl Gutzkow's critical article "Vergangenheit und Gegenwart. 
1830-1838", published in 1839 (see Note 57). p. 422 
502 See Note 36. p. 422 
A reference to a publishing house in Cologne called after Pierre Marteau, a 
fictitious publisher under whose trademark books and pamphlets in French, 
Dutch and German were printed in the 17th- 19th centuries. p. 422 
204 Engels is presumably referring to a book by F. Marlow (the pseudonym of the 
poet Hermann Ludwig Wolfram),Foust. Ein  dramatisches  Gedicht in drei Abschnitten, 
published in Leipzig in 1839. 
Raupach was the author of many philistine plays on historical subjects. 
p. 427 
205 In his article "Über den Charakter des Wilhelm Tell in Schillers Drama", 
which appeared in the Dramaturgische Blätter, Ludwig Börne sharply cnticised 
Schiller's hero, calling him a downright philistine who was more like a petty 
bourgeois than a "bold mountaineer". p. 449 
The March 1839 issue of the Athenäum für Wissenschaft, Kunst und Leben, a 
journal published in Nuremberg, gave the following appraisal of Engels' 
"Letters from Wuppertal": "In several issues of the Telegraph for March of this 
year we find a really true picture of religious life in FJberield and Barmen. 
Krummacher is depicted very authentically in a few characteristic strokes." 
p. 450 
207 See Note 49. p. 451 
208 See Note 176. P- 453 
209 See Note 117. p. 460 
210 See Note 99. p. 464 
Engels is referring to the decision of the Federal Diet to ban works by the 
writers of the Young Germany movement (see Note 32 and Note 199). 
Karl Gutzkow's novel Wally, die Zweiflerin was one of the pretexts for this decision 
and also for arresting and prosecuting the author. Gutzkow was arrested in late 
November 1835, and on January 13, 1836, sentenced to one month's imprison­
ment for "blasphemous views, disrespect for the Christian faith and the Church 
and depicting immoral situations". p. 465 
For Börne's essay on Schiller's Wilhelm Tell see Note 205. 
It was evidently about this time that Engels began translating works by 
Shelley, who was one of his favourite poets. In 1840, he consulted the radical 
German writers Levin Schücking and Hermann Püttmann on the preparation 
and publication of a collection of Shelley's poems (see this volume, pp. 494-95). 
Engels' translations have not come to light. p. 467 
213 Professor Eduard Gans died on May 5, 1839, and was buried in Berlin. He 
supported the Hegelian school, and his popularity with the students aroused 
the concern of the Prussian Government. p. 467 
214 On pp. 147-62 of Volume 3 of Deutschland und die Deutschen, published in 
Altona in 1840, Beurmann gives a description of Barmen and Elberfeld 
21-384 

=====第640页=====
618 Notes 
(Wuppertal) that is reminiscent in many respects of Engels' "Letters from 
Wuppertal". p. 471 
sis Engels is referring to the German translation of Roman Soltyk's book La Pologne. 
Précis historique, politique et militaire de sa révolution, T. I-II, Paris, 18S3. This 
translation appeared in Stuttgart in 1834 under two titles: Polen, geographisch 
und historisch geschildert. Mit einer vollständigen Geschichte der Jahre 1830 und 
1831.  Von einem Augenzeugen and Polen und seine Helden im letzten Freiheitskamp­
fe. Nebst einem kurzen Abriss der polnischen Geschichte seit ihrem Beginne bis zum 
Jahre 1830 von dem Grafen Soltyk. p. 472 
216 In his Odysseus Redivivus, a work which has not come to light, Engels apparently 
described one of the heroes of the national liberation struggle waged by the 
Greeks against Turkish rule in 1821-25. 
Engels sympathised deeply with the struggle of the Greek people for their 
freedom even when he was quite young. This is evident from his unfinished 
Pirate Tale (see this volume, pp. 557-71) which he wrote while still at school. 
p. 472 
217 i • 
Engels is quoting a parody on a poem by the 18th-century German writer 
Count Friedrich Leopold von Stolberg in which an old Swabian knight is 
speaking to his son (Sohn, da hast Du meinen Speer). p. 475 
218 Engels is referring to the book Darlegung der Haupt-Resultate aus den wegen der 
revolutionären Complotte der neueren Zeit in Deutschland geführten Untersuchungen. 
Auf den Zeitabschnitt mit Ende Juli 1838, Frankfurt am Main. 
This book contained documents of the central investigation commission of the 
German Confederation in Frankfurt am Main, which inquired into the activities 
of the "demagogues", an opposition movement involving students and people 
from other social strata (see Note 9). 
p. 480 
Engels is referring to the first article in David Strauss' collection Charakteristiken 
und Kritiken. Eine Sammlung zerstreuter Aufsätze aus den Gebieten der Theologie, 
Anthropologie und Aesthetik, Leipzig, 1839. The article is entitled "Schleier­
macher und Daub in ihrer Bedeutung für die Theologie unsrer Zeit". 
p. 486 
220 See Note 216, p. 488 
The article attacking Darstellung und Kritik des modernen Pietismus, a book by the 
Young Hegelian Dr. Christian Märklin, was published in the Evangelische 
Kirchen-Zeitung (Nos. 1-8, January 1, 4, 8, 11, 15, 18, 22 and 25, 1840) under 
the title "Vorwort". p. 489 
Parsees—members of a religious sect in India and Iran deifying fire, air, water 
and earth; adherents of Zo roast nanism. 
Libertines—members of a pantheistic sect in France and Switzerland in the 
middle of the 16th century; they were democratic in nature and fought against 
Calvin and his followers, but were defeated. p. 489 
Engels is referring to the first, sixth and seventh articles by David Strauss in his 
collection Charakteristiken und Kritiken: I. "Schleiermacher und Daub in ihrer 
Bedeutung für die Theologie unsrer Zeit"; VI. "Kerner, Geschichten Beses­
sener neuerer Zeit"; VII. "Kerner, Eine Erscheinung aus dem Nachtgebiete 
der Natur...". p. 490 222 
22S 

=====第641页=====
Notes 619 
225 A reference to the article "Vorwort des Herausgebers zum zehnten 
Jahrgange", published in the Literarischer Anzeiger für christliche Theologie und 
Wissenschaft überhaupt Nos. 1 and 2, 1840. p. 490 
A reference to the marriage feast at Cana at which Christ turned water into 
wine (St. John, Ch. 2). p. 490 
Nos.  1 and 2, January 12 and 19, 1840. p. 491 
Rulemann Friedrich Eylert, court preacher and confidant of Frederick Wil­
liam III, made this speech on January 19, 1840, in the Rittersaal at the royal palace 
in Berlin. It was published in the Allgemeine Preussische Staats-Zeitung No. 20, 
January 20, 1840. p. 492 
During the war against Napoleon, Frederick William III, King of Prussia, 
recognised the Spanish Constitution of 1812 (see Note 100). In December 1822, 
however, the Verona Congress of the Holy Alliance adopted a decision, 
sponsored by the Emperors of Russia and Austria and the Prussian King, 
sanctioning an armed intervention by France against revolutionary Spain. On 
April 7, 1823, French troops invaded Spain, the absolute power of Ferdinand 
VII was restored and the 1812 Constitution again abrogated (it was first 
declared null and void by the clerical and aristocratic circles in May 1814 but 
then restored during the second Spanish revolution of 1820-23). p. 493 
Carbonari (from carbonaro —a coal man) — members of secret conspiratorial 
societies in Italy and France in the opening decades of the 19th century. In 
Italy their aim was national liberation and the unification of the country, and 
certain political reforms; in France, the overthrow of the Bourbons, p. 493 
Engels is speaking about the dedication in a volume of poems by Annette Elisa­
beth von Droste-Hülshoff, which he received as a present from Levin Schücking 
when visiting Münster (see Note 84). p. 494 
Engels is referring to Levin Schücking's review of poems by Annette Elisabeth von 
Droste-Hülshoff, which was printed in the Telegraph für Deutschland No. 170, 
October 1838. p. 494 
2S2 See Note 212. P- 494 
233 In one of the sections of the article entitled "Tagebuch aus Berlin", which 
appeared in the Telegraph für Deutschland in June and July 1840, Karl Gutzkow 
attacked the Hallische Jahrbücher, a journal published by the Young Hegelians 
(see issue No. 97, June 1840). p. 496 
A reference to the following books by Hermann Püttmann: Die Düsseldorfer 
Malerschule und ihre Leistungen seit der Errichtung des Kunstvereines im Jahre 1829, 
Leipzig, 1839, and Chatterton, Barmen, 1840. p. 497 
Engels is referring to Coleridge's poems translated into German by Levin 
Schücking. p. 497 
236 In the article mentioned here Engels criticised the writings of the Young 
Germany literary group and condemned the unprincipled dissension within it. 
He did not break with this group, however, until a much later date, and 
contributed to Gutzkow's Telegraph für Deutschland until the end of 1841. 
p. 497 
21* 

=====第642页=====
620 Notes 
237 The Blätter zur Kunde der Literatur des Auslands for June 7, 1840, contained 
Schücking's translations of two poems by Shelley and three by Coleridge. 
p. 497 
Music to the words of the Catholic hymn, Stabat mater  dolorosa,  was set by many 
composers, including Pergolese, Palestrina and Rossini. p. 523 
239 See Note 49. p. 527 
The poem by Robert Prutz to which Engels is referring was published as a 
separate publication in Leipzig in 1840. p. 528 
2 In late March 1841 Engels returned to his parents in Barmen after finishing 
his term of service at the Bremen office of Heinrich Leupold's trading firm. 
p. 532 
Engels wrote to his sister Marie from Bremen on March 8, 1841, about his 
intention to make a journey to Italy (see this volume, p. 529), but he did not go 
there until the middle of May. On the way he visited Basle and Zurich and 
then crossed the Alps at Sphlgen. His travel impressions are described in the 
unfinished essay "Wanderings in Lombardy" (see this volume, pp. 170-80). 
p. 532 
243 Engels decided to go to Berlin for a term of military training as a volunteer in 
an artillery brigade, and also to attend lectures at Berlin University and make 
closer contacts with radical scientists and writers. 
Engels' subsequent letters to Marie were sent from Berlin, where he arrived 
in the latter half of September 1841. p. 534 
244 Karl Werder's tragedy Columbus was first performed on January 7, 1842, at the 
Royal Opera in Berlin. Excerpts from Beethoven's symphonies were played 
before the curtain went up and between the acts. p. 538 
Engels' term of military service expired in early October 1842. p. 546 
A reference to Jung's reply to Engels' article "Alexander Jung, 'Vorlesungen 
über die moderne Literatur der Deutschen'". Jung's reply was printed in the 
Königsberger Literatur-Blatt No. 42, July 20, 1842, under the ironical title of "Ein 
Bonbon für den kleinen Oswald, meinen Gegner in den  Deutschen  Jahrbüchern" 
(see Note 141). p. 546 
247 Argonauts (Greek mythology) — the heroes who sailed with Jason in the Argo to 
Colchis in quest of the Golden Fleece guarded by the dragon. p. 553 
248 Engels wrote this poem in Greek and read it at his school's public celebrations 
in Elberfeld on September 15, 1837. The theme was taken from the Greek 
myth about the war waged by Argos against Thebes. The campaign was led by 
Polynices, son of King Oedipus, against his brother Eteocles, who had usurped 
power in Thebes. Aeschylus' tragedy Seven against Thebes was based on this 
myth. p. 572 
249 A reference to a school report from the Elberfeld gymnasium, which Engels 
entered in October 1834. Prior to this he attended the Barmen municipal 
school. p. 582 
250 Engels received this reference in September 1837 when he had to leave the top 
form of the Elberfeld gymnasium in compliance with the wishes of his father, 
who sent him to study commerce at the Barmen office of his firm; in June 
1838,  Engels went to Bremen for the same purpose. p. 584 

=====第643页=====
NAME INDEX 
A 
Abélard, Pierre (1079-1142)—French 
philosopher and theologian.—278 
Adam,  Adolphe Charles (1803-1856)— 
French composer.—150 
Aeschylus (525-456 B.C.)—Greek drama­
tist.—443 
Alexander I (1777-1825)—Emperor of 
Russia (1801-25).—493 
Alexander of Macedon (Alexander the Great) 
(356-323 B.C.)—general and states­
man of antiquity.—154 
Alexis, Willibald —see Horing, Georg 
Wilhelm Heinrich 
Alienstein, Karl (1770-1840)—Prussian 
Minister of Finance (1808-10) and 
Minister of Religious Worship, Educa­
tion and Medicine (1817-38).—143, 
197, 363 
Aluenslehen, Ltidwig Karl Friedrich 
Wilhelm Gustav von (wrote under the 
pseudonym of Gusto« Seilen) (1800-
1868)—German writer and journalist; 
one of the publishers and editors of 
the Zeitung für den Deutschen Adel 
(1840-42).—68, 146 
d'AItiiella, Louis Coblet, Count—son of 
the Belgian statesman Count d'Alviella; 
student of Bonn University (1841-42). 
— 547 
Amdurgh, Isaac van (first half of the 
19th cent.)—animal tamer.—91 Andrea, Friedrich Wilhelm —author of 
heraldic researches.—352 
Anno II (or Hanno) (c. 1010-1075)— 
Archbishop of Cologne (1056-75), 
canonised in 1183.—132 
Ansgarius (Ansgor) (801-865)—German 
Archbishop, Christian missionary 
in Scandinavian countries.—120, 121, 
126 
Archimedes (c. 287-212 B.C.)—Greek 
mathematician and engineer.—128 
Ariosto, Lodovico (1474-1533)—Italian 
poet of the Renaissance.—443 
Aristophanes (c. 446-c. 385 B.C.)—Greek 
comic dramatist and poet.— 82 
Aristotle (384-322 B.C.) —Greek philos­
opher.— 484 
Arminius (Hermann)—chief of the Ger­
man tribe of the Cherusci (17 B.C.-21 
A.D.).—15,  51 
Arndt, Ernst Moritz (1769-1860)—Ger­
man writer, historian and philologist; 
took part in the liberation struggle 
against Napoleon's rule.—137-39, 141, 
144, 145, 146-49, 528 
Arnim, Elisabeth (Bettina) von (1785-
1859)—German romantic writer.— 
49, 411 
Asposio (born c. 470 B.C.)—Greek 
courtesan.— 249 
Attila (d. 453)—King of the Huns (433-
53).—24 

=====第644页=====
622 Name Index 
B 
Baader, Franz Xaver von (1765-1841)— 
German philosopher, physician, ex­
pert in mining; professor of philos­
ophy and theology at Munich Univer­
sity (1826-38).—296 
Bach,  Johann Sebastian (1685-1750)— 
German composer.—159 
Bade, Karl—Prussian officer, military 
writer.—140 
Bag—see  Sack,  Karl Heinrich 
Bagel—publisher and owner of a book­
store in Wesel. —18 
Ball, Hermann (1804-1860)—German 
Protestant pastor, first in Wülfrath 
and later in Elberfeld.—15, 426 
Bärmann, Georg Nicolaus (1785-1850)— 
Hamburg author who wrote in High 
and Low German.—496 
Bauer, Bruno (1809-1882)—German phi­
losopher and writer, Young Hegelian; 
after 1866 became national-liberal.— 
197, 270, 285, 313, 316-30, 334, 336, 
338, 341,  345-51,  361, 366 
Bauer, Caroline (1807-1877)—German 
actress.—102 
Bauer, Edgar (1820-1886)—German 
philosopher and journalist, Young 
Hegelian; brother and associate of 
Bruno Bauer.—335, 337, 339, 346, 
347 
Beck,  Karl Isidor (1817-1879) —German 
poet; exponent of "true socialism" in 
the mid-1840s—41-46, 51, 71, 82, 
89, 91-92, 411, 422, 449, 465-68, 473, 
488 
Becher, Nikolaus (1809-1845)—German 
poet.—148,  517, 527, 528 
Beethoven, Ludwig van (1770-1827)—Ger­
man composer.—44, 150, 159, 491, 
530 
Bellini, Vincenzo (1801-1835)—Italian 
composer.—44, 150 
Beta, Karl (1807-1857) —Greek teacher 
at Elberfeld grammar school  (1833-
54).—20 
Biranger, Pierre Jean de (1780-1857) — 
French poet, author of satirical songs 
on political subjects.— 83 
Bergmann, Joh. H.—sugar broker in 
Bremen.—492 Bernhard —Frederick Engels' friend or 
relative in Barmen.— 531 
Bettina —see Arnim, Elisabeth (Bettina) von 
Beurmann, Eduard (1804-1883)—Ger­
man writer, member of the Young 
Germany literary group.—157, 158, 
421, 422, 465, 471 
Blank,  Wilhelm (1821-1892)—Frederick 
Engels' schoolmate, subsequently a 
merchant.—396, 416, 423, 426, 446, 
449,  450, 476, 513, 530, 534 
Bleek,  Friedrich (1793-1859)—German 
Protestant theologian, professor of 
Bonn University.— 527 
Blücher, Gebhard Leberecht von (1742-
1819)—Prussian field marshal; took 
part in wars against Napoleonic Fran­
ce.—331,  339 
Blum,  Karl Ludwig (1786-1844)—Ger­
man composer, theatrical artist and 
poet.—102, 103 
Böhme, Jacob (1575-1624)—German 
craftsman, pantheist philosopher.— 
395 
Boileau-Despréaux, Nicolas (1636-1711)— 
French poet and theoretician of clas­
sicism.— 82 
Börne, Ludwig (1786-1837)—German 
critic and writer.—  38, 42, 43, 45, 51, 
54, 66, 72, 82, 86, 108, 137, 142-44, 
266, 280, 288-92, 420, 448, 449, 455, 
465, 467, 472, 477, 484, 485 
Bourbons—royal family in France (1589-
1792,  1814-15 and 1815-30).—358 
Brandis, Christian August (1790-1867)— 
German historian of philosophy; took 
part in publishing Aristotle's works.— 
328 
Bredt, Wilhelm August (1817-1895)— 
Burgomaster (1855-57) and Chief Bur­
gomaster of Barmen (1857-79).—550 
Brinckmeier, Eduard (1811-1897) —Ger­
man writer, editor of the Mitternacht­
zeitung (1835-39).—496 
Brutus, Lucius Junius (6th cent. B.C.)— 
according to legend, founder of the 
Roman Republic, Roman Consul 
(509 B.C.); condemned his own sons 
to death for having conspired against 
the Republic—249 
Brutus, Marcus Junius (c. 85-42 B.C.) — 
Roman politician, republican, one of 

=====第645页=====
Name Index 623 
the initiators of the conspiracy against 
Julius Caesar.—414 
Buffon, Georges Louis Leclerc, Comte de 
(1707-1788)—French naturalist.—81 
Buhl, Ludwig (1814-c. 1882)—German 
writer, Young Hegelian, author of 
pamphlets in the Patriot series.—336, 
346 
Bulow-Cummerow, Ernst Gottfried Georg 
von (1775-1851) — German writer and 
politician, exponent of the interests 
of the Prussian Junkers.—  271,  366 
Bunsen, Carl (b. 1821)—student of the 
law faculty at Bonn University  (1841-
42), later diplomat.—548 
Byron, George Gordon  Noel,  Lord (1788-
1824) —English romantic  poet.—101, 
286, 450, 494, 497 
C 
Caesar, Gaius Julius (c. 100-44 B.C.)— 
Roman general and statesman.— 443 
Calcar, Jan van—see  Joest,  Jan van 
Calderôn de la Barca, Pedro (1600-1681)— 
Spanish dramatist.—107, 110 
Calvin, John (real name—Jean Chauuin) 
(1509-1564) —Swiss theologian, Prot­
estant reformer.—30, 97, 126, 489 
Camôes (Camoëns), Luiz de (1524-1580)— 
Portuguese poet of the Renaissance.— 
445 
Campe, Johann Julius Wilhelm (1792-
1867) — German bookseller and pub­
lisher; head of the Hoffmann und 
Campe Publishing House in Hamburg. 
— 161 
CapeUe, Ernst Friedrich Conrad (1790-
1847)—Protestant pastor in Bremen, 
adherent of the rationalist trend in 
Lutheranism.— 515 
Carrière, Moritz (1817-1895)—German 
philosopher, professor of aesthetics.— 
21, 93 
Cato,  Marcus Porcius (95-46 B.C.)—Ro­
man statesman, leader of the repub­
licans;  committed suicide, not wishing 
to survive the fall of the republic.— 
249 
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de (1547-
1616)—Spanish novelist.—450 Chamisso, Adelbert «on (1781-1838) — 
German romantic poet.— 53 
Chapeau —student at Bonn University 
(1842).—548 
Charles the Great (CharUmagne) (c. 742-
814)—King of the Franks (768-800) 
and Roman Emperor (800-814).—38, 
48 
Charles X (1757-1836)—King of France 
(1824-30).—54, 199, 492, 493 
Cicero, Marcus Tullius (106-43 B.C.)— 
Roman orator, statesman and philos­
opher.—172, 584 
Cid, the (Campeador the Cid) (real name 
— Rodrigo Diaz de Vivar) (c. 1043-
1099)—Spanish national hero, famous 
for his exploits in the wars against the 
Moors.—50, 142, 415 
Claudius, Matthias (1740-1815) —Ger­
man writer, author of a number of 
songs.—  508 
Ciauren, Heinrich (pseudonym of Carl 
Heun) (1771-1854) —German novelist 
and official.—449 
Ciausen, Johann Christoph Heinrich (1806-
1877)—teacher of German language, 
history and geography at Elberfeld 
grammar school; later professor.—20 
Cieners from Barmen.—440 
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor (1772-1834)— 
English romantic poet and literary 
critic—497 
Columbus, Christopher (1451-1506) — Ital­
ian navigator, discoverer of Ameri­
ca.—538 
Copernicus, Ntcofaus (1473-1543)—Polish 
scholar, founder of modern astrono­
my.— 59 
Corroenin, Louis Marie de la Haye, Vi­
comte de (wrote under the pseudonym 
of Tiroon) (1788-1868)—French jurist 
and politician; opponent of the July 
monarchy.— 356, 357 
Corneille, Pierre (1606-1684) —French 
dramatist, one of the founders of 
French classicism.—166 
Cousin, Victor (1792-1867)—French phi­
losopher.—294 
Creizenoch, TTieodor (1818-1877)—Ger­
man poet and literary historian.— 
42, 82, 411-12, 471, 482 

=====第646页=====
624 Name Index 
Cuvier, Georges Leopold Chrétien Frédéric 
Dagobert, Baron de (1769-1832)— 
French naturalist, zoologist and pa­
laeontologist, founder of comparative 
anatomy.— 222 
D 
Dante Alighieri (1265-1321)—Italian 
poet.—28,  542 
Danton, Georges Jacques (1759-1794)— 
leading figure in the French Revolu­
tion; leader of the Right wing of the 
Jacobins.—320, 321, 341, 348 
Daub, Karl (1765-1836) —German Prot­
estant theologian.—486, 490 
David (end of the  1 lth-first half of the 
10th cent. B.C.)—King of Israel.—74 
Delius, Nikolaus (1813-1888)—German 
philologist, Shakespeare scholar, pro­
fessor of Bonn University from 1863. 
— 105 
Derkhiem—employee at Leupold's trad­
ing firm in Bremen.— 502, 504, 510 
Descartes, René (1596-1650)—French 
dualist philosopher, mathematician 
and naturalist.—186, 197 
Diest, Otto Erich Heinrich —student of the 
law faculty at Bonn University  (1841-
42).—548 
Diesterweg, Friedrich Adolf Wilhelm (1790-
1866)—German teacher.—19 
Diez. Friedrich Christian (1794-1876)— 
German philologist, author of the 
Grammatik der romanischen Sprachen, 
professor of Bonn University.— 508 
Dingelstedt, Franz von (1814-1881)—Ger­
man poet and novelist, dramatist of 
the court theatre from the mid-1840s. 
—21,  42, 422 
Diogenes of Sinope (end of the 4th cent.-
323 B.C.)—Greek philosopher, one of 
the founders of the Cynic school.— 
394, 484, 485 
Dombrowski (Dabrowski), Jan Henryk 
(1755-1818)—Polish general; took 
part in Napoleon's campaigns of 1806-
07, 1809 and 1812.—154 
Domitian (Titus Flavius Domitianus) (51-
96)—Roman Emperor (81-96).—356 
Donizetti, Gaetano (1797-1848)—Italian 
composer.—129, 150 Döring, Karl August (1783-1844) —Prot­
estant preacher in Elberfeld.— 16, 23-
25, 30, 427 
Droste-Hülshoff,  Annette Elisabeth, Freiin 
von (1797-1848)—German writer and 
poet.—101,  494, 497 
Droste-Vischering, Clemens August, Baron 
von (1773-1845)—Archbishop of Co­
logne, cousin of Annette Elisabeth von 
Droste-Hülshoff.— 363 
Duchâtel, Charles Marie Tanneguy, Comte 
(1803-1867)—French statesman, 
Orleanist, Minister of Trade (1834-
36) and of the Interior (1839 and 
1840-February 1848).—271 
Duller, Eduard (1809-1853)—German 
romantic writer, author of historical 
novels.—25,  51, 413, 422 
Dumas, Alexandre (Alexandre Davy de la 
Pailleterie) (1802-1870)—French nov­
elist and dramatist.—  49, 50 
Duntze—Burgomaster of Bremen (1839). 
—424 
Dürholt —clerk at Wittenstein's firm in 
Unter-Barmen.—25, 427 
E 
Eberlein —employee at Leupold's trading 
firm in Bremen.—386, 508, 511 
Ebert, Karl Egon (from 1872 Ritter von) 
(1801-1882)—Austrian romantic poet. 
— 422 
Edelmann, Johann Christian (1698-1767) 
— German theologian.—320, 348 
Edward (1841-1910)—prince descended 
from the Hanover dynasty, future 
King Edward VII of Great Britain and 
Ireland (1901-1910).—537 
Egen,  Peter Casper Nicolaus (1783-1849) 
—teacher of mathematics and physics; 
headmaster of the Realschule in Elber­
feld (1830-48).—19, 28 
Eichhoff,  Karl Johann Ludwig (1805-
1882)—teacher of Greek and Latin in 
the Elberfeld grammar school.—20 
Eichhorn, Johann Albrecht Friedrich (1779-
1856)—Prussian statesman, Minister 
of Religious Worship, Education and 
Medicine (1840-48).—366, 586, 587 

=====第647页=====
Name Index 625 
Eisenbart, Johann Andreas (1661-1727)— 
German physician.—283 
Elias,  Wilhelm —Lutheran preacher in 
Halle, pietist.—495 
Engelke—postman in Bremen.— 394, 
410 
Engelmann, Wilhelm (1808-1878)—owner 
of a publishing house founded in 
Leipzig in 1811.—495, 497 
Engels, Adeline (1827-1901)—Frederick 
Engels' cousin.— 385, 500 
Engels, Anna (1825-1853)—Frederick 
Engels' sister.—391, 400, 424, 439-
40, 517, 532, 535, 582 
Engels, August (1797-1874)—Frederick 
Engels' uncle, co-owner of the firm 
Caspar Engels and Sons in Barmen.— 
534 
Engels, August (1824-1855)—Frederick 
Engels' cousin, son of August Engels. 
—400,  441, 531, 579 
Engels, Caspar (1753-1821)—Frederick 
Engels' grandfather.— 580 
Engels, Caspar (1792-1863)—Frederick 
Engels' uncle.—386, 583 
Engels, Elisabeth Francisca Mauritzia (née 
«on Hoar) (1797-1873)—Frederick 
Engels' mother.—385, 388, 399, 438-
42, 521, 534, 577-80 
Engels, Elise (1834-1912)—Frederick En-
gels'  youngest sister.—  533,  535, 581 
Engels, Emil (1828-1884)—Frederick En-
gels'  brother.—438-40, 533, 534, 581 
EngeU,  Emilie (1825-1906)—Frederick 
Engels' cousin.— 385 
Engels, Frederick (1820-1895).—27-28, 
103-04, 106, 112-20, 132-36, 170-80, 
182-87,  201, 268-73, 353, 389, 393-
95, 400-01,  402, 411-13, 415-16, 419-
20, 424-27, 444-45, 448, 456-60, 462, 
463-64, 466-67, 471-72, 474-75, 480, 
485-88,  492-98, 501, 507, 527-30, 532-
41, 543, 545-46 
Engels, Friedrich (1796-1860)—Frederick 
Engels' father.—387, 395", 402, 442, 
492,  531, 579, 580, 583, 586 
Engels, Hedwig (1830-1904)—Frederick 
Engels' sister.—438-41, 533, 535, 581 
Engels, Hermann (1822-1905) —Fred­
erick Engels' brother.—390, 400, 406, 
417-19,  441, 442, 492, 531, 533, 535, 
546, 581 Engels, Ida (1822-1884)—Frederick Eng­
els' cousin.—403, 507, 513, 542, 544 
Engels, Julie (1821-1875)—Frederick 
Engels' cousin.—403, 535 
Engels, Julius (1818-1883)—Frederick 
Engels' cousin.—583 
Engels, Karl (1817-1840)—Frederick 
Engels' cousin.— 385, 403 
Engels, Louise—wife of August Engels 
senior, Frederick Engels' uncle.— 579 
Engels, Marie (1824-1901)—Frederick 
Engels' sister.—385-88, 390-92, 399, 
401, 402-05, 418-20, 423, 424, 437-42, 
447, 469, 498, 500, 501, 503, 507, 
510, 516, 517, 519, 523, 528, 531, 
532, 533, 536, 539, 542, 544, 545, 
546, 582 
Engels, Rudolf (1831-1903)—Frederick 
Engels' brother.—400, 438-40, 533, 
535, 581 
Erdmann, Johann Eduard (1805-1892)— 
German philosopher, Right-wing He­
gelian.— 527 
Ernst August (1771-1851)—King of Han­
over (1837-51).—278, 389, 493 
Euripides (c. 480-c. 406 B.C.)—Greek 
dramatist.—585 
Everaert—owner of a printshop in Co­
logne.— 394 
Etuich, Johann Jakob (1788-1863)—Ger­
man teacher, one of the founders of 
the Barmen municipal school.—18, 
468 
Eylert, RuUmann Friedrich (1770-1852)— 
German bishop, member of the State 
Council, confidant of Frederick Wil­
liam III.—492, 493 
F 
Faber —pseudonym of a contributor to 
the Dresden Afcend-Zeitung.—433 
Feistkorn, G.  W.—painter,  Frederick 
Engels' friend in Bremen—388, 399, 
403, 518 
Feldmann, Gustau (b. 1820)—Frederick 
Engels' schoolmate-, subsequently 
President of the Chamber of Deputies 
in Saarbrücken. — 394 
Ferdinand VII (1784-1833)—King of 
Spain (1808 and 1814-33).—493 

=====第648页=====
626 Name Index 
Feuerbach, Ludwig Andreas von (1804-
1872)—German philosopher.—185, 
197, 209, 219, 237, 285, 293, 295, 
296, 337, 339, 340, 341, 345 
Fichte, Immanuel Hermann von (1796-
1879)—German philosopher and 
theologian, professor of philosophy at 
Bonn (1840-42) and Tübingen (1842-
63), son of Johann Gottlieb Fichte. — 
192, 328 
Fichte, Johann Gottlùb (1762-1814)—Ger­
man philosopher. —165, 166, 182, 
183, 198, 214 
Florencourt, Franz von (François  Chassot  de) 
(1803-1886)—German writer, editor 
of a number of periodicals, first lib­
eral and later conservative.— 142 
Fouqué, Friedrich Heinrich Karl, Baron de 
la Motte (1777-1843)—German roman­
tic writer and journalist, advocated 
privileges for the nobility; editor-in-
chief of the Zeitung für den Deutschen 
Adel (1840-43).—68, 69, 146, 431, 468 
Francis II (1768-1835)—Holy Roman 
Emperor (1792-1806); Emperor of 
Austria as Francis I (1804-35).—493 
Frankl, Ludwig August, Ritter von Hoch­
wart (1810-1894)—Austrian roman­
tic poet.—422 
Frederick the Great (1712-1786)—King of 
Prussia (1740-86).—163 
Frederick William III (1770-1840)— 
King of Prussia (1797-1840).—307, 
360, 363, 471, 492, 493, 537 
Frederick William IV (1795-1861)—King 
of Prussia (1840-61).—135, 199, 353, 
360-66,  487, 526, 537, 540, 587 
Freiligrath, Ferdinand (1810-1876)—Ger­
man romantic poet; in later years wrote 
revolutionary poetry and joined the 
Communist League.—19,  21-23,  25, 
42, 45, 51, 98, 100, 162, 288, 411, 
422, 427, 468, 497, 527 
Fry, Elizabeth (1780-1845)—English phi­
lanthropist, especially noted as promot­
er of a democratic prison reform.— 
133 
G 
Gabler, Georg Andreas (1786-1853)— 
German Hegelian philosopher; in 1835 succeeded Hegel as lecturer at 
Berlin University.—270 
Galileo Galilei (1564-1642)—Italian 
physicist and astronomer, founder of 
mechanics.—59 
Gans, Eduard (c. 1798-1839)—German 
philosopher, professor of law at Ber­
lin University, follower of Hegel.— 
143, 185, 191, 452, 467, 491 
Gerasimi (Gerasimo) (d. 475)—Christian 
priest; abbot of a monastery in Pal­
estine-— 35 
Gesenius, Heinrich Friedrich Wilhelm 
(1786-1842)—German orientalist; Prot­
estant theologian of the rationalist 
trend.—486 
Gluck,  Christoph Willibald (1714-1787)— 
German composer.—159 
Godfrey of Bouillon (Godefroy de Bouillon) 
(c. 1060-1100)—Duke of Lower Lor­
raine (1089-1100), one of the leaders 
of the first crusade (1096-99).—35, 
524 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von (1749-1832) 
— German poet and thinker, prom­
inent figure of the Enlightenment.— 
8, 19, 24, 35, 43, 77, 82, 88, 105, 129, 
139, 162, 323, 394, 397, 400, 411, 
420,  421, 427, 431, 445, 449, 465, 
468, 472, 520 
Goldmann, Karl Eduard (died c. 1863)— 
German writer, author of the book 
Die europäische Pentarchie. —54 
Görres, Guido Moritz (1805-1852)—Ger­
man Catholic writer, editor of the 
journal Historisch-politische Blätter für 
das katolische Deutschland. —63, 64 
Görres, Johannes Joseph von (1776-1848) 
—German writer, philologist and his­
torian; professor of history at Munich 
University.—33,  34, 38, 40, 87, 451 
Gorrissen, Georg —Frederick Engels' fel­
low lodger in Bremen.—388 
Gossner, Johannes (1773-1858)—German 
Catholic priest, converted to Protes­
tantism in 1826, pietist.—472 
Gottfried,  Gesina (Gesche) (1785-1831)— 
woman poisoner from Bremen who 
was publicly executed.—514 
Gottfried von Strassburg (end of the 12th-
beginning of the 13th cent.)—German 

=====第649页=====
Name Index 627 
poet, author of the epic poem Tristan 
und Isolde.—38 
Gottsched,  Johann Christoph (1700-1766)— 
German writer and critic, represent­
ative of the early Enlightenment in 
Germany.— 52 
Grabbe, Christian Dietrich (1801-1836)— 
German dramatist, member of the 
Young Germany literary group, author 
of historical tragedies.— 413 
Graeber, Franz Friedrich (1784-1857) — 
pastor at the Reformed Church in 
Barmen-Gemarke (1820-46), father 
of Friedrich and Wilhelm Graeber.— 
402 
Graeber, Friedrich (1822-1895)—Fred­
erick Engels' schoolmate, later pastor.— 
388, 392, 394, 402, 403, 407, 414, 
420,  423, 425, 445, 452, 457, 458, 
459, 461, 463, 466, 467, 474-77, 487, 
488, 513, 525 
Graeber, Hermann (1814-1904)—brother 
of Friedrich and Wilhelm Graeber, 
teacher of ancient languages in the 
Barmen municipal school (1836-40), 
then a pastor.—402, 475 
Graeber, Wilhelm (1820-1895)—Frederick 
Engels' schoolmate, later pastor.— 
388, 392, 394, 396, 402, 442, 448, 
463, 464, 471, 474, 481, 513 
Graeber—cousin of Friedrich, Wilhelm 
and Hermann Graeber.—402 
Grave—employee at Leupold's trading 
firm in Bremen.—391, 392 
Gregory VII (Hildebrand) (c. 1020-1085) 
—Pope from 1073 to 1085.—13 
Grel—Frederick Engels' friend.— 513 
Griesheim, Adolf von (1820-1894)—Ger­
man factory owner; co-partner of Er-
men and Engels firm, husband of 
Frederick Engels' sister Anna and aft­
er her death husband of Engels' sister 
Elise.— 531, 583 
Griesheim, Friderike von (née van Haar) 
(1789-1880)—Frederick Engels' aunt. 
— 385,  583 
Grillparzer, Franz (1791-1872)—Austrian 
dramatist —422, 491 
Grimm brothers—see Grimm, Jacob and 
Grimm, Wilhelm 
Grimm, Jacob Ludwig Carl (1785-1863)— 
German philologist, author of a histor­ical grammar of the German language 
(Die deutsche Grammatik) and of folk­
lore adaptations; professor in Götting­
en and then in Berlin, liberal.— 39, 
96, 389 
Grimm, Wilhelm Carl (1786-1859)—Ger­
man philologist, co-author of his broth­
er's main works, professor in Göttingen 
and then in Berlin, liberal.—  39, 96, 
133 
Groening, Heinrich (1774-1839)—Burgo­
master of Bremen from 1817.—423 
Grosscreutz, A. von—contributor to the 
German literary newspaper  Abend-
Zeitung edited by Theodor Hell.— 433 
Grün, Anastasius (pseudonym of Auers-
perg, Anton Alexander, Graf von) (1806-
1876)—Austrian poet.—420, 422 
Grün, Karl Theodor Ferdinand (wrote un­
der the pseudonym of Ernst von der 
Haide) (1817-1887)—German writer; 
one of the principal spokesmen of 
"true socialism" in the mid-1840s.— 
84, 93, 288, 483 
Guizot, François Pierre Guillaume (1787-
1874)—French historian and states­
man; actually directed France's home 
and foreign policy from 1840 to the 
February revolution of 1848.— 355, 
517 
GüJI, Friedrich Wilhelm (1812-1879)— 
German poet, author of poems and 
songs for children.—23 
Gutenterg, Johann (c. 1400-1468)—Ger­
man inventor of printing from mov­
able type.—56, 61, 62, 66, 103, 344, 
497 
Gutzkow, Karl Ferdinand (1811-1878)— 
German writer, member of the Young 
Germany literary group; editor of the 
journal Telegraph fur Deutschland 
(1838-42).—21,  47, 71-87, 89-92, 102, 
285, 288-93, 411, 412, 415, 420-22, 
427, 446, 449, 450, 455, 456, 462, 465, 
468, 471, 472, 481, 485, 487, 496, 497 
H 
Haar, Bernhard van (1760-1837) — head­
master of the gymnasium in Hamm, 
Frederick Engels' grandfather, pietist. 
— 553 

=====第650页=====
628 Name Index 
Haar, Franciska Christina van (b. 1758)— 
Frederick Engels' grandmother.— 385, 
580 
Haar, Ludwig van— Bernhard van Haar's 
son, Frederick Engels' uncle.— 582 
Haase, Friedrich (1808-1867)—German 
philologist, Latin and Greek scholar.— 
20 
Haide, Ernst von der —see Grün, Karl 
Theodor Ferdinand 
Haller, Karl Ludwig von (1768-1854)— 
Swiss lawyer and historian, advocate of 
absolutism.—361 
Hammerich, Johann Friedrich —head of a 
publishing house founded in Altona in 
1789.—495,  496 
Handel, George Frederick (1685-1759)— 
German composer.—159, 523 
Hantschke, Johann Carl Leberecht (1796-
1856) — senior teacher and acting 
director of the Elberfeld grammar 
school (1831-42), Frederick Engels' 
tutor.—20, 500, 520, 582, 585 
Häring, Georg Wilhelm Heinrich (wrote 
under the pseudonym of Alexis,  Wil­
libald) (1798-1871)—German writer, 
author of a number of historical nov­
els.—420 
Hose—Bremen Senator (alderman).— 
424 
Hassel —publisher in Elberfeld.— 23 
Haydn, Franz Joseph (1732-1809)— 
Austrian composer.—159 
He—physician.— 398 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (1770-
1831)—German philosopher.—42, 47, 
50, 63-64, 66, 69, 83, 86, 88-89, 93, 
99, 106, 122, 140-44, 157, 165, 168, 
181-87,  191-99,  202-11,  213-17, 220, 
222, 223, 226, 235, 236, 237, 243, 250, 
257,  269-71,  281, 286, 289-95, 320-23, 
328, 348-50, 362, 435-36, 451, 477, 
483, 486, 489-91 
Heine, Heinrich (1797-1856)—German 
revolutionary  poet.—21,  42, 44, 49, 
66, 81, 82, 84, 87, 90, 92, 137, 166, 
290-92,  411, 420, 465, 473, 488 
Heineken, H, A.—broker in Bremen.— 
424 
Heinrich der Löwe —see Henry the Lion 
Hell, Theodor —see Winkler, Karl Gottlieb 
Theodor Heller, Robert (1812-1871)—German 
writer and journalist.—422, 432 
Helmes, Johann Jacob (b. 1788)—Barmen 
official.—577 
Hengstenberg, Ernst Wilhelm (1802-1869) 
—German theologian, professor of 
Berlin University, editor of the Evan­
gelische Kirchen-Zeitung; extreme con­
servative.—181,  315, 333, 346, 350, 
421, 454, 460, 480, 487, 489, 526, 
527 
Henning, Leopold von (1791-1866)— 
German philosopher, professor of 
Berlin University, Hegel's pupil.—270 
Henry IV (1050-1106)—Emperor of the 
Holy Roman Empire (1056-1106).— 
13, 511 
Henry the Lion (1129-1195)—Duke of 
Saxony (1139-81) and Bavaria (1156-
81).—34,  35 
Herbart, Johann Friedrich (1776-1841)— 
German philosopher, psychologist 
and teacher.—295 
Herloßsohn, Karl Georg Reginald (1804-
1849)—German writer.—422, 432 
Hermann—see Arminius 
Hermann, Reinhard (1806-1839) — pastor 
at the Reformed Church in Elberfeld. 
— 15, 416, 427 
Herod (73-4 B.C.)—King of Judaea 
(40-4 B.C.).—251 
Herwegh, Georg (1817-1875) —German 
democratic poet.— 174, 288 
Hessel, Johann Jacob (1806-1891)—pastor 
at Münster near Kreuznach. —403 
Heuser, Gustav —Frederick Engels' Elber­
feld friend.—445, 473, 474, 491, 513 
Hey, Wilhelm (1789-1854)—German 
priest, author of poems and fables 
for children.— 23 
Hildebrand,  Theodor (Hildebrandt, Th.) — 
pseudonym of Frederick Engels.— 5, 
6, 26, 419, 444, 445 
Hinrichs, Hermann Friedrich Wilhelm 
(1794-1861)—German professor of 
philosophy, Right-wing Hegelian.— 
296, 489 
Hippocrates (c. 460-c. 377 B.C.)—Greek 
mathematician and physician, found­
er of medicine.— 485 
Hirzei, Bernhard (1807-1847) —Swiss 
priest, orientalist.— 346 

=====第651页=====
Name Index 629 
Hoffmann—see Campe, Johann Julius 
Wilhelm 
Hofmannswaldau, Christian Hofmann von 
(1617-1679)—German poet.—51 
Hohenstaufens—princely German family 
(1138-1254).—364, 508 
Holbein, Hans (the Younger) (1497-1543) 
—German painter and wood engraver 
of the Renaissance.—134, 170 
Holler—friend of the Engels family.— 
403 
Höller from Solingen —Frederick Eng­
els' acquaintance in Bremen.— 501 
Homer—epic poet of Ancient Greece, 
author of Iliad and Odyssey.—35, 279, 
443,  558, 585 
Horace (Quintus Horatius Flaccus) (65-8 
B.C.)—Roman poet.—23, 82, 466, 
584 
Hösterey —Barmen acquaintance of the 
Engels family.— 539 
Hotho,  Heinrich Gustav (1802-1873)— 
professor of aesthetics and history 
of art at Berlin University; follower 
of Hegel.—50 
Houben, Philipp (died c. 1855)—notary 
in Xanten, expert in ancient history, 
archaeologist.— 134 
Houviald, Christoph Ernst, Freiherr von 
(1778-1845)—German dramatist.— 
449 
Hub,  Ignaz (wrote under the pseudonym 
of Fran* »n Steinach) (1810-1880)— 
German poet and journalist; founder 
of the Rheinisches Odeon. — 422 
Hugo,  Victor Marie (1802-1885)—French 
writer.—49 
Hühnerbein. F.  W.—German  tailor, ac­
quaintance of the Engels family; in 
later years a member of the Commu­
nist League.— 440 
Hüllstett, G. Karl Anton—senior teacher 
in Düsseldorf, author of an anthology 
of German literature for gymnasium 
pupils.—413 
Hülsmann, August (1822-1846)—pastor 
of a Lutheran community in Elber-
feld; later a consistorial and school 
councillor in Düsseldorf. — 16, 24 
Hülsmann, Eduard —brother of August 
Hülsmann; pastor in Dahl and from 1836 of a Lutheran church in Schwelm. 
— 16 
Huskisson, William (1770-1830)—Eng­
lish statesman, Tory, President of the 
Board of Trade (1823-27).—271 
HUM  or Hus, Johnor Jan(c. 1369-1415)— 
Bohemian religious reformer and 
ideologist of the national movement; 
professor of Prague University from 
1398,  and rector of the same between 
October 1402 and April 1403; burnt 
at the stake as a heretic — 482 
Hütten, Ulrich wm(1488-1523)— German 
poet, .supporter of the Reformation; 
participant in and ideological leader 
of the knights' uprising of 1522-23 — 
171 
I 
Immermann, Karl  Leberecht  (1796-1840)— 
German writer, journalist, critic and 
prominent figure in the theatre.— 
53, 83, 123-25, 161-68, 420, 449 
Itistein, Johann Adam von (1775-1855)— 
German statesman, one of the leaders 
of the liberal opposition in the Baden 
Provincial Diet.—299 
J 
Jachmann, Karl Reinhold (d. 1873)—Ger­
man theologian and writer.—277 
Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich (1743-1819)— 
German fideist philosopher.—217 
Jacoby, Franz Carl Joel (1810-1863)— 
German Catholic writer, opponent of 
the Hegelian school, harbinger of 
religious fanaticism.—63-65 
Jacoby, Johann (1805-1877)—German 
radical writer and politician; in the 
1870s was close to the Social-Democrat­
ic Party.—305, 307 
Jahn,  Friedrich Ludwig (1778-1852)— 
German writer and journalist, organis­
er of Turnplatz (open-air gymnasiums) 
movement in Germany; took part in 
the struggle against Napoleon's rule.— 
138, 141, 166 

=====第652页=====
630 Name Index 
Jarcke, Karl Ernst (1801-1852)—Ger­
man lawyer and writer, extreme mon­
archist.— 63 
Jean Paul (pseudonym of Richter, Johann 
Paul Friedrich) (1763-1825)—German 
satirist.—16, 473 
Jemand,  Wilhelm —see Langewiesche,  Wil­
helm 
Joest, Jan van (pseudonym—Calcar, Jan 
van) (c. 1460-1519)—Dutch painter.— 
134 
John—English acquaintance of Frederick 
Engels in Bremen.—424, 425 
Jonghaus, Peter (1816-1884)—Frederick 
Engels' schoolmate, later pastor.— 389, 
398, 410, 411, 427, 445, 463, 468, 
475 
Jung— headmistress of the Mannheim 
Institute for Young Ladies.—498, 544, 
546 
Jung, Alexander (1799-1884)—German 
writer, literary historian, journalist; 
associated with the Young Germany 
literary group.—284-90, 293-97, 543, 
546 
Jung, Georg Gottlob (1814-1886)—Ger­
man writer, Young Hegelian, one of 
the managers of the Rheinische Zeit­
ung.— 336, 347, 546 
Jung, Johann Heinrich (wrote under the 
pseudonym of Heinrich Jung-
Stilling) (1740-1817) —German writer, 
pietist.— 25 
Jürgens —itinerant preacher, adventur­
ist.—11 
K 
Kampermanns —textile manufacturers in 
Barmen.—388 
Kampermann, Laura (b. 1827)—friend 
of Frederick Engels' sisters.—438-41 
Kant, Immanuel (1724-1804)—German 
philosopher.—42, 69, 122, 128, 129, 
165, 182, 186, 202, 218, 455 
Karl Theodor (1724-1799)—Elector of 
Pfalz (1733-99) and Bavaria (1777-99). 
— 18 
Kirchner —friend of the Engels family.— 
388 Klein,  Julius Leopold (1810-1876)— 
German dramatist and theatre critic.— 
288 
Klopstock, Friedrich Gottlieb (1724-1803) 
—German poet, representative of the 
German Enlightenment.—  315,  411 
Knapp, Albert (1798-1864)—German 
poet, author of church songs and 
hymns, pietist.—101, 315, 398 
Knebel, H.—director of a grammar school 
in Duisburg, author of Französische 
(ScftuJ-) Grammatik für Gymnasien und 
Progymnasien. — 18 
Kock,  Charles Paul de (1794-1871)— 
French novelist and dramatist.—21 
Kohl, Albert (1802-1882)—Protestant 
pastor in Elberfeld, pietist.—14, 15, 
416,  426, 427 
Kohlmann, Johann Melchior (1795-1864)— 
pastor from Horn near Bremen.— 
515 
Koppen, Karl Friedrich (1808-1863)— 
German radical writer and historian, 
Young Hegelian.—143, 335, 337, 339, 
345, 347 
Köster, Heinrich (1807-1881)—German 
philologist and teacher.—19, 21 
Kostlin, Christian Reinhold (I813-1856) — 
German jurist and poet.—162 
Kossmaly, Karl (1812-1873)—German 
musical critic, professor of music, 
conductor.— 159 
Köttgen, Gustav Adolf (1802-1882)—Ger­
man painter and poet, in later years 
was close to the "true socialists".— 
542 
Kotzebue, August Friedrich Ferdinand von 
(1761-1819)—German writer and 
journalist, extreme monarchist.—3, 
129, 393, 395, 397 
Krabbe —publisher in Stuttgart.—495 
Kreutzer, Konradin (1780-1849)—Ger­
man composer.—400 
Kristine —maidservant at Consul Leu-
pold's in Bremen.— 505 
Krug, Friedrich Wilhelm (b. 1799)— 
German theologian, author of poems, 
fiction and autobiographical works.— 
25 
Krummacher, Emil (1798-1886)—pastor 
in Duisburg, then in Bonn; son of 
Friedrich Adolf Krummacher.—17 

=====第653页=====
Name Index 631 
Krummacher, Friedrich Adolf (1767-1845) 
—German pedagogue, pastor in Bre­
men (1824-43), religious writer; broth­
er of Gottfried Daniel Krummacher. 
— 12, 106, 126, 127,416, 427 
Krummacher, Friedrich Wilhelm (1796-
1868)—German preacher and reli­
gious writer, leader of the Wuppertal 
pietists; son of Friedrich Adolf Krum-
macher.—12-17,  29-31,  121, 122, 126, 
127-28,  155, 156, 157, 158, 315, 346, 
361, 416, 423, 446, 472, 514 
Krummacher, Gottfried Daniel (1774-1837) 
—German Protestant preacher and 
religious writer, pastor in Elberfeld; 
brother of Friedrich Adolf Krum­
macher.—12 
Krusbecker, Jan—broker in Bremen.— 
447 
Kruse, Karl Adolf Bernhard (1807-1873)— 
teacher of the Elberfeld Realschule. — 
19 
Kühne, Ferdinand Gustav (1806-1888)— 
German writer, member of the 
Young Germany literary group, editor 
of the Zeitung für die elegante Welt and 
the journal Europa.— 42, 50, 71, 77, 
78, 80-84,  88-91,  92, 286, 288, 290, 
292,411,421,472 
L 
Lais—one of the Greek courtesans in 
the latter half of the 5th and the 
beginning of the 4th century B.C.— 
249 
Lange —shipowner from Vegesack.—104 
Langewiesche, Wilhelm (pen-name— 
William Jemand) (1807-1872)—writer 
and bookseller in Barmen.—23, 468 
Laube, Heinrich (1806-1884)—German 
writer, member of the Young Ger­
many literary group; later, theatre 
director, producer of Vienna theatres. 
—82,  84, 87, 89, 97, 285, 286, 288, 
290-92,  411, 422, 473 
Lavater, Johann Kaspar (1741-1801)— 
Swiss clergyman and writer, physiog­
nomist.—454 
Lenau, Nikolaus (pseudonym of Niembsch 
von Strehlenau) (1802-1850)—Austrian 
poet.—42,  45, 288, 420, 422, 508 Leo, Heinrich (1799-1878)—German 
historian and writer, extreme mon­
archist, ideologist of Junkerdom. — 64, 
187, 196, 270, 281-83, 293, 296, 315, 
340, 345, 361, 365, 435, 436, 451, 
452, 462, 467, 477, 489, 526, 527 
Leo, Leonarde^Leonardo Oronzo Salvatore 
de Leo) (1694-1744)—Italian compos­
er.—474 
Le Sage, Alain René (1668-1747)— 
French writer.—547 
Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim (1729-1781)— 
German writer, critic, philosopher 
and Enlightener.—  82, 411, 449, 472 
Leupolds—family of Heinrich Leupold, 
owner of a trading firm in Bremen.— 
386, 404, 529 
Leupold—wife of Consul Heinrich Leu­
pold.— 396, 401, 438 
Leupold,  Elisabeth—daughter of Consul 
Heinrich Leupold.—401 
Leupold,  Heinrich (d. 1865)—Consul, 
owner of a trading firm in Bremen 
in which Engels worked from mid-
July 1838 to the end of March  1841.— 
389, 391, 396, 404, 406, 410, 418, 
500, 502, 507, 510, 511, 520, 524, 529 
Leupold,  Karl—son of Consul Heinrich 
Leupold, junior co-owner of his father's 
firm.—419 
Leupold,  Ludwig (Loin)—son of Consul 
Heinrich Leupold.—401 
Leupold,  Siegfried—son of Consul Hein­
rich Leupold.—401 
Leupold,  Sophie—daughter of Consul 
Heinrich Leupold.—511 
Leupold,  Wilhelm —son of Consul Hein­
rich Leupold.—505, 508, 520, 524, 525 
Leupoldt, Johann Michael (1794-1874)— 
German psychiatrist, author of several 
works on medicine.— 281 
Lewald,  August (1792-1871)—German 
writer close to the Young Germany 
literary group, editor of the journal 
Europa (1835-46).—22, 422 
Lieth,  Ludwig Theodor (1776-1850)— 
headmaster of the Elberfeld gymna­
sium for girls, author of poems for 
children.—23 
Liszt, Franz (1811-1886)—Hungarian 
composer and pianist.—541 

=====第654页=====
632 Name Index 
Livy (Titus Livius) (59 B.C.-17 A.D.)— 
Roman historian, author of History 
of Rome (Ab urbe condita librt).—584 
Lohenstein, Daniel Caspar von (1635-1683) 
—German poet, representative of 
aristocratic literature.—51 
Lou« XI (1423-1483)—King of France 
(1461-83).—357 
Louis XIV (1638-1715)—King of France 
(1643-1715).—48, 50 
Louis XV (1710-1774)—King of France 
(1715-74).—163 
Louis Philippe I (1773-1850)—Duke of 
Orleans, King of the French (1830-
48).—355, 360 
Loyola,  St. Ignatius of(Inigo Lopez  de Loyola) 
(1491-1556)—Spanish nobleman, 
founder of the Society of Jesus.— 
51, 64, 413 
Ludwig (Louis) III (c. 880-928)—King 
of the Western Franks.—42 
Ludwig (Louis) I (1786-1868)—King of 
Bavaria (1825-48).—353, 527 
Luise —maid in the house of Frederick 
Engels' parents.—439 
Luther, Martin (1483-1546)—leader of 
the Reformation, founder of Prot­
estantism (Lutheranism) in Germany, 
ideologist of the German burghers.— 
66, 404, 486 
M 
Machiavelli, Niccolo (1469-1527) —Italian 
politician, historian and writer.— 360 
Maien—see Meyen, Eduard 
Maintenon, Françoise  d'Aubigné,  Marquise 
de (1635-1719)—mistress and, from 
1685,  wife of Louis XIV.—49, 51 
Mallet, Friedrich Ludwig (1792-1865)— 
German theologian, Protestant pastor 
in Bremen, publisher of several reli­
gious journals, pietist.—106, 157, 346, 
491, 515, 516 
Manz, Georg Joseph (1808-1894)—Ger­
man publisher; founded a publishing 
firm in Landshut which was trans­
ferred to Regensburg in 1835.— 63 
Marat, Jean Paul (1743-1793)—French 
writer, a Jacobin leader in die 
French Revolution.—63, 341, 348 Marbach, Oswald (1810-1890)—German 
writer and journalist, author of 
adaptations of German medieval epics 
and publisher of German Volksbücher 
(popular books).—33, 34, 36, 37, 39, 
490 
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus (121-180)— 
Roman Emperor (161-80), Stoic phi­
losopher.—249 
Marggraff,  Hermann (1809-1864)—Ger­
man writer and journalist.—88, 473 
Marheineke, Philipp Konrad(1780-1846)— 
German Protestant theologian, philos­
opher and historian of Christianity, 
follower of Hegel.—268-70, 452 
Märklin, Christian (180 7-1849)—German 
theologian, follower of Hegel; in 1839-
40 wrote three pamphlets against pie­
tism.—460 
Marryat, Frederick (1792-1848)—Eng­
lish naval officer and novelist.—21 
Martin, Henri (1793-1882)—French 
animal tamer.—91 
Marx, Karl (1818-1883).—336, 338-39, 
347 
Mathy, Karl (1807-1868)—Baden jour­
nalist, official and politician, moderate 
liberal.—299 
Mendelssohn-Bartholdy,  Jakob Ludwig Felix 
(1809-1847)—German composer and 
conductor.—159, 523 
Mengs, Anton Raphael (1728-1799)— 
German painter.—471 
Menken, Gottfried (1768-1831)—German 
Protestant theologian, pastor in 
Bremen.— 515 
Menzel,  Wolfgang (1798-1873)—German 
conservative writer and literary critic. 
—43,  64, 141, 420, 421, 431, 452, 
472, 482, 496 
Mercadante, Giuseppe Saverio Raffaelle 
(1797-1870)—Italian composer, author 
of operas and religious music.—129 
Meyen, Eduard (1812-1870)—German 
journalist, Young Hegelian.—296, 
335, 345-46, 348 
Meyer, Albertus —editor of the Bremer 
Stadtbote.— 418 
Meyer, G. C. A.—publisher in Bruns­
wick.—496 
Meyer, Thérèse—fiancée of Wilhelm 
Leupold.—525 

=====第655页=====
Name Index 633 
Meyer (Stick-Meyer) — father of Thérèse 
Meyer, fiancée of Wilhelm Leupold. — 
525 
Meyerbeer, Giacomo (real name—Jakob 
Liebmann Meyer Beer) (1791-1864)— 
German composer, pianist and con­
ductor.—542 
Micheiet, Karl Ludwig (1801-1893) — 
German philosopher, follower of He­
gel, professor of Berlin University.— 
191, 435, 436, 451, 452, 467 
Miesegans, Timoleon—Bremen resident. 
— 515 
Miguel, Maria Evarist (Miguel Maria 
Evaristo de Bragaraa) (1802-1866)— 
King of Portugal (1828-34).—493 
Mohammed Ali (1769-1849)—ruler of 
Egypt (1805-49), carried out several 
progressive reforms.—148 
Mohr, Karl Friedrich Gottlieb (1803-1888) 
—member of the Bremen Senate, 
Burgomaster of Bremen (1857-73).— 
425 
Molineus, Albert (1814-1889) —Barmen 
manufacturer, husband of Ida Engels. 
—542,  544 
Montanus Eremita—see Zuccalmaglio, 
Vincent Jakob von 
Montholon, Charles Tristan, Comte de 
(1783-1853) — general-aide-de-camp 
of Napoleon I; condemned to impris­
onment for participating in an 
abortive Bonapartist coup  d'état  in 
1840.—154 
Morison, James (1770-1840)—English 
entrepreneur who amassed big 
wealth through the sale of so-called 
Morison pills.— 278 
Morvell, C. F. (real name— Vollmer, C. F.) 
(d. 1864)—German writer, author of 
historical novels.—422 
Mosen, Julius (1803-1867)—German 
romantic writer.—23, 288, 411 
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus (1756-1791) 
—Austrian composer.—  89, 150, 159, 
400,  471 
Mügge, Theodor (1806-1861)—German 
writer and journalist, Young Hegeli­
an.—332 
Müller —a novice in 1839, lived in the 
house of Pastor Treviranus in Bre­
men.—472 Müller, Julius (1801-1878)—German 
Protestant theologian.—345, 347 
Müllner, Amadeus Gottfried Adolf (1774-
1829)—German poet, dramatist and 
literary critic.—496 
Munch, Ernst Hermann Joseph von (1798-
1841)—German historian and writer. 
—86 
Mundt, Theodor (1808-1861)—German 
writer, member of the Young Germany 
literary group; professor of literature 
and history at Breslau and Berlin.— 
21, 36, 42, 50, 79, 82-88, 90, 92, 285, 
286, 288, 290-93, 411, 421, 422, 462, 
465, 473, 488 
Mural, Joachim (1767-1815)—French 
marshal, participant in Napoleon's 
campaigns; King of Naples (1808-15). 
— 154 
N 
Napoleon I Bonaparte (1769-1821)— 
Emperor of the French (1804-14 and 
1815).—21,  50, 66,  139-41,  153-54, 
166, 271, 283, 320, 348, 358, 464, 
491, 493, 517 
Neander, Johann August Wilhelm (1789-
1850)—German Protestant theologian, 
historian of Christianity and the 
Church, pietist.—235, 454, 455, 462, 
466, 486, 491, 527 
Nero (Nero Claudius Caesar Augustus 
Germanicus) (37-68)—Roman Emperor 
(54-68).—279, 356 
Nestroy, Johann Nepomuk (1801-1862)— 
Austrian dramatist and actor, author 
of vaudevilles.—21 
Neuburg—shop assistant in the Barmen 
publishing house of Wilhelm Lange-
wiesche.—468 
Neuiandt— Frederick Engels' acquaint­
ance in Bremen.— 424, 425 
Newton, Sir Isaac (1642-1727)—English 
physicist, astronomer and mathema­
tician, founder of classical mechanics. 
—60,  96 
Ney, Michel (1769-1815)—French mar­
shal, participant in Napoleon's cam­
paigns in 1808-11.—154 
Nicholas I (1796-1855)—Emperor of 
Russia (1825-55).—360, 491, 493, 537 

=====第656页=====
634 Name Index 
Niusch,  Karl Immanuel (1787-1868)— 
German Protestant theologian and 
preacher, professor of theology at 
Bonn and Berlin.—346, 527 
Noltenius, J. Daniel (1779-1852)—Burgo­
master of Bremen (from 1839).— 
423,  424, 446 
Nork, Friedrich (real name— Korn, Frie­
drich) (1803-1850)—German writer, 
well known for his adaptations of 
Greek myths.—432 
Nösselt, Friedrich August (1781-1850)— 
German pedagogue, author of 
textbooks on history, geography and 
German literature.—18 
O 
Oswald,  Friedrich (F. O., S. Oswald)— 
pseudonyms of Frederick Engels. — 
31, 40, 46, 52, 70, 335, 337, 339, 
347, 543 
Otto I (1815-1867)—Prince of Bavaria, 
King of Greece (1832-62).—484 
Otto,  Friedrich Wilhelm —head of a 
publishing firm founded in 1797.— 352 
P 
Palestrina, Giovanni Pierluigi da (c. 1525-
1594)—Italian composer.—523 
Paniel,  Karl Friedrich Wilhelm (1803-
1856)—German Protestant theolo­
gian, pastor in Bremen, supporter of 
the rationalist trend in Lutheranism.— 
127-28,  155-56, 514, 515 
Patkul,  Johann Reinhold (1660-1707)—Li-
vonian nobleman; from 1702 was in 
Russian service as Privy Councillor 
and general.—292 
Paulus, Heinrich Eberhard Gottlob (1761-
1851)—German Protestant theolo­
gian, representative of the rational­
ist trend in Lutheranism.—14, 127, 
128 
Peel, Sir Robert (1788-1850)—English 
statesman, Prime Minister (1841-46); 
in 1846 repealed the Corn Laws.—357, 
376, 377 Pergolese (Pergolesi), Giovanni Battista 
(1710-1736)—Italian composer.—523, 
530 
Pericles (c. 490-429 B.C.)—Athenian 
statesman.—484 
Petrarch or Petrarca, Francesco (1304-
1374)—Italian poet of the Renais­
sance—24, 172, 443 
Pfizer, Gustav (1807-1890) —German lyr­
ical poet and critic, belonged to the 
Swabian school of romanticists.— 
42, 497 
Philip—see Philippi, Friedrich Adolf 
Philippi, Friedrich Adolf (1809-1882)— 
German Protestant theologian.—322, 
323, 478 
Pilate, Pontius (died c. 37) —Roman proc­
urator of Judaea (26-36).— 170 
Pindar (c. 522-443 B.C.)—Greek lyric 
poet.—20 
Platen (Platen-Hallermünde), August, Graf 
von (1796-1835)—German poet and 
dramatist.—23,  54, 96, 420 
Plato (c. 427-c. 347 B.C.)—Greek 
philosopher.—585 
Plümacher, Friedrich (1819-1905) —Fred­
erick Engels' schoolmate, later pastor. 
— 389,  410, 427, 461, 513 
Poitiers, Guillaume de (1071-1127) — 
French troubadour.—146 
Pol Johann —Protestant pastor in 
Heedfeld (near Wuppertal), author 
of religious poems.—24, 25, 30, 415 
Poniatowski, Joseph Anthony (1763-1813) 
—Polish politician and general, took 
part in Napoleon's campaigns in 1809-
13.—154 
Prutz, Robert Eduard (1816-1872)— 
German poet, journalist and literary 
historian, was connected with the 
Young Hegelians.—332, 528 
Pückler-Muskau, Hermann, Prince (1785-
1871)—German writer.—288, 289 
Püttmann, Hermann (1811-1894)—Ger­
man radical poet and journalist, 
representative of "true socialism".— 
22, 495, 496, 497 
Q 
Quintana, Manuel Jose' (1772-1857)— 
Spanish writer and poet.— 55 

=====第657页=====
Name Index 635 
R 
Rachel (real name— Félix, Elizabeth) 
(1821-1858)—French actress.—49 
Racine, Jean Baptiste (1639-1699)— 
French dramatist, representative of 
French classicism.— 50 
Radewell, Friedrich —German writer.— 
292 
Radge, Edgar—see Bauer, Edgar 
Ranke, Leopold von (1795-1886)— 
German historian, professor of Ber­
lin University, ideologist of Junker­
dom.— 491 
Raumer, Friedrich Ludwig Georg von 
(1781-1873)—German historian and 
politician; representative of the 
narrative-romantic trend; professor 
at Berlin and Breslau universities.— 
508 
Raupach, Ernst Benjamin Salomo (1784-
1852) — Prussian poet and drama­
tist.—51,  129, 427, 449 
Reichardt, Johann Friedrich (1752-1814) 
—German composer, author of songs 
to Goethe's words.—473 
Reinhold —Barmen physician.—536 
Rettig—deputy of the Baden Provin­
cial Diet.—299 
Richter, Heinrich (1800-1847)—inspector 
of the Rhenish missionary society 
and the mission-house in Barmen.— 
17 
Riedel, Carl (1804-1878)—German 
radical journalist, follower of Hegel.— 
185 
Riem,  Friedrich Wilhelm (1779-1857)— 
German musician, composer and 
organist.—159 
Riepe, Rudolf—teacher in the Barmen 
municipal school (1835-58), then in 
the Elberfeld high school for 
girls.—  19, 400, 417 
Rindeschwender —deputy of the Baden 
Provincial Diet.— 299 
Ringseis, Johann Nepomuk (1385-1880)— 
German physician and theologian, 
professor of Munich University, 
advocate of religious orthodoxy.—282 
Ripoll, Cayetano—teacher in Rizaffo, 
Spain; executed as a heretic on 
July 26, 1826.—493 Robespierre, Maximilien François Marie 
Isidore de (1758-1794)—active partic­
ipant in the French Revolution; Jaco­
bin leader, head of the revo­
lutionary government (1793-94).— 
341, 348, 349 
Rochow, Gustav Adolf Rochus von (1792-
1847) — Prussian statesman, Min­
ister of the Interior (1834-42).—366 
Rosenkranz, Johann Karl Friedrich (1805-
1879)—German Hegelian philosopher 
and literary historian.—50, 277, 284, 
491 
Rossini, Gioacchino Antonio  ( 1792-1868)— 
Italian composer.—150 
Roth,  Richard (1821-1858)—comrade of 
the young Engels, later manufactur­
er.—424,  447, 470, 501, 503, 508, 
515, 529, 530, 534 
Rothe, Moritz (1800-1888)—Protestant 
pastor in Bremen.— 515 
Rothschilds—dynasty of financiers with 
banks in many countries of Europe.— 
70 
Rötscher, Heinrich Theodor (1803-1871)— 
German art theoretician, theatre 
critic,  follower of Hegel.— 50 
Rotteck, Karl Wenzeslaus von (1775-
1840)—German historian and liberal 
politician.—493 
Rousseau, Jean Jacques (1712-1778)— 
French democratic writer and 
philosopher, representative of the 
Enlightenment.— 127 
Rtg—see Rutenoerg, Adolf 
Rückert, Friedrich (1788-1866)—German 
romantic poet and translator of orien­
tal poetry.—23, 397, 411, 420, 422, 
537 
Ruge, Arnold (1802-1880)—German 
radical journalist and philoso­
pher, Young Hegelian.—143, 185, 
196, 296, 331, 334-38, 340, 341, 345-
47, 348, 350, 351, 487, 491, 526, 543, 
545-46 
Runkei, Martin—German conservative 
journalist, editor of the Elberfelder 
Zeitung in 1839-43.—22, 27-28, 446 
Russe«, John  Russell,  1st Earl (1792-
1878)—British statesman, Whig 
leader, Prime Minister (1846-52 and 

=====第658页=====
636 Name Index 
1865-66) and Foreign Secretary (1852-
53 and 1859-65).—376, 377 
Rutenberg, Adolf (Rtg) (1808-1869)— 
German journalist, Young Hegelian, 
member of the editorial board of the 
Rheinische Zeitung in 1842.—337, 347 
Ruyter—captain of the ship Maria.— 
119 
S 
Sack, Karl Heinrich (1789-1875)—Ger­
man Protestant theologian, professor 
at Bonn, advocate of religious 
orthodoxy.—329-30, 332, 338, 342, 
346-49, 351 
Sand,  George (pseudonym of Aurore Du-
pin, baronne Dudevant) (1804-1876)— 
French authoress, representative of the 
democratic trend in romanticism.— 
101, 286 
Sander, Immanuel  Friedrich  (1797-1859)— 
Lutheran pastor in Elberfeld, pietist.— 
16, 24 
Sass, Friedrich (pseudonym—Alexander 
Soltwedet) (1819-1853)—German jour­
nalist, Young Hegelian, later "true 
socialist".—158 
Saul (11th cent. B.C.)—King of 
Israel.—74 
Schadow, Friedrich Wilhelm (1788-1862)— 
German painter, director of the 
Academy of Arts in Düsseldorf (1826-
59).—134 
Schebest, Agnese (1813-1869)—German 
opera singer.—102 
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von 
(1775-1854)—German philosopher.— 
165, 181-87, 191-95, 198-202, 206-
18, 219, 220, 221-30, 234-37, 243-57, 
258-60, 269, 294, 295, 538, 543 
Schifflin, Philipp —teacher of modern 
languages in the Barmen municipal 
school.—18 
Schiller, Johann Christoph Friedrich von 
(1759-1805)—German poet, historian 
and philosopher, professor of history 
at Jena University.—3, 16, 33, 43, 
77, 105, 115, 116, 124, 129, 199, 
279, 393, 395, 397, 411, 427, 448, 
465, 467, 468 Schlegel, August Wilhelm von (1767-1845) 
— German romantic poet, translator, 
literary historian and critic.— 25 
Schleiermacher, Friedrich Daniel Ernst 
(1768-1834)—German philosopher, 
theologian and preacher.— 269, 457, 
462, 463, 486, 490 
Schlichthorst,  J. D — pastor.— 128 
Schlippenbach — Countess.— 541 
Schmits, Peter Gottfried—Barmen offi­
cial.—577 
Schmitt, Jacob—acquaintance of the 
Engels family.— 470 
Schneller, Ferdinand Alexander August 
(1809-1853)—German writer.—422 
Schornstein, Johannes—teacher of music 
and singing at the Elberfeld grammar 
school (1824-44), organist of a re­
formed community.— 406, 500 
Schröder-Devrient, Wilhelmine (1804-
1860)—German opera singer.—102 
Schubarth, Karl Ernst (1796-1861)— 
German conservative writer, teacher 
at the Hirschberg gymnasium.—66, 
187, 452, 453 
Schücking, Levin (1814-1883)—German 
writer, contributor to the Kölnische 
Zeitung from 1845.—101, 422, 494-96 
Schumacher, Balthasar Gerhard (1755-
1801)—German jurist, author of the 
song on which the Prussian National 
Anthem was based.—144 
Schumann, Robert Alexander (1810-1856) 
—German composer and musical 
critic.—159 
Schiinemann, Karl—owner of a pub­
lishing house founded in Bremen in 
1817.—494-95, 497 
Schwab, Gustav (1792-1850)—German 
romantic poet, author of adaptations 
of German epics and classical myths.— 
34, 157, 416 
Scott,  Sir Walter (1771-1832)—Scottish 
writer.—431 
Scribe, 'Augustin Eugène (1791-1861)— 
French dramatist.—150 
Sealsfield, Charles (pseudonym—Postl, 
Karl Anton) (1793-1864) —Austrian 
writer.— 295 
Seydelmann, Karl (1793-1843) —Ger­
man actor.— 129 

=====第659页=====
Name Index 637 
Seyffert—Prussian official, Privy Coun­
cillor.— 308 
Shakespeare, Wiüiam (1564-1616)— 
English poet and dramatist.—72, 76, 
77, 78, 100, 166, 418, 449, 483 
Shelley, Mary  WollsUmecraft  (1797-1851)— 
English authoress, second wife of Percy 
Bysshe Shelley.—101, 496 
Shelley, Percy Bysshe (1792-1822)— 
English poet, revolutionary romantic. 
—95,  101, 107, 467, 494, 495, 497 
Siebel, Christian Hermann (1808-1879)— 
Barmen manufacturer, relative of 
Frederick Engels'.— 531, 544 
Simons—lieutenant, acquaintance of 
Frederick Engels'. —445 
Simrocfc, Karl Joseph (1802-1876)— 
German poet and philologist, author of 
adaptations of the works of medieval 
literature and folk epics, publisher of 
German VoiksWfcher.—33, 36, 39 
Sinck von Sinnes —see Müller, Julius 
Smidt, Johann (1773-1857)—Burgo­
master of Bremen (1821-48 and 1853-
57).—424, 514 
Smith, Adam (1723-1790)—British econ­
omist.—271 
Smitt, Friedrich von (Fyodor Ivanovich) 
(1787-1865)—Russian military histo­
rian.—471 
Snethlage, Karl Wilhelm Moritz (1792-
1871)—relative of the Engels family; 
Protestant pastor in Unter-Barmen 
(from 1822) and court preacher in 
Berlin (from 1842).—578-79, 586-87 
Snethlage, Luise (1822-1878)—daughter 
of Karl Snethlage, Frederick Engels' 
cousin, wife of Christian Hermann 
Siebel from 1841.—531, 544 
Socrates (c. 470-399 B.C.)—Greek phi­
losopher.—165, 218, 390, 394 
Sollwedel, Alexander—see Sass, Friedrich 
Soltyk, Roman, Count (1791-1842)— 
Polish officer, participant in the 1830-
31 insurrection.—471 
Sophocles (c. 497-406 B.C.)—Greek 
dramatist.—73, 483 
Souit, Nicolas Jean de Dieu, Duke of 
Dalmatia (1769-1851)—French mar­
shal and statesman, in 1808-14 com­
manded French troops in Spain; War 
Minister (1830-34 and 1840-45), For­eign Minister (1839-40) and Prime 
Minister (1832, 1834, 1839-40 and 
1840-47).—517 
Spinoza (Baruch or Benedictus) de (1632-
1677)—Dutch philosopher.—221, 
222, 455 
Stahl,  Friedrich Julius (1802-1861)— 
German jurist and politician, extreme 
monarchist, professor of Berlin Uni­
versity from 1840.—181, 200 
Stahr, Adolf Wilhelm Theodor (1805-
1876)—German writer, author of 
historical novels and essays on the 
history of art and literature.—105 
Stamm —owner of a hotel in Bonn.— 
548 
Steffens, Henrik (1773-1845)—German 
naturalist, writer, philosopher, follow­
er of Schelling, Norwegian by birth.— 
141 
Stegmayer, Ferdinand (1803-1863)—Ger­
man composer and conductor, in 1839 
conductor at the Bremen theatre.— 
159 
Steinhaus, Johann Friedrich —Barmen 
publisher.—23 
Stephan, Martin (1777-1846)—preacher 
of a Bohemian community in Dres­
den;  in 1838 emigrated to America 
together with his 700 followers.—103 
Sternberg, Alexander (1806-1868)— 
German writer who idealised the 
Middle Ages.—49, 146 
Stieglitz, Heinrich (1801-1849)—German 
poet.—411 
Stier, Rudolf Ewald (1800-1862)— 
German Protestant theologian and 
pastor, known also for his adaptations 
of Schiller's poems in the church 
fashion.—16, 28,427,476 
Stilling, Johann Heinrich —see Jung, 
Johann Heinrich 
Stirner, Max (real name—Schmidt, 
Johann Caspar) (1806-1856)—German 
philosopher, Young Hegelian.— 336, 
339, 346 
Strauss, David Friedrich (1808-1874)— 
German philosopher and writer, 
Young Hegelian, author of Das Leben 
Jesu.— 14, 50, 74, 106, 122, 143, 157, 
173, 185, 196, 219, 234, 237, 285, 
286, 293, 296, 321, 346, 425, 454, 

=====第660页=====
638 Name Index 
455, 460, 462, 471, 480, 486, 489-90, 
526, 527 
Strücker, F.  W.—Frederick  Engels' 
Elberfeld friend.—392-94, 398-400, 
406,  468, 502, 544 
Stuhr, Peter Feddersen (1787-1851)—Ger­
man historian, author of works on the 
history of religion, professor of philos­
ophy at Berlin University.— 228 
Stüve, Johann Karl Bertram (1798-
1872)—German liberal politician, 
Minister of the Interior in Hanover 
(1848-50).—152 
Szczepansky, Gustav L. Fr. H. W. von— 
student at Bonn University (1839-
42).—548 
T 
Tacitus, Cornelius (c. 55-c. 120)—Roman 
historian and orator.—15, 354 
Taglioni, Maria (1804-1884)—Italian 
ballet dancer.—411 
Thiersch, Bernhard (1794-1855)—Ger­
man pedagogue and poet.—97 
Tholuck, Friedrich August Gottreu (1799-
1877)—German Protestant theolo­
gian, pietist.—157, 486, 490, 491, 
526, 527 
Thucydides (c. 460-c. 395 B.C.)—Greek 
historian, author of The History of 
the Peloponnesian War.—471 
Thümmel, Hans Adolf von— Hofmarschall 
of the Electorate of Hessen. —424 
Thuringus—pen-name of a member of 
the Dresden Abend-Zeitung editorial 
board.—433 
Tichatschek, Joseph Alois (1807-1886)— 
German opera singer.—102 
Tieck,  Johann Ludwig (1773-1853)— 
German writer and philologist, repre­
sentative of romanticism, author of 
adaptations of German medieval lit­
erature and folk-lore.— 34, 37, 40, 411, 
413 
Tiele, Johann Nikolaus (1804-185.6)— 
Protestant pastor at Bremen, pietist.— 
127, 476 
Toel, F. A.—one of the editors of the 
Bremer Kirchenbote. Eine Zeitschrift. — 
106 Torstrick, Johann Adolf (1821-1877)— 
Frederick Engels' Bremen friend, later 
teacher and researcher on Aristotle.— 
474, 475, 485 
Treviranus, Georg Gottfried (1788-1868)— 
Bremerf pastor in whose house Fred­
erick Engels lived from 1838 to  1841.— 
105-06,  386, 387, 399, 406, 445, 500, 
501, 524 
Treviranus, Marie—daughter of pastor 
Georg Gottfried Treviranus.— 403, 
522 
Treviranus, Mathilde —wife of pastor 
Georg Gottfried Treviranus.— 399, 
404, 522 
Triboni, Joachim—Genoa resident who 
made a trip to the Swiss Alps.—173 
Tripsteert, Crischan—pen-name of a 
member of the editorial board of the 
Bremisches Unterhaltungsblatt. —106 
Tromlitz, August von (real name— 
Witzleben, Karl August, Freiherr von) 
(1773-1839)—German writer, author 
of novels and short stories on histor­
ical themes.—  21, 422, 431 
Troost, Henriette (Jettchen) (1826-1853)— 
Marie Engels' friend.— 399 
U 
Uhland,  Johann Ludwig (1787-1862)— 
German romantic poet, head of the 
Swabian school.—22, 74, 411, 422, 
431 
V 
Varnhagen von Ense, Karl August (1785-
1858)—German writer and literary 
critic of the liberal trend.— 85, 88, 289, 
473 
Varnhagen von Ense, Rahel Antonie  Fred­
erike (née Levin) (1771-1833)—wife 
of Karl August Varnhagen von Ense, 
well known for her literary salon in 
Berlin.—411 
Venedey, Jakob (1805-1871)—German 
radical writer and politician.—480, 
484 
Vernet, Horace (1789-1863)—French 
battle-scene painter.— 537 

=====第661页=====
Name Index 639 
Victor I (St. Victor)—Pope (189-198).— 
132 
Victoria (1819-1901)—Queen of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1837-1901).— 
360 
Virgil (Publius Vergiiius Maro) (70-19 
B.C.)—Roman poet.—103, 584 
Voigt, H. L.—Königsberg publisher.— 
277 
Voltaire, François Marie Arouet de (1694-
1778) — French deist philosopher, writ­
er, historian, representative of the 
Enlightenment.—18, 82, 127, 321, 
335, 348, 350 
Voss, Johann Heinrich (1751-1826)—Ger­
man poet, translator of Homer, Virgil 
and other ancient authors.— 25 
W 
Wachsmann, Karl Adolf von (1787-1862) 
— German writer and journalist, mod­
erate liberal, member of the edito­
rial boards of the Dresden  Abend-
Zeitung and the Zeitung für die elegan­
te Welt.—422, 432 
Walesrode, Ludwig Reinhold (pseudo­
nym— Emil Wagner) (1810-1889)— 
German writer, democrat, publisher of 
the Demokratische Studien.— 277, 278, 
280 
Wadenstcin, Albrecht Wenzel Eusebius von 
(1538-1634)—general at the time of 
the Thirty Years' War, commander 
of the imperial army in 1618-30 and 
1632-34.—415 
Wallmüller —owner of a café in Berlin.— 
540 
Wallraf,  Ferdinand Franz (1748-1824)— 
German scientist, professor of natural 
science and aesthetics at Cologne 
University (1786), its rector (from 
1794),  founder of a museum in Co­
logne, author of a work on the city's 
history.—134 
Weber, Wilhelm Ernst (1790-1850)— 
headmaster of a humanitarian school 
in Bremen; author of works on philos­
ophy, pedagogics and aesthetics, 
translator of ancient authors.—104, 
105, 127, 157 Wedell, von—captain, commander of the 
12th Foot Company of the Guards 
Artillery Brigade where Engels was 
in military service from October 1, 
1841,  to September 30, 1842.—547, 
588 
Wegscheider, Julius August Ludwig 
(1771-1849)—German Protestant 
theologian of the rationalist trend, 
professor of philosophy and theology. 
—486 
Weinirenner, August—teacher of music, 
organist of a Lutheran community in 
Elberfeld.—542 
Weiss«, Christian Hermann (1801-1866)— 
German philosopher, opponent of the 
Hegelian school.—466 
Weicker, Karl Theodor (1790-1869)— 
German jurist and writer, liberal, 
deputy of the Baden Provincial 
Diet.—298,  299 
Wemhöners —family in Barmen.— 531 
Wemho'ner, Emil—graduate of the Bar­
men municipal school (1839), later 
merchant.— 531 
Wemhöner, Mathilde —member of the 
Wemhöner family.— 535 
WendeJ—clerk in the office of Fred­
erick Engels' father.—439, 440 
Werder, Karl (1806-1893)—German 
poet, literary critic and philosopher, 
follower of Hegel.— 538 
Wichelhaus, Johannes (1819-1858)— 
Protestant theologian, studied with 
Frederick Engels at the Elberfeld 
grammar school.—465 
Wich«Ihausen, Peter—Deputy of the Par­
ish of Barmen.—577 
Wieland,  Christoph Martin (1733-1813)— 
German writer of the Enlightenment, 
translator of Shakespeare and ancient 
authors.—394, 411 
Wienfcarg, Ludolf (1802-1872)—German 
writer and critic, member of the 
Young Germany literary group.— 
42, 74, 81, 84, 87, 106, 288, 290, 
421, 465, 472 
Wigand, Otto (1795-1870)—German 
publisher and bookseller, owner of a 
firm in Leipzig, published works by 
radical writers.—331, 332, 340, 342, 
344, 346, 347 

=====第662页=====
640 Name Index 
WM, Ludwig (1807-1882)—German 
writer and critic close to the Young 
Germany literary group.—81, 82, 91, 
422 
WUhelmine—probably the name of the 
wife of the German poet Wülfing 
who wrote an elegy on the occasion 
of her death entitled Wühelmine, 
schönster  aller Namen! —24 
William of Poitiers—see Poitiers, Guillaume 
Winkler, J. Ch. F.—missionary, author 
of a collection of poems entitled 
Harfenklänge. —17 
Winkler, Karl Gottlieb Theodor (pen-
name— Theodor Hell) (1775-1856)— 
German conservative writer and 
journalist, publisher of the  Abend-
Zeitung.—  420,  422, 433, 434 
Wittenstein—owner of a firm in Unter-
Barmen — 427 
Wolf (Wolff), Christian (1679-1754)— 
German philosopher and naturalist, 
economist and jurist.—156 
Abner—a biblical character; also a char­
acter in the tragedies König Saul 
by Karl Gutzkow and Saul by Karl 
Beck.—45, 77 
Achilles—the greatest of the Greek 
heroes in Homer's Iliad.—554 
Achilles—a character in Jean Racine's 
tragedy Iphigénie en Aulide.—50 
Adam (Bib.).—83, 164, 477, 479 
Adrastus (Gr. Myth.)—King of Argos; 
a character in Aeschylus' tragedy 
Seven against Thebes.—572, 573 
Aegeus (Gr. Myth.)—King of Athens, the 
father of Theseus.—553 
Agenor (Gr. Myth.)—King of Phoenicia, 
father of the founder of Thebes, 
Cadmus.—553, 572 
Ahasuerus—the name given by tradi­
tion to the Wandering Jew; a charac­
ter in German folk tales and numerous 
poetic works based on them.—35, 36, 
412, 482 
Alberich (Oberon)—a character in the Ni­
belungenlied, a dwarf who guarded Wülfing, Friedrich Ludwig (b. 1807)— 
German poet.—23 
Wurm, Gustav (1819-1888)—Frederick 
Engels' schoolmate, subsequently a 
philologist.—389, 394, 396, 398, 399, 
410,  417, 437, 445, 450, 453, 463, 
464,  465, 474, 475, 513, 516 
Z 
Zedlitz, Joseph Christian von (1790-
1862)—Austrian romantic poet.— 
421, 422 
Ziegler und Kliphausen, Heinrich Anshelm 
(1663-1696)—German poet, repre­
sentative of aristocratic literature.— 
51 
Zuccalmaglio, Vincenz Jakob von (pen-
name—  Montanus  Eremita) (1806-1876) 
—German poet and researcher of 
legends.—24 
the Nibelungs' treasure and was killed 
by Siegfried.—133 
Amphiaraus (Gr. Myth.)—King of Argos; 
a character in Aeschylus' tragedy Seven 
against Thebes.—572 
Andronicus—the title character in A Story 
of the Slave Andronicus, attributed to 
Gerasimi, the abbot of a Palestinian 
monastery (5th cent.).— 35 
Antigone—daughter of Oedipus, King of 
Thebes; a character in Sophocles' 
tragedies Oedipus at Colonus and 
Antigone.—73 
Aphrodite (Gr. Myth.)—goddess of love 
and beauty.— 24 
Apollo—Greek god of the  arts.—  82 
Arethusa (Gr. Myth.)—a nymph of 
springs.—155 
Argeia (Gr. Myth.)—daughter of Adras­
tus, King of Argos, wife of Polynices; 
a character in Aeschylus' tragedy Seven 
against Thebes.—572 
Argus (Argos) (Gr. Myth.)—a hundred-
eyed monster set to watch  Io.—  553 INDEX OF LITERARY AND MYTHOLOGICAL NAMES 

=====第663页=====
Name Index 641 
Ariadne (Gr. Myth.)—daughter of Minos, 
King of Crete; Theseus' mistress.— 
227, 553 
Arminius—one of the title characters 
in Lohenstein's novel Grossmüthiger 
Feldherr  Arminias. —51 
Arthur—a character in Karl Gutzkow's 
novel Seraphine.—89 
Astharoth—a character in Karl Gutzkow's 
tragedy König Saul.—79 
Athalia—the title character in Jean 
Racine's tragedy.—49 
Baal (Oriental Myth.)—god of the sky, 
sun and fertility; his cult was wide­
spread in Phoenicia, Syria and 
Palestine in the 20th-10th centuries 
B.C.—192 
Banise—the title character in Heinrich 
Ziegler und Kliphausen's novel 
Asiatische Banise.—51 
Belial—the Hebrew name of the 
spirit of evil; one of the biblical names 
of the devil.—249 
Belle Isle, Mademoiselle de—the title char­
acter in the drama by Alexandre 
Dumas père. — 50 
Black Knight—a character in Friedrich 
Schiller's tragedy Die Jungfrau von 
Orleans.—76-77 
Blasedow—the main character in Karl 
Gutzkow's novel Blasedow und seine 
Söhne.— 79, 84, 89, 96, 450 
Busiris (Gr. Myth.)—King of Egypt.— 
279 
Cadmus (Gr. Myth.)—son of Agenor, 
King of Phoenicia, founder of the 
city of Thebes.— 553 
Capaneus (Gr. Myth.)—King of Argos; 
a character in Aeschylus' tragedy Sev­
en against Thebes.—572 
Cardenio—the title character in Karl 
Immermann's tragedy Cardenio und 
Celinde.—449 
Celinde—a character in Karl Gutzkow's 
novel Blasedow und seine Söhne. —89 
Cercyon (Gr. Myth.)—a giant killed by 
Theseus.— 553 
Childe Harold—the title character in 
Byron's poem Childe Harold's  Pil­
grimage.—450 Christ, Jesus (Bib.).—15, 134, 209, 229-
35, 241, 243, 247-49, 251-58, 260, 
261, 263, 327, 400, 412, 415, 416, 
426, 454, 458, 461, 466, 477-79, 485, 
486,  526, 543, 555 
Claudius—a character in the German 
popular book Kaiser Octavianus.—38 
Clemens—a character in the German 
popular book Kaiser Octavianus.—38 
Clio (Gr. Myth.)—the muse of histo­
ry.—24 
Columbus—the title character in Karl 
Werder's tragedy.—538 
Damocles—according to a Greek legend, 
a courtier of the Syracusian tyrant Dio-
nysius (4th cent. B.C.).—151 
Danaus (Danaos) (Gr. Myth.)—King of 
Argos, by whose order his daughters 
killed their husbands.—553 
Daniel (Bib.).—273 
David (Bib.)—King of Israel; a character 
in the tragedies Saul by Karl Beck 
and König Saul by Karl Gutzkow. — 
24, 45, 63, 74, 77-79, 315, 416 
Diana (Rom. Relig.)—goddess of hunt­
ing and chastity; since the 5th century 
B.C.  she was identified with the Greek 
goddess Artemis.—134 
Dionysus (Bacchus) (Gr. and Rom. Relig.) 
—god of wine and fertility.— 229 
Don Carlos—the title character in Schil­
ler's tragedy.—279 
Don Quixote—the title character in 
Cervantes' novel.—38, 78, 79, 278, 
450,  554 
Dorothea—the main character in 
Goethe's poem Hermann und Dorothea. 
—402-03 
Dulcinea del Toboso—a character in Cer­
vantes' novel Don Quixote.—24 
Eckart —according to medieval German 
legends, a devoted servant and trust­
worthy watchman.—137, 464, 468 
Edmund—a character in Karl Gutzkow's 
novel Seraphine.—89 
Elijah (Bib.X—192, 247, 257, 349, 432, 
458 
Ernst—the title character in the 
German popular book Herzog Ernst.— 
35 

=====第664页=====
642 Name Index 
Eteocles (Gr. Myth.)—a son of Oedipus, 
who usurped power in Thebes; a char­
acter in Aeschylus' tragedy Seven 
against Thebes.—572, 573, 574 
Eulenspiegel, Till—a character in German 
folk tales and numerous literary works 
based on them.—34, 36, 390, 394 
£z<*iW (Bib.),—315 
Faust—the title character in a German 
popular book and in Goethe's tragedy; 
a character in Karl Gutzkow's dramatic 
essays Hamlet in Wittenberg.—35, 36, 
72, 73, 395, 412, 414, 427, 481-82, 554 
Fierabras—the title character in a Ger­
man popular book whose plot goes 
back to a medieval French  epic.—  39 
Florens—a character in the German 
popular book Kaiser Octavianus.—37 
Fortuna primigenia (Rom. Myth.)—god­
dess of maternity and creativity.— 224 
Fortunat—the title character in a 
German popular book.—  34, 39 
Ganymede (Class. Myth.)—a beautiful 
boy carried up to Olympus by the 
gods,  Zeus' lover and cup-bearer.—473 
Genovefa—the title character in a Ger­
man popular book.—  34, 37 
George, Saint—mythological dragon-
killer.—192, 526 
Ghismonda—the title character in Karl 
Immermann's tragedy Die Opfer des 
Schweigens. —167 
Gideon (Bib.).—346 
Giselher—a satyrical character in 
Engels' article "Requiem for the Ger­
man Adelszeitung". —67 
Götz von Berlichingen —the title character 
in a drama by Goethe.—465 
Graf von Thai—the title character from 
a ballad by Annette Elisabeth von 
Droste-Hülshof f .—494 
Griseldis—the title character in a German 
popular book, personification of toler­
ance and love.— 37-39, 80 
Gustav —a character in Theodor Mundt's 
novel Madonna. Unterhaltungen mit 
einer Heiligen. — 88 
Haimon (Heymon) —the title character 
in the German popular book Haimonskinder, whose plot goes back 
to a medieval French  epic.—  34, 38, 
395 
Haimon's Children (Haimonskinder)—the 
four sons of Duke Haimon, the title 
character in a German popular book.— 
34, 38, 395 
Hamlet—the title character in Shake­
speare's tragedy and in Karl Gutzkow's 
dramatic essays Hamlet in Wittenberg.— 
44, 72, 76, 79, 85, 397, 449 
Helena—the heroine of a Greek epic 
and of the German popular book Die 
schöne Helena based on it; also a char­
acter in numerous literary adapta­
tions.—37,  394 
Hera (Gr. Relig.)—supreme female 
deity, goddess of clouds, storms, thun­
der and lightning; protectress of mar­
riage and the family; sister and wife 
of Zeus.—573 
Heracles (Hercules) (Class. Myth.)—son of 
Zeus,  who possessed enormous 
strength and courage.—  391,  415, 485, 
553 
Hermes (Gr. Relig.)—pastoral god, pro­
tector of cattle; god of roads, trade, 
gymnastics and eloquence.—118 
Hippomedon (Gr. Myth.)—one of the sev­
en leaders of the expedition against 
Thebes; a character in Aeschylus' 
tragedy Seven against Thebes.—572 
Hirlanda—the title character in a 
German popular book whose plot goes 
back to French folk-lore of the early 
17th century.—37 
Hof er, Andreas—the title character in 
Karl Immermann's tragedy.—448 
Inachus (Gr. Myth.)—founder of the 
town of Argos.—485 
Iphigenia (Gr. Myth.)—daughter of 
King Agamemnon; the title character 
in Jean Racine's tragedy Iphigénie en 
Aulide.—49 
Isaiah (Bib.).—227, 247, 252, 255 
Isidor—one of the main characters 
in Ernst Raupach's tragedy Die Lei­
beigenen, oder Isidor und Olga. —448 
Isolde—the main character in the me­
dieval romance Tristan and Isolde, in 
the German popular book of the same 

=====第665页=====
Name Index 643 
title and in numerous literary adapta­
tions.—38 
James (Bib.).—235, 257, 345, 347 
Janossyk—a robber in Karl Beck's ballad 
Ungarischen Melodien.— 45 
Jason (Gr. Myth.)—the leader of the 
Argonauts' expedition to obtain the 
Golden Fleece.—553 
Jehovah (Bib.).—74, 75 
Job (Bib.).—390 
John Bull—the title character in John 
Arbuthnot's book The History of John 
Bull (18th cent.). His name is often 
used to personify England.—132 
John,  Saint, the Apostle (Bib.).—235, 251, 
258, 261, 262, 264, 315, 327, 344, 
426, 461, 476, 479, 494 
John,  Saint, the Baptist (Bib.).—257, 290 
Jonah (Bib.).—343 
Jonathan—a biblical character; also a 
character in the tragedies Saul by 
Karl Beck and König Saul by Karl 
Gutzkow.— 77-78 
Joseph (Bib.) — son of Jacob, sold by his 
brothers as a slave into Egypt where 
he became the Pharaoh's courtier 
through his wisdom and beauty.— 
426, 454, 457, 458, 466 
Joshua (Bib.).—29, 477 
Judas Iscariot (Bib.).—36, 251 
Judith (Bib.).—77 
Juliet—one of the title characters in 
Shakespeare's tragedy Romeo and 
Juliet.—100 
Lazarus—a character from Robert Hel­
ler's story "Die Schwestern des 
Lazarus".— 432 
Lear—the title character in Shakespeare's 
tragedy King Lear.—79, 415 
Lot—a character in the Old Testament 
(Genesis) who was rescued by God 
from the burning city of Sodom.— 
97 
Loyola—the title character in Eduard 
Duller's novel,— 51 
Lucrezia Borgia—the title character in 
Victor Hugo's drama.—49, 50 
Luke (Bib.).—243, 350, 416, 453, 458, 
466, 476 Magelone—the title character in a Ger­
man popular book.— 37 
Marino Falieri—the title character in 
an unfinished tragedy by Karl Gutz­
kow.— 71, 72 
Mark (Bib.).—350, 476 
Mary (Bib.).—254, 350, 417, 426, 458, 
479 
Matthew (Bib.).—250, 257, 261, 263, 264, 
390, 454, 461, 466, 476 
Melusina—the title character in the 
German popular book Die schöne Me­
lusina.—  34, 37 
Menelaus (Gr. Myth.) — King of Sparta; 
took part in the Trojan War.— 394 
Mephistopheles—one of the names of 
Satan; a character in Goethe's tragedy 
Faust and in Karl Gutzkow's dramatic 
essays Hamlet in Wittenberg.—72, 73, 
129 
Merlin—an enchanter in old Welsh 
sagas;  the title character in Karl Im-
mermann's drama.—167 
Merob—a character in Karl Beck's trag­
edy Soul.—45 
Michael—according to biblical tradition, 
one of the seven archangels.—126, 
344, 350 
Michal—a character in Karl Gutzkow's 
tragedy König Soui. —77, 90 
Michel—a German name personifying 
a maladroit and dull-witted philistine. 
—278 
Minotaur (Gr. Myth.)—fabulous monster 
living on Crete and fed with human 
flesh.—553 
Moab—a character in Karl Beck's tragedy 
Saul.—45 
Moloch—the Sun-god in Carthage and 
Phoenicia, whose worship was accom­
panied by human sacrifices.—45, 
324 
Morgan le Fay (Celtic Myth.)—one of the 
nine fairies protecting the Celts.— 
136 
Morolf (Marcolf)—one of the title char­
acters in the German popular book 
Salomon und Morolf.—34, 36 
Moses (Bib.).—25, 67, 86, 119, 257, 322, 
324, 455 
Münchhausen —the title character in 
Karl Immermann's novel Münchhausen, 

=====第666页=====
644 Name Index 
eine Geschichte in Arabesken. —162, 
167 
Nibelungs— mythological dwarfs who 
possessed a famous treasure; the me­
dieval German epic Nibelungenlied was 
named after them.—75, 132 
Octavianus—the title character in the 
German popular book Kaiser Octavia­
nus and in Ludwig Tieck's comedy.— 
34, 37, 395 
Odysseus—the title character in Engels' 
lost work Odysseus Redivivus.—472, 
488 
Oedipus (Gr. Myth.)—King of Thebes; 
the title character in Sophocles' trag­
edies Oedipus Rex (Tyrannus) and 
Oedipus at Colonus.—23, 96, 572, 573, 
574 
Olga —one of the main characters in 
Ernst Raupach's tragedy Die Leibei­
genen, oder Isidor und Olga. —448 
Ophelia—a character in Shakespeare's 
tragedy Hamlet and in Karl Gutzkow's 
dramatic essays Hamlet in Wittenberg.— 
72 
Pallas Athena (Gr. Myth.)—goddess of 
war; personification of wisdom; protec­
tress of arts and crafts.—  24, 237, 
573 
Pan (Gr. Relig.)—god of pastures and 
woods, protector of shepherds and 
cattle.—95 
Parthenopaeus (Gr. Myth.) — one of the 
seven leaders of the expedition against 
Thebes; a character in Aeschylus' trag­
edy Seven against Thebes.—572 
Patkul—the title character in Karl 
Gutzkow's drama.—292 
Po«i (Bib.).—14, 122, 126, 127, 157, 229, 
235, 243, 257-61, 263, 476 
Pegasus (Gr. Myth.)—a winged horse.— 
506 
Peter (Bib.).—235, 257-58, 261-63, 456, 
542, 544 
Phèdre (Gr. Myth.)—wife of Theseus; 
the title character in Jean Racine's 
tragedy Phèdre. —50 Philipp —a character in Schiller's tragedy 
Don Carlos.—129, 279 
Polynices (Gr. Myth.)—son of Oedipus, 
took part in the war against Thebes; 
a character in Aeschylus' tragedy Sev­
en against Thebes.—572, 573 
Pontus—one of the title characters in the 
German popular book Pontus und Sido-
nia.—39 
Posa, Marquis—a character in Schiller's 
tragedy Don Carlos.—279, 467 
Priam (Gr. Myth.)—King of Troy.— 
558 
Prometheus (Gr. Relig.)—one of the 
titans.—131 
Python (Gr. Myth.)—a huge serpent 
which lived at Delphi and was killed 
by Apollo.—473 
Queen Mab —the title character from a 
lyrical poem by Shelley.—107, 495, 
497 
Reinald—one of the sons of Duke 
Haimon in the German popular book 
Haimonskinder.—3 7 
Roland—the hero of the French epic 
Chanson de Roland.— 192, 389, 415, 
515 
Romeo—one of the title characters in 
Shakespeare's tragedy  Romeo and  Juliet. 
— 100 
Ruy Bias—the title character in Victor 
Hugo's drama.— 50 
Samson—a biblical hero known for his 
supernatural strength and courage.— 
347 
Samuel—a biblical prophet; a character 
in Karl Gutzkow's drama König  Saul.— 
73-78 
Sancho Panza—a character in Cervantes' 
Don Quixote.—450 
Satan—in a number of religions, the 
evil spirit who opposed God.— 229, 
248, 321, 350 
Saturn (Rom. Relig.)—god of sowing.— 
55 
Saul—a biblical character; also the title 
character in the tragedies Saul by Karl 
Beck and König Saul by Karl Gutz­
kow.— 46, 69, 71, 73, 74, 78-79, 90, 
91, 92, 471 

=====第667页=====
Name Index 645 
Savage, Richard—the title character in 
Karl Gutzkow's drama Richard Savage 
oder der Sohn einer Mutter. —71, 73-77, 
80, 91, 102, 103 
Schildbürger —characters in a German 
popular book of the same name, fa­
mous for their stupidity.—  34, 36, 395 
Seraphine—the title character in Karl 
Gutzkow's novel.—89 
Shylock—a character in Shakespeare's 
comedy The Merchant of Venice.— 
129 
Sibyl—one of the women in ancient 
times believed to possess prophetic 
powers.—252, 395 
Siegfried—one of the main characters 
in an ancient German epic and in 
the medieval epic Nibelungenlied; the 
title character in Engels' tragicomedy 
Der gehörnte  Siegfried.— 34, 37, 39, 132, 
135, 136, 394, 415, 428-37, 554 
Sieghard —a character in Engels' tragi­
comedy Der gehörnte Siegfried.—428, 
429 
Siegmuni —father of Siegfried, the hero 
of an ancient German epic and of the 
medieval epic Nibelungenlied. —132 
Siegwart von der Neige —a satirical char­
acter in Engels' article "Requiem for 
the German Adelszeitung". —67 
Siglint—mother of Siegfried, the hero 
of an ancient German epic and of the 
medieval epic Nibelungenlied. —132 
Solomon (Salomon)—a biblical character; 
also one of the title characters in the 
German popular book  Salomon  und Mo-
rolf.—34,  36, 416 
Tannhäuser —a character in German 
folk-lore; the title character of Heine's 
poem.—137 
Tell, Wilhelm— the title character in 
Schiller's drama.—448, 467, 554 
Theoderich von der Neige —a satirical 
character in Engels' article "Requiem 
for the German Adelszeitung". —67-68 
Theophilus—a character in the New Tes­
tament.—458 Theseus (Gr. Myth.)—King of Athens and 
founder of the Athenian state.—553 
Thusnelda —one of the main characters 
in Lohenstein's novel Grossmiithiger 
Feldherr Arminius.—51 
Timothy—according to Christian tradi­
tion,  a disciple and colleague of St. 
Paul.—263 
Tobianus—a character in Karl Gutzkow's 
novel Blasedow und seine Söhne. —450 
Tristan—a character in a medieval epic; 
the main character in the medieval 
romance Tristan and Isolde, in a Ger­
man popular book and in numerous 
literary works based on them.—  37-
39, 167, 445 
Tydeus (Gr. Myth.)—one of the seven 
leaders of the expedition against 
Thebes; a character in Aeschylus' trag­
edy Seven against Thebes.—572 
Uranus (Gr. Myth.)—personification of 
Heaven; husband of the earth-god­
dess,  Ge, father of the Titans, Cy­
clopes and Hecatoncheires, hundred-
armed giants.— 231 
Venus (Rom. Relig.)—goddess of love 
and beauty.—137, 467 
Wahlheim —the title character in Frie­
drich Wilhelm Krug's story Kämpfe und 
Siege des jungen Wahlheim. —25 
Wally —the title character in Karl 
Gutzkow's novel Wally, die Zweiflerin. — 
38, 79, 84, 89, 420 
Wolter, Markgraf —a character in the 
German popular book Griseldis.—88, 
473 
Werner—the title character in Karl 
Gutzkow's drama Werner,  oder Herz und 
Welt.— 80, 292 
Zeruiofc—a character in Karl Gutzkow's 
tragedy König Soul.— 77, 79 
Zeus (Gr. Relig.)—the supreme deity.— 
85, 573 

=====第668页=====
INDEX OF QUOTED 
AND MENTIONED LITERATURE 
WORKS BY FREDERICK ENGELS* 
Alexander Jung, "Lectures on Modern German Literature". 
— Alexander Jung, "Vorlesungen über die moderne Literatur der Deutschen". 
In: Deutsche Jahrbücher für Wissenschaft und Kunst Nos. 160-62, July 1842.— 543 
Ernst Moritz Arndt 
— Ernst Moritz Arndt. In: Telegraph für Deutschland Nos. 2-5, January  1841.—  528 
F. W. Rrummacher's Sermon on Joshua 
— F. W. Krummachers Predigt über Josua. In: Telegraph für Deutschland No. 84, 
May 1839.—446 
German Volksbücher 
— Die deutschen Volksbücher. In: Telegraph für Deutschland Nos. 186,  188-91, 
November 1839.—488 
Karl Beck 
— Karl Beck. In: Telegraph für Deutschland Nos. 202 and 203, December 
1839.—91,  488. 
Letters from Wuppertal 
— Briefe aus dem Wuppertal. In: Telegraph für Deutschland Nos. 49-52, March 
1839;  Nos. 57 and 59, April 1839.—28, 30, 426, 446, 467, 471 
Modern Literary Life 
— Modernes Literaturleben. In: Mitternachtzeitung für gebildete Leser Nos. 51-54, 
March 1840; Nos. 83-87, May 1840.—496, 497 
[Reports from Bremen.] Theatre. Publishing Festival. Literature 
— [Korrespondenz-Nachrichten aus Bremen.] Theater. Buchdruckerfest. 
Literatur. In: Morgenblatt für  gebildete  Leser Nos. 181 and 182, July 1840.—127 
[Reports from Bremen.] An Outing to Bremerhaven 
— [Korrespondenz-Nachrichten aus Bremen.] Eine Fahrt nach Bremerhaven. 
In: Morgenblatt für gebildete Leser Nos. 196-200, August  1841.—  498 
Editions in the language of the original are given only in cases when they were published 
during the author's lifetime.— Ed. 

=====第669页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 647 
Schelling and Revelation. Critique of the Latest Attempt of Reaction Against the Free 
Philosophy 
— Schelling und die Offenbarung. Kritik des neuesten Reaktionsversuchs gegen 
die freie Philosophie, Leipzig, 1842.—295, 543 
Schelling, Philosopher in Christ, or the Transfiguration of Worldly Wisdom into Divine 
Wisdom. For Believing Christians Who Do Not Know the Language of  Philosophy 
— Schelling, der Philosoph in Christo, oder die Verklärung der Weltweisheit 
zur Gottesweisheit. Für gläubige Christen, denen der philosophische Sprach­
gebrauch unbekannt ist, Berlin, 1842.— 543 
The Emperor's  Procession  (a poem) 
— Der Kaiserzug. In: Telegraph für Deutschland No. 23, February  1841.—  517 
To Levin Schücking, June 18, 1840.— 496 
To Levin Schücking, July 2, 1840.—527 
To Marie Engels, January 7, 1839.—523, 529 
To Marie Engels, March 12, 1839.—444 
To Marie Engels, October 29, 1840.—524 
To the Bremen Courier 
— An den Stadtboten. In: Bremisches Unterhaltungsblatt No. 34, April 27, 1839.— 
444 
[Two Sermons by F. W. Krummacher.] 
— [Zwei Predigten von F. W. Krummacher.] In: Telegraph für Deutschland 
No. 149, September 1840.—126 
WORKS BY DIFFERENT AUTHORS 
Acta Sanctorum.—394-95 
Andrea, F. W. Das Wissenswürdigste der Heraldik und der Wappenkunde, Erfurt, 
1842.—352 
Annolied.— 132 
Arndt, E. M. Erinnerungen aus dem äusseren Leben, Leipzig, 1840.—137-50 
Bade, C. Napoleon im Jahre 1813, politisch-militairisch geschildert, 4 Teile, Altona, 
1839-41.—140 
[Bauer, B.] Die Posaune des jüngsten Gerichts über Hegel den Atheisten und Antichristen. 
Ein Ultimatum, Leipzig, 1841.—197, 296, 345-47, 350, 351 
Beck, K. Erklärung. In: Zeitung für die elegante Welt No. 231, November 25, 
1839.—91 
— Der fahrende Poet. Dichtungen, Leipzig, 1838.—43, 71, 91, 449, 467, 468 
— Literatur in Ungarn. In: Zeitung für die elegante Weit Nos.  173-81,  September 5, 
7-9, 11, 12, 14-16, 1837.—82 
— Nächte. Gepanierte Lieder, Leipzig, 1838.—41-44, 91, 449, 467 
— Novellistische Skizzen. In: Zeitung für die elegante Welt Nos. 171-75, September 2, 
3, 5-7, 1839.—43 
— Das Roslein (Gedicht). —45 

=====第670页=====
648 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
— Saul. Trauerspiel in fünf Aufzügen. Erster Aufzug. In: Zeitung für die elegante 
Welt Nos. 216-19, November 4, 5, 7 and 8, 1839.—45, 91, 92 
— Saul. Tragödie in fünf Aufzügen (Bühnenmanuskript), Leipzig, 1840.— 91,92 
— Schlaf wohl (Gedicht). In: Zeitung für die elegante Welt No. 126, June 30, 
1838.—45 
— Die Schöpfung (Gedicht).— 449 
— Stille Lieder, Erstes Bändchen, Leipzig, 1840.—44, 45, 89, 91 
— Eine Träne (Gedicht). —44 
— Ein ungarisches Wachthaus (Ballade). —45 
— Der Zigeunerkönig (Ballade). —45 
Becker, N. Der deutsche Rhein.— 148, 517, 527-28 
Beethoven, L. v.  C-moll  Sinfonie. — 530 
— Es-dur Sinfonie "Eroica". — 530 
Bekenntniss bremischer Pastoren in Sachen der Wahrheit, Bremen, 1840.—156 
Beurmann, E. Deutschland und die Deutschen, Bd. 1-4, Altona, 1838-40.—158, 471 
— Skizzen aus den Hanse-Städten, Hanau, 1836.—158 
— (anon.) Paulus in Bremen. Von einem Candidaten der Theologie aus Stade, Hanau, 
1841.—157 
Bible.—10, 15, 29, 32, 67, 76, 157, 327, 328, 426, 435-37, 453-55, 459, 466 
The Old Testament.—74, 231, 252, 257, 426, 476 
Daniel.— 273 
Isaiah.— 227, 247, 252, 255 
Joshua.— 29 
1 Kings.— 74, 192 
The Pentateuch.—322-24 
Genesis. — 67 
Exodus.— 324 
Deuteronomy.— 324 
Psalms. —116 
The Song of Solomon.—416 
The New Testament.—66, 231, 233, 257, 426, 454 
The Acts of the Apostles.—258-60, 476 
1 Corinthians.—15, 249, 261, 262 
Ephesians.—262 
The Epistles of John.—15, 251, 261 
Galatians.—126 
Hebrews.—476 
John.—15,  251, 261 
2 John.—461 
Jude.— 251 
Luke.—243,  415, 426, 454 
Mark.—426, 454 
Matthew.—229, 250, 257, 263, 264, 390, 461, 466 
1 Peter.—262, 456 
2 Peter.—263 
Philippians.—  229,  253 
The Revelation of St. John.—264 
2 Thessalonians.— 262 
1 Timothy.—263 

=====第671页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 649 
Blum, C. Theater. Dritter  Band:  Schwärmerei nach der Mode. Erziehungs-Resuüate, 
Berlin, 1844.—102, 103 
Boileau-Despréaux, N. Les Satires.—82 
Börne, L. Gesammelte Schriften, 14 Teile, Hamburg, 1829-31, Paris, 1833-34.—288, 
290, 448 
I. und 2. Teil: Dramaturgische Blätter, Hamburg, 1829.—448, 485 
— Das Bild,  Trauerspiel von Houwald. —449 
— Cardenio und Celinde, Trauerspiel von Immermann. —449 
— Über den Charakter des Wilhelm Teil.— 449, 467 
— Hamlet, von Shakespeare. —449 
— Isidor und Olga, Trauerspiel von Raupach, —449 
— Der Leuchtturm, Drama von Houwald. —449 
— Das Trauerspiel in Tyroi, non Immermann. —449 
— Der Wollmarkt, Lustspiel von Clauren. —449 
5. Teil: Schilderungen aus Paris, Hamburg, 1829.—485 
6. Teil: Fragmente und Aphorismen, Hamburg, 1829.—485 
7. Teil: Kritiken, Hamburg, 1829.—485 
9. und 10. Teil: Briefe aus Paris. 1830-1831, Hamburg, 1831.—38, 82, 143, 289, 
485 
II. und 12. Teil: Briefe aus Paris. 1831-1832, Paris, 1833.—38, 82, 143, 289, 485 
13. und 14. Teil: Briefe aus Paris. 1832-1833, Paris, 1834.—38, 82, 143, 289, 485 
— Menzel,  der Franzosenfresser,  Paris, 1837.—43, 137, 472, 481, 485 
Buffon, G. L. L. Discours sur le Style, Paris, 1753.—336 
Bülow-Cummerow, E. G. G. Preussen, seine Verfassung, seine Verwaltung, sein Verhältnis 
zu Deutschland, Berlin, 1842.—271, 366 
Byron, G. N. G. Childe Harold's Pilgrimage.—450 
Calderon de la Barca, Pedro. Comedias. —107 
Camöes, Luiz Vaz de: Os Lusiadas. —445 
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Don Quixote—$8, 78, 79, 450, 554 
Christliches Gesangbuch zur Beförderung öffentlicher und häuslicher Andacht, Bremen, 
1812.-397 
Claudius, M. Rheinweinlied. —508 
Clauren, H. Der Wollmarkt oder das Hotel de Witourg. Lustspiel in vier Aufzügen, 
Dresden und Leipzig, 1826.—449 
ü 
Clausen, J. Ch. H. Pindoros der Lyriker. In: Programm des Gymnasiums, Elberfeld, 
1834.—20 
[Cormenin, L. M.] De la Centralisation, Paris, 1842 (published under the pseudonym 
of Timon).—356 
Cousin, V. Über französische und deutsche Philosophie, Stuttgart und Tübingen, 
1834.—294 
Creizenach, Th. Dichtungen, Mannheim, 1839.—471, 482 
— Gutzkow über Ahasver. In: Zeitung für die elegante Weh No. 189, September 27, 
1838.—412 
— Der schwäbische  Apoll.  Lustspiel in einem Akt. In: Dichtungen, Mannheim, 
1839.—82,  482 
22-384 

=====第672页=====
650 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Cuvier, G. Discours sur les révolutions de la surface du globe, et sur les changemens 
qu'elles ont produits dans le règne animal, Paris et Amsterdam, 1826, 8th ed., 
Paris,  1840.—222 
Dante, A. La Divina Commedia. —28 
Darlegung der Haupt-Resultate aus den wegen der revolutionären Complotte der neueren 
Zeit in Deutschland geführten Untersuchungen. Auf den Zeitabschnitt mit Ende 
Juli 1838. Frankfurt, a. M. [1839].—480 
Descartes, R. Principia philosophiae. —186, 210 
Dies irae... (Requiem aeternam dona eis). —66 
Diez, F. Grammatik der romanischen Sprachen, 2 Teile, Bonn,  1836-38.—  508 
Dingelstedt, F. Ferdinand Freiligrath. Ein Literaturbild. In: Jahrbuch der Literatur, 
1. Jg., Hamburg, 1839.—21 
D[roste-]H[ülshoff], A. E. v. Gedichte, Münster, 1838.—111, 494, 497 
— Der Graf von Thai— 494, 497 
Duller, E. Der Antichrist, Bd. 1-2, Leipzig, 1833.—51 • 
— Grabbe's Leben. In: Grabbe, Christian Dietrich: Die Hermannsschlacht. Drama, 
Düsseldorf, 1838.—413 
— Kaiser und Papst. Roman. In vier Teilen, Leipzig,  1838.—51,  413 
— Kronen und Ketten. Ein historischer Roman, Bd. 1-3, Frankfurt a. M., 1835.— 
51, 413 
— Loyola, Bd. 1-3, Frankfurt a. M.,  1836.—51,  413 
— Die Witteisbacher. Balladen, München, 1831.—413 
Eichhoff,  K. und Karl Chr. Beltz. Lateinische Schulgrammatik mit Rücksicht auf die 
neuere Gestaltung der deutschen Sprachlehre für die unteren und mittleren Gymna­
sialklassen und für Progymnasien  bearbeitet,  Elberfeld, 1837.— 20 
Elias,  W. Glaube und Wissen, Bremen, 1839.—495 
Ewich, J. J. Human, der Lehrer einer niederen und höheren Volksschule, in seinem Wesen 
und Wirken, Theil 1-2, Wesel, 1829.—18 
Feuerbach, L. Das Wesen des Christentums, Leipzig, 1841.—197, 219, 295, 345 
Fouqué, L. M. Vorwort an unsere Leser. In: Zeitung für den Deutschen Adel No. 1, 
January l, 1840.—68 
Freiligrath, F. Gedichte, Stuttgart und Tübingen, 1838.—42, 51, 68 
— Werke in 9 Bdn., Berlin, Leipzig, Knaur (n. d.).— 22, 42 
— Freistuhl zu Dortmund (Gedicht). — 51 
— Das malerische und romantische Westphalen, Barmen-Leipzig, 1839 (2. Lfg. 
1840).—100 
Goethe, J. W. v. Sämtliche Werke in vierzig Bänden, Stuttgart und Tübingen, 
1840.—520 
— Fous«. Der Tragödie erster und zweiter Teil.— 35, 73, 88, 323, 412 
— Für junge Dichter. —394 
— Der Gott und die Bajadere. —138 
— Götz von Berlichingen mit der eisernen Hand. —465 
— In allen guten Stunden (Bundeslied). —473 
— Mignon. —8 
— Noch ein Wort für junge Dichter. —394 

=====第673页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 651 
— Reineke Fuchs.— 162 
— Wandrers Nachtlied.— 397 
— Die Wahlverwandtschaften. —520 
[Goldmann, K. E.] Die europäische Pentarchie, Leipzig, 1839.— 54 
Görres, J. Dt« teutschen Volksbücher. Nähere Würdigung der schönen Historien-, 
Wetter- und Arzneybüchlein, welche theils innerer Werth, theils Zufall, Jahrhun­
derte hindurch bis auf unsere Zeit erhalten hat, Heidelberg,  1807.—  33, 38 
Gottfried von Strassburg. Tristan und Isolde. —38 
Grillparzer, F. Weh' dem, der lügt! Lustspiel in fünf Aufzügen, Wien, 1840.—491 
Grimm, Brüder. Kinder- und Haus-Märchen, Bd. 1-3, Berlin, 1812-22.—96 
[Grimm, J.] Jacob Grimm über seine Entlassung, Basel, 1838.— 389 
Grimm, W. Die Deutsche Heldensage, Göttingen, 1829.—133 
Grün, A. Apostasie (Gedicht). In: Zeitung für die elegante Welt No. 28, February 8, 
1838.—94 
[Grün, K.] Buch der Wanderungen. Ostsee und Rhein, Cassel und Leipzig, 1839 
(published under the pseudonym of Ernst von der Haide). —483 
Gutzkow, K. Blasedow und seine Söhne. Komischer Roman, 3 Teile, Stuttgart, 1838.— 
79, 84, 89, 96, 450 
— Hamlet in Wittenberg. Dramatische Umrisse. In: Skizzenbuch, Cassel und Leipzig, 
1839.-72, 85 
— Julius Mosens Ahasver (a review). In: Telegraph für Deutschland No. 124, 
August 1838.—411-12 
— König Saul. Trauerspiel in fünf Aufzügen, Hamburg, 1839.—71-79, 90, 471 
— Literarische Elfenschicksale. Ein Märchen ohne Anspielung. In: Telegraph für 
Deutschland Nos. 31, 32, 35, 36 and 65-68, February and April 1838.—87 
— Die literarischen Elfen. Ein Märchen ohne Anspielung. In: Skizzenfruch, Cassel 
und Leipzig, 1839.—87 
— Marino Falieri. Dramatische Studie. In: Skizzenbuch, Cassel und Leipzig, 
1839.—72 
— Patkul. Ein politisches Trauerspiel in 5 Aufzügen. In: Dramatische Werke von 
Karl Gutzkow, Leipzig, 1842-57.—292 
— Zur Philosophie der  Geschichte,  Hamburg, 1836.—47 
— Richard Savage oder: Der Sohn einer Mutter (published under the pseudonym 
of L.  Falk).— 71, 73, 80, 91, 102, 103 
— Seraphine. Roman, Hamburg, 1837.—89 
— Sfcizzen&uch, Cassel und Leipzig, 1839.—72, 471 
— Tagebuch aus Berlin. Abschnitt VI. In: Telegraph für Deutschland No. 97, 
June 1840.—496, 497 
— Vergangenheit und Gegenwart. 1830-1838. In: Jahrbuch der Literatur, Hamburg, 
1839.—71,  84, 90, 422 
— Wally, die Zweiflerin. Roman, Mannheim, 1835.—38, 72, 79, 84, 420 
— Werner, oder Herz und Welt. Schauspiel in fünf Aufzügen. In: Dramatische 
Werke von Karl Gutzkow, Leipzig, 1842-57.—80 
Haller, K. L. v. Restauration der Staats-Wissenschaft oder Theorie des natürlich-geselligen 
Auslands; der Chimäre des  künstlich-bürgerlichen  entgegengesetzt,  Bd. 1-6, Winterthur, 
1816-34.—361 
22* 

=====第674页=====
652 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Halm, Fr. Griseldis. Dramatisches Gedicht in fünf Akten, Wien, 1837.—80 
Hantschke, J. C. L. Hebräisches Übungsbuch für Schulen. In 2 Abt. durchaus praktisch 
eingerichtet. Mit Vorrede von G. B. Winer, Leipzig,  1823.—  20 
Hegel, G. F. W. Werke, Berlin, 1831-45.—195 
— Encyclopädie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse, Bd. 6, Berlin, 
1833.—143,  183, 187 
— Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts, oder Naturrecht und Staatswissenschaft 
im Grundrisse, Bd. 8, Berlin, 1833.—196 
— Phänomenologie des Geistes, Bd. 2, Berlin, 1832.—199, 217 
— Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der Philosophie, Bd. 13-15, Berlin, 1833-36.— 
183, 214 
— Vorlesungen über die Philosophie der  Geschichte,  Bd. 9, Berlin, 1837.—486, 490 
— Vorlesungen über die Philosophie der Religion, Bd. 11-12, Berlin, 1832.—196 
Heine, H. Sämmtliche Werke, Bd. 1-7, Leipzig und Wien. — 21 
— Reisebilder, Bd. 3.—21 
— Der Salon, Bd. 3.—21 
— Der Schwabenspiegel.  In: Jahrbuch der Literatur, Hamburg, 1839.—42, 90 
— Der Tannhäuser. Eine Legende. —137 
— Über Ludwig Börne, Hamburg, 1840.— 291 
Heller, R. Die Schwestern des Lazarus. In: .Rosen. Eine Zeitschrift für die gebildete 
WeU Nos. 1-35, January  1-February  15, 1839.—432 
Hey, W. Erzählungen aus dem Leben Jesu, für die Jugend dichterisch bearbeitet. 
(Zu Olivier's Volksbilderbibel), Hamburg, 1838.—23 
— Fünfzig Fabeln für Kinder, mit Bildern..., Hamburg,  1833.—  23 
— Noch fünfzig Fabeln für Kinder, Hamburg, 1837.— 23 
Hinrichs, H. F. W. [A review of Bruno Bauer's book] Die Posaune des jüngsten 
Gerichts über Hegel den Atheisten und Antichristen. Ein Ultimatum, Leipzig, 1842. 
In: Jahrbücher  für wissenschaftliche  Kritik Nos. 52-55, March 1842.—296 
Homer, Iliad.—35, 558 
Der hömere Siegfried. Eine wunderschöne Historie von dem gehörnten Siegfried. Was 
wunderliche Ebentheuer dieser theure Ritter ausgestanden, sehr denkwürdig und mit 
Lust zu lesen. Aus dem Französischen ins Teutsche übersetzt, und von neuem wieder 
aufgelegt. Gedruckt in diesem Jahre, Cöln (n. d.). — 34, 37 
Houwald, E. v. Das  Bild.  Trauerspiel in fünf Akten, Leipzig, 1821.—449 
— Der Leuchtthurm. Die Heimkehr. Zwei Trauerspiele, Leipzig, 1821.—449 
Hüllstett, G. K. A. Sammlung ausgewählter Stücke aus den Werken deutscher Prosaiker 
und Dichter, zum 'Erklären und mündlichen Vortragen für die unteren und mittleren 
Klassen von Gymnasien, 2 Teile, Düsseldorf, 1830-31.—413 
Immermann, K. Andreas Hofer, der Sandwirt von Passeyer. Ein Trauerspiel, 3 Bde, 
Düsseldorf, 1835.— See Das Trauerspiel in Tyrol. 
— Cardenio und Celinde. Trauerspiel in fünf Aufzügen, Berlin, 1826.—449 
— Die Epigonen, Düsseldorf, 1836.—124, 162, 167 
— Ghism,onda —see Die Opfer des Schweigens 
— MemoroWiien, Erster Teil, Hamburg, 1840.—161-69 
— Merlin. Eine Mythe, Düsseldorf, 1832.—167 

=====第675页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 653 
— Münchhausen. Eine Geschichte in Arabesken, 4 Teile, Düsseldorf, 1838-39.— 
162, 167 
— Di« Opfer des Schweigens. Trauerspiel in fünf Aufzügen. In: Taschenbuch 
dramatischer Originalen, Leipzig, 1839.—167 
— Das Trauerspiel in Tyrol. Ein dramatisches Gedicht in fünf Aufzügen, Ham­
burg, 1828.—449 
— Tristan und Isolde. Ein Gedicht in Romanzen, Düsseldorf, 1841.—167 
Jacoby, F. C. J. Kampf und Sieg, Regensburg, 1840.—63-65 
Jacoby, J. Mein« weitere Vertheidigung wider die gegen mich erhobene Beschuldigung 
der Majestätsbeleidigung und des frechen, unehrerbietigen Tadels des Landesgesetzes, 
Zürich und Winterthur, 1842.—305, 307-09 
— Vier Fragen beantwortet von einem Ostpreussen, Mannheim,  1841.—  305, 307-09 
Jung, A. Briefe über die  neueste  Literatur. Denkmale literarischen Verkehrs, Hamburg, 
1837.—285 
— Königsberg in Preussen und di« Extreme des dortigen Pietismus, Braunsberg, 
1840.—285 
— Vorlesungen über die moderne Literatur der Deutschen, Danzig, 1842.— 284-97 
Kant, I. Zum ewigen Frieden. Ein philosophischer Entwurf, Königsberg, 1795.— 
69 
Knapp, M. A. Evangelischer Liederschatz für Kirche und Haus, Bd. 1-2, Stuttgart und 
Tübingen, 1837.—398 
Knebel, H. Französische (Schul-) Grammatik für Gymnasien und Progymnasien, Koblenz, 
1834 (2. Aufl., 1836).—18 
Koppen, C. F. Friedrich der Grosse und seine Widersacher. Eine Jubelschrift. Meinem 
Freunde Karl Heinrich Marx aus Trier gewidmet, Leipzig, 1840.— 345 
Koran. —454 
Köster, H. Kurze Darstellung der Dichtungsarten. In: Neunter Bericht über die höhere 
Stadtschule in Barmen, Barmen, 1837.—19 
K[östlin],  R. Die deutschen Dichter und ihr Pubiifcum. In: Europa. Chronik der gebildeten 
Welt, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1840.—162 
Kreutzer, K. Das Nachtlager von Granada. Romantische Oper in zwei Akten, Wien, 
1834.—400 
Krug, F. W.  Poetische  Erstlinge und prosaische Reliquien, Barmen,  1831.—  25 
— Kämpfe und Siege des jungen Wahlheim oder Lebensbilder aus dem Reiche des 
Wahren, Guten und Schönen, 1. Bändchen, Elberfeld, 1833.—25 
Krummacher, F. A. Parabeln, Duisburg, 1809.—12, 106 
Krummacher, F. W. Das letzte Gericht. Gastpredigt gehalten am 12. Juli 1840 vor 
der St. Ansgarü-Gemeine zu Bremen. Bremen, 1840.—121, 126 
— Paulus kein Mann nach dem Sinne unsrer Zeit. Predigt, Bremen, 1840.— 
121, 126 
— Theologische Replik an Herrn Doctor Paniel in Bremen, Elberfeld, 1840.—128, 
155 
Kruse, C. A. Grundregeln der englischen Aussprache, nach Waiher's System, Elberfeld, 
1837.—19 

=====第676页=====
654 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Kühne, F. G. Klosternovellen, 2 Bde., Leipzig, 1838.—91 
— Eine Quarantäne im Irrenhause. Novelle aus den Papieren eines Mondsteiners, 
Leipzig, 1835.—50, 89-90 
— Weibliche und männliche Charaktere, 2 Teile, Leipzig, 1838.—42, 50, 81, 88 
— (anon.) Gutikow's neueste Romane. In: Zeitung für die elegante Welt Nos. 192 
and 193, October 1 and 2, 1838.—90 
— (anon.) Deutsche Lyrik. Karl Beck, Ferdinand Freiligrath. In: Zeitung für die 
elegante Welt Nos. 223 and 224, November 13 and 15, 1838.—42 
Langewiesche, W. Der ewige Jude. Didaktische Tragödie, Iserlohn, 1831 (published 
under the pseudonym of Jemand,  W.). — 23 
Laube, H. Geschichte der deutschen Literatur, Bd. 1-4, Stuttgart, 1839-40.— 286 
— Reisenovellen, Bd. 1-4, Mannheim, 1834-36.—411 
— Neue Reisenovellen, Bd. 1-2, Mannheim, 1837.—411 
Leben und Thaten des grossen Helden Heinrich des Löwen, Herzog zu Braunschweig, 
Einbeck.— 35 
Lenau, N. Faust. Ein Gedicht, Stuttgart und Tübingen, 1836.—508 
Leo,  H. Geschichte der Gesundheit und der Krankheiten von Dr. Joh. Mich. Leupoldt, 
Erlangen, 1842. In: Evangelische Kirchen-Zeitung Nos. 36 and 37, May 4 and 7, 
1842.—281-83 
— Die Hegelingen. Actenstücke und Belege zu der s. g. Denunciation der ewigen 
Wahrheit, Halle, 1838.—64, 196, 270, 452, 489 
— Lehrbuch der Universalgeschichte, zum Gebrauch in höheren Unterrichtsanstalten, 
Bd. 1-6, Halle, 1835-44.—345 
— Sendschreiben an J. Görres, Halle, 1838.—452 
Leo,  L. Miserere (Achtstimmig im A-capella-Stil), 1739.—474 
Le Sage, A. R. Le Diable boiteux (1707).—547 
Lessing, G. E. Briefe, antiquarischen Inhalts, 2 Teile, Berlin, 1768-69.— 82 
Leupoldt, J. M. Geschichte der Gesundheit und der Krankheiten, Erlangen, 1842.—281 
Lieder eines heimgegangenen Freundes, Elberfeld,  1839.—  30-31 
Lieth, C. L. T. Gedichte für das erste Jugend-Alter, zur Bildung des Herzens und 
Geistes. Aus Teutschlands besten Dichterwerken für Schule und Haus gesammelt, 
T. 1-2, Crefeld, 1834-35.—23 
Lohenstein, D. C. v. Grossmüthiger Feldherr Arminius oder Herrmann, Als Ein 
tapfferer Beschirmer der deutschen Freiheit. Nebst seiner Durchlauchtigen Thussnel-
da, Leipzig, 1689-90.—51 
[Ludwig I. von Bayern.] Walhalla's Genossen, geschildert durch König Ludwig den 
Ersten von Bayern, den Gründer Walhalla's, München, 1842.— 353 
Ludwigslied. —42 
Luther, M. Ein' feste Burg ist unser Gott.... —404 
Lyser, J. P. Episoden. Karl Beck als Dramatiker. In: Allgemeine Theater-Chronik 
No. 143, November 25, 1839.—45 
Mallet [F. L.]. Vorwort. In: Bremer Kirchenbote Nos. 1 and 2, January 12 and 19, 
1840.—491 

=====第677页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 655 
Marbach, G. O. An das gesammte deutsche Volk. In: Intelligenzblatt zu den "Halli­
schen  Jahrbüchern" No. 1, 1838.—33 
— Deutsche Volksbücher, Leipzig, 1838-39.—33, 34, 36, 37, 39 
— Geschichte  von Griseldis und dem Markgrafen Walter, Leipzig, 1838 
— Alte und neue Lieder in Leid und Lust, Leipzig, 1838 
— Geschichte  von der edlen und  schönen  Melusina, Leipzig, 1838 
— Der Schildbürger  seltsame,  abendteuerliche,  ungehörte  und  bischer unbeschriebene  Ge­
schichten und Taten, Leipzig, 1838 
— Geschichte von der schönen Magelone und dem Ritter Peter mit den Silbernen 
Schlüsseln, Leipzig, 1838 
— Geschichte  vom Kaiser Octavianus, Leipzig, 1838 
— Geschichte  von den sieben  Schwaben,  Leipzig, 1838 
— Geschichte  von der heiligen Pfalzgräfin Genovefa, Leipzig, 1838 
— Geschichte won den vier Heymonskindern; Geschichte von dem gehörnten Siegfried, 
Leipzig, 1838 
— Geschichte von den drei Schwestern. Geschichte von den drei Rolandsknappen, 
Leipzig, 1838 
— Eulenspiegel, Leipzig, 1839 
— Tristan und Isolde, Leipzig, 1839 
[Marggraff, H.] Deutschland'* jüngste Literatur und Kulturepoche. Charakteristiken 
von Hermann Marggraff, Leipzig, 1839.— 88 
Marheineke, Ph. Einleitung in die öffentlichen Vorlesungen über die Bedeutung der 
Hegeischen Philosophie in der christlichen Theologie. Nebst einem Separatvotum über 
B. Bauers Kritik der evangelischen  Geschichte,  Berlin, 1842.— 270 
— Zur Kritik der Schellingschen Offenbarungsphilosophie, Berlin, 1843. Schluss 
der öffentlichen Vorlesungen über die Bedeutung der Hegeischen Philosophie in der 
christlichen Theologie, Berlin, 1843.—270 
Märklin, Chr. Darstellung und Kritik des modernen Pietismus. Ein wissenschaftlicher 
Versuch, Stuttgart, 1839.—460 
Marlow, F. Faust. Ein dramatisches Gedicht in drei Abschnitten, Leipzig, 1839.— 
427 
Marseillaise.— 148, 335 
Mendelssohn-Bartholdy, F. Paulus. Oratorium. — 523 
[Menzel, W.] Wally, die Zweiflerin. Roman von Karl Gutzkow. Mannheim. Löwenthal, 
1835.  In: Literatur-Blatt. Beilage zum Morgenblatt für gebildete Stände Nos. 93 
and 94, September 11 and 14, 1835.—420-21 
Meyen, E. Heinrich Leo, der verhallerte Pietist. Ein Literaturbrief. Allen Schülern 
Hegel's gewidmet, Leipzig,  1839.—  345 
— [A review of] Vorlesungen über die moderne Literatur der  Deutschen  von Alexander 
Jung. In: Rheinische Zeitung Nos.  149-51,  May 29-31,  1842.—296, 346 
Mosen, J. Ahasver. Episches Gedicht, Dresden und Leipzig,  1838.—  23, 411 
[Mozart, W. A.] Die Zauberflöte. Oper in zwei Aufzügen von Wolfgang Amadeus 
Mozart, Text von Emmanuel Schikaneder (1791).—400, 471 
Mügge, Th. Toussaint. Ein Roman, 4 Teile, Stuttgart, 1840.—332 
Müller, J. Di« christliche Lehre von der Sünde. —345 

=====第678页=====
656 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Münch, £. Erinnerungen, Lebensbilder und Studien aus den ersten sieben und dreissig 
Jahren eines teutschen Gelehrten, mit Rückblicken auf das öffentliche, politische,  intel­
lektuelle und sittliche Leben von 1815 bis 1835 in der Schweiz, in Teutschland und 
den Niederlanden, Bd. 1-3, Carlsruhe, 1836-38.—86 
Mundt, Th. Görres und die katholische Weltanschauung. In: Der Freihafen, 2. Heft, 
Altona, 1838.—87 
— Die Komödie der Neigungen. In: Der Delphin, 1839. Ein Almanach, herausge­
geben von Theodor Mundt, 2. Jg., Altona [1839].—85 
— Madonna. Unterhaltung mit einer Heiligen, Leipzig, 1835.—85-86, 88, 286, 292 
— Moderne Lebenswirren. Briefe und Zeitabenteuer eines Salzschreibers, Leipzig, 
1834.—85 
— Spaziergänge und Weltfahrten, Bd. 1-3, Altona, 1838-39.—85, 88, 411 
— (anon.) Lebenserinnerungen von Münch. In: Der Freihafen, 2. Heft, Altona, 
1838.—86 
Neander, A. Das Leben Jesu Christi in seinem geschichtlichen Zusammenhange und 
seiner  geschichtlichen  Entwickelung, Hamburg, 1837.—486 
Neue Eintracht....— 160 
Der Nibelunge Not.— 132 
Paniel, K. F. W. Drei Sonntagspredigten, mit Bezug auf eine besondere Veranlassung, 
am 12., 19. und 26. Juli 1840 gehalten, Bremen, 1840.—127-28 
— Unverholene Beurtheilung der von dem Herrn Pastor Dr. philos. Krummacher von 
Elberfeld, zur Vertheidigung seiner Bremischen  Verfluchungssache  herausgegebenen, 
sogenannten "Theologischen Replik", Bremen, 1840.—128, 155 
Petrarca, F. Canzoniere. —172 
Platen, A. v. Gesammelte Werke. In Einem Band, Stuttgart und Tübingen, 1839.— 
54 
— Gedichte aus dem ungedruckten Nachlasse des Grafen August von Platen-HalUr-
münde. Als Anhang zu den bei Cotta erschienenen Gedichten Platens, 
Strassburg, 1839 (2. Aufl. 1841).—54 
— An Karl den Zehnten (Ode). — 54 
— Der romantische Oedipus. Lustspiel in 5 Akten (1828). In: Gesammelle Werke. 
In Einem Band, Stuttgart und Tübingen, 1839.—23, 96 
Poema del Cid.— 142 
Pol, J. Gedichte, Heedfeld, 1837.—24 
Prutz, R. E. Der Rhein. Gedicht, Leipzig, 1840.—528 
Püttmann, H. Die Düsseldorfer Malerschule und ihre Leistungen seit der Errichtung 
des Kunstvereines im Jahre 1829. Ein Beitrag zur modernen Kunstgeschichte, 
Leipzig, 1839.—497 
— Chatterton. Erster Theil, Leben des Dichters; Zweiter Theil. Dichtungen, Bar­
men,  1840.—497 
— [A review of] F. Freiligrath, Gedichte. In: Abendzeitung (Dresden) No. 19, March 
6, 1839.—22 
Raumer, F. v. Geschichte der Hohenstaufen und ihrer  Zeit,  Bd. 1-6, Leipzig, 1823-
25.—508 

=====第679页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 657 
Raupach, E. Die Fürsten Chawansky. Eine dramatische Dichtung. Die Leibeigenen, 
oder Isidor und Olga. Trauerspiel in fünf Acten, Wien, 1828.—449 
Richter, H. und W. Erklärte Haus-Bibel, oder allgemein verständliche Auslegung der 
ganzen heiligen Schrift alten und neuen Testaments, nach vielen englischen, deutschen 
u. a. Auslegern bearbeitet, Bd. 1-6, Barmen und Schwelm, 1834-40.—13 
[Riedel, C] v. Schellings religionsgeschichtliche Ansicht, nach Briefen aus München. 
Mit einer vergleichenden Zugabe: Peter  Feddersen  Stuhr über  Urgeschichte  und Mytho­
logie, und einem Vorberichte über v. Schellings jüngste literarische Fehden, Berlin, 
1841.—185 
Rotteck, C. v. Allgemeine Weltgeschichte für alle Stände, von den frühesten Zeiten bis 
zum Jahre 1831, mit Zugrundelegung seines grösseren Werkes, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 
1833.—493 
[Rückert, F.] Fünf Märlein zum Einschläfern für mein Schwesterlein. In: Gesammelte 
Gedichte von Fr. Rückert, Bd. 1-6, Erlangen, 1834-38, Bd. 1.—23 
Rüge, A. Friedrich von  Florencourt  und die Kategorieen der politischen Praxis. Politische, 
kirchliche und litterarische Zustände in Deutschland. Ein journalistischer Beitrag 
zu den Jahren 1838 und 1839, von Friedrich von Florencourt. Leipzig, 1840. 
In: Hallische Jahrbücher Nos. 281 and 282, November 23 and 24, 1840.—142 
— [A review of] Königsfcerg in Preussen und die Extreme des dortigen Pietismus non 
Dr. Alex. Jung. Braunsoerg 1840. In: Deutsche Jahrbücher für Wissenschaft und 
Kunst Nos. 153-55, December 27-29, 1841.—285 
— Der Novellist. Eine Geschichte in acht Dutzend Denkzetteln aus dem Taschenbuche 
des Helden, Leipzig, 1839.—345 
Runkel, M. Elberfeld. In: Elberfelder Zeitung No. 101, April 12, 1839.—27 
— Zu Grabbe's Bildniss. Gedicht. In: Rheinisches Odeon, 2. Jg., Düsseldorf, 
1838.—27 
Schelling's Vorlesungen in Berlin. Darstellung und Kritik der Hauptpunkte derselben... 
von Dr. J. Frauenstädt, Berlin, 1842.—182, 198 
Schifflin, Ph. Anleitung zur Erlernung der  französischen  Sprache,  1.Cursus, 3. verb. Aufl., 
Elberfeld, 1839; 2. und 3. Cursus, Elberfeld, 1833.—18 
Schiller, F. v. Don Carlos.— 129 
— Die Götter Griechenlands. —16, 33 
— Die Jungfrau von Orleans. —77 
— Piccolomini. —199 
— Die Räuber.— 449, 465 
— Der Taucher. —116 
— Wilhelm Teil.— 448 
— Die Worte des Glaubens. —397 
Schubarth, K. E. Ueber die Unvereinbarkeit der  Hegel'schen  Staatslehre mit dem obersten 
Lebens- und Entwickelungsprinzip des Preussischen Staats, Breslau, 1839.—  66, 453 
Schücking, L. Gedichte von Annette Elisabeth D... H... In: Telegraph für  Deutschland  No. 
170, October 1840.—494 
— Gedichte non Shelley und Coleridge. In: Blätter zur Kunde der Literatur des 
Auslands No. 68-69, June 7, 1840.—497 
Schumacher, B. G. Heil Dir im Siegerkranz.... —144-45 

=====第680页=====
658 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Schwab, G. Buch der schönsten Geschichten und Sagen für Alt und Jung wiedererzählt, 
2 Teile, Stuttgart, 1836-37.—34 
Teil 1: 
Der gehörnte Siegfried 
Die schöne Magelone 
Der arme Heinrich 
Hirlanda 
Genovefa 
Das Schloss in der Höhle Xa Xa 
Griseldis 
Robert der Teufel 
Die Schildbürger 
Teil II: 
Kaiser Octavianus 
Die vier Heymonskinder 
Die schöne Melusina 
Herzog Ernst 
Fortunat und seine Söhne 
Shakespeare, W. Hamlet.— 72, 79, 397, 449 
— King Lear. —79 
— A Midsummer Night's Dream.—100 
— Romeo and Juliet.—100 
Shelley, P. B. Queen Mab.— 107, 495, 497 
— Sensitive Plant.—497 
Simrock, K. v. Deutsche Volksbücher nach den ächtesten Ausgaben hergestellt, Berlin, 
1839.—33,  39 
— Salomon und Morolf 
— Eine schöne merkwürdige Historie des heiligen Bischofs Gregories auf dem Stein 
genannt 
Smitt, F. v. Geschichte des Polnischen Aufstandes und Krieges in den Jahren 1830 und 
1831.  Nach authentischen Quellen dargestellt, 3 Teile, Berlin, 1839.—471 
Soltwedel, A. Hanseatische Briefe. In: Der Freihafen, 3. und 4. Heft, 1839, und 
1. Heft, 1840.—158 
Soltyk, R. Polen und seine Helden im letzten Freiheitskampfe. Nebst einem kurzen 
Abriss der polnischen Geschichte seit ihrem Beginne bis zum Jahre 1830, 
Bd. 1-2, Stuttgart, 1834.—471 
— (anon.) Polen, geographisch und historisch geschildert. Mit einer vollständigen 
Geschichte der Jahre 1830 und 1831. Von einem Augenzeugen. Zwei 
Teile in einem Band, Stuttgart, 1834.—471-72 
Sophocles. Antigone.—73 
Stabat mater dolorosa.—405, 523, 530 
Stier, R. Christliche Gedichte, Basel, 1825.—16 
Strauss, D. F. Charakteristiken und Kritiken. Eine Sammlung zerstreuter Aufsätze 
aus den Gebieten der Theologie, Anthropologie und Aesthetik, Leipzig, 1839.— 
486, 490 
— Die christliche Glaubenslehre in ihrer geschichtlichen Entwicklung und im Kampfe 
mit der modernen Wissenschaft, Bd. 1-2, Tübingen und Stuttgart,  1840-41.— 
197, 286, 526 

=====第681页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 659 
— Das Leben Jesu, kritisch bearbeitet, Bd. 1-2, Tübingen, 1835-36 (4. Aufl. 
1840).—196, 219, 455, 486, 526, 527 
Tafel— 160 
[Thiersch, B.] Ich bin ein Preusse.... In: Lieder und Gedichte des Dr. Bernhard 
Thiersch, von seinen Freunden in und bei Halberstadt für sich herausgegeben, 
Halberstadt, 1833.—97 
Tholuck, A. Die Glaubwürdigkeit der evangelischen Geschichte, zugleich eine Kritik des 
Lebens Jesu von Strauss, für theologische  und nicht  theologische  Leser  dargestellt,  2. Aufl., 
Hamburg, 1838.—486 
[Tieck, L.] Kaiser Octavianus. In zwei Teilen. In: Ludwig Tieck's Schriften, Bd. 1, 
Berlin, 1828.—37 
Tiele, J. N. Sendschreiben an Herrn Dr. theol. et philos. Paniel, Pastor zu St. Ansgarii 
in Bremen in Bezug auf dessen drei am 12. 19. 26. Juli 1840 gehaltene Sonntags-
Predigten, Bremen [1840].—127 
Unpietistische Reime, erbaulich und gut zu lesen für Jedermann. Erste Gabe, Bremen, 
1841.—157 
Venedey, J. Preussen und Preussenthum, Mannheim, 1839.—480, 484 
Volksbücher.— 32-40, 394, 402, 412, 488 
Ahasver —see Der ewige Juge 
Eulenspiegel.— 34, 36, 395 
Der einige Jude.— 35, 36, 482 
Faust.— 35, 36, 395, 412, 481-82 
Fierabras. —39 
Fortunat.— 34, 38 
Genovefa.— 34, 37 
Glücksrad. —38 
Griseldis.— 37-39 
Die Haimonskinder (Heymonskinder). — 34, 38, 395 
Heinrich der Löwe (see also Leben und Thaten). — 34, 35 
Helena.— 37, 395 
Herzog Ernst. —35 
Hirlanda. —37 
Hundertjähriger Kalender. —38 
Kaiser Octavianus.—  34, 37, 395 
Leben und Thaten des grossen Helden Heinrich des Löwen, Herzog zu Braunsc/iweig, 
Einbeck.— 34, 35 
Magelone. —37 
Melusina. —34, 37 
Der Pf äff von Kaienberge. —36 
Pontus und Sidonia. —39 
Solomon und Morolf. —34, 36 
Die Schildbürger.— 34, 36, 395 
SioyHenmeissagungen. —252, 395 
Die Sieben Schwaben. — 36 
Siegfried.— 34, 37, 39, 135, 394 
Spielmann. —464 

=====第682页=====
660 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Traumbuch. —38 
Der treue Eckart. —464 
Tristan und Isolde (Tristan und Isolde).— 37-39, 445 
Der wilde Jäger. —482 
Walesrode, L. Glossen und Randzeichnungen zu Texten aus unserer Zeit. Vier öffentliche 
Vorlesungen, gehalten zu Königsberg, 2. Aufl., Königsberg, 1842.— 277-80 
[Weber, W. E.] Die Verfluchungen. Im Interesse denkender Christen von einem 
Anonymus des Bremischen Bürgerfreundes, Bremen, 1840.—127, 157 
Weisse, Ch. H. Die evangelische Geschichte kritisch und philosophisch  bearbeitet,  Bd. 1-2, 
Leipzig, 1838.—466 
Werder, K. Columbus. Trauerspiel. — 538 
[Wieland, Ch. U.]S£KPATH IMAINOMENOSoder die Dialogen des Diogenes von 
Sinope. Aus einer alten Handschrift, Leipzig, 1770.— 394 
Wienbarg, L. Die Dramatiker der Jetztzeit, 1. Heft, Altona,  1839.—81,  471 
— Ludwig Uhland als Dramatiker. In: Die Dramatiker der Jetztzeit. —42, 74 
Wihl, L. Erklärung. In: Zeitung für die elegante Welt No. 102, May 28, 1839.—91 
Winkler, J. Ch. F. Harfenklänge, bestehend in einer metrischen Übersetzung und 
Erläuterung von 51 ausgewählten Psalmen, und in einer Auswahl von evange­
lischen Gedichten und Liedern, nebst einem Anhang, in welchem nachträglich 
noch einige Psalmen geliefert werden, Barmen, 1838.—17, 415 
Wülfing, F. L. Ein Heftchen wackerer Gesänge, 1832.—24 
— Leier und Schwert oder Bienen, mit und ohne Stachel, Barmen,  1830.—  24 
— Jugendblüthen, Barmen, 1830.— 24 
Ziegler und Kliphausen, H. A. v. Asiatische Banise, Oder blutiges und doch muthiges 
Pegu, in Historischer und mit dem mantel einer Helden- und Liebes-geschicht  bedeckten 
warheit beruhende, Leipzig, 1688.— 51 
[Zuccalmaglio, V. v.] Die Vorzeit der Länder Cleve-Mark, Jülich-Berg und Westpha-
len, Bd. 1 (Heft 1-4), 2. Aufl., Solingen und Gummersbach, 1837; Bd. 2 (Heft 
5-8), 1838-39 (published under the pseudonym of Montanus,  E.).—  24 
DOCUMENTS 
Allgemeines Landrecht für die Preussischen Staaten.— 280, 304-06, 309-10, 481 
Code Napoléon, Paris und Leipzig, 1808.— 21 
Zensuredikt vom 18. Oktober 1819: Verordnung, wie die Zensur der Druckschriften 
nach dem Beschluss des deutschen Bundes vom 20sten September d. J. auf 
fünf Jahre einzurichten ist. Vom 18ten Oktober 1819. In: Gesetz-Sammlung für die 
Königlichen Preussischen Staaten 1819, Berlin [1820].—305-07 
Zensurinstruktion der Preussischen Regierung vom 24. Dezember 1841. In: Allgemeine 
Preussische Staats-Zeitung No. 14, January 14, 1842.—300, 310-11 

=====第683页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 661 
ANONYMOUS ARTICLES 
AND REPORTS PUBLISHED IN PERIODIC EDITIONS 
Athenäum für Wissenschaft, Kunst und Leben, March, 1839: Notizen. —450 
Berlinische Nachrichten von Staats- und gelehrten Sachen Nos. 137 and 138, June 16 
and 17, 1842: Aufsätze über inländische Zustände. XVI. Ein Rückblick.— 300-01 
Deutscher Courier No. 44, November 3, 1839: Erste Vorstellung von "Richard Savage, 
oder der Sohn einer Mutter", Trauerspiel in 5 Aufzügen, von Karl Gutzkow. —80 
Evangelische Kirchen-Zeitung Nos. 23-25, March 20, 23 and 27, 1839: Die Grenzen 
der Naturbetrachtung. —455 
— Nos. 1-8, January 1, 4, 8, 11, 15, 18 [22 and 25], 1840: Vorwort.— 489 
Hallische Jahrbücher für deutsche Wissenschaft und Kunst Nos. 95, 97-99, April 20, 
22-24,  1840: Richard Savage in Leipzig. Correspondenz.— 102-03 
Königsberg«- Literotur-Biatt No. 1, October 6, 1841; No. 2, October 13, 1841; 
No. 3, October 20, 1841; No. 4, October 27, 1841; No. 7, November 17, 1841; 
Nos.  8-12, November 24, December 1, 8, 15 and 22, 1841; No. 13, December 
29, J841; No. 26, March 30, 1842; No. 29, April 20, 1842; No. 35, June 1, 
1842;  No. 36, June 8, 1842.—294-97 
Literarische Zeitung No. 9, March 2, 1842: Naturphilosophie. —281 
Litterarischer Anzeiger für  christliche  Theologie und  Wissenschaft  überhaupt Nos. 1 and 2, 
January 2 and 6, 1840: Vorwort des Herausgebers zum zehnten Jahrgange. —490 
Rheinisches Jahrbuch für Kunst und Poesie, 1. Jg., Köln, 1840: Moderne Romane: 
Biosedon), Münchhausen, William's Dichten und Trachten. —79, 81 
Telegraph für Deutschland No. 208, December 1838: Zeichen der Zeit (Besprechung des 
Gedichtbandes von J. Ch. F. Winkler Har/enklönge...). —415 
— No. 190, November 1839: Kieine Chroni* (über Karl Becks Trauerspiel 
Saul, 1. Akt., mit einer Note von Karl Gutzkow). —45 
Zeitung für die elegante Welt No. 99, May 21, 1838: Mundt's Spaziergänge und Welt-
fahrten. Zweiter Band. —88 
— No. 135, July 13, 1839: Richard Savage, oder, grosse Geister  begegnen  sich. —91 

=====第684页=====
INDEX OF PERIODICALS 
Abend-Zeitung —a literary daily which appeared in Dresden (1817-50) and Leipzig 
(1851-57). From 1827 to 1844 it was published by Theodor Hell.— 22, 412, 433 
Adelszeitung —see Zeitung für den Deutschen Adel 
Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung —see Jenaische Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung 
Allgemeine Preussische Staats-Zeitung —a newspaper published in Berlin from 1819 
to 1843 six times a week. In the 1840s it was the semi-official organ of the 
Prussian Government.—22, 300, 307 
Allgemeine Theater-Chronik —a journal published in Leipzig from 1832 to 1875. In 
the 1830s it was edited by Ludwig Alvensleben. —45 
Allgemeine Zeitung —see Elberfelder Zeitung 
Athenäum für Wissenschaft, Kunst und Leben. Eine Monatsschrift für das gebildete 
Deutschland —a literary-critical monthly, organ of the Young Hegelians; appeared 
in Nuremberg in 1838 and 1839. In 1841 it was published in Berlin as a weekly 
under the title Athenäum. Zeitschrift für das  gebildete  Deutschland. Ludwig Feuerbach 
was one of its editors.—191, 450 
Barmer Wochenblatt zur Belehrung und Unterhaltung —a journal published in Barmen 
from 1832 to 1846 under the editorship of Johann Friedrich Steinhaus; organ 
of the Barmen pietists.— 22 
Barmer Zeitung —a liberal daily published from 1834 to 1931; from 1838 to 1841 
Hermann Püttmann was its editor.— 22 
Berliner Allgemeine Kirchenzeitung —a newspaper published from 1830 to 1849 by 
Georg Friedrich Heinrich Rheinwald, professor of theology.—192 
Berliner Conversations-Blatt für Poesie, Litteratur und Kunst —a journal edited bv Wil­
helm Häring (Willibald Alexis) (1827-29) and Hermann Marggraff (1836-38). 
From 1830 to 1836 it was published under the title Der Freimüthige oder Berliner 
Conversationsblatt, with Wilhelm Häring as its editor.— 445 

=====第685页=====
Index of Periodicals 663 
Berliner Jahrbücher —see Jahrbücher für wissenschaftliche Kritik 
Berliner politisches Wochenblatt —a conservative weekly published from 1831 to 1841 
with the participation of Karl Ludwig von Haller, Heinrich Leo and Friedrich 
von Raumer; was supported and patronised by Frederick William IV.—  63, 68, 
145 
Berlinische Nachrichten von Staats- und gelehrten Sachen —a newspaper published in 
Berlin from 1740 to 1874 six times a week. In the early 1840s it was the 
government's semi-official organ; it was also known as the Spenersche Zeitung 
after the name of its publisher.—  300,  301 
Blätter zur Kunde der Literatur des Auslands —a literary newspaper published in 
Stuttgart from 1836; in 1838-40 its publisher was the German poet and critic 
Gustav Pfizer.— 497 
Bremer Kirchenbote. Eine Zeitschrift— a journal, organ of the Bremen pietists, 
published from 1832 to 1847; its publishers were Georg Gottfried Treviranus, 
Friedrich Ludwig Mallet and F. A. Toel; Mallet was its editor from 1839 to 1845.— 
106, 489, 491 
Der Bremer Stadtbote —a weekly published by Albertus Meyer from January 1839.— 
26, 418-20, 444 
Bremer Zeitung für Staats- Gelehrten- und Handelssachen —a moderate liberal daily 
published from 1813 to 1848 by Johann Georg Heyse. —105 
Bremisches Conversationsblatt —a moderate liberal literary journal published as a 
supplement to the Bremer Zeitung in 1838 and 1839.—106, 418 
Bremisches Unterhaltungsblatt —a literary newspaper published from 1823 to 1857; 
from 1838 to 1840 its editor was W. Fricke, the editorial board including 
Crischan Tripsteert.—106, 418 
Der Christen-Bote. Ein  kirchlich-religiöses  Sonntagsblatt —a conservative church magazine 
published in Stuttgart from 1832 to 1846.—346 
Criminalistische Zeitung für die Preussischen Staaten— a moderate liberal weekly 
published in Berlin in 1841 and 1842.—302, 303 
Deutsche Jahrbücher für Wissenschaft und Kunst —see Hallische Jahrbücher für deutsche 
Wissenschaft und Kunst 
Deutscher Courier. Europäische Wochenschrift für Politik und konstitutionelle Interessen — 
a weekly published in Stuttgart from 1834 to 1842.— 80 
Deutscher Musenalmanach —a liberal yearbook published in Leipzig from 1832 to 1838 
by Adelbert von Chamisso and Gustav Schwab. —437, 445, 451 
Deutscher Musenalmanach —a literary weekly, organ of the Young Hegelians, pub­
lished in Berlin in 1840-41 by Theodor Echtermeyer and Arnold Ruge.— 332 
Dorfzeitung —a provincial newspaper published in Elberfeld from 1838 to 1847.— 
22 
Die Eisenbahn. Zeitschrift zur Beförderung geistiger und geselliger Tendenzen —a literary 
Journal published in Leipzig from 1838 to 1844.— 92 

=====第686页=====
664 Index of Periodicals 
Elberfelder Zeitung —a daily published under various names from 1789 to 1904; 
in 1834 it merged with the Elberfeld Allgemeine Zeitung and assumed the name 
Elberfelder Zeitung; for a number of years its editor was Martin Runkel.—22, 
27, 446 
Europa. Chronik der gebildeten Welt —a liberal journal published from 1835 to 1885, 
first in Stuttgart and then in Karlsruhe and Leipzig. August Lewald was its 
editor from 1835 to 1846.—22, 162, 422 
Evangelische Kirchen-Zeitung —a conservative church newspaper founded by Ernst 
Wilhelm Hengstenberg and published in Berlin from 1827 to 1924.—16, 
192, 281, 421-23, 425, 426, 452, 455, 460, 462, 480, 489 
The Examiner—a weekly, organ of the liberal bourgeoisie, published in London from 
1808 to 1881.—376, 377 
Der Freihafen. Galerie von Unterhaltungsbildern aus den Kreisen der Literatur, Gesell­
schaft und Wissenschaft —a literary quarterly published in Altona from 1838 to 
1844 and influenced by the Young Germany literary group; its publisher was 
Theodor Mundt.— 86-87, 158 
Fremdenblatt (Elberfeld).— 22 
Der Gesellschafter oder Blätter für Geist und Herz —a literary newspaper of a liberal 
orientation; came out in Berlin from 1817 to 1848.—445 
Hallische Jahrbücher für deutsche Wissenschaft und Kunst —a literary and philosophical 
journal, organ of the Young Hegelians, published under the editorship of Arnold 
Ruge and Theodor Echtermeyer in Halle (1838-41); threatened with banning in 
Prussia, it began to appear, in July 1841, under the title Deutsche Jahrbücher für 
Wissenschaft und Kunst in Leipzig. However, in January 1843 the journal was 
closed down by the Saxon Government and banned by decision of the Federal 
Diet throughout Germany.—50, 92, 102, 142, 144, 185, 191, 196, 197, 284, 
331, 336, 340, 345, 346, 351, 496, 497, 526, 543 
Intelligenzblatt —supplement to the Elberfelder Zeitung. —22 
Jahrbuch der Literatur —a liberal literary almanac published in Hamburg in 1839 
by the Hoffmann und Campe Publishing House.—21, 71, 84, 90, 422 
Jahrbücher für wissenschaftliche Kritik —a journal, organ of the Right-wing Hege­
lians,  published in Stuttgart and Tübingen from 1827 to 1846; in 1834 it appeared 
in Berlin.—21, 195, 295, 296, 487 
Jenaische Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung —a literary journal published in Jena and 
Leipzig from 1804 to 1841. From 1842 to 1848 it appeared under the title 
Neue Jenaische Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung. —80 
Der Komet. Ein Unterhaltungsblatt für die gebildete Lesewelt —a liberal literary daily 
published from 1830 to 1848, first in Altenburg and then in Leipzig; its editor 
was Karl Georg Reginald Herloßsohn. —433 

=====第687页=====
Index of Periodicals 665 
Königlich Priuilegirte  Preussische  Staats- Kriegs- und Friedens-Zeitung —a daily published 
(under this title) in Königsberg from 1752 to 1850. In the 1840s it was a 
progressive bourgeois'newspaper.—310 
Königsberger Literatur-Blatt —a newspaper published under Alexander Jung's 
editorship in Königsberg from 1841 to 1845; it was influenced by the Young 
Germany literary group.—284, 293-95 
Königsfcerger Zeitung —see Königlich Priuiiegirte Preussische Staats- Kriegs- und Frie­
dens-Zeitung 
Leipziger Allgemeine Zeitung —a daily published from 1837; in the early 1840s 
it had a radical orientation. By a government decree of December 28, 1842, 
the newspaper was banned in Prussia, but it continued to appear in Saxony until 
April i, 1843.—260, 308, 353 
Literarische Zeitung —a literary weekly published in Berlin from 1834 to 1849 
and financed by the Prussian Government. Its publishers were Karl Büchner 
(1834-37), Eduard Meyen (1838) and Heinrich Brandes.— 281 
Literatur-Blatt —a newspaper published as a supplement to the Morgenhiott für 
gebildete Stände in Stuttgart and Tübingen from 1820 to 1852; from 1852 to 
1869 it appeared as an independent literary paper. Between 1830 and 1869 it 
was edited by Wolfgang Menzel.— 293, 412, 420 
Literarischer Anzeiger für christliche Theologie und Wissenscha/t überhaupt —a theological 
Journal, organ of the Halle pietists, published from 1830 to 1849 by Friedrich 
August Tholuck.—192, 490 
Der Menschenfreund. Eine religiöse Zeitschrift —a theological journal published in 
Berlin from 1824 to 1847 by Friedrich August Tholuck.—192, 490 
Mitternachtzeitung für gebildete Leser —a liberal newspaper published under this title 
in Brunswick from 1830 to 1839 under the editorship of Eduard Brinckmeier. 
Earlier, between 1826 and 1829, it was published by Adolf Müllner under the 
title Mitternachtzeitung für gebildete Stände. —496, 497 
Morgenfclatt für gebildete Leser —a literary daily published in Stuttgart and Tübingen 
from 1839 to 1865. From 1807 to 1838 it appeared under the title MorgenMatt 
für gebildete Stände. Frederick Engels contributed to the newspaper in 1840 and 
1841.—22, 412 
Musenalmanach —see Deutscher Musenalmanach 
Neue Zeitschrift für Musik —a theoretical-musical journal published in Leipzig 
from 1834 to 1926. It was founded, and in 1834-41 edited, by Robert Schumann.— 
159 
Das Nordlicht —a journal published in Leipzig from 1839 by Rudolf Mettler.— 92 
Der Patriot. Zeitschrift für Deutschland —a journal published in Bremen between 
July and December 1838.—105 
Pfizers Blätter —see Blätter zur Kunde der Literatur des Auslands 

=====第688页=====
666 Index of Periodicals 
Der Pilot. Allgemeine Revue der einheimischen und ausländischen Literatur- und 
Volkszustände —a literary and philosophical journal published by Johann Friedrich 
Hammerich in Altona from 1840 to 1842; from 1841 it appeared twice a week. 
Its editor-in-chief was Theodor Hell (1841-42).—292 
Provinzialzeitung—see Elberfelder Zeitung 
Rheinische Zeitung für Politik, Handel und Gewerbe —a daily founded on January 1, 
1842,  as an organ of the Rhenish bourgeois opposition circles and published 
until March 31, 1843, in Cologne. Edited by Marx (from October 15, 1842, 
to March 17, 1843), the newspaper acquired a clearly expressed revolutionary-
democratic character. By a decision of the Prussian Government it was closed 
down on April 1, 1843. In 1842 Engels was one of its contributors.— 296, 
310, 546 
Rheinisches Jahrbuch für Kunst und Poesie —a literary journal published in Cologne 
in 1840 and 1841 under the editorship of Ferdinand Freiligrath, G. Matzerath 
and Karl Simrock.—  79, 81, 161, 497 
Rheinisches Odeon—a democratic literary journal; in the first year of its publication 
(1836) it appeared in Coblenz and in the second (1838) in Düsseldorf; it was 
published by Ignaz Hub, Ferdinand Freiligrath and August Schnezler.— 27 
Rosen. Eine Zeitschrift für die gebildete Welt —a liberal literary journal published in 
Leipzig from 1838 to 1848, by Robert Heller (1838-44) and George Hesekiel 
(1845-48).—432 
The Shipping and Mercantile Gazette—a newspaper published in London from 
January 1836.—115 
Spenersche  Zeitung —see Berlinische Nachrichten von Staats- und gelehrten Sachen 
Staats-Zeitung —see Allgemeine  Preussische  Staats-Zeitung 
Täglicher Anzeiger für Berg und Mark —a daily published in the 1830s and 
1840s.— 22 
Telegraph für Deutschland —a literary journal founded by Karl Gutzkow; in 1837 
it was published in Frankfurt am Main and in 1838-48 in Hamburg; in the 
late 1830s and early 1840s it expressed the views of the Young Germany 
literary group. Engels contributed to the journal from March 1839 to  1841.— 
28, 71, 73, 87, 91, 292, 412, 415, 426, 446, 450, 468, 472, 488, 496, 497 
Unterhaltungsblatt —see Bremisches Unterhaltungsblau 
Wupperthaler Lesekreis —supplement to the Barmer Zeitung. —22 
Zeitschrift für Philosophie und spekulative Theologie —a conservative journal published 
under this title in Bonn from 1837 to 1846 by Immanuel Hermann Fichte. —192 
Zeitschrift für spekulative Physik —a natural-philosophy journal published under the 
editorship of Friedrich Wilhelm Schelling in Jena and Leipzig in 1800 and 
1801.—183 

=====第689页=====
Index of Periodicals 667 
Zeitung für den Deutschen Adel —a newspaper which expressed the interests of the 
feudal nobility; it appeared from 1840 to 1846, first in Leipzig and then in Alten-
burg; it was published by Ludwig Alvensleben (up to 1842) and edited by Friedrich 
Fouqué (1840-42).—66-70 
Zeitung für die elegante Welt —a literary newspaper published from 1801 to 1859 in 
Leipzig and, in the last years, in Erfurt; in the 1830s and 1840s it expressed 
the views of the Young Germany literary group. From 1835 to 1843 it was 
edited by Gustav Kühne.— 42, 43, 45, 88, 91, 92, 94, 412, 467 

=====第690页=====

=====第691页=====
SUBJECT INDEX 
A 
Absolute idea—  99, 184-85, 186-87, 197, 
213-14, 215-17, 289-90 
See also Hegelianism, Idea 
Absolutism—48-50, 96-97, 145, 356-58, 
363-66,  480 
See also France, Monarchy, State 
Abstraction—140-41,  210-11,  221-22, 
236, 266, 324-25, 338-39 
Alsace—149-50 
America—see United States of America 
Ancient art—134, 275 
See also Ancient tragédies, Hellenism, 
Poetry 
Ancient poetry—see Poetry 
Ancient tragedies—73, 78, 275 
Anthropology— 237-38 
Anti-Corn Law League—376-77, 381 
See also Corn Lauis 
Apriorism—218 
Architecture—7-8, 132-34 
See also Cologne Cathedral, Gothic style, 
Xanten Cathedral 
Aristocracy—67, 357 
— landed—146-47, 357-76, 380-82 
— monied—104-05, 112, 357, 375 
Art—133,  217, 275 
— socially conditioned—48, 49, 51-52 
— and religion—274-75 
See also Ancient art, Architecture, Comic 
and tragic, Drama, Literature, Music, 
Opera, Painting, Poetry 
Artistic form and content—44-46, 49-50, 
53-54,  74-75, 138, 162 Artistic  work—  81-82,  95 
— and the writer's personality— 
83, 84, 85, 89 
— independence in—84, 85, 86 
See also Artistic form and content, 
Fantasy 
Asceticism—  33, 138-39 
Atheism—  286,  296, 328-29,  330-31, 
332-33,  339-40,  349-51,  361 
See also Bible, Christianity, Religion 
Athens—258, 259, 260 
Austria—266, 481 
See also German states, Germany, 
Prussia 
Authority—  76, 158, 201, 286-87, 294, 
454, 459 
See also Faith, Reason 
B 
Barmen— 8-9, 415-16, 468 
Basle—170 
Battle o/Jena—163, 271 
Being and thinking—186-87, 201-02, 214-
16, 218, 220 
See also Hegelianism, Schelling's phi­
losophy 
Belgium—149-50 
Berlin—86, 259-60, 268, 325, 335, 396-
97, 483 
Bifc-le—12-15, 17, 66, 74, 157, 231, 233, 
251-52,  257-64, 313, 322, 416, 426, 
453-55,  457-62, 471, 476 
— historical criticism of—74, 256-57, 
486 

=====第692页=====
670 Subject Index 
— rationalistic criticism of—128, 156, 
157, 323-24, 336, 426-27, 453-
59, 466, 476 
— and church doctrine—466 
See also Christianity, God, Pietism, Ra­
tionalism, Theology 
Bonn—  276, 325-26, 396-97 
Book printing (in Germany)—66, 103-04 
Bourgeoisie—  357-58,  364-65, 368-69, 
373-75 
See also Burghers 
Bremen—102, 104, 112, 113-16, 119-20, 
126, 157-60, 416, 528 
Bremerhaven— 115-16, 119, 498, 499 
Bureaucracy— 97 
See also Officials, Prussianism 
Burghers, German—68-69, 104-05, 112, 
145-46,  364-65 
C 
Calvinism—11-12, 97, 126, 489 
Cartesianism—186-87, 197 
Category (phil.)—206-07, 211, 236-37 
Catholicism— 9, 101, 236,  360-61,  362-65 
See also Church 
Censorship—  309-11,  334, 465, 472, 481, 
488 
— and public opinion—307-08 
— and law—306-07, 309-10 
— in Prussia—38, 280, 298, 304, 307-
08, 309-10, 331-32, 360-61 
See also Freedom, Press, Prussia 
Centralisation—see State 
Chance—see Necessity and chance 
Character (in literature)—34, 45, 54, 72-
73, 74-75, 77-79, 89-90 
Chartism 
— as a workers' party—368-69, 374, 
375-76,  377, 379 
— and the ruling classes—368-69 
— and universal suffrage—368-69 
See also  England,  People's Charter, 
Working class 
Christianity—  30, 95, 97, 121, 155, 158, 
228-29,  230, 238-39, 254-55, 455-62, 
476-79,  526-27 
— its origin—231 
— its contradictions—201, 224-25 
— criticism of—196-97, 248-49 
— and other religions—222, 236-37, 
251-53 
— and the problem of man—226-27 — Christian conception of history— 
256-58 
— and law —361-62 
— and morals—249-50 
Church—48, 74-75, 155, 230, 257-58, 
363-64, 454, 457-58, 481 
— its history—48, 235, 257-58, 260-61 
— and State—361-64, 380 
— Catholic—64-65, 235, 257-58, 260-
62, 362-65 
— Protestant—121, 257:58, 261, 363 
Classes—  302-03,  370, 372-7*4, 378-79 
See also Class struggle, Interests 
Classicism (in literature)—82 
Class struggle—  368,  372-73, 378-79 
See also Chartism, Classes, Strikes, 
Working class 
Clergy—  75-76,  127-28, 350, 366, 460 
Cologne—132 
Cologne Cathedral—132-34, 353-54 
Comic and tragic 
— in art—78-79 
— in life—78-79 
Condition of the working class—see 
Working class 
Consciousness—  54, 139, 148-49, 166,215-
16 
See also Being and thinking, Self-con­
sciousness 
Constitution— 175, 421 
— bourgeois—298-99 
— English—346-47, 370 
— Spanish—140, 493 
— Prussian—298, 365-67, 493 
— of the Holy Roman Empire—175 
— French—266, 355-56 
Constitutionalism—32, 37, 149-50, 163, 
365-67,  442-43 
Contradictions—  208-09,  212-13, 326, 372, 
373-74, 459-60, 476 
— internal and external—267, 459-60 
— in society—358-72 
Corn Laws (in England)—376-77, 380-81 
Cosmopolitanism—141-42, 163, 266 
See also Liberalism 
Craftsmen (in Germany)—10-11, 117 
Crisis  (trade)  — 373,  378 
Criticism— 81-82 
— literary—82, 87-88, 90-92, 93, 288, 
289-90, 448-49 
— of the theatre—74, 80-81 
Crusades— 133 

=====第693页=====
Subject Index 671 
D 
Descartes' philosophy—see Cartesianism 
Despotism— 166 
— in Prussia—364-65 
— in Russia—148, 358-59, 360 
See also Absolutism, Monarchy 
Dialectics—  81-82,  359 
See also Hegelianism, Schelling's phi­
losophy 
Dogmatism—  237-38,  527 
Drama—-77-78 
— the problem of dramatic action — 
71-72,  73, 76-78 
— plot—74-75, 78-79 
— and reality—292 
See also Criticism, English drama, 
German drama, Theatre 
Dualism—  83-84,  95, 200-01 
E 
Eastern question—148 
Education—17-21,  138-39, 165, 268, 277, 
455, 462, 466, 480 
See also Universities, Youth 
Election system 
— in England—381 
— in France—358 
— in Prussia—365-67 
Emancipation—37, 38, 77, 101, 139, 141, 
361, 363, 421, 443 
Emigration—115-18, 498 
Empiricism— 218 
Encyclopaedists—  50 
England 
— industry—370, 371-73 
— trade—371-73, 378 
— political system—360, 370-71 
— political parties of ruling classes — 
368-69,  371, 375-77, 380 
— judicial power, laws—302, 371 
— electoral reform movement—368-
69, 380 
— home and foreign policy—148, 
368-69,  370, 372-73, 375-79, 381 
— colonial policy  —372-73,  379 
— prospects of revolution—368-69, 
370,  373-74, 380-81 
See also Anti-Corn Law League, Aristoc­
racy, Bourgeoisie, Chartism, Class strug­gle, Constitution, Corn Laws, Free trade, 
Nobility, Peasants, Radicals, Revolution, 
Working class 
English drama—  72, 76, 100, 166 
English poetry—95, 100-01 
Entails—146, 147, 364 
Epos—see German folk legends 
Essence and appearance—358-59, 364-65, 
371, 375 
Estates system—145-46, 364-65 
See also Bourgeoisie, Burghers, Crafts­
men,  Germany, Guild system, Interests, 
Peasants, Prussia 
Ethics—  32, 281-82, 361-62, 379, 456, 
459, 477 
— good and evil—5-6, 230, 259, 426 
— love—173 
Europe—  266,  355-56 
Executive power— 302, 359 
See also Election system, Law, Legisla­
tion, State 
Experience (phil.)—201, 218 
F 
Factory labour—9-10 
Faith—  236-37,  250, 426, 471 
— its origin—122 
— and reason—250-51 
See also Authority, Christianity, Reason, 
Religion, Science 
Family—164-65, 262, 282 
Fantasy—195,  199-201,  235-36 
— imagination in artistic work—43-
44, 53-54, 82, 85 
Federation—see State 
Feudalism—  48, 355, 371 
Feuerbach's  philosophy—  209,  237, 296, 337 
See also Anthropology, Christianity 
Fichte's philosophy—165, 198-99 
— and Schelling's philosophy—198-
99 
Folk-song—148-49 
— in Germany—9, 42, 82 
France—142, 302, 321, 358 
— absolute monarchy—357-58 
— under the Restoration—136, 196, 
358 
— the July monarchy—355-56, 360 
See also Ahsoiutism, Constitution, French 
literature, French Revolution, Huguenot 

=====第694页=====
672 Subject Index 
wars, Jacobin dictatorship, July revolution. 
of 1830 in France, Legitimism, Music. 
Napoleonic wars 
"Free, TV'—332, 334, 337-38, 342-
44, 347-48,  349-51,  353 
Freedom—145, 147, 151, 169, 184-85, 
235-36,  238-39, 321, 349-50, 371 
— of property—147 
— political—48, 266, 272-73, 290, 
298,  300-01,  334, 356-57,  358-61, 
364-65 
— of personality—338-39, 356-57, 
455-56,  459 
— of the press—300-01, 360, 364-65 
See also Censorship, Journalism, Press 
Freedom of denomination—363-64 
Free trade—  373,  377 
French literature—49-50, 68, 82-83 
French Revolution—50, 141, 249, 367 
— its prerequisites—357-58 
— its influence in Europe—137, 140, 
141, 263 
See also Gironde, Jacobin dictatorship 
G 
German drama—45-46, 54,  71-81,  102-03, 
129-30, 275, 288 
German emigrants—116-18, 159-60, 498 
German folk legends—  96, 132-33, 135, 
136, 137, 160, 175 
See also Germanpopular  books,  People'sart 
Germanising trend (Germanisation) —140-
42, 167 
— as a trend without historical and 
philosophical foundation—140, 
145 
— as an extremely nationalistic trend 
— 141-42, 145-46, 148 
German liberalism—see Liberalism 
German literature—  20-22,  24-25, 33-34, 
37, 50-52, 53-54, 82-84, 89-90,  92-93, 
104-05,  158-59, 289, 293, 413,  420-21, 
485 
— conditions of its development— 
41, 78-79, 88-89 
— influence of Hegel's philosophy on 
— 50-51,  88, 286, 291 
— national tendencies—137-40 
See also German popular books, Young 
Germany movement German philosophy—117-19, 165, 168 
See also  Feuerbach'sphilosophy,  Hegelian-
ism, Kant's  philosophy,  Philosophy,  Spel­
ling's philosophy 
German poetry—  21-23,  42-46, 53-54, 81-
82, 100-01,  161-69, 288, 411, 468 
— medieval—33-34, 51-52 
— religious tunes in—24-25,  30-31, 
86, 397-98, 416 
German popular books (Volksbücher) — 
32-40 
German states—103-04, 105, 119-20, 147 
See also Austria, Prussia 
German theatre—  80-81,  102-03, 275, 393, 
397, 523 
See also Criticism, Drama, German 
drama, Theatre 
Germany—  90-98,  100-01,  139-40, 143, 
145, 147-50, 192 
— industry—373, 378 
— political system—32-33, 136, 140 
— home and foreign policy—116-17, 
137, 141-43, 147-50, 266-67, 298-
99, 393 
— problem of unification—140, 149-
50, 266, 298 
— patriotic and national liberation 
movement, 1808-13—139-41, 162-
63, 205, 364 
— prospects of revolution—147, 420, 
463-64 
See also Absolutism, Alsace, Austria, 
Bonn,  Book printing, Bremen, Bremerha­
ven, Burghers, Cologne, Craftsmen, "Free, 
The", German drama, German emigrants, 
German folk legends, Germanising  trend, 
German literature, German philosophy, 
German poetry, German popular books, 
German states, German theatre, Hanse, 
Journalism, Liberalism, Merchants, Mu­
nich,  Music, Nationalism, National  libera­
tion movement, Nobility, North Germany, 
Peasants,  People's  art, Philistinism, Press, 
Prussia, Shipping  project,  South Germany, 
Westphalia, Wuppertal, Young Germany 
movement, Young Hegelians, Youth 
Gironde— 339 
Gnoseology—  207-09 
God, gods—133, 231-33, 248, 251-58, 
260-61,  264, 363-64, 460, 462-66 
— German—133 

=====第695页=====
Subject Index 673 
— Greek—16, 231 
— and speculative philosophy—216-
17, 220-21,  223-25, 227-28, 230, 
232-33,  236, 248-57, 259, 263, 316, 
321, 323, 454-55, 458-62, 476-79, 
489 
— ontological proof of the existence of 
God—219, 220 
See also Bible, Christianity, Religion, 
Theology 
Gospel—see Bible 
Gothic style—101, 133 
Great week—see July revolution of 1830 
in France 
Greece—  95, 253 
See also Ancient art, Athens, Mythology 
Guild system—364-65 
See also Estates system 
H 
Hanse— 97, 158 
Hegelianism 
— general characteristic of Hegel's 
system—86, 89, 99, 143-44, 165-
66, 168-69, 191-96, 197-98, 237-38, 
269-70, 281, 286-87, 451-52, 483, 
486,  489-90 
— problems of identity of being and 
thinking—186-87, 200-02, 209-10 
— dialectic—198-99, 206-07, 208-09, 
210-11,  236,451 
— place and importance of logic— 
202, 206-07, 210, 215-17 
— revolutionary and conservative 
elements of Hegel's philosophy— 
66, 86, 142-43, 191, 196-97, 217-
18 
— contradictions in Hegel's system— 
196, 217, 235 
— philosophy of law—196 
— Hegel's teaching on the state— 
196, 289, 362 
— philosophy of history—47, 68-69, 
213-14, 256-57, 486, 490 
— philosophy of religion—196, 224-
25, 287, 489 
— problems of freedom and necessi­
ty—86 
— and Prussian monarchy—86, 197-
98, 486-87 — influence on German literature— 
50-51,  88, 89-90, 168-69, 286, 291 
See also Absolute idea, Being and think­
ing, Idea, Young Hegelians 
Hegelians—see Young Hegelians 
Hellas—see Greece 
Hellenism— 230, 238 
Heretics, heresies—12-13 
— gnosticism—201, 207 
— Pelagianism—249 
— Socianianism—249 
Historical school of law—145-47, 271-
72, 361, 364, 375 
History—68-69, 256-57, 272-73, 281-82, 
355-57 
— its law-governed character—47-48, 
75, 228, 272-73, 355-56 
— historical progress—47-48, 239-40, 
272-73,  356-57, 370-71 
— and personality—75-76, 78-79, 
355-56 
Holland—  97-98,  134, 149 
Holy Roman Empire—175 
Huguenot wars—357 
I 
Idea, ideas 
— their role in social progress— 
48, 143, 196, 239-40, 290, 370-71 
— ideological struggle—284 
— in Hegel—186-87, 212-13 
— in Schelling—205-06, 212-13, 216-
17 
See also Absolute idea, Hegelianism, 
Intellectual life, Schelling's philosophy 
Identity (phil.)—205, 214, 220, 223 
See also Hegeiionism 
Immigration—117-18 
Industrial production—372-73 
— its contradictions under capital­
ism—372-78 
— and impoverishment of the prole­
tariat—378-79 
See also Working class 
Infinity— 208 
Inquisition—126, 493 
Intellect—  287,  323, 462, 486 
— in literary work—43-44, 53-54, 
82, 85 
Intellectual life—12-13, 17-18, 65, 141-
42, 144, 152, 271-74, 277, 290 

=====第696页=====
674 Subject Index 
Interests—  363,  370, 381 
— material—370-71 
— class—381 
— of the estates—364-65 
— of the state—266 
Islam—see Mohammedanism 
Israel—see Jews 
J 
Jacobin dictatorship—64 
Jesuits— 76 
Jews—142, 149-50, 182, 196, 387-88, 
443 
— Hebrews—74-76, 192, 231 
— emancipation  of—141,  421, 443 
See also Judaism, Religion 
Journalism—2S, 105-06, 148, 298-99 
— its role in society—27, 158-59, 292 
— as a means of political and literary 
polemic—87-88,  90-91,  92-93, 
— and literature—291-92 
— in Germany—21-23, 92, 105 
See also Censorship, Criticism, Freedom, 
Literature, Press 
Judaism—  76, 96, 232, 236, 252, 324-25 
See also Jews 
July monarchy—see France 
July revolution of 1830 in France—50, 
136, 142, 196, 355-56, 358, 420, 501 
— its prerequisites—358 
— its influence in Europe—266-67, 
420,  463-64 
See also France 
Jury system—136, 141, 302-03, 307, 358-
59 
K 
Kant's philosophy—  69, 156, 186, 218 
— "thing-in-itself"—165 
— rational thinking—186 
— ability to know—202 
— as the basis of religious rationalism 
— 128 
See also Apriorism, Philosophy 
Königsberg—  277, 284 
Koran—454-55 L 
Landed property—146-48, 376, 381 
See also Legislation 
Landlords—see Aristocracy 
Language (linguistics)—138, 193, 443-44 
— popular—160 
— German—138, 176, 159-60, 396 
— Romance—176 
See also Thinking 
Law—144, 302-03, 371 
— criminal—283 
— civil—141 
— hereditary—146-47 
— and property—302-03 
— English—371 
— Prussian—304-11, 364, 479-81 
— Roman (Pandects)—141 
— sense of justice—371 
— and equity—144 
— and religion—362 
See also Legislation 
Legislation— 304-07, 309-10, 359, 371, 
374 
— agrarian—146-47 
— practice of the courts—305, 307, 
480 
Legitimism—  49,  355-56, 361-62 
Liberalism—  20-21,  141 
— French—355-56, 357-58 
— German—86, 143, 266-67, 284-85, 
289, 292, 295-96, 297-98, 302, 364-
66 
Libertines—489 
Libya— 96 
Literature—165, 288 
— its social role—27,  32-33,  48, 51-52 
— and reality—292 
— and philosophy—50-51 
— the author's views—74 
See also Artistic form and content, 
Character, Criticism, French literature, 
German literature, Journalism, Popular 
character, Prose, Spanish literature, Style 
Logic—156, 166, 184-85, 205-08, 221-22, 
464 
See also Hegelianism 
Lorraine—149 
Lutheranism—12-13, 66, 362-63, 454, 486 
See also Church, Pietism, Protestantism 
Lyrics—42, 82 
See also Poetry 

=====第697页=====
Subject Index 675 
M 
Mankind—  129, 146, 238-40, 296, 356, 
458-59 
Market—  372-73,  376-77 
Marriage—see Family 
Masses—173,  275, 358, 380, 387 
See also People 
Materialism— 50, 222 
Medicine—281-83 
Merchants (in Germany)—104-05, 117, 
172 
Middle Ages—  66, 133, 145-46, 170, 357, 
363-65 
See also Absolutism, Crusades 
Middle class—see Bourgeoisie 
Military training—129-30, 146, 505-06, 
507-08 
Mohammedanism—182, 236 
See also Koran 
Monarchy— 289, 358-59,  360-61,  493 
— absolute—97, 135-36, 144-45, 358-
59, 363-65 
— constitutional— 144, 360 
See also Absolutism, Constitutionalism, 
England,  France, Prussia, State 
Monotheism—  222,  224 
Morals—138-39 
See also Ethics 
Munich—200, 397 
Music—159, 275, 404-07, 418 
— French—159, 530-31 
— German—150,159, 275, 387, 473-
74, 523, 530 
— Italian—150,159,523,529-30 
See also Opera, Poetry 
Mysticism 
— in religion—10, 11-12,15, 17-18, 
458, 471 
— in philosophy—200-01, 227-28, 
291, 296-97 
See also Spelling's philosophy 
Mythology—199, 228, 231 
— Greek—414-15, 553 
— German—75, 132-33, 414-15, 554 
— Christian—75, 228, 476-77 
See also Germon folk legends, God 
N 
Napoleonic Code (Code  Napoléon)  — 21 
Napoleonic wars—139, 141,153-54,271-72 Nationalism—141,  148-49, 163 
— its origin—140-42 
— and cosmopolitanism— 141-42 
See also Germanising trend 
National liberation movement—137, 140, 
149-50 
Nature—205,  212-13, 214-16, 236-38, 
310-11 
Necessity and chance—236, 364, 459, 466 
Negation (phil.)—140-41, 149-50, 284 
— and positive content—239-40, 293 
— in Hegel's philosophy—205-07, 
211, 212-13, 222-24 
See also Hegeiianism 
Neo-Scheliingianism— see Schef Jing's 
philosophy 
Nobility—  69-70,  146-47, 364-65, 376 
— and the estates system—146, 363-
65 
— its ideology—68-70 
— English—376, 380-81 
— German—67-69, 70, 145-46 
See also Aristocracy 
North Germany—  95-96,  158-59, 163, 
265-66,  276, 298 
O 
Object and subject—  214,  215-17, 286 
See also Hegeiianism, Schelling's philos­
ophy 
Objectivity—  216-17,  287 
Officiais— 136, 305, 307-08, 359, 360, 
362, 364-65, 484 
See also Bureaucracy, Prussianism 
Old Lut/ieranism—see Lutheranism 
Opera (in Germany)—129, 400, 538 
Opposition—65, 265, 267, 284-85, 309-
10 
P 
Painting—134, 170 
Pantheism—95, 106, 222, 224-25, 244, 
489, 526 
Paris—357-58 
Parliamentarism—265, 267, 355, 268-
69, 376-77 
Parsees—489 
Patriotism—141,  148-49, 265 

=====第698页=====
676 Subject Index 
Peasants 
— English—375, 381 
— German—116-17, 126, 364 
People 
— its sovereignty—144, 163 
— the role of masses in history—37, 
76, 281-82, 370, 377, 378 
— its participation in the administra­
tion of the state—144, 147, 302, 
308, 358-59, 365-66, 371, 421 
— its role in the national liberation 
struggle—140 
See also Masses 
People's art (fairy-stories, poetry, legends) — 
4, 5, 35, 36-37, 96-97,  1-74-75 
See also Folk-song, Gt man popular 
books, Mythology 
People's Charter—S68 
See also Chartism 
Personality—  83-84,  89-90, 177, 226-27, 
355-59 
See also Artistic  work,  Christianity, 
Freedom, History, State, Will 
Philistinism—  25,  135, 143, 166, 168-69, 
276, 300, 331, 353, 396-97, 416, 475, 
484, 525 
Philosophy—  99, 109, 200-02, 205-06, 209-
10, 218, 221-22, 280, 282, 316, 321-
22, 455, 462, 527 
— and the state—197-98 
— in Germany—118, 165, 168, 267 
See also Cartesianism, Empiricism, 
Feuerbach's  philosophy,  Fichte's  philosophy, 
German philosophy, Hegelianism, Kant's 
philosophy, Mysticism, Schelling's philoso­
phy, Stirner's  philosophy,  Wolf's  philosophy, 
Young Hegelians 
Pietism—10-12, 14-18, 22-23, 25, 30, 32-
33, 48, 86-87, 103-04, 121, 127-29, 
155-56,  284-85, 345-46, 416, 423, 446, 
457,  460, 462, 466, 471, 480, 489, 494 
Poetry—18-19, 33, 42-43, 45, 47-54, 81-
82 
— its social content—37-39, 43-44 
— ancient—82 
— medieval—23-24, 33, 82, 172-73 
— Romance—33-34, 37 
— and religion—95, 397, 416 
— and music—43-44 
See also Character, Fantasy, German 
poetry, Lyrics, Popular character, Verse 
Political crimes—136, 304-07, 308-09, 310-11,  480 
See also Law, State 
Political rights—365 
Politics—165, 271-72, 289, 368-69 
— political awareness—298, 381 
Popular character (in literature)—33-35, 
39-40 
Positive philosophy—see Schelling's philoso­
phy 
Possibility and reality—  202-03,  207 
See also Hegelianism, Schelling's phi­
losophy 
Press— 200 
— and public opinion—66, 355 
— press laws—304-11 
— as a means of political struggle— 
87-88 304-05 
— French—357 
— German—22-23, 105-06,  412-1.1 
See also Censorship,  Freedom,  Journalise  • 
Press laws—see Press 
Progress—148, 237-38, 239-40, 270-72, 
293, 298, 338-39, 355-56,  360-61,  370-
72, 455 
See also History 
Proletariat—see Working class 
Property—147-48 
— and law—302-03 
— and revolution—373 
Prose—  22-23,  81-88, 167 
See also French literature, German lite­
rature. Literature, Spanish literature 
Protestantism—64, 197, 360-63, 454 
— and Catholicism—100-01, 360-61 
See also Church 
Prussia—163-64, 268-69, 271-72,  360-61, 
366-67 
— social and political system—96-97, 
135-36,  197-98, 272-73, 298, 299, 
304, 310-11,  363-66, 480 
— laws—136, 304-07, 309-10 
— home and foreign policy—304-05, 
360, 362-63, 367 
— democratic movement—298-99, 
365-67 
See also Absolutism, Barmen, Berlin, 
Censorship, Constitution, Despotism, 
Election system, Law, Monarchy, Napo­
leonic wars, Press, Prussianism 
Prussianism—  97, 163, 166-68, 298, 361 
Publicity—  301,  302-03, 307, 480 
See also Freedom, Press 

=====第699页=====
Subject Index 677 
Public opinion—66, 92, 181, 271-72, 284, 
298, 307-08, 365-66, 371, 465 
Q 
Quakers—103 
Quality and quantity—306 
R 
Radicals (in England)—368-69, 375-77 
See also England 
Rationalism (in religion)—74, 127-28, 
141-42,  156-58, 248-49, 423, 486 
Reality—see Possibility and reality 
Reason—  82, 157, 208-09, 210, 287, 293, 
295, 356, 456, 459 
— and authority—158 
— and faith—157,  249-51,  321, 454, 
461-62,  486-87 
— and reality—287, 293 
Reformation— 357 
Reformists—9, 11-12, 13, 15, 19-20, 29, 
30, 122, 126-27 
— and German philosophy—122 
— and art—12, 122 
— and Catholics—12, 20 
— and Lutherans—12, 13, 20 
See also Calvinism, Church, Religion 
Religion—  95, 133-34, 196-97, 217-18, 
231, 282, 287-92, 321-22, 326, 357, 
456,  460-62 
— and the state—362-64 
— and science—122, 127-28 
— and art—24-25,  30-31,  36-37, 122, 
274-75 
— religious fanaticism—12, 357, 416 
See also Christianity, Mohammedanism, 
Mysticism, Rationalism, Theology 
uiissance—49 
ublic— 359 
:e also Slate 
jration—see France 
lution 
its prerequisites—147,357-58,369-
71, 373-74 
ways and means of its accomplish­
ment—373-74 
and law—368-69, 374 
political—303,  357, 374 
->cial—374, 380-81 See also  England,  French Revolution, 
Germany, July revolution of 1830 in 
France 
Rhenish Province of Prussia—81, 95, 163, 
274-75 
Right—356-57, 358, 371 
Romanticism (as a literary trend)—35, 39-
40, 162, 167-68 
— and religion—30 
— in Germany—30, 33, 51-52, 105, 
166 
Rome, Romans—48, 82, 231, 253, 443 
Russia 
— as a reactionary force in Europe— 
148, 150 
— tsarist despotism—148, 359, 360 
See also Despotism 
S 
Satire 
— ancient—82, 96 
— German—389 
Saxony—96 
Spelling's philosophy—184-85, 199-200, 
221, 225-26, 236-37, 293 
— its religious and mystical charac­
ter—198-201,  202-03, 205-06, 
_209-12,  213-19, 223-28, 231-37, 
243-48,  250-51,  253-56 
— its place in the history of modern 
philosophy—183 
— criticism of Hegel's philosophy— 
182-86,  214-16, 220 
— positive and negative philosophy— 
183-85,  186-87,  200-01,  204-05, 
213-14, 217-20 
— problem of essence (concept) and 
existence—184, 186, 200-04, 207-
08, 209-10, 213-14, 215-16, 222-23 
— power (potential)—184, 187, 202-
14 
— matter—203-04, 207, 212, 220 
— nature—204-05, 212-13, 236 
— philosophy of history—213-14 
See also Hegelianism, Idea, Philoso­
phy 
Science—156, 164-65, 268, 270, 271-73 
— and life—50-51 
— objectivity of—216 
— and religion—122, 127-28, 321, 
457, 458-59 

=====第700页=====
678 Subject Index 
Sculpture 
— ancient—134-35 
— medieval (in Germany)—132-33 
Self-consciousness— 239-40, 296, 361 
See also Consciousness 
Shipping project (in Germany)—128-29 
Single, particular, universal—272, 287, 
356-57,  359, 364 
Slavs—149, 277 
Society—165,  366-67 
See also Classes, Family, State 
Sophistry—126-27, 267, 371, 479 
South Germany—265-66, 298 
See also Germany, Rhenish Province of 
Prussia 
Sovereignty—139-40, 355, 363 
Spanish literature—78-79 
Spirit (mind)—see Absolute idea, Hegelian-
ism, Schelling's philosophy 
Starvation—  374,  376, 379 
Stole—48,  145, 271-73, 302, 356, 358-
59, 363, 364-65 
— and society—136, 358-59, 364-65 
— and the individual—356-59 
— and the nation—139-40, 144-45 
— and law—136, 144, 146-47, 358-59 
— and Church—360-64 
— and philosophy—197-98 
— monarchic—356-59, 480 
— republican—358-59 
— federal—359 
— centralised—356-59 
— feudal—146-47 
— Christian—360-63 
See also Absolutism, Despotism, Hegelian-
ism, Historical school of law, Monarchy, 
Politics 
Stirner's philosophy—339 
Stoicism— 249, 259 
Strikes, general— 373-74 
Style 
— in literature—25, 39, 81-82, 85, 
86, 138, 162-63, 472-73, 481 
— in philosophy—186-87, 195 
Switzerland—170-71 
T 
Taxes—367, 480 
Theatre—  80-81,  102-03, 129-30 
See also Criticism, German theatre Theology—  219,  269-70, 322, 326-27, 361-
66, 459-60, 471, 476-80, 487, 490, 526 
See also Bible, Christianity, Church, 
Pietism, Rationalism, Religion 
Theory and practice—195-96, 266-67, 
271-73,  338-39, 370 
Theory of knowledge—see Gnoseology 
"Thing-in-itself—see Kant's philosophy 
Thinking— 205-06, 213-15, 219, 293 
— and reality—195-96, 207-08, 220 
— and language—195 
See also Being and thinking, Hegelian-
ism, Intellect, Reason,  Schelling's philosor 
phy, Self-consciousness 
Time (phil.)—see Kant's philosophy 
Town—138, 146, 357-58 
Trade—364-65, 372-73, 376-78 
See also Crisis, Free trade 
Transcendental—  218,  233, 256 
Truth—47, 187, 196-97, 235-36, 250-
51, 455, 461, 527 
See also Authority, Faith 
U 
Unemployment—  379 
See also Working class 
United States of America—116-17, 358-
59, 498-99 
Unity of the  world—  295-97 
Universities (in Germany)—268, 276, 396-
97 
V 
Verse—45, 51-52, 54, 79-80, 101, 39 
94, 449 
W 
Wages—  373 
Westphalia—161 
Will—15,  232, 458 
See also Christianity, Personality 
Wolf's philosophy—156 
Women—  38, 77, 291, 379, 421 
— emancipation of—38, 77, 42.' 
— their participation in public 
101 

=====第701页=====
Subject Index 679 
Working class 
— its emergence—373 
— condition in capitalist society— 
9-11,  370, 373, 375-79 
— its class awareness—373-76, 378-
79 
— as a revolutionary force—373-74 
Wuppertal—  7, 8, 16 
X 
Xanten— 132, 134-35 
Xanten Cathedral—132-34 
Y 
Young Germany movement—20-21, 41-42, 
50-51,  84, 86-87, 279-80,  284-91,  411, 
420-22,  460, 467 
— its place in ideological struggle— 
50-51,  422-23 — and German literature—20-21, 27, 
41-42,  86-87,  420-21,  449-50, 464-
65 
See also German literature 
Young Hegelians—  64-65,  85-86, 92-93, 
142-45,  165, 181, 196-97,287-88,451-
52 
— progressive and conservative as­
pects of Hegel's philosophy—143-
44, 216-17 
— criticism of some aspects of He­
gel's philosophy—143, 287-88 
See also Hegelianism, Young Germany 
movement 
Youth—137, 168 
— in Germany—132, 135-36, 137-39, 
165, 168-69, 173-74, 196, 266, 274 
See also Education, Universities 
Z 
Zurich—171,  173 

=====第702页=====
