L E N I N cOLLEcTED WORKS 5 / IN ACCORDANCE WITH A DECISION OF THE NINTH CONGRESS OF THE R . 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) AND THE SECOND CONGRESS OF SOVIETS OF THE U . 
S. 
S. 
R. 
 B. 
 n . 
 l d H n H С О Ч И Н E Н И Я И з д a н u е ч е m в е p m o e ГОСУДАРСТВ ЕНН ОЕ ИЗ ДАТ ЕЛЬ СТВО ПОЛИТИЧЕ СКОЙ ЛИ ТЕРАТУ РЫ M О С К В А V. 
 I. 
 L E N I N cOLLEcTED WORKS VOLUME 5 May !(0! – Februar y !(02 PROGRESS PUBLISHERS MOSCOW TRANSLATED BY THE LATE JOE FINEBERG AND GEORGE HANNA EDITED BY VICTOR JEROME First printing 1960 Second printing 1964 Third printing 1972 Fourth printing 1975 Fifth printing 1977 l 10102–671 ÇÜà èÇõÄÉå. 
 From Marx to Mao M L © Digital Reprints 2009 www. 
marx 2mao. 
com CONTENTS Preface ............................ 
. 
 11 1901 WHERE TO BEGIN ........................ 13 ANOTHER MASSACRE ...................... 
 25 THE PERSECUTORS OF THE ZEMSTVO AND THE HANNIBALS OF LIBERALISM ........................... 31 I............................ 
 36 II............................ 
 43 III ............................ 
 48 IV ............................ 
 55 V............................ 
 62 VI ............................ 
 72 A VALUABLE ADMISSION ..................... 81 THE LESSONS OF THE CRISIS ................... 
 89 THE SERF-OWNERS AT WORK .................. 95 A ZEMSTVO CONGRESS ..................... 101 THE AGRARIAN QUESTION AND THE “CRITICS OF ” .... 
 103 IThe “Law” of Diminishing Returns .......... 
 107 IIThe Theory of Rent .................. 119 III Machinery in Agriculture ............... 130 IV The Abolition of the Antithesis Between Town and Country . 
 Particular Questions Raised by the “Critics” 146 V“The Prosperity of Advanced, Modern Small Farms” . 
 The Baden Example ................ 
. 
 159 VI The Productivity of a Small and a Big Farm . 
 An Example from East Prussia ............. 
 167 VII The Inquiry into Peasant Farming in Baden .... 
. 
 182 VIII General Statistics of German Agriculture for 1882 and 1895 . 
 The Question of the Medium Farms ... 194 IX Dairy Farming and Agricultural Co-operative Societies in Germany . 
 The Agricultural Population in Ger-many Divided According to Its Position in the Econ-omy ......................... 
. 
 205 THE “UNITY ” CONFERENCE OF R . 
S. 
D L. 
P. 
 ORGANISATIONS ABROAD , September 21-22 (October 4-5), 1901 .......... 
. 
 223 1. 
SPEECH DELIVERED ON SEPTEMBER 21 (OCTOBER 4) . 
 (Note from the Minutes )...................... 
 225 2. 
QUESTIONS SUBMlTTED TO THE UNION OF RUSSIA N SOCIAL-DEMOCRATS ABROAD AT THE “UNITY” CONFERENCE, SEPTEM-BER 21 (OCTOBER 4), 1901 .................. 230 FIGHTING THE FAMINE-STRICKEN ................ 
 231 REPLY TO THE ST . 
 PETERSBURG COMMITTEE .......... 
 239 PARTY AFFAIRS ABROAD ..................... 241 PENAL SERVITUDE REGULATIONS AND PENAL SERVITUDE SEN-TENCES............................ 
. 
 243 REVIEW OF HOME AFFAIRS ................... 
. 
 251 IFamine ........................ 253 IIAttitude Towards the Crisis and the Famine .... 
. 
 274 III The Third Element .................. 281 IV Two Speeches by Marshals of the Nobility ....... 
 289 PREFACE TO THE PAMPHLET DOCUMENTS OF THE “UNITY ” CON -FERENCE ............................ 
 302 THE PROTEST OF THE FINNISH PEOPLE ............. 
 306 THE JOURNAL SVOBODA ..................... A TALK WITH DEFENDERS OF ECONOMISM ............ 313 ON THE TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE REVOLUTION-ARY ACTIVITY OF G. 
 V. 
 PLEKHANOV ............... 321 DEMONSTRATIONS HAVE BEGUN ................ 
. 
 322311 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR ON A LETTER SOUTHERN WORKERS .......... 
. 
 326 ANARCHISM AND SOCIALISM ................... 
 327 1902 CONCERNING THE STATE BUDGET ................ 
 331 POLITICAL AGITATION AND “THE CLASS POINT OF VIEW” .... 
 337 REPLY TO “A READER” ..................... 344 WHAT IS TO BE DONE? Burning Questions of Our Movement ... 347 Preface ........................... 349 I Dogmatism and “Freedom of Criticism” ....... 
. 
 352 A. 
What Does “Freedom of Criticism” Mean? .... 
. 
 352 B. 
The New Advocates of “Freedom of Criticism” ... 356 C. 
Criticism in Russia ................ 
. 
 361 D. 
Engels on the Importance of the Theoretical Struggle ...................... 
 368 II The Spontaneity of the Masses and the Consciousness of the Social-Democrats ................ 
 373 A. 
The Beginning of the Spontaneous Upsurge .... 
 374 B. 
Bowing to Spontaneity . 
 Rabochaya Mysl .... 
. 
 378 C. 
The Self-Emancipation Group and Rabocheye Dyelo 387 III Trade-Unionist Politics and Social-Democratic Politics 397 A. 
Political Agitation and Its Restriction by the Econ-omists ...................... 
. 
 398 B. 
How Martynov Rendered Plekhanov More Profound 408 C. 
Political Exposures and “Training in Revolution-ary Activity ”................... 
. 
 412 D. 
What Is There in Common Between Economism and Terrorism? ................... 
 417 E. 
The Working Class as Vanguard Fighter for Democ-racy........................ 421 F. 
Once More “Slanderers”, Once More “Mystifiers” ... 436 IV The Primitiveness of the Economists and the Organi-sation of the Revolutionaries ............. 
 440 A. 
What Is Primitiveness? ............... 441 B. 
Primitiveness and Economism ............ 444 C. 
Organisation of Workers and Organisation of Rev-olutionaries ................... 
. 
 451 D. 
The Scope of Organisational Work ....... 
. 
 467 E. 
“Conspirational” Organisation and “Democratism” 473 F. 
Local and All-Russian Work ............ 482 V The “Plan” for an All-Russian Political Newspaper 492 A. 
Who Was Offended by the Article “Where To Begin” 493 B. 
Can a Newspaper Be a Collective Organiser? .... 
 498 C. 
What type of Organisation Do We Require? .... 
 510 Conclusion ........................ 517 Appendix . 
The Attempt to Unite Iskra with Rabocheye Dyelo ..................... 521 Correction to What Is To Be Done? ............ 528 Notes .............................. 531 The Life and Work of V . 
 I. 
 Lenin. 
 Chronology ......... 569 I L L U S T R A T I O N S First page of Iskra , No. 
 4, carrying Lenin’s article “Where To Begin” . 
 1901 ...................... 
. 
 15 Facsimile of the cover of the magazine Zarya , No . 
 2-3 1901; which published the following of Lenin’s writings: “The Persecutors of the Zemstvo and the Hannibals of Liberalism”, the first four chapters of “The Agrarian Question and the ‘Critics of Marx’” (under the heading“‘Critics’ on the Agrarian Question”), and “Review of HomeAffairs” ........................... 33 Facsimile of the title page of the magazine Obrasovaniye , No. 
 2, for 1906 which carried chapters V-IX of Lenin’s “The Agrarian Question and the ‘Critics of Marx’” .... 
 105 First page of the manuscript of Lenin’s “The Journal Svo-boda ”. 
 1901 ......................... 
 312-313 First page of the manuscript of Lenin’s “Anarchism and So-cialism” . 
 1901 ........................ 329 Cover of Lenin’s What Is To Be Done? 1902 ....... 
. 
 348-49 PREFACE Volume Five contains Lenin’s works written between May 1901 and February 1902. 
 These include articles and notes published in Iskra : “Where To Begin”, “Another Mas-sacre”, “A Valuable Admission”, “The Lessons of the Crisis”,“The Serf-Owners at Work”, “Fighting the Famine-Stricken”,“Party Affairs Abroad”, “A Talk with Defenders of Econ-omism”, “Demonstrations Have Begun”, “Political Agita-tion and ‘The Class Point of View’”, and others. 
 In these articles Lenin deals with the most important events in Rus-sian domestic affairs and throws light on the concrete tasksof building the Party and of the class struggle of the prole-tariat. 
 In the article “The Persecutors of the Zemstvo and the Hannibals of Liberalism”, published in Zarya in December 1901, Lenin elaborates the tactics of the Marxist party of the proletariat in relation to the liberal bourgeoisie. 
 “The Agrarian Question and the ‘Critics of Marx’” ex-pounds and develops the Marxist theory of the agrarian ques-tion and is a critique of the Russian and internationalrevisionists. 
 This volume also contains Lenin’s What Is To Be Done? the theoretical premises of which laid the foundations ofthe ideology of the Bolshevik Party. 
 Seven of the works of Lenin to be found in this volume are included in the Collected Works for the first time. 
 Of these, three are notes published in Iskra : “A Zemstvo Congress”, “On a Letter from ‘Southern Workers’”, and “Reply to ‘A Reader’”. 
 The other four documents are: “Speech Deliv-ered on September 21 (October 4, new style)” [Lenin’s speech at the “Unity” Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 organi-sations abroad on September 21 (October 4), 1901], “The Journal Svoboda ”, “On the Twenty-Fifth Anniversary of the Revolutionary Activity of G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov”, and “Anarch-ism and Socialism”. 
 These four items appeared in printonly after the October Revolution. 
 Written in May 1901 Published in Iskra, No. 
 4, May 1901Published according to the Iskra textWHERE TO BEGIN1 In recent years the question of “what is to be done” has confronted Russian Social-Democrats with particularinsistence. 
 It is not a question of what path we must choose(as was the case in the late eighties and early nineties), butof what practical steps we must take upon the known path and how they shall be taken. 
 It is a question of a system and plan of practical work. 
 And it must be admitted that we havenot yet solved this question of the character and the methodsof struggle, fundamental for a party of practical activity,that it still gives rise to serious differences of opinion whichreveal a deplorable ideological instability and vacillation. 
 On the one hand, the “Economist” trend, far from being dead, is endeavouring to clip and narrow the work of politicalorganisation and agitation. 
 On the other, unprincipled eclec-ticism is again rearing its head, aping every new “trend”,and is incapable of distinguishing immediate demands fromthe main tasks and permanent needs of the movement as a whole. 
 This trend, as we know, has ensconced itself in Rabocheye Dyelo . 
 2 This journal’s latest statement of “pro-gramme”, a bombastic article under the bombastic title “AHistoric Turn” (“ Listok ” Rabochevo Dyela , No. 
 6 3), bears out with special emphasis the characterisation we have given. 
Only yesterday there was a flirtation with “Economism”, a fury over the resolute condemnation of Rabochaya Mysl , 4 and Plekhanov’s presentation of the question of the struggle againstautocracy was being toned down. 
 But today Liebknecht’swords are being quoted: “If the circumstances change with-in twenty-four hours, then tactics must be changed withintwenty-four hours. 
” There is talk of a “strong fighting organ-isation” for direct attack, for storming the autocracy; of “broad revolutionary political agitation among the masses”(how energetic we are now—both revolutionary and political!); of “ceaseless calls for street protest,”; of “street demonstrations of a pronounced [ sic!] political character”; and so on, and so forth. 
 We might perhaps declare ourselves happy at Rabocheye Dyelo ’s quick grasp of the programme we put forward in the first issue of Iskra ,5 calling for the formation of a strong well-organised party, whose aim is not only to win isolated con-cessions but to storm the fortress of the autocracy itself; but the lack of any set point of view in these individuals can only dampen our happiness. 
 Rabocheye Dyelo , of course, mentions Liebknecht’s name in vain. 
 The tactics of agitation in relation to some specialquestion, or the tactics with regard to some detail of partyorganisation may be changed in twenty-four hours; but only people devoid of all principle are capable of changing, in twenty-four hours, or, for that matter, in twenty-four months,their view on the necessity—in general, constantly, andabsolutely—of an organisation of struggle and of politicalagitation among the masses. 
 It is ridiculous to plead differentcircumstances and a change of periods: the building of a fight-ing organisation and the conduct of political agitation are essential under any “drab, peaceful” circumstances, in anyperiod, no matter how marked by a “declining revolutionaryspirit”; moreover, it is precisely in such periods and undersuch circumstances that work of this kind is particularlynecessary, since it is too late to form the organisation in times of explosion and outbursts; the party must be in a state of readiness to launch activity at a moment’s notice. 
 “Changethe tactics within twenty-four hours”! But in order tochange tactics it is first necessary to have tactics; withouta strong organisation skilled in waging political struggleunder all circumstances and at all times, there can be no ques-tion of that systematic plan of action, illumined by firm principles and steadfastly carried out, which alone is worthyof the name of tactics. 
 Let us, indeed, consider the matter;we are now being told that the “historic moment” has pre-sented our Party with a “completely new” question—thequestion of terror. 
 Yesterday the “completely new” question was political organisation and agitation; today it is terror. 
 Is it not strange to hear people who have so grossly forgottentheir principles holding forth on a radical change in tactics? Fortunately, Rabocheye Dyelo is in error. 
 The question of terror is not a new question at all; it will suffice to recall briefly the established views of Russian Social-Democracy on the subject. 
 In principle we have never rejected, and cannot reject, terror. 
 Terror is one of the forms of military action that maybe perfectly suitable and even essential at a definite juncturein the battle, given a definite state of the troops and the existence of definite conditions. 
 But the important point is that terror, at the present time, is by no means suggested asan operation for the army in the field, an operation closelyconnected with and integrated into the entire system of strug-gle, but as an independent form of occasional attack unre-lated to any army. 
 Without a central body and with the weakness of local revolutionary organisations, this, in fact, is all that terror can be. 
 We, therefore, declare emphaticallythat under the present conditions such a means of struggleis inopportune and unsuitable; that it diverts the mostactive fighters from their real task, the task which is mostimportant from the standpoint of the interests of the move-ment as a whole; and that it disorganises the forces, not of the government, but of the revolution. 
 We need but recallthe recent events. 
 With our own eyes we saw that the massof workers and “common people” of the towns pressedforward in struggle, while the revolutionaries lacked a staff ofleaders and organisers. 
 Under such conditions, is there not the danger that, as the most energetic revolutionaries go over to terror, the fighting contingents, in whom alone it is possibleto place serious reliance, will be weakened? Is there not thedanger of rupturing the contact between the revolutionaryorganisations and the disunited masses of the discontented,the protesting, and the disposed to struggle, who are weak precisely because they are disunited? Yet it is this contact that is the sole guarantee of our success. 
 Far be it from us todeny the significance of heroic individual blows, but it isour duty to sound a vigorous warning against becominginfatuated with terror, against taking it to be the chief andbasic means of struggle, as so many people strongly incline to do at present. 
 Terror can never be a regular military op-eration; at best it can only serve as one of the methods em-ployed in a decisive assault. 
 But can we issue the call for such a decisive assault at the present moment? Rabocheye Dyelo apparently thinks we can. 
 At any rate, it exclaims: “Form assault columns!” But this, again, is more zeal than reason. 
 The main body of our military forces consists of volunteersand insurgents. 
 We possess only a few small units of regulartroops, and these are not even mobilised; they are not con-nected with one another, nor have they been trained to formcolumns of any sort, let alone assault columns. 
 In view of all this, it must be clear to anyone who is capable of appre-ciating the general conditions of our struggle and who ismindful of them at every “turn” in the historical course ofevents that at the present moment our slogan cannot be “Tothe assault”, but has to be, “Lay siege to the enemy fort-ress”. 
 In other words, the immediate task of our Party is not to summon all available forces for the attack right now, but to call for the formation of a revolutionary organisationcapable of uniting all forces and guiding the movement inactual practice and not in name alone, that is, an organisationready at any time to support every protest and every outbreakand use it to build up and consolidate the fighting forces suitable for the decisive struggle. 
 The lesson of the February and March events 6 has been so impressive that no disagreement in principle with thisconclusion is now likely to be encountered. 
 What we needat the present moment, however, is not a solution of the prob-lem in principle but a practical solution. 
 We should not only be clear on the nature of the organisation that is needed and its precise purpose, but we must elaborate a definiteplan for an organisation, so that its formation may be under-taken from all aspects. 
 In view of the pressing importanceof the question, we, on our part, take the liberty of submit-ting to the comrades a skeleton plan to be developed in greater detail in a pamphlet now in preparation for print. 
 7 In our opinion, the starting-point of our activities, the first step towards creating the desired organisation, or,let us say, the main thread which, if followed, would enableus steadily to develop, deepen, and extend that organisation,should be the founding of an All-Russian political news-paper. 
 A newspaper is what we most of all need; without it we cannot conduct that systematic, all-round propagandaand agitation, consistent in principle, which is the chief and permanent task of Social-Democracy in general and, in particular, the pressing task of the moment, when interest in politics and in questions of socialism has been aroused among the broadest strata of the population. 
 Never has theneed been felt so acutely as today for reinforcing dispersedagitation in the form of individual action, local leaflets,pamphlets, etc. 
, by means of generalised and systematicagitation that can only be conducted with the aid of the pe-riodical press. 
 It may be said without exaggeration that the frequency and regularity with which a newspaper is printed(and distributed) can serve as a precise criterion of how wellthis cardinal and most essential sector of our militantactivities is built up. 
 Furthermore, our newspaper mustbe All-Russian. 
 If we fail, and as long as we fail, to combine our efforts to influence the people and the government by means of the printed word, it will be utopian to think ofcombining other means, more complex, more difficult, butalso more decisive, for exerting influence. 
 Our movementsuffers in the first place, ideologically, as well as in practicaland organisational respects, from its state of fragmentation, from the almost complete immersion of the overwhelming majority of Social-Democrats in local work, which narrowstheir outlook, the scope of their activities, and their skillin the maintenance of secrecy and their preparedness. 
 It isprecisely in this state of fragmentation that one must lookfor the deepest roots of the instability and the waverings noted above. 
 The first step towards eliminating this short-coming, towards transforming divers local movements intoa single, All-Russian movement, must be the founding ofan All-Russian newspaper. 
 Lastly, what we need is definite-ly a political newspaper. 
 Without a political organ, a politi-cal movement deserving that name is inconceivable in the Europe of today. 
 Without such a newspaper we cannot pos-sibly fulfil our task—that of concentrating all the elementsof political discontent and protest, of vitalising thereby therevolutionary movement of the proletariat. 
 We have takenthe first step, we have aroused in the working class a passionfor “economic”, factory exposures; we must now take the next step, that of arousing in every section of the population that is at all politically conscious a passion for political exposure. 
 We must not be discouraged by the fact that the voice of political exposure is today so feeble, timid, and infrequent. 
 This is not because of a wholesale submission to police despot-ism, but because those who are able and ready to make ex-posures have no tribune from which to speak, no eager andencouraging audience, they do not see anywhere among thepeople that force to which it would be worth while directingtheir complaint against the “omnipotent” Russian Govern-ment. 
 But today all this is rapidly changing. 
 There is such a force—it is the revolutionary proletariat, which has demon-strated its readiness, not only to listen to and support the sum-mons to political struggle, but boldly to engage in battle. 
We are now in a position to provide a tribune for the nation-wide exposure of the tsarist government, and it is our dutyto do this. 
 That tribune must be a Social-Democratic news-paper. 
 The Russian working class, as distinct from the other classes and strata of Russian society, displays a constant in-terest in political knowledge and manifests a constant andextensive demand (not only in periods of intensive unrest)for illegal literature. 
 When such a mass demand is evident,when the training of experienced revolutionary leaders has already begun, and when the concentration of the working class makes it virtual master in the working-class districtsof the big cities and in the factory settlements and commu-nities, it is quite feasible for the proletariat to found a polit-ical newspaper. 
 Through the proletariat the newspaper willreach the urban petty bourgeoisie, the rural handicraftsmen, and the peasants, thereby becoming a real people’s political newspaper. 
 The role of a newspaper, however, is not limited solely to the dissemination of ideas, to political education, and tothe enlistment of political allies. 
 A newspaper is not onlya collective propagandist and a collective agitator, it is also a collective organiser. 
 In this last respect it may be lik-ened to the scaffolding round a building under construction,which marks the contours of the structure and facilitatescommunication between the builders, enabling them to dis-tribute the work and to view the common results achievedby their organised labour. 
 With the aid of the newspaper, and through it, a permanent organisation will naturally take shape that will engage, not only in local activities, butin regular general work, and will train its members to fol-low political events carefully, appraise their significance and their effect on the various strata of the population, and develop effective means for the revolutionary party to influence those events. 
 The mere technical task of regularly supplying thenewspaper with copy and of promoting regular distributionwill necessitate a network of local agents of the united party,who will maintain constant contact with one another, knowthe general state of affairs, get accustomed to performing regularly their detailed functions in the All-Russian work, and test their strength in the organisation of various revolu-tionary actions. 
 This network of agents * will form the skel-eton of precisely the kind of organisation we need—one that issufficiently large to embrace the whole country; sufficientlybroad and many-sided to effect a strict and detailed division of labour; sufficiently well tempered to be able to conduct steadily its own work under any circumstances, at all “sud-den turns”, and in face of all contingencies; sufficiently flex-ible to be able, on the one hand, to avoid an open battleagainst an overwhelming enemy, when the enemy has con-centrated all his forces at one spot, and yet, on the other, to take advantage of his unwieldiness and to attack him when and where he least expects it. 
 Today we are faced with therelatively easy task of supporting student demonstrationsin the streets of big cities; tomorrow we may, perhaps, havethe more difficult task of supporting, for example, the unem-ployed movement in some particular area, and the day after to be at our posts in order to play a revolutionary part in a peasant uprising. 
 Today we must take advantage of the tensepolitical situation arising out of the government’s cam-paign against the Zemstvo; tomorrow we may have to sup-port popular indignation against some tsarist bashi-bazoukon the rampage and help, by means of boycott, indictment demonstrations, etc. 
, to make things so hot for him as to *It will be understood of course, that these agents could work successfully only in the closest contact with the local committees(groups, study circles) of our Party. 
 In general, the entire plan weproject can, of course, be implemented only with the most active support of the committees which have on repeated occasions at-tempted to unite the Party and which, we are sure, will achieve thisunification—if not today, then tomorrow, if not in one way, then inanother. 
 force him into open retreat. 
 Such a degree of combat readi-ness can be developed only through the constant activity of regular troops. 
 If we join forces to produce a common news-paper, this work will train and bring into the foreground,not only the most skilful propagandists, but the most capa-ble organisers, the most talented political party leaderscapable, at the right moment, of releasing the slogan for thedecisive struggle and of taking the lead in that struggle. 
 In conclusion, a few words to avoid possible misunder-standing. 
 We have spoken continuously of systematic, plannedpreparation, yet it is by no means our intention to implythat the autocracy can be overthrown only by a regular siegeor by organised assault. 
 Such a view would be absurd anddoctrinaire. 
 On the contrary, it is quite possible, and historically much more probable, that the autocracy will collapse under the impact of one of the spontaneous outburstsor unforeseen political complications which constantly threat-en it from all sides. 
 But no political party that wishes toavoid adventurous gambles can base its activities on the an-ticipation of such outbursts and complications. 
 We must go our own way, and we must steadfastly carry on our regular work, and the less our reliance on the unexpected, the lessthe chance of our being caught unawares by any “historicturns”. 
 ANOTHER MASSACRE It seems that we are now passing through a period in which our working-class movement is once more about to engagewith irresistible force in the sharp conflicts that terrify the government and the propertied classes and bring joy and encouragement to socialists. 
 Yes, we rejoice in these conflictsand are encouraged by them, notwithstanding the tremendousnumber of victims claimed by military reprisals, because theworking class is proving by its resistance that it is not recon-ciled to its position, that it refuses to remain in slavery or to submit meekly to violence and tyranny. 
 Even with the most peaceful course of events, the present system alwaysand inevitably exacts countless sacrifices from the workingclass. 
 Thousands and tens of thousands of men and women,who toil all their lives to create wealth for others, perishfrom starvation and constant malnutrition, die prematurely from diseases caused by horrible working conditions, by wretch-ed housing and overwork. 
 He is a hundred times a hero whoprefers to die fighting in open struggle against the defendersand protectors of this infamous system rather than die the lin-gering death of a crushed, broken-down, and submissivenag. 
 We do not by any means want to imply that scuffling with the police is the best form of struggle. 
 On the contrary, we have always told the workers that it is in their intereststo carry on the struggle in a more calm and restrained man-ner, and to try to make use of all discontent for support tothe organised struggle of the revolutionary party. 
 But theprincipal source that sustains revolutionary Social-Democra-cy is the spirit of protest among the working class which, in view of the violence and oppression surrounding the work-ers, is bound to manifest itself from time to time in the form of desperate outbursts. 
 These outbursts arouse to conscious life the widest sections of the workers, oppressed by poverty and ignorance, and stimulate in them a noble hatred for the oppressors and enemies of liberty. 
 That is why the newsof massacres such as that which took place at the ObukhovWorks on May 7, makes us exclaim: “The workers’ revolt hasbeen suppressed; long live the revolt of the workers!” There was a time, and not very long ago at that, when workers’ revolts were a rare exception, called forth only by some special circumstances. 
 Now things have changed. 
A few years ago industry was flourishing, trade was brisk,and the demand for workers was great. 
 Nevertheless, the work-ers organised a number of strikes to improve their workingconditions; they realised that they must not let the moment slip by, that they must take advantage of the time when the employers were making particularly high profits and it wouldbe easier to win concessions from them. 
 The boom, however,has given way to a crisis. 
 The manufacturers cannot sell theirgoods, profits have declined, bankruptcies have increased,factories are cutting production, and workers are being dis-charged and turned into the streets in masses without a crust of bread. 
 The workers now have to fight desperately, not toimprove their conditions, but to maintain the old standardsand to reduce the losses the employers impose on them. 
 And sothe working-class movement develops in depth and extent:at first, struggle in exceptional and isolated cases; then, un-ceasing and stubborn battles during industrial prosperity and the trade boom; finally, similar unceasing and stubbornstruggle in the period of crisis. 
 We may now say that theworking-class movement has become a permanent featureof our life and that it will grow whatever the conditions. 
 The change-over from boom to crisis will not only teach our workers that united struggle is a permanent necessity, it will also destroy the harmful illusions that began to takeshape at the time of industrial prosperity. 
 By means ofstrikes, the workers were able in some places to force conces-sions from the employers with comparative ease, and this“economic” struggle assumed an exaggerated significance; it was forgotten that trade unions and strikes can, at best, only win slightly better terms for the sale of labour-pow-er as a commodity. 
 Trade unions and strikes cannot help in times of crisis when there is no demand for this “commodity”, they cannot change the conditions which convert labour-power into a commodity and which doom the masses of work-ing people to dire need and unemployment. 
 To change theseconditions, a revolutionary struggle against the wholeexisting social and political system is necessary; the indus-trial crisis will convince very many workers of the justiceof this statement. 
 Let us return to the massacre of May 7. 
 We give below avail-able information on the May strikes and manifestations ofunrest among the St. 
 Petersburg workers. 
 8 We shall also exam-ine the police report of the massacre. 
 Lately we have learnedto understand the significance of government (and police)reports of strikes, demonstrations, and clashes with the troops; we have gathered sufficient material to judge the reliability of these reports—the smoke of police false-hoods may sometimes give a clue to the fire of popularindignation. 
 “On May 7,” says the official report, “about two hundred workers employed in various departments of the Obukhov Steel Works in the village of Alexandrovskoye on the Schlüs-selburg Highway stopped work after the dinner break, and inthe course of their interview with Lieutenant ColonelIvanov, assistant to the director of the works, put forwarda number of groundless demands. 
” If the workers stopped work without giving two weeks’ notice (assuming the stoppage was not due to lawless acts all too frequently committed by the employers), evenaccording to Russian law (which of late has been systemati-cally enlarged and sharpened against the workers), they havemerely committed a common offence for which they are lia-ble to prosecution in a magistrate’s court. 
 But the Russian Government is making itself more and more ridiculous by its severity. 
 On the one hand, laws are passed designatingnew crimes (e. 
g. 
, wilful refusal to work or participation ina mob that damages property or resists armed force), penal-ties for striking are increased, etc. 
, while on the other, thephysical and political possibility of applying these laws and imposing corresponding penalties is disappearing. 
 It is physically impossible to prosecute thousands and tens ofthousands of men for refusing to work, for striking, or for “mobs”. 
 It is politically impossible to try each case of this sort, for no matter how the judges are selected and no matter how publicity is emasculated, there still remains at least the shadow of a trial, naturally a “trial” of the governmentand not of the workers. 
 Thus, criminal laws passed for thedefinite purpose of facilitating the government’s political struggle against the proletariat (and at the same time ofconcealing the political character of the struggle by “state” arguments about “public order”, etc. 
) are steadily forced into the background by direct political struggle and open street clashes. 
 “Justice” throws off the mask of majesty and im-partiality, and takes to flight, leaving the field to the police,the gendarmes, and the Cossacks, who are greeted with stones. 
 Let us take the government’s reference to the “demands” of the workers. 
 From a legal standpoint stoppage of work is a misdemeanour, irrespective of the workers’ demands. 
But the government has lost its chance of basing itself onthe law it recently issued, and it tries to justify its reprisalscarried out with “the means at its disposal” by declaring theworkers’ demands to be without basis. 
 Who were the judges in this affair? Lieutenant-Colonel Ivanov, assistant to the director of the works, the very authority against whom theworkers were complaining! It is not surprising, therefore,that the workers reply to such explanations by the powersthat be with a hail of stones. 
 And so, when the workers poured into the street and held up horse trams a real battle began. 
 Apparently the workers fought with all their might, for, although armed only withstones, they managed twice to beat off the attacks by police, gendarmes, mounted guards, and the armed factory guard. 
 * It is true, if police reports are to be believed, “several shots”were fired from the crowd, but no one was injured by them. 
 Stones, however, fell “ like hail ”, and the workers not only *Note this! The government communication states that “the armed factory guard” “were already standing by in the factory yard”,whereas the gendarmes, mounted guards, and the city police werecalled out later. 
 Since when, and why, was an armed guard main-tained in readiness in the factory yard? Since the First of May? Did they expect a workers’ demonstration? That we do not know; but itis clear that the government is deliberately concealing facts thatwould explain the mounting discontent and indignation of the workers. 
 put up a stubborn resistance, they displayed resourcefulness and ability in adapting themselves immediately to the situation and in selecting the best form of struggle. 
 They occupied the neighbouring courtyards and from over the fences poured a hail of stones on-the tsar’s bashi-bazouks, so thateven after three volleys had been fired, killing one man (only one?) and wounding eight (?) (one of whom died the fol-lowing day), even after this, although the crowd had fled, the fight still continued and some companies of the Omsk Infantry Regiment had to be called out to “clear the workersout of the neighbouring courtyards”. 
 The government emerged victorious, but such victories will bring nearer its ultimate defeat. 
 Every clash withthe people will increase the number of indignant workers who are ready to fight, and will bring into the foreground more experienced, better armed, and bolder leaders. 
 We havealready discussed the plan of action these leaders shouldfollow. 
 We have repeatedly pointed to the imperativenecessity for a sound revolutionary organisation. 
 But inconnection with the events of May 7, we must not lose sight of the following: Much has been said recently about the impossibility and the hopelessness of street fighting against modern troops. 
Particularly insistent on this have been the wise “Critics”who have dragged out the old lumber of bourgeois science inthe guise of new, impartial, scientific conclusions, and have distorted Engels’ words that refer, with reservations, only to a temporary tactic of the German Social-Democrats. 
 9 But we see from the example of even this one clash howabsurd these arguments are. 
 Street fighting is possible; it isnot the position of the fighters, but the position of the govern-ment that is hopeless if it has to deal with larger numbers than those employed in a single factory. 
 In the May 7 fight-ing the workers had nothing but stones, and, of course, themere prohibition of the city mayor will not prevent themfrom securing other weapons next time. 
 The workers wereunprepared and numbered only three and a half thousand;nevertheless, they repelled the attack of several hundred mounted guards, gendarmes, city police, and infantry. 
 Did the police find it easy to storm the one house, No. 
 63, Schlüsselburg Highway? 10 Ask yourselves—will it be easy to “clear the workers ” out of whole blocks, not merely out of one or two courtyards, in the St. 
 Petersburg working-class districts? When the time of decisive battle comes, will it not be necessary to “ clear” the houses and courtyards of the capital, not only of workers, but of all who have not forgot-ten the infamous massacre of March 4, 11 who have not become reconciled to the police government, but are only terri-fied by it and not yet confident of their own strength? Comrades! Do your best to collect the names of those killed and wounded on May 7. 
 Let all workers in the capital honourtheir memory and prepare for a new and decisive struggleagainst the police government for the people’s liberty! Iskra , No. 
 5, June 1901 Published according to the Iskra text Published according to the text in the magazine, checked with the text in the collection: Vl. 
 Ilyin. 
 Twelve Years . 
 1907Written in June 1901 First published in December 1901 in Zarya, No. 
 2-3 Signed: T. 
 P. 
THE PERSECUTORS OF THE ZEMSTVO AND THE HANNIBALS OF LIBERALISM12 Facsimile of the cover of the magazine Zarya , No. 
 2-3, 1901, which published the following of Lenin’s writings: “The Persecutors of the Zemstvo and the Hannibals of Liberalism”, the first four chaptersof “The Agrarian Question and the ‘Critics of Marx’” (under theheading: “The ‘Critics’ on the Agrarian Question”), and “Review of Home Affairs” It has been said of the Russian peasant that he is poorest of all in the consciousness of his poverty; of the ordinaryRussian subject, it may be said that, while he is poor incivil rights, he is poorest of all in the consciousness of his lackof rights. 
 Just as the peasant has grown accustomed to his wretched poverty, to living his life without pondering over the causes of his wretchedness, or the possibility of removingit, so the plain Russian subject has become accustomed tothe omnipotence of the government, to living on withouta thought as to whether the government can retain itsarbitrary power any longer and whether, side by side with it, there are not forces undermining the outmoded political system. 
 A particularly good “antidote” to this political apa-thy and somnolence is usually contained in the “secret docu-ments” * which reveal that, not only desperate cutthroats and confirmed enemies of the government, but also membersof the government itself, including ministers, and even the tsar, realise the tottering state of the autocracy and seek ways and means to improve their position, which they con-sider totally unsatisfactory. 
 One such document is theMemorandum drawn up by Witte, who, having quarrelledwith the Minister of the Interior, Goremykin, over thequestion of introducing Zemstvo institutions in the outlying regions, decided to display his perspicacity and his loyalty to the autocracy by drawing up an indictment against theZemstvo. 
 ** *I refer, of course, only to that “antidote”—by no means the sole or even the most “powerful” one—which is represented by the press. 
 **The Autocracy and the Zemstvo . 
 A Confidential Memorandum by the Minister of Finance, S. 
 Y. 
 Witte, with a preface and annotations by R. 
 N. 
 S. 
 Published by Zarya ,13 Stuttgart, Verlag von J. 
 H. 
 W. 
 Dietz Nachf. 
, 1901, pp. 
 xliv and 212. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR The charge is levelled against the Zemstvo that it is incompatible with autocracy, that by its very nature it is constitutional, that its existence inevitably gives rise to friction and conflict between the representatives of the pub-lic and the government. 
 The indictment is drawn up onthe basis of vast (relatively) and fairly well preparedmaterial, and since it is an indictment concerning a politi-cal affair (a rather peculiar one at that), we may be sure that it will be read with no less interest and will prove no less useful, than were the indictments in political trials oncepublished in our newspapers. 
 I Let us endeavour to determine whether the assertion that our Zemstvo is constitutional is borne out by the facts,and if so, to what extent, and in what precise sense. 
 In this matter, the epoch in which the Zemstvo was introduced is of particular importance. 
 The fall of serfdomwas a historical event of such magnitude that it inevitablymade a rent in the police veil concealing class antag-onisms. 
 The most solidified and best educated class, andthe one most accustomed to political power—the nobility— displayed a very definite desire to restrict the power of the autocracy by means of representative institutions. 
 Thereference to this fact in Witte’s Memorandum is extremelyinstructive. 
 He says: “Declarations concerning the neces-sity of ‘representation for the nobility’ and concerning‘the right of the Russian nation to elect its representatives to advise the supreme authority’ were made at assemblies of nobles as far back as 1859-60. 
” “Even the word ‘consti-tution’ was uttered. 
” * “Several Gubernia ** Committees *Dragomanov, “Zemstvo Liberalism in Russia”, p. 
 4. 
 Witte very often fails to mention that he has quoted from Dragomanov (cf. 
, for example, pp. 
 36-37 of the Memorandum and pp. 
 55-56 of the above-mentioned article), although he refers to him in some otherpassages. 
 **Gubernia , uyezd , volost —Russian administrative-territorial units. 
 The largest of these was the gubernia, which had its subdi-visions in uyezds, which in turn were subdivided into volosts. 
 This system of districting continued under the Soviet power until the introduction of the new system of administrative-territorial division Tr for the Peasant Question and individual members of commit-tees called before the drafting commissions urged the necessi-ty of drawing the public into participation in the admini-stration. 
 ‘Deputies are openly striving for a constitution,’wrote Nikitenko in his diary in 1859. 
” “When, after the promulgation of the Regulations of February 19, 1861,14 the hopes entertained in the autocracy were far from realised, and, moreover, when the ‘redder’ elements in the administration (likeN. 
 Milyutin) were alienated from the implementation of the Regula-tions, the movement in favour of ‘representation’ became more nearly unanimous. 
 It found expression in resolutions moved in many assem-blies of nobles in 1862, and in petitions drawn up by the assembliesin Novgorod, Tula, Smolensk, Moscow, St. 
 Petersburg, and Tver. 
The most remarkable of these was the Moscow petition, which pleadedfor local self-government, public trials, obligatory redemption of peas-ant lands, publication of budgets, freedom of the press, and the con-vening in Moscow of a National Duma representing all classes for thepurpose of drawing up a complete system of reforms. 
 Sharpest were thedecisions adopted and the petition drawn up by the nobility of Tveron February 2, urging the necessity of introducing a number of civiland economic reforms (e. 
g. 
, equality of rights for all social-estates, obligatory redemption of peasant lands) and ‘the convocation of elected representatives of the whole Russian nation as the only meansfor satisfactorily settling the questions raised, but not settled, inthe Regulations of February 19’. 
 * “Despite the administrative and judicial penalties inflicted on the initiators of the Tver petition **—continues Dragomanov—(not for *Dragomanov, op. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 5. 
 Cited in an abridged form in the Memorandum, p. 
 64, with a reference, not to Dragomanov, but toKolokol , No. 
 126 and to Revue des deux Mondes , June 15, 1862. 
 15 **Incidentally, one of the initiators of this petition, Nikolai Alexandrovich Bakunin, a younger brother of the famed M. 
 A. 
 Baku-nin, passed away recently (April 19, this year, i. 
e. 
, 1901) at his estate in Tver Gubernia. 
 Nikolai Alexandrovich signed the petition of1862, together with his younger brother Alexei and other mediators. 
This petition, relates the author of an item on N. 
 A. 
 Bakunin, publishedin one of our newspapers, called down punishment upon its signa-tories. 
 After a year’s confinement in the Fortress of Peter and Paul the signatories were released, but Nikolai Alexandrovich and his brother Alexei were not pardoned (they had not signed the petitionfor pardon) and as a consequence, were prohibited from holding publicoffice. 
 After that, N. 
 A. 
 Bakunin never made a public appearance,nor could he speak publicly again.... 
 In this manner our govern-ment retaliated against the lawful actions of the landed nobility at the time of “the great reforms”! And this was in 1862, prior to the Polish rebellion, at a time when even Katkov 16 proposed the convo-Zemsky Sobor the petition directly, but for the sharp motivation attached to the col-lective resignation of the civil mediators17), declarations in the same spirit were made at various assemblies of nobles in 1862 and earlyin 1863, at which projects for local self-government were also drawn up. 
 “At this time, a constitutional movement was in progress also among the raznochintsi , 18 finding expression there in more or less revolu-tionary secret societies and proclamations: Velikoruss (between August and November 1861, officers like Obruchev and others took part in itspublication), Zemskaya Duma (1862), Zemlya i Volya (1862-63).... 
 Velikoruss published a draft petition which, as many said, was to have been submitted to the tsar during the Thousand Years of Russia celebrations in August 1862. 
” The draft petition stated inter alia : “May it please Your Majesty to convene in one of the capitals of ourRussian fatherland, in Moscow or in St. 
 Petersburg, the representativesof the Russian nation in order that they may draw up a constitutionfor Russia.... 
” * If we recall also the proclamation To Young Russia ,19 the numerous arrests and the Draconic punishments inflictedupon the “political” criminals (Obruchev, Mikhailov, andothers), culminating in the frame-up of Chernyshevsky 20 and his being sentenced illegally to penal servitude, we shallhave a complete picture of the social situation that gave rise to the Zemstvo reform. 
 Witte states only half the truth in his Memorandum when he says that “the idea underlyingthe establishment of Zemstvo institutions was undoubtedlya political one”, that governing circles “undoubtedly tookinto consideration” the liberal and constitutionalist aspira-tions of the people. 
 The hidebound official view on social phenomena, which the author of the Memorandum reveals throughout, is here demonstrated by his ignoring the revo-lutionary movement and by his concealing the Draconic meas-ures of repression with which the government protected itself against the onset of the revolutionary “party”. 
 True,from our modern viewpoint, it seems strange to speak of a revolutionary “party” and of its onset at the beginning of the sixties. 
 Forty years of historical experience have made usmore exacting with regard to what may be called revolution-ary movements and revolutionary onsets. 
 But it must notbe forgotten that at that time, after thirty years of the rule National Duma were current in Russian literature of the sixties of the past century as terms denoting national representative assem-bly. 
— Tr. 
] *Cf. 
 V. 
 Burtsev, One Hundred Years , p. 
 39. 
 of Nicholas I, no one could have foreseen the course of events, no one could have estimated the government’s real strength of resistance or the real strength of the people’s indignation. 
 Even the most cautious and sober politician could not butacknowledge the possibility of a revolutionary outbreak andthe serious danger of a peasant revolt—in the obtaining con-ditions of the revival of the democratic movement in Europe;the ferment in Poland; the discontent in Finland; the demands for political reforms made by the entire press and by all the nobility; the widespread distribution of Kolokol through-out Russia; the powerful appeals of Chernyshevsky, who wasable, by means even of censored articles, to educate genuinerevolutionaries ; the appearance of proclamations; the ferment among the peasants, who were “very often” * compelled b y armed force and bloodshed to accept the Regulations that *L. 
 Panteleyev, “Reminiscences of the Sixties”, in the collec-tion of essays, At the Glorious Post (p. 
 315). 
21 This minor piece con-tains a number of very interesting facts on the revolutionary unrest in 1861-62 and on the police reaction.... 
 “Early in 1862 the social atmosphere was extremely tense; the slightest incident could havegiven a strong impetus to the course of events in either direction. 
 The impetus was given by the great conflagrations that occurred in St. 
 Petersburg in May of that year. 
” These fires first broke out on May 16and raged with particular fierceness on May 22 and 23—on the latter date there were five conflagrations. 
 On May 28, the Apraksin Place [a market-place in St. 
 Petersburg named after its owner, CountApraksin. 
— Tr. 
] caught fire and a wide area surrounding it was laid waste. 
 The populace attributed these fires to the students, and the rumours were taken up by the newspapers. 
 The manifesto To Young Russia , proclaiming a bloody war against the whole existing system and justifying every means to this end, was taken to confirm the rumours of incendiarism. 
 “After May 28, something in the natureof martial law was proclaimed in St. 
 Petersburg. 
” A special committee was established with powers to take extraordinary measures for the protection of the capital. 
 The city was divided into three zones, eachunder the control of a military governor. 
 A field court martial was set up to try those accused of incendiarism. 
 Sovremennik 22 and Russ-koye Slovo23 were suspended for eight months; Dyen ,24 published by Aksakov, was suppressed. 
 Stringent temporary press regulations (sanc-tioned on May 12, i. 
e. 
, before the fires broke out ; consequently, “ the progress of events ” was towards reaction and was unrelated to the fires, the opinion of Mr. 
 Panteleyev notwithstanding) and regulations for the surveillance of printing locations were resorted to. 
 Numerous political arrests were made (Chernyshevsky and N. 
 Serno-Solovye-vich, Rymarenko, and others); Sunday schools and public reading-rooms were closed; permits for public lectures in St. 
 Petersburg stripped them of everything; the refusal of whole groups of civil mediators from among the nobility to apply such Regu-lations, and, finally, the student disorders. 
 Under such circumstances, the autocratic government, which held it tobe its lofty mission to protect, at all costs, the omnipotenceand irresponsibility of the court camarilla and the army ofofficial leeches, on the one hand, and to support the worstrepresentatives of the exploiting classes, on the other—such a government had no other recourse than ruthlessly to exter-minate individuals, the conscious and indomitable enemiesof tyranny and exploitation (i. 
e. 
, “the ringleaders” of “therevolutionary party”), terrify the masses of discontentedpeople, and bribe them with small concessions. 
 This meantpenal servitude for those who preferred to remain silent rather than pour forth stupid or hypocritical phrases about the “great emancipation”; reforms ( innocuous for the autocracy and the exploiting classes ) for those who waxed enthusiastic over the liberalism of the government and the era ofprogress. 
 We do not wish to suggest that these calculated reaction-ary police tactics were clearly conceived and systematically pursued by all, or even by a few, of the members of theruling clique. 
 Some of them, on account of their narrow-mindedness, may not have pondered on the significance of thesetactics as a whole and may have been childishly enthusiasticabout “liberalism”, failing to observe its police mantling. 
 In general, however, there is no doubt that the collective experience and collective reasoning of the rulers compelledthem to pursue these tactics unswervingly. 
 Not in vain didmost of the grandees and notables undergo a prolongedtraining in bureaucratic and police methods in the service became more difficult to obtain; and the second department of the Literary Fund25 and even the Chess Club26 were closed down. 
 The Committee of Inquiry failed to establish any connection be-tween the fires and politics. 
 One of its members, Stolbovsky, told Mr. 
Panteleyev that in the Committee “he succeeded in exposing the prin-cipal false witnesses who, it seems, were the cat’s-paw of police agents” (325-26). 
 Thus, there are weighty grounds for believing that the ru-mours about student incendiarism were circulated by the police . 
 The despicable exploitation of the ignorance of the people for thepurpose of slandering revolutionaries and protesters was, therefore,in full swing at the height of the “epoch of great reforms”. 
 of Nicholas I, and were, so to speak, case-hardened by fire and water. 
 They remembered how sovereigns had at one time flirted with liberalism, and at another acted as the executioners of the Radishchevs27 and “let loose” the Arakcheyevs28 at their loyal subjects; they remembered December 14, 1820,29 and they played the role of gendarme of Europe the Russian Gov-ernment had played in 1848-49. 
 30 The historical experience of autocracy not only compelled the government to pursue tactics of intimidation and corruption, but also compelled many independent liberals to recommend these tactics tothe government. 
 In proof of this, we shall quote the opinionsof Koshelev and Kavelin. 
 In his pamphlet, Constitution , Autocracy , and the National Duma (Leipzig, 1862), A. 
 Koshe-lev expresses opposition to a constitution, advocates the con-vening of a National Advisory Duma, and anticipates the following objection: “To convene a National Duma means to lead Russia towards revo-lution, i. 
e. 
, to repeat, in Russia, the États généraux ,31 which were sub-sequently transformed into the Convention and which came to an endwith the events of 1792, the proscriptions, the guillotine, the noyades , * etc. 
” “No, gentlemen,” replied Koshelev, “it will not be the convoca-tion of a National Duma that will prepare the ground for revolution, as you understand it. 
 Revolution will come much more surely and rapidly as a result of the hesitant and contradictory actions of thegovernment, one step forward—one step backward, edicts and lawsimpossible of execution, the restraints placed upon thought and speech;as a result of the police (open, and what is worse, secret) surveillanceover the actions of the social-estates and of private persons, the petty persecution of certain individuals, the plunder of the Treasury, the squandering of public funds and the lavish granting of rewards, theincapacity of statesmen and their alienation from Russia, etc. 
, etc. 
A country just awakening from centuries of oppression can be moresurely driven to revolution (again as you understand it) by militaryexecutions, solitary confinement, and banishment; for rankling wounds are incomparably more sensitive and painful than fresh wounds. 
 But have no fear, the revolution, which, as you suppose, was broughtabout in France by journalists and other writers, will not break out inRussia. 
 Let us also hope that no society of desperate hotheads, whochoose assassination as a means of attaining their ends, will be formedin Russia (although it is more difficult to vouch for that). 
 What is more probable and dangerous is that, influenced by the split and unob-served by the rural, urban, and secret police, an alliance will be estab-lished between the peasants and the petty-bourgeois townspeople, *Mass executions, by drowning. 
— Ed. 
 which will be joined by young and old, writers and adherents of Veliko-russ , Young Russia , etc. 
 Such an all-destructive alliance, advocating equality, not before, but despite, the law (What matchless liberalism!We, of course, are in favour of equality, but not of equality despite the law—the law which destroys equality!), not the popular, histori-cal village commune, but its morbid progeny, and not the rule of reas-on, which certain office-holders fear so much, but the rule of bruteforce, which these office-holders so readily employ—such an alliance,I say, is far more probable in Russia and may be far more powerfulthan the moderate, well-meaning, and independent opposition to the government which our bureaucrats abhor so much and which they try so hard to restrict and suppress. 
 Do not imagine that the partyor the inner, secret, and anonymous press is small and weak, do notimagine that you have plucked it out root and branch. 
 No! By prevent-ing the youth from completing their education, by treating youthfulpranks as if they were political crimes, by petty persecution and police surveillance you have increased the strength of that party tenfold, and have multiplied it and spread it throughout the Empire. 
 What willour statesmen resort to in the face of an outbreak resulting from suchan alliance? Armed force? But will that be absolutely reliable?”(pp. 
 49-51). 
 Do not the pompous phrases of this tirade obviously suggest the tactics: destroy the “hotheads” and the adherents ofthe “alliance between the peasants and the petty-bourgeoistownspeople”; satisfy and disunite the “well-meaning andmoderate opposition” through concessions? But the gov-ernment proved to be cleverer and more agile than the Koshelevs imagined; it conceded much less than a National“Advisory” Duma. 
 And the following from a private letter written by K. 
 D. 
 Kavelin to Herzen, 32 dated August 6, 1862: “... The news from Russia is not so bad, in my opinion. 
 It was not Nicholas Solovyevich that was arrested, but Alexander. 
 The arrests do not surprise me and, I confess, do not seem to me outra-geous. 
 A revolutionary party considers every means to over-throw the government justified, while the government defends itself by every means at its disposal. 
 Arrests andbanishment under the reign of the despicable Nicholas were quite another thing. 
 People then died for their ideas, their convictions, their faith, and their utterances. 
 I would liketo see you in the government’s boots and see what you would do against a party that is secretly and openly working against you. 
 I like Chernyshevsky very, very much, but neverin my life have I seen such a brouillon [an irascible, unso-ciable bully, a sower of discord], * such a tactless and cock-sure fellow! To perish in vain, for absolutely no reason at all! There cannot be the least doubt now that the conflagra-tions have a connection with the leaflets. 
” ** What an exam-ple of servile-professorial profundity! It is the revolutionaries who are to blame for everything; it is they who are conceitedenough to hiss at phrase-mongering liberals, they who are so impudent as to work secretly and openly against the govern-ment and so tactless as to get themselves incarcerated in theFortress of Peter and Paul. 
 He, too, the liberal professor, would punish people like these “with all the means at his disposal”, were he in power. 
 II Thus, the Zemstvo reform was one of the concessions forced from the autocratic government by public ferment andrevolutionary pressure. 
 We have dealt with the character ofthis pressure in detail in order to supplement and correct thepicture outlined in the Memorandum by its bureaucratic author, who obscured the struggle that had given rise to this concession. 
 Nevertheless, the half-hearted and pusillanimouscharacter of this concession is quite clearly described inthe Memorandum: “At first, when the Zemstvo reform was just being undertaken, it was no doubt intended as a first step toward the introduction of repre-sentative institutions *** , but later, when Count Lanskoi and N. 
 A. 
 Mi-lyutin were replaced by Count Valuyev, there was an obvious desire,as even the ex-Minister of the Interior admits, to act in a spirit of‘conciliation’, ‘softly and evasively’. 
 ‘The government has no clear *Interpolations in square brackets (within passages quoted by Lenin) have been introduced by Lenin, unless otherwise indicat-ed. 
— Tr. 
 **We quote from the German translation of Dragomanov’s edi-tion of the correspondence of K. 
 D. 
 Kavelin and I. 
 S. 
 Turgenev withA. 
 I. 
 Herzen: Bibliothek russischer Denkwürdigkeiten , herausgegeben von Th. 
 Schiemann, Stuttgart, 1894, Bd. 
 4, S. 
 65-66. 
 *** There is “no doubt” that the author of the Memorandum, in employing the language of Leroy-Beaulieu, commits the usual bureau-cratic exaggeration. 
 There is “no doubt” that neither Lanskoi norMilyutin had anything very definite in mind, and it is ridiculous toregard the evasive phrases of Milyutin (“in principle in favour of theConstitution, but regards its introduction as premature”) as a “first step”. 
 idea of its aims,’ he said at the time. 
 In short, an attempt was made— unfortunately made so often by statesmen and always with bad resultsfor everyone—to act evasively between two opposite opinions, tosatisfy liberal aspirations and preserve the existing system. 
 ” The pharisaical word “unfortunately” is highly amusing. 
 A minister of the police government describes as casual the tactics which the government could not but pursue and did pursue in adopting the factory inspection laws, as wellas the law on the reduction of the working day (June 2, 1897),and which it is now (1901) pursuing in General Vannovsky’sflirtation with the “public”. 
 33 “On the one hand, it was stated in the explanatory Memorandum attached to the regulations governing Zemstvo institutions that thepurpose of the proposed law was to develop as completely and asconsistently as possible the principle of local self-government, and that‘the Zemstvo administration is merely a special organ of one and the same state authority’.... 
 Severnaya Pochta , then the organ of the Ministry of the Interior, hinted broadly that the institutions to beestablished were to serve as schools for representative bodies. 
 “On the other hand, ... the Zemstvo institutions are described in the explanatory Memorandum as private and as public institutions, sub-ject to the general laws in the same way as individual societies and private persons are subject.... 
 “Both the provisions in the Regulations of 1864 and, in particular, all the subsequent measures adopted by the Ministry of the Interior inrelation to the Zemstvo institutions clearly indicate that the ‘independ-ence’ of the Zemstvo institutions was seen as a great danger, and thatthe government was afraid to permit the proper development of these institutions, being fully aware of what that would lead to . 
 [Our italics throughout. 
] ... There is no doubt that those who had to carry out theZemstvo reform did so merely as a concession to public opinion , in order as the explanatory Memorandum stated, ‘to limit the unrealisable expectations and radical aspirations which have been aroused among the various social-estates in connection with the establishment of the Zemstvo institutions’; at the same time, these people fully understood it [the reform?] and strove to prevent the proper development of the Zemstvo , to give it a private character, restrict its powers, etc. 
 While pacifying the liberals with the promise that the first step would not bethe last and declaring, or, to be more precise, echoing the adherentsof the liberal trend, that it was necessary to grant the Zemstvo insti-tutions real and independent powers, Count Valuyev, in the very act of drafting the Regulations of 1864 , strove in every way to restrict the powers of those institutions and place them under strict administrativeguardianship.... 
 “Bereft of a single guiding idea, representing a compromise between two opposite trends, the Zemstvo institutions, in the form in which they were established by the Regulations of 1864, proved in practice to be out of accord with the fundamental idea of local self-government on which they were based, as well as with the administrative systeminto which they were mechanically inserted and which, moreover,had neither been reformed nor adapted to the new conditions of life. 
 The Regulations of 1864 sought to reconcile the irreconcilable and in that way to satisfy both the advocates and opponents of Zemstvo self-government. 
 The former were offered superficialities and hopes for the future , while in order to satisfy the latter the powers of the Zemstvo institutions were given an extremely elastic definition . 
” What pointed words our ministers sometimes accidentally let drop when they desire to put a spoke in the wheel of oneof their colleagues and to display their profundity, and howuseful it would be for every one of our self-complacent Russians and all admirers of the “great” reforms to hang on their walls in golden frames the wise police maxims: “Pacifythe liberals with the promise that the first step will notbe the last”, “offer” them “superficialities and hopes for thefuture”! It would be particularly useful at the present timeto refer to these precepts when reading in articles or other items in newspapers about General Vannovsky’s “heartfelt solicitude”. 
 Thus, from the very beginning, the Zemstvo was doomed to serve as a fifth wheel to the wagon of Russian stateadministration, a wheel tolerated by the bureaucracy only insofar as it would not disturb its absolute authority, while the role of the representatives of the population was restrict-ed to the simple technical fulfilment of the functions outlinedby this very bureaucracy. 
 The Zemstvos had no executiveorgans of their own, they had to act through the police, theyhad no contact with one another, and they were immediatelyplaced under the control of the administration. 
 Having made such a harmless concession, the government, on the very day after the establishment of the Zemstvos, began systematical-ly to impose restrictions upon them; the almighty bureaucraticclique could not reconcile itself to the elected representation of the social-estates and began to persecute it in every pos-sible way. 
 A very interesting part of the Memorandum is the summary of facts on this persecution, notwithstanding its obvious incompleteness. 
 We have seen how pusillanimous and irrational was the attitude of the liberals towards the revolutionary movementat the beginning of the sixties. 
 Instead of supporting the “alliance of the petty-bourgeois townspeople and the peasants with the adherents of Velikoruss ”, they feared this “alliance” and held it up as a bogy with which to scare the government. 
 Instead of rising to the defence of the leaders of the democraticmovement, persecuted by the government, they pharisai-cally washed their hands of them and justified the action ofthe government. 
 This treacherous policy of grandiloquenceand shameful flabbiness met with poetic justice. 
 Having dealt with those who proved themselves capable, not merely of jabbering about liberty, but of fighting for it, the govern-ment felt sufficiently strong to squeeze the liberals out ofeven the minor and inferior positions which they had occu-pied “with the permission of the authorities”. 
 So long as the“alliance of the petty-bourgeois townspeople and the peasants” with the revolutionaries represented a serious menace, the Ministry of the Interior itself mumbled words about a “schoolof representative institutions”, but when the “tactless andcock-sure” hecklers and hotheads had been removed, the“scholars” were treated with an iron hand. 
 Then a tragicom-ical epic began. 
 The Zemstvo appealed for an extension of its rights, but was deprived of one right after another and given “fatherly” homilies in answer to its petitions. 
 But letthe historical dates, even those presented in the Memoran-dum, speak for themselves. 
 On October 12, 1866, the Ministry of the Interior issued a circular subordinating the Zemstvo employees completely to government institutions. 
 On November 21 a law was passed restricting the right of the Zemstvo in taxing commercialand industrial establishments. 
 The St. 
 Petersburg ZemstvoAssembly, in 1867, sharply criticised this law, and (onthe proposal of Count A. 
 P. 
 Shuvalov) adopted a decisionto petition the government to arrange for the questions touched upon by this law to be discussed by “the combined forces and with the simultaneous efforts of the central admini-stration and the Zemstvo”. 
 The government’s answer tothis petition was to close down the St. 
 Petersburg Zemstvoinstitutions and to resort to reprisals: the chairman of theSt. 
 Petersburg Zemstvo Board, Kruse, was banished to Oren-burg; Count Shuvalov—to Paris; and Senator Luboshchin-sky was ordered to resign. 
 Severnaya Pochta , organ of the Ministry of the Interior, published an article in which “these stern measures of punishment were explained by the fact that the Zemstvo Assemblies, too, from the very opening of their sessions, had acted contrary to the law [to what law? and why were the law-breakers not brought to trial , when only shortly before a speedy, just, and merciful court procedurehad been introduced?]; that instead of supporting the Zem-stvo Assemblies of other gubernias, utilising for that purposethe rights which His Majesty has graciously granted them for exercising proper care over the local economic interests of the Zemstvo in their charge [i. 
e. 
, instead of being humblysubmissive and following the “intentions” of the officialdom],they strove continuously, by falsely explaining the case andmisinterpreting the laws, to rouse sentiments of mistrust and lack of respect for the government ”. 
 After such an admoni-tion, it is not surprising that “the other Zemstvos failed to support the St. 
 Petersburg Zemstvo, although the law ofNovember 21, 1866, had everywhere given rise to deep-goingdiscontent, so that at meetings many people declared it tobe tantamount to destroying the Zemstvos”. 
 On December 16, 1866, the Senate issued a “clarification” granting the governors of the gubernias the right to refuse endorsement to any person elected by a Zemstvo Assemblywhom the respective governor deemed politically unrelia-ble. 
 On May 4, 1867, there followed another Senate interpre-tation to the effect that communication of Zemstvo propos-als to other gubernias was contrary to law, since Zemstvo institutions must concern themselves only with local affairs. 
 On June 13 the Council of State issued a ruling, with Impe-rial sanction, prohibiting publication of decisions, minutes,reports of discussions, etc. 
, of the meetings of Zemstvo, urban,and social-estate assemblies without the consent of thegubernia authorities. 
 Further, that law extended the powers of chairmen of Zemstvo Assemblies; it granted them the right to close meetings at their discretion and imposed uponthem the obligation, under threat of punishment , to close any meeting at which questions not in consonance with thelaw were presented for discussion. 
 The public greeted thismeasure with hostility, regarding it as a serious restric-tion of Zemstvo activity. 
 “Every one knows,” Nikitenko entered in his diary, “that the Zemstvos are tied hand andfoot by the new regulations which give the chairmen of Assemblies and the governors of gubernias almost unlimited powers over them. 
” The circular of October 8, 1868 makes it obligatory to obtain the consent of the governor for the publication even of the reports of the Zemstvo Boardsand restricts inter-communication between Zemstvos. 
 In1869 the office of inspector of elementary schools was estab-lished for the purpose of taking the effective management ofelementary education out of the hands of the Zemstvos. 
 A regulation issued by the Committee of Ministers on Sep-tember 19, 1869, which received Imperial sanction, declaresthat “neither in their composition nor in their fundamentalprinciples are Zemstvo institutions governmental authori-ties”. 
 The law of July 4 and the circular of October 22, 1870confirm and increase the subordination of Zemstvo employ-ees to the governors of the gubernias. 
 In 1871 instructions were issued to the inspectors of elementary schools empow-ering them to dismiss teachers who were deemed politicallyunreliable and to suspend all decisions of the school coun-cils and submit them to the school guardians for theirsanction. 
 On December 25, 1873, Alexander II, in a rescript addressed to the Minister of Education, expressed the fear that unless proper guardianship and control are exercised over them , the elementary schools may be converted “ into an instrument for the moral corruption of the people , some attempts at which have already been disclosed ,” and he ordered the marshals of the nobility, by their close co-operation, to preserve the moral influence of the schools. 
 In 1874 a new reg-ulation concerning the elementary schools was issued, whichplaced the management of the schools entirely in the handsof the head masters. 
 The Zemstvo “protested”—if a petitionpleading that the law be revised and that the representativesof the Zemstvo take part in this revision (the petition of the Kazan Zemstvo in 1874) can, without irony, be described as a protest. 
 Of course, the petition was rejected. 
 Etc. 
, etc. 
 III Such was the first course of lessons given to Russian cit-izens in the “school of representative institutions” openedby the Ministry of the Interior. 
 Fortunately, in addition tothe political scholars who, in connection with the constitu-tional declarations of the sixties, wrote that “it is time to give up all nonsense and get down to business, and business is now in the Zemstvo institutions and nowhere else”, * there were in Russia also “hotheads”, who were not satisfiedwith such “tact” and went with revolutionary propagandaamong the people. 
 Although they adhered to a theory whichin essence was not revolutionary, their propaganda rouseda spirit of discontent and protest among broad strata of the educated youth. 
 Despite their utopian theory, which rejected political struggle, the movement led to a desperate grapplebetween the government and a handful of heroes, to a strug-gle for political freedom. 
 Thanks to this struggle, and to italone, the situation again changed; the government wasonce more compelled to make concessions, and the liberals once again revealed their political immaturity, their inability to support the fighters and bring real pressure to bear uponthe government. 
 The constitutional aspirations of the Zemst-vo became very marked, but these proved to be but a feeble“impulse”, despite the fact that Zemstvo liberalism in itselfhad made decided political progress. 
 Particularly noteworthy was its attempt to establish an illegal party and to set up its own political organ. 
 In his Memorandum, Witte summa-rises some of these illegal writings (of Cannan, Dragomanov,Tikhomirov), in order to demonstrate the “slippery path”(p. 
 98) upon which the Zemstvo had entered. 
 In the late sev-enties, several congresses of Zemstvo liberals were held. 
 The liberals decided “to take measures to bring about at least a temporary cessation of the destructive activities of theextreme revolutionary party, for they were convinced thatnothing could be achieved by peaceful means if the terror-ists continued to irritate and alarm the government by threatsand acts of violence” (p. 
 99). 
 Thus, instead of making an effort to extend the struggle, to secure considerable public support for individual revolutionaries, to organise some sortof public pressure (in the form of demonstrations, of refusalby the Zemstvo to carry out compulsory expenditures, etc. 
),the liberals again appealed for “tact”—“not to irritate” *A letter written by Kavelin to relatives in 1865, in which he refers to the petition of the Moscow nobility for “the convocation ofa general assembly of representatives of the land of Russia to discussneeds common to the whole state”. 
 the government!—to employ the “peaceful means” that had so brilliantly proved their futility in the sixties! * Of course, the revolutionaries refused to agree to any cessation or sus-pension of fighting actions. 
 The Zemstvo supporters thenformed the League of Oppositional Elements, which was latertransformed into the Zemstvo Union and Self-GovernmentSociety, or Zemstvo Union. 
 The programme of the ZemstvoUnion contained the following demands: (1) freedom of speech and the press, (2) inviolability of the person, and (3) the convocation of a Constituent Assembly. 
 An attempt topublish illegal pamphlets in Galicia failed (the Austrian po-lice seized the manuscripts and the persons who intended toprint them), and in August 1881 Volnoye Slovo , 34 edited in Geneva by Dragomanov (ex-professor of Kiev University), became the official organ of the Zemstvo Union. 
 “In the final analysis,” wrote Dragomanov in 1888, “the attempt to pub-lish Volnoye Slovo as a Zemstvo organ cannot be regarded as successful, if only for the reason that Zemstvo material didnot begin to reach the editorial office regularly until late in1882 and publication ceased in May 1883” (op. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 40). 
 The failure of the liberal organ was a natural effect of the weakness of the liberal movement. 
 On November 20, 1878,Alexander II delivered a speech at a meeting of representa-tives of the social-estates in Moscow, in which he expressedthe hope that “he would obtain their co-operation in check-ing the erring younger generation which was pursuing the fatal path whither suspect persons were striving to lead it. 
” Later, an appeal for public co-operation appeared in Pra-vitelstvenny Vestnik 35 (No. 
 186, 1878). 
 In reply, five Zemstvo Assemblies (Kharkov, Poltava, Chernigov, Samara, andTver) issued declarations urging the need to convene aNational Assembly. 
 “We may believe also,” says Witte in his Memorandum, after summarising in detail the contents *Dragomanov said in all justice: “As a matter of fact, liberalism in Russia cannot employ absolutely ‘peaceful means’, because every declaration in favour of changing the higher administration is pro-hibited by law. 
 The Zemstvo liberals should have stepped resolutelyover the bounds of this prohibition, and in this way at least havedemonstrated their strength to both the government and the terror-ists. 
 As the Zemstvo liberals did not demonstrate this strength, theylived to see the day when the government revealed its intention to destroy the already truncated Zemstvo institutions” (ibid. 
, pp. 
 41-42). 
 of these petitions, of which only three appeared in the press in full, “that the Zemstvo declarations on the convocation of a National Assembly would have been far more numerous, had not the Ministry of the Interior taken timely steps toprevent such declarations; the marshals of the nobility, aschairmen of gubernia Zemstvo Assemblies, received circularletters instructing them to prevent even the reading of suchpetitions at meetings of the assemblies. 
 In some places, arrests were made and councillors banished. 
 In Chernigov the meeting hall was invaded and forcibly cleared by gen-darmes” (p. 
 104). 
 The liberal magazines and newspapers supported the mov-ement. 
 A petition signed by “twenty-five prominent Moscowcitizens” addressed to Loris-Melikov asked for the convoca-tion of an independent assembly of representatives of the Zemstvos which should be given the right to participate inthe government of the nation. 
 In appointing Loris-MelikovMinister of the Interior, the government was apparently making a concession. 
 But only apparently ; for not only were no decisive steps taken, there were not even any declarations that might be called positive and incapable of misinterpre-tation. 
 Loris-Melikov called together the editors of St. 
 Pe-tersburg periodicals and explained to them “the programme”:to learn the wishes, needs, etc. 
, of the population, to enablethe Zemstvos, etc. 
, to enjoy their legal rights (the liberalprogramme guarantees the Zemstvos those “rights” of which the law systematically deprives them!), etc. 
 The author of the Memorandum states: “Through the medium of these interlocutors the Minis-ter’s programme was circulated throughout Russia—for whichpurpose they had been called together. 
 In point of fact, theprogramme did not promise anything definite. 
 One could read into it anything one desired, i. 
e. 
, everything or noth-ing. 
 A leaflet secretly distributed at the time was right inits way [only in “its” way, not absolutely in “every” way!]when it stated that the programme simultaneously waggeda ‘fox tail’ and gnashed ‘wolf’s fangs’. 
 This attack on theprogramme and its author is the more understandable, be-cause, in communicating the programme to the representa-tives of the press, the Count strongly urged them ‘not to con-fuse and not to excite the public mind needlessly with their visionary illusions’. 
” But the liberal Zemstvo supporters refused to listen to the truth contained in the secret leaflet and accepted the wagging of the “fox tail” as a “new policy” worthy of confidence. 
 “The Zemstvos believed and sympa-thised with the government,” says the Memorandum, quotingan illegally published pamphlet, The Opinions of the Zemstvo Assemblies on the Present State of Russia , “and they seemed afraid of running too far ahead and of pestering the govern-ment with excessive requests. 
” A characteristic admission on the part of the Zemstvo adherents, who enjoyed freedomof expression! The Zemstvo Union at its congress in 1880 hadonly just decided “to strive to secure central popular repre-sentation, of which an absolute condition would be a singlechamber and universal suffrage”, when this decision to strive to secure was carried out by the tactic of refraining from “running too far ahead ” and “ believing and sympathising with ” ambiguous declarations that bind no one to anything! With unpardonable naïveté, the Zemstvo adherents imaginedthat presenting petitions meant “striving to secure”—andpetitions “poured in from the Zemstvos in abundance”. 
 On January 28, 1881, Loris-Melikov submitted a most humble Memorial to the tsar proposing the establishment of acommission of Zemstvo representatives with advisory powersonly, for the purpose of drafting the laws His Majesty wouldbe pleased to indicate. 
 The Special Council set up by Alex-ander II approved of this measure; the findings of the Coun-cil of February 17, 1881, were confirmed by the Tsar, who also approved the text of the government announcementsubmitted by Loris-Melikov. 
 “Undoubtedly,” writes Witte, “the establishment of such a purely advisory commission did not yet establish a consti-tution,” but, he continues, it can hardly be denied that it represented a step forward (following the reforms of the six-ties) towards a constitution and towards nothing else. 
 Theauthor then repeats a statement contained in the foreignpress to the effect that upon reading Loris-Melikov’s Memo-rial, Alexander II exclaimed: “Why, this is the États géné-raux .... 
 What is proposed to us is neither more nor less than the Assembly of Notables of Louis XVI. 
” 36 We would observe, on our part, that under certain cir-cumstances the application of Loris-Melikov’s proposal might have been a step towards a constitution, but it might also not have been; everything depended on which prevailed —the pressure of the revolutionary party and the liberal public, or the counter-pressure of the very powerful, compactparty of persisting supporters of the autocracy that wereunscrupulous in the methods they employed. 
 If, however,we speak, not of what might have happened, but of whatactually did happen, then we must admit the indubitable fact that the government was wavering . 
 Some members of the government were in favour of strenuously resisting theliberals, while others were in favour of making concessions. 
But—and this is particularly important—even the latterwavered, having no very definite programme and neverrising above the level of scheming bureaucrats. 
 In his Memorandum, Witte writes: “Count Loris-Melikov appeared to be afraid to look the affair straight in the face and to define his programme with precision; he continued the evasive policy—in another direction, it is true—that had been adopted by Count Valuyev towards the Zemstvo institutions. 
 “As even the legal press rightly pointed out at the time, the pro-gramme announced by Loris-Melikov was distinguished by its extremevagueness. 
 This vagueness is observed in all the Count’s subsequentactions and pronouncements. 
 On the one hand, he declared that the autocracy was ‘separated from the people’, that ‘he looks to public sup-port as the principal force...’, and that he regarded the proposed reform‘not as something final, but merely as a first step’, etc. 
 On the otherhand, the Count declared at the same time to the press representativesthat ‘the hopes aroused among the people are nothing but a visionaryillusion...’, and in his most humble Memorial to the Tsar, he stated cate-gorically that a National Assembly would be ‘a dangerous experiment of reverting to the past...’, that the measure he proposed would notin any way restrict the powers of the autocracy, since it had nothingin common with Western constitutional forms. 
 Generally speaking, asL. 
 Tikhomirov has fitly remarked, the Memorial itself is distinguishedby its wonderfully confused wording” (p. 
 117). 
 In his attitude towards the freedom fighters Loris-Melikov, that notorious hero of the “dictatorship of the heart”,37 displayed “a cruelty unparalleled, before or since, inordering the execution of a seventeen year-old youth fora printed leaflet found in his possession. 
 Loris-Melikov did not forget the most remote parts of Siberia, and he did everything to worsen the conditions of the exilessuffering for their propaganda” (V. 
 Zasulich in Sotsial-Demokrat ,38 No. 
 1, p. 
 84). 
 In view of the government’s wavering, only a force capable of earnest struggle could have secured a constitution; but such a force was lacking— the revolutionaries had exhausted themselves by their effortof March 1 39; there was neither a broad movement nor a strong organisation of the working class, and the liberalpublic on this occasion again proved to be so politicallyimmature that even after the assassination of Alexander II it restricted itself to the mere presentation of petitions. 
 The Zemstvos, the municipalities, and the liberal press ( Porya-dok, Strana , Golos *), all presented petitions. 
 Particularly loyal, artful, and nebulous were the petitions of the liberalauthors of memoranda, such as the Marquis of Velepolski,Professor Chicherin, and Professor Gradovsky. 
 Witte’s Memo-randum reproduces their content from a pamphlet published in London, ** The Constitution of Count Loris-Melikov (Free Russian Press Fund, London, 1893). 
 Those authors inventedingenious devices for bringing the monarch to cross theRubicon without his being aware of it”. 
 It stands to reasonthat all these cautious petitions and artful devices proved utterly useless without a revolutionary force, and the auto-cratic party triumphed—triumphed despite the fact that onMarch 8, 1881, a majority of the Council of Ministers (sevenagainst five) had voted in favour of Loris-Melikov’s pro-posal. 
 (So the pamphlet has it; but Witte, who assiduouslycites its authors, for some reason or other declares in his Memorandum: “It is not authentically known what happened at this meeting of March 8 and what it resulted in; it wouldbe rash to rely upon the rumours that have reached the for-eign press,” p. 
 124). 
 On April 29, 1881, the Manifesto on thereaffirmation and preservation of autocracy, described byKatkov as “manna from heaven”, was promulgated. 
 *Poryadok (Order); Strana (The Country); Golos (The Voice). 
— Ed. 
 **As we have seen, the author of the Memorandum most care-fully copies from illegal pamphlets and admits that “the undergroundpress and the literary works published abroad quite correctlyjudged the position on this question from their point of view” (p. 
 91). 
The only thing original produced by this learned Russian “political-scientist” is a certain amount of raw material; he has had to borrow all the fundamental points of view regarding political questions inRussia from underground literature. 
 For the second time since the emancipation of the peas-ants the revolutionary tide was swept back, and following it and as a consequence of it, the liberal movement for a second time gave way to reaction , over which Russian pro-gressive society, of course, raised bitter lamentations. 
 We arepast masters of the art of lamentation; we lament the tact-lessness and self-assurance of revolutionaries in harassingthe government; we lament the government’s indecisiveness when, finding that it is not confronted by a real force, it makes pseudo-concessions and takes back with one hand whatit has given with the other; we lament “the age without ideasand ideals”, when the government, having settled scores withrevolutionaries whom the people failed to support, hastensto make up for lost time and fortifies itself for a fresh onslaught. 
 IV The epoch of the “dictatorship of the heart”, as Loris-Me-likov’s ministry has been described, proved to our liberals that even the “constitutionalism” of one of the ministers,even of the Prime Minister, with the government waveringand the Council of Ministers approving “the first step towardsreform” by a majority, still guarantees precisely nothing,if there is no serious social force capable of compelling the government to surrender. 
 It is interesting to note also that the government of Alexander III did not show its fangs im-mediately upon the promulgation of the Manifesto reaffirm-ing the autocracy, but found it necessary for a time to foolthe “public”. 
 In employing the term “fool” the public, wedo not suggest that the government adopted the Machiavel-lian scheme of some minister, notable, or other. 
 It cannot be over-emphasised that the system of pseudo-concessions andof seemingly important steps “to meet” public opinion hasbecome an integral part of the policy of every modern govern-ment, including the Russian, for the Russian Governmenthas for many generations recognised the necessity of reckon-ing with public opinion in one way or another, and in the course of many generations has trained statesmen in theshrewd art of domestic diplomacy. 
 Such a diplomat wasCount Ignatyev, whose appointment to the Ministry of theInterior in place of Loris-Melikov was intended to cover the government’s retreat towards out and out reaction. 
 More than once Ignatyev proved himself a demagogue and deceiver of the worst type, so much so that Witte reveals in his Mem-orandum not a little “police complacency” when he de-scribes the period of his office as an “unsuccessful attempt tocreate a country with local self-government and with anautocratic tsar at its head”. 
 True, this is precisely the “for-mula” advanced at the time by I. 
 S. 
 Aksakov; it was util-ised by the government for its manoeuvres and was assailed by Katkov, who proved conclusively that there is a necessaryconnection between local self-government and a constitution. 
But it would be short-sighted to attempt to explain the well-known tactics of the police government (tactics deriving fromits very nature) by the prevalence of this or that political view at the given moment. 
 Ignatyev issued a circular, in which he promised that the government would “take urgent measures to introduceproper methods to secure, with the maximum of success, theactive participation of local public figures in the executionof His Majesty’s designs”. 
 The Zemstvos responded to this “call” by petitions pleading for the convocation of an assem-bly “of the elected representatives of the people” (from thememorandum of a member of the Cherepovets Zemstvo; thegovernor did not even permit the opinion of a member of theKirillov Zemstvo to be published). 
 The government instruc-ted the governors to “take no further action” with regard to these petitions; “at the same time, measures were apparent-ly taken to prevent other assemblies from submitting simi-lar petitions”. 
 The notorious attempt was made to calla conference of “qualified people” hand-picked by the minis-ters (for the purpose of discussing questions of reducing landredemption payments, 40 regulating migration, reforming local government, etc. 
). 
 “The work of the committees of experts evoked no sympathy among the public and, not-withstanding all the precautionary measures , even aroused a direct protest from the Zemstvos. 
 Twelve Zemstvo Assem-blies petitioned that Zemstvo representatives be invited toparticipate in legislative activity, not only on special oc-casions and by appointment from the government, but per-manently and by election from the Zemstvos. 
” An attemptby the Samara Zemstvo to adopt a similar motion was pre-vented by the chairman, “after which the Assembly broke up in protest” (Dragomanov, op. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 29; Memorandum, p. 
 131). 
 That Count Ignatyev duped the Zemstvos is appar-ent from the following fact: “Mr. 
 Ustimovich, Marshal ofthe Poltava Nobility and author of the draft ConstitutionalPetition of 1879, openly declared in the Gubernia Assemblyof Nobles that he had received positive assurances [sic!] from Count Ignatyev that the government would call upon the representatives of the country to take part in legisla-tive activity” (Dragomanov, ibid. 
). 
 These frauds of Ignatyev crowned the work of covering up the government’s transition to a decisively new policy,and not without good reason did D. 
 A. 
 Tolstoi, who on May30, 1882, was appointed Minister of the Interior, earn the nickname “Minister of Struggle”. 
 Petitions from the Zem-stvos even for the convening of some sort of private con-ferences were unceremoniously rejected. 
 There was even acase of a government commission replacing a Zemstvo Boardand banishing its members, on a complaint lodged by a gov-ernor against “the systematic opposition” of the Zemstvo (of Cherepovets). 
 D. 
 A. 
 Tolstoi, a faithful disciple and fol-lower of Katkov, went further and decided to “reform” theZemstvo institutions. 
 The idea underlying the reform (which,as we have seen, was confirmed by history) was that “theopposition to the government has strongly entrenched itselfin the Zemstvos” (p. 
 139 of the Memorandum, dealing with the original plan for Zemstvo reform). 
 D. 
 A. 
 Tolstoi planned to replace the Zemstvo Boards with bureaus subordinated tothe governor and to make all decisions of the Zemstvo As-semblies subject to the governor’s sanction. 
 This would havebeen a truly “radical” reform; but it is extremely interestingto note that even this disciple of Katkov, this “Minister of Struggle”, in the words of the Memorandum, “did not abandon the usual policy of the Ministry of the Interior towards theZemstvo institutions. 
 In the draft of his project, Tolstoidid not openly express his idea, actually to abolish the Zemst-vos; on the pretext of correctly developing the principleof local self-government, he sought to preserve their external form, but, at the same time, deprive them of all internal substance”. 
 This cunning policy of “the fox tail”was still further supplemented and developed in the Council of State, with the result that the Zemstvo Regula-tions of 1890 “proved to be another half-measure in the history of Zemstvo institutions. 
 They did not abolish the Zemstvos, but rendered them featureless and colourless; they did notdestroy their character as being representative of all social-estates, but they gave them a social-estate tinge; ... they didnot convert the Zemstvo institutions into regular organs ofthe state, ... but increased the power of the governors over them ... and increased the governor’s power of veto”. 
 “The Regulations of July 12, 1890, were, in keeping with theirauthor’s design, a step in the direction of abolishing theZemstvo institutions, not a radical reform of Zemstvo localself-government. 
” The Memorandum goes on to state that this new “half-measure” did not remove the opposition to the government (it was, of course, impossible to remove the opposition toa reactionary government by intensifying that reaction),but merely drove certain of its manifestations below the surface. 
 The opposition manifested itself, first, in the factthat certain anti-Zemstvo laws—if one may so term them— met with resistance and were not carried out de facto ; it manifested itself, again, in constitutional (or, at all events,constitution-flavoured) petitions. 
 Thus, the law of June 10,1893, which tied up the Zemstvo medical service in a tangleof detailed regulations, met with the first-mentioned typeof opposition. 
 “The Zemstvo institutions put up a strenuous resistance to the Ministry of the Interior, which had to make a retreat. 
 The Ministry was compelled to suspend the intro-duction of new regulations, already drafted, to reserve themfor a complete collection of the laws, and to draft a freshproposal on altogether different principles [i. 
e. 
, principlesmore acceptable to the Zemstvos]. 
” The Assessment of Real Estate Act of June 8, 1893, which similarly introduced the principle of regulation and restricted the rights of the Zem-stvos in the assessment of rates, likewise gave rise to dissat-isfaction, and in many cases “is not being applied in practice”. 
The medical and statistical institutions established bythe Zemstvos, which have brought considerable benefit to the population (as compared with the bureaucracy, of course), proved themselves of sufficient strength to paralyse theregulations drawn up in the chancelleries of St. 
 Petersburg. 
 The second form of opposition also found expression in the new Zemstvo, in 1894, when the Zemstvo petitions to Nicholas II renewed very definitely their demand for the extension of local self-government and gave rise to the“celebrated” words about senseless dreaming. 
 To the horror of the ministers, the “political tendencies” of the Zemstvos did not disappear. 
 The author of the Memo-randum cites the bitter complaints of the Governor of Tver (from his report of 1898) over the “closely knit group of peo-ple of liberal views” which had concentrated the affairs ofthe gubernia Zemstvo entirely in its own hands. 
 “From thesame governor’s report for 1895, it is apparent that the strug-gle against the Zemstvo opposition presents a difficult taskfor the local administration and that the marshals of the nobility, who officiate as chairmen at Zemstvo meetings, are sometimes called upon to display ‘civic courage’ [ sic!] in carrying out the instructions contained in the confiden-tial circulars of the Ministry of the Interior on matters inwhich the Zemstvo institutions must not interfere. 
” It isfurther related how, at one of the meetings of the assembly, the gubernia Marshal of the Nobility turned over his post as chairman to the uyezd * Marshal (Tver), how the Tver Marshal in his turn passed it on to the Novy Torzhok Mar-shal, and how the Novy Torzhok Marshal also fell ill andhanded over the post to the Staritsa Marshal. 
 And so, eventhe marshals of the nobility flinch from carrying out police functions! “The law of 1890 [laments the author of the Mem-orandum] gave the Zemstvo a social-estate tinge, strength-ened the government element in the assemblies, andappointed all the uyezd marshals of the nobility and ruralsuperintendents 41 to the gubernia Zemstvo Assemblies, and the fact that these featureless, social-estate, bureaucratic Zemstvos continue nevertheless to betray political tendencies, is a matter that should be pondered.... 
 Resistance has notbeen overcome; deep discontent and silent opposition un-doubtedly exist, and will continue to exist until the Zemstvorepresenting all estates dies. 
” Such is the last word in bureau-cratic wisdom. 
 If curtailed representation gives rise to dis-content, then the abolition of every kind of representation *See footnote to p. 
 36. 
— Tr. 
 will, by simple human logic, strengthen this discontent and opposition. 
 Mr. 
 Witte imagines, however, that if one of the institutions that bring at least a particle of discontent to the surface is closed down, the discontent will disappear. 
 Per-haps you think that Witte proposes something as resoluteas the abolition of the Zemstvo? Nothing of the kind. 
Although, for the sake of fine words, he condemns the policyof evasion, Witte himself has nothing else but this policy to propose; nor can he have, without shedding the skin of minister of the autocratic government. 
 Witte mumblesarrant nonsense about a “third way”—neither bureaucraticdomination nor local self-government, but an administra-tive reform which should “properly organise” the “participa-tion of public elements in government institutions”. 
 It is easy to emit nonsense of this kind, but after all the experi-ments with “qualified people” no one will be deceived by it;it is only too obvious that without a constitution any “par-ticipation of public elements” will be a fiction, will meanthe subordination of the public (or those “called” from thepublic) to the bureaucracy. 
 While criticising a particular measure of the Ministry of the Interior (the establishment of Zemstvos in the outlying regions), Witte cannot suggest any-thing new on the general question he himself raises, butmerely warms up the old methods—half-measures, pseudo-concessions, and promises of numerous benefits, none ofwhich are fulfilled. 
 It cannot be too strongly emphasised that on the general question of “the direction of domestic policy”, Witte and Goremykin are at one, and that the con-troversy between them is merely a family quarrel, a feudwithin the clan. 
 On the one hand, Witte hastens to declare,“I have never proposed nor do I now propose the abolitionof Zemstvo institutions or any radical change in the present system ... under present conditions there can hardly be any talk of abolishing them [the existing Zemstvos]”. 
 Witte,“on his part, thinks that with the establishment of stronggovernmental authority in the localities, it will be possibleto place greater confidence in the Zemstvos”, etc. 
 Afterestablishing a strong local bureaucracy to counterbalance local self-government (i. 
e. 
, rendering local self-government impotent), one can place greater “confidence” in it. 
 The sameold song! Mr. 
 Witte fears only “institutions representing all the social-estates”; he “did not have in mind the various corporations, societies, unions of the social-estates or trade unions and did not consider their activities to be dangerous to the autocracy”. 
 For example, in regard to the “village com-munes”, Mr. 
 Witte does not doubt in the least that in viewof their “inertness” they are harmless to the autocracy. 
 “Thepredominance of landownership relations and the interestsconnected with them develop spiritual peculiarities in the rural population which render it indifferent to anything outside the politics of the village pump.... 
 Our peasants atvillage meetings concern themselves with the apportioningof taxes, ... the distribution of allotments, etc. 
 Moreover,they are illiterate or semi-literate— what sort of politics then can they concern themselves with ?” Mr. 
 Witte is ex-tremely sober-minded, as you see. 
 In regard to the unions of social-estates he declares that from the point of view of thedanger they represent to the central government “their di-versity of interests is of great importance. 
 The government,by taking advantage of this diversity of interests, can alwaysfind support in one social-estate and play it off against the political claims of the others”. 
 Witte’s programme of “prop-erly organised participation of public elements in govern-ment institutions” is nothing but another of the innumerableattempts of the police state to “split” the population. 
 On the other hand, Mr. 
 Goremykin, with whom Mr. 
 Witte enters into such heated controversy, himself carries out this very systematic policy of disunity and persecution. 
 He argues (in his Memorandum, to which Witte rejoins) thatit is necessary to institute new offices to supervise theZemstvo; he is opposed to permitting even simple local con-gresses of Zemstvo civil servants; he stands whole-heartedlyfor the Regulations of 1890—that step towards the abol-ition of the Zemstvos; he fears the effort of the Zemstvos to include “tendentious questions” in their programme of as-sessment work; he fears Zemstvo statistics generally; he isin favour of taking the elementary schools out of the handsof the Zemstvos and placing them under the control of govern-ment institutions; he argues that the Zemstvos are incapable of handling the questions connected with the food supply (Zemstvo workers, don’t you see, encourage “exaggeratednotions of the extent of the disaster and the needs of the famine-stricken population”!!); and he defends the fixing of limits to Zemstvo taxation, “in order to protect landed proper-ty from excessive increases in Zemstvo taxes”. 
 Witte is entirely right, therefore, when he says: “The entire policy of the Min-istry of the Interior towards the Zemstvos consists inslowly but steadily undermining their organs, weakeningtheir significance, and concentrating their functions in thehands of government institutions. 
 It may be said without the slightest exaggeration that when the ‘recently adopted measures’ referred to in the Memorandum [Goremykin’s]‘regulating the various branches of Zemstvo work andadministration’ are brought to a successful conclusion, weshall have no local self-government whatever. 
 All that willbe left of the Zemstvo institutions will be a mere idea and a shell without any real content. 
” Consequently, the policy of Goremykin (and more so the policy of Sipyagin) and ofWitte lead to the same goal, and the controversy over thequestion of the Zemstvo and constitutionalism is, we repeat,nothing more than a family quarrel. 
 Lovers’ tiffs are easilymade up again. 
 The “fight” between Mr. 
 Witte and Mr. 
 Goremykin is nothing more serious than that. 
 As for our own views on the general question of the autocracy and theZemstvos, it will be more convenient to present them inthe process of analysing the preface written by R. 
 N. 
 S. 
 * V Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
’s preface represents much that is of interest. 
 It touches upon the broadest questions of political reforms in Russia, the various methods by which these reforms canbe effected, and the significance of the various forces leadingto these reforms. 
 On the other hand, Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
, who appar-ently has close relations with liberal circles generally, andZemstvo liberal circles in particular, undoubtedly sounds a new note in the chorus of our “underground” literature. 
 Therefore, in order to clear up the question of the politicalsignificance of the Zemstvos in principle and to acquaintourselves with the tendencies and, I shall not say directions, *A nom de plume used by Mr. 
 Struve. 
 (Author’s comment to the 1907 edition. 
— Ed. 
) but moods, in the circles close to the liberals, it will be well worth our while to deal in detail with this preface and determine whether that which is new in it is positive or negative, and to what extent it is positive and to whatextent negative and why. 
 The fundamental feature of R. 
 N. 
 S. 
’s views is the following. 
 As can be seen from numerous passages of hisessay, quoted below, he favours peaceful, gradual, and strictly legal development. 
 On the other hand, he rebels with all his being against the autocracy and yearns for polit-ical freedom. 
 But the autocracy is an autocracy preciselybecause it prohibits and persecutes all “development” towards freedom. 
 This contradiction permeates the wholeof R. 
 N. 
 S. 
’s essay and renders his argumentation extremely illogical, hesitant, and unsound. 
 Constitutionalism can be combined with solicitude for the strictly legal developmentof autocratic Russia only on the premise or, at least, on theassumption that the autocratic government itself will un-derstand, grow weary, yield, etc. 
 And Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
 does,indeed, at times fall from the height of his civic indignation to the vulgar viewpoint of the most immature liberalism. 
 Thus, he says of himself: “... we who regard the struggle for civil liberties waged by politically conscious people in Russiatoday to be their vow of Hannibal, a vow as sacred as thattaken by the men and women who fought for the emancipa-tion of the peasants in the forties” ... and, again, “however trying it is to those of us who have taken the ‘vow of Hanni-bal’ to fight against the autocracy”, etc. 
 Well said, powerfullysaid! Powerful words like these would have been an embel-lishment to the article, if the same spirit of indomitable andirreconcilable struggle (“the vow of Hannibal”) had pervadedit throughout. 
 But these powerful words, precisely because they are so powerful, sound discordant when accompanied by a note of artificial conciliation and pacification, by anattempt to introduce, even with the aid of far-fetched inter-pretations, the conception of peaceful, strictly legal devel-opment. 
 Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
, unfortunately, evinces more thanenough such notes and such attempts. 
 He devotes a page and a half, for instance, to a detailed “argumentation” of the idea that “the policy of the state during the reign of Nicholas IIdeserves even severer [our italics] condemnation from the moral and political points of view than the wicked revision of the reforms of Alexander II carried out during the reign of Alexander III”. 
 Why severer condemnation? It appears that this is because Alexander III fought against revolution, while Nicholas II fought against “the legal aspirations of Russian society”; the former fought against politically conscious forces, the latter against “quite peace-ful social forces often acting without any clear political idea” (“hardly even realising that their purposive cultural work was undermining the state system”). 
 To a considerable degree this is untrue in point of fact, as we shall show further on. 
 But apart from this, one cannot help noting the author’s peculiar line of reasoning. 
 He condemns autocracy, but con-demns one autocrat more than another, not because of poli-cy, for that has remained unchanged, but because he (al-legedly) has no “hotheads” to contend with, such as “natural-ly” call forth sharp resistance, and, consequently, he has no occasion for persecutions. 
 Is not such an argument an ob-vious concession to the loyal and humble contention that Our Father the Tsar need not fear to call together his beloved people because they have never dreamed of anythingbeyond the bounds of peaceful strivings and strict legality? We are not surprised to find such a “train of thought” (or train of lies) in the works of Mr. 
 Witte, who writes in his Memorandum: “One would suppose, when there are no polit-ical parties and there is no revolution, and when the rights of the supreme authority are not being challenged, that the administration should not be contraposed to the people or society...”, * etc. 
 We are not surprised to meet with such ar-guments in the writings of Mr. 
 Chicherin, who, in the Mem-orandum presented to Count Milyutin after March 1, 1881, declared that “the authorities must first of all display their energy and show that they have not lowered their nag in the face of danger”, that “the monarchical system is compatible with free institutions only when the latter are the fruit of peaceful development and the calm initiative of the supreme authority itself”, and who recommended the *P. 
 205. 
 “This is even silly,” observes R. 
 N. 
 S. 
 in a footnote to this passage. 
 Quite so. 
 But is not R. 
 N. 
 S. 
’s reasoning on pp. 
 xi-xiiof his preface, cited above, moulded from the same clay? establishment of a “strong and liberal” government func-tioning with the aid of a “legislative organ strengthened and renovated by the elective element”. 
 * Now, it would be quite natural for such a Mr. 
 Chicherin to acknowledge that the policy of Nicholas II deserves greater condemnation, because under his rule peaceful development and the calm initiative of the supreme authority itself could have led to free insti-tutions. 
 But is it natural and decent to hear such reasoning from a man who took the vow of Hannibal to struggle? Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
 is wrong in point of fact. 
 “Now,” he says, com-paring the present reign with the preceding one, “no one thinks seriously of the violent overthrow wishfully imagined by the adherents of Narodnaya Volya. 
” Parlez pour vous , monsieur! Speak only for yourself. 
 We know quite definite-ly that the revolutionary movement in Russia, far from hav-ing died out or subsided in the present as compared with the previous reign, has, on the contrary, revived and become many times stronger. 
 What kind of “revolutionary” move-ment would it be, if none of the participants thought seri-ously of a violent change? The objection may be raised that in the quoted lines Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
 has in mind, not violentrevolution in general, but a specific “Narodnaya Volya” revolution, i. 
e. 
, a revolution that will be both political and social at the same time, a revolution that will lead, not only to the overthrow of the autocracy, but to the seizure of pow-er. 
 Such an objection, however, would be groundless, first, because to the autocracy as such (i. 
e. 
, to the autocratic government and not to the “bourgeoisie” or “society”) it is not important for what reason people want to overthrow it; important is the fact that they want to overthrow it. 
 Second-ly, at the beginning of the reign of Alexander III, the Na-rodnaya Volya adherents “presented” to the government the very alternative that Social-Democracy now presents to Nicholas II—either revolutionary struggle or the renun-ciation of autocratic power. 
 (See the Letter of the Executive Committee of Narodnaya Volya to Alexander III, dated March 10, 1881, which put forward two conditions: (1) a general amnesty for all political offenders, and (2) the *Witte’s Memorandum, pp. 
 122-23. 
 The Constitution of Count Loris-Melikov , p. 
 24. 
 convening of an assembly of representatives of the entire Russian people on the basis of universal suffrage, freedom of the press, speech, and assembly. 
) Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
 himself knows perfectly well that many people, not only among theintelligentsia, but also among the working class, “thinkseriously” about a violent revolution; see page xxxix etseq. 
 of his essay, where reference is made to “revolutionarySocial-Democracy”, which possesses a “mass basis and in-tellectual forces”, which is advancing towards “the decisive political struggle”, towards the “sanguinary struggle ofrevolutionary Russia against the absolutist-bureaucraticregime” (p. 
 xli). 
 There is not the slightest doubt, therefore, thatMr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
’s “loyal speeches” constitute a special method,an attempt to influence the government (or “public opinion”) by demonstrating his (or other people’s) modesty. 
 Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
, by the way, thinks that the term “struggle” may be given a very wide interpretation. 
 “The abolitionof the Zemstvo,” he writes, “will place a trump card in thehands of revolutionary propagandists—we say this quiteobjectively [ sic!], without, on the one hand, experiencing repulsion against what is usually termed revolutionary ac-tion, or, on the other, being carried away with infatuationor admiration for this form [ sic!] of struggle for political and social progress. 
” This is a most remarkable tirade. 
 Ifwe remove the quasi-scientific formula, this inappropriateparading of “objectivity” (since the author himself mentions his preference for one or another form of activity or of strug-gle, the protestation of his objectivity rates in value withthe statement, two and two equal one stearin candle), weshall find the hoary argument: Gentlemen of the government,you may believe me when I begin to scare you with revolu-tion, because my heart is not in it. 
 His reference to objec-tivity is nothing more nor less than a fig-leaf intended to conceal subjective antipathy to revolution and revolutiona-ry activity. 
 And Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
 stands in need of a fig-leaf,because such antipathy is totally incompatible with the vowof Hannibal. 
 By the way, are we not making a mistake about this Hannibal? Did he really take a vow to struggle against the Romans, or only to fight for the progress of Carthage, whichprogress, of course, in the final analysis, would be to the in-jury of Rome? Can the term “struggle” be understood other-wise than in its “narrow” meaning? Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
 thinks it can. 
 A comparison of the vow of Hannibal with the above-men-tioned tirade yields the conclusion that struggle againstthe autocracy manifests itself in various “forms”: one formis the revolutionary, illegal struggle; another form is “strug-gle for political and social progress” in general, in other wordspeaceful legal activity, which disseminates culture within the limits permitted by the autocracy. 
 We do not doubt in the least that it is possible even under the autocracy tocarry on legal activity which promotes Russian progress, insome cases fairly rapid technological progress, in a few casesinsignificant social progress, and, in exceptional cases, polit-ical progress to a very slight extent. 
 We may argue about the magnitude of this slight progress and the extent to which it is possible, the extent to which isolated cases of such prog-ress are capable of paralysing the mass political demorali-sation which the autocracy is constantly sowing among thepopulation everywhere. 
 But to include, even indirectly,peaceful legal activity in the conception of struggle against the autocracy means to facilitate this work of demoralisa-tion and to weaken the as it is infinitely weak consciousnessof the Russian man in the street of his responsibility ascitizen for everything the government does. 
 Unfortunately, Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
 is not alone among the illegal writers who seek to obliterate the difference between revolu-tionary struggle and peaceful uplift activities. 
 He has a predecessor in the person of R. 
 M. 
, author of the article “OurReality”, published in the celebrated “ Separate Supplement ” to Rabochaya Mysl42 (September 1899). 
 In his controversy with the Social-Democratic revolutionaries, Mr. 
 R. 
 M. 
wrote: “The struggle for the Zemstvo and for municipal seIf-government, the struggle for public schools, the struggle for public courts, the struggle for public aid to the famine-stricken population, etc. 
, all represent the struggle againstthe autocracy.... 
 This social struggle, which for some unex-plained reason fails to attract the favourable interest of manyRussian revolutionary writers, is, as we have seen, being waged by Russian society, and not only since yesterday.... 
 The question now is how these separate social strata ... canwage the struggle against the autocracy most effectively.... 
 The principal question for us is how this social struggle against the autocracy should be waged by our workers, whose movement our revolutionaries regard as the best means ofoverthrowing the autocracy” (pp. 
 8-9). 
 As can be seen, Mr. 
 R. 
 M. 
 does not bother to conceal his antipathy towards the revolutionaries; he openly characterises legal oppositionand peaceful activity as struggle against the autocracy, and the most important question for him is how the workers should conduct this struggle. 
 Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
 is not nearly so crude and open, but the kinship between the politicaltrends of this liberal and of the ardent worshipper of thelabour movement pure and simple, is very definitely ap-parent. 
 * With respect to Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
’s “objectivity”, we must say that he sometimes simply casts it aside. 
 He is “objective”when he speaks of the working-class movement, of its organ-ic growth, of the future inevitable struggles between revo-lutionary Social-Democracy and the autocracy, and when hestates that the abolition of the Zemstvos will inevitably force the liberals to organise an illegal party. 
 All this is set forth in a very business-like and sober manner, so soberindeed that one can only rejoice that the working-classmovement in Russia is so well understood in liberal circles. 
But when, instead of fighting the enemy, Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
 beginsto talk about the possibility of “submission” on the part of the enemy, he forfeits his “objectivity”, gives expression to his real sentiments, and even passes from the indicativemood to the imperative. 
 “Only in the event of people being found among those in power courageous enough to submit to history and to compel the autocrat to *“The economic organisations of the workers,” says Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
 in another passage, “will serve as a school for the real political educationof the working masses. 
” We would advise our author to be more care-ful in employing the term “real”, which has been worn thin by theknights of opportunism. 
 It cannot be denied that under certain condi-tions their economic organisations may help the workers very consid-erably in their political training (no more than it can be deniedthat under other circumstances they may help in their political demor-alisation). 
 But the masses of the workers can obtain real political training only by their participation in all aspects of the revolutionarymovement, including open street fighting and civil war against the defenders of political and economic slavery. 
 submit to it will the final and bloody struggle between revolutionary Russia and the autocratic-bureaucratic regime be avoided.... 
 No doubtthere are men among the higher bureaucracy who do not sympathisewith the reactionary policy.... 
 These men, the only persons having access to the throne, never dare to express their convictions openly.... 
 Perhaps the enormous shadow of the inevitable, historic day of retri-bution, the shadow of great events, will cause the government circlesto waver and will destroy the iron system of reactionary policy whilethere is yet time. 
 Comparatively little is required for this now.... 
 Per-haps it [the government] will realise, before it is too late, the fatal danger of protecting the autocratic regime at all costs. 
 Perhaps even before it has to face revolution, it will grow weary of its struggle againstthe natural and historically necessary development of freedom, andwill waver in its ‘irreconcilable’ policy. 
 If it ceases to be consistentin its struggle against freedom, it will be obliged to open the door widerand wider for it. 
 It maybe ... no, not only may be, but so shall it be !” (Author’s italics). 
 Amen! is all that we need add to this well-intentioned and lofty monologue. 
 Our Hannibal makes such rapid prog-ress that he now appears before us in a third form. 
 The firstwas the struggle against the autocracy, the second—thespreading of culture, the third—appeals to the enemy tosubmit and attempts to frighten him with a “shadow”. 
 How frightful! We quite agree with our respected Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
 that the sanctimonious hypocrites of the Russian Governmentare sooner frightened by “shadows” than by anything elseon earth. 
 Immediately prior to conjuring up shadows, ourauthor, in referring to the growth of the revolutionary forcesand to the impending revolutionary outbreak, exclaimed: “We foresee with profound sorrow the horrible price in people and in cultural forces that will have to be paid for this madly aggressive, conservative policy which has neither politi-cal sense nor a shadow of moral justification. 
” What a bot-tomless pit of doctrinairism and unction is revealed by this conclusion to an argument about the revolutionary out-break! The author fails completely to understand the enor-mous historical significance it would have, if, for once at least, the people of Russia taught the government a good lesson. 
 Instead of showing the “horrible price” the peo-ple have paid and are still paying to absolutism, in order to arouse their hatred and indignation and instil in them a readiness and a passion for struggle, you talk about future sacrifices in order to frighten people away from the struggle. 
 My good gentlemen! It would be far bet-ter for you to refrain altogether from talking about the “revolutionary outbreak” than to ruin your reasoning with such a finale. 
 Apparently, you do not wish to create “great events”, you merely want to talk about “the shadow ofgreat events”, and then only with “persons having accessto the throne”. 
 Our legal press, as we know, is chock-full of such talk with shadows and about shadows; and in order to give substance to the shadows, it has become fashionable torefer to the “great reforms” and to sing to them hallelujahsfull of conventional lies. 
 An author writing under the sur-veillance of the censor may sometimes be forgiven suchlies, since otherwise he would never be able to express his striving for political reforms. 
 But no censorship hovered over Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
 He writes, “The great reforms were notdevised for the greater triumph of the bureaucracy. 
” Howevasive this apologetic phrase is. 
 By whom “devised”? By Herzen, Chernyshevsky, Unkovsky, and those who marchedwith them? But these people demanded ever so much more than was effected by the “reforms”, and because of this they were persecuted by the government that introduced the“great” reforms. 
 By the government and by those who fol-lowed it blindly singing its praises and snarling at the “hot-heads”? But the government strove by every means in itspower to concede as little as possible, and to curtail the democratic demands precisely for the “greater triumph of the bureaucracy”. 
 Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
 is well aware of thesehistorical facts, and he obscures them only for the reasonthat they entirely refute his smug theory of the possible“submission” of the autocrat. 
 There is no place for submis-siveness in politics, and the time-honoured police method of divide et impera , divide and rule, yield the unimportant in order to preserve the essential, give with one hand andtake back with the other, can be mistaken for submissiononly out of unbounded simplicity (both sacred and sly sim-plicity). 
 “... When the government of Alexander II devised and introduced the ‘great reforms’, it did not at the same time deliberately set itself the aim of cutting off imperative-ly all the Russian people’s legal roads to political liberty,it did not weigh its every step and every paragraph of the /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR law with this end in view. 
” This is untrue ! The government of Alexander II, both in “devising” the reforms and in in-troducing them, set out from the very beginning to reject the demands for political freedom then put forward. 
 Fromthe beginning to the end it cut off every legal road to liber-ty; for it answered even simple appeals with repressions,it never even permitted liberty to be discussed freely. 
 Suf-fice it to recall the facts mentioned in Witte’s Memorandum, quoted above, to refute Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
’s paeans of praise. 
 Concerning the persons in the government of Alexander II,Witte expresses himself, for example, as follows: “It must beobserved that the prominent statesmen of the sixties, whosecelebrated names will be preserved by a grateful posterity,in their time did more that is great than anything their successors may have done; they toiled at the renovation of our state and social system from sincere conviction, not to frus-trate the strivings of their ruler, but out of unboundedloyalty to him” (p. 
 67 of the Memorandum). 
 What is trueis true—from sincere conviction, out of unbounded loyaltyto the ruler at the head of the police gang.... 
 After this we are not surprised that Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
 says very little about the most important question of the roleof the Zemstvos in the struggle for political liberty. 
 Apartfrom the usual references to the “practical” and “cultural”work of the Zemstvo, he mentions in passing its “education-al-political significance”; he says that the “Zemstvo has political significance”, that the Zemstvo, as Mr. 
 Witte clearly sees, “is dangerous [to the present system] only byvirtue of the historical tendency of its development—asthe embryo of a constitution”. 
 And, concluding these seem-ingly casual remarks, comes the following attack uponrevolutionaries: “We value Mr. 
 Witte’s work, not only for the truth it tells about the autocracy, but also as a valuable political testimonial to the Zemstvo granted by the bureau-cracy itself. 
 This testimonial is an excellent reply to allthose who, being devoid of political education or carriedaway by revolutionary phrases [ sic!], have refused to see the enormous political significance of the Russian Zemstvos and their legal cultural activity. 
” Who has revealed a lack of education? Who is carried away? Where and when? Withwhom does Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
 disagree? And why? To these ques-tions no reply is forthcoming, and our author’s attack is nothing but an expression of his antipathy towards revolu-tionaries, which we know from other passages in his essay. 
 Matters are not clarified by the still stranger comment:“By these words we do not desire [?!] to offend revolution-aries whose moral courage in the struggle against tyrannycannot be too highly estimated. 
” Wherefore this remark?What connection is there between moral courage and inability to appreciate the Zemstvos? Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
 has indeed fallen out of the frying-pan into the fire. 
First he “offended” the revolutionaries by making anunsupported and “anonymous” (i. 
e. 
, not known againstwhom levelled) charge of ignorance and phrase-mongering,and now he commits a fresh “offence” against them by as-suming that they can be induced to swallow the charge of ignorance if the pill is sweetened by recognition of theirmoral courage. 
 To complete the confusion, Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
contradicts himself by declaring, in chorus, as it were, withthose who are “carried away by revolutionary phrases”,that “the modern Russian Zemstvo ... is not a political mag-nitude that could impress or overawe anyone by its own direct power.... 
 It can barely maintain its own position”.... 
“Only in the remote future and only as a result of the cultur-al development of the whole country could such institu-tions [as the Zemstvo] ... become a menace to this [absolut-ist] system. 
” VI Let us, however, try to analyse the issue on which Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
 speaks so angrily and emptily. 
 The facts we have cited above show that the “political significance” of the Zem-stvos. 
, i. 
e. 
, their significance as a factor in the struggle forpolitical freedom, lies principally in the following: first,these bodies of representatives of our propertied classes(particularly the landed aristocracy) forever contraposeelected institutions to the bureaucracy, give rise to constant conflicts between them, expose at every step the reaction-ary character of the irresponsible tsarist officialdom, andfoster discontent and opposition to the autocratic govern-ment. 
 * Secondly, the Zemstvos, attached to the bureaucratic chariot like a superfluous fifth wheel, strive to consolidate their position, to increase their significance, and to obtain wards it”, as Witte himself puts the matter. 
 For that reason they are unsuitable as allies of the government in its fightagainst the revolutionaries; they maintain a benevolentneutrality towards the latter and render them undoubted, if indirect, service by causing the government to waver in its measures of repression at critical moments. 
 Of course,institutions, which hitherto have proved that they are, atbest, capable of making only liberal petitions and main-taining benevolent neutrality, cannot be regarded as an“important”, or to any degree an independent, factor in the political struggle; but it cannot be denied that the Zemst-vos represent one of the auxiliary factors in the struggle. 
 In this sense we are even prepared, if you will, to regard theZemstvo as a piece of constitution. 
 Perhaps the reader willsay, “Then you agree with Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
, who does not claimany more for them?” Not at all. 
 It is only here that our difference with him begins. 
 Let us admit for the sake of argument that the Zemstvo is a piece of constitution. 
 But it is precisely such a piece that was used to decoy Russian “society” away from a consti-tution. 
 It is precisely such a relatively unimportant posi-tion that the autocracy has yielded to growing democracy in order to retain its hold on its principal positions, in order to divide and disunite those who demanded politicalreforms. 
 We have seen how this policy of disuniting on thebasis of “confidence” in the Zemstvo (“the embryo of a con-stitution”) succeeded in the sixties and in the years 1880-81. 
 The question of the relation of the Zemstvos to politi-cal freedom is a particular case of the general question of the relation of reforms to revolution. 
 This particular caseserves to illustrate the narrow-mindedness and stupidityof the fashionable theory of Bernstein, 43 which substitutes reforms for revolutionary struggle and declares (e. 
g. 
, *See the extremely detailed treatment of this aspect of the question in the pamphlet by P. 
 B. 
 Axelrod, The Historical Position and the Mutual Relations between Liberal and Socialist Democracy in Russia , Geneva, 1898. 
 See particularly pp. 
 5, 8, 11-12, 17-19. 
a constitution by petitioning—“unconsciously march to-through the mouth of Mr. 
 Berdyaev) that the “principle of progress is that the better things are, the better”. 
 This principle in its general form is as untrue as its reverse that the worse things are, the better. 
 Revolutionaries, of course,will never reject the struggle for reforms, the struggle tocapture even minor and unimportant enemy positions, if these will serve to strengthen the attack and help to achievefull victory. 
 But they will never forget that sometimes the enemy himself surrenders a certain position in order to dis-unite the attacking party and thus to defeat it more easily. 
They will never forget that only by constantly having the“ultimate aim” in view, only by appraising every step ofthe “movement” and every reform from the point of viewof the general revolutionary struggle, is it possible to guard the movement against false steps and shameful mistakes. 
 It is this aspect of the question—the significance of the Zemstvo as an instrument for strengthening the autocracy through half-concessions, as a means of bringing over a cer-tain section of the liberals to the side of the autocracy— that Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
 has completely failed to understand. 
 He has preferred to invent for his own use a doctrinaire schemeby which the Zemstvos and the constitution are connectedby the straight-line “formula”, the better things are, thebetter. 
 “If you first abolish the Zemstvos in Russia,” hesays, addressing himself to Witte, “and then increase the rights of the individual, you will lose the good opportu-nity of giving the country a moderate constitution growinghistorically out of local self-government with a social-estate appearance. 
 At all events you will render the cause ofconservatism a distinct disservice. 
” What a beautiful andharmonious conception! Local self-government with a so-cial-estate tinge—a wise conservative, having access to the throne—a moderate constitution. 
 The unfortunate thingabout it is that in actual practice, the wise conservativeshave on more than one occasion, thanks to the Zemstvos,found “good opportunities” to withhold the constitution from the country. 
 Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
’s peaceful “conception” had its effect also on the slogan with which he concludes his essay and whichis printed in the manner of a slogan, as a separate line and in heavy type: “Rights, and an Authoritative All-Russian Zemstvo!” It must be frankly acknowledged that this is the same sort of indecent flirting with the political prejudices of the broad masses of Russian liberals as Rabochaya Mysl ’s flirting with the political prejudices of the broad massesof the workers. 
 We are duty-bound to raise a protest in thefirst as in the second case against such flirting. 
 It is preju-dice to believe that the government of Alexander II did not cut off the legal road to liberty, that the Zemstvos pro-vide a good opportunity for granting a moderate constitu-tion to the country, and that the slogan, “Rights, and anAuthoritative Zemstvo” can serve as the banner of, we shallnot say the revolutionary, but even the constitutional,movement. 
 This is not a banner that can serve to distinguish enemies from allies, or help to direct and guide the move-ment; it is but a rag that can only help the most unreliablecharacters to creep into the movement, and assist the gov-ernment to make still another attempt to come off withhigh-sounding promises and indesisive reforms. 
 One neednot be a prophet to be able to prophesy this. 
 Our revolutionary movement will reach its apogee, the liberal ferment in society will increase tenfold, and otherLoris-Melikovs and Ignatyevs will appear in the govern-ment and inscribe on their banner: “Rights, and an Author-itative Zemstvo”. 
 But if it came to pass, it would be themost unfavourable outcome for Russia and the most favour-able for the government. 
 If any considerable section of the liberals put their faith in that banner, and, allowingthemselves to be carried away by it, attack the revolution-ary “hotheads” in the rear, the latter may find themselvescut off, and the government will try to restrict itself toa minimum of concessions limited to something in the nature of an advisory and aristocratic constitution. 
 Whether this attempt will be successful or not, depends upon theoutcome of the decisive struggle between the revolutionaryproletariat and the government; but of one thing we maybe certain—the liberals will be betrayed. 
 With the aid ofslogans like those advanced by Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
 (“Authorita-tive Zemstvo”, etc. 
), the government will decoy them like puppies away from the revolutionaries, only to take themby the scruff of the neck and thrash them with the whip of reaction. 
 And when that happens, gentlemen, we will not forget to say, Serves you right ! Why, instead of a demand for the abolition of absolu-tism, is such a moderate and chastened wish put forward asultimate slogan? First, for the sake of the philistine doctri-nairism that desires to render a “service to conservatism”and believes that the government will be softened by suchmoderation and be rendered “submissive” by it. 
 Secondly, in order to “unite the liberals”. 
 Indeed, the slogan “Rights, and an Authoritative Zemstvo” can perhaps serve to uniteall liberals in the same way as (in the opinion of the “Econ-omists”) the slogan “add a kopek to each ruble” * will unite all the workers. 
 But will not such unity be a loss rather than a gain? Unity is an advantage when it raises those who are united to the level of the class-conscious and decisive programme of the unifying force. 
 Unity is a disadvantagewhen it lowers the unifying force to the level of the prej-udices of the masses. 
 Among Russian liberals there isundoubtedly a widespread prejudice that the Zemstvo isindeed the “embryo of a constitution”, ** the “natural”, peace-ful, and gradual growth of which is accidentally retarded *I. 
e. 
, a one per cent wage increase. 
— Tr. 
 **As to what may be expected from the Zemstvo, it may not be without interest to quote the following opinion expressed by Prince P. 
 V. 
 Dolgorukov in his Listok44 published in the sixties (Burtsev, op. 
 cit. 
, pp. 
 64-67): “In examining the main regulations governingthe Zemstvo institutions, we again come across the selfsame secret thought of the government, which continually breaks out into the light, viz. 
, to overwhelm with generosity, to proclaim loudly, ‘Seehow much I am giving you!’— yet to give as little as possible, and even to impose restrictions upon the enjoyment of the little that is given.... 
 Under the present autocratic system, the Zemstvo institu-tions do not and cannot bring any benefits, and will not and cannot have any significance, but they are rich in the seeds of fruitful devel-opment in the future.... 
 New Zemstvo institutions may well be des-tined to serve as the basis for the future constitutional order in Rus-sia.... 
 But as long as Russia lacks a constitutional system of govern-ment, as long as the autocracy exists, and as long as freedom of thepress is denied, the Zemstvo institutions will be doomed to remain political phantoms, mute assemblies of those who should voice the interests of the people. 
” Thus, even in the sixties, Dolgorukov wasnot very optimistic. 
 The forty years that have passed since then have taught us much and have demonstrated that the Zemstvos were destined by “fate” (and partly by the government) to serve as thebasis for a series of measures to overwhelm the constitutionalists. 
 by the intrigues of certain immoral time-servers, that only a few petitions are necessary in order to bring the autocrat to “submission”, that legal cultural work generally and Zemstvo work in particular have “considerable politicalsignificance”, relieving those who mouth verbal hostilityto the autocracy of the obligation actively to support therevolutionary struggle against the autocracy in one wayor another, and so forth, and so on. 
 Undoubtedly, it would be very useful and desirable to unite the liberals; but the unity must be one whose purpose is to combat outworn prej-udices and not to play up to them, to raise the generallevel of our political development (or rather underdevelop-ment), and not to sanction it—in a word, it must be a unityfor the purpose of supporting the illegal struggle and not for the purpose of opportunistic phrase-mongering about the great political significance of legal activity. 
 If there canbe no justification for issuing to the workers the politicalslogan “Freedom to Strike”, etc. 
, then, by the same token,there can be no justification for issuing to the liberals theslogan “An Authoritative Zemstvo”. 
 Under the autocracy every kind of Zemstvo, however “authoritative” it may be, will inevitably be a deformity, incapable of develop-ment, while under a constitution the Zemstvo will immedi-ately lose its present-day “political” significance. 
 The unification of liberals is possible in two ways: by form-ing an independent liberal party (illegal, of course), or by organising liberal aid for revolutionaries. 
 Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
 himself points to the first form, but ... if what he says in this connection is to be taken as a genuine expression of the views and prospects of liberalism, then it does not give grounds for very great optimism. 
 He writes: “Without a Zemstvo, the Zemstvo liberals will have to form a liberal party or abandon the historical stage as an organised force. 
 We are convinced that the organisation of liberals in an ille-gal party, even if its programme and its methods are very moderate, will be the inevitable result of the abolition of the Zemstvo. 
” If that is the case, we shall have to wait a long time, for even Witte does not wish to abolish the Zemst-vos, and as for the Russian Government it is very much concerned with preserving their outward form, even if their content is completely eliminated. 
 That a liberal party will be a very moderate one is quite natural, and it is useless to expect that the movement among the bour-geoisie (for only on that movement can a liberal party be based) will give rise to any other. 
 But what should be the ac-tivities and the “methods” of such a party? Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
does not explain. 
 He says: “An illegal liberal party, beingan organisation consisting of the most moderate and leastmobile of the opposition elements, cannot by itself devel-op a particularly extensive, or particularly intensive, activity.... 
” We think, however, that in a certain sphere,although limited by local and above all by Zemstvo inter-ests, the liberal party could very well develop an exten-sive and intensive activity, such as the organisation ofpolitical exposures.... 
 “But with such activity on the part of other parties, especially the Social-Democratic or work-ing-class party, the liberal party, even without enteringinto any direct agreement with the Social-Democrats, canbecome a highly important factor.... 
” Very true; and thereader will naturally expect that the author would, atleast in general outline, describe the work of this “factor”. 
 But instead of doing so, Mr. 
 R. 
 N. 
 S. 
 describes the growth of revolutionary Social-Democracy and concludes: “Withthe existence of a pronounced political movement ... aliberal opposition, if it is in the least organised, can playan important political role; with proper tactics, a moderateparty always stands to gain from an accentuated struggle between extreme social elements.... 
” That is all! The “role” of the “factor” (which has already managed to convert it-self from a party into an “opposition”) is to “take advantage”of the growing acuteness of the struggle. 
 Mention is madeof what the liberals stand to gain, but not a word is saidabout the liberals taking part in the struggle. 
 The slip of the tongue, one may say, is providential.... 
 The Russian Social-Democrats never closed their eyes to the fact that the political liberties for which they arefirst and foremost fighting will benefit primarily the bour-geoisie. 
 Only a socialist steeped in the worst prejudices ofutopianism, or reactionary Narodism, would for that rea-son object to carrying on the struggle against the autocracy. 
 The bourgeoisie will benefit by these liberties and rest onits laurels—the proletariat, however, must have freedom in order to develop the struggle for socialism to the utmost. 
 And Social-Democracy will persistently carry on the strug-gle for liberation, regardless of the attitude of the various strata of the bourgeoisie towards it. 
 In the interests of thepolitical struggle, we must support every opposition to theoppressive autocracy, no matter on what grounds and inwhat social stratum it manifests itself. 
 For that reason, weare by no means indifferent to the opposition expressed by our liberal bourgeoisie in general, and by our Zemstvo liberals in particular. 
 If the liberals succeed in organisingthemselves in an illegal party, so much the better. 
 We shallwelcome the growth of political consciousness among thepropertied classes; we will support their demands, we willendeavour to work so that the activities of the liberals and the Social-Democrats mutually supplement each other. 
 * But even if they fail to do so (which is more probable), we shall not give them up as lost, we will endeavour to strength-en contacts with individual liberals, acquaint them withour movement, support them by exposing in the labourpress all the despicable acts of the government and the local authorities, and try to induce them to support the revolu-tionaries. 
 Such an exchange of services between liberalsand Social-Democrats is already proceeding; it must beextended and made permanent. 
 But while always ready tocarry on this exchange of services, we will never, underany circumstances, cease to carry on a determined struggle against the illusions that are so widespread in the politi-cally undeveloped Russian society generally and amongRussian liberals in particular. 
 Paraphrasing the celebratedstatement of Marx in regard to the Revolution of 1848,we may say of the Russian revolutionary movement thatits progress lies, not so much in the achievement of any positive gains, as in emancipation from harmful illusions. 
 46 *The present writer had occasion to point out the utility of a lib-eral party four years ago, in commenting upon the Narodnoye Pra-vo Party. 
45 See The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats (Gene-va, 1898, p. 
 26): “... If, however, the party [Narodnoye Pravo] also contains not masquerade, but real non-socialist politicians, non-socialist democrats, then this party can do no little good by striving to draw closer to the political opposition among our bourgeoisie.... 
” (See present edition, Vol. 
 2, p. 
 345. 
— Ed. 
) We have emancipated ourselves from the illusions of anarch-ism and Narodnik socialism, from contempt for politics, from the belief in the exceptionalist development of Rus-sia, from the conviction that the people are ready for rev-olution, and from the theory of the seizure of power andthe duel-like combat between the autocracy and the heroicintelligentsia. 
 It is time our liberals emancipated themselves from the illusion, theoretically untenable, one might assume, yet very tenacious in practice, that it is still possible to holdparley with the Russian autocracy, that some kind of Zemst-vo is the embryo of a constitution, and that the sincere ad-herents of the constitution can fulfil their vow of Hannibalby patient legal activity and by patient appeals to the enemy to turn submissive. 
 A VALUABLE ADMISSION Labour unrest has once again been the subject of intense and widespread comment. 
 The governing circles are alarmed,in all earnestness alarmed. 
 This is evident from the fact that it was deemed necessary to “punish”, by suspen-sion for a week, even Novoye Vremya , 47 that arch-loyal newspaper ever fawning on the authorities, for an articlepublished in issue No. 
 9051 of May 11, entitled “Aproposof the Labour Unrest”. 
 Of course, the penalty was not in-flicted because of the contents of the article, which was replete with the warmest appreciation of the government and the sincerest concern for its interests. 
 What was consid-ered dangerous was the very discussion of events thatwere “disturbing society”, the mere reference to their ex-tensiveness and their importance. 
 Below we give extractsfrom the secret circular (also dated May 11) 48 directing that press articles dealing with the disorders in the facto-ries and with the workers’ attitude towards the employersbe published only by permission of the Department of Po-lice, which proves better than all arguments that the gov-ernment itself is inclined to regard the labour unrest as amatter of state importance. 
 The article in Novoye Vremya is of particular interest precisely for the reason that it outlines a complete state programme, which in effectamounts to allaying the discontent by a few petty and inpart fictitious doles to which are attached pompous sign-boards about protective policy, cordiality, etc. 
, and whichprovide pretexts for increasing surveillance by government officials. 
 But this programme, which is not a new one, embodies, one may say, the “acme” of wisdom of modernstatesmen, not only in Russia, but also in the West. 
 In a society based on private property and the enslavement of millions of propertyless toilers by a handful of rich people, the government cannot be anything but the loyal friend and ally of the exploiters and the most reliable guardianof their power. 
 In our times, guns, bayonets, and whips arenot a sufficiently reliable guardian; it is necessary to con-vince the exploited that the government stands aboveclasses, that it does not serve the interests of the aristocracy and the bourgeoisie, but those of justice, that it is concerned with protecting the weak and the poor against the rich andthe powerful, etc. 
 Napoleon III in France and Bismarckand Wilhelm II in Germany exerted no little effort to playup to the workers in this way. 
 But in Europe, where thereis a more or less free press, a representative government, electoral campaigns, and well-established political parties, all these hypocritical tricks were quickly exposed. 
 In Asia,however, which includes Russia, where the masses of thepeople are so wretched and ignorant, and where there aresuch strong prejudices fostering faith in Our Father theTsar, tricks of this kind are quite successful. 
 One of the very characteristic signs that the European spirit is beginning to penetrate into Russia is the failure with which this policy has met in the last ten or twenty years. 
 Over and over againit was tried, but each time, within a few years after theenactment of some “protective” (allegedly protective) la-bour law, there was a reversion to the old state of affairs—the number of discontented workers increased, ferment grew, unrest gained in scope—again the “protective” policy wasannounced with a blare of trumpets, again pompous phrasescould be heard about heartfelt solicitude for the work-ers; another law was passed providing a penny’s worth ofbenefit and a pound’s worth of empty and lying words for the workers, and in a few years’ time the whole business was repeated. 
 The government was as frantic as a squirrelin a cage, and went to any lengths, in one form or another,to stop up the gaps with sops and shreds; but the discontentbroke out in ever newer places with increasing vigour. 
 Let us recall the outstanding points in the history of “labour legislation” in Russia. 
 Towards the end of the sev-enties there were big strikes in St. 
 Petersburg, and thesocialists tried to take advantage of the situation to inten-sify their agitation. 
 Alexander III included factory legis-lation in his so-called “popular” (but in fact aristocratic-police) policy. 
 In 1882 the Factory Inspectorate was intro-duced and at first its reports were even published. 
 The gov-ernment, of course, was not pleased with these reports andceased their publication . 
 The factory inspection laws proved to be merely a stopgap. 
 Then came the years 1884-85;the industrial crisis gave rise to a powerful movement among the workers, and there were a number of turbulent strikes in the central district (the Morozov cotton-mill strike 49 being particularly noteworthy). 
 Again the “protective”policy was brought to the fore, this time advocated withparticular zeal by Katkov in Moskovskiye Vedomosti . 
 50 Katkov fumed and raged over the fact that the Morozov strikers were tried by a jury, and he described the hundred and one questions submitted by the court for the jury’sdecision as “a hundred-and-one gun salute in honour of theappearance of the labour question in Russia”; but, at thesame time, he demanded that the “state” come to the de-fence of the workers and prohibit the monstrous system of fines that had ultimately aroused the Morozov cotton weav-ers to revolt. 
 The law of 1886 was passed; it greatly wid-ened the powers of the Factory Inspectorate and prohibitedthe imposition of arbitrary fines to benefit the employers. 
Ten years passed, and again there was an outbreak of labourunrest. 
 The strikes of 1895, particularly the great strike of 1896, 51 caused the government to tremble with fear (espe-cially on account of the fact that the Social-Democratswere by then regularly marching shoulder to shoulder withthe workers); with unprecedented celerity, it passed the “pro-tective” law (June 2, 1897) for a shorter working day. 
 Dur-ing the discussion of the projected law in committee the officials of the Ministry of the Interior, including the direc-tor of the Department of Police, declared loudly that thefactory workers must come to regard the government as theirconstant protector and their just and merciful patron (seethe pamphlet The Secret Documents on the Law of June 2, 189752). 
 Although passed, the protective law is being cur-tailed and rendered ineffective on the sly through circulars issued by the selfsame government. 
 Another industrialcrisis sets in. 
 The workers for the hundredth time are convinced that the “protection” of the police government cannot substantially alleviate their conditions, or give them liberty to look after themselves; again unrest and street fighting, again the government is anxious, again wehear police speeches about “state protection”, this timeproclaimed in Novoye Vremya . 
 Gentlemen! Will you never tire of scooping up water with a sieve? No, the government, of course, will never tire of repeat-ing its attempts to intimidate the irreconcilable workers and decoy the weaker, the more foolish, and more cowardly,by means of a dole. 
 Nor will we ever tire of exposing the realmeaning of these attempts and of exposing “statesmen”who but yesterday ordered soldiers to shoot down the work-ers and today are shouting about protection; who but yes-terday talked about their justice and their patronage of the workers and today are seizing the best of the workers andintellectuals, one after another, and leaving them to themercy of the police without trial. 
 Therefore we considerit necessary to dwell on the “state programme” of Novoye Vremya in good time before some new “protective” law is promulgated. 
 Moreover, the admissions made in this connec-tion by a publication so “authoritative” in the sphere ofhome politics as Novoye Vremya are worthy of attention. 
 Novoye Vremya is compelled to admit that the “regret-table manifestations in the sphere of the labour question”are not accidental. 
 Of course, the socialists, too, are respon-sible (the newspaper avoids mentioning the awful word “socialist”, preferring such vague terms as “pernicious pseu-do-doctrines” and the “propaganda of anti-state and anti-social ideas”); but ... but why are the socialists so successfulamong the workers? Novoye Vremya , of course, does not miss an opportunity to hurl abuse at the workers: they are so “undeveloped and ignorant” that they willingly listen to the pernicious propaganda of the socialists, so harmful tothe welfare of the police. 
 Consequently, the socialists andthe workers are to blame, and the gendarmes have longbeen waging a desperate war against the guilty, filling theprisons and places of exile. 
 But to no avail. 
 Apparently, there is something in the conditions of the factory workers which “engenders and fosters discontent with their presentconditions” and thus “favours the success” of socialism. 
 “The severe toil of the factory workers in extremely unfa-vourable conditions of life provides them with a bare sub-sistence for as long as they are able to work, and in every emergency when they are without work for any length oftime, they find themselves in desperate straits, as, for exam-ple, the workers in the Baku oilfields described recently inthe newspapers. 
” Government supporters, thus, are compelledto admit that the success of socialism is due to the really bad conditions of the workers. 
 But the admission is made in such a vague and evasive form, and with such reser-vations, that it is clear that people of this sort cannot pos-sibly have the slightest intention of touching the “sacredproperty” of the capitalists which oppresses the workers. 
“Unfortunately,” writes Novoye Vremya , “we know too little about the actual state of affairs in regard to the labour question in Russia. 
” Yes, unfortunately indeed! And “we”know little, precisely because we permit the police govern-ment to keep the whole press in slavery, to gag every onewho honestly attempts to expose the scandalous state ofaffairs in our country. 
 But “we” do try to turn the working man’s hatred not against the Asiatic government but against the non-Russians. 
 Novoye Vremya broadly hints at the “non-Russian factory managers”, and calls them “coarse andgreedy”. 
 Such a bait is likely to trap only the most ignorantand undeveloped workers, those who believe that all theirmisfortunes come from the “Germans” or the “Jews” and who do not know that the German and the Jewish workers unite to fight their German and Jewish exploiters. 
 But even theworkers who do not know this have learned from thousandsof examples that the Russian capitalists are the “greediest”and most unceremonious of all capitalists, and that theRussian police and the Russian Government are the “coars-est” of all. 
 Of interest, too, are Novoye Vremya ’s regrets that the workers are no longer so ignorant and submissive as is thepeasantry. 
 The paper bewails the fact that the workers“are abandoning their rural nests”, that the “factory districtsbecome the gathering centres of mixed masses”, that the “villagers are abandoning their villages with their modest [that is the heart of the matter], but independent, socialand economic interests and relationships”. 
 Indeed, they have something to bewail. 
 “The villagers” are tied to their nests, and out of fear of losing them, dare not submit demands to their landlord, to threaten him with strikes, etc. 
 The villagers do not know conditions in other placesand are interested only in the affairs of their own ham-let (the supporters of the government call this the “inde-pendent interests” of the villager; knowing his place, notpoking his nose into politics—what can please the author-ities more?); but in this hamlet, the local leech, the land-lord or the kulak, knows every single individual; the peasantshave all inherited from their fathers and grandfathers theservile lesson of submission, and there is no one there toawaken consciousness in them. 
 In the factory, however,the people are “mixed”, are not tied to their nests (it is all the same to them where they work), they have seen and learned things, and are bold and full of interest in every-thing that is going on in the world. 
 Notwithstanding this deplorable transformation of the humble muzhik into a class-conscious worker, our policewiseacres still hope to delude the working masses with phrases about “the state’s protection of the workers’ welfare”. 
 Novoye Vremya fortifies this hope with the following out-worn argument: “Capitalism, proud and all-powerful in theWest, is still an infant in our country, it can walk only inleading strings, and these are provided by the government. 
”...Now, only a humble peasant will believe this old song about the omnipotence of the authorities! The worker, however, sees all too often that the capitalists keep the police, thechurch, and the military and civil officials in “leading strings”. 
And so, continues Novoye Vremya , the government “ must insist ” upon an improvement in the workers’ conditions, i. 
e. 
, it must demand this improvement of the employers. 
 Simple, is it not? Issue an order, and, presto, the thing is done. 
 But it is easy to talk; in point of fact, the orders ofthe authorities, even the most “modest”, such as the estab-lishment of hospitals at the factories, have been ignoredby the capitalists for whole decades. 
 Moreover, the govern-ment would not dare to order the capitalists to do anything that would seriously affect the “sacred” right of private property. 
 Furthermore, the government wants no seriousimprovement in the conditions of the workers, because in thousands of instances it is an employer itself and under-pays and oppresses the workers in the Obukhov Works and in hundreds of other places, as well as tens of thousands of postal and railway employees, etc. 
, etc. 
 Novoye Vremya , realising that no one would take the orders of our govern-ment seriously, tries to bolster up its position with lofty his-torical examples. 
 This should be done, it says in regard to theimprovement in the conditions of the workers, “in the same way as half a century ago, when the government took the peasant question in hand, when it was guided by the wiseconviction that it would be better, through reforms fromabove, to avert the presentation of demands for such reformsfrom below and not to wait for such an eventuation”. 
 Now, this is really a valuable admission. 
 Before the eman-cipation of the peasants, the tsar indicated to the nobility the possibility of a popular rebellion, saying that it wouldbe better to emancipate from above than to wait until theybegan to emancipate themselves from below. 
 And now thiscringing newspaper admits that the mood of the workersfills it with a fear no less than did the mood of the peasants “on the eve of freedom”. 
 “Better from above than from be-low”! The autocracy’s newspaper lackeys are profoundlymistaken if they think there is a “similarity” between thedemands for reforms today and those of that time. 
 The peas-ants demanded the abolition of serfdom, having nothingagainst the tsar’s rule and believing in the tsar. 
 The work-ers today are revolting first and foremost against the gov-ernment; they realise that their lack of rights under thepolice autocracy binds them hand and foot in their struggleagainst the capitalists and for that reason they demandliberation from governmental tyranny and governmentaloutrage. 
 The workers are also in a state of unrest “on the eve of freedom”, but this will be the liberation of the whole people, which is wresting political freedom from the despots. 
 * * * Do you know what great reform is proposed in order to hush the discontent of the workers and to demonstrate to them the “state’s protection”? If persistent rumour is to bebelieved, a struggle is going on between the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of the Interior. 
 The latter demands that the Factory Inspectorate be placed under its control; for then, it argues, the factory inspectors will be less likely to indulge the capitalists and will show more regard forthe interests of the workers and in this way avert unrest. 
Let the workers prepare for this new act of the tsar’s grace;the factory inspectors will don different uniforms and theywill be placed on the staff of another ministry (in all prob-ability with a rise in salary), the very ministry, indeed (especially the Department of Police), which for such a longtime past has been demonstrating its love and solicitudefor the workers. 
 Iskra , No. 
 6, July 1901 Published according to the Iskra text THE LESSONS OF THE CRISIS The commercial and industrial crisis has already dragged on for almost two years. 
 Apparently it is still growing,spreading to new branches of industry and to new districts, and is becoming more acute as a result of the failure of more banks. 
 Every issue of our newspaper since last Decemberhas in one form or another shown the development of thecrisis and its disastrous effects. 
 The time has come to raisethe general question of the causes and the significance ofthis phenomenon. 
 For Russia, it is a comparatively new phenomenon, as new as Russian capitalism. 
 In the old capitalist countries—i. 
e. 
, in the countries where the greatestpart of the goods is produced for sale, and where the major-ity of the workers own neither land nor tools, but sell theirlabour-power to employers, to the owners of property, tothose to whom the land, the factories, the machinery, etc. 
, belong—in the capitalist countries, crises are an old phenom-enon, recurring from time to time, like attacks of a chronicdisease. 
 Hence, crises may be predicted, and whencapitalism began to develop with particular rapidity in Rus-sia, the present crisis was predicted in Social-Democraticliterature. 
 The pamphlet The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats , written at the end of 1897, stated: “We are ap-parently now passing through the period in the capitalistcycle [a rotation, in which the same events repeat themselveslike summer and winter] when industry is ‘prospering’,when business is brisk, when the factories are working atfull capacity, and when countless new factories, new enter-prises, joint-stock companies, railway enterprises, etc. 
, etc. 
, are springing up like mushrooms. 
 One need not be aprophet to foretell the inevitable and fairly sharp crash that is bound to succeed this period of industrial ‘prosper-ity’. 
 This crash will ruin masses of small owners, will throw masses of workers into the ranks of the unem-ployed.... 
” * And the crash came with a severity unparal-leled in Russia. 
 What is the cause of this horrible, chronicdisease of capitalist society, which recurs so regularlythat its coming can be forecast? Capitalist production cannot develop otherwise than by leaps and bounds—two steps forward and one step (and sometimes two) back. 
 As we have said, capitalist produc-tion is production for sale, the production of commoditiesfor the market. 
 Production is conducted by individual cap-italists, each producing on his own and none of them ableto say exactly what kind and what amount of commodities will be required on the market. 
 Production is carried on haphazardly; each producer is concerned only in excellingthe others. 
 Quite naturally, therefore, the quantity of com-modities produced may not correspond to the market demand. 
This probability becomes particularly great when the enor-mous market is suddenly extended to new huge, unexplored territories. 
 This was precisely the situation at the beginning of the industrial “boom” we experienced not so long ago. 
 Thecapitalists of all Europe stretched out their paws towards thatpart of the globe inhabited by hundreds of millions of peo-ple, towards Asia, of which until recently only India anda small section of the coastal regions had been closely con-nected with the world market. 
 The Transcaspian Railway began to “open up” Central Asia for the capitalists; the “GreatSiberian Railway” (great, not only because of its length,but because of the unrestricted plunder of the Treasury bythe contractors and the unrestricted exploitation of theworkers who built it) opened up Siberia. 
 Japan began to develop into an industrial nation and strove to make a breach in the Chinese Wall, opening the way to a choice mor-sel into which the capitalists of England, Germany, France,Russia, and even Italy immediately plunged their teeth. 
The construction of gigantic railways, the expansion of theworld market, and the growth of commerce, all stimulated an unexpected revival of industry, an increase of new *See present edition, Vol. 
 2, p. 
 346. 
— Ed. 
 enterprises, a wild hunt for commodity markets, a hunt for profits, the floating of new companies, and the attraction to industry of masses of fresh capital, which consisted partly of the small savings of small capitalists. 
 It is notsurprising that this wild world-hunt for new and unknownmarkets led to a terrific crash. 
 To obtain a clear idea of the nature of this hunt for mar-kets and profits, we must remember what giants took part in it. 
 When we speak of “separate enterprises” and “individ-ual capitalists”, we sometimes forget that, strictly speak-ing, these terms are inexact. 
 In reality, only the appropri-ation of profit has remained individual but production itselfhas become social. 
 Gigantic crashes have become possibleand inevitable, only because powerful social productive forces have become subordinated to a gang of rich men, whose only concern is to make profits. 
 We shall illustratethis by an example from Russian industry. 
 Recently thecrisis has spread to the oil industry, in which such enter-prises as the Nobel Brothers Oil Company are engaged. 
 In 1899the company sold 163,000,000 poods of oil products to the value of 53,500,000 rubles, while in 1900 it sold 192,000,000 poods to the value of 72,000,000 rubles. 
 In one year, a sin-gle enterprise increased the value of its output by 18,500,000rubles! This “single enterprise” is maintained by the com-bined labour of tens and hundreds of thousands of workersengaged in extracting oil and refining it; in delivering it by pipeline, railways, seas, and rivers; and in making the necessary machinery, warehouses, materials, lighters, steam-ers, etc. 
 These tens of thousands of workers work for thewhole of society, but their labour is controlled by a handfulof millionaires, who appropriate the entire profit earnedby the organised labour of this mass of workers. 
 (In 1899 the Nobel Company made a net profit of 4,000,000 rubles, and in 1900 the figure was 6,000,000 rubles, of which theshareholders received 1,300 rubles per 5,000-ruble-share,with five members of the board of directors receiving bonuses to the amount of 528,000 rubles!) When several such enter-prises fling themselves into the wild chase for a place in an unknown market, is it surprising that a crisis sets in? Furthermore, for an enterprise to make profit, its goods must be sold, purchasers must be found. 
 The purchasers of these goods must comprise the entire population, because these colossal enterprises produce whole mountains of goods. 
 But nine-tenths of the population of all capitalist countries are poor; they are workers who receive extremely miserablewages and peasants who, in the main, live even worse thanthe workers. 
 Now, when, in the period of a boom, the largeindustrial enterprises set out to produce as vast a quantityof goods as possible, they flood the market with such a huge quantity of goods that the majority of the population, being poor, cannot pay for them. 
 The number of machines, tools,warehouses, railroads, etc. 
, continues to grow. 
 From timeto time, however, this process of growth is interrupted be-cause the masses of the people for whom, in the last analy-sis, these improved instruments of production are intended, remain in a state of poverty that verges on beggary. 
 The crisis shows that modern society could produce immeasur-ably more goods for the improvement of the living condi-tions of the entire working people, if the land, factories,machines, etc. 
, had not been seized by a handful of privateowners, who extract millions of profits out of the poverty of the people. 
 The crisis shows that the workers should not confine themselves to the struggle for individual concessionsfrom the capitalists. 
 While industry is in upswing, suchconcessions may be won (the Russian workers on more thanone occasion between 1894 and 1898 won concessions byenergetic struggle); but when the crash comes, the capi-talists not only withdraw the concessions they made, but take advantage of the helpless position of the workers toforce wages down still lower. 
 And so things will inevitablycontinue until the army of the socialist proletariat over-throws the domination of capital and private property. 
 Thecrisis shows how near-sighted were those socialists (who call themselves “Critics”, probably because they borrow uncritically the doctrines of the bourgeois economists)who two years ago loudly proclaimed that crashes werebecoming less and less probable. 
 The lessons of the crisis, which has exposed the absurdity of subordinating social production to private property, are so instructive that even the bourgeois press is now demanding stricter supervision—e. 
g. 
, over the banks. 
 Butno supervision will prevent the capitalists from setting up enterprises in times of boom which must inevitably become bankrupt later on. 
 Alchevsky, the founder of a land and a commercial bank in Kharkov, both now bankrupt, acquired millions of rubles by fair means or foul for the purpose ofestablishing and maintaining mining and metallurgical en-terprises that promised wealth beyond the dreams of avarice. 
A hitch in industry wrecked these banks and mining and me-tallurgical enterprises (the Donets-Yuryev Company). 
 But what does the “crash” of enterprises mean in capitalist society? It means that the smaller capitalists, capitalists of the “secondmagnitude”, are eliminated by the big millionaires. 
 The placeof Alchevsky, the Kharkov millionaire, is taken by theMoscow millionaire, Ryabushinsky, who, being a richercapitalist, will bring greater pressure to bear on the workers. 
 The supplanting of smaller capitalists by big capitalists, the increased power of capital, ruination of masses of smallproperty-owners (e. 
g. 
, small investors, who lose all theirproperty in a bank crash), the frightful impoverishment ofthe workers—all this is brought about by the crisis. 
 Werecall also cases described in Iskra of capitalists lengthening the working day and discharging class-conscious workers in an effort to replace them by more submissive peoplefrom the villages. 
 The effect of the crisis in Russia is, in general, ever so much greater than in any other country. 
 Stagnation in in-dustry is accompanied by famine among the peasantry. 
 Unemployed workers are being sent out of the towns to the villages, but where can the unemployed peasants be sent?By sending the workers to the villages, the authorities desireto clear the cities of the discontented people; but perhapsthose sent out will be able to rouse at least part of the peas-antry from its age-long submission and induce it, not only to request, but to demand . 
 The workers and peasants are being drawn closer to each other, not only by unemploy-ment and hunger, but also by police tyranny, which de-prives the workers of the possibility of uniting to defendtheir own interests and prevents even the aid of well-dis-posed people from reaching the peasantry. 
 The heavy paw of the police is becoming a hundred times heavier for the millions of people who have lost all means of livelihood. 
 Thegendarmes and the police in the towns, the rural superin-tendents and the village policemen in the rural districts, see clearly that hatred against them is growing, and they are beginning to fear, not only the food-kitchens, set up in the villages, but even advertisements in the newspapers appeal-ing for funds. 
 Afraid of voluntary contributions! In truth,the thief fears his own shadow. 
 When the thief sees a passer-by offering alms to the man he has robbed, he begins tothink that the two are shaking hands in a pledge to settle accounts with him. 
 Iskra , No. 
 7, August 1901 Published according to the Iskra text THE SERF-OWNERS AT WORK On June 8, 1901, a law was adopted governing the grants of state lands in Siberia to private persons. 
 How this newlaw will be applied, the future will show; but its character is so instructive, it so strikingly demonstrates the undis-guised nature and the real strivings of the tsarist govern-ment, that it should be analysed thoroughly and made knownas widely as possible among the working class and thepeasantry. 
 Our government has long been granting doles to the no-ble, aristocratic landlords. 
 It established for them the No-bles’ Bank, it granted them all sorts of privileges in obtain-ing loans and relief in the payment of arrears, it helpedthem to arrange a strike of the millionaire sugar-refinersin order to raise prices and increase their profits; it tookcare to provide the ruined sons of the aristocracy with soft jobs as rural superintendents, and it is now arranging for the government purchase of vodka on very favourable termsfor the noble distillers. 
 However, in making grants of statelands, it not only makes gifts to the richest and most aris-tocratic exploiters, but creates a new class of exploiters and dooms millions of peasants and workers to permanent bondage to new landlords. 
 Let us examine the principal features of the new law. 
 It must be observed, first of all, that before its introductionin the Council of State by the Minister of Agriculture andState Property, the law was discussed at a special confer-ence on the affairs of the nobility . 
 It is generally known that in Russia today it is not the workers and peasants, but the noble landlords who suffer most from poverty, and so this“special conference” hastened to devise measures by which their poverty might be relieved. 
 State lands in Siberia will be sold and leased to “private persons” for the purpose of “private enterprise”; but foreigners and non-Russian sub-jects of the tsar (the Jews included among the latter) areprohibited for ever from acquiring these lands in any way. 
 The lands may be leased (and we shall see that this is themost advantageous transaction for the future landlords)only to nobles, “who”, as the law states, “owing to their eco-nomic reliability, are the most desirable landowners to have in Siberia from the standpoint of the government”. 
 Thus,the standpoint of the government is that the labouring pop-ulation must be enslaved to the big landed aristocracy. 
How big can be seen from the fact that salable allotmentsmay not exceed three thousand dessiatines , while no limit at all is placed on the amount of land leased, and the term of the leases may be for a period up to ninety-nine years ! According to the government’s calculations, a poor landlordneeds two hundred times as much land as a peasant, who is given fifteen dessiatines of land in Siberia for himself andhis family. 
 The easy terms and the exceptions to the rule which the law provides for the landlords are truly astounding. 
 Thelessee pays nothing for the first five years. 
 If he purchasesthe land he has leased (which right the new law gives him), payment is spread over a period of thirty-seven years. 
 Withspecial permission, an area of land exceeding 3,000 dessia-tines may be set aside for sale, land may be sold at agreed prices and not by auction, while arrears may be postponedfor one or even three years. 
 It must not be forgotten thatgenerally only the higher dignitaries and persons with courtconnections, etc. 
, will take advantage of the new law—and such people will obtain these easy terms and the exemptions quite casually, in the course of a drawing-room conversation with a governor or a minister. 
 But there’s the rub! Of what use are these bits of land, three thousand dessiatines in area, to the landowning gener-als if there is no “muzhik” forced to work for these generals?However rapidly poverty is increasing among the people in Siberia, the local peasant is nevertheless much more in-dependent than the “Russian” peasant and he has not beentrained to work under the bludgeon. 
 The new law is intended to train him. 
 “The lands appointed for private enter-prises shall , as far as possible , be divided into lots alternating with areas held by the peasant allotment holders”, says Ar-ticle 4 of the new law. 
 The tsarist government displays itssolicitude for the poor peasants and tries to provide “meansof livelihood” for them. 
 Ten years ago, the same Mr. 
Yermolov who now, as Minister of Agriculture and StateProperty, has introduced into the Council of State the new Siberian land law providing for the disposal of state lands to private persons, wrote a book (anonymously) entitledThe Crop Failure and the Distress of the People . 
 In that work he openly declared that there was no reason for permit-ting peasants who could obtain “a livelihood” from theirlocal landlords to migrate to Siberia. 
 Russian statesmen do not hesitate to express purely feudal views; peasants were created to work for the landlords, and peasants, therefore,must not be “permitted” to migrate to a place of their choice,if thereby the landlords will be deprived of cheap labour. 
And when, despite all the difficulties, the red tape, and eventhe downright prohibition, the peasants still continued to migrate to Siberia in hundreds of thousands, the tsarist government, acting like the steward of an old-time manoriallord, hastened after them to work them to exhaustion in theirnew habitations. 
 If, however, “alternating” with the punypeasant allotments * and peasant lands (the best of which are already occupied), there will be lots of three thousand dessia-tines belonging to the noble landlords, then all temptation to migrate to Siberia will disappear very soon. 
 The morecramped the conditions of the surrounding peasants become,the more the new landlords’ land will increase in value;the peasants will be obliged to hire themselves out cheaply,or lease land from the landlords at exorbitant rates—just as in “Russia”. 
 The new law sets out precisely to create as quickly as possible a new paradise for the landlords and anew hell for the peasants; there is a special clause on theleasing of land for a single season. 
 While special permission is required to sublease state lands, it is permitted quite *By the terms of the 1861 reform, peasant allotments, unlike peasant lands, could not be sold. 
— Tr. 
 freely for one season. 
 All that the landlord need trouble about is to engage a steward, who will sublease land by the des-siatine to the peasants living on the allotments “alternating” with the landlord’s land, and send his master the net profit. 
 Probably many nobles will not care to carry on even such an “enterprise”. 
 In that case, they can make a nice littlepile at one stroke by reselling the state land to real farmers. 
It is no accident that the new law has been timed with the construction of a railroad in Siberia, when banishment to Siberia has been abolished, and when migration to Siberiahas increased to an enormous extent; all this will inevi-tably lead (and is already leading) to a rise in land values. 
Hence, the granting of state lands to private persons at thepresent time is nothing more nor less than plunder of the Treasury by the nobles. 
 The state lands are rising in value, but they are being leased or sold on highly advantageousterms to generals and people of that stripe, who will benefitby the rising prices. 
 In Ufa Gubernia, for instance, in oneuyezd alone, the nobles and officials made the followingtransaction in land sold to them (on the basis of a similar law): they paid the government 60,000 rubles for the land and within two years sold it for 580,000 rubles, obtainingfor the mere resale more than hall a million rubles ! From this instance we can imagine the millions of rubles that willpass into the pockets of the poverty-stricken landlords thanksto the land grants throughout Siberia. 
 With all sorts of lofty arguments the government and its adherents seek to cover up this naked robbery. 
 Theytalk about the development of culture in Siberia, and ofthe enormous importance of model farms. 
 As a matter offact, the large estates, which place the neighbouring peas-ants in a hopeless position, can at the present time serve only to develop the most uncultured methods of exploi-tation. 
 Model farms are not established by robbing theTreasury, and the grant of lands will lead simply to landspeculation among the nobles and officials, or to farmingmethods in which bondage and usury will flourish. 
 The noblearistocrats, in alliance with the government, have prohib-ited Jews and other non-Russians (whom they try to pre-sent to the ignorant people as particularly outrageous ex-ploiters) from acquiring state lands in Siberia, in order that they may themselves engage in the worst type of exploi-tation without hindrance. 
 There is talk also of the political significance of having the social-estate of landed nobility in Siberia; among theintelligentsia, it is said, there is a very large number offormer exiles, of unreliable people there, who need to be coun-terbalanced by the establishment of a reliable support of thestate, a reliable “local” element. 
 This talk contains a greater and profounder truth than Grazhdanin 53 and Moskovskiye Vedomosti imagine. 
 The police state is arousing so much hostility against itself among the masses that it finds itnecessary artificially to create groups that can serve aspillars of the fatherland. 
 It is essential for the governmentto create a class of big exploiters, who would be under ob-ligation to it for everything and dependent upon its grace, who would make enormous profits by the most despicablemethods (speculation and kulak exploitation), and, conse-quently, could always be relied upon to support every tyr-anny and oppression. 
 The Asiatic government must findsupport in Asiatic large landownership, in a feudal system of “granting lands”. 
 And if it is not possible at present to grant “populated estates”, it is possible at all events to grantestates alternating with the lands of peasants who are becom-ing more and more destitute. 
 If it is not convenient simplyto grant thousands of dessiatines of land gratis to the Courtlickspittles, it is possible to cover up this wholesale bestow-al of lands by their sale or “leasing” (for 99 years) that is attended by thousands of privileges. 
 When we comparethis land policy with that of modern progressive countrieslike America, for example, can we call it anything elsebut feudal? In America, no one would dare talk about permitting or not permitting migration; for in that coun-try, every citizen has the right to go where he pleases. 
 In that country every one who desires to engage in farminghas the right by law to occupy vacant land in the outlying parts of the country. 
 In America, they are not creating aclass of Asiatic satraps, but a class of energetic farmerswho have developed the productive forces of the country. 
 Thanks to the abundant free land there, the working class in America enjoys the highest standard of living in theworld. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR And what a period our government has chosen for passing this serf-owners’ law! It is a period of the most acute indus-trial crisis, when tens and hundreds of thousands are unem-ployed, when millions of peasants are again suffering fromfamine. 
 The government has exerted all its efforts toprevent the disaster from being given “publicity”. 
 That is whyit has sent the unemployed workers back to their villagehomes; that is why it has transferred food distribution from the Zemstvos to the police officials; that is why it has pro-hibited private persons from organising food-kitchens forthe famine-stricken; and that is why it has gagged the press. 
But when the famine “publicity”, so unpleasant to the earsof the well-fed, died down, Our Father the Tsar set to workto assist the poverty-stricken landlords and poor unfortu-nate courtier generals. 
 We repeat, our task at the present time is simply to bring the contents of this new law to theknowledge of all. 
 As they become acquainted with it, themost undeveloped sections of the workers, and the mostbackward and downtrodden peasants, will understand whomthe present government serves and what kind of government the people must have. 
 Iskra , No. 
 8, September 10, 1901 Published according to the Iskra text A ZEMSTVO CONGRESS The wave of excitement among the general public that spread over the country after the events of this spring isnot receding. 
 It makes itself felt in one form or another among all sections of Russian society, a society that as recently as January of this year seemed to be deaf and aliento the purposive work of Russian Social-Democracy. 
 Thegovernment is bending its every effort to calm the troubledpublic conscience as quickly as possible with the usualsoap bubbles such as the Manifesto of March 25 on “heart-felt protection”, such as the so-called Vannovsky Reforms or the Sipyagin and Shakhovskoi 54 solemn buffoon tours of Russia.... 
 Some of the more naïve among the generalpublic will actually be calmed by such measures, but byfar not all. 
 Even the present-day Zemstvo people, aboutfifty per cent of whom are scared civil servants, seem to be coming out of the state of chronic trepidation to which they were reduced in the now historical stagnant epoch of the“Peacemaker-Tsar”. 
 His Majesty the Bureaucracy, having now shed its crude covering of modesty, is arousing feelings of discontent anddisgust even among the Zemstvos, among those timid peo-ple in whom civic courage and civic morality are almost completely atrophied. 
 We have been informed that in the city of X (for precau-tion, to remain unnamed) a congress of Zemstvo memberswas called at the end of June. 
 It is said to have been attend-ed by 40 or 50 Zemstvo people from several gubernias. 
 These people did not, of course, assemble to discuss po-litical questions, but to solve peaceable, purely Zemstvoproblems; they gathered “without infringing the bounds of the department and the extent of their authority”, as it is picturesquely expressed in the Zemstvo Instructions (Ar-ticle 87). 
 The meeting, however, was called without the per-mission and knowledge of the administration and, conse-quently, was held “in contravention of the Instructions forthe activities of Zemstvo institutions”, to quote the Instruc-tions, and the assembled Zemstvo men gradually went overfrom the discussion of peaceable, innocent questions to a dis-cussion of the general state of affairs. 
 Such is the logic of life: conscientious Zemstvo men, howsoever they at times de-nounce radicalism and illegal work, are, by the force of events,faced with the necessity of illegal organisation and a moredetermined form of activity. 
 Far be it from us to condemnthis natural and perfectly correct path. 
 It is time, at long last, for Zemstvo members to give an energetic and organ-ised rebuff to a government that has taken the bit betweenits teeth, has killed rural self-government, has mutilatedboth urban and Zemstvo self-government, and with asinineobstinacy lays the axe to the last remnants of the Zemstvoinstitutions. 
 It is said that one of the elderly and respected men of the Zemstvo, during the discussion at the congress on the question of how to combat the law setting limits totaxation by the Zemstvos, exclaimed: “Zemstvo membersmust, at last, say their word; for if they don’t, they’ll neverbe able to!” We are in complete agreement with the outcryof this liberal who is prepared to challenge the bureaucrat-ic autocracy to open struggle. 
 The Zemstvos are on the eve of internal bankruptcy. 
 If the best Zemstvo men do not to-day take energetic measures, if they do not get rid of theirusual Manilov 55 attitude, their trivial questions of second-ary importance—“tinkering”, as one venerable Zemstvoman put it—the Zemstvos will lose their adherents and turn into the usual “government offices”. 
 Such an inglorious death is inevitable; for one cannot with impunity for wholedecades do nothing but show cowardice, offer thanks, andhumbly petition; one must threaten, demand, stop wastingtime on trifles, and settle down to the real work. 
 Iskra , No. 
 8, September 10, 1901 Published according to the Iskra text THE AGRARIAN QUESTION AND THE “CRITICS OF ”56 Published according to the Zarya and Obrazovaniye texts, checked with the text of the collection The Agrarian Question , by Vl. 
 Ilyin, 1908Written in June-September 1901 Chapters I to IV were first published in Zarya, No. 
 2-3, December 1901, signed N. 
 Lenin ; Chapters V to IX were published in Obrazovanije ,57 No. 
 2, February 1906, signed N. 
 Lenin Facsimile of the title-page of the magazine Obrazovaniye , No. 
 2, for 1906 which carried chapters V-IX of Lenin’s “The Agararian Question and the ‘Critics of Marx’” “... To argue ... that dogmatic Marxism has been jolted from its positions in the sphere of agrarian questions wouldbe like forcing an open door.... 
” So spoke Russkoye Bogatst-vo 58 last year through the mouth of Victor Chernov (1900, No. 
 8, p. 
 204). 
 What a peculiar quality this “dogmatic Marx-ism” possesses! For many years now scientists and very learned people in Europe have been gravely declaring (and newspaper scribes and journalists have been repeating itover and over again) that Marxism has been jolted from itspositions by “criticism”, and yet every new critic startsfrom the beginning, all over again, to bombard these al-legedly destroyed positions. 
 Mr. 
 Chernov, for example, in the periodical Russkoye Bogatstvo , as well as in the collec-tion, At the Glorious Post , in a two-hundred-and-forty-page-long “discussion” of Hertz’ work * with his reader, “forces an open door”. 
 Hertz’ work, which has beengiven such a lengthy exposition, is itself a review ofKautsky’s book, and has been translated into Russian. 
 Mr. 
 Bulgakov, in keeping with his promise to refute this very same Kautsky, has published a whole two-volume study. 
Now, surely, no one will ever be able to find the remnantsof “dogmatic Marxism”, which lies crushed to death beneaththis mountain of critical printed matter. 
 I THE “LAW” OF DIMINISHING RETURNS Let us first of all examine the general theoretical physiog-nomy of the Critics. 
 Mr. 
 Bulgakov published an article in the periodical Nachalo59 criticising Kautsky’s Agrarian *See present volume, footnote to p. 
 130— Tr. 
 Question in which he at once exposed his stock of “critical” methods. 
 He charged down on Kautsky with the dash and abandon of a veritable cavalier and “scattered” him to the winds. 
 He put into Kautsky’s mouth what he had not said,he accused him of ignoring the very circumstances and argu-ments which he, Kautsky, had expounded with precision,and he presented to the reader as his own the critical conclu-sions drawn by Kautsky. 
 With the air of an expert, Mr. 
 Bulgakov accused Kautsky of confounding technology with economics, and in doing so betrayed, not only incredibleconfusion, but also a disinclination to read to the end thepage he quotes from his opponent’s book. 
 Needless to say,this article from the pen of the future professor is repletewith outworn gibes against socialists, against the “theory of collapse”, against utopianism, against belief in miracles, etc. 
 * Now, in his doctoral thesis ( Capitalism and Agri-culture , St. 
 Petersburg, 1900), Mr. 
 Bulgakov settled all his accounts with Marxism and brought his “critical” evolu-tion to its logical conclusion. 
 Mr. 
 Bulgakov makes the “law of diminishing returns” the corner-stone of his “theory of agrarian development”. 
 We are treated to quotations from the works of the classicswho established this “law” (according to which each addi-tional investment of labour and capital in land produces,not a corresponding, but a diminishing quantity of products). 
We are given a list of the English economists who recognise this law. 
 We are assured that it “has universal significance”, that it is “an evident and absolutely undeniable truth”,“which needs only to be stated clearly”, etc. 
, etc. 
 The moreemphatically Mr. 
 Bulgakov expresses himself, the clearerit becomes that he is retreating to bourgeois political econ-omy, which obscures social relationships by imaginary “eternal laws”. 
 Indeed, what does the “evidentness” of the notorious “law of diminishing returns” amount to? If eachsuccessive investment of labour and capital in land pro-duced, not a diminishing, but an equal quantity of products, *I replied immediately to Mr. 
 Bulgakov’s article in Nachalo by an article entitled “Capitalism in Agriculture”. 
 Following the suppression of Nachalo , my article was published in Zhizn ,60 1900, Nos. 
 1 and 2. 
 (Author’s note to the 1908 edition. 
— Ed. 
) (See present edition, Vol. 
 4, pp. 
 105-59. 
— Ed. 
) there would be no sense in extending the area of land under cultivation; additional quantities of grain would be pro-duced on the same plot of land, however small, and “it would be possible to carry on the agriculture of the whole globeupon one dessiatine of land”. 
 This is the customary ( and the only ) argument advanced in favour of this “universal” law. 
 A little thought, however, will prove to anyone thatthis argument is an empty abstraction, which ignores the most important thing—the level of technological develop-ment, the state of the productive forces. 
 Indeed, the veryterm “additional (or successive) investments of labour andcapital” presupposes changes in the methods of production, reforms in technique. 
 In order to increase the quantity ofcapital invested in land to any considerable degree, new machinery must be invented , and there must be new meth-ods of land cultivation, stock breeding, transport of prod-ucts, and so on and so forth. 
 Of course, “additional invest-ments of labour and capital” may and do take place on arelatively small scale even when the technique of productionhas remained at the same level. 
 In such cases, the “law of diminishing returns” is applicable to a certain degree , i. 
e. 
, in the sense that the unchanged technique of productionimposes relatively very narrow limits upon the investmentof additional labour and capital. 
 Consequently, instead ofa universal law, we have an extremely relative “law”—sorelative, indeed, that it cannot be called a “law”, or even a cardinal specific feature of agriculture. 
 Let us take for grant-ed: the three-field system, cultivation of traditional graincrops, maintenance of cattle to obtain manure, lack of im-proved grassland and improved implements. 
 Obviously,assuming that these conditions remain unchanged, the pos-sibilities of investing additional labour and capital in the land are extremely limited. 
 But even within the narrow limits in which some investment of additional labour andcapital is still possible, a decrease in the productivity ofeach such additional investment will not always and not necessarily be observed. 
 Let us take industry—flour-milling or ironworking, for example, in the period preceding world trade and the invention of the steam-engine. 
 At that level of technical development, the limits to which additionallabour and capital could be invested in a blacksmith’s forge, or in a wind-or water-mill, were very restricted; the inevi-table thing that happened was that small smithies and flour-mills continued to multiply and increase in number until the radical changes in the methods of production createda basis for new forms of industry. 
 Thus, the “law of diminishing returns” does not at all apply to cases in which technology is progressing and meth-ods of production are changing; it has only an extremely relative and restricted application to conditions in which technology remains unchanged. 
 That is why neither Marxnor the Marxists speak of this “law”, and only representa-tives of bourgeois science like Brentano make so much noiseabout it, since they are unable to abandon the prejudicesof the old political economy, with its abstract, eternal, and natural laws. 
 Mr. 
 Bulgakov defends the “universal law” by arguments deserving only of ridicule. 
 “What was formerly a free gift of Nature must now be pro-duced by man: the wind and the rain broke up the soil,which was full of nutritive elements, and only a little effort on the part of man was required to produce what was needed. 
 In the course of time, a larger and larger share of the produc-tive work fell to man. 
 As is the case everywhere, artificialprocesses more and more take the place of natural processes. 
But while in industry this expresses man’s victory over Na-ture, in agriculture it indicates the increasing difficulties of an existence for which Nature is diminishing her gifts. 
 “In the present case it is immaterial whether the increas-ing difficulty of producing food is expressed in an increasein human labour or in an increase of its products, suchas instruments of production, fertilisers [Mr. 
 Bulgakov wishes to say that it is immaterial whether the increasing difficulty of producing food finds expression in an increasedexpenditure of human labour or in an increase in theproducts of human labour]; what is important is that foodbecomes more and more costly to man. 
 This substitutionof human labour for the forces of Nature and of artificial factors of production for natural factors is the law of dimin-ishing returns” (16). 
 Evidently, Mr. 
 Bulgakov is envious of the laurels of Messrs. 
 Struve and Tugan-Baranovsky, who arrived at the conclusion that it is not man who works with the help of machines, but machines that work with the help of man. 
 And like those critics, he sinks to the level of vulgar polit-ical economy by talking about the forces of Nature beingsuperseded by human labour, and so forth. 
 Speaking gener-ally, it is as impossible for human labour to supersede theforces of Nature as it is to substitute pounds for yards. 
 Both in industry and in agriculture, man can only utilise the forces of Nature when he has learned how they operate, andhe can facilitate this utilisation by means of machinery, tools, etc. 
 That primitive man obtained all he requiredas a free gift of Nature is a silly fable for which Mr. 
 Bulga-kov would be howled down even by first-term students. 
 Our age was not preceded by a Golden Age; and primitive man was absolutely crushed by the burden of existence,by the difficulties of the struggle against Nature. 
 The in-troduction of machinery and of improved methods of pro-duction immeasurably eased man’s struggle against Naturegenerally, and the production of food in particular. 
 It has not become more difficult to produce food; it has become more difficult for the workers to obtain it because capital-ist development has inflated ground-rent and the price ofland, has concentrated agriculture in the hands of large andsmall capitalists, and, to a still larger extent, has concen-trated machinery, implements, and money, without which successful production is impossible. 
 To explain the aggra-vation of the workers’ condition by the argument that Na-ture is reducing her gifts can mean only that one has becomea bourgeois apologist. 
 “In accepting this law,” continues Mr. 
 Bulgakov, “we do not in the least assert that there is a continuously increasing difficulty in food production; nor do we deny progress in agriculture. 
 To assert the first, and to deny thesecond, would be contrary to obvious facts. 
 This difficultydoes not grow uninterruptedly, of course; developmentproceeds in zigzag fashion. 
 Discoveries in agronomics andtechnical improvements convert barren into fertile land and temporarily remove the tendency indicated by the law of diminishing returns” (ibid. 
). 
 Profound, is it not? Technical progress is a “temporary” tendency, while the law of diminishing returns, i. 
e. 
, diminishing productivity (and that not always) of additional investments of capital on the basis of an unchanging technique, “has universalsignificance”! This is equal to saying that the stopping oftrains at stations represents the universal law of steamtransport, while the motion of trains between stations is atemporary tendency paralysing the operation of the univer-sal law of immobility. 
 Finally, extensive data clearly refute the univer-sality of the law of diminishing returns—data on the agri-cultural as well as the non-agricultural population. 
 Mr. 
Bulgakov himself admits that “if each country were re-stricted to its own natural resources, the procuring of food would call for an uninterrupted relative increase [note this!] in the quantity of labour and, consequently, in the agricul-tural population” (19). 
 The diminution in the agriculturalpopulation of Western Europe, accordingly, is explainedby the fact that the operation of the law of diminishing re-turns has been counteracted by the importation of grain. 
 An excellent explanation, indeed! Our pundit has forgot-ten a detail, namely, that a relative diminution in the ag-ricultural population is common to all capitalist countries,both agricultural and grain-importing. 
 The agriculturalpopulation is relatively diminishing in America and in Rus-sia. 
 It has been diminishing in France since the end of the eighteenth century (see figures in the same work of Mr. 
Bulgakov, II, p. 
 168). 
 Moreover, the relative diminutionof the agricultural population sometimes becomes an ab-solute diminution, whereas the excess of grain importsover exports was still quite insignificant in the thirties andforties, and only after 1878 do we cease to find years in which grain exports exceed grain imports. 
 * In Prussia there was a relative diminution in the agricultural population from73. 
5 per cent in 1816 to 71. 
7 per cent in 1849, and to 67. 
5per cent in 1871, whereas the importation of rye began onlyin the early sixties, and the importation of wheat in theearly seventies (ibid. 
, Part II, pp. 
 70 and 88). 
 Finally, if *Statistique agricole de la France. 
 Enquête de 1892 , Paris, 1897, p. 
 113. 
 ( Agricultural Statistics of France. 
 Survey of 1892 . 
—Ed. 
) we take the European grain-importing countries, e. 
g. 
, France and Germany during the last decade, we shall find that there has been undoubted progress in agriculture side by side with an absolute diminution in the number of work-ers engaged in farming. 
 In France this number droppedfrom 6,913,504 in 1882 to 6,663,135 in 1892 ( Statistique agricole , Part II, pp. 
 248-51), and in Germany from 8,064,000 in 1882 to 8,045,000 in 1895. 
 * Thus, it may be said that the entire history of the nineteenth century, by a multitude of data on countries of the most variedcharacter, proves irrefutably that the “universal” law ofdiminishing returns is absolutely paralysed by the “temporary” tendency of technological advance which enables a rela-tively (and sometimes absolutely) diminishing rural popu-lation to produce an increasing quantity of agricultural products for an increasing mass of population. 
 Incidentally, this mass of statistical data also refutes the two following main points of Mr. 
 Bulgakov’s “theory”:first, his assertion that the theory that constant capital (im-plements and materials of production) grows more rapidly than variable capital (labour-power) “is absolutely inapplic-able to agriculture”. 
 With an air of importance Mr. 
 Bulga-kov declares that this theory is wrong, and in proof of hisopinion refers to: (a) “Professor A. 
 Skvortsov” (celebratedmostly for having ascribed Marx’s theory of the average *Statistik des Deutschen Reichs , Neue Folge, Bd. 
 112: Die Land-wirtschaft im Deutschen Reich (Statistics of the German Empire , New Series, Vol. 
 112: Agriculture in the German Empire . 
—Ed. 
), Berlin, 1898, S. 
 6 #. 
 This evidence of technological advance accom-panied by a diminution in the agricultural population is of course not at all pleasing to Mr. 
 Bulgakov, for it utterly destroys his Mal-thusianism. 
 Our “strict scientist”, therefore, resorts to the following trick: instead of taking agriculture in the strict sense of the term (land cultivation, livestock breeding, etc. 
), he (after adducing statistics on the increase in the quantity of agricultural produce obtained per hectare!) takes “agriculture in the broad sense”, in which German sta-tistics include hothouse cultivation, market gardening, and forestry and fishing ! In this way, we get an increase in the sum-total of per-sons actually engaged in “agriculture”!! (Bulgakov, II, p. 
 133. 
) The figures quoted above apply to persons for whom agriculture is the prin-cipal occupation. 
 The number of persons engaged in agriculture as a subsidiary occupation increased from 3,144,000 to 3,578,000. 
 To add these to the previous figures is not entirely correct; but even if wedo this, the increase is very small: from 11,208,000 to 11,623,000. 
 rate of profit to ill-intentioned propaganda); and (b) the fact that under intensive farming the number of workers employed per unit of land increases. 
 This is an example of the deliberate refusal to understand Marx which fashion-able Critics constantly display. 
 Think of it: the theory ofthe more rapid growth of constant capital as compared withvariable capital is refuted by the increase of variable capital per unit of land! And Mr. 
 Bulgakov fails to notice that the very statistics he himself offers in such abundance confirm Marx’s theory. 
 In German agriculture as a whole the numberof workers employed diminished from 8,064,000 in 1882to 8,045,000 in 1895 (and if the number of persons engagedin agriculture as a subsidiary occupation is added, it in-creased from 11,208,000 to 11,623,000, i. 
e. 
, only by 3. 
7 per cent). 
 In the same period, livestock increased from 23,000,000 to 25,400,000 (all livestock expressed in terms of cattle),i. 
e. 
, by more than 10 per cent; the number of cases in whichthe five most important agricultural machines were employedincreased from 458,000 to 922,000, i. 
e. 
, more than dou-bled; the quantity of fertilisers imported increased from 636,000 tons (1883) to 1,961,000 tons (1892), and the quan-tity of potassium salts from 304,000 double centners to2,400,000. 
 * Is it not clear from this that constant capital has increased in relation to variable capital? This, quiteapart from the fact that these summary figures to a greatextent conceal the progress of large-scale production. 
 We shall deal with this point later. 
 Secondly, the progress of agriculture simultaneously with a diminution, or a negligible absolute increase, in the agri-cultural population completely refutes Mr. 
 Bulgakov’sabsurd attempt to revive Malthusianism. 
 The first of theRussian “ex-Marxists” to make this attempt was probably Mr. 
 Struve, in his Critical Remarks ; but he, as always, nev-er went beyond hesitant, half-expressed, and ambiguousremarks, which he did not carry to their logical conclusionor round off into a complete system of views. 
 Mr. 
 Bulgakov,however, is bolder and more consistent; he unhesitatinglyconverts the “law of diminishing returns” into “one of the *Statistik des Deutschen Reichs , Bd. 
 112, S. 
 36#; Bulgakov, II, 135. 
 most important laws of the history of civilisation” ( sic! p. 
 18). 
 “The entire history of the nineteenth century ... with its problems of riches and poverty would be unintelligible without this law. 
” “I have not the least doubt that the so-cial question as it is posed today is materially linked withthis law. 
” (Our strict scientist hastens to make this decla-ration on page 18 of his “Inquiry”!)... “There is no doubt,”he declares at the end of his work, “that where over-popula-tion exists, a certain part of the poverty that prevails must be put under the heading of absolute poverty , the poverty of production and not of distribution” (II, 221). 
 “The popu-lation problem, in the special form in which it presentsitself to us as a result of the conditions of agricultural pro-duction, is, in my opinion, the principal obstacle—at the present time at any rate—in the way of any extensive appli-cation of the principles of collectivism or co-operation inagricultural enterprise” (II, 265). 
 “The past leaves to thefuture a heritage in the shape of a grain problem more ter-rible and more difficult than the social problem—the prob-lem of production and not of distribution” (II, 455), and so on and so forth. 
 There is no need for us to discuss the scien-tific significance of this “theory”, which is inseparably con-nected with the universal law of diminishing returns, sincewe have already examined this law. 
 The fact that criticalflirtation with Malthusianism in its logical developmenthas inevitably resulted in a descent to the most vulgar bourgeois apologetics is proved by the above-quoted argu-ments, which Mr. 
 Bulgakov has presented with a franknessthat leaves nothing to be desired. 
 In a further essay we shall examine data from several new sources cited by our Critics (who constantly din into ourears that orthodox Marxists fear specification) and show that Mr. 
 Bulgakov generally stereotypes the word “over-population”, the use of which relieves him of the necessityof making any kind of analysis, particularly of analysingthe class antagonisms among the “peasantry”. 
 Here we shallconfine ourselves to the general theoretical aspect of the ag-rarian question and touch on the theory of rent. 
 “As for Marx,” writes Mr. 
 Bulgakov, “we must say that in Volume III of Capital , in the form in which we have it now, he adds nothing worthy of attention to Ricardo’s theory of differ-ential rent” (87). 
 Let us bear this “nothing worthy of atten-tion” in mind and compare the Critic’s verdict with the follow-ing statement made by him previously: “Notwithstanding his obvious opposition to this law [the law of diminishingreturns], Marx appropriates, in its fundamental princi-ples, Ricardo’s theory of rent, which is based on this law”(13). 
 Thus, according to Mr. 
 Bulgakov, Marx failed to seethe connection between Ricardo’s theory of rent and the law of diminishing returns, and therefore he never carried his argument to its logical conclusion! In regard to such a state-ment we can say but one thing—that no one distorts Marxto the degree that the ex-Marxists do and no one is so incred-ibly un... un... unabashed in ascribing to the writer he iscriticising a thousand and one mortal sins. 
 Mr. 
 Bulgakov’s assertion is a glaring distortion of the truth. 
 Actually, Marx not only saw the connection betweenRicardo’s theory of rent and his erroneous doctrine of di-minishing returns, but quite definitely exposed Ricardo’serror. 
 Anyone who has read Volume III of Capital with even a grain of “attention” could not but have observed the fact, very much “worthy of attention”, that it was precisely Marx who freed the theory of differential rent from all connection with the notorious “law of diminishing returns”. 
 Marx demonstrated that the unequal productivity of differ-ent investments of capital in land was all that was neces-sary for the formation of differential rent. 
 The question as to whether the transition is from better land to worse land or vice versa, as to whether the productivity of the additionalinvestments of capital in land diminishes or increases, isabsolutely immaterial. 
 In actual practice, all sorts of com-binations of these varying cases take place; and it is utter-ly impossible to subject these combinations to a single gen-eral rule. 
 For example, Marx first of all describes the first form of differential rent, which arises from the unequalproductivity of capital invested in unequal plots of land,and he explains his case by tables (concerning which Mr. 
Bulgakov severely rebukes Marx for his “excessive predi-lection for clothing what are often very simple thoughts in a complicated mathematical garb”. 
 This complicated mathematical garb is simply the four rules of arithmetic,and the very simple ideas, as we see, were completely mis-understood by our learned professor). 
 After analysing these tables, Marx draws the conclusion: “This takes care of the first false assumption regarding differential rent—still found among West, Malthus, and Ricardo—namely, thatit necessarily presupposes a movement toward worse andworse soil, or an ever-decreasing fertility of the soil. 
 Itcan be formed, as we have seen, with a movement towardbetter and better soil; it can be formed when a better soil takes the lowest position that was formerly occupied by the worst soil; it can be connected with a progressive improve-ment in agriculture. 
 The precondition is merely the in-equality of different kinds of soil. 
” (Marx does not speak hereof the unequal productivity of successive investments ofcapital in land, because this gives rise to the second form of differential rent; in this chapter he speaks only of the first form of differential rent. 
) “So far as the increase in produc-tivity is concerned, it [differential rent— Ed. 
] assumes that the increase in absolute fertility of the total area doesnot eliminate this inequality, but either increases it, leavesit unchanged, or merely reduces it” ( Das Kapital , III, 2, S. 
 199). 
61 Mr. 
 Bulgakov failed to see the radical difference between Marx’s theory of differential rent and Ricardo’stheory of rent. 
 He preferred to rummage in Volume III ofCapital for “a fragment which would rather suggest the idea that Marx was by no means opposed to the law of diminish-ing returns” (p. 
 13, footnote). 
 We apologise to the reader for having to devote so much space to a passage that is quite immaterial to the question that concerns us and Mr. 
 Bul-gakov. 
 But what can one do when the heroes of modern crit-icism (who have the insolence to charge orthodox Marx-ists with resorting to rabulous disputation) distort theabsolutely clear meaning of a doctrine to which they are op-posed by quoting passages out of context and in faulty trans-lations? Mr. 
 Bulgakov quotes the passage that he found asfollows: “From the standpoint of the capitalist mode of pro-duction, a relative increase in the price of ( agricultural ) products always takes place, since [we ask the reader to pay particular attention to the words we have italicised] these products cannot be secured unless an expenditure is in-curred, a payment made, which was not previously made. 
”Marx goes on to say that elements of Nature entering as agents into production, costing nothing, represent a free gift of Nature’s productive power of labour; but if for the production of an additional product it is necessary to work without the help of this natural power, a new capital outlayis required, which leads to an increase in the cost of pro-duction. 
 Concerning this mode of “quoting” we have three remarks to make. 
 First, Mr. 
 Bulgakov himself introduced the word “since”, which gives his tirade the definite sense of establish-ing some kind of “law”. 
 In the original (Das Kapital , III, 2, S. 
 277-78)62 Marx does not say “since ” but “when ”. 
 When something is paid for which formerly did not have to be paidfor, there is a relative increase in the price of the product. 
Is that proposition anything like a recognition of the “law” of diminishing returns? Secondly, Mr. 
 Bulgakov inserts in parentheses the word “agricultural”. 
 In the original text the word does not appear at all . 
 In all probability, with the frivolousness characteristic of the Critics, Mr. 
 Bul-gakov decided that in this passage Marx could be speakingonly of agricultural products, and therefore hastened to give his readers an “explanation” that is a complete misrepresen-tation. 
 In point of fact, Marx in this passage speaks of prod-ucts generally; in the original, the passage quoted by Mr. 
Bulgakov is preceded by the words: “But, in general, thefollowing is to be noted. 
” Freely bestowed natural forcesmay also enter into industrial production—in the same section on rent Marx gives the example of a waterfall which for a certain factory takes the place of steam power—andif it is necessary to manufacture an additional quantityof products without the aid of these freely bestowed naturalforces, there will always be a relative increase in the price of the products. 
 Thirdly, we must examine the context in which this passage occurs. 
 Marx discusses in this chapter differential rent obtained from the worst cultivated soil,and he examines as always two absolutely equivalent, two absolutely equally possible cases: the first case—increas-ing productivity of successive investments of capital( S. 
 274-76),63 and the second case—decreasing productivity of such investments ( S. 
 276-78). 
64 In regard to the second of the possible cases, Marx says: “Concerning decreasingproductiveness of the soil with successive investments of capital, see Liebig.... 
 But, in general , the following is to be noted” (our italics). 
 There follows the passage “trans-lated” by Mr. 
 Bulgakov, stating that when what was for-merly obtained gratis has now to be paid for, there isalways a relative increase in the price of the product. 
 We shall leave it to the reader to judge the scientific conscientiousness of the Critic who turned Marx’s remarkabout one of the possible cases into a recognition of this case by Marx as some sort of general “law”. 
 And the following is the conclusion at which Mr. 
 Bul-gakov arrives concerning the passage he has discovered: “This passage, of course, is vague.... 
” Of course! By sub-stituting one word for another, Mr. 
 Bulgakov has renderedit utterly meaningless! “... but it cannot be understood otherwise than as an indirect or even direct recognition [listen well!] of the law of diminishing returns. 
 I am un-aware that Marx has expressed himself openly on the latterin any other place” (I, 14). 
 As an ex-Marxist, Mr. 
 Bulgakovis “unaware” that Marx openly declared the assumptionsof West, Malthus, and Ricardo—that differential rent presupposes a transition to worse land or diminishing returns—to be utterly false. 
 * He is “unaware” that in the course of his voluminous analysis of rent Marx pointsout scores of times that he regards diminishing and increas-ing productivity of additional investments of capital asequally possible cases! II THE THEORY OF RENT Mr. 
 Bulgakov has completely failed to understand Marx’s theory of rent. 
 He is convinced that he has shattered thistheory by the two following arguments: (1) According to Marx, agricultural capital enters into the equalisation of *This false assumption of classical political economy, refuted by Marx, was adopted by the “Critic” Mr. 
 Bulgakov, following on the heels of his teacher, Brentano, uncritically, of course. 
 “The condi-tion for the appearance of rent,” Mr. 
 Bulgakov writes, “is the lawof diminishing returns” (I, 90). 
 “... English rent ... as a matter of fact distinguishes successive investments of capital of varying and, as a rule, diminishing productivity” (I, 130). 
 the rate of profit, so that rent is created by a surplus profit that exceeds the average rate of profit. 
 Mr. 
 Bulgakov con-siders this to be false because the monopoly of land owner-ship eliminates free competition, which is necessary for theprocess of equalising the rate of profit. 
 Agricultural capitaldoes not enter into the process of equalising the rate ofprofit. 
 (2) Absolute rent is merely a special case of differen-tial rent, and it is erroneous to distinguish the one from the other. 
 The distinction is based upon a completely arbi-trary twofold interpretation of one and the same fact,namely, the monopoly ownership of one of the factors of pro-duction. 
 Mr. 
 Bulgakov is so convinced of the crushingeffect of his arguments that he cannot refrain from pouringforth a stream of vehement words against Marx, such as petitio principii , * non-Marxism, logical fetishism, Marx’s loss of capacity for mental flights, and so forth. 
 And yetboth those arguments are based on a rather crude error. 
The same one-sided vulgarisation of the subject which in-duced Mr. 
 Bulgakov to raise one of the possible cases (di-minishing productivity of additional investments of capi-tal) to the level of the universal law of diminishing returns brings him in the present instance to employ the concept“monopoly” uncritically and to convert it into somethinguniversal. 
 In doing so, he confuses the results which accrueunder the capitalist organisation of agriculture from the limitedness of land , on the one hand, and from private property in land , on the other. 
 These are two different things, as we shall explain. 
 “The condition , although not the source, of the appear-ance of ground-rent,” writes Mr. 
 Bulgakov, “is the sameas that which gave rise to the possibility of the monopoli-sation of land—the fact that the productivity of the land is limited, while man’s growing need for it is limitless” (I, 90). 
 Instead of “the productivity of the land is limited”,he should have said, “ land is limited ”. 
 (As we have shown, limitedness of the productivity of the land implies “limit-edness” of the given technical level, the given state of theproductive forces. 
) Under the capitalist system of society, *An argument based on the conclusion from a proposition that has still to be proved. 
— Ed. 
 the limitedness of land does indeed presuppose monopoli-sation of land, but of land as an object of economy and not as an object of property rights . 
 The assumption of the capi-talist organisation of agriculture necessarily includes theassumption that all the land is occupied by separate pri-vate enterprises; but it in no way includes the assumption that the whole of the land is the private property of thosefarmers, or of other persons, or that it is, in general, pri-vate property. 
 The monopoly of landownership based on property rights and the monopoly of the land economy aretwo entirely different things, not only logically, but histor-ically. 
 Logically, we can quite easily imagine a purelycapitalist organisation of agriculture in which privateproperty in land is entirely absent, in which the land is the property of the state, or of a village commune, etc. 
 In ac-tual practice we see that in all developed capitalist coun-tries the whole of the land is occupied by separate, privateenterprises; but these enterprises exploit not only theirown lands, but also those rented from other landowners,from the state, or from village communes (e. 
g. 
, in Russia, where, as is well known, the private enterprises established on peasant communal lands are principally capitalist peas-ant enterprises). 
 Not without reason did Marx, at the verybeginning of his analysis of rent, observe that the capitalistmode of production meets in its first stages (and subordi-nates to itself) the most varied forms of landed property: from clan property 65 and feudal landed property down to the property of the peasant commune. 
 Thus, the limitedness of land necessarily presupposes only the monopolisation of the economy of the land (underthe domination of capitalism). 
 The question arises: whatare the necessary consequences of this monopolisation in relation to the problem of rent? The limitedness of land re-sults in the price of grain being determined by the condi-tions of production, not on the average land, but on theworst land under cultivation. 
 This price of grain enablesthe farmer ( =the capitalist entrepreneur in agriculture) to cover his cost of production and gives him the average rate of profit on his capital. 
 The farmer on the better land obtains an additional profit, which forms differential rent . 
 The question as to whether private property in land exists has nothing whatever to do with the question of the forma-tion of differential rent, which is inevitable in capitalist agriculture even on communal, state, or non-private lands. 
 The only consequence of the limitedness of land un-der capitalism is the formation of differential rent arisingout of the difference in the productivity of various invest-ments of capital. 
 Mr. 
 Bulgakov sees a second consequence inthe elimination of free competition in agriculture when he says that the absence of this free competition prevents agricultural capital from participating in the formationof average profit. 
 Obviously, he confuses the question ofland cultivation with the right of property in land. 
 Theonly thing that logically follows from the limitedness ofland (irrespective of private property in land) is that the land will be entirely occupied by capitalist farmers; but it by no means follows that free competition among those farm-ers will necessarily be restricted in any way. 
 Limitednessof land is a general phenomenon which inevitably leavesits impress upon the whole of capitalist agriculture. 
 Thelogical unsoundness of confusing these different things is clearly confirmed by history. 
 We shall not speak of Eng-land, where the separation of landownership from landcultivation is obvious, where free competition among farm-ers is almost limitless, where capital obtained from com-merce and industry was and is invested in agriculture onthe widest scale. 
 But in all other capitalist countries (not-withstanding the opinion of Mr. 
 Bulgakov, who, following Mr. 
 Struve, vainly strives to place “English” rent in a spe-cial category) the same process of the separation of landown-ership from land cultivation is actual, although in ex-tremely varied forms (leases, mortgages). 
 In failing to seethis process (strongly emphasised by Marx), Mr. 
 Bulgakov has failed to see the main thing. 
 In all European countries, after the fall of serfdom, we see the decay of landownershipbased on social-estates, the mobilisation of landed property,the investment of merchant and industrial capital in agri-culture, an increase in tenant farming and an increase inthe mortgaging of land. 
 In Russia also, despite the most pronounced survivals of serfdom, we see after the Reform * *The Reform of 1861 which abolished serfdom in Russia. 
— Tr. 
 increased purchasing of land by peasants, commoners, and merchants, and increased leasing of privately-owned, state, and village communal lands, etc. 
, etc. 
 What do all these phenomena prove? They prove that free competitionhas entered agriculture—despite the monopoly of landed property and regardless of the infinite variety of its forms. 
 In all capitalist countries at the present time, everyowner of capital can invest his money in agriculture (by purchasing or leasing land) as easily, or almost as easily, as he can invest in any branch of commerce or in-dustry. 
 In arguing against Marx’s theory of differential rent, Mr. 
 Bulgakov says that “all these differences [differencesin the conditions of the production of agricultural products] are contradictory and may [our italics] mutually eliminate one another; as Rodbertus pointed out, distance may becounteracted by fertility, different degrees of fertility maybe equalised by more intensive cultivation of the morefertile plots” (I, 81). 
 A pity, indeed, that our strict scientistshould have forgotten that Marx noted this fact and was able to appraise it not so one-sidedly. 
 Marx wrote: “... It is evident that these two different causes of differential rent—fertility and location [of plots of land]—may work in op-posite directions. 
 A certain plot of land may be very fa-vourably located and yet be very poor in fertility, and viceversa. 
 This circumstance is important, for it explains how it is possible that bringing into cultivation the land of a certain country may equally well proceed from the betterto the worse land as vice versa. 
 Finally, it is clear that theprogress of social production in general has, on the onehand, the effect of evening out differences arising fromlocation [of plots of land] as a cause of ground-rent, by creat-ing local markets and improving locations by establishing communication and transportation facilities; on the otherhand, it increases the differences in individual locationsof plots of land by separating agriculture from manufactur-ing and forming large centres of production, on the onehand, while relatively isolating agricultural districts [ re-lative Vereinsamung des Landes ] on the other” ( Das Kapital , III, 2, S. 
 190). 
66 Thus, while Mr. 
 Bulgakov triumphantly repeats the long known references to the possibility of the mutual elimination of the differences, Marx presents the further problem of the transformation of this possibility into reality and shows that, simultaneously with equalising influences, there are to be observed differentiating influ-ences. 
 The final result of these mutually contradictory influ-ences is, as everyone knows, that in all countries plots ofland differ considerably both in fertility and in location. 
 Mr. 
 Bulgakov’s objection merely reveals that he has not given any thought whatsoever to his observations. 
 Continuing his argument, Mr. 
 Bulgakov says that the con-ception of the last and least productive investment of labourand capital is “employed uncritically by both Ricardo andMarx. 
 It is not difficult to see what an arbitrary elementis introduced by this conception: let the amount of capital invested in land be equal to 10 a, and let each successive a represent a diminishing productivity; the total product ofthe soil will be A. 
 Obviously, the average productivity of each a will be equal to A/10; and if the total capital is re-garded as a single whole, then the price will be determinedprecisely by this average productivity” (I, 82). 
 Obviously, we say in reply to this, behind his florid phrases about the “limited productivity of the land” Mr. 
 Bulgakov failed tosee a trifle : the limitedness of land. 
 This limitedness, ir-respective of the form of property in land, creates a certain kind of monopoly, i. 
e. 
, since all the land is occupied byfarmers, and since there is a demand for the whole of the grain produced on the whole of the land, including the worst land and the remotest from the market, it is clearthat the price of grain is determined by the price of produc-tion on the worst land (or the price of production connect-ed with the last and least productive investment of capital). 
Mr. 
 Bulgakov’s “average productivity” is a futile exercise in arithmetic, for the limitedness of land prevents the actual formation of this average. 
 For this “average productivity”to form and to determine the prices, every capitalist must,in general, not only be able to invest capital in agriculture(to the extent that free competition, as we have said, existsin agriculture), but he must be able at all times to establish new agricultural enterprises in addition to those already existing. 
 If this were possible, there would be no differencewhatever between agriculture and industry, and rent could not come into existence. 
 But precisely because of the limit-edness of land, this is not the case. 
 To proceed. 
 Until now we have pursued our argument without taking into account the question of property inland; we have seen that this method was necessary for log-ical considerations, as well as for the reason that historicaldata show that capitalist agriculture emerged and developedunder various forms of landownership. 
 Let us now introduce this new condition. 
 Let us assume that all land is privately owned. 
 How will this affect rent? Differential rent will becollected by the landowner from the farmer on the basisof his right of ownership. 
 Since differential rent is the sur-plus profit over and above the normal, average profit oncapital, and since free competition in the sense of the free investment of capital in agriculture exists (is being created by capitalist development), the landowner will always finda farmer who will be satisfied with the average profit andwho will give him the surplus profit. 
 Private property inland does not create differential rent; it merely transfersit from the hands of the farmer to the hands of the landown-er. 
 Is the influence of private landownership restricted to that? Can we assume that the landowner will permitthe farmer to exploit gratis the worst and most inconvenient-ly located land, which only produces the average profiton capital? Naturally, not. 
 Landownership is a monopoly,and on the basis of this monopoly the landowner demands payment from the farmer for this land also. 
 That payment will be absolute rent , which has no connection whatever with the difference in productivity of various investmentsof capital, and which has its genesis in the private owner-ship of land . 
 In accusing Marx of making an arbitrary, two-fold interpretation of the same monopoly, Mr. 
 Bulgakov did not take the trouble to consider that we are actually dealing with a twofold monopoly. 
 In the first place, we have themonopoly (capitalist) of land economy. 
 This monopolyoriginates in the limitedness of land, and is therefore inev-itable in any capitalist society. 
 This monopoly leads to the determination of the price of grain by the conditions of production on the worst land; the surplus profit obtained by the investment of capital on better land, or by a moreproductive investment of capital, forms differential rent. 
 This rent comes into being quite independently of private property in land, which simply enables the landowner totake it from the farmer. 
 In the second place, we have themonopoly of private property in land. 
 Neither logically norhistorically is this monopoly inseverably linked with theprevious monopoly. 
 * There is nothing in this monopoly that is essential to capitalist society and to the capitalist organisation of agriculture. 
 On the one hand, we can quiteeasily conceive of capitalist agriculture without privateproperty in land; indeed, many consistent bourgeois econo-mists have demanded the nationalisation of land. 
 On theother hand, even in practice we meet with the capitalistorganisation of agriculture without private ownership ofland, e. 
g. 
, on state and village-commune lands. 
 Conse-quently, it is necessary to distinguish between these twokinds of monopolies, as well as to recognise that absoluterent, which is engendered by private property in land, exists side by side with differential rent. 
 ** *It is hardly necessary to remind the reader that we are dealing here with the general theory of rent and the capital-ist organisation of agriculture; we do not, therefore, concern our-selves with facts like the antiquity and widespread character of pri-vate property in land, or the undermining of the last-mentioned form of monopoly, and partly of both its forms, by overseas competition,and so forth. 
 **In the second part of Volume II of Theories of Surplus-Value (Theorien über den Mehrwert , II. 
 Band, II. 
 Theil), published in 1905, Marx gives an explanation of absolute rent which confirms the correct-ness of my interpretation (particularly in regard to the two forms of monopoly). 
 The following passages from Marx pertain to this inter-pretation: “If land were an unlimited element, not only in relationto capital and to population, but in actual fact, i. 
e. 
, if it were as‘unlimited’ as ‘air and water’, if it ‘existed in unlimited quantities’[quotations from Ricardo], then the appropriation of land by one per-son could not in practice in any way exclude the appropriation of land by another person. 
 In that case, private (as also ‘public’ and state)property in land could not exist. 
 If, in addition, the land every-where were of the same quality, no rent could be obtained for it.... 
The crux of the matter is—if land in relation to capital existed as anatural element, then capital in the sphere of agriculture would ope-rate in the same way as it does in every other sphere of industry. 
 There would then be no property in land and no rent.... 
 On the otherhand, if land is: (1) limited; and (2) appropriated—if property in landis a condition for the emergence of capital—and that is precisely thecase in countries where capitalist production is developing; and incountries where this condition did not formerly exist (as in old Eu-Marx explains the possibility of the formation of absolute rent from the surplus-value of agricultural capital by thefact that in agriculture the share of variable capital in thetotal composition of capital is above the average (a quitenatural assumption in view of the undoubted backwardnessof agricultural as compared with industrial technique). 
This being the case, it follows that the value of agriculturalproducts, generally speaking, is higher than the cost oftheir production, and that surplus-value is higher thanprofit. 
 The monopoly of private property in land, however,prevents this surplus from passing wholly into the processof equalising profits, and absolute rent is taken from thissurplus. 
 * Mr. 
 Bulgakov is greatly dissatisfied with this explanation and he exclaims: “What kind of thing is this surplus-value,which, like cloth or cotton, or some other commodity, cansuffice or not suffice to cover a possible demand? In the firstplace, it is not a material thing, it is a concept, which serves to express a definite social relationship of production” rope), capitalist production itself creates it, as in the United States— then land does not represent a field of activity accessible to capitalin an elementary way. 
 That is why absolute rent exists, apart fromdifferential rent” (pp. 
 80-81). 
 67 Marx definitely draws a distinction here between the limitedness of land and the fact that land is private property. 
 (Author’s note to the 1908 edition. 
— Ed. 
) *We desire to say in passing that we have considered it necessa-ry to deal in particular detail with Marx’s theory of rent becausewe find that the interpretation Mr. 
 P. 
 Maslov gives of it is also incor-rect (“The Agrarian Question”, in Zhizn , Nos. 
 3 and 4, 1901). 
 In that article, he regards the diminishing productivity of successive invest-ments of capital, if not as a law, then at all events as the “usual” and as it were normal phenomenon, which he links with differential rent,and he rejects the theory of absolute rent. 
 Mr. 
 P. 
 Maslov’s interest-ing article contains many true remarks concerning the Critics, butit suffers greatly from the author’s erroneous theory just referred to(while defending Marxism, he has not taken the trouble to define clearly the difference between “his own” theory and that of Marx), as well as from a number of careless and utterly unjust assertions,as for example, that Mr. 
 Berdyaev “is completely liberating him-self from the influence of bourgeois authors” and is distinguishedfor his “consistent class point of view, maintained without sacrific-ing objectivity”; that “in many respects Kautsky’s analysis is in places ... tendentious”; that Kautsky “has completely failed to indi-cate in what direction the development of the productive forces inagriculture is proceeding”; and so forth. 
 (I, 105). 
 This contrasting of a “material thing” to a “con-cept” is a striking example of the scholasticism which is now so freely offered in the guise of “criticism”. 
 What would be the use of a “concept” of the share of the social productif there were not definite “material things” correspondingto that concept? Surplus-value is the money equivalentof the surplus product, which consists of a definite share ofcloth, cotton, grain, and of all other commodities (the word “definite” must not, of course, be understood in the sense that science can concretely define that share, but inthe sense that the conditions which, in general outline,define the dimensions of this share are known). 
 In agri-culture, the surplus product is larger (in proportion to thecapital) than in other branches of industry, and this surplus (which does not enter into the equalisation of profit owing to the monopoly of private property in land) may, naturally,“suffice or not suffice to cover the demand” of the monopo-list landowner. 
 We shall not burden the reader with a detailed exposition of the theory of rent which Mr. 
 Bulgakov has created, as he modestly remarks, “by his own efforts”, “pursuing his own path” (I, 111). 
 A few remarks will suffice to character-ise this product of the “last and least productive investment”of professorial “effort”. 
 The “new” theory of rent is brewedaccording to the ancient recipe: “What is worth doing atall is worth doing thoroughly”. 
 Since free competition exists, then without any restrictions (although absolutely free com-petition has nowhere and at no time existed). 
 Since monop-oly exists, there is nothing more to be said. 
 Consequently,rent is not taken from surplus-value, and not even from theagricultural product; it is taken from the product of non-agricultural labour; it is simply a tribute, a tax, a deduc-tion from the total social product, a promissory note in favour of the landlord. 
 “Agricultural capital, with its profit,and agricultural labour, agriculture in general as a sphereof investment for capital and labour, are therefore a status in statu * in the kingdom of capitalism.... 
 All [ sic!] defini-tions of capital, surplus-value, wages, and value generally are imaginary quantities when applied to agriculture” (I, 99). 
 *A state within a state. 
— Ed. 
 So, now everything is clear: both capitalists and wage-workers in agriculture are imaginary quantities. 
 But if Mr. 
 Bulgakov at times wanders into the clouds, he, at others, argues not altogether irrationally. 
 Fourteen pages fartheron we read: “The production of agricultural products costssociety a certain quantity of labour; that is the value ofthese products. 
” Excellent. 
 Consequently, at least the“definition” of value is not altogether an imaginary quan-tity. 
 Farther we read: “Since production is organised on a capitalist basis, and since capital stands at the head ofproduction, the price of grain will be determined by theprice of production, that is, the productivity of the givenlabour and capital invested will be calculated according toaverage social productivity. 
” Fine! Consequently, the “definitions” of capital, surplus-value, and wages are not altogether imaginary quantities. 
 Consequently, free compe-tition (although not absolutely free) exists; for unless cap-ital could flow from agriculture into industry and viceversa, “the calculation of productivity according to averagesocial productivity” would be impossible. 
 Again: “The monopoly in land causes price to rise above value to the limits permitted by market conditions. 
” Excellent! Butwhere has Mr. 
 Bulgakov seen that tribute, taxes, promis-sory notes, etc. 
, are dependent upon market conditions?If the monopoly causes price to rise to the limits permittedby market conditions, then the only difference between the “new” theory of rent and the “old” is this: the author, pur-suing “his own path”, failed to understand the differencebetween the influence of the limitedness of land and theinfluence of private property in land, on the one hand, andthe connection between the concept “monopoly” and theconcept “the last and least productive investment of la-bour and capital”, on the other. 
 Is it surprising, therefore, that seven pages farther on (I, 120) Mr. 
 Bulgakov shouldcompletely lose sight of “his own” theory and argue aboutthe “method of distributing this [agricultural] productamong the landowner, the capitalist farmer, and the agri-cultural labourers”? A brilliant finale to a brilliant criti-cism! A remarkable outcome of the new Bulgakov theory of rent , which, henceforth, will enrich the science of polit-ical economy! III MACHINERY IN AGRICULTURE Let us now pass to what Mr. 
 Bulgakov regards as the “remarkable” work of Hertz ( Die agrarischen Fragen im Verhältniss zum Sozialismus , Wien, 1899. 
 * Russian transla-tion by A. 
 Ilyinsky, St. 
 Petersburg, 1900). 
 We shall need, however, to spend a little time in simultaneously examiningsimilar arguments by both authors. 
 The question of machinery in agriculture and the closely connected question of large-and small-scale productionin agriculture most frequently provide the “Critics” with the occasion to “refute” Marxism. 
 We shall later analyse some of the detailed data they present; for the present let usexamine their general arguments. 
 The Critics devote entire pages to arguing in detail that the use of machinery encoun-ters greater difficulties in agriculture than in industry andfor that reason machines are used to a smaller extent and have less significance. 
 This is indisputable, and it was def-initely shown, for example, by the same Kautsky whose nameis enough to arouse Messrs. 
 Bulgakov, Hertz, and Chernov to a state bordering on frenzy. 
 But this indisputable fact does not in the least controvert the other fact that the use of ma-chinery is developing rapidly in agriculture also, and that it has a powerful transforming effect upon it. 
 All that the Critics can do is to “evade” this inevitable conclusion by suchprofound arguments as, “Agriculture is characterised by the domination of Nature in the process of production and by the lack of human free will” (Bulgakov, I, 43). 
 “... instead of the uncertain and imprecise work of man, it [machinery in industry] performs micrometric as well as colossal work with mathematical precision. 
 The machine cannot do thelike [?] in the production of agricultural products because, to this day, this working instrument is not in the hands of man, but in the hands of Mother Nature. 
 This is no meta-phor” (ibid. 
). 
 Indeed it is no metaphor; it is merely an empty phrase; for everyone knows that the steam plough, the seed-drill, the threshing-machine, etc. 
, make work more “certain *Friedrich Otto Hertz, The Agrarian Question in Relation to Socialism , Vienna, 1899. 
— Ed. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR and precise”; consequently, to say, “cannot do the like”, is simply to talk nonsense! Similarly, how can it be said that machinery in agriculture “cannot to any extent [ sic!] revo-lutionise production ” (Bulgakov, I, 43-44, where he quotes the opinion of agricultural machinery experts, who, however, merely refer to the relative difference between agriculturaland industrial machinery), or that “not only cannot machin-ery convert the worker into its adjunct [?], but that the worker still retains his previous control of the process”(44)—as feeder of the threshing-machine, perhaps? Mr. 
 Bulgakov tries to belittle the superiority of the steam plough by references to Stumpfe and Kutzleb (who wroteof the ability of small-scale farming to compete with large-scale farming), as against the opinions of experts in agri-cultural machinery and agricultural economics (Fühling,Perels). 
 He advances arguments to the effect that steam ploughing requires a special soil * and “extremely exten-sive estates” (in Mr. 
 Bulgakov’s opinion this is not an argu-ment against small-scale farming, but against the steam plough!), and that with 12-inch furrows the work of animals is cheaper than steam power, and so forth. 
 One could fill tomes with such arguments, without, however, in the least refuting the fact that the steam plough has made extremely deep ploughing possible (furrows deeper than 12 inches), orthe fact that its use has rapidly developed: in England, in 1867, only 135 estates were using steam ploughs, whereas in 1871 over 2,000 steam ploughs had come in to use (Kauts-ky); in Germany the number of farms using steam ploughs increased from 836 in 1882 to 1,696 in 1895. 
 On the question of agricultural machinery Mr. 
 Bulgakov frequently cites Franz Bensing, whom he recommends as “the author of a special monograph on agricultural machin-ery” (I, 44). 
 It would be most unfair if we did not in thepresent case show how Mr. 
 Bulgakov quotes his authors, and how the very witnesses he calls testify against him. 
 *Hertz, with a particularly “triumphant” air, insists upon this, contending that the “absolute” judgement ( S. 
 65, Russian transla-tion, p. 
 156) that the steam plough is superior to the horse plough“under all circumstances” is false. 
 This is precisely what is called forc-ing an open door! In arguing that Marx’s “construction” on the more rapid growth of constant capital as compared with variable capi-tal is inapplicable to agriculture, Mr. 
 Bulgakov points to the need of a larger expenditure of labour-power in propor-tion to the increase in the productivity of agriculture, and,among others, quotes the calculations made by Bensing:“The general amount of human labour required by the var-ious systems of economy is expressed as follows: the three-field system—712 man-days; the Norfolk crop rotation sys-tem—1,615 man-days; crop rotation with a considerableproduction of sugar-beet—3,179 man-days per 60 hectares”(Franz Bensing, Der Einfluss der landwirtschaftlichen Ma-schinen auf Volks-und Privatwirtschaft , * Breslau, 1897, S. 
 42. 
 Quoted by Bulgakov, I, 32). 
 The unfortunate thing, how-ever, is that by this calculation Bensing desired to prove that the role of machinery is growing. 
 Applying these figuresto German agriculture as a whole, Bensing calculates thatthe available agricultural workers would be sufficient to cul-tivate the land only on the three-field system, and that, con-sequently, the introduction of a crop rotation system would have been altogether impossible without machines. 
 It is well known that when the old three-field system prevailed machin-ery was hardly utilised at all; consequently, Bensing’scalculation proves the opposite of what Mr. 
 Bulgakov tries to prove; this calculation shows that the growth of productiv-ity of agriculture was necessarily accompanied by a more rapid growth of constant capital as compared with variable capital. 
 Elsewhere Mr. 
 Bulgakov, after asserting that “a radical [sic!] difference exists between the role of machinery in the manufacturing industry and in agriculture”, quotes the wordsof Bensing: “Agricultural machinery cannot effect an un-limited increase in production in the way machines in indus-try do...” (I, 44). 
 Mr. 
 Bulgakov is unlucky again. 
 Bensingpoints to this by no means “radical” difference between agri-cultural and industrial machinery in the beginning of Chap-ter VI of his book, which is entitled: “The Influence of Agri-cultural Machinery on Gross Income”. 
 After making a de-*The Influence of Agricultural Machinery on National and Pri-vate Economy . 
—Ed. 
 tailed analysis of the data relating to each special type of ma-chine as published in agricultural literature and of his own findings obtained in a special inquiry, Bensing arrives at the following general conclusion: the increase in gross incomeobtained by the use of a steam plough is ten per cent, of aseed-drill ten per cent, and of a threshing-machine fifteenper cent; moreover, the seed-drill causes a saving of twentyper cent in seed; only the use of potato-digging machines shows a decline of five per cent in gross income. 
 Mr. 
 Bul-gakov’s assertion that “at all events, the steam plough isthe only agricultural machine about which anything favour-able can be said from the technical point of view” (I, 47-48)is at all events refuted by the very Bensing to whom incautious Mr. 
 Bulgakov here refers. 
 In order to present the significance of machinery in agri-culture as precisely and completely as possible, Bensing makesa number of detailed calculations of the results of farmingcarried on without machinery, with one machine, with twomachines, and so forth, and, finally, with the use of all theimportant machines, including the steam plough and light railways ( Feldbahnen ). 
 He found that in farming without the aid of machinery gross income amounted to 69,040marks—expenditure, 68,615 marks, net income, 425 marks,or 1. 
37 marks per hectare. 
 In farming that made use of allthe important machines gross income amounted to 81,078marks—expenditure, 62,551. 
5 marks, net income, 18,526. 
5 marks, or 59. 
76 marks per hectare, i. 
e. 
, more than forty times as much as in the first case . 
 That is the effect of machin-ery alone, for the system of cultivation is assumed to haveremained unchanged. 
 It goes without saying that the use ofmachinery is accompanied, as Bensing’s calculations show, byan enormous increase in constant capital and a diminution in variable capital (i. 
e. 
, in the capital expended on labour-power and in the number of workers employed). 
 In short,Bensing’s work entirely refutes Mr. 
 Bulgakov and provesthe superiority of large-scale production in agriculture, aswell as the fact that the law of the growth of constant capi-tal at the expense of variable capital is applicable to agri-culture. 
 Only one thing makes Mr. 
 Bulgakov akin to Bensing, and that is that the latter adopts the purely bourgeois point of view, completely fails to understand the contradictions in-herent in capitalism, and smugly pretends not to see that ma-chines oust the worker, etc. 
 This moderate and methodical pupil of the German professors speaks of Marx with a hatredto match Mr. 
 Bulgakov’s, except that Bensing is more con-sistent—he calls Marx “an opponent of machinery” in gen-eral, in both agriculture and industry, because, says he,Marx “distorts the facts” when he talks of the harmful effect machines have on the workers and attributes all sorts of mis-fortunes to machines (Bensing, loc. 
 cit. 
 , S. 
 4, 5, and 11). 
 Mr. 
 Bulgakov’s attitude toward Bensing reveals to us again andagain what the “Critics” take from the bourgeois scientistsand what they pretend not to see. 
 The nature of Hertz’ “criticism” is sufficiently revealed by the following example. 
 On page 149 of his book (Russian translation) he charges Kautsky with employing “ feuilleton methods”, and on page 150 he “refutes” the assertion thatlarge-scale production is superior to small-scale produc-tion in regard to the use of machinery, by the following argu-ments: (1) Machinery is accessible also to small farmers through the medium of co-operative societies. 
 That, if you please, is supposed to refute the fact that machinery is used on a larger scale on big farms! On the question as to who hasgreater access to the benefits of co-operative organisation, we shall have a separate talk with Hertz in our second essay. 
(2) David has shown in Sozialistische Monatshefte68 (Vol. 
 V, No. 
 2) that the use of machinery on small farms “is extensive and is rapidly increasing ... that seed-drills are frequently[sic!] to be found even on very small farms. 
 The same applies to mowers and other machines” ( S. 
 63, Russian translation, p. 
 151). 
 But if the reader turns to David’s article, * he will see that the author takes the absolute figures of the number of farms using machinery, and not the percentage of those farms in relation to the total number of farms in the given cate-gory (as Kautsky does, of course). 
 Let us compare those figures, which are for the whole of Germany for 1895: ** *This faulty method is repeated in David’s work Socialism and Agriculture , St. 
 Petersburg, 1906, p. 
 179. 
 (Author’s note to the 1908 edition. 
— Ed. 
) **Statistik des deutschen Reichs , 112. 
 Bd. 
, S. 
 36 #. 
 Farms using machinery Groups of farms Under 2 hectares 3,236,367 214 0. 
01 14,735 0. 
46 245 0. 
01 2 to 5 ” 1,016,318 551 0. 
05 13,088 1. 
29 600 0. 
06 5 to 20 ” 998,804 3,252 0. 
33 48,751 4. 
88 6,746 0. 
68 20 to 100 ” 281,767 12,091 4. 
29 49,852 17. 
69 19,535 6. 
93 100 and over ” 25,061 12,565 50. 
14 14,366 57. 
32 7,958 31. 
75 Totals 5,558,317 28,673 0. 
52 140,792 2. 
54 35,084 0. 
63 Confirmation indeed of the statement of David and Hertz that seeding-machines and mowers are “frequently” found “even on very small farms”! And if Hertz draws the “conclu-sion” that, “judged by statistics, Kautsky’s assertion willnot stand criticism”, who is it that really employs feuil-leton methods? It should be pointed out as a curiosity that whereas the “Critics” deny the superiority of large-scale farming in regard to the use of machinery and deny the overwork and under-consumption caused by this fact in small farming, they out-rageously contradict themselves when compelled to dealwith the actual facts of the situation (and when they forgettheir “principal task”—to refute “orthodox” Marxism). 
Thus, in Volume II of his book (p. 
 115) Mr. 
 Bulgakov says: “Large-scale farming always works with greater capital in-tensity than small-scale farming, and therefore, naturally,gives preference to the mechanical factors of productionover live labour-power. 
” That Mr. 
 Bulgakov as a “Critic”should follow Messrs. 
 Struve and Tugan-Baranovsky in theirinclination towards vulgar political economy by contrasting mechanical “ factors of production” to live factors is indeed quite “natural”. 
 But is it natural that he should so incau-tiously deny the superiority of large-scale farming? On concentration in agricultural production Mr. 
 Bulga-kov can find no other words with which to express himself than “the mystical law of concentration”, and so forth. 
 But he comes up against the figures for England, and theyshow that a tendency towards the concentration of farms wasTotal numberof farms Seeding-machines Per cent Seed-drills Per cent Mowersandreapers Per cent observed from the fifties to the end of the seventies. 
 “Small subsistence farms combined into larger farms,” writes Mr. 
 Bulgakov. 
 “ This consolidation of land was by no means the result of the conflict between large-scale and small-scaleproduction [?] but of a conscious [?!] striving on the partof the landlords to increase their rents by combining sev-eral small farms which provided them with very low rentsinto large farms capable of paying them larger rents” (I, 239). 
 We are to understand from this: Not conflict between large-scale and small-scale farming, but the elimination of the latter, because it is less remunerative. 
 “Since farming is estab-lished on a capitalist basis, it is indisputable that withincertain limits large-scale capitalist farming possesses un-doubted advantages over small-scale capitalist farming” (I, 239-40). 
 If this is indisputable, why the clamour? Why did Mr. 
 Bulgakov cry murder (in Nachalo ) against Kautsky, who begins his chapter on large-scale and small-scale production (in his Agrarian Question ) with the statement: “The more capitalistic agriculture becomes, the more qualitative be-comes the difference in technique between large-scale and small-scale production”? But not only the period of prosperity of English agricul-ture—also the period of crisis leads to conclusions un-favourable to small-scale farming. 
 The reports of commis-sions published during recent years “with astonishing per-sistence assert that the crisis has most severely affected the small farmers” (I, 311). 
 One report dealing with small owners says: “Their homes are worse than the average la-bourers’ cottages.... 
 All of them work astonishingly hardand for many more hours than the labourers, and many ofthem say that their material conditions are not so good asthose of the latter, that they do not live as well and rarely eat fresh meat.... 
 The yeomen, burdened with mortgages, were the first to go under...” (I, 316). 
 “They stint themselves inall things as only few labourers do.... 
 The small farmers keepgoing as long as they are able to avail themselves of theunpaid labour of the members of their families.... 
 It is hardlynecessary to add that the living conditions of the small farm-ers are far worse than those of the labourers” (I, 320-21). 
 We have quoted these passages so that the reader may judgethe correctness of the following conclusion drawn by Mr. 
 Bulgakov: “The severe ruination of the farms which had sur-vived until the epoch of the agrarian crisis indicates merely [!!] that in such circumstances small producers succumb more quickly than large producers—and nothing more [ sic!!]. 
 It is utterly impossible to draw from this any general con-clusion concerning the economic viability of small farms, forin that epoch the whole of English agriculture was insolvent”(I, 333). 
 Isn’t this priceless? And in the chapter dealing with the general conditions of development of peasant farm-ing, Mr. 
 Bulgakov even generalises this remarkable methodof reasoning in the following manner: “A sudden drop in priceshas a serious effect on all forms of production; but peasantproduction, having least capital at its disposal, is natur-ally less stable than large-scale production (which does not in the slightest affect the question of its general viability)” (II, 247). 
 Thus, in capitalist society, enterprises having lesscapital at their disposal are less stable; but that does notaffect their “general” viability! Hertz is not more consistent in his reasoning. 
 He “refutes” Kautsky (in the manner described above); but in discussing America he admits the superiority of large-scale farming in that country, which permits “the employment of machineryon a far larger scale than our parcellised farming permits”( S. 
 36, Russian translation, p. 
 93). 
 He admits that “the Euro-pean peasant, employing antiquated, routine methods ofproduction, frequently toils [ robotend ] for a crust of bread like a labourer, without striving for anything better” (ibid. 
). 
 Hertz admits generally that “small-scale production employsa relatively larger amount of labour than large-scale pro-duction” ( S. 
 74, Russian translation, p. 
 177); he could well communicate to Mr. 
 Bulgakov the data on the increase inyield resulting from the introduction of the steam plough ( S. 
 67-68, Russian translation, pp. 
 162-63), etc. 
 The natural concomitant of our Critics’ faulty theoretical reasoning on the significance of agricultural machinery istheir helpless repetition of the views of downright reaction-ary agrarians who are opposed to machinery. 
 Hertz, it istrue, still hesitates on this delicate point; in speaking of the “difficulties” in the way of introducing machinery in agriculture, he observes: “The opinion is expressed that somuch free time is left in the winter that hand threshing is more profitable” ( S. 
 65, Russian translation, pp. 
 156-57). 
 Apparently, Hertz, with the logic peculiar to him, is in-clined to draw the conclusion that this is an argument, not against small production, not against the capitalist ob-stacles to the introduction of machinery, but against machin-ery! It is not surprising that Mr. 
 Bulgakov chides Hertzfor being “too closely tied to the opinion of his party” (II,287). 
 The Russian professor, of course, is above such degrad-ing “ties” and proudly declares: “I am sufficiently free from the prejudice so widespread—particularly in Marxist lit-erature—according to which every machine must be re-garded as progress” (I, 48). 
 Unfortunately, the flight of imagi-nation revealed in this magnificent piece of reasoning findsno correspondence in concrete conclusions. 
 “The steam thresh-ing-machine,” writes Mr. 
 Bulgakov, “which deprives very many workers of winter occupation, spelt for the labourersan undoubtedly serious evil uncompensated by technicaladvantages. 
 * Goltz, incidentally, points this out and even gives expression to a utopian desire” (II, 103), i. 
e. 
, the de-sire to restric t the use of threshing-machines, particularly steam threshers, “in order”, adds he, “to improve the condi-tions of the agricultural labourers, as well as to reduce emi-gration and migration” (by migration Goltz, in all probability,means movement to the towns). 
 We shall remind the reader that this Goltzian idea was also noted by Kautsky in his Agrarian Question . 
 It will not be without interest, therefore, to compare the attitude of the narrow orthodox Marxist, steeped in Marxist prejudices,with that of the latter-day Critic who has excellently assim-ilated the whole spirit of “criticism” towards a concretequestion of economics (the significance of machines) and poli-tics (not to be restricted?). 
 Kautsky says ( Agrarfrage , S. 
 41) that Goltz ascribes a particularly “harmful influence” to the threshing-machine:it deprives the agricultural labourers of their principal *Cf. 
 Vol. 
 1, p. 
 51: “... the steam thresher ... performs the bulk of the work in winter when there is a scarcity of work as it is (con-sequently, the usefulness of the machine for agriculture as a whole [sic!!] is more than doubtful; we shall come across this fact again later on). 
” winter occupation, drives them into the towns, and inten-sifies the depopulation of the countryside. 
 Goltz proposes to restrict the use of the threshing-machine, and, Kautsky adds, proposes this “ostensibly in the interests of agricul-tural labourers, but in fact in the interests of the landlords,for whom,” as Goltz himself says, “the loss resulting from suchrestriction will be amply compensated—if not immediate-ly, then in the future—by the larger number of workers they will be able to obtain in the summer-time”. 
 “Fortun-ately,” continues Kautsky, “this conservative friendship forthe labourers is nothing more nor less than reactionary uto-pianism. 
 The threshing-machine is of too great an ‘immedi-ate’ advantage for the landlord to be induced to abandon itsuse for the sake of profits ‘in the future’. 
 And so, the thresh-er will continue to perform its revolutionary work; it will continue to drive the agricultural labourers into the towns,and as a result will become a powerful instrument for the rais-ing of wages in the rural districts, on the one hand, and forthe further development of the agricultural machine in-dustry, on the other. 
” Mr. 
 Bulgakov’s attitude towards the problem as presented by a Social-Democrat and by an agrarian is very character-istic; it is an example in miniature of the position all thecontemporary “Critics” occupy midway between the partyof the proletariat and the party of the bourgeoisie. 
 The Crit-ic, of course, is not so narrow-minded and not so banal as to adopt the point of view of the class struggle and the revo-lutionising of all social relationships by capitalism. 
 On theother hand, however, although our Critic “has grown wiser”,the recollection of the time when he was “young and foolish”,and shared the prejudices of Marxism, prevents him fromadopting in its entirety the programme of his new com-rade, the agrarian, who quite reasonably and consistently passes from the conclusion that machinery is harmful “for thewhole of agriculture” to the desire to prohibit its use. 
 And our good Critic finds himself in the position of Buridan’sass, between two bundles of hay. 
 On the one hand, he haslost all understanding of the class struggle and is now capable of saying that machinery is harmful for “the whole of agri-culture”, forgetting that the whole of modern agriculture is conducted mainly by entrepreneurs, who are concerned only about their profit; he has so far forgotten “the years of his youth”, when he was a Marxist, that he now raises the ex-tremely absurd question as to whether the technical advan-tages of machinery will “compensate” for its harmful effects upon the labourers (produced, not by the steam thresher alone, but by the steam plough, the mower, seed-sifter, etc. 
). 
 He even fails to see that, in fact, the agrarian wants to en-slave the labourer further both in winter and in summer. 
 On the other hand, he vaguely recalls the obsolete, “dogmat-ic” prejudice that prohibiting machinery is utopian. 
 Poor Mr. 
 Bulgakov! Will he manage to extricate himself from this unpleasant situation? It is interesting to note that in trying in every way to belit-tle the significance of agricultural machinery, and even making use of the “law of diminishing returns”, our Critics have forgotten to mention (or have deliberately refrained from mentioning) the new technological revolution which electrical engineering is preparing in agriculture. 
 But Kaut-sky, who, according to the extremely unfair judgement of Mr. 
 P. 
 Maslov, “committed a serious mistake in completely failing to indicate the course taken by the development ofthe productive forces in agriculture” ( Zhizn , 1901, No. 
 3, p. 
 171), pointed to the significance of electricity in agri-culture as far back as 1899 (in Die Agrarfrage ). 
 Today, the symptoms of the approaching technological revolution are much more distinct. 
 Attempts are being made to elu-cidate theoretically the significance of electricity in agricul-ture (see Dr. 
 Otto Pringsheim, Landwirtschaftliche Manu-faktur und elektrische Landwirtschaft , * Brauns Archiv, XV, 1900, S. 
 406-18; and Kautsky’s article in Neue Zeit ,69 XIX, 1, 1900-01, No. 
 18, “ Die Elektrizität in der Landwirt-schaft ”**). 
 Practical landlord farmers are describing their experiments in the application of electricity (Pringsheim cites a work by Adolf Seufferheld, who describes the experi-ments on his own farm). 
 These landlords see in electricity a means of making agriculture once more remunerative. 
 They call upon the government and the landlords to estab-*Agricultural Manufacture and Electrified Agriculture . 
—Ed. 
 **“Electricity in Agriculture. 
”— Ed. 
 lish central power stations and to organise the mass produc-tion of electricity for farmers. 
 (Last year a work was pub-lished in Königsberg, written by P. 
 Mack, an East-Prussian landlord, entitled Der Aufschwung unseres Landwirtschafts-betriebes durch Verbilligung der Produktionskosten. 
 Eine Untersuchung über den Dienst , den Maschinentechnik und Elektrizität der Landwirtschaft bieten . 
*) Pringsheim makes what in our opinion is a very true obser-vation: that, in its general technological, and perhaps even economic, level, modern agriculture is at a stage of develop-ment which more than anything resembles the stage of in-dustry Marx described as “manufacture”. 
 The predominance of hand labour and simple co-operation, the sporadic em-ployment of machines, the relatively small extent of produc-tion (if we consider, for example, the total annual volume of products sold by a single enterprise), the relatively limited market for the most part, the connection between large-and small-scale production (the latter, like the handicrafts-man in his relation to the big master-manufacturer, supplies the former with labour-power—or else the former buys up the “semi-finished articles” from the latter; thus, the bigfarmer buys beets, cattle, etc. 
, from the small farmers)— all these are symptoms of the fact that agriculture has not yet reached the stage of real “large-scale machine industry” in the Marxian sense. 
 In agriculture there is no “system of machines” as yet linked into one productive mechanism. 
 Of course, this comparison must not be carried too far. 
 On the one hand, agriculture possesses certain peculiar fea-tures that cannot possibly be removed (if we leave aside the extremely remote and problematic possibility of producing protein and foods in laboratories). 
 Owing to these peculiar-ities, large-scale machine production will never manifest in agriculture all the features it possesses in industry. 
 On the other hand, even in the manufacture stage of development large-scale production in industry reached predominance and considerable technical superiority over small-scale produc-*The Rise in Our Agriculture Through Reduced Cost of Produc-tion. 
 An Inquiry into the Services Offered to Agriculture by Mechan-ical Engineering and Electricity . 
—Ed. 
 tion. 
 For a long time the small producer tried to counteract this superiority by the lengthened working day and curtailed consumption which are so characteristic of the handicrafts-man and of the modern small peasant. 
 The predominance of hand labour in the manufacture stage enabled the small producer to hold his own for a time by “heroic” measures such as these. 
 But those who were deceived by this and talked about the viability of the handicraftsman (even as our con-temporary Critics talk of the viability of the peasant) very soon found themselves refuted by the “temporary tendency” which paralysed the “universal law” of technological stag-nation. 
 Let us recall, for instance, the Russian investigators into the handicraft weaving industry in Moscow Gubernia in the seventies. 
 As far as cotton weaving was concerned, they said, the hand weaver was doomed; the machine had triumphed. 
 The handicraft silk weaver, however, may still hold his own for a time, the machinery being still far from perfect. 
 Two decades have passed, and machinery has driven the small producer from still another of his last refuges, as if telling those who have ears to hear and eyes to see that the economist must always look forward, towards technologicalprogress, or else be left behind at once; for he who will not look ahead turns his back on history; there is not and there cannot be any middle path. 
 “Writers who, like Hertz, in treating of competition between small-and large-scale production in agriculture ignored electrical engineering, must start their investigation all over again,” aptly remarked Pringsheim, which remark applies with still greater force to Mr. 
 Bulgakov’s two-volume work. 
 Electricity is cheaper than steam power. 
 It is more easily divisible into small units, it can be more easily transmitted over very long distances; machinery powered by electricity runs more smoothly and precisely, and for that reason it is more convenient to use it in threshing, ploughing, milking, cutting fodder, * etc. 
 Kautsky describes one of the Hungar-*This is for the information of our bold Mr. 
 Bulgakov, who boldly and groundlessly speaks of “branches of agricultural produc-tion in which machinery cannot be used at all, as, for example, live-stock farming” (I, 49). 
 ian latifundia * in which electricity is transmitted from a central station in all directions to the remote parts of the estate and is used for running agricultural machinery, for chopping mangels, for raising water, for lighting, etc. 
, etc. 
 “In order to pump 300 hectolitres a day from a well 29 me-tres deep into a reservoir 10 metres high, and in order to pre-pare fodder for 240 cows, 200 calves, and 60 oxen and horses, i. 
e. 
, for chopping mangels, etc. 
, two pairs of horses were required in the winter and one pair in the summer, at a cost of 1,500 gulden. 
 Now, the horses have been replaced by a three and a five h. 
p. 
 motor costing altogether 700 gulden to maintain, which represents a saving of 800 gulden” (Kautsky, loc. 
 cit. 
). 
 Mack calculates the cost of a horse-workday at 3 marks; but if the horse is replaced by electricity the cost is 40 to 75 pfennigs, i. 
e. 
, four to seven times cheaper. 
 If in 50 years or more from now, he says, 1,750,000 of the horses used in German agriculture were supplanted by electricity (in 1895, 2,600,000 horses, 1,000,000 oxen, and 2,300,000 cows were used for field work in German agriculture, of which 1,400,000 horses and 400,000 oxen were used on farms exceeding 20 hectares in area), expenses would be reducedfrom 1,003,000,000 marks to 261,000,000 marks, i. 
e. 
, by 742,000,000 marks. 
 An enormous area of land now utilised for raising cattle feed could then be turned to the produc-tion of food—for the improvement of the food of the work-ers, whom Mr. 
 Bulgakov tries so much to scare with the prospect of the “diminution of the gifts of Nature”, “the grain problem”, and so forth. 
 Mack strongly recommends the unit-ing of agriculture with industry for the permanent exploi-tation of electricity; he recommends the cutting of a Mazu-rian canal to provide power for five power stations which would distribute electricity to farmers within a radius of 20-25 kilometres. 
 He recommends the use of peat for the same purpose, and demands the association of farmers: “Only in co-operative association with industry and big capital is it possible to make our branch of industry profitable once again” (Mack, S. 
 48). 
 Of course, the employment of new meth-ods of production will encounter many difficulties; it will *Again for the information of Mr. 
 Bulgakov, who talks of “the latifundian degeneration of large-scale farming”! not proceed in a straight line, but in zigzag fashion; however, that the employment of new methods will take place, that the revolution in agriculture is inevitable, can hardly bedoubted. 
 “The substitution of electric motors for the majority of draught animals,” rightly says Pringsheim, “means opening up the possibility of the machine system in agricul-ture.... 
 What could not be achieved by steam power will certainly be achieved by electrical engineering, namely, the advancement of agriculture from the oldmanufacture stage to modern large-scale production” (loc. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 414. 
) We shall not dilate upon the enormous victory the intro-duction of electrical engineering in agriculture will represent (and partly already represents) for large-scale production;it is too obvious to require emphasis. 
 It will be better tosee which modern farms contain the rudiments of this “ma-chine system” that will be set in motion by a central powerstation. 
 Before the machine system can be introduced, it is first of all necessary to test various kinds of machines, to conduct experiments with many combinations of machines. 
The information we require can be found in the returns ofthe German agricultural census of June 14, 1895. 
 We havefigures showing the number of farms in each category thatused their own or hired machines. 
 (Mr. 
 Bulgakov, when cit-ing some of these figures on page 114, Vol. 
 II, erroneous-ly takes them to apply to the number of machines used. 
 In passing, it may be said that the statistics on the numberof farms using machines, their own or hired, naturally bringout the superiority of large-scale farming to a smaller extentthan is really the case. 
 Big farmers have their own machines more often than small farmers, who are obliged to pay exor-bitant prices for the hire of machines. 
) The data relate tothe use either of machines in general, or of a certain kind ofmachine, so that we are not able to determine whole machines the farms in each group use. 
 But if for each groupwe compute the number of farms using each separate kind of machine, we shall obtain the number of cases in which ag-ricultural machines of all kinds are used . 
 The following table presents the data drawn up in this manner and shows how the ground is being prepared for the “machine system” inagriculture. 
 Per hundred farms Number of in-Number of farmsstances in whichSize of farms that used agri-some kind ofcultural ma-agriculturalchines generallymachine was(1895)used (1895) Under 2 hectares . 
 . 
 . 
 2. 
03 2. 
30 2 to 5 ” . 
 . 
 . 
 13. 
81 15. 
46 5 to 20 ” . 
 . 
 . 
 45. 
80 56. 
04 20 to 100 ” . 
 . 
 . 
 78. 
79 128. 
46 100 and over ” . 
 . 
 . 
 94. 
16 352. 
34 Average . 
 . 
 . 
 16. 
36 22. 
36 Thus, in small farms under five hectares (these comprise more than three-fourths of the total in this group, viz. 
,4,100,000 out of 5,500,000, or 75. 
5 per cent; but they account for only 5,000,000 hectares out of a total of 32,500,000 hec-tares, or 15. 
6 per cent), the number of cases in which agri-cultural machines of any type are used (we have includeddairy machinery) is quite insignificant. 
 Of the medium farms(from 5 to 20 hectares) fewer than half use machines gener-ally, while the number of instances showing use of agricul-tural machines represents only 56 per hundred farms. 
 Only under large-scale capitalist production * do we see the ma-jority of farms (from three-quarters to nine-tenths) using machinery and the beginning of the establishment of a ma-chine system : on every farm there is more than one case of use of machinery. 
 This means that several machines are used on a single farm: for example, farms of over 100 hectares use about four machines each (352 per cent as compared with 94 per cent using machines generally). 
 Of 572 latifundia (farmsof 1,000 hectares and over), 555 use machines; and the num-ber of cases in which machines were used is 2,800, i. 
e. 
, eachfarm used five machines . 
 It is clear from this which farms are preparing the ground for the “electrical” revolution and which will mostly take advantage of it. 
 *Over 20 hectares only 300,000 farms out of 5 500,000, i. 
e. 
, only 5. 
5 per cent of the total, but they occupy 17,700,000 hectares of land out of 32,500,000, or 54. 
4 per cent of the total farmland. 
 IV THE ABOLITION OF THE ANTITHESIS BETWEEN TOWN AND COUNTRY. 
 PARTICULAR QUESTIONS RAISED BY THE “CRITICS” From Hertz let us pass to Mr. 
 Chernov. 
 As the latter merely “talks with his readers” about the former, we shall confine ourselves here to a brief description of Hertz’ method of argument (and Mr. 
 Chernov’s method of paraphrasing him),and (in the next essay) take up certain new facts advanced bythe “Critics”. 
 It will suffice to cite but a single example to show the sort of theoretician Hertz is. 
 At the very beginning of his book we find a paragraph under the pretentious heading, “The Concept of National Capitalism”. 
 Hertz wants nothing morenor less than to present a definition of capitalism. 
 He writes:“We can, of course, characterise it as a system of nationaleconomy which rests juridically on the completely applied principles of freedom of the person and of property, techni-cally on production on a wide [large?] scale, * socially on the alienation of the means of production from the direct pro-ducers, politically on the possession by the capitalists of the central political power [the concentrated political power ofthe state?] ... solely on the economic basis of the distributionof property” (Russian translation, p. 
 37). 
 These definitions are incomplete, and certain reservations must be made, says Hertz; for example, domestic industry and small tenant farm-ing still persist everywhere side by side with large-scaleproduction. 
 “The realistic [sic!] definition of capitalism as a system under which production is under the control [domi-nation and control] of capitalists [owners of capital] is like-wise not quite suitable. 
” A fine “realistic” definition of capitalism as the domination of capitalists! How character-istic it is—this now fashionable, quasi-realistic, but infact eclectic quest for an exhaustive enumeration of all theseparate symptoms and separate “factors”. 
 The result, of *Mr. 
 V. 
 Chernov translates it ( Russkoye Bogatstvo , No. 
 4, p. 
 132): “on production which has achieved a high state of development”. 
 That is how he contrived to “understand” the German expression“auf grosser Stufenleiter ”!! course, is that this meaningless attempt to include into a general concept all the partial symptoms of single phenomena, or, conversely, to “avoid conflict with extremely var-ied phenomena”—an attempt that merely reveals an ele-mentary failure to understand what science is—leads the“theoretician” to a point where he cannot see the wood forthe trees. 
 Thus, Hertz lost sight of such a detail as commod-ity production and the transformation of labour-power into a commodity! Instead, he invented the following genetic definition, which—as punishment for the inventor—oughtto be quoted in full: Capitalism is “that state of national econ-omy in which the realisation of the principles of free exchangeand freedom of the person and of property has reached its(relative) high point which is determined by the economic development and the empirical conditions of each separate national economy” ( S. 
 10, Russian translation, pp. 
 38-39, not quite exact). 
 Filled with awe and admiration, Mr. 
 Cher-nov, of course, transcribes and describes this twaddle, and,moreover, treats the readers of Russkoye Bogatstvo for the space of thirty pages to an “analysis” of the types of nation-al capitalism. 
 From this highly instructive analysis we can extract a number of extremely valuable and by no meansstereotyped references, for example, to the “independent,proud, and energetic character of the Briton”; to the “sub-stantial” English bourgeoisie and the “unattractiveness” oftheir foreign policy; to the “passionate and impulsive temper-ament of the Latin race” and to the “methodicalness of the Germans” ( Russkoye Bogatstvo , No. 
 4, p. 
 152). 
 “Dogmatic” Marxism, of course, is utterly annihilated by this analy-sis. 
 No less annihilating is Hertz’ analysis of mortgage statistics. 
 At all events, Mr. 
 Chernov goes into ecstasies over it. 
 “The fact is,” he writes, “...Hertz’ figures have not yet been refuted by anyone. 
 Kautsky, in his reply to Hertz,dwelt at extreme length upon certain details [such as hisproof of Hertz’ distortions —a fine ‘detail’!], but to Hertz’ argument on the question of mortgages he made no reply whatever ” (Russkoye Bogatstvo , No. 
 10, p. 
 217, Mr. 
 Chernov’s italics). 
 As can be seen from the reference on page 238 in the cited issue of Russkoye Bogatstvo , Mr. 
 Chernov is aware of the article Kautsky wrote in reply (“ Zwei Kritiker meiner Agrarfrage ”,* in Neue Zeit , 18, 1, 1899-1900). 
 Mr. 
 Cher-nov could not but know, too, that the periodical in which the article appeared is prohibited in Russia by the censor. 
 The more noteworthy, therefore, as characterising the fea-tures of the modern “Critics”, is the fact that the very wordswhich Chernov himself underlines contain a flagrant untruth ; for on the question of mortgages Kautsky replied to “Hertz, David, Bernstein, Schippel, Bulgakov, e tutti quanti ”, ** on pp. 
 472-77, in the selfsame article to which Mr. 
 Chernov refers . 
 To rectify distorted truth is a tedious duty; but since we have to deal with the Messrs. 
 Chernov, it is aduty not to be neglected. 
 Kautsky, of course, replied to Hertz with ridicule; for in regard to this question too Hertz revealed his inability, or unwillingness, to understand what is what and an inclination to repeat the threadbare arguments of bourgeois economists. 
Kautsky in his Agrarfrage ( S. 
 88-89) dealt with the concen-tration of mortgages. 
 “Numerous petty village usurers,”wrote Kautsky, “are being forced more and more into the back-ground, forced to yield to big centralised capitalist or pub-lic institutions which monopolise mortgage credit. 
” Kautsky enumerates certain capitalist and public institutions ofthis type; he speaks of mutual land credit societies ( genos-senschaftliche Bodenkreditinstitute ) and points to the fact that savings-banks , insurance companies, and many corporations ( S. 
 89) invest their funds in mortgages, etc. 
 Thus, until 1887, seventeen mutual credit societies in Prussia had is-sued mortgage bonds to the amount of 1,650,000,000 marks. 
“These figures show how enormously ground-rent is concen-trated in the hands of a few central institutions [our italics]; but this concentration is rapidly increasing. 
 In 1875 Germanmortgage banks issued mortgage bonds to the amount of 900,000,000 marks and in 1888 to the amount of 2,500,000,000 marks, while in 1892 the amount reached atotal of 3,400,000,000 marks, concentrated in 31 banks (asagainst 27 in 1875)” ( S. 
 89). 
 This concentration of ground-rent is a clear indication of the concentration of landed property . 
 *“Two Critics of My Agrarian Question . 
”—Ed. 
 **Kautsky’s expression, p. 
 472 of Neue Zeit . 
 (E tutti quanti — and all others of their stripe. 
— Ed. 
) “No!” retort Hertz, Bulgakov, Chernov & Co. 
 “We find a very decided tendency towards decentralisation and the break-up of property” ( Russkoye Bogatstvo , No. 
 10, p. 
 216); for “more than a fourth of the mortgage credits are concen-trated in the hands of democratic [ sic!] credit institutions with a vast number of small depositors” (ibid. 
). 
 Presentinga series of tables, Hertz attempts with extraordinary zeal toprove that the bulk of the depositors in savings-banks, etc. 
, are small depositors . 
 The only question is—what is the pur-pose of this argument? Kautsky himself referred to the mu-tual credit societies and savings-banks (while not, of course,imagining, as does Mr. 
 Chernov, that they are particularly“democratic” institutions). 
 Kautsky speaks of the centrali-sation of rent in the hands of a few central institutions, and he is met with the argument about the large number of small depositors in savings-banks!! And this they call “the break-up of property”! What has the number of depositors in mort-gage banks to do with agriculture (the subject under discus-sion being the concentration of rent)? Does a big factory ceaseto signify the centralisation of production because its shares are distributed among a large number of small capitalists? “Until Hertz and David informed me,” wrote Kautsky in hisreply to the former, “I had not the slightest idea where thesavings-banks obtained their money. 
 I thought they operat-ed with the savings of the Rothschilds and the Vanderbilts. 
” In regard to transferring mortgages to the state, Hertz says: “This would be the poorest way of fighting big capital, but, of course, the best means of arousing the large and con-stantly increasing army of the smallest property-owners,particularly the agricultural labourers, against the proponentsof such a reform” ( S. 
 29, Russian translation, p. 
 78. 
 Mr. 
 Chernov smugly repeats this on pp. 
 217-18 of Russkoye Bogatstvo ). 
 These then are the “property-owners” over whose increase Bernstein & Co. 
 get so wrought up!—retorts Kautsky. 
Servant girls with twenty marks in the savings-bank! Andagain we have the threadbare argument employed againstthe socialists that by “expropriation” they will rob a large army of working people. 
 None other than Eugen Richter zealously advanced this argument in the pamphlet he pub-lished after the repeal of the Exceptional Law Against the Socialists70 (and which employers bought up by the thou-sands to distribute gratis among their workers). 
 In that pamphlet Richter introduces his celebrated “thrifty Agnes”, a poor seamstress who had a score or so of marks in the sav-ings-bank and was robbed by the wicked socialists whenthey seized political power and nationalised the banks. 
That is the source from which the Bulgakovs, * Hertzes, and Chernovs draw their “critical” arguments. 
 “At that time,” says Kautsky, concerning Eugen Richter’s “celebrated” pamphlet, “Eugen Richter was unanimouslyridiculed by all Social-Democrats. 
 Now we find people amongthe latter who, in our central organ [this, I think, refers toDavid’s articles in Vorwärts ], 71 sing a hymn of praise to a work in which these very ideas are reproduced. 
 Hertz, we extol thy deeds! “For poor Eugen, in the decline of his years, this is indeed a triumph, and I cannot refrain from quoting for his pleasurethe following passage from that very page in Hertz’ book:‘We see that the small peasants, the urban house-owners,and especially the big farmers, are expropriated by the lower and middle classes the bulk of which undoubtedly consists of the rural population”’ (Hertz, S. 
 29, Russian translation, p. 
 77. 
 Retold with rapture in Russkoye Bogatstvo , No. 
 10, pp. 
 216-17). 
 “David’s theory of ‘hollowing out’ [ Aushöh-lung ] capitalism by collective wage agreements [ Tarifge-meinschaften ] and consumers’ co-operative societies is now excelled. 
 It pales into insignificance before Hertz’ expropria-tion of the expropriators by means of savings-banks. 
 Thrif-ty Agnes, whom everybody considered dead, has come to lifeagain” (Kautsky, loc. 
 cit. 
, S. 
 475), and the Russian “Critics”, together with the publicists of Russkoye Bogatstvo , hasten to transplant this resurrected “thrifty Agnes” to Russian soil in order to discredit “orthodox” Social-Democracy. 
 And this very Mr. 
 V. 
 Chernov, spluttering with enthusiasm over Hertz’ repetition of Eugen Richter’s arguments, “anni-hilates” Kautsky in the pages of Russkoye Bogatstvo and in the symposium. 
 At the Glorious Post , compiled in honour of Mr. 
 N. 
 Mikhailovsky. 
 It would be unfair not to present some *Mr. 
 Bulgakov resorted to this argument against Kautsky with regard to the question of mortgages, in Nachalo , and in German, in Braun’s Archiv . 
 of the gems of this tirade. 
 “Kautsky, again following Marx,” writes Mr. 
 Chernov in Russkoye Bogatstvo , No. 
 8, p. 
 229, “admits that the progress of capitalist agriculture leads to the reduction of nutritive matter in the soil: in the form ofvarious products, something is continuously being takenfrom the land, sent to the towns, and never restored to theland.... 
 As you see, on the question of the laws of the fertil-ity of the soil, Kautsky helplessly [ sic!] repeats the words of Marx, who bases himself upon the theory of Liebig. 
 But when Marx wrote his first volume, Liebig’s ‘law of restora-tion’ was the last word in agronomics. 
 More than half a cen-tury has elapsed since that discovery. 
 A complete revolutionhas taken place in our knowledge of the laws governing soilfertility. 
 And what do we see? The whole post-Liebig period, all the subsequent discoveries of Pasteur and Ville, Solari’s experiments with nitrates, the discoveries of Berthelot, Hell-riegel, Wilfahrt, and Vinogradsky in the sphere of the bac-teriology of the soil—all this is beyond Kautsky’s ken.... 
”Dear Mr. 
 Chernov! How wonderfully he resembles Turgenev’sVoroshilov: you remember him in Smoke , the young Russian Privatdocent who went on a tour abroad. 
 This Voroshilov was a very taciturn young man; but now and again he would breakhis silence and pour forth scores and hundreds of the mostlearned of names, the rarest of the rare. 
 Our learned Mr. 
Chernov, who has utterly annihilated that ignoramus Kauts-ky, behaves in exactly the same manner. 
 Only ... only had we not better consult Kautsky’s book—glance at least at its chapter headings? We come to Chapter IV: “Modern Agri-culture”, section d, “Fertilisers, Bacteria ”. 
 We turn to section d and read: “Towards the end of the last decade the discovery was made that leguminous plants ... unlike other cultivated plants, obtain nearly the whole of their nitrogen supply, not from the soil, but from the air, and that far from robbing thesoil of nitrogen they enrich it. 
 But they possess this propertyonly when the soil contains certain micro-organisms whichadhere to their roots. 
 Where these micro-organisms do notexist, it is possible by means of certain inoculations to give these leguminous plants the property of converting soil poor in nitrogen into nitrogen-rich soil, and in this way to ferti-lise this soil to a certain extent for other crops. 
 As a general rule, by inoculating bacteria into these plants and by using a suitable mineral fertiliser (phosphoric acid salts and pot-ash fertilisers), it is possible to obtain the highest steady yields from the soil even without stable manure. 
 Only thanksto this discovery has ‘free farming’ acquired a really firmbasis” (Kautsky, pp. 
 51-52). 
 Who, however, gave a scientif-ic basis to the remarkable discovery of nitrogen-gatheringbacteria?—Hellriegel.... 
 Kautsky’s fault is his bad habit (possessed by many of the narrow orthodox) of never forgetting that members of amilitant socialist party must, even in their scientific works,keep the working-class reader in mind, that they must striveto write simply , without employing unnecessary clever turns of phrase and those outer symptoms of “learning” which so captivate decadents and the titled representatives of official science. 
 In this work, too, Kautsky preferred to relatein a clear and simple manner the latest discoveries in agro-nomics and to omit scientific names that mean nothing tonine-tenths of the readers. 
 The Voroshilovs, however, act inprecisely the opposite manner; they prefer to effuse a veri-table stream of scientific names in the domains of agronomics, political economy, critical philosophy, etc. 
, and thus bury essentials under this scientific lumber. 
 Thus, Voroshilov-Chernov, by his slanderous accusation that Kautsky is not acquainted with scientific names and scientific discoveries, blocked from view an extremely in-teresting and instructive episode in fashionable criticism, namely, the attack of bourgeois economics upon the social-ist idea of abolishing the antithesis between town and coun-try. 
 Prof. 
 Lujo Brentano, for instance, asserts that migra-tion from the country to the towns is caused, not by given social conditions, but by natural necessity , by the law of diminishing returns. 
 * Mr. 
 Bulgakov, following in the foot-*See Kautsky’s article “Tolstoi und Brentano” in Neue Zeit , XIX, 2, 1900-01, No. 
 27. 
 Kautsky compares modern scientific social-ism with the doctrines of Lev Tolstoi, who has always been a pro-found observer and critic of the bourgeois system, notwithstanding the reactionary naïveté of his theory, and bourgeois economics whose“star” Brentano (the teacher, as we know, of Messrs. 
 Struve, Bulgakov,Hertz, e tutti quanti ), betrays the most incredible muddle-headed-ness in confounding natural with social phenomena, in confounding steps of his teacher, stated in Nachalo (March 1899, p. 
 29) that the idea of abolishing the antithesis between town and country was “an absolute fantasy”, which would “cause an agronomist to smile”. 
 Hertz writes in his book: “The abo-lition of the distinction between town and country is, it istrue, the principal striving of the old utopians [and even ofthe Manifesto ]. 
 Nevertheless, we do not believe that a social system containing all the conditions necessary for directing human culture to the highest aims achievable would really abolish such great centres of energy and culture as the bigcities and, to soothe offended aesthetic sentiments, abandonthese abundant depositories of science and art, withoutwhich progress is impossible” ( S. 
 76. 
 The Russian transla-tor, on p. 
 182, rendered the word “ potenziert ”* as “poten-tial”. 
 These Russian translations are an awful nuisance! On page 270, the same translator translates the sentence,“Wer isst zuletzt das Schwein ?”** as “Who, in the end, is the pig?”). 
 As can be seen, Hertz defends the bourgeois systemfrom socialist “fantasies” with phrases that convey the“struggle for idealism” no less than do the writings of Messrs. 
 Struve and Berdyaev. 
 But his defence is not in the least strengthened by this bombastic, idealistic phrase-mongering. 
 of value with that of price, etc. 
 “This is not so characteristic of Bren-tano personally,” Kautsky says justly (p. 
 25), “as of the school to which he belongs. 
 The historical school of bourgeois economics, in its modern form, regards the striving towards an integral conception of thesocial mechanism as being a superseded standpoint [ überwundener Standpunkt ]. 
 According to this view, economic science must not in-vestigate social laws and combine them into an integral system, butmust confine itself to the formal description of separate social factsof the past and the present. 
 Thus, it accustoms one to swim merelyon the surface of things; and when a representative of this school,nevertheless, succumbs to the temptation to get to the bottom of things, he finds himself out of his depth and flounders helplessly round and round. 
 In our party, too, there has been observed for sometime a tendency to substitute for the Marxist theory, not some othertheory, but that absence of all theory [ Theorielosigkeit ] which dis-tinguishes the historical school—a tendency to degrade the theore-tician to the position of a mere reporter. 
 To those who desire, not simply an aimless skipping [ Fortwurschteln ] from instance to in-stance, but an integral, energetic movement forward towards a greatgoal, the Brentano confusion which we have exposed must serveas a warning against the present methods of the historical school. 
” *Raised to a higher power, abundant. 
— Ed. 
 The Social-Democrats have proved that they know how to appreciate the historic services of the great centres of energy and culture by their relentless struggle against all that encroaches on the freedom of movement of the populationgenerally and of the peasants and agricultural labourers inparticular. 
 That is why no agrarian can trap them, as hecan the Critics, with the bait of providing the “muzhik”with winter “employment”. 
 The fact that we definitely rec-ognise the progressive character of big cities in capitalist society, however, does not in the least prevent us fromincluding in our ideal (and in our programme of action, forwe leave unattainable ideals to Messrs. 
 Struve and Berdyaev)the abolition of the antithesis between town and country. 
It is not true to say that this is tantamount to abandoning the treasures of science and art. 
 Quite the contrary: this is necessary in order to bring these treasures within the reach of the entire people , in order to abolish the alienation from culture of millions of the rural population, which Marx aptlydescribed as “the idiocy of rural life”. 
 72 And at the present time, when it is possible to transmit electric power over long distances, when the technique of transport has been so greatly improved that it is possible at less cost (than atpresent) to carry passengers at a speed of more than 200 verstsan hour, * there are absolutely no technical obstacles to the enjoyment of the treasures of science and art, which for cen-turies have been concentrated in a few centres, by the whole of the population spread more or less evenly over the entire country. 
 And if there is nothing to prevent the abolition of the an-tithesis between town and country (not be imagined, ofcourse, as a single act but as a series of measures), it is not an“aesthetic sentiment” alone that demands it. 
 In the big cit-ies people suffocate with the fumes of their own excrement, to use Engels’ expression, and periodically all who can, fleefrom the cities in search of fresh air and pure water. 
 73 In-dustry is also spreading over the countryside; for it, too,requires pure water. 
 The exploitation of waterfalls, canals, *The proposal to construct such a road between Manchester and Liverpool was rejected by Parliament only because of the selfish op-position of the big railway magnates, who feared that the old com-panies would be ruined. 
 and rivers to obtain electric power will give a fresh impetus to this “spreading out of industry”. 
 Finally— last, but not least *—the rational utilisation of city refuse in general, and human excrement in particular, so essential for agricul-ture, also calls for the abolition of the antithesis betweentown and country. 
 It is against this point in the theoryof Marx and Engels that the Critics decided to directtheir agronomical arguments (the Critics preferred to refrain from fully analysing the theory, which is dealt with in great detail in Engels’ Anti-Dühring , 74 and, as usual, limited themselves simply to paraphrasing fragments ofthe thoughts of a Brentano). 
 Their line of reasoning is asfollows: Liebig proved that it is necessary to restore to thesoil as much as is taken from it. 
 He was therefore of the opin-ion that throwing city refuse into the seas and rivers was a stupid and barbarous waste of materials essential for agri-culture. 
 Kautsky agrees with Liebig’s theory. 
 But modern agronomics has proved that it is quite possible to restore theproductive forces of the soil without the use of stable manure,namely, by means of artificial fertilisers, by the inoculation of certain bacteria into leguminous plants which collect nit-rates, etc. 
 Consequently , Kautsky, and all those “orthodox” people, are simply behind the times. 
 Consequently—we reply—here, too, the Critics commit one of their innumerable and endless distortions . 
 After explaining Liebig’s theory, Kautsky immediately showed that modern agronomics has proved that it is quite possible “to dispense altogether with stable manure” ( Agrarfrage , S. 
 50; see passage quoted above), but added that this wasmerely a palliative compared with the waste of human excre-ment entailed by the present system of city sewage disposal. 
Now, if the Critics were at all capable of discussing the es-sential points of the question, this is the point they should have disproved; they should have shown that it is not apalliative. 
 But they did not even think of doing so. 
 Need-less to say, the possibility of substituting artificial for natu-ral manures and the fact that this is already being done ( part-ly) do not in the least refute the irrationality of wasting nat-ural fertilisers and thereby polluting the rivers and the air *These words are in English in the original. 
— Ed. 
 in suburban and factory districts. 
 Even at the present time there are sewage farms in the vicinity of large cities which utilise city refuse with enormous benefit to agriculture; but by this system only an infinitesimal part of the refuse is uti-lised. 
 To the objection that modern agronomics has refutedthe argument that the cities agronomically exploit thecountryside, with which the Critics present Kautsky assomething new, he replies, on page 211 of his book, that artificial fertilisers “render it possible to avoid the diminu-tion of soil fertility, but the necessity to employ them to anincreasing extent merely indicates still another of the nu-merous burdens agriculture has to bear, which are by no means a natural necessity , but a product of existing social relations ”. 
 * The words we have emphasised contain the “pivot” of the question which the Critics so zealously confuse. 
 Writers likeMr. 
 Bulgakov try to scare the proletariat with the bogy thatthe “grain question” is more terrible and important than thesocial question; they are enthusiastic over birth control andargue that “control of the increase of the population” is be-coming “the fundamental [ sic!] economic condition” for the prosperity of the peasantry (II, 261), that this control isworthy of “respect”, and that “much hypocritical indignation[only hypocritical, not legitimate, indignation against thepresent social system?] is roused among sentimental [?!]moralists by the increase in births among the peasant popula-tion, as if unrestrained lust [ sic!] were in itself a virtue” (ibid. 
). 
 Such writers must naturally and inevitably striveto keep in the background the capitalist obstacles to agricul-tural progress, to throw the entire blame for everything uponthe natural “law of diminishing returns”, and to present theidea of abolishing the antithesis between town and country as “pure fantasy”. 
 But what utter irresponsibility the Cher-novs betray when they repeat such arguments and at the sametime reproach the Critics of Marxism for “lacking principlesand for being eclectics and opportunists” ( Russkoye Bogat-stvo, No. 
 11, p. 
 246)?! What spectacle could be more comical *“It goes without saying,” continues Kautsky, “that artificial fertilisers will not disappear with the fall of capitalism; but they will enrich the soil with special materials and not fulfil the whole task of restoring its fertility. 
” than that of Mr. 
 Chernov reproving others for lack of prin-ciples and for opportunism. 
 All the other critical exploits of our Voroshilov are identical to what we have just examined. 
 Voroshilov assures us that Kautsky fails to understand the difference between capitalist credit and usury; that he betraysutter failure, or unwillingness, to understand Marx, in main-taining that the peasant fulfils the functions of entrepre-neur and, as such, stands in the same relation to the pro-letariat as the factory owner. 
 Beating his breast, Voroshilovcries out: “I say this boldly because I feel [ sic!] the ground firmly under my feet” ( At the Glorious Post , p. 
 169). 
 In all this, rest assured, Voroshilov is again hopelessly confusingthings and boasting as usual. 
 He “failed to see” the passages in Kautsky’s book that deal with usury as such ( Agrarfrage , S. 
 11, 102-04, especially 118, 290-92), and with all his might forces an open door, shouting as usual about Kautsky’s “doc-trinaire formalism”, “moral hard-heartedness”, “mockery athuman sufferings”, and so forth. 
 In regard to the peasant ful-filling the functions of entrepreneur, apparently this aston-ishingly complicated idea is beyond the scope of Voroshi-lov’s comprehension. 
 In the next essay, however, we shalltry to clarify this for him with very concrete examples. 
 When Voroshilov seeks to prove that he is a real represent-ative of the “interests of labour” and abuses Kautsky for “driv-ing from the ranks of the proletariat numerous genuine working people” (op. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 167), such as the Lumpen-proletariat , domestic servants, handicraftsmen, etc. 
, then the reader can be assured that Voroshilov is again muddlingthings together. 
 Kautsky examines the distinguishing char-acteristics of the “modern proletariat” which created themodern “Social-Democratic proletarian movement” ( Agrar-frage , S. 
 306); but to date the Voroshilovs have produced nothing to show that tramps, handicraftsmen, and domesticservants have created a Social-Democratic movement. 
 Thecharge directed at Kautsky that he is capable of “driving”domestic servants (who in Germany are now beginning tojoin the movement), handicraftsmen, etc. 
, from the ranks of the proletariat merely exposes to the full the impudence of the Voroshilovs; their display of friendship for the “genuineworking people” increases as such phrases decrease in prac-tical significance, and they can attack with greater impunity the second part of the Agrarian Question , which has been suppressed by the Russian censor. 
 Speaking, incidentally, ofimpudence, there are some other gems. 
 In praising Messrs. 
N. 
—on 75 and Kablukov, while completely ignoring the Marxist criticism directed against them, Mr. 
 Chernov, withaffected naïveté, asks: To whom do the German Social-Dem-ocrats refer when they speak of their Russian “comrades”? Let him who finds it hard to believe that such questions are asked in Russkoye Bogatstvo , turn to No. 
 7, p. 
 166. 
 When Voroshilov asserts that Engels’ “prediction” that the Belgian labour movement will prove barren owing to theinfluence of Proudhonism 76 “has been proved false”, then the reader may well know that Voroshilov, self-assured in his, shall we say, “irresponsibility”, is again distorting the facts. 
 He writes: “It is not surprising that Belgium has never beenorthodox Marxist, and it is not surprising that Engels, beingdispleased with her for that reason, predicted that the Belgianmovement, owing to the influence of ‘Proudhonist princi-ples’, would pass ‘von nichts durch nichts zu nichts ’. 
 * Alas, this prediction has fallen through, and the breadth and many-sidedness of the Belgian movement enable it to serve to-day as a model from which many ‘orthodox’ countries arelearning a great deal” ( Russkoye Bogatstvo , No. 
 10, p. 
 234). 
 The facts are as follows: In 1872 (seventy-two!), Engels wasengaged in a polemic in the columns of the Social-Democrat-ic paper Volksstaat 77 with the German Proudhonist Mül-berger to deflate the exaggerated importance attached to Proudhonism, he wrote: “The only country where the work-ing-class movement is directly under the influence of Prou-dhonist ‘principles’ is Belgium, and precisely as a result ofthis the Belgian movement comes, as Hegel would say, ‘from nothing through nothing to nothing ’. 
” ** Thus, it is positively untrue to say that Engels “predicted” or “prophesied” anything. 
 He merely spoke of the facts as they were , i. 
e. 
, the situation that existed in 1872. 
 And it is an *“From nothing through nothing to nothing. 
”— Ed. 
 **See the pamphlet Zur Wohnungsfrage , Zürich, 1887, in which Engels’ articles against Mülberger, written in 1872, are reproduced together with his introduction dated January 10, 1887. 
 The passagequoted will be found on p. 
 56 . 
 78 undoubted historical fact that at that time the Belgian move-ment was marking time precisely because of the predomi-nance of Proudhonism, whose leaders were opposed to col-lectivism and repudiated independent proletarian politi-cal action. 
 Only in 1879 was a “Belgian Socialist Party”formed; and only from that time onwards was the campaignfor universal suffrage conducted, marking the victory of Marx-ism over Proudhonism (the recognition of the political strug-gle of the proletariat organised in an independent class party) and the beginning of the pronounced successes of the move-ment. 
 In its present programme the “Belgian Labour Party”has adopted all the fundamental ideas of Marxism (apart from certain minor points). 
 In 1887, in a preface to the sec-ond edition of his articles on the housing question, Engels laid special emphasis on the “gigantic progress the interna-tional working-class movement has made during the pastfourteen years”. 
 This progress, he writes, is largely due to theelimination of Proudhonism, which predominated at that time and which now has been almost forgotten. 
 “In Belgium,” Engels observes, “the Flemings have ousted the Walloons from the leadership of the movement, deposed [ abgesetzt ] Proudhonism, and greatly raised the level of the movement”(preface, p. 
 4. 
 of the same pamphlet). 
 79 Russkoye Bogatstvo ’s description of the facts is a veritable paragon of fidelity! When Voroshilov ... but enough! Of course, we cannot hope to keep up with this legally published magazine, which is able with impunity, month after month, to give vent to a flood of falsehood about “orthodox” Marxism. 
 V “THE PROSPERITY OF ADVANCED, MODERN SMALL FARMS”. 
 THE BADEN EXAMPLE * Details, details! cries Mr. 
 Bulgakov in Nachalo (No. 
 1, pp. 
 7 and 13); and this slogan is repeated a hundred times in a hundred different sharps and flats by all the “Critics”. 
 *Chapters V-IX were published in the magazine Obrazova-niye with the following note by the author: “These essays were written in 1901. 
 The first part was published in pamphlet form last year inOdessa [by Burevestnik (Storm Petrel) Publishers]. 
 The second /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR Very well, gentlemen, let us examine the details. 
 It was utterly absurd of you to direct this slogan at Kaut-sky, since the principal task of a scientific study of the agrar-ian question, which is encumbered with a countless num-ber of disconnected details, was to present a general pictureof the whole of the modern agrarian system in its develop-ment. 
 Your slogan merely concealed your lack of scientif-ic principle and your opportunistic dread of any integral and well thought-out philosophy. 
 Had you not read Kaut-sky’s book in the manner of a Voroshilov, you would havebeen able to derive from it a great deal of information onhandling and assimilating detailed statistics. 
 And that youare unable to operate with detailed statistics we shall nowdemonstrate by a number of examples chosen by yourselves . 
 In his article entitled “Peasant Barbarians”, directed against Kautsky and published in the magazine of the Voro-shilovs, Sozialistische (??) Monatshefte (III. 
 Jahrg. 
, 1899, Heft 2), Eduard David triumphantly refers to “one of the most thorough and interesting monographs ” on peasant farm-ing that have appeared recently, namely, that of Moritz Hecht, entitled Drei Dörfer der badischen Hard * (Leipzig, 1895). 
 Hertz clutched at this reference and, following David,cited some figures from this “excellent work” ( S. 
 68, Rus-sian translation, p. 
 164) and “strongly recommended” ( S. 
 79, Russian translation, p. 
 188) the reading of the originalor of the passage given by David. 
 Mr. 
 Chernov, in Rus-skoye Bogatstvo , hastened to repeat both David and Hertz, and contrasted to Kautsky’s statements Hecht’s “strikingpictures of the prosperity of advanced, modern small farms”(No. 
 8, pp. 
 206-09). 
 Let us then turn to Hecht. 
Hecht describes three Baden villages located at distances ranging from four to fourteen kilometres from Karlsruhe: Hagsfeld, Blankenloch, and Friedrichsthal. 
 Although thefarms are small, from one to three hectares, the peasantslead a prosperous and cultured life and gather an exceptionally large yield from their land. 
 David (followed by Chernov) part appears in print for the first time . 
 Each essay is a more or less independent whole . 
 Their common theme is the analysis of the criti-cism of Marxism in Russian literature . 
”—Ed. 
 *Three Villages in the Hard of Baden . 
—Ed. 
 compares this yield with the average yield for the whole of Germany (in double centners per hectare: potatoes, 150-160 and 87. 
8; rye and wheat, 20-23 and 10-13; hay, 50-60 and 28. 
6) and exclaims: What do you think of thatas an example of “backward small peasants”! In the firstplace, we reply, insofar as no comparison is made betweensmall-and large-scale farming conducted under the sameconditions, it is absurd to view this as an argument against Kautsky. 
 Mr. 
 Chernov appears even more absurd when he asserts, in Russkoye Bogatstvo , No. 
 8, p. 
 229, that “Kaut-sky’s rudimentary view [regarding the agronomic exploita-tion of the village by the town] even exaggerates the shadyaspects of capitalism”, and when he cites, on page 209 ofthe same issue, as an argument against Kautsky, an instance in which this capitalist obstacle to the progress of agri-culture is eliminated by the fact that the villages he selects are situated in proximity to towns. 
 While the overwhelmingmajority of the agricultural population lose an enormousquantity of natural fertilisers as a result of the depopulationof the rural districts by capitalism and the concentration of the population in the cities, an insignificant minority of suburban peasants obtain special benefits from their situ-ation and become rich at the expense of the impoverishmentof the masses. 
 It is not surprising that the yield in the vil-lages described is so high, considering that they spend thesum of 41,000 marks annually on manure from the army stables in the three neighbouring garrison towns (Karlsruhe, Bruchsal, and Durlach) and on liquid refuse from the urbandrainage systems (Hecht, S. 
 65); artificial fertilisers are pur-chased only to the amount of 7,000 marks annually. 
 * T o attempt to refute the technical superiority of large-scaleover small-scale farming by adducing instances of small farms *Incidentally, Mr . 
 Chernov assures the readers of Russkoye Bo-gatstvo that there is “hardly any noticeable difference” in the size of the farms in those villages . 
 But if the demand for details is not an empty phrase on his lips, he cannot forget that for these suburbanpeasants the amount of land is of much less importance thanthe amount of fertilisers used; and in this respect the differenceis extremely marked . 
 The yields are highest and the peas-ants most prosperous in the village of Friedrichsthal, although the land area in that village is the smallest . 
 This village, farm-ing 258 hectares of land, spends 28,000 out of the total of 48,000 operating under such conditions means merely to expose one’s impotence. 
 Secondly, to what extent do these instances really represent “genuine small peasants”, echte und rechte Kleinbau-ern, as David says, and as Hertz and Chernov repeat after him? They mention only the area of the farms, and in thisway prove only their inability to handle detailed statistics. 
 As everyone knows, a hectare of land is to a suburbanpeasant what ten hectares are to a peasant living in a remote district; moreover, the very type of farms undergoes radical change because of the proximity of towns. 
 Thus, the priceof land in Friedrichsthal, the village which has the leastland, but which is the most prosperous of the suburban vil-lages, ranges from 9,000 to 10,000 marks, five times the average price of land in Baden (1,938 marks), and about twenty times the price in remote districts in East Prussia. 
 Consequently, judged by the size of output (the only exactindex of the size of a farm), these are by no means “small”peasants. 
 In regard to the type of farming, we see here a re-markably high stage of development of money economy and the specialisation of agriculture, which is particularly em-phasised by Hecht. 
 They cultivate tobacco (45 per cent of the area under cultivation in Friedrichsthal) and high gradesof potatoes (used partly for seed and partly for the table ofthe “gentry”—Hecht, S. 
 17—in Karlsruhe); they sell milk, butter, sucking-pigs, and grown pigs to the capital, and them-selves buy grain and hay. 
 Agriculture here has assumed a completely commercial character, and the peasant who con-ducts his farm in the neighbourhood of the capital is thepurest type of petty-bourgeois ; so that, had Mr. 
 Chernov really familiarised himself with the details he borrows from others,he might have acquired some understanding of this categoryof “petty-bourgeois” peasant which is to him so mysterious (see Russkoye Bogatstvo , No. 
 7, p. 
 163). 
 It is most curious that both Hertz and Mr. 
 Chernov, while declaring that theyare totally unable to understand how the peasant fulfils thefunctions of an entrepreneur, how he is able to figure as a marks spent on fertilisers, which amounts to 108 marks per hectare . 
 Hagsfeld spends only 30 marks per hectare (12,000 marks for 397 hectares), while Blankenloch spends only 11 marks per hectare (8,000marks for 736 hectares) . 
 worker at one moment and as an entrepreneur at another, refer to the detailed investigation of an author who says bluntly: “The peasant of the eighteenth century, with his eight-to-ten hectares of land, was a peasant [“ was a peasant”, Mr. 
 Chernov!] and a manual labourer; the dwarf peasantof the nineteenth century, with his one or two hectares ofland, is a brainworker, an entrepreneur and a merchant”(Hecht, S. 
 69; cf. 
 S. 
 12: “The farmer has become a merchant and an entrepreneur . 
” Hecht’s italics). 
 Well, have not Hertz and Mr. 
 Chernov “annihilated” Kautsky in the Voroshilovmanner for confusing the peasant with the entrepreneur? The clearest indication of the “entrepreneur” is his employ-ment of wage-labour. 
 It is highly characteristic that not oneof the quasi-socialists who referred to Hecht’s work uttered a single word about that fact. 
 Hecht, a most typical Klein-bürger of the ultra-loyal type, who waxes enthusiastic over the piety of the peasants and the “paternal solicitude” shownthem by the Grand Duchy officials in general, and over theiradoption of such an “important” measure as, in particular,the establishment of cookery schools, naturally tries to obscure those facts and to show that no “social gulf” separates the rich from the poor, the peasant from the agriculturallabourer, or the peasant from the factory worker. 
 “No agri-cultural day-labourer category exists,” writes Hecht. 
 “The ma-jority of the peasants are able to cultivate their land them-selves, with the help of their families; only a few in those three villages experience the need for outside help during the harvest or at threshing time; such families ‘request’ [‘ bit-ten’], to employ the local expression, certain men or women, who would never dream of calling themselves ‘day-labour-ers’, ‘to help them’” ( S. 
 31). 
 There is nothing surprising in the fact that only a few farmers in the three villages men-tioned hire day-labourers, because many “farmers”, as we shall see, are factory workers. 
 What proportion of pure farmersemploy hired labour Hecht does not say; he prefers to packhis candidate’s thesis (the Germans call it doctoral disserta-tion), which is devoted only to three villages (of one of whichhe is a native), not with exact statistics concerning the var-ious categories of peasants, but with reflections on the high moral significance of diligence and thrift. 
 (Notwithstandingthis, or perhaps because of it, Hertz and David extol Hecht’s work to the skies. 
) All we learn is that the wages of day-la-bourers are lowest in the most prosperous and purely agri-cultural village, Friedrichsthal, which is farthest away from Karlsruhe (14 kilometres). 
 In Friedrichsthal, a day-labourergets two marks a day, paying for his own keep, while in Hags-feld (4 kilometres from Karlsruhe and inhabited by factoryworkers) the wages of a day-labourer are three marks a day. 
Such is one of the conditions of the “prosperity” of the “real small peasants” so much admired by the Critics. 
 “In those three villages,” Hecht informs us, “purely patriarchal re-lations still exist between the masters and their servants [Gesinde in German means both domestic servants and farm labourers]. 
 The ‘master’, i. 
e. 
, the peasant with three to fourhectares of land, addresses his men and women labourers as ‘thou’ and calls them by their forenames; they call the peas-ant ‘uncle’ [ Vetter ] and the peasant’s wife ‘auntie’ [ Base ], and address them as ‘you’.... 
 The labourers eat at the familytable and are regarded as members of the family” ( S. 
 93). 
 Our “most thorough” Hecht says nothing about the extent towhich hired labour is employed in tobacco growing, which is so widely developed in that district and which requires a particularly large number of labourers; but since he has saidat least something about wage-labour, even this very loyallittle bourgeois must be regarded as being much better ableto handle the “details” of a research than the Voroshilovs of“critical” socialism. 
 Thirdly, Hecht’s research was used to refute the fact that the peasantry suffers from overwork and undernourishment. 
But here it turns out that the Critics preferred to ignore facts of the kind mentioned by Hecht. 
 They cleverly utilised that conception of the “middle” peasant by means of which boththe Russian Narodniks and the West-European bourgeois economists so extensively idealise the “peasantry”. 
 Speaking “generally”, the peasants in the three villages mentioned arevery prosperous; but even from Hecht’s far from thorough monograph it is apparent that in this respect the peasants must be divided into three large groups. 
 About one-fourth(or 30 per cent) of the farmers (the majority in Friedrichs-thal and a few in Blankenloch) are prosperous petty bourgeois, who have grown rich as a result of living in the vicinity of thecapital. 
 They engage in remunerative dairy farming (selling 10-20 litres of milk a day) and tobacco growing (one example: gross income of 1,825 marks from 1. 
05 hectares of land under tobacco), fatten pigs for sale (in Friedrichsthal, 497 out of 1,140 inhabitants keep pigs; in Blankenloch, 445 out of1,684; and in Hagsfeld, 220 out of 1,273 inhabitants), etc. 
This minority (who alone possess all the features of “pros-perity” so much admired by the Critics) are without doubtquite frequent employers of hired labour. 
 In the next group, to which the majority of farmers in Blankenloch belong, standards are very much lower, less fertilisers is used, theyield is lower, there is less livestock (in Friedrichsthal, thenumber of livestock, expressed in terms of cattle, is 599 headon 258 hectares; in Blankenloch, 842 head on 736 hectares;and in Hagsfeld, 324 head on 397 hectares); “parlours” are more rarely seen in the houses, meat is far from being a daily fare, and many families practise (what is so familiar to usRussians) the selling of grain in the autumn—when theyare hard pressed for money—and the re-purchasing of grainin the spring. 
 * In this group, the centre of gravity is con-stantly shifting from agriculture to industry , and 103 Blan-kenloch peasants are already employed as factory workers in Karlsruhe. 
 These, together with almost the entire populationof Hagsfeld, form the third category (40-50 per cent of thetotal number of farms). 
 In this category, agriculture is a sideline in which mostly women are engaged. 
 The standard ofliving is higher than in Blankenloch (the result of the in-fluence of the capital city), but poverty is strongly felt. 
 The peasants sell their milk and for themselves sometimes pur-chase “cheaper margarine” ( S. 
 24). 
 The number of goats kept is rapidly increasing: from nine in 1855 to ninety-three in1893. 
 “This increase,” writes Hecht, “can be explained onlyby the disappearance of farms that are strictly speaking peasant farms, and the break-up [ Auflösung ] of the peasant *Incidentally, Hecht explains the economic backwardness of Blankenloch by the predominance of natural economy and the ex-istence of common lands which guarantees to every person on reaching the age of 32 a strip of land ( Allmendgut ) of 36 ares ( 1 are=0. 
01 hec-tare. 
—Ed. 
), irrespective of whether he is “lazy or diligent, thrifty or otherwise” ( S. 
 30). 
 Hecht, for all that, is opposed to dividing up the common lands . 
 This, he says, is a sort of public charity institu-tion ( Altersversorgung ) for aged factory workers, whose numbers are increasing in Blankenloch . 
 class into a class of rural factory workers possessing extreme-ly small plots of land” ( S. 
 27). 
 Parenthetically, it should be said that between 1882 and 1895 the number of goats in Germany increased enormously: from 2,400,000 to 3,100,000,which clearly reveals the reverse of the progress of the “sturdypeasantry” which the Bulgakovs and the petty-bourgeoissocialist “Critics” laud to the skies. 
 The majority of the work-ers walk three and a half kilometres every day to their factory in the town, because they cannot afford to spend even one mark (48 kopeks) a week on railway fares. 
 Nearly 150workers out of the 300 in Hagsfeld find it beyond their meansto pay even 40 or 50 pfennigs for dinner in the “public dining-room” and have their dinners brought to them from home. 
“Punctually at eleven o’clock,” writes Hecht, “the poor womenfolk put the dinners in their pots and carry them to the factory ” ( S. 
 79). 
 As for the working women, they, too, work at the factory ten hours a day, and all they receive fortheir toil is from 1. 
10 to 1. 
50 marks (the men receive 2. 
50to 2. 
70 marks); at piece-work they earn from 1. 
70 to 2. 
00marks. 
 “Some of the working women try to supplement their meagre wages by some auxiliary employment. 
 In Blanken-loch four girls work at the paper mill in Karlsruhe, and theytake home paper to make bags at night. 
 Working from eightp. 
 m. 
 to eleven p. 
 m. 
 [ sic!], they can make 300 bags, for which they receive 45-50 pfennigs; this supplement to their smalldaily earnings goes to pay their railway fares to and from work. 
 In Hagsfeld, several women who worked in factories as girls earn a little extra money polishing silverware onwinter evenings” ( S. 
 36). 
 “The Hagsfeld worker,” says Hecht, moved, “has a permanent residence not by imperial order,but as a result of his own efforts; he has a little house which heis not compelled to share with others, and a small plot of land. 
 But more important than these real possessions is the consciousness that they have been acquired by his own dil-igence. 
 The Hagsfeld worker is both a factory worker and apeasant. 
 Those with no land of their own rent at least a fewstrips to supplement their income by working in their spare time . 
 In the summer, when work in the factory starts only [“only”!] at seven o’clock, the worker rises at four in order to hoe potatoes in his field, or to carry fodder to the cattle. 
 Orwhen he returns from work at seven in the evening, what is there for him to do, especially in the summer? Well, he puts in an hour or an hour and a half in his field; he does not want a high rent from his land—he merely wants to make full use [ sic!] of his labour-power.... 
” Hecht goes on at great length in this unctuous strain and concludes his book with thewords: “The dwarf peasant and the factory worker have both[sic!] raised themselves to the position of the middle class, not as a result of artificial and coercive measures, but as a result of their own diligence, their own energy, and the high-er morality they have reached. 
” * “The three villages of the Baden Hard now represent one great and broad middle class ” (Hecht’s italics). 
 There is nothing astonishing in the fact that Hecht writes in this vein, for he is a bourgeois apologist of the common or garden variety. 
 But what name do those people deserve who, to deceive others, call themselves socialists, who paint real-ity in still brighter colours than does Hecht, point to theprosperity of the bourgeois minority as general progress, andconceal the proletarisation of the majority with the staleshibboleth “unification of agriculture and industry”? VI THE PRODUCTIVITY OF A SMALL AND A BIG FARM . 
 AN EXAMPLE EAST PRUSSIA For a change let us go from distant South Germany to East Prussia, nearer to Russia. 
 We have before us a highlyinstructive and detailed investigation of which Mr. 
 Bulga-kov, who clamours so loudly for details, has been totallyunable to make use. 
 “A comparison of the data on the real *Hecht says very much more about this “higher morality”, and no less than Mr . 
 Bulgakov waxes enthusiastic over the “sober mari-tal policy”, the “iron diligence”, the “thrift”, and the “temperance” he even quotes a “well-known peasant proverb”: Man sieht nicht auf die Goschen (d. 
 h. 
 Mund ), sondern auf die Groschen , which freely trans-lated means: We work, not so much for our mouths as for ourpockets. 
 We suggest that our readers compare this proverb with the “doctrine” of the Kiev professor, Bulgakov: that peasant farming (since it seeks neither lent nor profit) is “the most advantageous form of organisation of agriculture that society [ sic!] can have” (Bulgakov, I, 154) . 
 productivity of large and small farms,” writes Mr. 
 Bulgakov, “cannot provide an answer to the question of their tech-nical advantages, since the farms compared may be operat-ing under different economic conditions. 
 The most that canbe obtained from such data is the factual confirmation ofthe negative conclusion that large-scale production possessesno technical advantages over small-scale production, notonly theoretically, but, under certain conditions, also practi-cally. 
 Quite a few comparisons of this kind have been made in economic literature, at all events sufficient to undermine thebelief of the unbiased and unprejudiced reader in the advan-tages of large-scale production generally” (I, 57-58). 
 In afootnote the author cites two instances. 
 The first is Auh-agen’s work, quoted by Kautsky in his Agrarfrage ( S. 
 111), as well as by Hertz ( S. 
 69, Russian translation, p. 
 166), in which a comparison is made only between two farms in Han-over, one of 4. 
6 hectares and one of 26. 
5 hectares. 
 In thisexample, the small farm has a higher yield per hectare thanthe large one, and Auhagen determined the income of thesmall farm to be higher than that of the large farm. 
 Kautsky, however, has shown that this higher income is the result of under-consumption . 
 Hertz attempted to refute this evidence, but with his usual success. 
 Since Hertz’ work has now beentranslated into Russian, while Kautsky’s reply to Hertz isunknown in Russia, we shall, very briefly, give the substanceof this reply (in the cited article in Neue Zeit ). 
 Hertz, as usual, distorted Kautsky’s arguments and alleged that he referred only to the fact that the owner of the big farm isable to send his son to the Gymnasium. 
 In actuality, Kautskymentioned this merely to illustrate the standard of living,and had Hertz quoted in full the budgets of the two families in question (each consisting of five persons), he would have obtained the following figures: 1,158. 
40 marks for the small farm and 2,739. 
25 marks for the large farm. 
 If the family ofthe small farm lived on the same standard as that of the large farm, the small farm would prove less profitable than the large one. 
 Auhagen estimates the income of the small farm at1,806 marks, i. 
e. 
, 5. 
45 per cent of the capital invested (33,651 marks), and that of the large farm at 2,720 marks, or 1. 
82 per cent of the capital invested (149,559 marks). 
 If wemake allowance for the under-consumption of the small farmer, we shall find that his income is equal to 258 marks , or 0. 
80 per cent ! And this, when the amount of labour involved is disproportionately high: on the small farm there are three workers to 4. 
6 hectares, that is, one worker to 1. 
5hectares, while on the large farm there are eleven (see Hertz, S. 
 75, Russian translation, p. 
 179) to 26. 
5 hectares, that is oneworker to 2. 
4 hectares. 
 Furthermore, we shall not dwell onthe circumstance, justly ridiculed by Kautsky, that the alleged socialist Hertz compares the labour of the children of modern peasants to Ruth’s 80 gleaning! Mr. 
 Bulgakov con-fines himself merely to presenting the figures of the yieldper hectare, but says not a word about the respective standards of living of the small and big farmers. 
 “We find another example,” continues our advocate of details, “in the latest researches of Karl Klawki ( Ueber Kon-kurrenzfähigkeit des landwirtschaftlichen Kleinbetriebs. 
Thiel ’s Landwirtschaftliche Jahrbücher , 1899, Heft 3-4). 
 * His examples are taken from East Prussia. 
 The author com-pares large, medium, and small farms by taking four of eachkind. 
 The specific feature of his comparisons is, first, the fact that expenditure and income are expressed in money, and, secondly, the fact that the author translates the cost of la-bour-power on the small farms, where it is not purchased,into money and places it to the expenditure account; such amethod is hardly correct for our purpose [ sic! Mr. 
 Bulgakov forgets to add that Klawki translates the cost of labour on all the farms into money and from the outset values the la-bour on the small farms at a lower rate!]. 
 Nevertheless, wehave.... 
” There follows a table which for the moment we shallmerely summarise: the average net profit per morgen ( =4 hec-tare) on the large farm is ten marks, on the medium farm,eighteen marks, on the small farm, twelve marks. 
 And Mr. 
 Bulgakov concludes: “The highest profits are obtained on the medium farms; then come the small farms, while the largefarms lag behind the others. 
” We have seen fit to quote the entire passage in which Mr. 
 Bulgakov compares the large and small farms. 
 Now let usconsider what is evidenced by Klawki’s interesting work, *The Competitive Capacity of Small-Scale Production in Agri-culture —Thiel ’s Agricultural Yearbooks , 1899, Issue 3-4 . 
—Ed. 
 120 pages of which are devoted to a description of twelve typical farms existing under equal conditions. 
 In the first place, we shall cite the statistics pertaining to these farms,and in the interest of space and clarity we shall confine ourselves to the average figures for the large, medium, and small farms (the average size of the farms in each categorybeing 358, 50, and 5 hectares respectively). 
 Income and expenditure per morgen in marks (1 morgen = 1/4 hectare) Per 100 Income Consump-mor-Total from the tion of gen Income sale of own prod-Total produce uce Categoryof farms Large 17 16 33 11 14 25 6 2 8 33 23 10 65 70 887 887 Medium 18 27 45 12 17 29 6 10 16 45 27 18 35 60 744 924Small 23 41 64 9 27 36 14 14 28 64 52 12 8 80 — — It would appear, therefore, that all Mr. 
 Bulgakov’s con-clusions are fully confirmed by Klawki’s work: the smallerthe farm, the higher the gross income and the higher eventhe income from sales per morgen! We think that with themethods employed by Klawki—widely employed methods, in their main features common to all bourgeois and petty-bourgeois economists—the superiority of small-scale farm-ing in all or nearly all cases is proved. 
 Consequently, the essential thing in this matter, which the Voroshilovs complete-ly fail to see, is to analyse those methods , and it is for this reason that Klawki’s partial researches are of such enormous general interest. 
 Let us start with the yields. 
 It turns out that the yield of the great majority of cereals regularly and very considerably *a=where the value of the labour-power of the farmer and his family is not expressed in terms of money; b =if it is so expressed . 
Expen-diture per 100 marks of prod-ucts* Marks a b Agriculture Stock farming Total Agriculture Stock farming Total Agriculture Stock farming Total IncomeExpenses Net profit Hired workdays Total workdays diminishes with the diminution of the area of the farms. 
 The yield (in centners per morgen) on the large, medium, and small farms respectively is: wheat 8. 
7, 7. 
3, 6. 
4; rye 9. 
9, 8. 
7, 7. 
7; barley 9. 
4, 7. 
1, 6. 
5; oats 8. 
5, 8. 
7, 8. 
0; peas 8. 
0, 7. 
7,9. 
2; * potatoes 63, 55, 42; mangels 190, 156, 117. 
 Only of flax, not grown on the large farms, do the small farms (3 outof 4) gather a bigger yield than the medium farms (2 out of 4), namely, 6. 
2 Stein (=18. 
5 pounds) as against 5. 
5. 
 To what is the higher yield on the large farms due? Klawki ascribes decisive importance to the following four causes:(1) Drainage is almost entirely absent on the small farms,and even where it exists the drain pipes are laid by the farm-er himself and laid badly. 
 (2) The small farmers do notplough their land deep enough, their horses being weak. 
(3) Most often the small farmers are unable to give theircattle sufficient fodder. 
 (4) The small farmers have inferiormanure, their straw is shorter, it is largely used as fodder(which also means that the feed is inferior), and less straw isused for bedding. 
 Thus, the small farmers’ cattle is weaker and inferior, and is kept in a worse condition. 
 This circumstance explains the strange and glaring phenomenon that, notwithstanding thehigher yield per morgen on the large farms, income from agri-culture per morgen, according to Klawki’s computations, is less on the large than on the medium and small farms. 
 The reason for this is that Klawki does not include fodder , either in disbursement or in income. 
 In this way, things that in re-ality make for an essential difference between the large andsmall farms, a difference unfavourable to the latter, are arti-ficially and falsely equated. 
 By this method of computationlarge-scale farming appears to be less remunerative than small-scale farming, because a larger portion of the land of the large farms is devoted to the cultivation of fodder (al-though the large farms keep a much smaller number of cattleper unit of land), whereas the small farmers “make shift”with straw for fodder. 
 Consequently, the “superiority” of small-scale farming lies in its wasteful exploitation of the land (by inferior fertilisation) and of the cattle (by inferior fodder). 
 *These are grown only on two out of the four farms in this cate-gory; in the large and medium categories, three out of four grow peas . 
 Needless to say, such a comparison of the profitableness of different farms lacks all scientific value. 
 * Another reason for the higher yield on large farms is that a larger number of the big farmers (and apparently, even, al-most they alone) marl the soil, utilise larger quantities ofartificial fertilisers (the expenditure per morgen being0. 
81 marks, 0. 
38 marks, and 0. 
43 marks respectively) andKraftfuttermittel ** (in large farms two marks per morgen, and in the others nil). 
 “Our peasant farms,” says Klawki, who includes the medium farms in the category of large peas-ant farms, “spend nothing on Kraftfuttermittel . 
 They are very slow to adopt progressive methods and are particularlychary of spending cash” (Klawki, op. 
 cit. 
, 461). 
 The largefarms are superior also in the method of cultivating the soil: we observe improved crop rotation on all four of the large farms, on three of the medium farms (on one the old three-field system is used), and only on one of the small farms (onthe other three the three-field system is used). 
 Finally, thebig farmers use machinery to a far greater extent. 
 True,Klawki himself is of the opinion that machinery is of no great consequence, but we shall not be satisfied with that “opinion”; we shall examine the statistics. 
 The following eightkinds of machines—steam threshers, horse threshers, grain-sorting machines, sifters, seed-drills, manure spreaders,horse-drawn rakes, and rollers—are distributed among thefarms described, as follows: on the four large farms, twenty-nine (including one steam thresher); on the four medium farms, eleven (not a single steam-driven machine); and onthe four small farms, one machine (a horse-driven thresher). 
 *It should be noted that a similarly false equation of obviously unequal quantities in small-and large-scale farming is to be found, not only in separate monographs but in the great bulk of contempo-rary agrarian statistics . 
 Both French and German statistics deal with “average” live weight and “average” price per head of cattle in all cate-gories of farms . 
 German statistics go so far in this method as to define the gross value of the whole of the cattle in various categories of farms (classified according to area) . 
 At the same time, however the reservation is made that the presumed equal value per head of cattle in different categories of farms “does not correspond to the reality” (S. 
 35). 
 **Concentrated feed . 
—Ed. 
 Of course, no “opinion” of any admirer of peasant farming can make us believe that grain-sorting machines, seed-drills, rollers, etc. 
, do not affect the size of the crop. 
 Incidentally, we have here data on machines belonging to certain definiteowners, unlike the general run of German statistics, whichregister only cases of the use of machines, whether owned orhired. 
 Obviously, such a registration will also have the effectof minimising the superiority of large-scale farming and of obscuring forms of “borrowing” machines, like the following described by Klawki: “The big farmer willingly lends thesmall farmer his roller, horse rake, and grain-sorting machine,if the latter promises to supply a man to do the mowingfor him in the busy season” (443). 
 Consequently, a certainnumber of the cases in which machines are employed on small farms, which, as we have shown, are rare, represent a trans-muted form of acquiring labour-power. 
 To continue. 
 Another case of erroneous comparison of obviously unequal quantities is Klawki’s method of comput-ing the price of the product on the market as being equalfor all categories of farms. 
 Instead of taking actual trans-actions, the author takes as a basis an assumption that he himself points to as incorrect. 
 The peasants sell most oftheir grain in their own locality, and merchants in small townsforce down prices very considerably. 
 “The large estates arebetter off in this respect, for they can send grain to the prin-cipal city in the province in considerable quantities. 
 In doing so, they usually receive from 20 to 30 pfennigs more per centner than they could get in the small town” (373). 
The big farmers are better able to assess the value of theirgrain (451), and they sell it, not by measure, as the peasantsdo to their disadvantage, but by weight. 
 Similarly, the bigfarmers sell their cattle by weight, whereas the price of the peasants’ cattle is fixed simply on the basis of outer appear-ance. 
 The big farmers can also make better arrangements forselling their dairy products, for they can send their milk tothe towns and obtain a higher price than the middle farmers,who convert their milk into butter and sell it to merchants. 
Moreover, the butter produced on the medium farms is supe-rior to that produced on the small farms (use of separators, daily churning, and so forth), and the latter get from five toten pfennigs per pound less. 
 The small farmers have to sell their fat stock sooner (i. 
e. 
, less matured) than the middle farmers, because they have a smaller supply of fodder (444). 
 Klawki, in his monograph, leaves out of his calculations all these advantages—in their totality by no means unimpor-tant—which the large farms possess as sellers, just as thetheoreticians who admire small-scale farming leave out thisfact and refer to the possibility of improving matters by means of co-operation. 
 We do not wish to confound the realities of capitalism with the possibilities of a petty-bourgeois co-operative paradise. 
 Below we shall bring forward facts showing who really derives the most advantage out ofco-operatives. 
 Let us note that Klawki “is not concerned with” the labour of the small and middle farmers themselves in drain-ing the soil and in all kinds of repair work (“the peasants do the work themselves”), and so forth. 
 The socialist calls this“advantage” enjoyed by the small farmer Ueberarbeit , over-work, and the bourgeois economist refers to it as one of theadvantageous aspects (“for society ”!) of peasant farming. 
 Let us note that, as Klawki points out, the hired labourers get better pay and food on the medium farms than on the large farms, but they work harder: the “example” set by thefarmer stimulates “greater diligence and thoroughness” (465). 
Which of these two capitalist masters—the landlord or his“own kind”, the peasant—squeezes more work out of thelabourer for the given wages, Klawki does not attempt to de-termine. 
 We shall therefore confine ourselves to stating that the expenditure of the big farmers on accident and old-ageinsurance for their labourers amounts to 0. 
29 marks per mor-gen and that of the middle farmer to 0. 
13 marks (the smallfarmer here, too, enjoys an advantage in that he does notinsure himself at all; needless to say, to the “great advantage of the society” of capitalists and landlords). 
 We shall also bring an example from Russian agricultural capitalism. 
 Thereader who is familiar with Shakhovskoi’s work Outside Agricultural Employment will probably remember the fol-lowing characteristic observation: The Russian homesteadfarmers and the German colonists (in the south) “pick” their labourers, pay them from 15 to 20 per cent more than do the big employers and squeeze 50 per cent more work out of them. 
This was reported by Shakhovskoi in 1896; this year we read in Torgovo-Promyshlennaya Gazeta ,* for instance, the fol-lowing communication from Kakhovka: “... The peasants and homestead farmers, as is the custom, paid higher wages (than those paid on the big estates), for they demand betterworkers and those possessing the greatest endurance” (No. 
109, May 16, 1901). 
 There are hardly grounds for assumingthat this condition is characteristic of Russia alone. 
 In the table given above the reader saw two methods of computation—one that takes into account the money value of the farmer’s labour-power, and one that does not. 
 Mr. 
Bulgakov considers that to include this money value “is hard-ly correct”. 
 Of course, a precise budget of the farmers’ and la-bourers’ expenditure, in money and in kind, would be farmore correct; but since we lack these data, we are obliged to make an approximate estimate of the family’s money expen-diture. 
 The manner in which Klawki makes this approxima-tion is extremely interesting. 
 The big estate-owners do notwork themselves, of course; they even have special salariedmanagers who carry out all the work of direction and super-vision (of four estates, three are supervised by managers and one is not; Klawki would consider it more correct to classify this last estate, consisting of 125 hectares, as a large peasantestate). 
 Klawki “assigns” to the owners of two large estates2,000 marks per annum each “for their labour” (which on thefirst estate, for instance, consists of leaving the principalestate once a month for a few days’ check-up on the manager’s work). 
 To the account of the farmer of 125 hectares (the first-mentioned estate consisted of 513 hectares) he“assigns” only 1,900 marks for the work of the farmer himselfand of his three sons. 
 Is it not “natural” that a farmer with asmaller amount of land should “make shift” with a smallerbudget? Klawki allows the middle farmers from 1,200 to 1,716 marks for the labour of the husband and wife, and in three cases also of the children. 
 To the small farmers he allowsfrom 800 to 1,000 marks for the work of four to five ( sic!) persons, i. 
e. 
, a little more (if more at all) than a labourer,an Instmann , gets, who with his family earns only from 800 to 900 marks. 
 Thus, we observe here another big step forward: first, a comparison is made between figures that are obvi-*Commercial and Industrial Gazette . 
 —Tr. 
 ously uncomparable; now it is declared that the standard of living must decline with the diminution in the size of the farm. 
 But that means the a priori recognition of the fact that capitalism degrades the small peasants, a fact ostensibly to have been refuted by the computations of the “net profit”! And if, by the author’s assumption , the money income diminishes with the diminution in the size of the farm, the drop in consumption is evident by direct data. 
 Consumption of agricultural products on the farms amounts to the follow-ing per person (counting two children as one adult): large farm, 227 marks (average of two figures); medium farm, 218 marks (average of four figures); small farm, 135 ( sic!) marks (average of four figures). 
 And the larger the farm, the larger is the quantity of additional food products purchased ( S. 
 453). 
 Klawki himself observes that here it is necessary to raise the question of Unterkonsumption (under-consumption), which Mr. 
 Bulgakov denied, and which here he preferred to ignore , thus proving to be even more of an apologist than Klawki. 
 Klawki seeks to minimise the significance of this fact. 
 “Whether there is any under-consumption among thesmall farmers or not, we cannot say,” he states, “but we think it is probable in the case of small farm IV [97 marks per head]. 
 The fact is that the small peasants live very frugally [!] and sell much of what they, so to speak, save out of their mouths” ( sich sozusagen vom Munde absparen ). 
 * He attempts to prove that this fact does not refute the higher “productiv-ity” of small-scale farming. 
 If consumption were increased to 170 marks, which is quite adequate (for the “younger broth-*It is interesting to note, for example, that the income from the sale of milk and butter on the large farms amounts to seven marks per morgen, on the medium farms three marks, and on the small farms seven marks . 
 The point is, however, that the small peasants consume “very little butter and whole milk ... while the inhabitants of small farm IV [on which the consumption of products produced on the farmamounts to only 97 marks per head] do not consume these items at all” (450). 
 Let the reader compare this fact (which, by the way, has long been known to all except the “Critics”) with Hertz’ grand reason-ing ( S. 
 113, Russian translation, p . 
 270): “But does the peasant get nothing for his milk?” Who, in the end, eats the [milk-fed] pig? Notthe peasant?” These utterances should be recalled more often as anunexcelled example of the most vulgar embellishment of poverty . 
 er”,81 but not for the capitalist farmer, as we see), the figure for consumption per morgen would have to be increased and the income from sales reduced by six or seven marks. 
 If thisamount is subtracted (see table above), we get from 29 to 30 marks, i. 
e. 
, a sum still larger than that obtained on the large farms ( S. 
 453). 
 But if we increase consumption, not to this haphazardly-taken figure (and a low one at that, because “he’ll manage somehow”), but to 218 marks (equal to the ac-tual figure on the medium farms), the income from the saleof products will drop on the small farms to 20 marks per mor-gen, as against 29 marks on the medium farms, and 25 marks on the large farms. 
 That is to say, the correction of this one error (of the numerous errors indicated above) in Klawki’s computations destroys all the “advantages” of the small peasant. 
 But Klawki is untiring in his quest of advantages. 
 The small peasants “combine agriculture with industrial occupa-tions”: three small peasants (out of four) “diligently workas day-labourers and receive board in addition to their pay” (435). 
 But the advantages of small-scale farming are partic-ularly marked during periods of crisis (as Russian readershave long known from the numerous exercises on this theme on the part of the Narodniks, now rehashed by the Chernovs): “During agricultural crises, as well as at other times, it isthe small farms that possess the greatest stability, they are able to sell a relatively larger quantity of products than the other categories of farms by severely curtailing domesticexpenses, which, it is true, must lead to a certain amount of under-consumption” (479—Klawki’s last conclusions; cf. 
 S. 
 464). 
 “Unfortunately, many small farms are reduced to this by the high rates of interest on loans. 
 But in this way,although with great effort, they are able to keep on their feetand eke out a livelihood. 
 Probably, it is the great diminutionin consumption that chiefly explains the increase in the num-ber of small peasant farms in our locality indicated in thestatistics of the Empire. 
” And Klawki adduces figures for theKönigsberg Regierungsbezirk , * where in the period between 1882 and 1895 the number of farms under two hectares increased *Königsberg Administrative Area . 
—Ed. 
 from 56,000 to 79,000, those from two to five hectares from 12,000 to 14,000, and those from five to twenty hectares from 16,000 to 19,000. 
 This is in East Prussia, the very place in which the Bulgakovs claim to see the “elimination” of large-scale by small-scale production. 
 And yet the gentlemen whogive the bare statistics of the area of farms in this Suzdal 82 fashion clamour for “details”! Naturally, Klawki considersthat “the most important task of modern agrarian policy for the solution of the agricultural labourer problem in the East is to encourage the most efficient labourers to settledown by affording them the opportunity of acquiring a pieceof land as their own property, if not in the first, then at leastin the second [ sic!] generation” (476). 
 It doesn’t matter that the Instleute who purchase a plot of land out of their sav-ings “in the majority of cases prove to be worse off financial-ly; they are fully aware of this themselves, but they are tempt-ed by the greater freedom”, and the main task of bourgeoispolitical economy (now, apparently, of the “Critics” also) isto foster this illusion among the most backward section ofthe proletariat. 
 Thus, on every point Klawki’s inquiry refutes Mr. 
 Bul-gakov, who referred to Klawki. 
 This inquiry demonstratesthe technical superiority of large-scale production in agri-culture, the overwork and under-consumption of the smallpeasant and his transformation into a regular or day-labour-er for the landlord; it proves that there is a connection be-tween the increase in the number of small peasant farms and the growth of poverty and proletarisation. 
 Two conclusionsthat follow from this inquiry are of exceptional significancefrom the point of view of principle. 
 First, we see clearly theobstacle to the introduction of machinery in agriculture:the abysmal degradation of the small farmer, who is ready to “leave out of account” his own toil and who makes manual labour cheaper for the capitalist than machinery. 
 Mr. 
 Bul-gakov’s assertions notwithstanding, the facts prove incon-testably that under the capitalist system the position of thesmall peasant in agriculture is in every way analogous to that of the handicraftsman in industry. 
 Mr. 
 Bulgakov’s assertions notwithstanding, we see in agriculture a still further dimi-nution in consumption and a still further intensification oflabour employed as methods of competing with large-scale production. 
 Secondly, in regard to every manner of compari-son between the remunerativeness of small and large farms, we must once and for all declare as absolutely useless and vul-garly apologetic any conclusion that leaves out of account thefollowing three circumstances: (1) How does the farmer eat, live, and work? (2) How are the cattle kept and worked? (3) How is the land fertilised, and is it exploited in a rational manner? Small-scale farming manages to exist by methods of sheer waste—waste of the farmer’s labour and vital energy, waste of strength and quality of the cattle, and waste of theproductive capacities of the land. 
 Consequently, any inquirythat fails to examine these circumstances thoroughly is noth-ing more nor less than bourgeois sophistry. 
 * It is not surprising, therefore, that the “theory” of the over-work and under-consumption of the small peasants in modern society has been so severely attacked by Messrs. 
 the Crit-ics. 
 In Nachalo (No. 
 1, p. 
 10) Mr. 
 Bulgakov “undertook” to give any number of “citations” disproving Kautsky’s asser-*Leo Huschke, in his work, Landwirtschaftliche Reinertrags-Berechnungen bei Klein-, Mittel-und Grossbetrieb dargelegt an typ-ischen Beispielen Mittelthüringens [Assessment of Net Incomes of Small , Medium , and Large Farms , Based on Typical Examples from Middle Thuringia . 
—Ed. 
] (Gustav Fischer, Jena, 1902), justly points out that “it is possible by merely reducing the assessment” of the smallfarmer’s labour-power to obtain a computation that will prove his superiority over the middle and the big farmer, and his ability to compete with them ( S. 
 126) . 
 Unfortunately, the author did not carry his idea to its logical conclusion, and therefore did not present system-atic data showing the manner in which the cattle were kept, the meth-od of fertilising the soil, and the cost of maintaining the farmer’shousehold in the various categories of farms. 
 We hope to return to Herr Huschke’s interesting work . 
 For the moment we shall merely note his reference to the fact that small-scale farming fetches lowerprices for its products than large-scale farming ( S. 
 146, 155) and his conclusion that: “The small and medium farms strove to overcome the crisis which set in after 1892 (the fall in the prices of agricultur-al produce) by cutting down cash expenditure as much as possible, while the large farms met the crisis through increasing their yields by means of increased expenditure on their farms” ( S. 
 144) . 
 Expendi-ture on seeds fodder and fertilisers in the period from 1887-91 to 1893-97 was reduced on the small and medium farms and increased on the large farms . 
 On the small farms this expenditure amounted to seventeen marks per hectare and on the large farms to forty-four marks . 
 (Author’s note to the 1908 edition . 
—Ed. 
) tions. 
 From the studies of the League for Social and Politi-cal Questions,83 Bäuerliche Zustände (Conditions of the Peas-antry ), repeats Mr. 
 Bulgakov, “Kautsky, in his attempt to galvanise the corpse [ sic!] of the obsolete dogma back to life, selected certain facts showing the depressed condition ofpeasant farming, which is quite understandable at the presenttime. 
 Let the reader look for himself; he will find evidencethere of a somewhat different character” (II, 282). 
 Let us “look” for ourselves and verify the quotations given by this strict scientist, who, in part, merely repeats Hertz’ quota-tions ( S. 
 77, Russian translation, p. 
 183). 
 “From Eisenach comes evidence of improvements in stock-breeding, in soil fertilisation, evidence of the use of machin-ery, and in general of progress in agricultural production.... 
” We turn to the article on Eisenach ( Bäuerliche Zustände , I. 
 Band). 
 The condition of the owners of less than five hec-tares (of which there are 887 out of the 1,116 farms in thisdistrict) “is, in general, not very favourable” (66). 
 “Insofar asthey can work for the big farmers as reapers, day-labourers,etc. 
, their condition is relatively good...” (67). 
 Generally speaking, important technological progress has been made in the past twenty years, but “much is left to be desired, partic-ularly in regard to the smaller farms...” (72). 
 “... the smaller farmers sometimes employ weak cows for field work.... 
”Subsidiary earnings derive from tree felling and cartingfirewood; the latter “takes the farmers away from agriculture” and leads to “worsened conditions...” (69). 
 “Nor does tree felling provide adequate earnings. 
 In some districts the smalllandowners [ Grundstücksbesitzer ] engage in weaving, which is miserably [ leidlich ] paid. 
 In isolated cases work is obtained at cigar-making at home. 
 Generally speaking, there is a shortageof subsidiary earnings...” (73). 
 And the author, Ökonomie-Commissar Dittenberger, concludes with the remark that, in view of their “simple lives” and their “modest requirements”,the peasants are strong and healthy, which “is astonishing,considering the low nutritive value of the food consumed bythe poorest class, among whom potatoes are the principal itemof fare...” (74). 
 That is how the “learned” Voroshilovs refute the “obso-lete Marxist prejudice that peasant farming is incapableof technological progress”! “... In regard to the Kingdom of Saxony, General Secre-tary Langsdorff says that in whole districts, particularly in the more fertile localities, there is now hardly any difference in intensiveness of cultivation between the large and thesmall estates”. 
 That is how Kautsky is refuted by the Aus-trian Voroshilov (Hertz, S. 
 77, Russian translation, pp. 
 182-83), followed by the Russian Voroshilov (Bulgakov, II,282, referring to Bäuerliche Zustände , II, 222). 
 We turn to page 222 of the book from which the Critics cite, and follow-ing the words quoted by Hertz we read: “The difference ismore marked in the hilly districts, where the bigger estatesoperate with a relatively large working capital. 
 But here,too, very frequently, the peasant farms realise a no lessernet profit than do the large farms, since the smaller income is compensated by greater frugality, which at the pre-vailing very low level of requirements [ bei der vorhanden-en grossen Bedürfnisslosigkeit ] is carried to such lengths that the condition of the peasant is very often worsethan that of the industrial worker, who has become accus-tomed to greater requirements” ( Bäuerliche Zustände , II, 222). 
 We read further that the prevailing system of land cul-tivation is crop rotation, which has become the predomi-nant system among the middle farmers, while “the three-field system is met with almost exclusively among thesmall peasant-owned estates”. 
 In regard to stock-breeding,progress is also observed everywhere. 
 “Only in regard to the raising of horned cattle and the utilisation of dairy products does the peasant usually lag behind the big land-lord” (223). 
 “Professor Ranke,” continues Mr. 
 Bulgakov, “testifies to the technological advance in peasant farming in the envi-rons of Munich, which, he says, is typical for the whole of Upper Bavaria. 
” We turn to Ranke’s article: Three Gross-bauer communities farming with the aid of hired labourers— 69 peasants out of 119 hold more than 20 hectares each,comprising three-fourths of the land. 
 Moreover, 38 of these“peasants” hold more than 40 hectares each, with an averageof 59 hectares each; between them they hold nearly 60 per cent of the entire land.... 
 We think this should suffice to reveal the manner in which Messrs. 
 Bulgakov and Hertz “quote”. 
 VII THE INQUIRY INTO PEASANT FARMING IN BADEN “Due to lack of space,” writes Hertz, “we cannot render the detailed and interesting judgements of the Inquiryinto 37 communities in Baden. 
 In the majority of casesthey are analogous to those presented above: side by sidewith favourable, we find unfavourable and indifferent judgements; but nowhere in these entire three volumes of the Inquiry do the detailed budgets of expenditure give any groundsfor the conclusion that ‘under-consumption ’ (Unterkonsump-tion ), ‘sordid and degrading poverty’, etc. 
, are prevalent” ( S. 
 79, Russian translation, p. 
 188). 
 The words we have em-phasised represent, as usual, a direct untruth . 
 The very Ba-den Inquiry to which Hertz refers contains documentary evidence attesting to “under-consumption” precisely among the small peasantry . 
 Hertz’ distortion of the facts closely resembles the method that was especially cultivated by theRussian Narodniks and is now practised by all the “Critics”on the agrarian question, viz. 
, sweeping statements about “the peasantry”. 
 Since the term “peasantry” is still more vague in the West than it is in Russia (in the West thissocial-estate is not sharply defined), and since “average”facts and conclusions conceal the relative “prosperity” (orat all events, the absence of starvation) among the minorityand the privation suffered by the majority, apologists of all sorts have an unlimited field of activity. 
 In actual fact, the Baden Inquiry enables us to distinguish various groupsof peasants, which Hertz, although an advocate of “details”,preferred not to see. 
 Out of 37 typical communities, aselection was made of typical farms of big peasants ( Gross-bauer ), middle peasants, and small peasants, as well as of day-labourers, making a total of 70 peasants’ (31 big, 21 middle, and 18 small) and 17 day-labourers’ households;and the budgets of these households were subjected to a verydetailed examination. 
 We have not been able to analyseall the data; but the principal results cited below will suf-fice to enable us to draw very definite conclusions. 
 Let us first present the data on the general economic type of (a) large, (b) middle, and (c) small peasant farms(Anlage VI: “ Uebersichtliche Darstellung der Ergebnisse der in den Erhebungsgemeinden angestellten Ertragsberechnun-gen. 
”* We have divided this table into groups for the Grossbauer , Mittelbauer , and Kleinbauer respectively). 
 Size of holdings—average in each group: (a) 33. 
34 hectares,(b) 13. 
5 hectares, and (c) 6. 
96 hectares—which is relativelyhigh for a country of small land-holdings like Baden. 
 Butif we exclude the ten farms in communities Nos. 
 20, 22,and 30, where exceptionally large holdings are the rule (up to 43 hectares among the Kleinbauer and up to 170 hec-tares among the Grossbauer !), we shall obtain the follow-ing figures, more normal for Baden: (a) 17. 
8 hectares,(b) 10. 
0 hectares, and (c) 4. 
25 hectares. 
 Size of families:(a) 6. 
4 persons, (b) 5. 
8, and (c) 5. 
9. 
 (Unless otherwise stated,these and subsequent figures apply to all the 70 farms. 
) Consequently, the families of the big peasants are consider-ably larger; nevertheless, they employ hired labour to afar greater extent than the others. 
 Of the 70 peasants, 54,i. 
e. 
, more than three-fourths of the total, employ hiredlabour, namely: 29 big peasants (out of 31), 15 middle (outof 21), and 10 small (out of 18). 
 Thus, of the big peasants, 93 per cent cannot manage without hired labour, while the figure for the small peasants is 55 per cent. 
 These fig-ures are very useful as a test of the current opinion (accepteduncritically by the “Critics”) that the employment of hiredlabour is negligible in present-day peasant farming. 
 Amongthe big peasants (whose farms of 18 hectares are included in the category of 5-20 hectares, in wholesale descriptions reck-oned as real peasant farms), we see pure capitalist farming:24 farms employ 71 labourers—almost 3 labourers per farm,and 27 farmers employ day-labourers for a total of 4,347days (161 man-days per farmer). 
 Compare this with the sizeof the holdings of the big peasants in the environs of Munich, whose “progress” served our bold Mr. 
 Bulgakov as a refuta-tion of the “Marxist prejudice” regarding the degradation ofthe peasants by capitalism! For the middle peasants we have the following figures: 8 employ 12 labourers, and 14 employ day-labourers for atotal of 956 man-days. 
 For the small peasants: 2 employ *Appendix VI: “Brief Review of the Results of the Assessment of Incomes in Communities Investigated . 
”—Ed. 
 2 labourers, and 9 employ day-labourers for a total of 543 man-days. 
 One-half the number of small peasants employ hired labour for 2 months (543:9 =60 days), i. 
e. 
, in the most important season for the farmers (notwithstanding the factthat their farms are larger, the production of these smallpeasants is very much lower than that of the Friedrichs-thal peasants, of whom Messrs. 
 Chernov, David, and Hertzare so enamoured). 
 The results of this farming are as follows: 31 big peasants made a net profit of 21,329 marks and suffered a loss of2,113 marks, i. 
e. 
, a total profit for this category of 19,216marks, or 619. 
9 marks per farm (523. 
5 marks if 5 farms incommunities Nos. 
 20, 22, and 30 are excluded). 
 For the medi-um farms the corresponding amount will be 243. 
3 marks (272. 
2 marks, if the 3 communities are excluded), and for the small farms, 35. 
3 marks (37. 
1 marks, if the 3 communi-ties are excluded). 
 Consequently, the small peasant, liter-ally speaking, can barely make ends meet and only just manages to do so by cutting down consumption . 
 The Inquiry (Ergebnisse , etc. 
, in Vol. 
 IV of Erhebungen , 84 S. 
 138) con-tains figures showing the consumption of the most important food items on each farm. 
 Below we quote these data as aver-ages for each category of peasants: Consumption per person Expenditure per day per person Groceries, Bread heating, Cloth-Category of peasants andPota-Meat Milk lighting, ing fruittoesetc. 
, per per day Gram-PoundsmesLitres Pfennings Marks Big peasants ....... 
 1. 
84 1 . 
82138 1 . 
05 7266 Middle ”....... 
 1. 
59 1 . 
90 111 0. 
95 6247 Small ”....... 
 1. 
49 1 . 
94 721 . 
11 57 38 Day-labourers ...... 1. 
69 2 . 
14 56 0. 
85 51 32 These are the data in which our bold Hertz “failed to per-ceive” either under-consumption or poverty! We see thatthe small peasant, as compared with those of the highergroups, reduces his consumption very considerably, and that his food and clothing are little better than those of the day-labourer. 
 For example, he consumes about two-thirds of the amount of meat consumed by the middle peasant, and about half the amount consumed by the big peasant. 
These figures prove once again the uselessness of sweepingconclusions and the erroneousness of all assessments of in-come that ignore differences in living standards. 
 If, forinstance, we take only the two last columns of our table (to avoid complicated calculations in translating food prod-ucts into money terms), we shall see that the “net profit”,not only of the small peasant, but also of the middle peas-ant, is a pure fiction , which only pure bourgeois like Hecht and Klawki, or pure Voroshilovs like our Critics, can takeseriously. 
 Indeed, if we assume that the small peasant spends as much money on food as the middle peasant does, his expenditure would be increased by one hundred marks , and we would get an enormous deficit . 
 If the middle peasant spent as much as the big peasant, his expenditure would beincreased by 220 marks, and unless he “stinted himself”in food he, too, would sustain a deficit. 
 * Does not the reduced consumption of the small peasant, following self-evidently from the inferior feeding of his cattle and theinadequate restoration (often the complete exhaustion) ofthe productivity of the soil, entirely confirm the truth ofMarx’s words, at which the modern Critics merely shrugtheir shoulders in lofty contempt: “An infinite fragmentation *Mr. 
 Chernov “objects”: Does not the big farmer stint his day-labourer still more in food and other expenses? ( Russkoye Bogatstvo , 1900, No . 
 8, p . 
 21 2) . 
 This objection repeats the old Krivenko-Voron-tsovtrick, if one may use such an expression, of foisting liberal-bour-geois arguments upon Marxists . 
 The objection would be valid against those who say that large-scale production is superior, not only tech-nically, but because it improves (or at least makes tolerable) the con-dition of the labourers. 
 Marxists do not say that . 
 They merely ex-pose the false trick of painting the condition of the small farmer in roseate hues , either by sweeping statements about prosperity (Mr . 
 Chernov on Hecht), or by estimates of “income” that leave out of ac-count reduced consumption . 
 The bourgeoisie must needs paint things in roseate hues, must needs foster the illusion among the labourers that they can become “masters” and that small “masters” can obtain high incomes . 
 It is the business of socialists to expose these falsehoods and to explain to the small peasants that for them too there is no sal-vation outside of the revolutionary movement of the proletariat. 
 of means of production, and isolation of the producers themselves. 
 Monstrous waste of human energy. 
 Progressive deterioration of conditions of production and increased prices of means of production—an inevitable law of proprie-torship of parcels ” (Das Kapital , III, 2, S. 
 342). 
85 In regard to the Baden Inquiry we must note still another distortion by Mr. 
 Bulgakov (the Critics mutually supple-ment each other; while one distorts one aspect of the infor-mation adduced from a given source, a second distorts the other). 
 Mr. 
 Bulgakov frequently quotes from the BadenInquiry. 
 It would appear , therefore, that he is acquainted with it. 
 Yet we find him writing the following: “The excep-tional and apparently fatal indebtedness of the peasant”—so states the Overture, II, 271—“represents one of the most immutable dogmas in the mythology created in literature in relation to peasant farming.... 
 Surveys at our disposalreveal considerable indebtedness only among the smallest,not yet firmly established holdings [ Tagelöhnerstellen ]. 
 Thus, Sprenger expresses the general impression obtainedfrom the results of the extensive investigation conducted in Baden [to which reference is made in a footnote] in the following manner: ‘...Only the plots of the day-labourersand small peasant farmers are relatively speaking heavilymortgaged in a large number of the districts investigated;but even among these, in the majority of cases, the indebt-edness is not so great as to cause alarm...’” (272). 
 A strange thing. 
 On the one hand, there is reference to the Inquiry itself , and on the other , there is merely the quoted “general impression” of a certain Sprenger who has written about thisInquiry. 
 But as ill-luck would have it, Sprenger’s writingfalls short of the truth (at least in the passage quoted byMr. 
 Bulgakov; we have not read Sprenger’s book). 
 First, the authors of the Inquiry assert that, in the majority of cases, it is precisely the indebtedness of the small peasantholdings which reaches alarming dimensions. 
 Secondly, they assert that the position of the small peasants in this respectis not only worse than that of the middle and big peasants(which Sprenger noted) but also worse than that of the day-labourers. 
 It must be observed in general that the authors of the Ba-den Inquiry established the extremely important fact that on the large farms the limits of permissible indebtedness (i. 
e. 
, the limits to which the farmer may go without risking bankruptcy) are higher than on the small farms . 
 After the data we have presented above on the farming results obtainedby the big, middle, and small peasants respectively, thisfact requires no further explanation. 
 The authors of theInquiry estimate the indebtedness permissible and safe(unbedenklich ) for the large and medium farms at 40-70 per cent of the land value, or an average of 55 per cent. 
 In regard to the small farms (which they set as betweenfour and seven hectares for crop cultivation, and betweentwo and four hectares for viticulture and commercial crops),they consider that “the limits of indebtedness ... must notexceed 30 per cent of the value of the holding, if the regular payment of interest and of instalments on the principal is to be fully secured” ( S. 
 66, B. 
 IV). 
 In the surveyed commu-nities (with the exception of those where Anerbenrecht * prevails, e. 
g. 
, Unadingen and Neukirch), the percentage of indebtedness (in proportion to the value of the estate)steadily diminishes as we pass from the small to the large farms. 
 In the community of Dittwar, for instance, the in-debtedness of farms up to one-fourth of a hectare equals180. 
65 per cent; from one to two hectares, 73. 
07 per cent; fromtwo to five hectares, 45. 
73 per cent; from five to ten hectares,25. 
34 per cent; and from ten to twenty hectares, 3. 
02 percent (ibid. 
, S. 
 89-90). 
 But the percentage of indebtedness does not tell us everything, and the authors of the Inquiry draw the following conclusion: “The above-given statistics, consequently, confirm the widespread opinion that those owners of peasant holdingswho are on the border-line [in the middle] between the day-labourers and the middle peasants [in the rural districts the farmers of this category are usually called the “middle es-tate”— Mittelstand ] are frequently in a worse position than those in the groups above or below [ sic!] in the size of their holdings; for, although they are able to cope with moderate indebtedness, if it is kept at a certain and not very highlevel, they find it difficult to meet their obligations, being *Right of inheritance, by which the property of a peasant household passes undivided to a single heir . 
—Ed. 
 unable to obtain regular collateral employment (as day-labourers, etc. 
), by which means to increase their income.... 
” Day-labourers, “insofar as they have some regular collateral employment, are frequently in a much better position ma-terially than those belonging to the ‘middle estate’, for,as computations in numerous cases have shown, collateralemployment produces at times such a high net (i. 
e. 
, money)income as to enable them to repay even large debts” (loc. 
 cit. 
, 67). 
 * Finally, the authors reiterate that the indebted-ness of the small peasant farms in relation to the permissiblelevel is “sometimes unsafe”; hence, “in purchasing land,particular business-like caution must be exercised ... pri-marily by the small peasant population and by the day-labourers, closely related to it ” (98). 
 This, then, is the bourgeois counsellor to the small peas-ant! On the one hand, he fosters in the proletarians andsemi-proletarians the hope that they will be able to pur-chase land, “if not in the first, then in the second genera-tion”, and by diligence and abstemiousness obtain from itan enormous percentage of “net income”; on the other hand, he advises especially the poor peasants to exercise “partic-ular caution” in purchasing land if they have no “regularemployment”, that is to say, when the capitalists have noneed for settled workers. 
 And yet there are “critical” simple-tons who accept these selfish lies and threadbare banalities asthe findings of the most up-to-date science! One would think that the detailed data we have present-ed on the big, middle, and small peasants would sufficeto make even Mr. 
 V. 
 Chernov understand the meaning ofthe term “petty bourgeois” as applied to the peasant, a term that seems to inspire him with such horror. 
 Capitalist evolution has not only introduced similarity in the general economic system of West-European countries, but it hasbrought Russia also closer to the West, so that the main features of peasant farming in Germany are similar to those *The authors of the Inquiry rightly say: The small peasant sells relatively little for cash, but he stands particularly in need ofmoney, and because of his lack of capital, every cattle disease, everyhailstorm, etc . 
, hits him particularly hard . 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR in Russia. 
 However, in Russia the process of differentia-tion among the peasantry, abundantly confirmed in Rus-sian Marxist literature, is in an initial stage; it has not yet assumed anything like a finished form, it has not yet givenrise, for example, to the immediately noticeable, distinctivetype of big peasant ( Grossbauer ). 
 In Russia the mass expro-priation and extinction of an enormous section of the peas-antry still greatly overshadow the “first steps” of our peas-ant bourgeoisie. 
 In the West, however, this process, which started even before the abolition of serfdom (cf. 
 Kautsky,Agrarfrage , S. 
 27), long ago caused the obliteration of the social-estate distinction between peasant and “privately-owned” (as we call it) farming, on the one hand, and theformation of a class of agricultural wage-workers, which has already acquired fairly definite features, on the other. 
 * I t would be a grave error to assume, however, that this processcame to a stop after more or less definite new types of ruralpopulation had emerged. 
 On the contrary, it goes on contin-uously, now rapidly, now slowly, of course, depending onthe numerous and varying circumstances, and assumes most diverse forms according to the varying agronomic conditions, etc. 
 The proletarisation of the peasantry continues, as weshall prove below by the mass of German statistics; besideswhich, it is evident from the cited data on the small peas-antry. 
 The increasing flight, not only of agricultural labour-ers, but of peasants, from the country to the towns is in itself striking evidence of this growing proletarisation. 
 But the peasant’s flight to the town is necessarily precededby his ruin; and the ruin is preceded by a desperate strugglefor economic independence. 
 The data on the extent of theemployment of hired labour, the amount of “net income”,and the level of consumption of the various types of peasant-ry, bring out this struggle in striking relief. 
 The principal weapon in this fight is “iron diligence” and frugality—fru-gality according to the motto “We work, not so much forour mouths as for our pockets”. 
 The inevitable result of the *“The peasantry,” writes Mr . 
 Bulgakov, with reference to France in the nineteenth century, “split up into two sections, each sharply distinguished from the other, namely, the proletariat and the small proprietors” (II, 176) . 
 The author is mistaken, however, in believing that the “splitting up” ended with this—it is a ceaseless process . 
 struggle is the rise of a minority of wealthy, prosperous farmers (an insignificant minority in most cases—and in every case when particularly favourable conditions are ab-sent, such as proximity to the capital, the construction ofa railway, or the opening up of some new, remunerativebranch of commercial agriculture, etc. 
) and the continuouslyincreasing impoverishment of the majority, which steadilysaps the strength of the peasants by chronic starvation and exhausting toil, and causes the quality of the land and cattle to deteriorate. 
 The inevitable result of the struggle is therise of a minority of capitalist farms based on wage-labour, and the increasing necessity for the majority to work at“side lines”, i. 
e. 
, their conversion into industrial and agri-cultural wage-workers. 
 The data on wage-labour very clearly reveal the immanent tendency, inevitable under the present system of society, for all small producers to become smallcapitalists. 
 We quite understand why bourgeois economists, on the one hand, and opportunists of various shades, on the other, shun this aspect of the matter and why they cannot help do-ing so. 
 The differentiation of the peasantry reveals to us the profoundest contradictions of capitalism in the very process of their inception and their further development. 
 A complete evaluation of these contradictions inevitably leads to the recognition of the small peasantry’s blind-alley and hopeless position (hopeless, outside the revolutionary struggle of the proletariat against the entire capitalist system). 
 It is not surprising that these most profound and most undevel-oped contradictions are not mentioned; there is an attempt to evade the fact of the overwork and under-consumption of the small peasants, which can be denied only by uncon-scionable or ignorant people. 
 The question of the hired labour employed by the peasant bourgeoisie and of wage-work of the rural poor is left in the shade. 
 Thus, Mr. 
 Bulgakov submitted an “essay on the theory of agrarian development”, passing over both these questions in eloquent silence! * *Or contains no less eloquent evasions, such as: “ ...the numer-ous cases of combining industry with agriculture, when industrialwage-workers own small plots of land...” are “no more than a detail [?!] in the economic system . 
 There are as yet [?] no grounds for re-garding this as a new manifestation of the industrialisation of agricul-“Peasant farming,” he says, “may be defined as that form of farming in which the labour of the peasant’s own family is exclusively, or almost exclusively employed. 
 Very rarely do even peasant farms dispense altogether with outside labour,—the help of neighbours or casual hired labour—but this doesnot change [naturally!] the economic features of peasantfarming” (I, 141). 
 Hertz is somewhat more naïve, and atthe very beginning of his book he makes the following res-ervation: “Hereinafter, by small or peasant farms I shall always assume a form of farming in which the farmer, themembers of his family, and not more than one or two workersare employed” ( S. 
 6, Russian translation, p. 
 29). 
 When they discuss the hiring of a “hand” our Kleinbürger soon forget the very “peculiarities” of agriculture which they con-stantly make so much of with no regard for relevance. 
 In agriculture, one or two labourers is by no means a smallnumber, even if they work only in the summer. 
 But the mainthing is not whether this is a small or a large number;the main thing is that hired labourers are employed by the ture, or its loss of independent development; this phenomenon is much too insignificant in extent (in Germany, for instance, only 4 . 
09 per cent of agricultural land is held by industrial wage-workers)” ( sic!— II, pp . 
 254-55) . 
 In the first place, the fact that an insignificant share of the land is held by hundreds of thousands of workers does not provethat this “phenomenon is insignificant in extent”, it proves ratherthat capitalism degrades and proletarises the small farmer . 
 Thus, the total number of farmers holding less than two hectares (although their number is enormous: 3,200,000 out of 5,500,000, or 58 . 
2 per cent, almost three-fifths ) own “only” 5 . 
6 per cent of the total area of agricultural land . 
 Will our clever Mr . 
 Bulgakov draw the inference from this that the entire “phenomenon” of small landownership and smallfarming is a mere “detail” and “is much too insignificant in extent”?? Of the 5,500,000 farmers in Germany, 791,000, or 14. 
4 per cent, are industrial wage-workers; and the overwhelming majority of theseown less than two hectares of land each, namely, 743,000, which rep-resents 22 . 
9 per cent of the total number of farmers owning less than two hectares . 
 Secondly, true to his usual practice, Mr . 
 Bulgakov distorted the statistics he adduced . 
 By an oversight he took from the page of the German Inquiry he quoted ( Statistik des Deutschen Reichs , B. 
 112, S. 
 49 #) the figure of the area of land owned by independent trading farmers . 
 The non-independent trading farmers (i . 
e. 
, indus-trial wage-workers) hold only 1. 
84 per cent of the total area of agri-cultural land . 
 791,000 wage-workers own 1 . 
84 per cent of the total area of land, while 25,000 landlords own 24 per cent . 
 Truly a most insignificant “detail”! wealthier, more prosperous peasants, whose “progress” and “prosperity” our knights of philistinism are so fond of pre-senting as the prosperity of the mass of the population. 
 And in order to put a better complexion on this distortion,these knights majestically declare: “The peasant is a workingman no less than the proletarian” (Bulgakov, II, 288). 
 Andthe author expresses satisfaction at the fact that “workers’parties are more and more losing the anti-peasant tinge char-acteristic of them hitherto” (characteristic of them hitherto!) (289). 
 “Hitherto”, you see, they “left out of account the factthat peasant property is not an instrument of exploitation,but a condition for the application of labour”. 
 That is howhistory is written! Frankly, we cannot refrain from saying:Distort, gentlemen, but have a sense of measure! And the same Mr. 
 Bulgakov has written a two-volume “study” of 800 pages chock-full of “quotations” (how correct they arewe have repeatedly shown) from all sorts of inquiries, de-scriptions, monographs, etc. 
 But not once, literally not once , has he attempted even to examine the relations between thepeasants whose property is an instrument of exploitation and those peasants whose property is “simply” a condition for the application of labour. 
 Not once has he presented systemat-ic statistics (which, as we have shown, were contained in thesources he cited) concerning the types of farms, the standardof living, etc. 
, of the peasants who hire labour, of the peas-ants who neither hire labour nor hire themselves out as labourers, and of the peasants who hire themselves out as labourers. 
 More than that. 
 We have seen that to prove the“progress of peasant farming” (peasant farming in general !) he has given data on the Grossbauer and opinions that confirm the progress of some and the impoverishment and prole-tarisation of others. 
 He even sees a general “social regenera-tion” ( sic!) in the rise of “well-to-do peasant farms” (II, 138; for general conclusion, cf. 
 p. 
 456), as if well-to-do peasant farmwere not synonymous with bourgeois, entrepreneur-peasantfarm. 
 His one attempt to extricate himself from this tangle ofcontradictions is the following still more entangled argument:“The peasantry, of course, does not constitute a homogeneous mass; this has been shown above [probably in his argument about such a petty detail as the industrial wage-labourperformed by farmers?]; a constant struggle is here in proc-ess between a differentiating trend and a levelling trend. 
 But are these differences and even the antagonism of individ-ual interests greater than those between the various strata of the working class, between urban and rural workers,between skilled and unskilled labour, between trade un-ionists and non-trade unionists? It is only by completelyignoring these differences within the worker estate (whichcause certain investigators to see the existence of a fifth estate in addition to the fourth) that a distinction can be drawn between the allegedly homogeneous working classand the heterogeneous peasantry” (288). 
 What a remarkablyprofound analysis! Confounding trade differences with classdifferences; confounding differences in the way of life withthe different positions of the various classes in the system of social production—what better illustration is needed of the complete absence of scientific principles in the fashion-able “criticism” * and of its practical tendency to obliterate, the very concept “class” and to eliminate the very idea ofthe class struggle. 
 The agricultural labourer earns fiftykopeks a day; the enterprising peasant who employs day-labourers earns a ruble a day; the factory worker in the capital earns two rubles a day; the small provincial master earns oneand a half rubles a day. 
 Any more or less politically consciousworker would be able to say without difficulty to which classthe representatives of these various “strata” belong, and inwhat direction the social activities of these various “strata” *Let us recall the fact that reference to the alleged homogeneity of the working class was a favourite argument of Ed . 
 Bernstein and of all his adherents . 
 And as regards “differentiation”, it was Mr . 
 Stru-ve who, in his Critical Remarks , profoundly observed: There is differ-entiation, but there is also levelling; for the objective student boththese processes are of equal importance (in the same way as it madeno difference to Shchedrin’s objective historian whether Izyaslav defeated Yaroslav or vice versa) . 
86 There is a development of the mon-ey economy, but there are also reversions to natural economy . 
 There is a development of large-scale factory production, but there is alsoa development of capitalist domestic industry (Bulgakov, II, 88:“Hausindustrie is nowhere near extinction in Germany”) . 
 An “objec-tive” scientist must carefully gather facts and note things, “on the one hand” and “on the other”, and (like Goethe’s Wagner) “pass from book to book, from folio to folio” without making the least attemptto obtain a consistent view and build up a general idea of the processas a whole . 
 will tend. 
 But for the representative of university science, or for the modern “Critic”, this is such a profound wisdom that it is totally beyond assimilation, VIII GENERAL STATISTICS OF GERMAN AGRICULTURE FOR 1882 AND 1895 . 
 THE QUESTION OF THE MEDIUM FARMS Having examined the detailed statistics of peasant farm-ing, which are particularly important for us, becausepeasant farming is the centre of gravity of the modernagrarian question, let us now pass to the general statistics of German agriculture and verify the conclusions drawn from them by the “Critics”. 
 Below, in brief, are the principalreturns of the censuses of 1882 and of 1895: Relative numbers No. 
 of CultivatedAbsolute farms area (1,000increase Groups (thousands) hectares) Farms Areaor de-of farmscrease 18821895 1882 1895 1882 1895 1882 1895 Under 2 hec-tares ... 3,0623,2 36 1,82 6 1,808 58 . 
05 8. 
25. 
75. 
6#174 —18 2-5 hectares 981 1,016 3,190 3,286 18 . 
61 8. 
31 0. 
01 0. 
1#35# 96 5-20 ” 927 999 9,158 9,722 17 . 
61 8. 
028. 
729. 
9#72#564 20-100 ” 281 282 9,908 9,870 5 . 
35. 
13 1. 
13 0. 
3# 1—38 100 and over 25 25 7,787 7,832 0 . 
50. 
424. 
524. 
1±0#45 Totals ... 5,276 5,558 31,869 32,518 100 100 100 100 #282 #649 Three circumstances must be examined in connection with this picture of change interpreted differently by Marx-ists and by the “Critics”: the increase in the number of thesmallest farms; the increase in latifundia, i. 
e. 
, farms ofone thousand hectares and over, in our table placed in therow of over one hundred hectares; and, lastly, the increase in the number of middle-peasant farms (5-20 hectares), which is the most striking fact, and the one giving rise tothe most heated controversy. 
Farms Area The increase in the number of the smallest farms indicates an enormous increase in poverty and proletarisation; for the overwhelming majority of the owners of less than two hectares cannot obtain a livelihood from agriculture alonebut must seek auxiliary employment, i. 
e. 
, work for wages. 
Of course, there are exceptions: the cultivation of specialcrops, viticulture, market gardening, industrial crop cul-tivation, suburban farming generally, etc. 
, render possible the existence of independent (at times even not small) farmers even on one and a half hectares. 
 But out of a totalof three million farms , these exceptions are quite insignif-icant. 
 The fact that the mass of these small “farmers”(representing three-fifths of the total number) are wage-labourers is strikingly proved by the German statistics concerning the principal occupations of the farmers in the various categories. 
 The following is a brief summary of thosestatistics: Farms according to principal occupation Per cent (per cent) of inde-pendent Groups farmers of farmersIndependentNon-in-with depend-Otherauxiliary Agri-Trade, entoccupa-Totaloccupa-culture etc . 
 labourtionstions Under 2 hectares 17 . 
422 . 
55 0 . 
39 . 
81 0 0 26 . 
1 2 to 5 ” 72. 
216 . 
38 . 
62 . 
91 0 0 25 . 
5 5 to 20 ” 90. 
87 . 
01 . 
11 . 
11 0 0 1 5 . 
5 20 to 100 ” 96. 
22 . 
50 . 
21 . 
1 100 8 . 
8 100 and over ” 93. 
61 . 
50 . 
44 . 
2100 2 3 . 
5 Average 45. 
01 7 . 
53 1 . 
16 . 
41 0 0 20 . 
1 We see, thus, that out of the total number of German farmers only 45%, i. 
e. 
, fewer than half , are independent with farming as their main occupation. 
 And even of these independent farmers one-fifth (20. 
1 %) have auxiliary occupa-tions. 
 The principal occupation of 17. 
5% of the farmers istrading, industry, market gardening, and so forth (in theseoccupations they are “independent”, i. 
e. 
, occupy the posi-tion of masters and not of hired workers). 
 Almost one-third (31. 
1 %) are hired workers (“not independent”, employed invarious branches of agriculture and industry). 
 The principal occupation of 6. 
4% of the farmers is office employment (in military service, civil service, etc. 
), the liberal profes-sions, etc. 
 Of the farmers with farms under two hectares, one half are hired workers; the “independent” farmers among these 3,200,000 “owners” represent a small minority, only17. 
4% of the total. 
 Of this number, 17%, one-fourth (26. 
1 %), are engaged in auxiliary occupations, i. 
e. 
, are hired workers, not in their principal occupations (like the above-mentioned 50. 
3%), but in their side-line occupations. 
 Even among the farmers owning from 2-5 hectares, only a littlemore than half (546,000 out of 1,016,000) are independentfarmers without auxiliary occupations. 
 We see from this how amazingly untrue is the picture presented by Mr. 
 Bulgakov when, asserting (erroneously, as we have shown) that the total number of persons actually engaged in agriculture has grown, he explains this by the“increase in the number of independent farms—as we alreadyknow, mainly middle-peasant farms, at the expense of thebig farms” (II, 133). 
 The fact that the number of middle-peasant farms has expanded most in proportion to the total number of farms (from 17. 
6% to 18%, i. 
e. 
, a rise of 0. 
4%) does not in the least prove that the increase in the agricul-tural population is due principally to the growth in the num-ber of middle-peasant farms. 
 On the question as to whichcategory has contributed most to the general increase inthe number of farms, we have direct data that leave no room for two opinions: the total number of farms has risen by 282,000, of which the number of farms under two hectaresincreased by 174,000. 
 Consequently, the larger agriculturalpopulation (if and insofar as it is larger at all) is to be ex-plained precisely by the increase in the number of non-independent farms (the bulk of the farmers with farms under two hectares not being independent). 
 The rise is greatest in the small allotment farms, which indicates growing pro-letarisation . 
 Even the increase (by 35,000) in the number of farms of 2-5 hectares cannot be wholly attributed tothe expanded number of independent farms, for of those farmers only 546,000 out of the total of 1,016,000 are in-dependent, drawing no subsidiary earnings. 
 Coming now to the large farms, we must note, first of all, the following characteristic fact (of utmost importance for the refutation of all apologists): the combination of agri-culture with other occupations has diverse and opposite significance for the various categories of farmers. 
 Among the small farmers it signifies proletarisation and curtailedindependence; for in this category agriculture is combinedwith occupations like those of hired labourers, small hand-icraftsmen, small traders, and so forth. 
 Among the bigfarmers, it signifies either a rise in the political significance of landed proprietorship through the medium of government service, military service, etc. 
, or the combination of agri-culture with forestry and agricultural industries. 
 As we know,the latter phenomenon is one of the most characteristicsymptoms of capitalist advance in agriculture. 
 That is why the percentage of farmers who regard “independent” farming as their principal occupation (who are engaged in farming as masters and not as labourers) sharply increases with theincrease in the size of the farms (17-72-90-96%), but dropsto 93% in the category of farms of 100 hectares and over. 
In this group 4. 
2% of the farmers regard office employment(under the heading of “other occupations”) as their principal occupation; 0. 
4% of the farmers regard “non-independent” work as their principal occupations (what is here discussed isnot hired labourers but managers, inspectors, etc. 
, cf. 
 Sta-tistik des Deutschen Reichs , B. 
 112, S. 
 49 #). 
 Similarly, we see that the percentage of independent farmers who engagein auxiliary occupations sharply diminishes with the increase in the size of the farms (26-25-15-9%), but greatly increases among the farmers possessing 100 hectaresand over (23%). 
 In regard to the number of large farms (100 hectares and over) and the area of land they occupy, the statistics givenabove indicate a diminution in their share in the total number of farms and the total area. 
 The question arises: Does this imply that large-scale farming is being crowdedout by small and middle-peasant farming, as Mr. 
 Bulgakovhastens to assume? We think not; and by his angry thrustsat Kautsky on this point Mr. 
 Bulgakov merely exposes hisinability to refute Kautsky’s opinion on the subject. 
 In the first place, the diminution in the proportion of the large farms is extremely small (from 0. 
47% to 0. 
45%, i. 
e. 
, two-hundredths of one per cent of the total number of farms, and from 24. 
43% to 24. 
088%, i. 
e. 
, 35-hundredths of one per cent of the total area). 
 It is a generally known fact that with the intensification of farming it is sometimes necessary t o make a slight reduction in the area of the farm, and thatthe big farmers lease small lots of land remote from the centreof the estate in order to secure labourers. 
 We have shownabove that the author of the detailed description of the large-and small-scale farms in East Prussia openly admits the auxiliary role played by small in relation to big landown-ership, and that he strongly advises the settlement oflabourers. 
 Secondly, there can be no talk of the eliminationof large-scale by small-scale farming, for the reason that dataon the size of farms are not yet adequate for judging the scale of production . 
 The fact that in this respect large-scale farming has made considerable progress is irrefutably proved by statistics on the use of machinery (see above),and on agricultural industries (to be examined in greaterdetail below, since Mr. 
 Bulgakov gives an astonishinglyincorrect interpretation of the German statistics on thissubject). 
 Thirdly, in the group of farms of 100 hectares and over a prominent place is occupied by latifundia , i. 
e. 
, farms of 1,000 hectares and over. 
 The number of these farmshas increased proportionately more than the number of mid-dle-peasant farms, namely, from 515 to 572, or by 11%,whereas the number of middle-peasant farms has increasedfrom 926,000 to 998,000, or by 7. 
8%. 
 The area of latifundia has increased from 708,000 hectares to 802,000 hectares, or by 94,000 hectares. 
 In 1882 latifundia occupied 2. 
22% ofthe total land under cultivation; by 1895 they occupied2. 
46%. 
 On this point Mr. 
 Bulgakov, in his work, supple-ments the groundless objections to Kautsky he made inNachalo with the following even more groundless generali-sation: “An index of the decline of large-scale farming,” he writes, “is ... the increase of latifundia, although theprogress of agriculture and the growth of intensive farmingshould be accompanied by the splitting-up of farms” (II, 126). 
Mr. 
 Bulgakov unconcernedly goes on to talk about the “lati-fundia [!] degeneration” of large-scale farming (II, 190, 363). 
 With what remarkable logic our “scholar” reasons: since the diminution in the size of farms at times , with the intensification of farming, implies an increase in production, therefore an increase in the number and in the area of lati-fundia should, in general , signify a decline! But since logic is so bad, why not turn for help to statistics? The source from which Mr. 
 Bulgakov draws his information contains a massof data on latifundia farming. 
 We present here some of thefigures: in 1895, 572 of the largest agricultural enterprisesoccupied an area of 1,159,674 hectares, of which 802,000hectares were given over to agriculture and 298,000 were covered by forests (a part of these latifundia proprietors were primarily timber merchants and not farmers). 
Livestock of all kinds is kept by 97. 
9% of these farmers, anddraught animals by 97. 
7 % . 
 Machines are used by 555 in thisgroup, and, as we have seen, it is in this group that themaximum number of cases of the use of machines of various types occurs; steam ploughs are used by 81 farms, or 14% of the total number of latifundia farms; livestock is kept asfollows: 148,678 head of cattle, 55,591 horses, 703,813 sheep,and 53,543 pigs. 
 Sixteen of these farms are combined withsugar refineries, 228 with distilleries, 6 with breweries,16 with starch factories, and 64 with flour-mills. 
 Inten-sification may be judged from the fact that 211 of these farms cultivate sugar-beet (26,000 hectares are devoted to thiscrop) and 302, potatoes for industrial purposes; 21 (with1,822 cows, or 87 cows per farm) sell milk to the cities, and204 belong to dairy co-operative societies (18,273 cows,or 89 per farm). 
 A very strange “latifundia degeneration” indeed! We now pass to the middle-peasant farms (5-20 hectares). 
 The proportion they represent of the total number of farmshas increased from 17. 
6% to 18. 
0% ( #0. 
4%), and of the total area, from 28. 
7% to 29. 
9% ( #1. 
2%). 
 Quite natu-rally, every “annihilator of Marxism” regards these figures as his trump card. 
 Mr. 
 Bulgakov draws from them the con-clusion that “large-scale farming is being crowded out bysmall-scale farming”, that there is a “tendency towards de-centralisation”, and so on and so forth. 
 We have pointedout above that precisely with respect to the “peasantry”unclassified statistics are particularly unsuitable and can more than ever lead to error; it is precisely in this sphere that the processes of the formation of small enterprises and the“progress” of the peasant bourgeoisie are most likely to conceal the proletarisation and impoverishment of the ma-jority. 
 In German agriculture as a whole we see an undoubted development of large-scale capitalist farming (the growth of latifundia, the increase in the use of machinery, and the de-velopment of agricultural industries), on the one hand; onthe other, there is a still more undoubted growth of prole-tarisation and impoverishment (flight to the cities, expandedparcellisation of the land, growth in the number of small allotment holdings, increase in auxiliary hired labour, decline in the food consumption of the small peasants, etc. 
). 
Hence, it would be clearly improbable and impossible thatthese processes should not be current among the “peasantry”. 
Moreover, the detailed statistics definitely indicate theseprocesses and confirm the opinion that data on the size of farms alone are totally inadequate in this case. 
 Hence, Kautsky rightly pointed out, on the basis of the general stateof the capitalist development of German agriculture, theincorrectness of drawing from those statistics the con-clusion that small-scale production was gaining over large-scale production. 
 We have, however, direct data abundantly proving that the increase in the number of “middle-peasant farms” indi-cates an increase in poverty and not in wealth and prosperity. 
 We refer to the very data on draught animals which Mr. 
Bulgakov utilised so clumsily both in Nachalo and in his book. 
 “If this required further proof,” wrote Mr. 
 Bulgakov with reference to his assertion that medium farming was pro-gressing and large-scale farming declining, “then to the indi-ces of the amount of labour-power we could add the indicesof the number of draught animals. 
 Here is an eloquenttable. 
” * Number of farms using animals for Difference field work 1882 1895 Under 2 hectares .... 
 325,005 306,340 —18,665 2to 5 ” ... 733,957 725,584 — 8,383 5t o 20 ” ... 894,696 925,103 #30,407 20t o 1 0 0 ” ... 279,284 275,220 — 4,064 100 and over ” ... 24,845 24,485 — 360 Totals ... 2,257,797 2,256,732 — 1,065 *We reproduce the table as given by Mr . 
 Bulgakov, merely add-“The number of farms with draught animals declined among the large as well as the small farms, and increased only among the medium farms” ( Nachalo , No. 
 1, p. 
 20). 
 Mr. 
 Bulgakov could be pardoned for having, in a hurriedly written magazine article, erred in arriving at a conclusiondiametrically opposed to the one the statistics on draught animals logically lead to. 
 But our “strict scientist” repeatedthis error in his “investigation” (Vol. 
 II, p. 
 127, where, moreover, he used the figures #30,407 and —360 as applying to the number of animals, whereas they apply to the numberof farms using draught animals. 
 But that, of course, is aminor point). 
 We ask our “strict scientist”, who talks so boldly of the “decline of large-scale farming” (II, 127): What is the signif-icance of the increase of 30,000 in the number of middle-peasant farms with draught animals when the total number of middle-peasant farms increased by 72,000 (II, 124)? Is itnot clear from this that the percentage of middle-peasant farms with draught animals is declining ? This being the case, should not Mr. 
 Bulgakov have ascertained what per-centage of farms in the various categories kept draught animals in 1882 and in 1895, the more so, since the data aregiven on the very page, and in the very table from whichhe took his absolute figures ( Statistik des Deutschen Reichs , B. 
 112, S. 
 31 #)? The data are here given: Percentage of farms using draught D ifference animals 1882 1895 Under 2 hectares ....... 
 10. 
61 9 . 
46 — 1 . 
15 2-5 ”....... 
 74. 
79 71 . 
39 — 3 . 
40 5-20 ”....... 
 96. 
56 92 . 
62— 3 . 
94 20-100 ”....... 
 99. 
219 7 . 
68 — 1 . 
53 100 and over ”....... 
 99. 
4297 . 
70 — 1 . 
72 Average ...... 42. 
79 40 . 
60 — 2 . 
19 Thus, the farms with draught animals diminished on the average by over 2 per cent; but the reduction was above the average among the small-and middle-peasant farms, and below the average among the large farms. 
 * Moreover, it *The smallest reduction is observed among the smallest farms, must not be forgotten that “it is precisely on the large farms that animal power is frequently displaced by mechanical power in the form of machines of various kinds, including steam-driven machines (steam ploughs, etc. 
)” ( Statistik des Deutschen Reichs , B. 
 112, S. 
 32#). 
 Therefore, if in the group of large farms (of 100 hectares and over) the numberwith draught animals diminished by 360, and if at the sametime the number with steam ploughs increased by 615 (710 in 1882 and 1,325 in 1895), it is clear that, taken as a whole, large-scale farming has not lost, but has benefited thereby. 
Consequently, we come to the conclusion that the only groupof German farmers who have undoubtedly improved their conditions of farming (with respect to the use of animalsfor field work, or the substitution of steam power for animals) are the big farmers, with farms of 100 hectares and over. 
 In all the remaining groups the conditions of farming have de-teriorated; and they have deteriorated most in the group of middle-peasant farms , in which the percentage of farms using draught animals has diminished most. 
 The difference in thepercentage of large farms (of 100 hectares and over) and medium farms (of 5-20 hectares) with draught animals was formerly less than 3% (99. 
42 and 96. 
56); the difference isnow more than 5% (97. 
70 and 92. 
62). 
 This conclusion is still more strongly confirmed by the data on the types of draught animals used. 
 The smaller thefarm, the weaker the types: a relatively smaller number of oxen and horses and a larger number of cows, which are much weaker, are used for field work. 
 The following datashow the situation in this respect for the years 1882 and1895: For one hundred farms using draught animals the data are: animal . 
 We shall see further that it was precisely among those farms (and only among them) that the composition of the draught animals improved, i . 
e. 
, a larger number of horses and oxen and a relatively smaller number of cows were being kept . 
 As the authors of the Ger-man Inquiry ( S. 
 32#) have rightly remarked, the farmers on the small-est allotments keep draught animals, not only for tilling the land,but also for “auxiliary work for wages”. 
 Consequently, in discussing the question of draught animals it would be erroneous to take these small allotments into account, since they are placed under altogether ex-ceptional conditions. 
 Cows, along with horses Cows only or oxen 1882 1895 1882 1895 Under 2 hectares ... 83. 
74 82 . 
10 —1. 
64 85 . 
218 3 . 
95 —1. 
26 2-5 ” ... 68. 
298 2 . 
69 #1. 
13 72 . 
95 74 . 
93 #1. 
98 5-20 ” ... 18. 
49 20 . 
30 # 1. 
81 29 . 
71 34 . 
75 #5. 
04 20-100 ” ... 0. 
250 . 
28 # 0. 
03 3 . 
426 . 
02 #2. 
60 100 and over ” ... 0. 
00 0 . 
03 # 0. 
03 0 . 
251 . 
40 #1. 
15 Average .... 
 41. 
61 41 . 
82 #0. 
214 8 . 
18 50 . 
48 #2. 
30 We see a general deterioration in the kind of draught animals used (for the reason indicated, the small allotmentfarms are not taken into account), the greatest deterioration occurring in the group of middle-peasant farms . 
 In that group, of the total number of farms possessing draught animals, the percentage of those compelled to use cows a s well as other animals, and of those compelled to use cows only , increased most of all . 
 At the present time, more than one-third of the middle-peasant farms with draught animalshave to use cows for field work (which, of course, leads topoorer tilling and, consequently, to a drop in the crop yield, as well as to a lower milk yield), while more than one-fifth use only cows for field work. 
 If we take the number of animals used for field work, we shall find in all groups (except the small allotment farms)an increase in the number of cows. 
 The number of horses andoxen has changed as follows: Number of Horses and Oxen Used for Field Work (Thousands ) 1882 1895 Difference Under 2 hectares .... 
. 
 62. 
96 9 . 
4 #6. 
5 2-5 ” .... 
. 
 308. 
3 302 . 
3— 6 . 
0 5-20 ” .... 
. 
 1,437. 
4 1,430 . 
5— 6 . 
9 20-100 ” .... 
. 
 1,168. 
5 1,155 . 
4— 1 3 . 
1 100 and over ” .... 
. 
 650. 
5 695 . 
2 #44. 
7 Totals ...... 3,627 . 
6 3,652 . 
8 #25. 
2 With the exception of the small allotment farms, an in-crease in the number of draught animals proper is seen only among the big farmers. 
 Consequently, the general conclusion to be drawn from the changes in farming conditions with regard to animal and mechanical power employed for field work, is as«’’‘’’» «’’‘’’» follows: improvement only among the big farmers; deterio-ration among the rest; the greatest deterioration among the middle-peasant farms . 
 The statistics for 1895 enable us to divide the middle-peasant farm group into two subgroups: with 5 to 10 hectaresand with 10 to 20 hectares respectively. 
 As was to be expected,in the first subgroup (which has by far the greater number offarms), farming conditions insofar as they affect the use of draught animals are incomparably worse than in the second. 
 Of the total of 606,000 owners of 5-10 hectares, 90. 
5% pos-sess draught animals (of the 393,000 with 10-20 hectares—95. 
8%), and of this number, 46. 
3% use cows for field work(17. 
9% in the 10-20 hectare group); the number using onlycows amounts to 41. 
3% (4. 
2% in the 10-20 hectare group). 
 It turns out that precisely the 5-10 hectare group, the one most poorly equipped with draught animals, shows thegreatest increase from 1882 to 1895 both in the number of farms and in area. 
 The relevant figures follow: Percentage of Total Farms Total area Cultivated area 1882 1895 1882 1895 1882 1895 5-10 hectares 10 . 
50 10 . 
90 # 0. 
40 11 . 
90 12 . 
37 # 0. 
47 12 . 
261 3 . 
02 # 0. 
76 10-20 hectares 7 . 
06 7 . 
07 # 0. 
01 16 . 
70 16 . 
59 — 0. 
11 16 . 
48 16 . 
88 # 0. 
40 In the 10-20 hectare group the increase in the number of farms is quite insignificant. 
 The proportion of the totalarea even diminished, while the proportion of the cultivatedarea increased to a much lesser extent than that of the farmsin the 5-10 hectare group. 
 Consequently, the increase in the middle-peasant farm group is accounted for mainly (and partly even exclusively) by the 5-10 hectare group, i. 
e. 
,the very group in which farming conditions with regard tothe use of draught animals are particularly bad. 
 Thus, we see that the statistics irrefutably reveal the true significance of the notorious increase in the number of middle-peasant farms: it is not an increase in prosperity, but an increase in poverty ; not the progress of small farming, but its degradation . 
 If the conditions of farming have de-teriorated most among the middle-peasant farms, and if«’’‘’’» «’’‘’’»«’’‘’’» these farms have been obliged to resort most extensively to the use of cows for field work, then, on the basis of this aspect of farming alone (one of the most important aspects of farming as a whole), it is not only our right but our dutyto draw the conclusions regarding all the other aspects offarming. 
 If the number of horseless farms (to use a term fa-miliar to the Russian reader, and one quite applicable tothe present case) has increased, if there is deterioration in the type of draught animals used, there cannot be the slightest doubt that the general maintenance of the animals and thetreatment of the soil, as well as the food and the living con-ditions of the farmers, have likewise deteriorated; for inpeasant farming, as all know, the harder the animals areworked and the worse they are fed, the harder the peasant works and the worse he is fed, and vice versa. 
 The conclu-sions we drew above from Klawki’s detailed study are fullyconfirmed by the mass data on all the small peasant farms inGermany. 
 IX DAIRY FARMING AND AGRICULTURAL CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES IN GERMANY . 
 THE AGRICULTURAL POPULATION IN GERMANY DIVIDED ACCORDING TO ITS POSITION IN THE ECONOMY We have dealt in such detail with the data on draught animals because these are the only data (apart from thosedealing with machinery, which we have earlier examined)that enable us to obtain an inside view, as it were, of agri-culture, of its equipment and organisation. 
 All the otherdata—on the amount of land (which we have cited), and the number of livestock (to be cited below)—merely describe the external aspects of agriculture, equating things that areobviously unequal, since treatment of the soil and, conse-quently, its yield, and the quality and productivity oflivestock are different in the different categories of farms. 
Although these differences are well known, they are usually forgotten in statistical compilations; the data on machines and draught animals alone enable us, at least to some ex-tent, to form a judgement of these differences and to decide who gains (on the whole) from them. 
 If the large farms use, to a larger extent than the rest, particularly complex and costly machines, which alone are taken into account by sta-tistics, then it is obvious that the other types of agricultur-al implements, which statistics ignore (ploughs, harrows,waggons, etc. 
), are of a better quality, are used in largernumbers, and (because the farms are bigger) are more fullyutilised on the large farms. 
 The same applies to livestock. 
 The small farmer must inevitably make up for the lack of these advantages by greater industry and frugality (he hasno other weapons in his struggle for existence), and for thisreason those qualities are not merely casual but always andinevitably distinguish the small farmer in capitalist society. 
The bourgeois economist (and the modern “Critic”, who on this question, as on all others, drags along at the tail of the bourgeois economist) calls this the virtue of thrift, persever-ance, etc. 
 (cf. 
 Hecht and Bulgakov), ascribing it to the peas-ant as a merit. 
 The socialist calls it overwork ( Ueberarbeit ) and under-consumption ( Unterkonsumption ) and holds capi-talism responsible for it; he tries to open the eyes of the peas-ant to the deception practised by those who deliver Manilov orations, picturing social degradation as a virtue andthereby striving to perpetuate it. 
 We shall now deal with the data on the distribution of livestock among the various groups of German farmers in1882 and 1895. 
 The following are the main summaries (in percentages of total): L i v e s t o c k (In value) Cattle Pigs 1882 1895 ± 1882 1895 ± 1882 1895 ± Under 2 hectares 9 . 
39 . 
4# 0. 
11 0 . 
58 . 
3— 2 . 
22 4 . 
725 . 
6# 0. 
9 2-5 ” 13. 
11 3 . 
5# 0. 
41 6 . 
91 6 . 
4— 0 . 
51 7 . 
61 7 . 
2— 0 . 
4 5-20 ” 33. 
33 4 . 
2# 0. 
93 5 . 
73 6 . 
5# 0. 
83 1 . 
43 1 . 
1— 0 . 
3 20-100 ” 29. 
528 . 
8— 0 . 
727 . 
027 . 
3# 0. 
320 . 
61 9 . 
6— 1 . 
0 100 and over ” 14. 
81 4 . 
1— 0 . 
79 . 
91 1 . 
5# 1. 
65 . 
76 . 
5# 0. 
8 Totals 100 100 — 100 100 — 100 100 — Thus, the share of the total livestock owned by the large farms has diminished, whereas that of the middle-peasantfarms has increased most. 
 We speak of the total livestock, notwithstanding the fact that the statistics refer only to value, because the statisticians’ assumption that the valueof each animal is equal for all groups is obviously wrong. 
 The data on value, which make it possible to add different kinds of livestock (the result could have been obtained by expressing all the livestock in terms of cattle; but this would have entailed fresh calculations, without however, alter-ing the conclusions materially), actually show the distri-bution of all livestock according to number and not accord-ing to real value. 
 Since the livestock belonging to the bigfarmers is of a better quality and probably improves to a greater extent than that of the small farmers (to judge by the improvement in the implements), the figures considerablyminimise the real superiority of large-scale farming. 
 With regard to certain types of livestock, it must be said that the diminution of the share of the large farms is en-tirely due to the decline in commercial sheep farming: from 1882 to 1895 the number of sheep diminished from 21,100,000 to 12,600,000, i. 
e. 
, by 8,500,000; of this total diminution,farms of 20 hectares and over accounted for 7,000,000. 
 Asis known, stock raising for the dairy-product and meat mar-kets is one of the developing branches of commercial live-stock farming in Germany. 
 For this reason we took the data on cattle and pigs, finding that the greatest progress in these two branches of livestock farming has been made on thelarge farms (of 100 hectares and over): share in thetotal number of cattle and pigs has increased most. 
 Thisfact stands out the more for the reason that the area oflivestock farms is usually smaller than that of agricultur-al farms and one would thus expect a more rapid develop-ment, not of large, but of middle, capitalist farms. 
 The gener-al conclusion to be drawn (in regard to the number, not the quality, of cattle) should be the following: the big farmershave lost most as a result of the sharp decline in commercialsheep farming, and this loss has not entirely, but only partly,been compensated by a greater increase (as compared with thesmall and medium farms) in the raising of cattle and pigs. 
 In speaking of dairy farming, we cannot ignore the ex-tremely instructive and, as far as we know, unutilised ma-terial on this question furnished by German statistics. 
 Butthis concerns the general question of combining agriculturewith agricultural industries, and we are obliged to deal with it because of the amazing distortion of the facts of which Mr. 
 Bulgakov is again guilty. 
 As is known, the com-bination of agriculture with the industrial processing of farm produce is one of the most outstanding characteristics of the specifically capitalist progress in agriculture. 
 Some time back, in Nachalo (No. 
 3, p. 
 32), Mr. 
 Bulgakov declared: “In my opinion, Kautsky vastly exaggerates the signif-icance of this combination. 
 If we take the statistics, weshall find that the amount of land connected with industryin this way is quite negligible. 
” The argument is an extreme-ly weak one; for Mr. 
 Bulgakov does not dare to deny the technically progressive character of this combination. 
 Andas for the most important question, as to whether large-scaleor small-scale production is the vehicle of this progress, hesimply evades it. 
 Since, however, the statistics provide avery definite reply to this question, Mr. 
 Bulgakov resorts in his book to— sit venia verbo ! *—cunning. 
 He cites the per-centage of farms (of all farms in general and not accordingto groups!) that are combined with agricultural industryin one form or another, and remarks: “It must not be supposedthat they are combined principally with large farms” (II,116). 
 The very opposite is the case, most worthy professor: that is precisely what must be supposed; and the table you give (which does not show the percentage of farms combined with agricultural industries in relation to the total numberof farms in each group) merely deceives the uninformed or inattentive reader. 
 Below we give the combined data (toavoid filling our pages with figures) on the number of farms connected with sugar refining, distilling, starch making, brewing, and flour milling (consequently, the totals willshow the number of cases in which agriculture is combined with agricultural industries), and we get the following picture: Number of cases ofTotal numbercombination with ag-of farmsricultural industries Per cent Under 2 hectares .... 
 3,236,367 11,364 0 . 
01 2to 5 ” .... 
 1,016,318 13,5421 . 
09 5t o 20 ” .... 
 998,804 2 5,879 2 . 
03 20t o 1 0 0 ” .... 
 281,787 8,273 2 . 
52 100 and over ” .... 
 25,061 4,006 15 . 
72 Totals .... 
. 
 5,558,317 63,064 1 . 
14 Farms with 1000 hec-tares and over .... 
. 
 572330 57 . 
69 *Save the mark!— Ed. 
 Thus, the percentage of farms in combination with agri-cultural industries is negligible in small-scale farming and reaches marked dimensions only in large-scale farming (and enormous dimensions on the latifundia, of which more than half enjoy the benefits of this combination). 
 If this fact is compared with the above-cited data on the use ofmachines and draught animals, the reader will understandthe pretentious nonsense of Mr. 
 Bulgakov’s aphorisms on the “illusion fostered by conservative” Marxists “that large-scale farming is the vehicle of economic progress and thatsmall-scale farming is the vehicle of retrogression” (II, 260). 
 “The great bulk (of sugar-beet and potatoes for distilling alcohol!) was produced on the small farms,” continuesMr. 
 Bulgakov. 
 But the very opposite is the case: it was precisely on the large farms : Under 2 hectares ... 10,781 0 . 
33 3,781 1 . 
0 565 0 . 
01 2-5 ” ... 21,413 2 . 
10 12,693 3 . 
2947 0 . 
09 5-20 ” ... 47,145 4 . 
7248,2 13 12 . 
13 , 0 23 0 . 
30 20-100 ” ... 26,643 9 . 
45 97,7822 4 . 
7 4,293 1 . 
52 100 and over ” ... 7,262 28 . 
98 233,820 59 . 
0 5,195 20 . 
72 Totals .... 
 113,244 2 . 
03 396,289 100 . 
0 14,023 0 . 
25 1000 hectares and over ....... 
 211 36 . 
88 26,127 — 302 52 . 
79 Thus, we see again that the percentage of farms culti-vating sugar-beet and potatoes for industrial purposes isnegligible in the small-farm group, considerable in the large-farm group, and very high on the latifundia. 
 The great bulkof the beets (83. 
7 per cent, judging by the area under beet) is produced on the large farms. 
 * *Mr. 
 Bulgakov’s sheer ... bad luck in his assertions on the pro-cessing of industrial crops is so strange that we involuntarily ask our-selves whether it may not be due to the fact that in citing the tablesfrom the German Inquiry he failed to see that they do not show theNumber of farmscultivating sugar-beets Percentage oftotal number offarms in category Area under beet(in hectares) Per cent Number of farmscultivating pota-tos for indus-trial purposes Percentage oftotal number offarms in category Similarly, Mr. 
 Bulgakov failed to ascertain the “share of large-scale farming” in dairy farming (II, 117); yet this branch of commercial livestock farming is one of those that are developing with particular rapidity over the whole ofEurope, as well as being one of the characteristics of theprogress of agriculture. 
 The following figures show the num-ber of farms selling milk and dairy products to the towns: Under 2 hectares .... 
 8,998 21 . 
46 0 . 
3 25,028 11 . 
59 2 . 
8 2-5 ” .... 
 11,049 26 . 
35 1 . 
1 30,275 14 . 
03 2 . 
7 5-20 ” .... 
 15,344 36 . 
59 1 . 
5 70,916 32 . 
85 4 . 
6 20-100 ” .... 
 5,676 13 . 
54 2 . 
0 58,439 27 . 
07 10 . 
3 100 and over ” .... 
 863 2 . 
06 3 . 
4 31,213 14 . 
46 36 . 
1 Totals .... 
. 
 41,930 100 . 
00 . 
8 215,871 100 . 
05 . 
1 1000 hectares and over 21 — 3 . 
7 1,822 — 87 . 
0 Thus, here too, large-scale farming is in advance: the percentage of farmers engaged in the milk trade increases proportionately with the increase in the size of the farms, and it is highest on the latifundia (“latifundia degeneration”). 
For instance, the percentage of large farms (100 hectares andover) selling milk to the towns is more than twice that ofthe middle-peasant (5-20 hectare) farms (3. 
4 and 1. 
5 percent). 
 The fact that the large farms (large in area) also engage in large-scale dairy farming is confirmed by the data on thenumber of cows per farm, viz. 
, 36 per farm of 100 hectares percentage of farms combined with agricultural industries in rela-tion to the total number of farms in the given group . 
 On the one hand, it is difficult to imagine that a “study” by a strict scientist could contain such a string of errors (accompanied by a string of smug con-clusions) . 
 On the other hand, the identity of Mr . 
 Bulgakov’s tables with those in the German Inquiry (S. 
 4 0# and 41 #) is beyond doubt .... 
 Oh those “strict scientists”! *We have included this column so that the reader may form a clear idea of the methods employed by Mr . 
 Bulgakov, who, for con-firmation of his conclusions, refers only to this one column (taken from the above Inquiry) . 
Number offarms Percentage oftotal* Percentage oftotal numberof farms ingroup Number ofcows Percentageof total Number ofcows per farms and over, and even 87 on the latifundia. 
 Generally speaking, the obviously capitalist farms (20 hectares and over) own 41. 
5% of the total number of cows, whose milk is sold to the towns, although these proprietors represent an insignif-icant percentage of the total number of farmers (5. 
52%),and a very small percentage of the number of farmers sellingmilk to the towns (15. 
6%). 
 The progress of capitalist farmingand the capitalist concentration of this branch of commer-cial livestock farming are therefore an indubitable fact. 
 But the concentration of dairy farming is by no means fully brought out by data on farms grouped according toarea. 
 It is clear a priori that there can and must be farms equal in area but unequal in regard to livestock in general,and to dairy cattle in particular. 
 Let us, first, compare the distribution of the total number of cattle among the various groups of farms with the distribution of the total number ofcows whose milk is sold to the towns. 
 P e r c e n t a g e o f cows whose all cattle milk is sold Difference to towns Under 2 hectares ...... 8. 
31 1 . 
6 # 3. 
3 2to 5 ” ...... 16. 
41 4 . 
0— 2 . 
4 5t o 20 ” ...... 36. 
53 2 . 
8— 3 . 
7 20t o 1 0 0 ” ...... 27. 
327 . 
1— 0 . 
2 100 and over ” ...... 11. 
51 4 . 
5 # 3. 
0 Totals ....... 
 100. 
0 100 . 
0 Thus, we see again that it is the middle-peasant farms which are the worst off ; this group utilises the smallest share of its cattle for the urban milk trade (the most prof-itable branch of dairy farming). 
 On the other hand, the large farms occupy a very favourable position and utilise a rela-tively large proportion of their cattle for the urban milktrade. 
 * But the position of the smallest farms is most fa-vourable of all, for they utilise the largest proportion of their cattle for the urban milk trade. 
 Consequently, in this *This difference is not to be explained by the fact that the pro-portion of oxen to the total number of cattle is unequal, for the per-centage of oxen (at all events those used for field work) is higher onthe large than on the middle-peasant farms . 
 group, special “milk” farms are developing on which agricul-ture is forced into the background, or even abandoned alto-gether (out of 8,998 farms in this group which sell milk to the towns, 471 have no arable land, and the farmers possessa total of 5,344 cows, or 11. 
3 cows per farm). 
 We obtain aninteresting picture of the concentration of dairy farmingwithin one and the same group according to area of tilledland if, with the aid of the German statistics, we single out the farms with one and with two cows each: Farms Selling Dairy Products to the Towns Farms with three cows or more Under 50 ares ...... 1,944 722 372 850 9,787 11 . 
5 11,255 50 ares to 2 hectares . 
. 
 7,054 3,3022 ,5521,2 00 5,367 4 . 
5 13,773 0 to 2 hectares ...... 8,998 4,024 2,924 2,050 15,156 7 . 
4 25,028 2 to 5 ” ...... 11,049 1,8624,497 4,690 19,419 4 . 
3 30,275 Among the farms with a negligible amount of agricultural land (0-0. 
5 hectares) we see an enormous concentration ofdairy farming: fewer than one half of these farmers (850out of 1,944) concentrate in their hands almost nine-tenths of the total number of cows in this group (9,789 out of 11,255), with an average of 11. 
5 cows per farm. 
 These areby no means “small” farmers; they are farmers having a turn-over in all probability (especially those adjacent to bigcities) of several thousand marks per annum, and it is doubt-ful whether they can manage without hired labour. 
 The rapid growth of the towns causes a steady increase in the number of such “dairy farmers”, and, of course, there willalways be the Hechts, Davids, Hertzes, and Chernovs toconsole the mass of the small peasants crushed by povertywith the example of isolated cases of their fellow-farmerswho have “got on in the world” by means of dairy farming, tobacco cultivation, and so forth. 
 In the 0. 
5-2 hectare group of farms we see that fewer than one-fifth of the total number of farmers (1,200 out of7,054) concentrate in their hands over two-fifths of the totalnumber of cows (5,367 out of 13,773); in the 2-5 hectareNumber offarms Farms withone cow Farms withtwo cows Numberof farms Numberof cows Cows perfarm Total numberof cows group, fewer than one half of the farmers (4,690 out of 11,049) concentrate in their hands more than three-fifths of the total number of cows (19,419 out of 30,275), and so on. 
 Unfortunately, the German statistics do not enable usto classify the groups with a larger number of cows. 
 * But even the data presented fully confirm the general conclusionthat the concentration of capitalist agriculture is in reality much greater than the data on area alone would lead us to suppose. 
 The latter combine in one group farms small in area and producing small quantities of grain with farms producing dairy products, meat, grapes, tobacco, vegetables,etc. 
, on a large scale. 
 Of course, all these branches occupya far inferior place as compared with the production of grain,and certain general conclusions hold good also in regard to statistics relating to area. 
 But, in the first place, certainspecial branches of commercial agriculture are growing with *To be more exact, the manner in which the German data are grouped does not enable us to do this; for the authors of the Inquiry had the data for each farm separately (on the basis of the replies list-ed in the questionnaires sent out to the farmers) . 
 In passing, we would state that this practice of gathering information from each farmseparately adopted by German agricultural statistics is superior tothe French method and apparently also to the English and other meth-ods . 
 Such a system enables us to classify the various types of farms not only according to area but also according to scale of farming (dairy farming, for example), according to the extent of use of machin-ery, degree of development of agricultural industries, and so forth . 
 But this system requires a more thorough classification of the statis-tical data. 
 First, the farms must be classified, not only according to one single feature (extent of area), but according to several features(number of machines, livestock, area of land under special crops, and so forth). 
 Secondly, combined classifications must be made, i . 
e. 
, the division of each group, classified according to area, into subgroupsaccording to numbers of livestock, etc. 
 Russian Zemstvo statistics on peasant farming can and should serve as a model in this respect . 
 While German government statistics are superior to Russian govern-ment statistics in their fullness and comprehensiveness, in their uniformity and exactness, and in the rapidity of their preparation and publication, our Zemstvo statistics are superior to the European partial inquiries and investigations because of the remarkablefullness and detailed analysis of certain particular data. 
 Russian Zemstvo statistics have for a long time included surveys of individ-ual farms and presented various group tables and the combined tables we have mentioned. 
 A close study of Russian Zemstvo statistics by Europeans would no doubt give a strong impetus to the progress particular rapidity in Europe, constituting a distinguishing feature of its capitalist evolution. 
 Secondly, the circumstance referred to is frequently forgotten with reference to certain examples, or to certain districts, and this opens a widefield for petty-bourgeois apologetics, samples of which werepresented by Hecht, David, Hertz, and Chernov. 
 They re-ferred to tobacco growers, who, judged by the size of theirfarms, are echte und rechte Kleinbauern , * but, if judged by the extent of their tobacco plantations, are by no means “small” farmers. 
 Moreover, if we examine the data on tobacco grow-ing separately, we shall find capitalist concentration inthis area also. 
 For instance, the total number of tobaccogrowers in Germany in 1898 was estimated at 139,000, witha cultivation of 17,600 hectares of tobacco land. 
 But of these 139,000, some 88,000, or 63 per cent, together owned not more than 3,300 hectares, i. 
e. 
, only one-fifth of the total area ofland under tobacco. 
 The other four-fifths were in the handsof 37% of the tobacco growers. 
 ** The same applies to grape growing. 
 As a general rule, the area of the “average” vineyard, in Germany, for example, is very small: 0. 
36 hectares (344,850 growers and 126,109 hectares of vineyards). 
 But the vineyards are distributedas follows: 49% of the growers (with 20 or fewer ares o f vineyards) have only 13% of the total area of vineyards; the“middle” growers (20-50 ares ), representing 30% of the to-tal, hold 26% of the total area of vineyards, whereas the big *Genuine small peasants . 
—Ed. 
 **Die deutsche Volkswirtschaft am Schlusse des 19 . 
 Jrhd . 
 (Ger-man National Economy at the End of the Nineteenth Century . 
—Ed. 
), Berlin, 1900, S. 
 6 0. 
 This is a very rough computation based on the fiscal returns . 
 For Russia, we have the following data on the distri-bution of tobacco growing in three uyezds of Poltava Gubernia: ofthe total of 25,089 peasant farms growing tobacco, 3,015 farms (lessthan one-eighth) have 74,565 dessiatines under grain out of a total of 146,774 dessiatines, or more than one half, and 3,239 dessiatines under tobacco out of a total of 6,844 dessiatines, or nearly one half . 
 By grouping these farms according to the tobacco area we get the fol-lowing: 324 farms (out of 25,089) have two or more dessiatines, com-prising a total of 2,360 out of 6,844 dessiatines . 
 These belong to the big capitalist tobacco planters, notorious for their outrageous exploi-tation of the workers . 
 Only 2,773 farms (a little more than one-tenth) had over half a dessiatine each under tobacco, comprising altogeth-er 4,145 out of 6,844 dessiatines under tobacco. 
 See A Review of To-bacco Growing in Russia , Issues II and III, St . 
 Petersburg, 1894 . 
 growers (half a hectare and over), representing 20% of the total, hold 61 % of the total area of vineyards, or more than three-fifths. 
 * Still more concentrated is market gardening (Kunst-und Handelsgärtnerei ), which is rapidly developing in all capitalist countries in direct dependence on the growthof large cities, big railroad stations, industrial settlements,etc. 
 The number of market gardening enterprises in Germanyin 1895 is estimated at 32,540, with an area of 23,570 hec-tares, or an average of less than one hectare each. 
 But more than half of this area (51. 
39%) is concentrated in the handsof 1,932 proprietors, or 5. 
94% of all the market gardeners. 
The size of the market gardens and the area of the rest ofthe land the big farmers utilise for agriculture can be judgedfrom the following figures: 1,441 market gardeners have vegetable gardens ranging from two to five hectares, making an average of 2. 
76 hectares per vegetable farm, and total landamounting to an average of 109. 
6 hectares per farm; 491farmers have vegetable gardens of five hectares and over,making an average of 16. 
54 hectares per farm, and total landamounting to an average of 134. 
7 hectares per farm. 
 Let us return to dairy farming, the data on which help us to judge the significance of co-operative societies, whichHertz regards as a panacea for the evils of capitalism. 
 Hertzis of the opinion that “the principal task of socialism” isto support these co-operative societies (op. 
 cit. 
, S. 
 21, Rus-sian translation, p. 
 62; S. 
 89, Russian translation, p. 
 214), and Mr. 
 Chernov, who, as might be expected, bruises his forehead in the act of ardent prostration before the new gods,has invented a theory of the “non-capitalist evolution ofagriculture” with the aid of co-operative societies. 
 Weshall have a word or two to say on the theoretical significanceof this sort of remarkable discovery. 
 For the moment, we shall note that the worshippers of co-operative societies *It is of interest to note that in France, where vine growing is incomparably more developed than in Germany (1,800,500 hectares), the concentration of vineyards is also more considerable . 
 However, we have only the general statistics on area to enable us to form ajudgement; for in France data are not gathered on individual farms,and the actual number of growers is unknown . 
 In Germany 12 . 
83% of the total vineyards belong to growers owning ten or more hectaresof land. 
 In France, however, 57 . 
02% of the vineyards belong to this category of growers . 
 are always eager to talk of what it is “possible” to achieve by co-operative societies (cf. 
 the instance given above). 
 We, however, prefer to show what is actually achieved by the aid of co-operative societies under the present capitalistsystem. 
 On the occasion of the census of enterprises and oc-cupations in Germany in 1895 a register was made of all farmsparticipating in co-operatives for the sale of dairy products(Molkereigenossenschaften und Sammelmolkereien ), as well as of the number of cows from which each farmer obtained milk and milk products for sale. 
 As far as we know, thoseare perhaps the only mass data that determine with precision, not only the extent to which farmers of various categoriesparticipate in co-operative societies, but, what is particu-larly important, the economic, so to speak, extent of this participation, viz. 
, the size of the particular branch of each farm in the co-operative society (the number of cowsproviding products for sale organised by co-operativesocieties). 
 We cite the figures, divided into the five princip-al groups according to area of farms: Farms Participating in Co-operative Societies for the Sale of Dairy Products Under 2 hectares . 
. 
 10,300 0 . 
36 . 
95 18,556 1 . 
71 1 . 
8 2-5 ” . 
. 
 31,819 3 . 
121 . 
49 73,156 6 . 
76 2 . 
3 5-20 ” . 
. 
 53,597 5 . 
43 6 . 
19 211,236 19 . 
51 3 . 
9 20-100 ” . 
. 
 43,561 15 . 
429 . 
42418,563 38 . 
65 9 . 
6 100 and over ” . 
. 
 8,805 35 . 
15 . 
95 361,435 33 . 
3772. 
0241. 
0 Totals ... 148,0822 . 
7 100 1,082,946 100 7 . 
3 1000 hectares and over ....... 
 204 35 . 
6—1 8 . 
273 — 89 . 
0 Thus, only an insignificant minority (3-5%) of the small farmers participate in co-operative societies—in all proba-bility an even smaller percentage than that of capitalistfarms in the lower groups. 
 On the other hand, the percentage *Mr. 
 Bulgakov stated: “The share of large-scale farming will be seen from the following figures” (II, 117) and he cited only these figures, which do not reveal “the share of large-scale farming, but (unless compared with other data) rather serve to obscure it. 
Number ofsuch farms Percentage offarms in giv-en categoryPercentage offarms in allcategories* Number ofcows on suchfarms Percentage oftotal numberof cows Average num-ber of cowsper farm { of the large, obviously capitalist, farms which participate in co-operative societies is from three to seven times greater than that of even the middle-peasant farms. 
 The percentage of the latifundia participating in co-operatives is largest ofall. 
 We can now form an idea of the boundless naïveté of theAustrian Voroshilov, Hertz, who, in retorting to Kautsky,states that the “German Agricultural Co-operative Whole-sale Society [ Bezugsvereinigung ], with which the largest co-operative societies are affiliated, represents 1,050,000 farm-ers” ( S. 
 112, Russian translation, p. 
 267, Hertz’ italics) from which he concludes that this means that not only big farmers (holding more than 20 hectares, who number 306,000)participate in these co-operatives, but peasants too! Hertzhad only to ponder a little over his own assumption (that all the large farms participate in co-operatives), in order to realise that if all big farmers are members of co-operativesocieties, this implies that of the rest a smaller percentage participate in them, which means that Kautsky’s conclusionconcerning the superiority of large-scale over small-scale farming even with respect to co-operative organisation i s fully confirmed. 
 But still more interesting are the data on the number of cows furnishing the products, the sale of which is organised by the co-operatives. 
 The overwhelming majority of these cows, almost three-fourths (72%), belong to big farmers engaged in capitalist dairy farming and owning ten, forty, and (on the latifundia) even eighty cows per farm. 
 And now let us listen to Hertz. 
 “We assert that co-operative societies bring most benefit to the small and smallest farmers ...” (op. 
 cit. 
, S. 
 112, Russian translation, p. 
 269, Hertz’ ital-ics). 
 The Voroshilovs are alike everywhere: be it in Russiaor in Austria. 
 When the Voroshilovs beat their breasts and exclaim vehemently, “We assert”, we can be quite sure that they are asserting that which is not. 
 To conclude our review of German agrarian statistics, let us examine briefly the general situation in regard to thedistribution of the agricultural population according to its position in the economy. 
 Of course, we take agriculture proper (A 1, and not A 1 to 6, according to the German no-menclature, i. 
e. 
, we do not include among the agricultur-ists fishermen, lumbermen, and hunters); we then take the data on persons for whom agriculture is the principal occu-pation . 
 German statistics divide this population into three main groups: (a) independent (viz. 
, farmer owners, tenantfarmers, etc. 
), (b) non-manual employees (managers, fore-men, supervisors, office clerks, etc. 
), and (c) labourers. 
 The last-named group is split up into the following four subgroups:(c 1) “members of families employed on a farm belonging to the head of the family—father, brother, etc. 
,” in other words, labourers that are members of the family, as distinctfrom hired labourers, to which category all the other sub-groups of group c belong. 
 Clearly, therefore, in order to study the social composition of the population (and its capitalistevolution), the labourers that are members of the family must not be grouped with the hired labourers, as is usually done, but with the farmers in group a; for they are in fact the farmers’ partners, enjoying right of inheritance, etc. 
 Other subgroups are: (c 2) agricultural labourers, men and women ( Knechte und Mägde ), and (c3) “agricultural day-labourers and other labourers (shepherds, herdsmen) owningor renting land”. 
 Consequently, the last-named subgroup con-sists of persons who are at the same time farmers and wage-labourers, i. 
e. 
, an intermediate and transitional group whichshould be placed in a special category. 
 Finally, there is thesubgroup (c 4) “ditto—neither owning nor renting land”. 
 In this way, we obtain three main groups: I. 
 Farmers—owners of land and the members of their families. 
 II. 
 Farm-ers—owners of land and at the same time wage-labourers. 
 III. 
 Wage-workers not owning land (non-manual employees,labourers, and day-labourers). 
 The following table illus-trates the manner in which the rural population * of Ger-*We speak only of the “active” population (as the French term it; in German, erwerbsthätige ), i. 
e. 
, those actually engaged in agri-culture, not including domestic servants and those members of fami-lies who are not regularly and permanently engaged in agricultural work . 
 Russian social statistics are so undeveloped that we still find lacking a special term like “ active ”, “erwerbsthätig ”, “occupied ”. 
 Yanson, in his analysis of the data on the occupations of the popula-tion of St . 
 Petersburg ( St. 
 Petersburg According to the Census of 1890 ), employs the term “independent”; but this is not a suitable term, for it usually implies masters, and, consequently, division accordingto participation or non-participation in industrial activity (in thebroad sense of the term) is confused with division according to theposition occupied in industry (individual self-employed workman) . 
 many was distributed among these groups in the years 1882 and 1895: Active (self-employed) population engaged in agriculture as the main occupation (thousands) 1882 1895 (a) Farm owners ....... 
. 
 2,253 2,522 # 269 (c1) Members of farmers’ fami-lies............. 
. 
 1,935 1,899 — 36 I......... 4,188 4,421 # 233 #5. 
6% (c2) Labourers with allotments (II)............. 
. 
 866 383 — 483 —55 . 
8% I # II 5,004 4,804 — 250 (b) Non-manual employees .... 
 47 77 # 30 (c3) Labourers .......... 
 1,589 1,719 # 130 (c4) Labourers without allotments . 
 1,374 1,445 # 71 III....... 
. 
 3,010 3,241 # 231 # 7. 
7% Totals ... 8,064 8,045 — 19 — 0 . 
2% Thus, the active population has diminished, although only slightly. 
 Among this population we see a diminutionin the landowning section (I #II) and an increase in the land-less section (III). 
 This clearly shows that the expropriation of the rural population is progressing , and that it is precisely the small landowners who are being expropriated; for weknow by now that the wage-labourers with small plots ofland belong to the group of smallest farmers. 
 Furthermore,of the persons owning land, the number of farmer-labourers is diminishing, while the number of farmers is increasing. 
 We see, therefore, the disappearance of middle groups and the growth of the extreme groups : the intermediary group is disappearing; capitalist contradictions are becoming more acute . 
 Of the wage-labourers there is an increase in the num-ber of those entirely expropriated, while the number owning land is diminishing. 
 Of the farmers there is an increase in the number directly owning enterprises, while The term “productive population” could be used, but even that would be inexact, for the military, rentier, and similar classes are not at all“productive”. 
 Perhaps the most suitable term would be “self-em-ployed” population, viz . 
, those engaged in some “trade” or other occu-pation ( =producing an income) as distinct from those who live at the expense of those “self-employed” . 
 the number employed in the enterprises of heads of families is diminishing. 
 (In all probability the latter circumstance is due to the fact that in the majority of cases working members of peasant families receive no pay whatever from the headof the family and for that reason are particularly prone tomigrate to the cities. 
) If we take the data on the population for whom agricul-ture is an auxiliary occupation, we shall see that this (active or self-employed) population increased from 3,144,000 to 3,578,000, i. 
e. 
, by 434,000. 
 This increase is almost entirelydue to the growth in the number of working members offarmers’ families, which expanded by 397,000 (from 664,000to 1,061,000). 
 The number of farmers increased by 40,000(from 2,120,000 to 2,160,000); the number of labourers owning land increased by 51,000 (from 9,000 to 60,000); while the number of landless labourers diminished by 54,000(from 351,000 to 297,000). 
 This enormous increase from664,000 to 1,061,000, or 59. 
8% in the course of 13 years,is further evidence of the growth of proletarisation—thegrowth of the number of peasant s, members of peasants’ families, who have come to regard agriculture merely as an auxiliary occupation. 
 We know that in those cases the prin-cipal occupation is working for wages (next in importancebeing petty trading, handicraft, etc. 
). 
 If we combine thenumbers of all working members of peasant families—thosefor whom agriculture is the principal occupation and those for whom it is merely an auxiliary occupation—we shall get the following: 1882—2,559,000; 1895—2,960,000. 
 Thisincrease may easily provide occasion for erroneous inter-pretations and apologetic conclusions, especially if it iscompared with the number of wage-labourers, which, on thewhole, is diminishing. 
 Actually, the general increase is obtained by the diminution in the number of working mem-bers of peasant families for whom agriculture is the princi-pal occupation and by the increase in the number for whom it is an auxiliary occupation; the latter amounted in 1882to only 21. 
7% of the total number of working members ofpeasant families, whereas in 1895 they amounted to 35. 
8%. 
 Thus, the statistics covering the entire agricultural popula-tion distinctly reveal to us the two processes of proletarisa-tion to which orthodox Marxism has always pointed, and which opportunist critics have always tried to obscure by stereotyped phrases. 
 These processes are: on the one hand, the growing separation of the peasantry from the land, the expropriation of the rural population, which either movesto the towns or is turned from landowning labourers intolandless labourers; on the other hand, the development of“auxiliary employment” among the peasantry, i. 
e. 
, the com-bination of agriculture with industry, which marks the first stage of proletarisation and always leads to increased pov-erty (longer working day, malnutrition, etc. 
). 
 Regardedonly from the external aspect, these two processes, to a cer-tain extent, even tend in opposite directions: an increasein the number of landless labourers and an increase in thenumber of working members of peasant landowning fami-lies. 
 For this reason, to confound the two processes, or to ignore either of them, may easily lead to the crudest blun-ders, numerous examples of which are scattered throughBulgakov’s work. 
 87 Finally, the occupational statistics reveal to us a remarkable increase in the number of non-manual employees, * from 47,000 to 77,000, or 63. 
8%. 
 Simultaneously with the growth of proletarisation, there is a growth of large-scale capitalist production, which requiresnon-manual employees to a degree rising in proportion to theincrease in the use of machinery and the development ofagricultural industries. 
 Thus, notwithstanding his vaunted “details”, Mr. 
 Bul-gakov proved unable to grasp the German data. 
 In the occu-pational statistics he merely saw an increase in the numberof landless labourers and a diminution in the number oflandowning labourers, which he took to be an index of the“changes that have taken place in the organisation of ag-ricultural labour” (II, 106). 
 But these changes in the organ-isation of labour in German agriculture as a whole have remained for him a fortuitous and inexplicable fact, in noway connected with the general structure and evolution ofagricultural capitalism. 
 In reality, it is only one of the aspectsof the process of capitalist development. 
 Mr. 
 Bulgakov’s *In regard to this fact Mr . 
 Bulgakov delivered himself in Na-chalo of the banal joke, “The increase in the number of officers in a dwindling army” . 
 A vulgarised view of the organisation of labour in large-scale production! /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR opinion notwithstanding, the technical progress of German agriculture is first and foremost the progress of large-scale production, as has been irrefutably proved by statistics relating to the use of machinery, the percentage of enter-prises using draught animals and the type used, the develop-ment of industries connected with agriculture, the growth ofdairy farming, and so forth. 
 Inseverably connected withthe progress of large-scale production are the growth of the proletarisation and expropriation of the rural population; the expanding number of small allotment farms and of peas-ants whose principal source of livelihood is auxiliary oc-cupations; the increased poverty among the middle-peasantpopulation, whose farming conditions have deterioratedmost (the largest increase in the percentage of horseless farms and in the percentage of farms using cows for field work), and, consequently, whose general living conditionsand quality of land cultivation have undergone greatestdeterioration. 
 THE “UNITY ” CONFERENCE OF R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 ORGANISATIONS ABROAD SEPTEMBER 21-22 (OCTOBER 4-5), 1901 88 1 SPEECH DELIVERED ON SEPTEMBER 21 (OCTOBER 4) (NOTE THE MINUTES) Comrades! Let us begin with the point on which the success of the conference depends. 
 As a representative of Iskra I consider it necessary to touch on the history of our attitude to the other organisations. 
Iskra has been completely independent from its very incep-tion, recognising only ideological connections with RussianSocial-Democracy and functioning on instructions from many comrades in Russia. 
 In its first issue Iskra declared that it would not deal with the organisational differences that hadarisen in the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad 89 and attached the greatest importance to its position on mat-ters of principle. 
 * Some members of the Union Abroad proposed that we hold a conference to come to an agreement with the organisations abroad. 
 We understood the proposal to mean that a groupin the Union was in agreement with our principles, whichmade it possible that the Union would also accept them. 
The revolutionary organisation Sotsial-Demokrat , 90 voiced agreement, notwithstanding considerable organisational differences, as well as differences on principle. 
 The Union, unfortunately, refused to negotiate. 
 When a new group ofinitiators 91 appeared, the Union consented to the negotia-tions. 
 Since the Union had no distinct physiognomy andsince a new trend towards revolutionary Marxism had man-ifested itself within it it was to be hoped that an agreement *See present edition, Vol. 
 4, pp. 
 378-79. 
— Ed. 
 on principle would be possible. 
 Iskra and Sotsial-Demokrat again consented, and the Geneva Conference was held. 
 At the beginning of our session Comrade Kruglov read the con-ference resolution without any comments. 
 No one from theUnion took the floor in opposition. 
 We affirm that in its tenth issue, Rabocheye Dyelo made a decisive break with the traditions of revolutionary Marx-ism and opposed the agreement on principles elaborated at the Geneva Conference, with whose tendencies the Union is apparently in agreement. 
 In view of this, my criticism will be directed against the editors of Rabocheye Dyelo , and not against the entire Union. 
 Let us compare the Geneva resolution with the articles in issue No. 
 10 of Rabocheye Dyelo . 
 The Geneva resolution astonishes one by its amazing de-tail and its stressing of points that are considered generallyknown. 
 Point 1 of the agreement on principles reads: “Accepting the basic principles of scientific socialism and acting insolidarity with international revolutionary Social-De-mocracy, we reject all attempts to introduce opportunism into the class struggle of the proletariat—attempts thatfind expression in so-called Economism, Bernsteinism,Millerandism, 92 etc. 
” Here there is an obvious allusion to something; obviously a struggle was taking place betweenopportunism and revolutionary Marxism. 
 Whatever the con-tents of issue No. 
 10 of Rabocheye Dyelo may be, it cannot, in any event, destroy the historical fact that the GenevaConference took place and that the resolution it adoptedcan serve as a basis for unification. 
 In its third point, forinstance, the Geneva resolution recognises that Social-Democracy should assume leadership in the struggle for democracy. 
 Apparently there were previous differences of opinion on this point, too. 
 In its effort to keep well awayfrom opportunism, the resolution descends almost to theridiculous. 
 (See Point “e”, in Paragraph 5. 
) It follows,therefore, that there were differences even on such elemen-tary questions. 
 Now let us compare that resolution with the articles in Rabocheye Dyelo (No. 
 10). 
 Unfortunately I have had the articles at my disposal for three days only, notmore than enough for a cursory examination. 
 These articles give a detailed explanation of the difference in our views; there are some just remarks addressed to Zarya and Iskra which we shall turn to account. 
 But that is not what concerns us at the moment; we are concerned withthe principles underlying the articles. 
 The position on prin-ciple adopted by Rabocheye Dyelo (No. 
 10) contradicts the position adopted by the Union delegates at the GenevaConference. 
 It is impossible to reconcile these two positions. 
 It is necessary to reveal the differences contained in them in order to know on what basis the Union takes its stand,in order to know whether it is possible to effect ideologicalunity, without which organisational unity would be mean-ingless; we have not sought and could not seek such unity. 
On pages 32 and 33 of issue No. 
 10 of Rabocheye Dyelo the author of the article demurs at the contraposing of Moun-tain and Gironde in international Social-Democracy. 
 93 Look but at the Geneva Conference—does it not representa clash between the Mountain and the Gironde? Does notIskra represent the Mountain? Did not Iskra in its very first editorial declare itself against organisational unity prior to the demarcation of ideological boundaries? In Rabocheye Dyelo , No. 
 10, it is stated that even the most rabid Bern-steinians take a stand on the basis of class interests. 
 Theresolution makes special mention of Bernsteinism, to re-fute which the delegates at the conference devoted consid-erable effort; and now, in the articles of Rabocheye Dyelo (No. 
 10), the same old fare is rehashed. 
 What is this, a chal-lenge or a sneer? To what end the effort we put forth? Peopleare simply laughing at our pains to elaborate a theoreticalbasis. 
 We must not forget that without a common ideologi-cal basis there can be no question of unity. 
 In the same ar-ticle, moreover, we get the prospect of a widened scope of our differences. 
 On page 33, for example, the author writes: “Perhaps our differences arise out of different interpretations ofMarxism?” Again, I ask, to what end the effort we put forth? Point “c” of Paragraph 4 of the Geneva resolution speaks of the necessity to struggle against all opponents of revolu-tionary Marxism; however, we are told that perhaps, in gen-eral, we understand Marxism differently. 
 I must also mention that all this is accompanied by argu-ments on the harmfulness of fettering thought, etc. 
, which is precisely what all the Bernsteinians are saying. 
 This was stated at the Lübeck Parteitag ,94 and it is also repeated by the followers of Jaurès,95 while the points of the agree-ment say nothing about this, since the agreement was madeexpressly on the basis of revolutionary Marxism. 
 Even faintmanifestations of criticism would have led to a completebreach. 
 We have met to discuss the content of the opinionsand not the freedom of opinion. 
 References to French and German models are most unfortunate. 
 The Germans have already achieved what we are still struggling for. 
 Theyhave a united Social-Democracy which exercises leader-ship in the political struggle. 
 Our Social-Democracy is notyet the leader of the revolutionary groups; on the contrary,there are signs of the revival of other revolutionary tenden-cies. 
 In the articles in Rabocheye Dyelo (No. 
 10), not only are there no signs of a complete break in principle with op-portunism, there is even something worse—there is praiseof the predominance of the spontaneous movement. 
 I amnot cavilling at words. 
 All of us, the comrades from Iskra , the comrades from Sotsial-Demokrat , and I, are calling at-tention only to the basic tendencies of the articles; but those words, as the Germans say, ins Gesicht schlagen . 
 * Particu-larly as regards these points the Geneva resolution couldnot be clearer. 
 The recently emerged Workers’ Party for thePolitical Liberation of Russia 96 chants in harmony with these publications. 
 Consider in the article the famous distinction between tactics-as-plan and tactics-as-process. 
 The author saysthat tactics-as-plan is in contradiction to the fundamentalprinciple of revolutionary Marxism, and he thinks that onemay speak of tactics-as-“process”, taken to mean the growthof the Party's tasks, which increase as the Party grows. 
 In my opinion this is simply unwillingness to discuss. 
 We have expended so much time and effort on the formulation of defi-nite political tasks, and at the Geneva Conference so muchwas said about them; and now we are suddenly being talkedto about “tactics-as-plan” and “tactics-as-process”. 
 To methis represents a return to the specific, narrow Bernsteinian product of Rabochaya Mysl which asserted that only that *Offend the nostrils. 
— Ed. 
 struggle should be conducted which is possible, and that the possible struggle is that which is going on. 
 We on our part maintain that only the distortion of Marxism is growing. 
 The Geneva resolution says that no stages are necessary forthe transition to political agitation, and then an article sud-denly appears in which “the literature of exposure” is contra-posed to the “proletarian struggle”. 
 Martynov writes aboutstudents and liberals, holding that they can worry about democratic demands themselves. 
 We, however, think that the entire peculiarity of Russian Social-Democracy consistsin the fact that the liberal democracy has not taken the ini-tiative in the political struggle. 
 If the liberals know betterwhat they have to do and can do it themselves, there isnothing for us to do. 
 The author of the article goes as far as to assume that the government will adopt concrete, admini-strative measures of its own accord. 
 As we all know, there were differences of opinion on the question of terror at the Geneva Conference. 
 After the Con-ference, a part of the Union Abroad, the Bund, 97 at its con-ference, came out decisively against terror. 
 On page 23, however, the author writes that we “do not wish to set ourselves against the terrorist moods”. 
 This is the sheerestopportunism. 
 * Published for the first time Published according to the text of the minutes *The minutes break off at this point. 
— Ed. 
 2 QUESTIONS SUBMITTED TO THE UNION OF RUSSIAN SOCIAL-DEMOCRATS ABROAD AT THE “UNITY ” CONFERENCE, SEPTEMBER 21 (OCTOBER 4), 1901 1. 
 Do all the three organisations accept, in principle, the resolution of the June Conference? 2. 
 Is the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad willing and able so to organise publication activity as torender impossible unprincipled and opportunist deviationsfrom revolutionary Marxism—deviations that create con-fusion of mind so dangerous for our movement—and to elim-inate all flirting with tacit and avowed Bernsteinism, aswell as servile acceptance of the elementary forms andspontaneity of the movement, which must inevitably leadto the conversion of the labour movement into an instru-ment of bourgeois democracy? First published in December Published according to 1901 , in the pamphlet, the text in the pamphlet Documents of the “Unity ” Conference FIGHTING THE FAMINE-STRICKEN What astonishing solicitude for the famine-stricken our government is displaying! What an amazingly long cir-cular (of August 17) the Minister of the Interior has issued to the governors of the affected gubernias! A veritable lit-erary work, more than sixteen pages long, written by Mr. 
Sipyagin to explain the government’s food policy in itsentirety. 
 The document was apparently published to im-press the “public”, as if to say: See how solicitous we are,how prompt we are with relief measures, how providential we are in organising in advance food-kitchens and all forms and phases of their activity! It must be admitted that thecircular issued by the Ministry of the Interior certainlydoes create an impression, both by its bulk and (if one hasthe patience to read it through) by its contents. 
 A frankexposition of the government’s policy is always the best means for agitation against the tsarist government and, while expressing our profound gratitude to Mr. 
 Sipyagin,we make bold to suggest that the other ministers speakmore frequently of their programme in circulars publishedfor general information. 
 If one has the patience to read through Mr. 
 Sipyagin’s circular to the end, we said. 
 A great deal of patience will be required, for three-fourths, nay, nine-tenths of the cir-cular consists of the usual official banalities. 
 It is a rehashof things known for years and repeated a hundred timeseven in the “Code of Laws”. 
 98 It is a mass of circumlocution, a detailed description of the ceremonial in the relations between Chinese mandarins; it is in the grand style of the chancelleries, with periods thirty-six lines long, in a “jar-gon” that makes the heart bleed for our native Russian language. 
 As you read deeply into this effusion, you feel as though you were in a Russian police-station with its musty walls and its all-pervading specific stench, in which the officials personify in their appearance and bearing the mostcase-hardened bureaucracy, while in the courtyard, vis-ible through the window, gloomy buildings loom reminis-cent of the torture chamber. 
 Three main points in the government’s new programme attract particular attention: first, greater power is vested in the individual officials and care is taken that the bureau-cratic spirit and service discipline should be strengthenedand protected from any breath of fresh air; secondly, a scaleof relief is fixed for the famine-stricken, viz. 
, regulationson the rationing of bread to be given to a “needy” family; and, thirdly, despairing horror is expressed at the fact that “disloyal” persons, capable of arousing the people againstthe government, are rushing in to help the famine-stricken,and timely measures against such “agitation” are providedfor. 
 We shall deal with each of these points in detail. 
 Only a year has elapsed since the government deprived the Zemstvos of the right to manage food affairs and trans-ferred that administration to the rural superintendentsand uyezd congresses (law of June 12, 1900). 
 Now beforethe law has come into force, it has been repealed by a merecircular. 
 The reports of a number of provincial governorssufficed to convince the government that the law had be-come unsuitable! This makes plainly evident the worth-lessness of laws that are turned out like pancakes by theSt. 
 Petersburg government departments without priordiscussion on a serious level by people really informedand capable of expressing an independent opinion, andwithout serious intention to create a more satisfactory state of affairs, laws that are dictated by the ambition of some cunning minister eager to further his career and display hisloyalty. 
 The Zemstvo is not loyal—take the food adminis-tration out of its hands! But before this could be done itwas discovered that the rural superintendents and even theuyezd congresses, consisting exclusively of government officials, were inclined to discuss matters too much. 
 Appar-ently there were rural superintendents stupid enough tocall famine famine and simple enough to think it necessary to fight against the famine, and not against those who really want to help the famine-stricken; and in all probability there were officials in the uyezd congresses who were not subordinated to the Ministry of the Interior and who alsofailed to understand the real tasks of “home politics”. 
 Andso, by the mere circular of a minister a new “Central Uyezd”—no, this is not a printer’s error—a “Central Uyezd FoodBoard” is set up, the whole purpose of which is to prevent the infiltration of disloyal persons and disloyal ideas and the commission of imprudent acts in the administrationof food distribution. 
 Thus, the Minister considers as im-prudent and prohibits the “premature” compilation (i. 
e. 
,not immediately before the bread distribution) of lists ofthe needy. 
 It arouses, he says, “exaggerated hopes” among the people! The Central Uyezd Food Board is concentrated in the hands of a single person , and the Ministry recommends the uyezd marshal of the nobility for the post. 
 Indeed, that official is so closely connected with the governor and per-forms so many police functions that he will doubtless beable to understand the true spirit of the food policy. 
 More-over, he is a big local landed proprietor, respected and trusted by all the landlords. 
 A man of that type will cer-tainly understand, as no one else will, the Minister’s pro-found idea on the “demoralising” effects of relief given topersons “able to dispense with it”. 
 As for the gubernatorialpowers, the Minister refers to this subject at the very begin-ning of the circular and repeats over and over again that the governor is responsible for everything, that all mustobey the governor, that the governor must be able to take“special” measures, etc. 
 To this day the governor in a Rus-sian province has always been a real satrap upon whose pleas-ure the existence of any and every institution, and even of every individual, in the province “in his charge” depends; but now a real “state of war” has been established. 
 Severityincreased to an inordinate degree—in connection with fam-ine relief! This is so truly Russian! But greater stringency, intensified surveillance—all this demands increased expenditure on the bureaucratic ma-chine, a fact of which the Minister has not lost sight; the uyezd marshals of the nobility, or other persons directingthe Central Uyezd Food Board, will be granted “a special sum” to cover their expenses, “concerning the approximate amount whereof Your Excellency will tender the appropri-ate application to me”, adds the circular in its “special” jargon. 
 In addition, further sums will be granted asfollows: 1,000 rubles in a lump sum for uyezd council“office expenses”; from 1,000 to 1,500 rubles for expensesof the gubernia governor’s offices. 
 It is the offices that willhave to carry on most of the activity, since famine relief will consist almost entirely of office work—how can the offices be left without the necessary funds? The offices come first,and what is left can go to the famine-stricken. 
 Mr. 
 Sipyagin displays remarkable persistence and resource-fulness in devising measures for reducing famine relief. 
 In the first place, he calls upon all governors to discuss which uyezds “have been affected by the harvest failure” (the final determination on this matter rests with the Minis-try itself, since even governors cannot be trusted to avoid“exaggeration”!). 
 Then follow the instructions indicatingwhen uyezds are not to be regarded as affected areas: (1) if not more than one-third of its volosts * are affected; (2) if a grain shortage is usual in the uyezd and additional grain is purchased annually with subsidiary earnings; (3) if localresources are insufficient to grant relief. 
 Here we have anexample in miniature of the bureaucratic solution of thefood problem—one measuring rod for all! What is the sizeof the population of one-third of the volosts? how seriously are they affected? have not the usual “earnings” been reduced this year by the serious industrial crisis?—all these are idlequestions after the categorical “directions” of the Ministry. 
But the worst is still to come. 
 The point at issue is—who isto be regarded as needy and how much relief is to be granted?Mr. 
 Sipyagin recommends the following “approximate” computation which “has rarely been found to be greatly exaggerated”. 
 (What we fear most of all is exaggeration; wefear exaggerated hopes, we fear exaggerated loans! Famine,unemployment—all these are merely “exaggerations”. 
 Suchis the idea that clearly emerges from all the ministerial reas-oning. 
) In the first place, a test threshing is to be made to determine the “ average yield per dessiatine in each village”, *See footnote to p. 
 36— Tr. 
 after which the area sown by each farmer is to be esti-mated. 
 Why not also determine the size of the crop harvested by farmers of different means? The harvest of a poor peasant is smaller, and the term “average” is disadvantageous pre-cisely to those in distress. 
 Secondly, those who gather notless than forty-eight poods of grain per family per annum(counting twelve poods for three adults and six poods fortwo children) are not regarded as being in distress. 
 This is the sort of calculation a tight-fisted kulak could be expected to make. 
 In an ordinary year even the poorest peasant fam-ily of five or six persons consumes eighty, not forty-eight,poods of grain, whereas the middle (average) peasant familyof five consumes 110 poods, as is known from surveys of peas-ant farming. 
 Consequently, the tsarist government is cut-ting down by one half the amount of grain actually needed for food. 
 Thirdly, says the circular, “this quantity [viz. 
,forty-eight poods per family] is to be reduced by one half,in view of the fact that the worker element represents aboutfifty per cent of the population”. 
 The government stubbornlyinsists upon its standing rule that the working population must not be given relief because, as it argues, they can earn money. 
 But the Minister has already ordered that the uyezdsin which the population is normally engaged in auxiliaryoccupations shall not come under the heading of affected areas. 
Why, then, should he deprive the working population of re-lief for a second time ? Everyone knows that, not only are there no opportunities for earning extra money this year, but that even the usual subsidiary earnings have declinedowing to the crisis. 
 The government itself has banished manythousands of unemployed workers from the cities to therural areas. 
 The experience of previous famines has shownthat exclusion of the adult working population from relief leads only to the division of the existing inadequate relief between children and adults. 
 No, the saying that “you can-not skin one ox twice” would be far too flattering for aMinistry of the Interior that in a twofold way excludes fromthe relief lists all who are able to work. 
 Fourthly, this relief,totally inadequate and reduced by one half, is still fur-ther cut down by one-third, one-fifth, or one-tenth, “in proportion to the approximate number of well-to-do farmershaving stocks left over from last year, or any other ma-terial resources”! This is the third hide flayed from the same ox. 
 What kind of “stock” can a peasant have if he has harvest-ed not more than forty-eight poods of grain for his whole family? All other earnings have been taken into accounttwice; moreover, even the Russian peasant, with all the pov-erty to which government policy and exploitation by cap-italists and landlords have reduced him, cannot liveby bread alone. 
 In addition to bread, he must spend money on fuel, clothes, and other food, as well as on repairs to his house. 
 In ordinary years, as scientific inquiries into peas-ant farming inform us, even the poorest peasant spendsmore than half his income on requirements other than bread. 
 If all these things are taken into account, it will be foundthat the Minister calculates the relief to be granted at one-fourth or one-fifth of what is actually needed. 
 This is not fighting famine, it is fighting those who really want to helpthe famine-stricken. 
 The circular concludes with a regular crusade against private philanthropists. 
 It has not infrequently been re-vealed, thunders Mr. 
 Sipyagin, that certain philanthropists strive to arouse among the population “discontent with the present system and encourage the people to make totallyunjustified demands on the government”, that they conduct“anti-government agitation”, etc. 
 These accusations areabsolutely false . 
 It is well known that in 1891 leaflets were distributed by “peasant well-wishers” 99 in which the people were rightly told who their real enemy was; probably other attempts at agitation were made in connection with thefamine. 
 But there was not a single case of revolutionariescarrying on propaganda under cover of philanthropy. 
 Thevast majority of the philanthropists—this is an undoubtedfact—were just philanthropists and nothing more . 
 When, therefore, Mr. 
 Sipyagin states that many of them were “persons whose political past is not irreproachable”, weask him, who among us now has an “irreproachable past”?Even “highly-placed persons” often paid tribute to thegeneral democratic movement in their youth. 
 Of course,we do not wish to say that to carry on agitation against the government in connection with the famine is impermis-sible or even undesirable. 
 On the contrary, such agitationis always necessary, particularly in times of famine. 
 We merely wish to point out that Mr. 
 Sipyagin is straying into the realm of fiction in trying to make it appear that his fears and anxieties are based on past experience. 
 We wish to say that Mr. 
 Sipyagin’s statement is further proof of an oldtruism: the police government is afraid of even the slightestcontact between the people and intellectuals that are in theleast independent and honest, it fears every true and boldutterance addressed directly to the people, it suspects— and rightly so—that mere solicitude for the genuine (not imaginary) satisfaction of the people’s needs is tantamountto agitation against the government; for the people see thatprivate philanthropists sincerely desire to help them, whilethe tsarist government officials hamper and reduce relief,minimise the extent of the distress, impede the opening of food-kitchens, etc. 
 Now the new circular demands that all contributions and appeals for contributions, as well as theopening of food-kitchens, “be under the control of the au-thorities”; it demands that all relief workers arriving in theaffected areas “present themselves” to the governor, thatthey may choose assistants only with his consent, and that they submit to him a report of their activities! Those who desire to help the famine-stricken must submit to policeofficials and to the police system of curtailing relief andshamefully reducing relief rates. 
 Whoever refuses to submitto this despicable procedure must not be allowed to carryon relief work—such is the essence of government policy. 
 Mr. 
 Sipyagin howls that “politically unreliable persons are eagerly taking advantage of the famine to pursue theircriminal aims on the pretence of helping their neighbours”,and this cry is taken up by the entire reactionary press(e. 
g. 
, Moskovskiye Vedomosti ). 
 How horrible! To exploit the sufferings of the people for political purposes! In point of fact, what is horrible is precisely the fact that in Rus-sia every kind of activity, even philanthropic work most remote from politics, inevitably brings people capableof independent thought into conflict with police tyrannyand with measures of “suppression”, “prohibition”, “restric-tion”, etc. 
, etc. 
 It is horrible that the government, under the cloak of high political considerations, pursues its Judas policy 100 of taking bread from the starving, cutting down relief to one-fifth, prohibiting everyone except police of-ficials from approaching the starving! We repeat the call issued in Iskra : Organise a campaign of exposure against the police government’s food policy; expose in the uncen-sored free press the outrages committed by local satraps,the whole avaricious tactic of curtailing relief, the miser-liness and inadequacy of the relief, the despicable attemptto minimise the extent of the famine, and the shamefulstruggle against those who desire to help the famine-stricken! We advise all who have a grain of sincere sympathy for the people in their dire distress to take measures to bringto their knowledge the true sense and significance of theministerial circular. 
 It is only because of the unboundedignorance of the people that such circulars do not immedi-ately call forth an outburst of general indignation. 
 Let the class-conscious workers who stand closest to the peas-antry and to the less enlightened urban masses take theinitiative in this work of exposing the government! A REPLY TO THE ST. 
 PETERSBURG COMMITTEE Rabochaya Mysl , the organ of the St. 
 Petersburg Com-mittee (League of Struggle101), in its issue No. 
 12, pub-lished an article replying to a note in the first issue of Iskra on the split in the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad. 
 Unfortunately, the reply assiduously evades the very essence of the controversy; such methods of discussionwill never make the case clear. 
 We have maintained andcontinue to maintain that a split has taken place in the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad, that the Union broke up into two sections after the withdrawal from the conference in 1900 of a substantial minority, including theEmancipation of Labour group, 102 which had established the Union and formerly edited all its publications. 
 Nowthat the split has occurred, neither of the two sections canoccupy the place formerly occupied by the old Union as a whole. 
 The St. 
 Petersburg Committee does not attempt to refute this opinion when (for some unknown reason) itspeaks only of Plekhanov and not of the Sotsial-Demokrat organisation and when it lets its readers know only indi-rectly that the St. 
 Petersburg League of Struggle apparentlydenies the fact of the split and continues to regard one of the sections of the late Union Abroad as the whole Union. 
 To what end engage in a polemic if there is no desire to examine the essence of the opponent’s opinion and franklyto express one’s own? To continue. 
 We have maintained and hold to our view that the principal cause (not pretext, but cause) of the split was a difference of opinion on principles, namely, a difference between revolutionary and opportunist Social-Democracy. 
 For this reason alone, what has happened in the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad cannot be regarded as anything but a split in the old Union Abroad. 
 The question arises—how does the St. 
 Petersburg Committee regard the matter? Will it dare to deny the existence of pro-found differences in principle between the two sectionsof the late Union Abroad? We do not know, because the St. 
Petersburg Committee contrived to write a “reply” whichdoes not contain a single word about the main question. 
 We again ask the St. 
 Petersburg comrades—and not only the St. 
 Petersburg comrades—does not a polemic thatevades the heart of the matter threaten to degenerate intoan unpleasant wrangle? Is it, in fact, worth while engagingin a polemic if there is no desire to examine the essentialsof the question and to express one’s opinion definitely and without reservations, or if it is regarded as premature to do so? Iskra , No. 
 9, October 1901 Published according to the Iskra text PARTY AFFAIRS ABROAD The foreign branch of the Iskra organisation has united with the Sotsial-Demokrat revolutionary organisation ab-road, and has formed with it a single organisation under the name of the League of Russian Revolutionary Social-Democracy Abroad. 
103 As will be seen from its published declaration, the new organisation proposes to issue a numberof propaganda and agitational pamphlets. 
 The League isthe representative of Iskra abroad. 
 Thus, the organisation of revolutionary Social-Democrats abroad, led by the Eman-cipation of Labour group, has finally merged with the organisation grouped round our paper. 
 As before, the Eman-cipation of Labour group will participate directly in editingand managing our publications. 
 The unification of the Russian revolutionary Social-Democratic organisations abroad was accomplished ‘after their attempt to combine with the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad (which issues Rabocheye Dyelo ) had failed. 
 Early in summer, a conference of representativesof the three organisations drafted an agreement. 
 Thebasis of the agreement was provided by a number ofresolutions on matters of principle, according to which the Union Abroad would put an end to all flirting with Econo-mism and Bernsteinism, and recognise the principles ofrevolutionary Social-Democracy. 
 There was reason to hopethat unity would be accomplished; for until then the onlyobstacle to a rapprochement was the vacillation of the Union Abroad and of its organ, Rabocheye Dyelo , with re-gard to questions of principle. 
 These hopes were not justi-fied, since the recently published No. 
 10 of Rabocheye Dyelo contained editorial articles openly directed against the resolutions that had been drawn up at the conference with the participation of the delegation of the Union Abroad. 
 Apparently, the Union Abroad again swerved towards the Right Wing of our movement. 
 In fact, at the conference ofthe three organisations, the Union Abroad proposed “amend-ments” to the above-mentioned resolutions, which clearlyshowed that it was reverting to its previous deviations. 
The other organisations felt obliged to leave the conference, and in fact did so. 
 Apparently, our comrades of the Union Abroad are not yet sufficiently aware of the danger of theintermediary position their organisation occupies betweenrevolutionary socialism and the opportunism that playsinto the hands of the liberals. 
 We hope that time and bitterexperience will convince them of the error of their tactics. 
 The effort observed throughout the Party, not only to work for the expansion of our movement, but also to raise itsqualitative level, is the best guarantee that the much-desired unification of all our forces will be accomplishedunder the banner of revolutionary Social-Democracy, whichour paper serves. 
 Iskra , No. 
 9, October 1901 Published according to the Iskra text PENAL SERVITUDE REGULATIONS AND PENAL SERVITUDE SENTENCES Once again “provisional regulations”! This time, however, it is not disobedient students that are affected, but peasants who are guilty of starving. 
 On September 15, the “Provisional Regulations Gov-erning the Participation of the Population in the Famine-Affected Areas in the Works Undertaken by Order of theDepartments of Railways, Agriculture, and State Property”received the Imperial sanction and were immediately pro-mulgated. 
 When the Russian peasant becomes acquainted with these regulations (not from the newspapers, of course,but from personal experience), he will obtain further con-firmation of the truth knocked into him during centuriesof enslavement to the landlords and the officials: when theofficials solemnly declare that the peasant “is to be allowed to participate” in any large or small affair, either in paying redemption money for the landlords’ land, or in publicworks organised in connection with the famine, some newEgyptian plague must be expected. 
 In actuality, the entire contents of the Provisional Reg-ulations of September 15 give the impression of being a new penal law, a supplementary regulation to the Penal Code. 
 In the first place, the very organisation and man-agement of the works are hemmed in with as much profound“caution” and as many bureaucratic complications as ifrebels or convicts, rather than famine-stricken peasants,were being dealt with. 
 One would imagine that the organi-sation of public works was the simplest thing in the world: all that is required is that the Zemstvos and other insti-tutions be provided with funds and employ workers to build roads, clear forests, etc. 
 Under ordinary circum-stances, this is how such works are carried out. 
 Now, however, a new system is introduced. 
 The rural superintendent sug-gests what kind of work is to be done, the governor giveshis opinion, which is transmitted to the special “Confer-ence on Food Affairs” in St. 
 Petersburg, composed of repre-sentatives of various government departments, under thechairmanship of the Deputy Minister of the Interior. 
 More-over, the general management of this work is vested in the Minister, who may appoint special representatives to acton his behalf. 
 The St. 
 Petersburg Committee will even fixthe maximum pay for the workers, which, no doubt, meansthat it will see to it that the peasant is not “corrupted”by excessive pay! Apparently, the object of the Provision-al Regulations of September 15 is to hinder public works on a large scale, precisely as the Sipyagin circular of August17 hindered relief to the famine-stricken. 
 But still more important and more vicious are the special regulations governing the engagement of peasants for pub-lic works. 
 If the work is carried on “away from their place of res-idence” (which naturally affects the overwhelming major-ity of cases), the workmen must form special artels under the surveillance of the rural superintendent , who is to approve the overseer responsible for maintaining order. 
 Starvingpeasants must not dare to elect their overseer themselves, as workmen usually do. 
 They are placed under the command of the rural superintendent armed with the birch! Thenames of the members of artels are to be entered in a speciallist, which takes the place of the legal residence permit .... 
 Instead of individual passports, therefore, there will be listsof artel members. 
 The purpose of the change? To restrict the peasant; for, with his own passport, he could make bet-ter arrangements for himself in the new place, or leave thework more easily upon being dissatisfied. 
 Further, “the maintenance of order en route and the deliv-ery of consignments of workmen to the work managersare entrusted to officials specially appointed by the Ministry of the Interior”. 
 Free workmen are given travelling allow-ances; serfs are “shipped” in listed consignments and “delivered” to special officials. 
 Are not the peasants right in regarding “public” and state work as a new form of serf-dom? Indeed, the law of September 15 reduces the starving peasants to a position close to that of serfs, not only be-cause it deprives them of the freedom of movement. 
 Thelaw gives the officials the right to deduct part of their wages to be sent to the workmen’s families “if the gubernia author-ities in the district where their families reside” consider it necessary. 
 The money the workmen earn is to be disposed of without their consent. 
 The peasant is stupid; he cannotlook after his family himself. 
 The authorities can do thatfar better. 
 Who indeed has not heard how well they caredfor the peasant families in the military settlements 104? One thing stands in the way, however. 
 The peasants are no longer so submissive as they were at the time of the military settlements. 
 They may demand ordinary passportsand protest against deductions from their wages without theirconsent! Hence, it is necessary to resort to greater strin-gency, and so a special clause provides that “the preservationof order among the workers in the places of work is entrusted by the order of the Ministry of the Interior, to the local ru-ral superintendents, the officers of the special corps of gen-darmerie, police officials, or persons specially appointedfor the purpose”. 
 Apparently, the government a priori regards the starving peasants as “rebels”, and, in additionto the general surveillance conducted by the entire Russian police force, to which all Russian workers are subjected, it establishes an especially strict surveillance. 
 It is decidedbeforehand to treat the peasants with an iron hand for hav-ing dared to “exaggerate” the famine and for putting for-ward (as Sipyagin expressed himself in his circular) “totallyunjustified demands on the government”. 
 To avoid having dealings with the courts in the event of any expression of discontent by the workmen, the Provi-sional Regulations empower the officials to place workmenunder arrest for a period not exceeding three days without trial for disturbing the peace, for failing to work conscien-tiously, and for failing to obey orders. 
 A free workman must be brought before a magistrate before whom he may defend himself, and against whose sentence he may appeal; but astarving peasant may be imprisoned without trial! The only penalty that can be inflicted upon a free working man for refusing to work is dismissal, but according to the new law, “for persistent refusal to work” the peasant may be sent back to his home under escort , together with thieves and bandits! The new Provisional Regulations are in fact penal servit-ude regulations for the famine-stricken, regulations thatsentence them to hard labour and deprivation of rights forhaving dared to importune the officials with requests for aid. 
 The government has not been satisfied with depriving the Zemstvos of jurisdiction over food distribution, with pro-hibiting private persons from organising food-kitchenswithout the permission of the police, and with orderingreal needs to be reduced to one-fifth; it also declares thepeasant to be without rights and orders him to be punished without trial. 
 To the constant penal servitude of a starving existence and overwork is now added the threat of penalservitude on public works. 
 These are the measures taken by the government with respect to the peasants. 
 As for the workers, the punishmentmeted out to them is more strikingly described in the “In-dictment”, which appeared in our last issue, in connection with the unrest at the Obukhov Works in May. 
 Iskra dealt with these events in its June and July issues. 
 The legalpress was silent about the trial, probably remembering howeven the most loyal Novoye Vremya “suffered” for attempting to write on this subject. 
 A few lines appeared in the press to the effect that the trial had taken place at the end of September; subsequently one of the southern newspaperscasually reported the verdict: two were sentenced to penal servitude , eight were acquitted, the rest were sentenced to imprisonment and detention in houses of correction for termsranging from two to three and a half years. 
 Thus, in the article, “Another Massacre” ( Iskra , No. 
 5), * we underestimated the vindictiveness of the Russian Gov-ernment. 
 We believed that in the struggle it had recourseto military reprisals as a last resort, fearing to appeal tothe courts. 
 It turns out, however, that it managed to combineone with the other: after assaulting the crowd and killing *See present volume, pp. 
 25-30. 
— Ed. 
 three workers, thirty-seven men out of several thousand were seized and sentenced to Draconic punishments. 
 From the indictment we are able to judge to some extent the manner in which they were seized and tried. 
 AntonIvanovich Yermakov, Yephraim Stepanovich Dakhin, andAnton Ivanovich Gavrilov are charged with being theringleaders. 
 The indictment states that Yermakov had leaf-lets at his house (according to the evidence of Mikhailova, an assistant in a government liquor shop, who , however , was not called upon to testify at the trial ), that he talked about the struggle for political liberty, and that on April22 he went to Nevsky Prospekt with a red flag. 
 Further itis stressed that Gavrilov, too, possessed and distributedleaflets calling for a demonstration on April 22. 
 In regard to the accused Yakovleva, the charge is likewise that she participated in certain secret gatherings. 
 It is clear, there-fore, that the prosecutor sought to single out as ringleadersthose whom the secret police suspected of being politicallyactive workers. 
 The political character of the case is appar-ent also from the fact that the crowd shouted, “We want liberty!” and from the connection with the First of May. 
 It should be said in passing that it was the dismissal oftwenty-six men for “losing time” on the First of May that setoff the conflagration; but the prosecutor, of course, said nota word about the illegality of the dismissals! The case is clear. 
 Those suspected of being political ene-mies were made to stand trial. 
 The secret police submitted the list. 
 And the police “confirmed”, of course, that thesepersons had been in the crowd, thrown stones, and stoodout among the rest. 
 The trial was used as a shameful cloak for the second act of political vengeance (following the massacre). 
 Politics were mentioned in order to make the case appear more se-rious, but no explanation of the political circumstancesconnected with the case was allowed. 
 The men were triedas criminals, according to Article 263 of the Criminal Code,viz. 
, on the charge of “overt rebellion against the authori-ties appointed by the government”, rebellion, moreover, by armed persons (?). 
 The charge was a frame-up . 
 The police had instructed the judges to examine only one sideof the case. 
 We wish to point out that according to Articles 263-265 of the Code, a sentence of penal servitude may be imposed for participation in a demonstration of any kind: for “overt rebellion for the purpose of preventing the execution ofthe orders and measures prescribed by the government”,even if the “rebels” were not armed, and even if they didnot commit any overt act of violence! Russian laws mete outsentences of penal servitude with a free hand. 
 It is time we saw to it that every such trial is converted into a political trial by the accused themselves, so that the governmentshall not dare in the future to conceal its political vindic-tiveness by the farce of a criminal trial! Yet what “progress”, indeed, is to be observed in the ad-ministration of justice as compared, for example, with 1885! Then the weavers in the Morozov mills 105 were tried before a judge and a jury, full reports of the trial appearedin the press, and at the trial workers came forward aswitnesses and exposed the outrageous conduct of the employ-er. 
 But now—a court consisting of officials sitting withrepresentatives of the social-estates without an opinion of their own, a trial behind closed doors, dumb silence on the part of the press, hand-picked witnesses: factory officials;watchmen; policemen, who have beaten the people; soldiers,who have shot down the workers. 
 What a despicable farce! If we compare the “progress” made in the reprisals against the workers between the years 1885 and 1901 with the “prog-ress” made in the struggle against the famine-stricken be-tween the years 1891 and 1901, we obtain some idea of therapid spread of popular indignation in extent and in depth,and of the rising fury of the government, which is “clamp-ing down” on both private philanthropists and the peasants,and is terrorising the workers with penal servitude. 
 But threats of penal servitude will not terrify workers whose leaders showed no fear of death in open street battleswith the myrmidons of the tsar. 
 The memory of ourheroic comrades murdered and tortured to death in prisonwill increase tenfold the strength of the new fighters andwill rouse thousands to rally to their aid, and like the eighteen-year-old Marfa Yakovleva, they will openly say: “We stand by our brothers!” In addition to reprisals by thepolice and the military against participants in demonstra-tions, the government intends to prosecute them for rebel-lion; we will retaliate by uniting our revolutionary forces and winning over to our side all who are oppressed by the tyranny of tsarism, and by systematically preparing forthe uprising of the whole people! Iskra , No. 
 10, November 1901 Published according to the Iskra text REVIEW OF HOME AFFAIRS Written in October 1901 First published in December 1901 , in Zarya, No. 
 2-3 Signed: T. 
 Kh. 
Published according to the Zarya text /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR I. 
 FAMINE106 Again famine! The last ten years have been marked, not only by the ruin of the peasantry, but by its veritable ex-tinction, which has proceeded with such an astonishing rapidity that no war, however prolonged and bitter, has claimed such a host of victims. 
 The most powerful forces ofmodern times are massed against the peasant: world capi-talism, which is developing at an ever increasing rate, hascreated transoceanic competition, and has provided the smallminority of farmers able to hold out in the desperate strug-gle for survival with the most improved methods and imple-ments of production; and the militarist state, whose adven-turous policy in its colonial possessions in the Far East andCentral Asia involves enormous costs heavily burdening themasses of working people, the state which, in addition, isorganising at the people’s expense ever newer “suppression” and “restraints” to counteract the growing discontent and indignation of the masses. 
 Since famine has become a usual phenomenon in our country, it would be natural to expect that the governmentwould try to fix and strengthen its usual food distributionpolicy. 
 While in 1891-92 the government was caught unawares and was at first thrown into consternation, now, however, it is rich in experience and knows precisely where (and how)to proceed. 
 In its July issue (No. 
 6), Iskra wrote: “At this moment a black cloud of people’s distress is threatening ourcountry and the government is once again making prepara-tions for the exercise of its disgraceful function of brute vio-lence to deprive the starving people of bread and punish everyone who, contrary to government policy, rendersaid to the hungry. 
” The government’s preparations were swift and determined. 
 The spirit in which they were made is illustrated by the Elizavetgrad affair. 
 Prince Obolensky, Governor of Kher-son Gubernia, immediately declared war upon all who daredto write or speak about the famine in Elizavetgrad, appealfor public aid for the famine-stricken, form private groups,and invite private persons to organise this aid. 
 The Zemstvodoctors wrote to the newspapers stating that famine was rag-ing in the uyezd, that the people were disease-stricken and were dying, and that the “bread” they were eating wassomething unbelievable, not deserving to be called bread. 
The governor launched a polemic against the doctors and pub-lished official denials. 
 Anyone at all acquainted with thegeneral conditions under which our press has to work, anyone who will take the trouble to recall the severe persecution to which even moderate organs and incomparably more moderateauthors have been subjected recently, will understand thesignificance of this “polemic” between the head of a guberniaand mere Zemstvo doctors who are not even in governmentservice. 
 It was simply an act of gagging them, an outright declaration without any ceremony that the government would not tolerate the truth about the famine. 
 But what isa mere declaration? Whatever may be said of others, theRussian Government certainly cannot be reproached withrestricting itself to mere declarations when the opportunityexists to “apply power”. 
 And Prince Obolensky hastened to apply power; he appeared personally on the scene of war— war upon the famine-stricken and upon those who, thoughnot on the pay roll of any department, desired to renderreal aid to the famine-stricken; and he prohibited a number of private persons (including Madame Uspenskaya), who hadcome to the famine-stricken area, from opening food-kitchens . 
 Like Julius Caesar, Prince Obolensky came, saw, and con-quered; and the telegraph promptly informed the entireRussian reading public of his victory. 
 One thing is perplex-ing—that this victory, this brazen challenge to all Russianswho have retained at least a shred of decency, a grain ofcivic courage, met with no opposition whatever from those who, one may say, were most interested in the matter. 
 Very many persons in Kherson Gubernia doubtless knew—andknow now—the reason for the silence about the famine and the fight against famine relief; but no one has published a single statement on this instructive case, or the relevant documents, or even a simple appeal to protest against the monstrous prohibition of food-kitchens. 
 When the govern-ment carries out its threat to dismiss all who “lost time”on the First of May, the workers declare a strike; but the in-telligentsia keeps silent when intellectuals are prohibited ...from rendering aid to the famine-stricken. 
 Encouraged, as it were, by success in the first skirmish with the “sowers of discord” who dare to aid the famine-stricken,the government soon launched an attack all along the line. 
Prince Obolensky’s valiant exploit was elevated to a guidingprinciple, into a law, which would henceforth regulate therelations between all administrators and all persons accesso-ry to the distribution of food (the word “accessory”, strictly speaking, is a term in criminal law peculiar to the PenalCode; but as we have seen and shall see below, at the presenttime rendering aid to the famine-stricken without authorityis regarded as a crime). 
 Such a law was soon enacted—this time in the simplified form of “a circular from the Min-ister of the Interior to all governors of gubernias affected by the harvest failure of 1901” (August 17, 1901, No. 
 20). 
 It may be assumed that this circular will serve for many years to come as a souvenir of the monumental heights towhich police fear rises in the face of the people’s distress,a fear of closer ties between the famine-stricken people and the “intellectuals” who desire to help them; at the same time, it is a fear that reveals a firm intention to suppressall “clamour” about the famine and to restrict relief to themost insignificant scope. 
 One can only regret that the immod-erate length of the circular and the ponderous official stylein which it is written will hinder the public at large from becoming acquainted with its contents. 
 It will be remembered that the law of June 12, 1900, took the management of food affairs out of the hands of theZemstvos and transferred it to the rural superintendentsand uyezd congresses. 
 What, it seemed, could be more reli-able? The elective principle was eliminated; persons in any way independent of the authorities would have no ju-risdiction and consequently would make no more noise. 
 Butafter Prince Obolensky’s campaign, all this appeared to be inadequate. 
 The whole business must be more strictly subor-dinated to the Ministry and to the officials directly carrying out its orders; the slightest possibility of exaggeration must be definitely removed. 
 For that reason, the questionas to which uyezds are “affected by the harvest failure”is from now on to be decided exclusively by the Ministry, * which apparently is to serve as the headquarters for the general staff for conducting military operations against the famine-stricken. 
 Through the medium of the governors, these headquarters will direct the activities of the individuals(principally the uyezd marshals of the nobility) in whosehands the Central Uyezd Food Board is concentrated. 
 Theinitiator of military operations against the famine-stricken,Prince Obolensky, was obliged to travel personally to the district in order to prohibit, restrain, and curtail. 
 Now, everything is “regulated”, and all that is necessary is anexchange of telegrams (possible, thanks to the grant of athousand rubles per uyezd for office expenses) between theCentral Uyezd Board and the St. 
 Petersburg Central Boardfor the necessary “orders” to be given. 
 Turgenev’s civilised landlord not only kept away from the stables, but even gave orders in subdued tones to a liveried footman in whitegloves: “See that Fyodor gets it.... 
” 107 So it will be here now; “orders” will be given, “without clamour”, nicely andquietly, to restrain the immoderate appetites of the starvingpopulation. 
 The fact that Mr. 
 Sipyagin is convinced that the appe-tite of the starving peasant is immoderate becomes evident, *The manner in which the Ministry decides this question can be judged from the example of Perm Gubernia. 
 According to the lat-est press reports, this gubernia is still regarded as having “a goodharvest”, notwithstanding the fact that (according to the report ofthe extraordinary gubernia Zemstvo congress held on October 10)the harvest this year is even worse than the extremely poor harvest of 1898. 
 The yield this year represents only 58 per cent of the average, and in the Shadrinsk and Irbit uyezds is only 36 per cent and 34 percent respectively. 
 In 1898 the government granted the gubernia (inaddition to local grants) 1,500,000 poods of grain and over 250,000 ru-bles in money. 
 Now, however, the Zemstvos have no funds, they arerestricted in their powers, the harvest is far worse than that of 1898, the price of grain began to rise as from July 1 , the peasants have be-gun selling their cattle —and the government persists in declaring that the gubernia has “a good harvest”!! not only from the persistent warnings in the circular against “exaggeration”, but from the new regulations it lays down which remove all possibility of exaggeration. 
 Do not be ina hurry to draw up the lists of the distressed, for this will arouse among the population “exaggerated hopes”, the Min-ister states explicitly, and orders that the lists be drawnup only immediately before grain is to be distributed. 
 Fur-thermore, the circular regards it as superfluous to determine when an uyezd should be considered a distressed area; but it distinctly states when an uyezd should not be considered a distressed area (e. 
g. 
, when not more than one-third of the volosts are affected, when usual auxiliary employment isavailable, etc. 
). 
 Finally, in regard to the rate of relief to be granted to the famine-stricken, the Minister introduces reg-ulations which show with extreme clarity that the govern-ment desires at all costs to cut down these grants to the very minimum, to mere doles that do nothing to secure the popu-lation against starvation. 
 In point of fact, the quota is forty-eight poods of grain per family (calculated on the average yield of the harvest in each village), and those who possess that amount or more are not in need. 
 How this figure wasarrived at, no one knows. 
 All that is known is that in non-famine years even the poorest peasant consumes twice as much grain (cf. 
 Zemstvo Statistical Investigation of Peas-ants’ Budgets). 
 Consequently, undernourishment is con-sidered a normal state according to the Minister’s prescript. 
 But even this quota is reduced, first by half, in order to pre-vent the working elements, which represent about fifty per cent of the population, from obtaining loans, and then b y one-third, one-fifth, and one-tenth, “in proportion to theapproximate number of well-to-do farmers having stocks left over from last year, or any other [literally so: “or any other”!] material resources”. 
 One can judge from this whatan insignificant fraction of the amount of grain actually required by the population will be represented by the loan the government intends to grant. 
 And, as if rejoicing in hisinsolence, Mr. 
 Sipyagin, in explaining this incredible system of curtailing relief, declares that such an approximate com-putation “has rarely been found to be greatly exaggerated”. 
Comment is superfluous. 
 Whenever official declarations of the Russian Govern-ment contain something more than bare instructions and make at least some attempt to explain them, they almost invariably—it is a kind of law more stable than the major-ity of our laws—advance two principal motives or rathertwo principal types of motives. 
 On the one hand, we invar-iably find a number of general phrases, written in pompousstyle, about official solicitude and a desire to meet the require-ments of the time and the wishes of public opinion. 
 Thus, reference is made to the “important task of averting a foodshortage among the rural population”, to the “moral re-sponsibility for the welfare of the local population”, etc. 
It goes without saying that these commonplaces signifynothing and impose no definite obligation; but they are as alike as two peas to the immortal sermons delivered by the immortal Judas Golovlyov to the peasants he had robbed. 
Parenthetically it should be said, these commonplaces areconstantly exploited (sometimes out of simple-mindednessand sometimes as a “duty”) by the censored liberal presswhereby to demonstrate that the government shares its point of view. 
 But if the other, less general and less obviously hollow motives of the government’s orders are examined more clos-ly, concrete statements will always be found which repeat in toto the established arguments of the most reactionary organs of our press (e. 
g. 
, Moskovskiye Vedomosti ). 
 We are of the opinion that it would be well worth while (and quite possible even for those who work legally) to follow up andrecord every case of this solidarity between the governmentand Moskovskiye Vedomosti . 
 In the circular under discus-sion, for example, we find a repetition of the vile accusationslevelled by the terribly “wild landlords” to the effect that the premature compilation of lists of the distressed stimulates “efforts among certain well-to-do householdersto give their farms an appearance of poverty by selling theirsupplies, reserves, and implements”. 
 The Minister states thatthis “has been proved by experience in the course of previousfood campaigns”. 
 Consequently? Consequently, the Minister acquires his political experience from the lessons taught him by the most hidebound serf-owners, who raised such aclamour in previous famine years, who are clamouring now about the deceit of the peasants, and who are so indignant over the “noise” that is being raised about the epidemic of famine typhus. 
 It was from these serf-owners also that Mr. 
 Sipyagin learned to talk about demoralisation. 
 “It is extremely impor-tant,” he writes, “for ... the local institutions ... to helpeconomise the allocated funds and, above all [ sic!!], prevent the unjustified grants of government relief to persons who are materially secure, because of the harmful and demor-alising effect of such grants. 
” This shameless instruction tohelp economise the funds is sealed by the following advicebased on a point of principle: “... wide distribution of food grants to families that can dispense with them [that cansubsist on twenty-four poods of grain a year per family?], apart from being an unproductive [!] expenditure of state funds, will be no less harmful from the standpoint of thebenefits and requirements of the state than if those reallyin distress were left without proper aid. 
” In bygone times,monarchs would in their sentimental moments say. 
 “Itis better to acquit ten criminals than to convict one inno-cent man”; but nowadays the right arm of the tsar declares: It is as harmful to give relief to families that can manageon twenty-four poods of grain a year as to leave families“really” in need without relief. 
 What a pity that this magnif-icently candid “point of view” regarding “the benefits andrequirements of the state” is obscured from the eyes of the general public by a lengthy and dull circular! One hope is left: perhaps the Social-Democratic press and Social-Demo-cratic oral agitation will enable the people to become moreclosely acquainted with the contents of the ministerialcircular. 
 * * * But the circular directs an especially vigorous “attack” upon private philanthropists. 
 Everything indicates thatthe administrators, who are waging war against the famine-stricken, consider the most important “enemy” position tobe private relief circles, private food-kitchens, etc. 
 With laudable frankness Mr. 
 Sipyagin explains why private phi-lanthropy has for a long time now given the Ministry ofthe Interior sleepless nights. 
 “Beginning with the poor harvest of 1891 and 1892, and during all subsequent calamities of a similar kind,” says the circular, “it has not infrequently been found that certain philanthropists, while rendering material aid to the inhabitants of the affected districts,strive to rouse among them discontent with the presentsystem and encourage the people to make totally unjustifieddemands on the government. 
 At the same time, the failureto meet the distress to the full, and the inevitable ailments and economic disorders that arise therefrom, create an ex-tremely favourable soil for anti-government agitation;politically unreliable persons freely take advantage of thisand pursue their criminal aims under the cloak of helpingtheir neighbour. 
 Usually, as soon as the first news of a seriousharvest failure is received, persons with a political past that is not irreproachable pour into the affected districts from all directions, strive to make contact with representa-tives of charitable organisations and institutions from thecapital, who, through ignorance, engage those persons aslocal helpers and in this way create serious difficulties inim-ical to the interests of good order and administration. 
” However, the Russian Government is becoming hard pressed in the land of Russia. 
 Time was when only the studentyouth was considered as a stratum calling for special secu-rity measures. 
 The students were subjected to the strictestsurveillance, contact with them on the part of persons whosepolitical past is not irreproachable was regarded as a great offence, every study circle and society, even if it pursued purely philanthropic aims, was suspected of anti-governmentaims, etc. 
 In those times—not far in the past—there wasno other stratum , to say nothing of a social class, that in the eyes of the government, represented “an extremely fa-vourable soil for anti-government agitation”. 
 But since the middle nineties, one meets in official government communications mention of another, immeasurably morenumerous, social class that calls for special security mea-ures—the factory workers. 
 The growth of the labour move-ment compelled the government to establish a full-fledgedsystem of institutions to maintain surveillance over this new stormy element. 
 Among the districts prohibited as places of residence for politically doubtful persons wereincluded factory centres and settlements, uyezds and whole gubernias, in addition to the capitals and university cities. 
 * Two-thirds of European Russia came under special protection against unreliable elements, while the remaining third is becoming so crowded with “persons whose politicalpast is not irreproachable” that even the remotest provinceis becoming restless. 
 ** It now appears that according to the authoritative judgement of so competent a person asthe Minister of the Interior even the remotest village repre-sents “favourable soil” for anti-government agitation, in-sofar as there occur in it cases of not fully relieved distress,of sickness, and of economic disorder. 
 And are there manyRussian villages in which such “cases” are not constant?And should not we Russian Social-Democrats immediatelytake advantage of Mr. 
 Sipyagin’s instructive reference to “favourable” soil? On the one hand, precisely at this moment, the rural districts are displaying interest in the rumourswhich at times have managed to penetrate to them in oneway or another about the skirmishes that occurred betweenthe government’s gendarmes and the urban proletariat andthe young intelligentsia in February and March. 
 On the other hand, do not phrases like the peasant’s “totally unjustified demands”, etc. 
, provide a sufficiently wideprogramme for the most extensive, all-round agitation? We must take advantage of Mr. 
 Sipyagin’s useful infor-mation and laugh at his simplicity. 
 It is indeed the sheerestnaïveté to imagine that by placing private charity under the supervision and control of the governor he can hinder the spread of the influence of “unreliable” persons in therural districts. 
 Genuine philanthropists have never pursuedpolitical aims, so that the new measures of prohibition andrestriction will mostly affect the very persons who are leastdangerous to the government. 
 Those, however, who desire to *See, for instance, the secret circular published in Iskra , No. 
 6, on the people banished from St. 
 Petersburg, mostly writers, many of whom had never been involved in political affairs of any kind, letalone “labour” affairs. 
 Nevertheless, they have been denied domicile,not only in university cities, but also in “factory localities”, whilefor some the prohibition relates only to factory localities. 
 **See, for example, the correspondence in Iskra , Nos. 
 6 and 7, in which it is reported that public unrest and aid to the peasants in despite of the government had penetrated even into such God-guardedcities as Penza, Simferopol, Kursk, etc. 
 open the eyes of the peasants to the real significance of these measures, and to the government’s attitude towards the famine, will not consider it necessary to establish con-tact with representatives of the Red Cross or present them-selves to the governors. 
 Thus, when it was found that thefactory environment represented “favourable soil”, thosewho desired to establish contact with that environmentdid not visit the factory managers for information about factory conditions or present themselves to the factory in-spectors for permission to organise meetings with the work-ers. 
 We are fully aware, of course, that it is extremelydifficult to carry on political agitation among the peas-antry, the more so since it is impossible and irrational towithdraw revolutionary forces from the cities for that pur-pose. 
 Yet we must not lose sight of the fact that the govern-ment’s heroic deeds, such as restricting private charity,remove a good half of these difficulties and do half our workfor us. 
 * * * We shall not dwell on the same Minister’s circular call-ing for stricter surveillance over charitable concerts,theatrical performances, etc. 
; for that is a “mere bagatelle”,as compared with the circular we have just examined (cf. 
article “Fresh Obstacles”, Iskra , No. 
 9). 
 We will endeavour to establish the relation that exists now between the government relief for the population, fixed and distributed according to the new regulations,and the actual extent of the distress. 
 True, our informationon this point is exceedingly scanty. 
 The press now isthoroughly muzzled, the voices of private organisers offood-kitchens have been silenced simultaneously with the “prohibition” of their activities, and the only sources of information available to the Russian public, now struckdumb by the new stringent measures, are the official policereports on the favourable progress of the food campaign,the articles written in the same spirit in Moskovskiye Vedomosti , sometimes the interviews of an idle reporter with this or that Jack-in-office pompously expatiating on “His Excellency’s singleness of mind and His Excellency’s sin-gleness of authority, etc. 
”. 
 108 Thus, Novoye Vremya , No. 
 9195, reports that the Governor of Saratov, A. 
 P. 
 Engelhardt (formerly Governor of Archangel), gave an interview to a representative of a local newspaper, in the course of which he said that he had personally convened in that localitya conference of marshals of the nobility, of representativesof the Zemstvo Boards, of the rural superintendents, and ofrepresentatives of the Red Cross, at which he had “distrib-uted tasks”. 
 “Scurvy, in the form I have seen it in Archangel Guber-nia, is not to be found here [said A. 
 P. 
 Engelhardt]. 
 InArchangel, one cannot approach within five paces of a pa-tient; there the disease is really a form of ‘rot’. 
 Here we see mostly the effects of severe anaemia, which resultsfrom the awful conditions of domestic life. 
 Almost the only symptoms of scurvy observed here are white lips and white gums.... 
 With proper nutrition such patients recover withina week. 
 Food is now being distributed. 
 About one thousandrations are being distributed daily, although not morethan four hundred cases of acute distress have been registered. 
 “Besides scurvy, only three cases of typhus have been reported in the whole district. 
 We may hope that things will not get worse, for everywhere public works have beenorganised and the population is assured of employment. 
” What prosperity! In the whole of Khvalynsk Uyezd (to which the Jack-in-office refers) there are only four hundredpersons in acute distress (in all probability the rest, in Mr. 
 Sipyagin’s and Mr. 
 Engelhardt’s opinion, “can manage well” on twenty-four poods of grain per family per annum!),the population is provided for, and the sick recover withina week. 
 After this, how can we not believe Moskovskiye Vedomosti when, in a special leading article (in No. 
 258), it informs us that “according to the latest reports, in twelve gubernias affected by the harvest failure the administration is very actively organising relief . 
 Many uyezds have already been investigated for the purpose of ascertaining whetherthere is a shortage of food; uyezd managers of food-affairs have been appointed , etc. 
 Apparently, official representa-tives of the government are doing everything possible to render timely and adequate aid. 
” “... very actively organising”, and ... “not more than four hundred cases of acute distress have been registered”.... 
 In Khvalynsk Uyezd there are 165,000 rural inhabitants, and one thousand rations are being distributed. 
 The yield of rye in the whole of the south-eastern area (including Sa-ratov Gubernia) this year was 34 per cent below average. 
Of the total area of peasant lands planted to crops in SaratovGubernia (1,500,000 dessiatines), 15 per cent suffered acomplete failure of the harvest (according to the report ofthe gubernia Zemstvo Board) and 75 per cent suffered a poor harvest, while Khvalynsk and Kamyshin uyezds are the two worst affected uyezds in the gubernia. 
 Consequent-ly, the total amount of grain gathered in by the peasantsin Khvalynsk Uyezd is at least 30 per cent below average. 
Let us assume that half of this shortage affects the well-to-dopeasantry, which is not yet reduced thereby to starvation (a very risky assumption, since the well-to-do peasant pos-sesses better land and cultivates it better, so that he alwayssuffers less from a bad harvest than do the poor peasants). 
But even on this assumption, the number of the starvingmust be something like 15 per cent, or about 25,000. 
 Yetwe are offered the consolation that scurvy in Khvalynsk is not nearly so bad as it is in Archangel, that there were only three cases of typhus (if only they would lie more clev-erly!), and that one thousand rations are being distrib-uted (the size of which is in all probability determinedby Sipyagin’s system of combating exaggerations). 
 With respect to the “subsidiary earnings”, which, to avoid exaggeration, Mr. 
 Sipyagin thrice takes into account in his circular (once, when he orders that uyezds in which subsid-iary earnings are usual shall not be regarded as affectedareas; a second time when he orders that the forty-eightpoods scale be reduced by half because 50 per cent of theworking population “must” be earning wages; and a third time when he orders this scale to be further reduced by amounts ranging from one-third to one-tenth according tolocal conditions)—with respect to these subsidiary earnings,not only agricultural but even non-agricultural earnings havediminished in Saratov Gubernia. 
 “The harvest failure,” weread in the above-mentioned Zemstvo Board report, “has also affected the handicraftsmen, due to the drop in the sales of their manufactures. 
 Owing to these circumstances, a crisis is observed in the uyezds in which handicrafts are most highly developed. 
” Among these is Kamyshin Uyezd, which has suffered most, and in which many thousands of poor people are engaged in weaving the celebrated local striped calico (sarpinka ). 
 Even in normal years conditions in the handi-craft industry of this remote rural district were woeful; six-and seven-year-old children, for example, were employedat a wage of seven or eight kopeks a day. 
 We can picture toourselves what conditions are like there in a year of severe harvest failure and acute crisis in the handicraft industry. 
 In Saratov Gubernia (and in all affected gubernias, of course), the poor grain harvest is accompanied also by ashortage of fodder. 
 The past few months (i. 
e. 
, in the secondhalf of the summer!) have seen the spread of various cattlediseases and an increase in cattle mortality. 
 “According to a report of the veterinary surgeon in Khvalynsk Uyezd [we quote from the newspaper that contained the above-mentioned Zemstvo Board report], an examination of thecontents of the stomachs of the dead cattle revealed nothingbut earth. 
” The “Report of the Zemstvo Department of the Ministry of the Interior” on the progress of the food campaign con-tained, incidentally, the statement that of the uyezds recog-nised as affected areas “in Khvalynsk alone a number ofcases of epidemic scurvy have been discovered in two vil-lages since July. 
 The local medical staff is exerting all itsefforts to stop the epidemic and two Red Cross detachments have been sent to the district to assist the local forces. 
 Ac-cording to the report of the governor [the very A. 
 P. 
 Engel-hardt, whose acquaintance we have made], their effortsare meeting with considerable success; according to reportsreceived by the Ministry up to September 12, in none ofthe other affected uyezds were there any cases of acute dis-tress left without relief, and no development of disease as a consequence of inadequate nutrition is observed. 
” To show what confidence may be placed in the statement that no cases of acute distress were left unrelieved (were there cases of chronic distress?) and that the development of disease is not observed, we shall confine ourselves to com-paring data on two other gubernias. 
 In Ufa Gubernia, Menzelinsk and Belebeyev uyezds were declared to be affected areas, and the Zemstvo Depart-ment of the Ministry of the Interior reports that “according to the governor’s statement” the amount of the government grant required “specifically for food” is 800,000 poods. 
 However, a special meeting of the Ufa Gubernia ZemstvoAssembly held on August 27 to discuss the question ofrendering relief to the famine-stricken estimated foodrequirements of those uyezds at 2,200,000 poods of grain,1,000,000 poods for the other uyezds, not including grants of seed-grain (3,200,000 poods for the entire gubernia) and cat-tle fodder (600,000 poods). 
 Consequently, the Ministry fixedthe grant at one-fourth the amount fixed by the Zemstvo. 
 Another instance. 
 In Vyatka Gubernia none of the uyezds was declared affected areas at the time when the Zemstvodepartment issued its report; nevertheless, the food grant was fixed by that body at 782,000 poods. 
 This is the figure which, by press reports, was fixed by the Vyatka GuberniaFood Department at its meeting of August 28 (in accord-ance with the decisions of the Uyezd Assemblies held be-tween August 18 and 25). 
 Approximately on August 12 , these very Assemblies had fixed a different amount for the grant, viz. 
, 1,100,000 poods for food and 1,400,000 poods for seed. 
 Why this difference? What happened between Au-gust 12 and 28? The answer is, Sipyagin’s circular of August17 on fighting the famine-stricken had been published. 
 Con-sequently, the circular had an immediate effect, and thetrifling amount of 230,000 poods of grain was struck out of the estimate, drawn up, mark you, by the Uyezd Assemblies, i. 
e. 
, by the very institutions which, by the law of June 12,1900, were established in place of the unreliable Zemstvos,institutions composed of officials generally and of ruralsuperintendents in particular.... 
 Shall we really live to seethe day when even the rural superintendents will be ac-cused of liberalism? Perhaps we shall. 
 Recently we read in Moskovskiye Vedomosti the following reprimand inflicted on a certain Mr. 
 Om. 
, who, in Priazovsky Krai 109 had dared to propose that the newspapers publish the minutes of themeetings of the Gubernia Boards for Urban Affairs (sincepress representatives were not permitted to attend them): “The purpose is all too transparent: the Russian civil servant frequently suffers from a fear of appearing illiberal , and publicity may compel him, at times even against his own conscience, to support some fantastically liberal scheme proposed by the city or the Zemstvo. 
 By no means an altogether false calculation. 
” Should not the Vyatka rural superintendents, who (ap-parently out of fear of appearing illiberal) have revealedsuch unpardonable frivolity in “exaggerating” the foodcrisis, be placed under special surveillance? * Incidentally, if the wise Russian Government had not withdrawn from it jurisdiction over food affairs, the “fan-tastically liberal” Vyatka Zemstvo would have gone evenfurther in its estimate of the distress. 
 At all events, theSpecial Gubernia Conference, held from August 30 to Sep-tember 2, declared the amount of grain harvested to be 17per cent, and the amount of cattle fodder 15 per cent, below *Another instance of the manner in which the Governor of Vyatka combats exaggerations: “In an ‘announcement’ sent out to the Volost Boards the Gover-nor of Vyatka records a very cautious attitude on the part of the peasants towards food grants from the government and the Zemstvo. 
 ‘During my tour of the gubernia,’ writes Mr. 
 Klingenberg, ‘I sawfor myself with what deliberation and caution the peasants act in thepresent circumstances. 
 They hesitate to contract debts except underpressure of extreme necessity and are firmly resolved to wait patientlyfor God’s help in the year to come, striving by their own efforts to extricate themselves from their difficult condition. 
’ Hence, the Governor of Vyatka expresses the conviction that ‘the peaceful andsensible inhabitants of Vyatka Gubernia will not allow themselvesto be disturbed by rumours about free government and Zemstvo aidand about the annulment of debts and arrears, or by exaggerated re-ports of the failure of the harvest’. 
 The Governor deems it his duty to warn the peasants that ‘if a check of the grants shows that household-ers, even with no reserve stocks, have gathered in sufficient corn thisyear to feed themselves and their families and to sow their fields, buthave sold their corn and utilised the proceeds for other purposes, suchhouseholders must not count on obtaining a loan. 
 According to thenew law, the loans granted will be recoverable, not on the basis of collective liability, 110 but in accordance with the regulations governing the collection of taxes. 
 Consequently, every householderwho applies for and receives a loan must bear in mind that he andhe alone will be responsible for repayment, that no one will helphim, that repayment will be strictly enforced, and that if he fallsinto arrears all his movable property may be sold and his real estate confiscated. 
’” We can well imagine how the local volost authorities treat starv-ing peasants who have fallen into arrears and demand a loan aftersuch a statement by the Governor! subsistence needs. 
 The amount absolutely essential is 105,000,000 poods (the amount harvested in an ordinary year being 134,000,000; in this year, 84,000,000 poods). 
 There is, therefore, a shortage of 21 million poods . 
 “The total number of volosts in the gubernia suffering from ashortage of grain this year is 158 out of 310. 
 The population ofthese volosts numbers 1,566,000 persons of both sexes. 
”Yes, undoubtedly, “the administration is very actively or-ganising”—minimising the real extent of the distress and reducing the work of relieving the starving to a kind ofacrobatics of cheese-paring philanthropy. 
 In fact, the term “acrobats of philanthropy” would be too flattering a name for the administrators who have ral-lied under the banner of the Sipyagin circular. 
 What they have in common with acrobats of philanthropy is the paltry nature of the relief they render and their attempts to blowit up into something bigger than it is. 
 But the acrobats ofphilanthropy at worst regard the people upon whom theybestow their charity as playthings that pleasantly tickletheir vanity, whereas the Sipyagin administrators regard their beneficiaries as enemies, as people that make illegal demands (“totally unjustified demands on the government”)and that must therefore be held in restraint. 
 This pointof view was expressed most strikingly in the remarkableProvisional Regulations, which were accorded royal sanc-tion on September 15, 1901. 
 These regulations represent in the full sense a law, which consists of twenty articles and contains so much that isremarkable that we would not hesitate to designate it asone of the most important legislative acts of the early twen-tieth century. 
 To begin with the title: “Provisional Regu-lations Governing the Participation of the Population in the Famine-Affected Areas in the Works Undertaken by Order of the Departments of Railways, Agriculture, andState Property. 
” Evidently these works are so chock-fullof benefits that to be allowed to “participate” in them mustbe regarded as a special act of grace, otherwise the firstclause of the new law would not state: “Rural inhabitants of localities affected by the famine shall be allowed to participate in the carrying out of the works projects”, etc. 
 But the law provides for these “privileges” only in its second half, while in the first it deals with the organisation of the whole business. 
 The competent authorities “deter-mine the most suitable works projects to be undertaken”(Article 2), which “shall be carried out in conformity withthe provision in the law” (Article 3, which, like the chapterheadings in some Dickensian novel, may be entitled: “Theclause of the new law, which tells of the necessity of acting in accordance with the old law”). 
 The public works are to be launched on budget estimates, or on special credits, and thegeneral supervision of the organisation of these works is vestedin the Minister of the Interior, who may appoint officialswith special powers and who arranges a special “Conferenceon Food Affairs” with representatives of various ministries participating under the chairmanship of the Deputy Minis-ter. 
 The functions of this body include: (a) granting permis-sion for departures from the existing regulations; (b) dis-cussing proposals for the allocation of funds; (c) “fixing themaximum remuneration to be paid to workmen, as well asestablishing the other conditions under which the popula-tion may be permitted to participate in the aforesaid works; (d) distributing the work crews to the locations of the proj-ects; and, (e) organising the transport of the crews to theworks locations”. 
 The decisions of the Conference must besanctioned by the Minister of the Interior, as well as, “incorresponding cases”, by the ministers of other departments. 
 The function of determining the works projects, and of as-certaining the number of residents in need of work, is vestedin the rural superintendents, who must report the informa-tion to the governors, who, in turn, communicate theinformation with their opinions to the Ministry of theInterior and “on its instructions arrange, through the rural superintendents, for the dispatch of workers to the works locations.... 
” Ugh! At last we have mastered the “organisation” of this new business! The question now arises how much lubrica-tion will be required to set all the wheels of this ponderous,purely Russian administrative monster in motion. 
 Try to imagine this thing concretely. 
 Only the rural superintend-ent comes in direct contact with the famine-stricken. 
He therefore must take the initiative. 
 He sends a communi-ation—to whom? To the governor, says an article of the Provisional Regulations of September 15. 
 But in accordance with the circular of August 17, a special Central Uyezd Food Board has been established, whose function is “toconcentrate the management of all food affairs in the uyezd in the hands of a single official” (under the circular of Au-gust 17 the uyezd marshal of the nobility should preferablybe appointed to that post). 
 A “dispute” arises, which, of course, is quickly settled on the basis of the remarkably clear and simple “principles” outlined in the six points ofArticle 175 of the General Gubernia Regulations which pre-scribes “the order for settling disputes ... between publicdepartments and officials”. 
 In the end the document findsits way somehow into the office of the governor, where someone undertakes to draft an “opinion”. 
 Following which, everything goes to St. 
 Petersburg, there to be examined bythe special Conference. 
 But the representative of the Min-istry of Railways to the Conference is unable to decide onthe expediency of such a public works project as road re-pairs in Buguruslan Uyezd, and so another document trav-els from St. 
 Petersburg to the gubernia and back again. 
 When, finally, the expediency of the works, etc. 
, etc. 
, isdecided on in principle, the Conference in St. 
 Petersburgwill then set about “distributing the work crews” betweenBuzuluk and Buguruslan uyezds. 
 How shall this unwieldy machine be explained? By the novelty of the thing? Not at all. 
 Before the Provisional Regulations of September 15 were introduced, public workscould be organised ever so much more simply “on the basisof the existing laws”, and the circular of August 17, whichrefers to the public works organised by the Zemstvos, theGuardians of the poor, and the gubernia authorities, makes no reference to the necessity for any kind of special organi-sation. 
 You see, therefore, that the government’s “foodcampaign” consists in the fact that the St. 
 Petersburg de-partments spend a whole month (from August 17 to Sep-tember 15) thinking and thinking, and finally producea hopelessly tangled skein of red tape. 
 We may be sure, however, that the St. 
 Petersburg Conference stands in no danger of making exaggerations, as do the local bureaucratswho “fear to appear illiberal”.... 
 But the prize exhibit of the new Provisional Regulations is the prescript concerning the “rural inhabitants” hired for the works projects. 
 When work is to be carried out “away from their place of residence”, the workers must first of allform themselves into a special artel, “under the supervisionof the rural superintendent”, who endorses the appointmentof the artel overseer responsible for maintaining order;secondly, the names of the workmen joining such an artel must be entered in a special list which “is to serve as a substitute for the ordinary legally established residence permits of the workmen thereon listed during their transferto, and stay at, their place of work, and which must remainin the possession of the official accompanying the workmenon their journey, or, in his absence, in the possession of the artel overseer, and on arrival at the destination must be placed in charge of the works manager”. 
 Why is it necessary to substitute a special list for the ordinary passports, which every peasant who desires totravel has a right to receive gratis? This is clearly a restric-tion imposed upon the workmen, since, if they remained in possession of their passports, they would have more free-dom in selecting a room, in spending their free time, or inchanging one job for another, if they found it more remuner-ative or convenient to do so. 
 We shall see below that thiswas done deliberately, not only out of love for red tape,but specifically in order to impose restrictions upon the workmen and make their conditions approximate those of gangs of transported serfs accompanied by an “inven-tory” of a kind. 
 111 It appears that the function of “main-taining order on the journey, and the delivery [sic!] of thework crew to the public works manager is vested in an officialcommissioned for the purpose by the Ministry of the In-terior”. 
 The farther into it we get, the more complicated it becomes. 
 The substitution of lists for passports leads to of work crews”. 
 What have we here? Gangs of convicts being transported to penal servitude? Have all the laws permittingthe peasant in possession of a passport to travel wherever and however he pleases been repealed—perhaps as a punishment for “exaggerating” the famine? Is conveyance at governmentexpense a sufficient reason for depriving a citizen of his rights?the substitution of freedom of movement by—“consignment To continue. 
 It appears that the persons in charge of dis-tributing the workmen and of paying their wages, as well as the other officials of the department supervising the exe-cution of the works projects, “on the instructions of thegubernia authorities in the district where the families of theworkmen reside, dock the wages earned, wherever possible,and send the deducted amount to their home locations for themaintenance of the workmen’s families”. 
 A further depriva-tion of rights. 
 How dare the officials deduct part of the wages earned by the workers? How dare they interfere in the work-men’s family affairs and decide for them, as if they were serfs,whom they are to maintain and how much they are to con-tribute to that end? Would workmen permit their wages tobe docked without their consent? Apparently, this question entered the heads of those who drafted the new “penal servitude regulations”, because the clause immediately follow-ing the one quoted above says: “The preservation of orderamong the workmen in the works locations is entrusted,by decision of the Minister of the Interior, to the local ruralsuperintendents, to the officers of the special corps of gen-darmerie, to the police officials, or to persons specially appointed for that purpose. 
” It is clear that the peasants areto be punished by deprivation of their rights for “exaggerat-ing” the famine and for their “totally unjustified demandson the government”! It is not enough that the ordinarypolice, the factory police, and the secret police keep the Russian workers in general under surveillance; these regu-lations prescribe the establishment of a special surveillance. 
 One might think the government has completely lost itshead out of fear of these work crews of hungry peasants,freighted, transported, and delivered with a thousand pre-cautions. 
 We read further: “Workers guilty of disturbing the pub-lic peace and quiet, deliberately shirking their work, orrefusing to carry out the lawful demands of the worksmanagers or those appointed for the purpose of preservingorder, are liable, on the order of the officials mentionedin Article 16 [referred to above] to be placed under arrest for three days without trial ; for persistent refusal to work they may, on the orders of the said officials, be transported under escort to their permanent place of residence. 
” After this, can the Provisional Regulations of September 15 be called anything but provisional penal servitude regula-tions? Punishment without trial, deportation under escort.... 
 The ignorance and wretchedness of the Russian peasantis very great indeed, but there is a limit to everything. 
For this constant starvation and the steady banishmentof workers from the towns to the country cannot but havetheir effect. 
 And our government, which is so fond of govern-ing by means of provisional regulations * will one day receive a very severe shock. 
 The Provisional Regulations of September 15 must serve us as a means for wide agitation in workers’ study circlesand among the peasantry; we must distribute copies of these regulations with leaflets explaining them; we must call meetings and read this law to the audience, explain its mean-ing in connection with the government’s “food” policy asa whole. 
 We must see to it that every worker, who is in theleast class-conscious and who goes to the village, shallthoroughly understand the meaning of the “provisional penalservitude regulations” and be able to explain to all whom he meets what the regulations are about and what must be done to gain deliverance from the penal servitude of star-vation, tyranny, and lack of rights. 
 Let these provisional regulations governing workers ’ artels serve as a standing reproach and a serious warning to the soulful Russian intellectuals who advocate the estab-lishment of various kinds of artels and similar legal socie-ties permitted or encouraged by the government—a reproachfor that naïveté with which they believed in the sincerity ofthe government’s permission or encouragement, withoutperceiving the base serf character that was concealed behindthe signboard of “the furtherance of people’s labour”, etc. 
 A warning—when they speak in the future of artels and other societies permitted by the Sipyagins, never to forgetto tell the whole truth about the workers’ artels established *It is an old adage that any fool can govern under a state of siege. 
 In Europe, it may be necessary to declare a state of siege fromtime to time, but in Russia a state of siege is always in force, supple-mented, now here, now there, by provisional regulations. 
 Are not all political affairs in Russia conducted according to provisional regu-lations? in accordance with the provisional regulations of Septem-ber 15, and if they dare not talk about such artels, to remain entirely silent. 
 II. 
 ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE CRISIS AND THE FAMINE While we are faced with a fresh outbreak of famine, the old and protracted commercial and industrial crisis, which still drags on, has thrown on to the streets tens of thousands of workers unable to find employment. 
 Distress is verygreat among these workers, and all the more revealing isthe fact that both the government and educated “society”adopt an attitude towards the distress of the workers thatis entirely different from their attitude towards the distress of the peasants. 
 The public institutions and the press make no effort to determine the number of workers in distress,or the degree of that distress, even to the extent to whichthis is done in the case of the peasants. 
 No systematic meas-ures are adopted to organise aid for the starving work-ers. 
 Why this difference? It is, in our opinion, least of all because the distress among the workers is less apparent,or reveals itself in less acute forms. 
 True, the city dwellerswho do not belong to the working class know very littleabout the conditions of the factory workers, that they livenow even more congested in cellars, attics, and hovels, that they are more undernourished than ever before and are pawn-ing their last sticks and rags. 
 True, the increasing numberof tramps and beggars, who frequent doss-houses and fillthe prisons and hospitals, do not attract any particularattention, because, well, “everyone” is accustomed to theidea that doss-houses and dens of hopeless wretchedness are always packed in large cities. 
 True, unlike the peasants, unemployed workers are not tied down to a single place,and either of their own accord roam the country in quest ofemployment or are banished to “their native places” byauthorities afraid of concentrations of large numbers of unem-ployed workers. 
 Nevertheless, anyone who has any contact at all with industrial life knows from experience, and any-one who interests himself in public affairs knows from thenewspapers, that unemployment is steadily increasing. 
 No, the reasons for this difference in attitude lie much deeper; they are to be sought in the fact that famine in the rural districts and unemployment in the towns belong to two altogether different types of economic life and aredue to altogether different relations between the exploitingand the exploited classes. 
 In the rural districts, the rela-tions between these two classes are extremely confused andcomplicated by a multiplicity of transitional forms, as, for example, when farming is combined with usury, or with the exploitation of hired labour, etc. 
, etc. 
 It is not the ag-ricultural hired labourer—the antagonism of whose inter-ests to the interests of the landlord and wealthy peasantis clearly apparent and is largely understood by the la-bourer himself—who is starving, but the small peasant, who is usually regarded (and regards himself) as an independent farmer, who only now and again falls accidentally into some“temporary” dependence. 
 The immediate cause of the famine—the failure of the harvest—is spontaneous in the eyes of themasses, it is the will of God. 
 And as poor harvests accompa-nied by famine have occurred from time immemorial, legislation has long been compelled to reckon with them. 
 For years codes upon codes of laws have existed (princi-pally on paper) providing for the distribution of food amongthe people and prescribing an involved system of “meas-ures”. 
 Although these measures, borrowed largely fromthe period of serfdom and the period of prevailing patriar-chal, self-sufficing economy, correspond very little to the requirements of modern times, every famine sets in motionthe whole government and Zemstvo administrative ma-chine. 
 And, however greatly the powers that be may desireit, this machine finds it difficult, almost impossible, toavoid resorting to all manner of aid from the hated “third persons”, the intellectuals, who are striving to “raise a clamour”. 
 On the other hand, the connection of the faminewith the poor harvest, together with the wretched state ofthe peasants, who do not understand (or but vaguely un-derstand) that it is the increasing exploitation of capitalin conjunction with the predatory policy of the govern-ment and of the landlords which has reduced them to this ruinous condition, has caused the famine-strickento feel so absolutely helpless that, far from putting for-ward exacting demands, they put forward no “demands” at all. 
 The less conscious the oppressed class is of its oppres-sion and the less exacting it is in its demands upon its op-pressors, the larger the number of individuals among the propertied classes who will be inclined towards philan-thropy, and the less, relatively, will resistance be offered to this philanthropy by the local landlords, who are direct-ly interested in keeping the peasants in a state of poverty. 
If this indisputable fact is borne in mind, it will be clear that the increased opposition of the landlords, the loud cries raised about the “demoralisation” of the peasants,and, finally, the purely military measures against the famine-stricken and against the benefactors, adopted by a government actuated by such a spirit, are symptoms ofthe complete decline and decay of that ancient, sup-posedly immutable and time-hallowed, patriarchal rural life over which the ardent Slavophils, the reactionariesmost conscious of their aim, and the most naïve of the old-fashioned Narodniks, wax so enthusiastic. 
 The Narod-niks have always accused us Social-Democrats of artificial-ly applying the concept of the class struggle to conditions which do not admit of its application, while the reaction-aries have always accused us of sowing class hatred andof inciting “one section of the population against another”. 
 Without reiterating the answer to these charges, which has been given time and time again, we shall state merely thatthe Russian Government excels us all in the judgement of the profundity of the class struggle, and in the energetic force of the measures that must logically follow from sucha judgement. 
 Every one who has in one way or another come in contact with people who in famine years have gone to the village to “feed” the peasants—and who has not comein contact with them?—knows that they were prompted by pure sentiments of pity and humane sympathy, and that “political” plans of any kind were totally alien tothem; that the propaganda of the ideas of the class struggle left such people cold, and that the arguments of the Marx-ists in heated battles against the views of the Narodnikson the village left them unconvinced. 
 What has the class struggle to do with it? they said; the peasants are starving and we must help them—that is all. 
 But those who could not be convinced by the arguments of the Marxists may perhaps be convinced by the “argu-ments” of the Minister of the Interior. 
 No, it is not simplythat “the peasants are starving”, he warns the philanthro-pists, and they must not “simply” go to help the peasantswithout the permission of the authorities, for that spreads demoralisation and stimulates unjustifiable demands. 
 To interfere in the food campaign means to interfere in theplans of God and the police to provide the landlords withworkmen willing to work for next to nothing, and the Treas-ury with taxes collected by force. 
 He who ponders overSipyagin’s circular must say to himself—Yes, social war is going on in our countryside, and, as in all wars, the bellig-erents cannot be denied their right to inspect the cargoesof vessels sailing to enemy ports, even if the vessels sailunder neutral flags. 
 The only difference between this andother wars is that in this case one side, obliged perpetuallyto work and perpetually to starve, is not even fighting, it is only being fought—for the present. 
 In factory industry, however, it has long been evident that this war is being carried on, and there is no need for govern-ment circulars to explain to the “neutral” philanthropiststhat it is unwise to ford the river without first soundingits depth (that is, without first obtaining the permission of the authorities and the factory owners). 
 As early as 1885, when there was as yet no noticeable socialist agita-tion amongst the workers, even in the central gubernias,where the workers are closer to the peasantry than are theworkers in the capital, the industrial crisis caused thefactory atmosphere to become so electrically charged that storms broke out continuously, now in one place and now in another. 
 Under such circumstances, philanthropy is doomedto impotence from the outset and for that reason remainsa casual and purely individual affair, without acquiringeven a shadow of social significance. 
 We shall note yet one other peculiar feature in the atti-tude of the public towards famines. 
 It may be said without exaggeration that until very recently the opinion pre-vailed that the whole of the Russian economic, and even political, system rested upon the mass of independent land-owning peasant farmers. 
 The extent to which this opinion had penetrated the minds of even the most advanced thinking people, least susceptible to the wiles of officialflattery, was strikingly illustrated by Nikolai—on in hiswork published after the famine of 1891-92 112. 
 The ruin of an enormous number of peasant farms seemed to everyone to be so absurd, to be such an impossible leap into the void, that the necessity to extend the widest possible aid that would effectively “heal the wounds” was almost gener-ally recognised. 
 And again it was none other than Mr. 
 Si-pyagin who undertook the task of dispelling the last shredsof illusion. 
 What does “Russia” rest upon, what do thelandowners and the commercial and industrial classes live on, if not on the ruination and impoverishment of the people? To attempt to heal this “wound” otherwise than on paper—why, that would be a political crime! Mr. 
 Sipyagin will, without doubt, contribute to the dis-semination and the confirmation of the truth that thereneither is nor can be any other means of combating unem-ployment and crises, as well as the Asiatic-barbarian and cruel forms the expropriation of the small producers has assumedin Russia, than the class struggle of the revolutionary pro-letariat against the entire capitalist system. 
 The rulersof the capitalist state are no more concerned about thevast numbers of famine and crisis victims than a locomo-tive is concerned about those whom it crushes in its path. 
 Dead bodies stop the wheels, the locomotive halts, it may(with a too energetic driver) jump the rails, but, in any case,after a delay, long or short, it will continue on its way. 
We hear of death from starvation, and of the ruin of tensand hundreds of thousands of small farmers, but, at the same time, we hear accounts of the progress of agriculture in our country, of the acquisition of foreign markets bythe Russian landlords, who have sent an expedition of Rus-sian farmers to England; we hear of increased sales of im-proved implements and of the extension of cultivated grass-land, etc. 
 For the masters of Russian agriculture (as well as for all capitalist masters), intensified ruination and star-vation are nothing more than a slight and temporary hitch,to which they pay almost no attention whatever, unless compelled by the famine-stricken. 
 Everything goes on as usual—even speculation in the sale of lands belonging to the section of the proprietors which consists of the well-to-do peasantry. 
 Thus, Buguruslan Uyezd, Samara Gubernia, has been declared an “affected area”. 
 This means that famine andthe ruination of the mass of the peasantry have reached the highest point. 
 But the misfortune of the masses does not hinder, but on the contrary appears to facilitate, the consolidation of the economic position of the bourgeoisminority of the peasantry. 
 In the September correspondenceof Russkiye Vedomosti 113 (No. 
 244) we read the follow-ing concerning the uyezd referred to: “Buguruslan Uyezd, Samara Gubernia. 
 The most impor-tant subject of discussion in this uyezd is the rapid rise in the price of land everywhere and the enormous specu-lation in land as a result. 
 Only some fifteen or twentyyears ago, excellent valley land could be bought at from ten to fifteen rubles per dessiatine. 
 There were districts remote from the railway where, only three years ago, thirty-five rubles per dessiatine was regarded as a high price, and only on one occasion was as much as sixty rubles per dessia-tine paid for first-rate land, with an excellent farm-house,situated near a market. 
 Now, however, from fifty to sixty rubles per dessiatine is paid for the poorest land, while the price of good land has risen as high as eighty and even one hundred rubles per dessiatine. 
 The speculation caused by this rise in land prices assumes two forms: First, the pur-chase of land for the purpose of immediate resale (therehave been instances in which land was bought at forty ru-bles per dessiatine and resold within a year to the localpeasants at fifty-five rubles ). 
 In such cases usually the land-lords, not having either the time or the desire to bother with all the red tape and the formalities of selling theland to the peasants through the Peasant Bank, sell to thecapitalist land speculators, who in their turn resell to the selfsame local peasants . 
 In the second form, numerous land agents are engaged in foisting upon peasants from remote provinces (mostly from the Ukraine) all kinds of worthless land for which they obtain handsome commissions from the owners ( from one to two rubles per dessiatine), From what has been said, it should be clear that the main victim of this land speculation is the peasant , whose land hunger serves as the basis for this unimaginable and, by economic causes unexplainable, jump in the price of land. 
Of course, the building of railways has had something todo with this, but not a great deal, for the principal buyerof land in our country remains the peasant, who by nomeans regards the railway as a factor of prime importance. 
” These tenacious “enterprising muzhiks”, who so greedily invest their “savings” (and their plunder) in the purchaseof land, will inevitably cause the ruin of even those poor peas-ants who have still managed to survive the present famine. 
 While bourgeois society resorts to land-purchasing schemes for the well-to-do peasant as a means of counteracting the ruination and starvation of the poor peasants, the search for new markets is resorted to as a means of coun-teracting crises and the glutting of the markets with theproducts of industry. 
 The servile press ( Novoye Vremya , No. 
 9188) waxes enthusiastic over the successes of the newtrade with Persia and discusses glowingly the prospects of commerce with Central Asia and, particularly, with Man-churia. 
 The iron magnates and other industrial leaders rubtheir hands in glee when they hear of proposals for furtherrailway expansion. 
 It has been decided to build the follow-ing major lines: St. 
 Petersburg-Vyatka, Bologoye-Sedlets,Orenburg-Tashkent; the government has guaranteed a rail-way loan of 37,000,000 rubles (to the Moscow-Kazan, Lodz, and South-Eastern Railway companies); and other linesare planned: Moscow-Kyshtym, Kamyshin-Astrakhan andBlack Sea lines. 
 The starving peasants and unemployedworkers may console themselves with the thought that thestate money (if the state can raise it) will not, of course, be spent “unproductively” on famine relief (see Sipyagin’s circular), but will be poured into the pockets of engineersand contractors, like those virtuosi in the art of embezzle-ment who year by year stole large sums during the construc-tion of the Sormovo Dam, and who were only recentlyconvicted (by way of exception) by the Moscow Assizes 114 in Nizhni-Novgorod. 
 * *Unfortunately, lack of space prevents us from dealing in de-tail with this trial, which has demonstrated once again how the con-III. 
 THE THIRD ELEMENT The term “third element” or “third persons” was employed, if we are not mistaken, by the Vice-Governor of Samara,Mr. 
 Kondoidi, in his speech at the opening of the SamaraGubernia Zemstvo Assembly in 1900, to designate persons“belonging neither to the administration nor to the represent-atives of the social-estates”. 
 The increase in the numbers and in the influence of such persons serving in the Zemstvo as doctors, technicians, statisticians, agronomists, teachers,etc. 
, has long since attracted the attention of our reaction-aries, who have also described these hated “third persons”as the “Zemstvo bureaucracy”. 
 Generally speaking, it must be said that our reaction-aries (including, of course, the entire top bureaucracy) reveal a fine political instinct. 
 They are so well-experiencedin combating oppositions, popular “revolts”, religious sects,rebellions, and revolutionaries, that they are always on thequi vive and understand far better than naïve simpletons and “honest fogies” that the autocracy can never reconcile itself to self-reliance, honesty, independent convictions, and pride in real knowledge of any kind whatsoever . 
 So thoroughly im-bued are they with the spirit of subservience and red tape tractors and engineers run the show. 
 For us Russians this is an old story that is perennially new. 
 Engineer Alexandrov, in companywith Shnakenburg, head of the Nizhni-Novgorod branch of the Kazanregion of the Ministry of Railways, and the six contractors who werebrought to trial, during a period of three years (1893-95), had “built” for themselves and others thousands of rubles by presenting to the Treasury accounts, certificates, vouchers, etc. 
, etc. 
, for work neverdone and for supplies never delivered. 
 Not only the jobs, but even thecontractors, were fictitious; an ordinary clerk signed as a contractor!The amounts this fraternity pocketed can be seen from the following:Engineer Alexandrov submitted bills (from the “contractors” who found themselves in the dock) for a sum of over 200 ,000 rubles; in these accounts, for example, the sum of 4,400 rubles appeared insteadof the actually expended sum of 400 rubles. 
 According to the evi-dence of one of the witnesses, Engineer Alexandrov squandered largesums of money either on women or on his immediate superiors, the railway engineers, spending as much as from fifty to eighty rubles for a single dinner. 
 Most interesting of all, however, is the manner in which this case was handled and how it ended. 
 The chief of police, to whom a de-tective reported the matter, “refused to take it up” (!). 
 “This is not that prevails in the hierarchy of Russian officialdom that they have contempt for any one who is unlike Gogol’s Akaky Akakiyevich,115 or, to use a more contemporary simile, the Man in a Case116. 
 Indeed, if men in public office are to be judged, not by the positions they hold, but by their knowledge and their merits,will it not logically and inevitably lead to the creation offreedom of public opinion and public control to judge such knowledge and such merits? Will it not undermine the privileges of estate and rank upon which alone the Russianautocracy rests? Let us but listen to the arguments Kondoidiadvances to justify his displeasure: “Representatives of the social-estates, sometimes without adequately proven grounds, give ear to the words of intel-lectuals, even if the latter are nothing more than salaried civil servants, merely because they talk about science orquote something they have learned from newspaper ormagazine writers”. 
 Well, well! Mere “salaried civil servants”daring to teach “representatives of the social-estates”! In our affair,” he said, “it is the business of the Ministry of Railways,” and the detective had to appeal to the public prosecutor. 
 In the end the whole thing came to light because the thieves fell out: Alexand-rov “refused to split” with one of the clerk-contractors. 
 The casedragged on for six years . 
 Some of the witnesses died in the meantime and many of them managed to forget the most important points in the case. 
 A material witness like Lokhtin, ex-chief of the Kazan regionof the Ministry of Railways, could not be found (sic!): according to one version he was in Kazan, according to another in Yeniseisk on business! This is not a joke, reader—it is taken from the trial record. 
 The fact that others were implicated, in addition to those brought to trial, is apparent from the following: First, the commendable de-tective who brought the case to light is no longer in the service;he has purchased a tenement house, and is now living on the in-come from it. 
 Secondly, Engineer Makarov, chief of the Kazan Region of the Ministry of Railways (who during the construction of the Sor-movo Dam acted as assistant chief), tried his utmost at the trial to shield Alexandrov. 
 He even declared—literally!—that “ it was per-fectly in order ” for the dam to have been washed away in the spring of 1894. 
 When he examined Alexandrov’s books, he found everything in perfect order: Alexandrov was distinguished for his experience, zeal, and accuracy! The result: Alexandrov—one year’s confinement in a fortress; Shnakenburg—a severe reprimand (from which he was absolved by the Manifesto of 1896!). 
 The rest were acquitted. 
 The Treasury’sclaim was disallowed. 
 One can imagine how pleased the unlocated Lokhtins and the Makarovs still in the service must be. 
 passing, it should be said that the Zemstvo councillors, to whom the Vice-Governor referred, are members of a non-estate institution; but since every institution in our country is thoroughly saturated with the social-estate spirit, and sincethe Zemstvos, too, have lost the greater part of their non-estate character in consequence of the new regulations, itcan be said, for the sake of brevity, that in Russia there aretwo governing “classes”: (1) the administration, and (2) the representatives of the social-estates. 
 There is no room for a third element in a monarchy resting on the social-estates. 
And if unsubmissive economic development persistentlyundermines the foundations of the estates by the very growthof capitalism and gives rise to the need for “intellectuals”,who are becoming increasingly numerous, then it must be expected that the third element will strive to break out of its narrow confines. 
 “The dreams of those belonging neither to the adminis-tration nor to the representatives of the social-estates in theZemstvo,” said Mr. 
 Kondoidi, “are pure fantasy, but if these dreams have as their basis political tendencies, they may be harmful. 
” To admit the possibility of “political tendencies” is merely a diplomatic way of admitting their existence. 
 The “dreams” referred to here are, if you will, all assumptions that for the doctor stem from the interests of the medical professionand for the statistician, from the interests of statistics, and that do not take into consideration the interests of the governing estates. 
 In themselves, these dreams are fantasy,but, if you please, they foster political discontent. 
 We shall now relate the attempt of another administra-tor, the head of one of the central gubernias, to advancea different argument for displeasure with the third element. 
 According to this official, the activities of the Zemstvo in the gubernia in his charge “are year by year departing from the principles upon which the Ordinance on Zemstvo Insti-tutions 117 is based”. 
 According to these regulations, the local inhabitants are empowered to manage affairs dealing withlocal needs and requirements. 
 Owing to the indifference which the majority of landowners display towards the right granted them, “the Zemstvo Assemblies have become a mere formality and affairs are conducted by the Zemstvo Boards, /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR the character of which leaves much to be desired”. 
 This “has led to a big increase in the staffs of many Boards and to the practice of enlisting in the Zemstvo the services of experts — statisticians, agronomists, teachers, sanitary inspectors,etc. 
, who, conscious of their educational , and sometimes intellectual , superiority over the members of the Zemstvo, have begun to display increasing independence , which, in particular, is achieved by convening all kinds of congresses in the gubernia and by setting up all kinds of councils in the Boards. 
 As a result, the whole of the Zemstvo administrationhas fallen into the hands of persons who have nothing in common with the local population . 
” Although “there are among these persons many who are well-intentioned and areworthy of the utmost respect, they cannot regard their serv-ices as anything else than a means of livelihood, and they are interested in local needs and requirements only to theextent that their personal welfare depends upon these”. 
 In the opinion of the governor, “in Zemstvo affairs, the hired man cannot take the place of the property-owner ”. 
 This argu-ment may be described as more cunning or more candid than the one mentioned above, depending on how one looks at it. 
 It is more cunning because it makes no mention ofpolitical tendencies, but tries to base its reasoning exclu-sively on the interests of local needs and requirements. 
 It ismore candid because it openly contrasts the “hired man” tothe property-owner . 
 This is the time-honoured point of view of the Russian Kit Kitych, 118 who, in hiring a “mere teacher”, is guided principally by the market price of this particularform of professional service. 
 The real master of everythingis the property-owner, proclaims the representative of thecamp from which praises are constantly heard of Russia andits strong and absolutely independent authority which is above all the classes and which, thank God, is free from the domination of selfish interests over public life that prevailsin Western countries corrupted by parliamentarianism. 
 Andsince the property-owner is the master, he must be masteralso of medical, statistical, and educational “affairs”;our Jack-in-office does not hesitate to draw this conclusion, which is the open recognition of the political leadership of the propertied classes. 
 What is more curious, he does not hesi-tate to admit that these “experts” are conscious of their educational, and sometimes intellectual, superiority over the members of the Zemstvo. 
 Of course, what other measures can be taken against intellectual superiority than measures of severity?... Recently, our reactionary press was presented with an excellent opportunity to repeat the demand for these meas-ures of severity. 
 The refusal of the intellectuals to be treatedas ordinary hired men, as sellers of labour-power (rather than as citizens fulfilling definite public functions), has led from time to time to conflicts between the bigwigs of theZemstvo Boards and the doctors who would resign in a body,or to conflicts with the technicians, etc. 
 Recently the strug-gles between the Boards and the statisticians have assumedan outright epidemic character. 
 In the May issue of Iskra (No. 
 4), it was reported that the local authorities in Yaroslavl had long been dissatisfied withtheir statisticians and, after the events in St. 
 Petersburg inMarch, made a thorough “cleansing” of the statistical bureau,with instructions to the manager “in the future to engagestudents with extreme caution and with an assurance of their reliability beyond the shadow of a doubt”. 
 An article, enti-tled “Sedition in Vladimir-on-Klyazma” ( Iskra for June, No. 
 5), described the general condition of the suspectedstatisticians, and the reasons for the dislike exhibitedtowards them by the Governor, the manufacturers, and thelandlords. 
 The dismissal of the Vladimir statisticians for having telegraphed a message of sympathy to Annensky (who had been assaulted on Kazan Square on March 4) led practi-cally to the closing-down of the statistical bureau, and asstatisticians from other towns refused to serve in a Zemstvothat was unable to protect the interests of its employees, thelocal gendarmerie was obliged to act as mediator between the dismissed statisticians and the governor. 
 “A gendarme visited several of the statisticians at their homes and sug-gested to them that they submit a request for reinstatement”;but his mission was a complete failure. 
 Finally, the Augustissue of Iskra (No. 
 7) reported an “incident in the Yekateri-noslav Zemstvo” in which “pasha” Rodzyanko (chairman of the Gubernia Zemstvo Board) had dismissed statisticians for failing to carry out the “order” to keep a diary, which actionled to the resignation of all the other members of the bureau, as well as to letters of protest from the Kharkov statisticians (published in the came issue of Iskra ). 
 Complications then began to set in. 
 The Kharkov pasha, Mr. 
 Gordeyenko (also chairman of the gubernia Zemstvo Board), intervened anddeclared to the statisticians of “his” Zemstvo that he “willnot tolerate within the walls of the Board any meetingsof employees called to discuss questions that do not concerntheir duties”. 
 The Kharkov statisticians had barely carried out their intention of demanding the dismissal of the spy in their midst (Antonovich), when the administration dis-missed the manager of the statistical bureau, which againled to the resignation of all the statisticians. 
 The excitement caused by these events among the mass of Zemstvo statistical department employees can be judged by the letter written by the Vyatka statisticians, who sought to give a detailed reason for refusing to join the movement,for which they were justly described in Iskra (No. 
 9) as the “Vyatka strike-breakers”. 
 Iskra , of course, reported only some of the conflicts, by far not all, that took place; the legal press reported such conflicts also in the gubernias of St. 
 Petersburg, Olonets, Nizhni-Novgorod, Taurida, and Samara (we include in thecategory of conflicts cases in which a number of statisticiansare dismissed simultaneously, since such cases roused con-siderable discontent and ferment). 
 The lengths to which thesuspicious and shameless provincial authorities went can be judged from the following: “ S. 
 M. 
 Bleklov , manager of the Taurida Bureau , in his ‘Report on the Investigation of Dnieper Uyezd During Mayand June 1901’, which he submitted to the Board, relatesthat work in the uyezd was carried on under hitherto unprec-edented conditions. 
 Although the statisticians had the governor’s consent to the undertaking of their duties, were furnished with the necessary documents, and in accordancewith the orders of the gubernia officials were entitled to theassistance of the local authorities, they were nonetheless surrounded with extreme suspicion on the part of the uyezd police, who dogged their steps and expressed their distrust of them in the rudest manner , so much so that, as one peasant related, a policeman rode behind the statisticians and ques-tioned the peasants as to whether ‘the statisticians were not carrying on the propaganda of harmful ideas against the state and the fatherland’. 
 According to Mr. 
 Bleklov, the stat-isticians ‘encountered various obstacles and difficulties which not only hindered their work, but deeply outragedtheir sense of personal dignity .... 
 Frequently, the statisti-cians found themselves in the position of persons charged with a crime , concerning whom secret investigations were being made, which were known, by the by, to everybody—per-sons against whom it was considered necessary to warn all and sundry. 
 The unbearable moral depressionwhich they frequently suffered can therefore be well un-derstood. 
’” Not a bad illustration for the record of the Zemstvo-ver-sus-statistician conflicts and for the description of the sur-veillance over the “third element” in general! Small wonder that the reactionary press rushed in to at-tack the new “rebels”. 
 Moskovskiye Vedomosti published a thunderous leading article, entitled “The Strike of theZemstvo Statisticians” (September 24, No. 
 263), and a spe-cial article by N. 
 A. 
 Znamensky, entitled “The Third Ele-ment” (October 10, No. 
 279). 
 “The third element is rearing its head too high,” writes the paper; it is resorting to “sys-tematic opposition and strikes”, in order to resist the attemptsto introduce “necessary discipline in the service”. 
 The blamefor all this rests upon the Zemstvo liberals, who have demor-alised the employees. 
 “There is not the slightest doubt that measures have been taken to introduce a degree of order in statistics andin the work of assessing by the more sober and sensible of theZemstvo leaders, who refused to permit the Boards in their charge to be demoralised by anyone , even under the flag of liberal opposition. 
 The opposition and the strikes should at last open their eyes to the character of the people they have to deal with in the persons of the intellectual proletarians , roaming as they did from one gubernia to another , engaging, who knows, in statistical investigations, or in educating the local adolescents in the Social-Democratic spirit . 
 “At all events, the ‘Zemstvo-versus -statistician conflicts’ will bring home a useful lesson to the more sensible section of the Zemstvo people. 
 We think they will now seeclearly that in the person of the ‘ third element ’ they have nurtured a viper in the bosom of the Zemstvo insti-tutions. 
” * We, too, have no doubt that the howling and whining of the faithful watchdog of the autocracy (the appellation,as is known, which Katkov, who for so long succeeded inkeeping Moskovskiye Vedomosti charged with his spirit, as-sumed for himself) will “open the eyes” of many who do notyet fully understand how irreconcilable autocracy is to the interests of social development, to the interests of the intel-ligentsia generally, and to the interests of every genuine pub-lic cause which does not stand for embezzling state fundsand for treachery. 
 This little picture of the anti-“third element” crusade and the “Zemstvo-versus -statistician conflicts” should teach us Social-Democrats an important lesson. 
 It must strengthen our faith in the might of the labour movement we lead; for wesee that unrest in the foremost revolutionary class is spread-ing to other classes and other strata of society, that it hasalready led, not only to the rousing of the revolutionaryspirit among the students to a degree hitherto unparalleled, ** but to the beginning of the awakening of the countryside,to greater self-confidence and readiness to struggle on thepart of social groups that have until now (as groups) not beenvery responsive. 
 Public unrest is growing among the entire people in Rus-sia, among all classes, and it is our duty as revolutionary Social-Democrats to exert every effort to take advantage of this development, in order to explain to the progressiveworking-class intellectuals what an ally they have in thepeasants, in the students, and in the intellectuals generally,and to teach them how to take advantage of the flashes ofsocial protest that break out, now in one place, now in anoth-er. 
 We shall be able to assume our role of front-rank fighters *Moskovskiye Vedomosti , No. 
 263. 
 **As these lines are written, news comes of fresh and greater unrest among the students, of meetings in Kiev, St. 
 Petersburg, andother cities, of the formation of revolutionary students’ groups inOdessa, etc. 
 Perhaps history will impose upon the students the roleof initiators in the decisive struggle. 
 Be that as it may, if victoryis to be achieved in this struggle, the masses of the proletariat must be roused and we must accelerate our efforts to make them class-conscious, to inspire and organise them. 
 for freedom only when the working class, led by a militant revolutionary party, while never for a moment forgetting its special condition in modern society and its specific histor-ic task of liberating humanity from economic enslavement,will raise the banner in the struggle for freedom for the whole people and will rally to this banner all those of the mostvaried social strata whom the Sipyagins, Kondoidis, and therest of the gang are so wilfully forcing into the ranks of the discontented. 
 What is necessary now in order to achieve this is that we infuse into our movement, not only the consistent revolu-tionary theory elaborated in the course of a century-longdevelopment of European thought, but also the revolution-ary energy and revolutionary experience bequeathed to us by our West-European and Russian precursors, and that we do not fall into slavish adoption of the opportunism in itsvarious forms from which our Western comrades—who havenot been affected by it to such an extent—are turningaway, but which is such a strong hindrance to us in ourmarch to victory. 
 The Russian proletariat, at the present time, is confront-ed by the most difficult, but extremely gratifying, task:to crush the enemy, whom the long-suffering Russian intel-ligentsia has been unable to overcome, and to assume itsplace in the ranks of the international army of socialism. 
 IV. 
 TWO SPEECHES BY MARSHALS OF THE NOBILITY “It is a sadly significant fact, entirely without precedent; and many unexampled misfortunes are held in store forRussia by such facts, which are possible only because of ourfar-advanced social demoralisation.... 
” Thus wrote Mos-kovskiye Vedomosti , in the leading article of No. 
 268 (Sep-tember 29), commenting on a speech delivered by M. 
 A. 
 Sta-khovich, Marshal of the Nobility of Orel Gubernia, at a missi-onary congress held in that gubernia (the congress closed on September 24).... 
 Well, if “social demoralisation” hasaffected the marshals of the nobility, the foremost men in the uyezd and the second in importance in the gubernia, where indeed must we seek for the end of this “pestilential,spiritual canker that has seized upon Russia ”? What is the issue? The issue is that this Mr. 
 Stakhovich (the very gentleman who wished to find posts for the Orel nobility as liquor excise collectors; see “Casual Notes”, Zarya , No. 
 1 *) delivered a fiery speech in defence of freedom of conscience and was “tactless, not to say cynical, enoughto suggest the following”: ** “It is the duty of the missionary congress more than of any other body in Russia to proclaim the necessity of freedom of conscience , the necessity to abolish all penalties for seceding from the Orthodox Church and accepting another faith. 
And I would suggest that the Orel missionary congress openlyexpress itself in this sense and present such a petition insuitable manner .... 
” Of course, Moskovskiye Vedomosti was naïve enough to picture Mr. 
 Stakhovich as a Robespierre (“that oh, so gay M. 
 A. 
 Stakhovich, whom I have long known, a Robespierre!”wrote Mr. 
 Suvorin in Novoye Vremya , and it was difficult to read his speech “for the defence” without smiling), as itwas naïve of Mr. 
 Stakhovich to suggest to the priests thatthey petition “in suitable manner” for freedom of conscience. 
 It was like suggesting to a congress of police officers that they petition for political freedom! There is hardly need to add that “the convocation of the clergy, presided over by the highest priest”, rejected *See present edition, Vol. 
 4, pp. 
 383-413. 
— Ed. 
 **Moskovskiye Vedomosti , September 29, No. 
 268. 
 I apologise to the reader for betraying such a predilection for Moskovskiye Vedo-mosti . 
 But what can one do? In my opinion, it is the most interesting, the most consistent, and the most serviceable political newspaper in Russia. 
 One can hardly term “political” literature, in the propersense of the word, that which at best simply makes a selection of someinteresting, though raw, facts and then offers sighs instead of “wis-dom”: I do not say that such writing cannot be very useful, but it is not politics. 
 Nor can the Novoye Vremya type of literature be described as political literature in the real sense of the word, notwithstand-ing (or rather because of) the fact that it is excessively political. 
 Ithas no definite political programme and no convictions, it merelypossesses the ability to adapt its tone to the moods of the moment, to cringe before the powers that be and carry out their every order, and to flirt with an illusion of public opinion. 
 Moskovskiye Vedomosti , however, has its own line and does not fear (it has nothing to fear)to march ahead of the government, and to touch upon, at times veryfrankly, the most delicate subjects. 
 It is a useful newspaper, and in-dispensable helpmate in revolutionary agitation! Mr. 
 Stakhovich’s suggestion “both on account of the contents of the speech and of its non-accordance with the tasks of the local missionary congress”, after hearing the “weighty ob-jections” of His Grace, the Bishop Nikanor of Orel; of N. 
 I. 
Ivanovsky, Professor of the Kazan Academy of Divinity;of V. 
 M. 
 Skvortsov, editor and publisher of the periodicalMissionerskoye Obozreniye 119; of V. 
 A. 
 Ternavtsev and M. 
 A. 
 Novosyolov, members of the university staff; and of several missionary priests. 
 One might say: An alliance of “science” and the church! Of course, Mr. 
 Stakhovich interests us, not as a model of clear and consistent political thinking, but as a modelof the most “oh, so gay” Russian nobleman, who is alwaysready to grab a slice of the state pie. 
 And one can imagine to what extent “demoralisation” has penetrated Russian life generally and the life of our rural districts in particular asa result of police tyranny and the inquisitorial persecutionof religious sects, if the very stones cry out, if even marshalsof the nobility have begun to talk strongly about freedomof conscience. 
 The following instances from Mr. 
 Stakhovich’s speech give a striking picture of the outrageous state of affairs thatrouses even the most “oh, so gay” to indignation: “Go to the library of the missionary brotherhood, and take down the handbook of laws. 
 There you will read in Article 783, Volume II, Part I, that it is the duty of the ru-ral chief of police, in addition to preventing duelling, lam-pooning, drunkenness, hunting in the close season, and men and women washing together in public baths, to keep obser-vation over the arguments directed against the dogmasof the Orthodox Church and to prevent the seduction of the orthodox to other faiths and schisms!” Yes! There is actually such an article in the Act, and it imposes many more suchfunctions upon the rural police chief besides those enumerat-ed by the speaker. 
 The majority of city dwellers would look upon this article as a curiosity, as, indeed, Mr. 
 Stakhovichdesignated it; but for the peasant this curiosity conceals a bitterer Ernst , the bitter truth about the outrages commit-ted by the lower ranks of the police, who are only too firmlyconvinced that God is very high up and the tsar very far off. 
 And now some concrete instances that we shall cite to-gether with the official denial made by the President of the Council of the Orel Orthodox Brotherhood of Peter and Paul and of the Orel Diocesan Missionary Congress, ArchpriestPeter Rozhdestvensky ( Moskovskiye Vedomosti , No. 
 269, reprinted from Orlovsky Vestnik , 120 No. 
 257): “(a) In the speech [by Mr. 
 Stakhovich] reference is made toa village in Trubchevsk Uyezd: “‘With the knowledge and consent of the priest and of the officials , the suspected Stundists121 were locked in the church , a table was brought, a white cloth was spread over it, an iconwas upon it, and each was led separately to the table andcommanded to kiss the icon. 
 “‘“I refuse to kiss idols. 
” “‘“So! Flog him on the spot !” “‘The weaker ones returned to the orthodox faith after the first flogging. 
 But there were some who were flogged four times . 
’ “According to the official data presented in the report of the Orel Orthodox Brotherhood of Peter and Paul, published as far back as 1896, and according to the verbal information given at the congress by Father D. 
 Pereverzev, the describedacts of violence inflicted by the orthodox population upon thesectarians of the village of Lyubets in Trubchevsk Uyezd tookplace following a decision adopted at the village meeting and somewhere in the village , but certainly not with the consent of the local priest and on no account in the church ; this regret-table incident took place eighteen or nineteen years ago , long before the Orel Diocesan Mission was even thought of. 
” Commenting on the above, Moskovskiye Vedomosti states that Mr. 
 Stakhovich cited only two facts in his speech. 
 Perhaps so. 
 But what facts they were! The refutation based on “official data” (of the rural police) and on the report of the Orthodox Brotherhood but emphasises the shocking character of the outrages which roused the indignation ofeven an “oh, so gay” nobleman. 
 Whether the flogging tookplace “somewhere in the village” or in the church, six monthsor eighteen years ago, does not alter the case in the least (except perhaps in the one respect that, by general knowl-edge, the persecution of sects has become even more brutalof late and that the establishment of missions is directly related to this fact). 
 As to the local priest’s having had nothing to do with the inquisitors in rustic garb *—better had you kept quiet about it in the press, Reverend Father; you will only be a laughing-stock. 
 Of course, the “localpriest” did not give his “consent” to torture, a punishable actunder the Criminal Code, any more than the Holy Inquisitionpunished its victims with its own hands. 
 It handed them overto the secular authorities; nor did it ever shed blood, it only had its victims burned. 
 The second fact:“(b) It was stated in the speech:“‘In that case the priest will never again be able to give the answer we heard him give here: “ You say , Father , there were forty families and now there are only four . 
 What has be-come of the rest?” “‘“By the grace of God they have been banished to Trans-caucasia and to Siberia . 
”’ “Actually, in the village of Glybochka, Trubchevsk Uyezd, which is the village concerned in this case, there were in 1898 , according to the report of the Brotherhood, not forty Stundist families , but forty persons of both sexes, including twenty-one children. 
 In that year only seven persons werebanished to Transcaucasia by order of the regional court asa penalty for proselytising to the Stundist faith. 
 As for theexpression of the local priest, ‘ banished by the grace of God ’, it was a casual remark dropped at a closed session of the con-gress during a free exchange of opinion among the delegates , the more so, since the priest in question was previously knownto every one, and at the congress proved himself to be a most worthy missionary priest. 
” Such a refutation is truly priceless! Casually dropped dur-ing a free exchange of opinion! This is precisely what makes it interesting, for we know only too well the real value of the official utterances of official persons. 
 And if the priest, *In his rejoinder to the official denial, Mr. 
 Stakhovich wrote: “I do not know what the official report of the Brotherhood contains, but Father Pereverzev related the details of this incident at the con-gress and stated that the civil authorities knew of the decision of thevillage meeting [ sic!!]. 
 ... I asked him personally whether the priest knew and he answered, “Yes, he knew too. 
” Comment issuperfluous. 
 who uttered these words “straight from the heart”, is “a most worthy missionary priest”, the more significant are these words for that very reason. 
 “By the grace of God, banished to Transcaucasia and to Siberia. 
” These magnificent wordsshould become no less famous than Metropolitan Philaret’sdefence of serfdom with the help of Holy Writ. 
 Since we have mentioned Philaret, it would be unfair not to mention the letter addressed by a “learned liberal” to His Grace Ambrosius, Archbishop of Kharkov, and pub-lished in the magazine Vera i Razum 122 for 1901. 
 * The author of the letter signed himself: Jeronim Preobrazhensky, hon-orary citizen, formerly a member of the clergy. 
 It was theeditor who described him as the “learned [!] liberal”, no doubtbecause he was overawed by his “well of wisdom”. 
 We shall cite only a few passages from the letter, which again reveals the fact that political thought and political protest penetrateby unseen ways into wider circles than we sometimes imagine. 
 “I am already an old man, nearly sixty. 
 During my lifetime I have observed not a few departures from the fulfilment of church duties, andI must say conscientiously that in every case the clergy was to blame. 
As for ‘ the latest events ’, I think we should fervently thank the clergy of our day for opening the eyes of many. 
 Now not only volost clerks but young and old, educated and uneducated and even those barely able to read will strive to read the writings of the great Russian au-thor. 
 People pay high prices to get his books (published abroad by Svob-odnoye Slovo, 123 and freely obtainable in all countries of the world except Russia); they read them, discuss them, and finally come to con-clusions that are, of course, not favourable to the clergy. 
 The people are now beginning to understand where truth and where falsehood lies; they see that the clergy say one thing and do another, and that ofteneven their words are contradictory. 
 Much that is true might be said,but unfortunately one cannot speak frankly with the clergy; theywould immediately report to the authorities and demand punishmentand execution.... 
 But Christ did not attract converts by force and by executions, but by justice and love.... 
 “... In concluding your speech, you write: ‘We possess a great force for the struggle—that is the autocratic power of our most devoutsovereigns. 
’ Again a subterfuge, and again we refuse to believe you. 
Although you, the enlightened clergy, strive to assure us that you *We take this opportunity to thank the correspondent who sent us the reprints from the magazine. 
 Our ruling classes very often are not ashamed to expose themselves au naturel in prison, church, and similar special publications. 
 It is high time we revolutionaries system-atically utilised this “rich treasure-house” of political enlighten-ment. 
 ‘imbibed loyalty to the autocrat with your mother’s milk’ (from the speech of the present vicar, delivered at the time of his consecra-tion as bishop), we, the unenlightened , refuse to believe that a year-old infant (even a future bishop) could reason about theform of government and give preference to autocracy. 
 After the abortive attempt of Patriarch Nikon to play in Russia the role of the Popes of Rome, who in Western countries combined withinthemselves spiritual and temporal power, our church, through its highest representatives, the metropolitans, has wholly and for ever subjected itself to the power of the sovereigns, who sometimes, as wasthe case with Peter the Great, despotically imposed their will upon the church. 
 (The pressure Peter the Great brought to bear upon the cler-gy in the condemnation of Tsarevich Alexei. 
) In the nineteenth century,we see complete harmony between the secular and ecclesiastical author-ities in Russia. 
 In the stern epoch of Nicholas I, when, influenced by the great social movements in the West, social consciousness began toawaken in Russia and here, too, individual champions arose to fight against the outrageous enslavement of the common people, our church remained completely indifferent to the popular sufferings, and despiteChrist’s great commandment of human brotherhood and brotherly love, not a single voice was raised among the clergy in defence of the dispossessed people, against the cruel tyranny of the landlords; and the only reason for this was that the government did not yet dare tolay its hand upon serfdom, the existence of which Philaret of Moscow openly sought to justify with biblical texts from the Old Testament. 
 Then came the storm: Russia was defeated and politically degraded atSevastopol. 
 The defeat clearly exposed all the defects of our pre-Reform * system, and before all else our young, humane sovereign (who owesthe education of his mind and spirit to the poet Zhukovsky) brokethe ancient chains of slavery; but, by the irony of fate, the test of the great act of February 19 was submitted for revision from the Chris-tian point of view to the selfsame Philaret, who apparently hastenedto change his views regarding serfdom to suit the spirit of our times. 
The epoch of the great reforms left its mark also upon our clergy, which,under Makarius (afterwards Metropolitan) carried on the fruitful workof reorganising our ecclesiastical institutions in which they hacked a window (even if a small one) into the world of light and publicity. 
 The period of reaction, which set in after March 1, 1881, enabled anelement of leadership corresponding to the manner of Pobedonostsevand Katkov to penetrate into the clergy; and while the progressivepeople of the country in the Zemstvos and in society are presentingpetitions for the abolition of the survivals of corporal punishment, the church remains silent and utters not a word in condemnation of those who defend the rod—that atrocious instrument for the degra-dation of human beings created in the image of God. 
 After all this,would it be unjust to suppose in the event of changes in the régime from above that our clergy, through its representatives, would praise a con-stitutional monarch just as it now lauds the autocratic monarch? Why then the hypocrisy? Strength lies, not in the autocracy, but in Prior to the Peasant Reform of 1861. 
— Tr. 
 the monarch. 
 Peter I was also a heaven-sent autocrat, but the church to this day does not favour him, and Peter III was a similar autocrat who wanted to shear and educate our clergy—what a pity he was not allowed to reign for two or three years! And if the present reigningautocrat, Nicholas II, decided to express his kindly feelings for the famous Lev Nikolayevich, * where would you then run to hide with your snares, your fears, and your threats? “In vain you quote texts of the prayers which the clergy sends up for the tsar; this jumble of words in an incomprehensible jargon convinces no one. 
 We live under an autocracy: if ordered to do so,you will write prayers thrice as long and even more expressive”. 
 * * * The second marshal’s speech, as far as we know, was not published in our press. 
 A hectographed copy, sent to usby an unknown correspondent last August, bore the followingpencilled inscription: “Speech delivered by an uyezd mar-shal of the nobility at a private meeting of marshals calledto discuss student affairs. 
 ” We give the speech in full: “For lack of time I shall express my views on this meeting of mar-shals of the nobility in the form of theses: “The cause of the present disorders is known approximately: They are called forth, first, by the disordered state of our entire govern-mental system, by the oligarchic régime of the bureaucratic corporatebody, i. 
e. 
, by the dictatorship of the bureaucrats. 
 “This state of disorder in the bureaucratic governmental dictator-ship reveals itself throughout the whole of Russian society, from topto bottom, in the form of general discontent that finds its outward expression in the general politicalism, a politicalism that is not tem-porary or superficial, but profound and chronic. 
 “This politicalism, the common disease of the whole of society, permeates all its manifestations, its functions and institutions, and for that reason necessarily the educational institutions, with theiryounger, more impressionable public, which is oppressed by the same régime of the bureaucratic dictatorship. 
 “It is recognised that the root evil of student disorders lies in the general disorganisation of the state and in the general disease result-ing from this condition; however, in view of the spontaneous sentiments and of the necessity for checking the development of the local evil,the disorders cannot be ignored and efforts must be made at least from this side to diminish the frightfully destructive manifestations of the general evil in the same way as, when the whole organismis diseased and is in need of prolonged and radical treatment, it is necessary to take urgent measures to suppress local, acute, and destructive complications of the disease. 
 “In the secondary and higher educational establishments, the evil of the bureaucratic régime finds expression principally in the substi-tution of human (youthful) development and education by bureau-cratic training, which is combined with the systematic suppressionof human individuality and dignity. 
 “The distrust, indignation, and anger against the officials and the teachers roused among the youth by all these manifestations arebeing transferred from the high schools to the universities, where, unfortunately, the universities being what they are at present, the youth encounters the same evils and the same suppression of humanindividuality and dignity. 
 “In a word, for the youth, the universities are not temples of learn-ing, but factories for converting the impersonal student masses intothe bureaucratic commodity required by the state. 
 “This suppression of human individuality (in the process of con-verting the students into an impersonal, pliable mass), which revealsitself in the form of a systematic and chronic suppression and perse-cution of all personality and dignity, frequently in the form of brutal violence, lies at the base of all student disorders that have eruptedfor several decades and threaten to continue with greater intensity in the future, carrying off the best of Russia’s youth. 
 “All this we know—but what are we to do in the present situation? How can we help the present acute situation with all its bitterness, with all its misery and sorrow? Give up all efforts? Abandon our youth to the mercy of fate, to the bureaucrats, and to the police, withoutattempting to help them—wash our hands of the whole thing and walk off? This, to my mind, is the main issue, namely, what can we do to assuage the acute manifestation of this disease, now that werecognise its general character? “Our meeting reminds me of a crowd of well-intentioned people who have entered a wild forest for the purpose of clearing it, andwho stand in utter amazement at the enormity of the general task, instead of concentrating on any one special point. 
 “Professor K. 
 T. 
 has presented to us a striking general picture of the true state of affairs today in the universities and among the students, pointing out the various harmful influences from the outside, not only political, but even police influences, upon theunstable students; but we knew all this before, more or less, albeit not so clearly as we know now. 
 “He suggested a radical change in the whole of the educational system and its substitution by a better system as the only possible measure to adopt, but the professor remarked that this would proba-bly require considerable time; and if we bear in mind that every partic-ular system in the Russian state, as in every other state, forms an organic part of the system as a whole, then perhaps the end of that time is not foreseeable. 
 “But what must we do now in order at least to assuage the unbear-able pain caused by the disease at the present time? What palliative can we adopt? Even palliatives that temporarily soothe the patientare frequently recognised as necessary. 
 This is a question we have not as regards the student youth in general, which, I might say, obscure the question even more. 
 It is even difficult to recall those judgements, but I will endeavour to do so. 
 “Something was said about girl students: We gave them courses and lectures, and see how they thank us—by taking part in student disorders! “Now, had we presented bouquets or costly ornaments to the fair sex, such a reproach would be conceivable; to organise lecture courses for women, however, is not a favour, but the satisfaction of a social need. 
 Women’s lecture courses are not a caprice, but as much a social-ly necessary educational institution as are the universities for the higher development of the youth of both sexes. 
 That is why full social and comradely solidarity exists between the male and female educa-tional institutions. 
 “This solidarity, to my view, likewise fully explains the fact that the unrest among the student youth has also spread among the stu-dents in women’s educational institutions. 
 All the students are in a state of unrest, irrespective of attire, male or female. 
 “Someone else then spoke about the student unrest, saying that we must not be indulgent with the students, that their outrages must be halted by force. 
 To this, in my opinion, the rational objection was made that even if the conduct of the students can be set down as out-rageous, these are not fortuitous, but are chronic and deep-rooted and that therefore the resort to mere punitive measures, as past experience has shown, will prove unavailing. 
 Personally, as I view the matter,it is highly questionable as to which side is responsible for the greatest outrage of all the outrageous disorders that excite our educational in-stitutions and are bringing them to their doom; I do not believe thegovernment’s reports. 
 “This is the very point, that the other side is not listened to and cannot be listened to; it is gagged (the justice of my words, that inits reports the administration lies and that by its atrocious conduct it is chiefly responsible for the outrages, has not been fully confirmed). 
 “Reference was made to the outside influences of various revolu-tionary forces upon the student youth. 
 “Yes, those influences exist, but too much significance is attached to them. 
 Thus, the factory owners, in whose factories these influencesare mainly felt, also throw the blame for everything upon them, ar-guing that, were it not for those influences, there would be quiet and contentment and the peace of God in their factories; they forget or ig-nore all the legal and illegal exploitation of the workers, which brings about their impoverishment and rouses amongst them discontent and finally leads to disorders. 
 Were it not for this exploitation, the revo-lutionary elements working from the outside would be deprived of the many grounds and causes that enable them to penetrate so easily into factory affairs. 
 All this, in my opinion, may also be said with respectto our educational institutions, which have been transformed from temples of learning into factories for the manufacture of bureaucratic material. 
 “The power of the small but purposive handful of young men and of young men and women, apparently not in the least so predisposed, to strikes and to disorders lies in the general, instinctive conscious-ness of the oppression weighing over the whole of our student youth, and in the generally unhealthy state of mind that is created by thisoppression among student youth at all levels. 
 This is what happens in all factories. 
 “I recall also that something was said about not flattering the stu-dents, about not showing them sympathy during disorders, since expressions of sympathy merely incite them to fresh outbreaks, to illustrate which argument a number of varying instances were cited. 
On this point I would say, first of all, that in view of the manifold con-fusion and the diversity of occurrences during disorders, it is impos-sible to point to single cases as illustrative of all, since, for every suchcase, numerous others of a directly contradictory character can be found. 
 One can only dwell on the general indications, which I shall here briefly undertake to do. 
 “As we all know, the students are far from being coddled, not only have they not been scented with incense (I do not speak of the forties), but they have never enjoyed any particular public sympathy. 
 At thetime of the disorders, the public was either indifferent to the students or even more than negative towards them, throwing the blame entire-ly upon them, without knowing (or desiring to know) the causes ofthe disorders (credence was given, without the slightest doubt as to their veracity, to the government reports, which were hostile to the students, apparently for the first time the public has begun to doubtthem). 
 To speak, therefore, of flattering the students is quite be-side the mark. 
 “Failing to find support among the intelligentsia in general or among the professors and the university officials, the students finally began to seek sympathy among the various popular elements, and we know that they succeeded more or less in finding it, they have begungradually to gain the sympathy of the popular crowds. 
 “To be convinced of this, one need only note the difference be-tween the present attitude of the crowd and that displayed towardsthe students at the time of the Okhotny Ryad 124 assaults. 
 Herein lies the great evil: the evil is not that sympathy is expressed, but that this sympathy is one-sided, that it is assuming a demagogic tinge. 
 “The absence of sympathy and support of any kind on the part of the settled intelligentsia, and the distrust this gives rise to, throws our youth inevitably into the arms of demagogues and revolutionists;it becomes their tools and, again inevitably, demagogic elements begin more and more to develop among the student youth, drawing it away from peaceful, cultural development and from the existingorder (if it can be called order) and driving it into the enemy camp. 
 “We ourselves are to blame if our youth has ceased to have confi-dence in us; we have done nothing to deserve its confidence. 
 “These, I think, are the main ideas that were expressed at this meeting; the others (considerable in number, too) are hardly worth recalling. 
 “I come now to the conclusion. 
 In gathering here, our intention the heavy burden of our youth today, not some time in the future, and we were defeated. 
 Again the youth will be justified in saying and will say that today as in the past the peaceful, settled Russian intelli-gentsia neither can nor wishes to render it any assistance, to cometo its defence, to understand it and to ease its bitter lot. 
 The gulf between ourselves and the youth will become wider, and the youth will increasingly join up with the various demagogues whose hand isoutstretched towards it. 
 “We were not defeated by the fact that the measure we proposed, a petition to the tsar, was not accepted; perhaps that measure was nota practical one (although in my opinion no attention was paid to it); we were defeated by the fact that we ourselves destroyed all possibil-ity of applying any measure whatsoever to help our suffering youth;we have confessed our impotence, and once again we grope as before, in darkness. 
 “What remains for us to do?“Wash our hands of the affair? “This darkness constitutes the terrible and gloomy tragedy of Rus-sian life. 
” This speech requires no lengthy comment. 
 It too, appar-ently, belongs to a still sufficiently “oh, so gay” Russian noble who, either for doctrinaire or for selfish motives, ex-presses reverence for “peaceful, cultural development” ofthe “existing order” and waxes indignant with “revolutionists”,whom he confounds with “demagogues”. 
 But this indigna-tion, if examined closely, borders on the grumbling of an old man (old, not in age but in views) who perhaps is ready to recognise something good in the thing he is grumblingabout. 
 In speaking of the “existing order” he cannot refrainfrom remarking, “if it can be called order”. 
 He smoulderswith resentment against the disorder caused by the “dicta-torship of the bureaucrats”, the “systematic and chronic per-secution of all personality and dignity”; he cannot close his eyes to the fact that all the outrages are committed chieflyby the administration. 
 He is sufficiently straightforwardto confess his impotence and to recognise the indecencyof “washing one’s hands” of the entire country’s misery. 
 True,he is still frightened by the “one-sided” sympathy of the “crowd” towards the students. 
 His aristocratically effemi-nated mind is haunted by the menace of “demagogy”, and per-haps even by the menace of socialism (let us repay candourwith candour). 
 But it would be absurd to attempt to testthe views and sentiments of a marshal of the nobility who isfed up with the disgusting Russian bureaucracy by the touchstone of socialism. 
 We have no need to be diplomatic either in regard to him or to anyone else; when we hear a Russian landlord, for example, storming against the illegalexploitation and the impoverishment of factory workers, we will not fail, incidentally, to say to him, Cast out the beam out of thine own eye, friend! We shall not for a momentconceal from him that we stand and will continue to stand for the irreconcilable class struggle against the “masters” of modern society. 
 But a political alignment is determined,not only by ultimate aims, but also by immediate aims, not only by general views, but also by the pressure of direct practical necessity. 
 Whoever clearly sees the contradictionbetween the “cultural development” of the country and the “oppressive régime of the bureaucratic dictatorship” must, sooner or later, be compelled by the very facts of lifeto come to the conclusion that this contradiction cannot be removed unless the autocracy is removed. 
 Having come to this conclusion, he will unfailingly assist—grumble, butassist—the party that can rouse a menacing force againstthe autocracy—a force that will be menacing, not only inthe eyes of the autocracy, but in the eyes of all. 
 In order tobecome such a party, we repeat, Social-Democracy must purge itself of all opportunistic pollution, and under the banner of revolutionary theory, basing itself on the most revolutionaryclass, it must carry its agitation and organising activityamong all classes of the population. 
 Taking our leave of the marshals of the nobility, we say, Au revoir , gentlemen, our allies of tomorrow! PREFACE TO THE PAMPHLET DOCUMENTS OF THE “UNITY ” CONFERENCE In Iskra , No. 
 9 (October 1901), * we told of the unsuccessful attempt to unite the section of the Zarya-Iskra organisation abroad, the revolutionary organisation Sotsial-Demokrat and the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad. 
 Wehave decided to publish the proceedings of the “Unity”Conference, so that all Russian Social-Democrats mayindependently draw their own conclusions as to the reasonsfor the failure of the attempt at unity made by the organisa-tions abroad. 
 Unfortunately, the secretary of the Conference, elected by the Union Abroad, refused to assist in drawingup the minutes of the proceedings (as will be seen from hisletter, quoted on pages 10 and 11 of this pamphlet, in reply tothe invitation to him by the secretaries of the two otherorganisations). 
 This refusal is all the more strange for the reason that the Union Abroad has published its own account of the “Unity”Conference ( Two Conferences , Geneva, 1901). 
 It would appear, therefore, that although the Union Abroad desired to informthe Russian comrades of the results of the Conference, it did not wish to acquaint them with the debates. 
 ** We leave *See present volume, pp. 
 241-42. 
— Ed. 
 **According to the Conference standing orders, the minutes should have been approved by the Conference itself, each day’s pro-ceedings commencing with the reading and approval of the minutesof the previous day’s proceedings. 
 But on the second day, when thechairman, in opening the session, called for the minutes of the first day’s two sessions, the three secretaries in one voice declared that they could not present them. 
 Owing to the absence of a stenographer, therecords were in a most unsatisfactory state. 
 It is quite understand-able, therefore, that if the secretaries could not prepare the minutes it to the reader to draw his own conclusions as to the pos-sible and probable reasons for this unwillingness. 
 After the Union Abroad had rejected our proposal, we on our part did not think it desirable to publish a summaryof the discussion that had not been drawn up jointly by allthree secretaries; for this reason we are obliged to confineourselves to the publication of all documents and decla-rations submitted to the bureau of the Conference. 
 The bureau consisted of the chairmen and secretaries of all three organ-isations, and all declarations were submitted to the bureauexclusively in writing; thus there can be no doubt about theobjectivity of a description of the Conference which is basedon the documents and declarations. 
 On the other hand, the publication of all the documents and declarations presented to the bureau is all the more necessary at the present time, since the Union Abroad hascrowned its strange refusal to participate in drawing upthe minutes of the Conference with a still stranger methodof drawing up the Conference report. 
 Thus, the Union Ab-road has not reproduced in full the interpellations * submit-ted to the bureau of the Conference by the representative of Iskra (Frey125) in the name of the Iskra section abroad, and of the Sotsial-Demokrat organisation; but it did reproduce the reply (to the interpellations) “drawn up” by the UnionAbroad but not submitted to the bureau and not even readat the Conference ( Two Conferences , p. 
 26). 
 The Union Abroad is mistaken in stating that the “interpellation” was withdrawn. 
 The interpellation consisted of the twoquestions submitted to the Union by Frey in the name ofthe two organisations (see p. 
 6 of this pamphlet). 
 Neither of these questions was withdrawn ; only the form was changed pect that the minutes would be ready on the evening of the second day when we left the Conference. 
 Everyone knew perfectly well that theminutes were not ready. 
 Hence, the indignation of the Union Abroadover the “desertion” of our chairman, who “did not wait until theminutes of the Conference were approved” ( Two Conferences , p. 
 29), is nothing but a subterfuge. 
 Since there was no verbatim report, there was nothing else to do except for the three secretaries to get together and draw up at least a brief summary of the discussions. 
 This, in fact,was our proposal, but the Union Abroad rejected it. 
 Clearly, the re-sponsibility for the absence of a summarised, if not a full, report ofthe Conference, rests upon the Union Abroad. 
 to turn the questions into a resolution which might have been submitted to a vote (the words “Does the Union Abroad recognise in principle the resolution of the June Conference?” were altered to read: “The three organisations accept inprinciple the resolution of the June Conference”, etc. 
). 
Furthermore, the Union Abroad has not published the dec-laration of the Borba group which was presented to the bureau (see pp. 
 6-7 of this pamphlet). 
 Not only has the Union Abroad failed to publish the con-tents of the speech delivered by a member of the Borbagroup after the Union had submitted amendments to theJune resolutions, but it makes no reference whatever to thespeech. 
 * In that speech, a member of the Borba group, who had taken part in the June Conference, spoke against the amendments of the Union Abroad. 
 The Union published the “arguments” in favour of the amendments, contained in aspeech delivered at the Conference by B. 
 Krichevsky,without, however, having presented them to the bureau. 
 Ina word, having rejected our proposal for the joint draftingof a summary of the entire discussion, the Union preferred to publish only what it thought of advantage to itself and to ignore even some of the things that were presented to thebureau. 
 We do not propose to follow that example. 
 We have con-fined ourselves to the publication of all the declarations anddocuments presented to the bureau, with the bare statement as to the opinions expressed by the spokesmen of all the organisations represented at the Conference. 
 Let the readerjudge as to whether the articles in Rabocheye Dyelo , No. 
 10, and the amendments of the Union Abroad have violated the principle that was the basis of the agreement drawn up atthe June Conference. 
 Of course, we shall also leave unan-swered the angry words that so profusely decorate the pages of the pamphlet of the Union Abroad, including the chargesof “slander”, or of our having “broken up” the Conference byleaving it. 
 Such accusations can only raise a smile. 
 Threeorganisations gathered to discuss the question of unity. 
Two agreed that they could not unite with the third. 
 Natu-rally, there was nothing left for the two organisations but to *See pamphlet Two Conference , p. 
 28. 
 explain their position and depart. 
 Only those who are angry because they are wrong can characterise this step as “break-ing up” the Conference, or designate as “slander” the asser-tion that the Union Abroad wavers in questions of principle. 
 As for our view of the controversial questions of Russian Social-Democracy, we prefer not to confuse the issue withan objective report of the Conference proceedings. 
 In addi-tion to the articles that have already appeared, and will appear, in Iskra and Zarya , we are preparing a special pam-phlet on the urgent questions of our movement, to be pub-lished in the near future. 
 Written in November 1901 First published in December 1901 in a pamphlet issued by the League of Russian Revolutionary Social-Democracy AbroadPublished according to the text in the pamphlet THE PROTEST OF THE FINNISH PEOPLE We publish below the full text of another mass petition by means of which the Finnish people express their strongprotest against the policy of the government, which has violated, and continues to violate, the constitution of Fin-land, thus breaking the oath solemnly taken by all the tsars, from Alexander I to Nicholas II. 
 The petition was presented to the Finnish Senate on September 17 (30), 1901, for submission to the tsar. 
 It issigned by 473,363 Finnish men and women of all strata of society, i. 
e. 
, by nearly half a million citizens. 
 The total pop-ulation of Finland is 2,500,000, so that this petition veri-tably expresses the voice of the entire people . 
 The text reads in full: “Most puissant , most gracious Sovereign , Emperor and Grand Duke! Your Imperial Majesty’s change of the law On military service in Finland has aroused general alarm and profound sorrow throughout the territory. 
 The orders, the Manifesto and the law on military service, con-firmed by Your Imperial Majesty on July 12 (June 29) this year are to complete violation of the fundamental laws of the Grand Duchy andof the precious rights belonging to the Finnish people and to all the citizens of the country by virtue of its laws. 
 “In accordance with the fundamental laws, regulations governing citizens’ duties to defend the region may be issued only with the consent of the Diet. 
 This was the procedure by which the Military Service Act of 1878 was passed, in accordance with a joint decision ofthe Emperor Alexander II and the Diet. 
 During the reign of Emperor Alexander III, numerous specific changes were made in this Law, but none without the consent of the Diet. 
 Despite this, the Law of 1878is declared annulled, without the consent of the Diet, and the new or-ders issued in place of the old Law are at complete variance with the decision of the deputies to the Extraordinary Diet of 1899. 
 “One of the most important rights vested in every Finnish citizen Today, thousands and thousands of Finnish citizens are deprived of this right, for the new Military Service Act compels them to serve in Russian units and converts military service into suffering for those sons of our country who will be forcibly drafted into these units, aliento them in language, religion, manners, and customs. 
 “The new regulations abolish every legally fixed limitation of the annual contingent. 
 Moreover, they contain no recognition of the rightgranted by the fundamental laws for the Diet to participate in drafting the military budget. 
 “In violation of the fundamental principle of the Law of 1878, even the militia has been made entirely dependent upon the discre-tion of the Minister of War. 
 “The impression created by such regulations is not modified by the measures of relief referred to in the Manifesto, which are to oper-ate for a transitional period as yet undefined, because the temporary reduction in the number of recruits will be immediately followed byunlimited drafts for service with Russian units. 
 “The Finnish people have not asked for any relief of the military burden they have carried. 
 The Diet, which expresses the opinion ofthe people, has proved Finland’s readiness to increase its share in the defence of the state as far as it is in its power, on the condition that the juridical position of the Finnish troops as a Finnish institution ispreserved. 
 “Contrary to this, the new regulations state that the majority of the Finnish units are to be abolished and Russian officers permittedto enter the service of the few remaining units; that even the non-com-missioned officers of these units must know the Russian language which means that Finnish-born citizens mainly of peasant strata willbe prevented from filling these posts; that these troops are to come under Russian administration and that they may, even in peace-time, be stationed outside of Finland. 
 “These orders which do not constitute a reform but merely pursue the aim of abolishing the national troops of Finland, are a sign of distrust which the Finnish people throughout almost a century ofunion with Russia have done nothing to deserve. 
 “The new military service regulations also contain expressions, the implication of which is that the Finnish people have no father-land of their own and that the rights of Finnish citizenship to those born in the country are denied. 
 These expressions betray aims that are incompatible with the inalienable right of the Finnish people topreserve, in their union with Russia, the political position firmly guaranteed to Finland in 1809. 
 “A grave misfortune has beset our region during the recent years. 
 Time and again it has been demonstrated that the established funda-mental laws of the region are ignored, partly in legislative measures and partly in the assignment of Russians to important posts. 
 The re-gion has been administered in a manner to suggest that the aim was to disturb peace and order, to hinder useful pursuits, and to cause friction between Russians and Finns. 
 “The greatest misfortune that has befallen the country, however, In its humble response of May 27, 1899, the Diet described in de-tail the order which, according to the fundamental laws of Finland must be observed in the promulgation of a law on military service. 
 It was pointed out that if a new law on military service is passed inany other way, that law, even if put into operation by force, cannot be recognised as a legal measure, and in the eyes of the Finnish people will be nothing more than an act of violence. 
 “Everything the Diet indicated continues to be the Finnish peo-ple’s unchanging sense of justice, which cannot be changed by violence. 
 “Serious consequences are to be feared from regulations not in accord with the laws of the country. 
 The conscience of officials in government institutions will come into grave conflict with their sense of duty for conscience will urge them to refuse to be guided by such regula-tions. 
 The number of able-bodied emigrants compelled to leave the country from fear of the threatening changes will increase still more if the regulations announced will be put into effect. 
 “The new military service regulations, like every other measure directed against the rights of the Finnish people to a separate politi-cal and national existence, must inevitably sow distrust between themonarch and the people, as well as give rise to growing discontent, to a sense of general oppression, to uncertainty, and to enormous diffi-culties for society and its members in the work for the welfare of theregion. 
 These evils cannot be avoided except by the substitution of the aforesaid regulations by a military service law passed jointly with the Diet, and in general by the strict observance of the fundamentallaws on the part of the government authorities of the region. 
 “The Finnish people cannot cease to be a separate people. 
 United by a common historical fate, by juridical conceptions and culturalwork, our people will remain true to its love of the Finnish fatherland and to its traditional liberty. 
 The people will not deviate from its aspirations to occupy worthily the modest place fate has destined forit among the nations. 
 “Firm in the conviction of our rights and in the respect for our laws which are our mainstay in our social life, we are no less firmlyconvinced that the unity of mighty Russia will suffer no damage ifFinland continues in the future to be administered in accordance withthe fundamental principles laid down in 1809, and in this way to feelhappy and peaceful in its union with Russia. 
 “The sense of duty to their country compels the inhabitants of all communities and social strata to submit to Your Imperial Majesty atrue and unembellished record of the state of affairs. 
 We pointed outabove that the recently promulgated military service regulations,contradicting as they do the solemnly guaranteed fundamental lawsof the Grand Duchy, cannot be regarded as a legal act. 
 We consider it our duty to add that the military burden in itself is not nearly so important to the Finnish people as the loss of firmly establishedrights and of legally founded tranquillity on this most importantquestion. 
 We therefore humbly pray Your Imperial Majesty graciouslyto give the matters referred to in this petition the attention their se-riousness calls for. 
 We are, etc. 
” We have little to add to the above petition, which rep-resents a people’s indictment of the gang of Russian official law-breakers. 
 We shall enumerate the principal facts of the “Finnish question”. 
 Finland was annexed to Russia in 1809, during the war with Sweden. 
 Desiring to win over the Finns who were for-merly subjects of the Swedish King, Alexander I decided to recognise and confirm the old Finnish constitution. 
 Accord-ing to this constitution, no fundamental law can be made,amended, interpreted, or repealed without the consent of the Diet , i. 
e. 
, the assembly of representatives of all social-es-tates . 
 Alexander I, in a number of manifestos, “solemnly” confirmed “ the promise sacredly to preserve the separate constitution of the country ”. 
 This sacred promise was subsequently confirmed by all succeeding Russian monarchs, including Nicholas II, who, inthe Manifesto of October 25 (November 6), 1894, “promisedto preserve them [the fundamental laws] in their inviolableand immutable force and operation”. 
 Within five years the Tsar of Russia had broken his solemn oath . 
 Preceded by a campaign of vilification, conducted by the venal and servile press, the Manifesto of February 3 (15),1899 was promulgated, introducing new regulations, accord-ing to which laws might be passed without the consent of the Diet “if these laws concern the requirements of the Em-pire as a whole or are part of imperial legislation”. 
 This was a glaring violation of the constitution, a veri-table coup d’état , because every law can be said to concern the requirements of the Empire as a whole! This coup d’etat was brought about by violence : Governor General Bobrikov threatened to call troops into Finland if the Senate refused to publish the Manifesto. 
 According to the statements made by Russian officers, ball cartridges weredistributed to the Russian troops stationed in Finland, andhorses were saddled, etc. 
 The first act of violence was followed by innumerable others. 
 Finnish newspapers were suppressed one after anoth-er, the right of assembly was annulled, Finland was flooded with swarms of Russian spies and despicable provocateurs,who incited the people to rebellion etc. 
, etc. 
 Finally, the Military Service Act of June 29 (July 12) was passed, without the consent of the Diet . 
 This law has been dealt with sufficiently in the petition. 
 Both the Manifesto of February 3, 1899 and the Act of June 29, 1901 are illegal . 
 This is the violence of a per-jurer acting with a horde of bashi-bazouks called the tsaristgovernment. 
 It would be futile, of course, for 2,500,000Finns to think of an uprising; but we, all Russian citizens, should ponder over the disgrace that puts us to shame. 
 We are still slaves to such an extent that we are employedto reduce other peoples to slavery. 
 We still tolerate a govern-ment that suppresses every aspiration towards liberty inRussia with the ferocity of an executioner, and that further-more employs Russian troops for the purpose of violently infringing on the liberties of others! Iskra , No. 
 10, November 1901 Published according to the Iskra text THE JOURNAL SVOBODA126 Svoboda is a worthless little rag. 
 Its author—indeed, this is precisely the impression it creates, that one person has written it all, from beginning to end—claims to write popularly “for the workers”. 
 But what we have here is notpopularisation, but talking down in the worst sense of theterm. 
 There is not one simple word, everything is twisted.... 
The author cannot write a single phrase without embellish-ments, without “popular” similes and “popular” catchwordssuch as “theirn”. 
 Outworn socialist ideas are chewed overin this ugly language without any new data, any new exam-ples, any new analysis, and the whole thing is deliberatelyvulgarised. 
 Popularisation, we should like to inform theauthor, is a long way from vulgarisation, from talking down. 
The popular writer leads his reader towards profoundthoughts, towards profound study, proceeding from simpleand generally known facts; with the aid of simple argumentsor striking examples he shows the main conclusions to be drawn from those facts and arouses in the mind of thethinking reader ever newer questions. 
 The popular writerdoes not presuppose a reader that does not think, that can-not or does not wish to think; on the contrary, he assumesin the undeveloped reader a serious intention to use hishead and aids him in his serious and difficult work, leads him, helps him over his first steps, and teaches him to go forward independently. 
 The vulgar writer assumes that hisreader does not think and is incapable of thinking; he does not lead him in his first steps towards serious knowledge, but in a distortedly simplified form, interlarded with jokes and facetiousness, hands out “ready-made” all the conclu-sions of a known theory, so that the reader does not evenhave to chew but merely to swallow what he is given. 
 Written in the autumn of 1901 First published in the magazine Bolshevik , No. 
 2, 1936Published according to the manuscript A TALK WITH DEFENDERS OF ECONOMISM Below we publish in full, as received from one of our representatives, “A Letter to the Russian Social-Democratic Press . 
 “In response to the suggestion made by our comrades in exile that we express our views on Iskra , we have resolved to state the reasons for our disagreement with that organ. 
 “While recognising that the appearance of a special Social-Demo-cratic organ specially devoted to questions of the political struggleis entirely opportune, we do not think that Iskra , which has under-taken this task, has performed it satisfactorily. 
 The principal drawbackof the paper, which runs like a scarlet thread through its columns,and which is the cause of all its other defects, large and small, is theexaggerated importance it attaches to the influence which the ideolo-gists of the movement exert upon its various tendencies. 
 At the sametime, Iskra gives too little consideration to the material elements and the material environment of the movement, whose interaction createsa definite type of labour movement and determines its path, the pathfrom which the ideologists, despite all their efforts, are incapable ofdiverting it, even if they are inspired by the finest theories and pro-grammes. 
 “This defect becomes most marked when Iskra is compared with Yuzhny Rabochy 127 which, like Iskra , raises the banner of political struggle but connects it with the preceding phase of the South-Russianworking-class movement. 
 Such a presentation of the question is aliento Iskra . 
 It has set itself the task of fanning ‘the spark into a great conflagration’, * but it forgets that necessary inflammable material and favourable environmental conditions are required for such a task. 
In dissociating itself completely from the ‘Economists’, Iskra loses sight of the fact that their activity prepared the ground for the workers’participation in the February and March events, upon which Iskra lays so much stress and, to all appearances, greatly exaggerates. 
 Whilecriticising adversely the activity of the Social-Democrats of the latenineties, Iskra ignores the fact that at that time the conditions were *A play on the word Iskra , which means “spark”. 
— Tr. 
 lacking for any work other than the struggle for minor demands, and ignores also the enormous educational significance of that struggle. 
Iskra is entirely wrong and unhistorical in its appraisement of that period and of the direction of the activities of the Russian Social-Democrats at the time, in identifying their tactics with those of Zu-batov, 128 in failing to differentiate between the ‘struggle for mi-nor demands’, which widens and deepens the labour movement, and‘minor concessions’, whose purpose was to paralyse every struggleand every movement. 
 “Thoroughly imbued with the sectarian intolerance so characteris-tic of ideologists in the infantile period of social movements, Iskra is ready to brand every disagreement with it, not only as a departurefrom Social-Democratic principles, but as desertion to the camp ofthe enemy. 
 Of such a nature is its extremely indecent and most repre-hensible attack upon Rabochaya Mysl , contained in the article on Zuba-tov, in which the latter’s success among a certain section of the work-ing class was attributed to that publication. 
 Negatively disposed to the other Social-Democratic organisations, which differ from it intheir views on the progress and the tasks of the Russian labour move-ment, Iskra , in the heat of controversy, at times forgets the truth and, picking on isolated unfortunate expressions, attributes to its opponentsviews they do not hold, emphasises points of disagreement that are frequently of little material importance, and obstinately ignores the numerous points of contact in views. 
 We have in mind Iskra ’s attitude towards Rabocheye Dyelo . 
 “Iskra ’s excessive predilection for controversy is due primarily to its exaggerating the role of ‘ideology’ (programmes, theories...)in the movement, and is partly an echo of the internecine squabbles that have flared up among Russian political exiles in Western Europe, of which they have hastened to inform the world in a number of polem-ical pamphlets and articles. 
 In our opinion, these disagreements exercise almost no influence upon the actual course of the Russian So-cial-Democratic movement, except perhaps to damage it by bringing an undesirable schism into the midst of the comrades working in Rus-sia. 
 For this reason, we cannot but express our disapproval of Iskra ’s fervent polemics, particularly when it oversteps the bounds of decency. 
 “This basic drawback of Iskra is also the cause of its inconsistency on the question of the attitude of Social-Democracy to the various social classes and tendencies. 
 By theoretical reasoning, Iskra solved the prob-lem of the immediate transition to the struggle against absolutism. 
In all probability it senses the difficulty of such a task for the workers under the present state of affairs but lacking the patience to wait un-til the workers will have gathered sufficient forces for this struggle,Iskra begins to seek allies in the ranks of the liberals and intellectuals. 
 In this quest, it not infrequently departs from the class point of view, obscures class antagonisms, and puts into the forefront the commonnature of the discontent with the government, although the causes and the degree of the discontent vary considerably among the ‘allies’. 
 Such, for example, is Iskra ’s attitude towards the Zemstvo. 
 It tries to fan into flames of political struggle the Zemstvo’s Frondian demon-ment pays more attention to the protection of industry than to the agrarian aspirations of the Zemstvo gentry *, and it promises the nobles that are dissatisfied with the government’s sops the assistanceof the working class, but it does not say a word about the class antagonism that exists between these social strata. 
 It may be conceded that it is admissible to say that the Zemstvo is beingroused and that it is an element fighting the government, but this mustbe stated so clearly and distinctly that no doubt will be left as to thecharacter of a possible agreement with such elements. 
 Iskra , however, approaches the question of our attitude towards the Zemstvo in a way that to our mind can only dim class-consciousness, for in this matter, like the advocates of liberalism and of the various cultural endeavours,Iskra goes against the fundamental task of Social-Democratic litera-ture, which is, not to obscure class antagonism, but to criticise thebourgeois system and explain the class interests that divide it. 
 Such,too, is Iskra ’s attitude towards the student movement. 
 And yet in other articles Iskra sharply condemns all ‘compromise’ and defends, for instance, the intolerant conduct of the Guesdists. 
 “We shall refrain from dwelling upon Iskra ’s minor defects and blun-ders, but in conclusion we think it our duty to observe that we do notin the least desire by our criticism to belittle the significance whichIskra can acquire, nor do we close our eyes to its merits. 
 We welcome it as a political, Social-Democratic newspaper in Russia. 
 We regard one of its greatest merits to be its able explanation of the question of ter-ror to which it devoted a number of timely articles. 
 Finally, we can-not refrain from noting the exemplary, literary style in which Iskra is written, a thing so rare in illegal publications, its regular appear-ance, and the abundance of fresh and interesting material which it publishes. 
 “A group of comrades ” September 1901. 
” In the first place, we should like to say that we cordially welcome the straightforwardness and frankness of the authorsof this letter. 
 It is high time to stop playing at hide-and-seek, concealing one’s Economist “ credo ” (as is done by a section of the Odessa Committee from which the “politi-cians” broke away), or declaring, as if in mockery of the truth,that at the present time “not a single Social-Democraticorganisation is guilty of the sin of Economism” ( Two Con-ferences , p. 
 32, published by Rabocheye Dyelo ). 
 And now to the matter. 
 The authors of the letter fall into the very same fun-damental error as that made by Rabocheye Dyelo (see partic-ularly issue No. 
 10). 
 They are muddled over the question *Lenin’s reference is to the liberal landlords, members of the of the relations between the “material” (spontaneous, as Rabocheye Dyelo puts it) elements of the movement and the ideological (conscious, operating “according to plan”). 
 They fail to understand that the “ideologist” is worthy ofthe name only when he precedes the spontaneous movement, points out the road, and is able ahead of all others to solveall the theoretical, political, tactical, and organisationalquestions which the “material elements” of the movement spontaneously encounter. 
 In order truly to give “considera-tion to the material elements of the movement”, one mustview them critically, one must be able to point out thedangers and defects of spontaneity and to elevate it to the level of consciousness. 
 To say, however, that ideologists (i. 
e. 
,politically conscious leaders) cannot divert the movement from the path determined by the interaction of environment and elements is to ignore the simple truth that the con-scious element participates in this interaction and in the determination of the path. 
 Catholic and monarchistlabour unions in Europe are also an inevitable result of theinteraction of environment and elements, but it was the con-sciousness of priests and Zubatovs and not that of social-ists that participated in this interaction. 
 The theoreticalviews of the authors of this letter (like those of Rabocheye Dyelo ) do not represent Marxism, but that parody of it which is nursed by our “Critics” and Bernsteinians who are unableto connect spontaneous evolution with conscious revolu-tionary activity. 
 In the prevailing circumstances of today this profound theoretical error inevitably leads to a great tactical error,which has brought incalculable damage to Russian Social-Democracy. 
 It is a fact that the spontaneous awakening ofthe masses of the workers and (due to their influence) of other social strata has been taking place with astonishing rapidity during the past few years. 
 The “material elements”of the movement have grown enormously even as comparedwith 1898, but the conscious leaders (the Social-Democrats) lag behind this growth . 
 This is the main cause of the crisis which Russian Social-Democracy is now experiencing. 
 The mass (spontaneous) movement lacks “ideologists” sufficiently trained theoretically to be proof against all vacillations;it lacks leaders with such a broad political outlook, such /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR revolutionary energy, and such organisational talent as to create a militant political party on the basis of the new movement. 
 All this in itself would, however, be but half the evil. 
 Theoretical knowledge, political experience, and organisingability are things that can be acquired. 
 If only the desireexists to study and acquire these qualities. 
 But since the endof 1897, particularly since the autumn of 1898, there have come forward in the Russian Social-Democratic movement individuals and periodicals that not only close their eyesto this drawback, but that have declared it to be a specialvirtue, that have elevated the worship of, and servilitytowards, spontaneity to the dignity of a theory and arepreaching that Social-Democrats must not march ahead of the movement, but should drag along at the tail-end . 
 (These periodicals include not only Rabochaya Mysl , but Rabocheye Dyelo , which began with the “stages theory” and ended with the defence, as a matter of principle, of spontaneity, of the“full rights of the movement of the moment”, of “tactics-as-process ”, etc. 
) This was, indeed, a sad situation. 
 It meant the emergence of a separate trend , which is usually designated as Econo-mism (in the broad sense of the word), the principal featureof which is its incomprehension, even defence , of lagging , i. 
e. 
, as we have explained, the lagging of the conscious leadersbehind the spontaneous awakening of the masses. 
 The charac-teristic features of this trend express themselves in the follow-ing: with respect to principles, in a vulgarisation of Marxismand in helplessness in the face of modern “criticism”, thatup-to-date species of opportunism; with respect to politics,in the striving to restrict political agitation and politicalstruggle or to reduce them to petty activities, in the fail-ure to understand that unless Social-Democrats take the leadership of the general democratic movement in their own hands, they will never be able to overthrow the autocra-cy; with respect to tactics, in utter instability (last springRabocheye Dyelo stood in amazement before the “new” question of terror, and only six months later, after consid-erable wavering and, as always, dragging along at the tail-end of the movement, did it express itself against terror,in a very ambiguous resolution); and with respect to organisation, in the failure to understand that the mass character of the movement does not diminish, but increases, our obligation to establish a strong and centralised organisa-tion of revolutionaries capable of leading the preparatorystruggle, every unexpected outbreak, and, finally, the de-cisive assault. 
 Against this trend we have conducted and will continue to conduct an irreconcilable struggle. 
 The authors of the letter apparently belong to this trend. 
 They tell us that the economic struggle prepared the ground for the workers’participation in the demonstrations. 
 True enough; but weappreciated sooner and more profoundly than all others theimportance of this preparation, when, as early as December1900, in our first issue, we opposed the stages theory, * and when, in February, in our second issue, immediatelyafter the drafting of the students into the army, and priorto the demonstrations, we called upon the workers to cometo the aid of the students. 
 ** The February and March events did not “refute the fears and alarms of Iskra ” (as Martynov, who thereby displays his utter failure to understand the question, thinks— Rabocheye Dyelo , No. 
 10, p. 
 53), but wholly confirmed them, for the leaders lagged behind thespontaneous rise of the masses and proved to be unpreparedfor the fulfilment of their duties as leaders. 
 Even at thepresent time the preparations are far from adequate, and forthat reason all talk about “exaggerating the role of ideology” or the role of the conscious element as compared with the spontaneous element, etc. 
, continues to exercise a mostbaneful influence upon our Party. 
 No less harmful is the influence exerted by the talk, alleg-edly in defence of the class point of view, about the need tolay less stress on the general character of discontent manifest-ed by the various strata of the population against the govern-ment. 
 On the contrary, we are proud of the fact that Iskra rouses political discontent among all strata of the population, and the only thing we regret is that we are unable to do thisin a much wider scale. 
 It is not true to say that in doing so,we obscure the class point of view; the authors of the letter *See present edition, Vol. 
 4, pp. 
 366-71. 
— Ed. 
 **Ibid . 
, pp. 
 414-19. 
— Ed. 
 have not pointed to a single concrete instance in evidence of this, nor can they do so. 
 Social-Democracy, as the van-guard in the struggle for democracy, must (notwithstanding the opinion expressed in Rabocheye Dyelo , No. 
 10, p. 
 41) lead the activities of the various oppositional strata, explainto them the general political significance of their partialand professional conflicts with the government, rally themto the support of the revolutionary party, and train from its own ranks leaders capable of exercising political influence upon all oppositional strata. 
 Any renunciation of this func-tion, however florid the phrases about close, organic contactwith the proletarian struggle, etc. 
, with which it may deck it-self, is tantamount to a fresh “defence of lagging”, the defenceof lagging behind the nation-wide democratic movement on the part of Social-Democrats; it is tantamount to a surrender of the leadership to bourgeois democracy. 
 Let the authorsof the letter ponder over the question as to why the events oflast spring served so strongly to stimulate non-Social-Demo-cratic revolutionary tendencies, instead of raising the author-ity and prestige of Social-Democracy. 
 Nor can we refrain from protesting against the astonish-ing short-sightedness displayed by the authors of the letterin regard to the controversies and internecine squabblesamong the political exiles. 
 They repeat the stale nonsenseabout the “indecency” of devoting to Rabochaya Mysl a n article on Zubatov. 
 Do they wish to deny that the spreading of Economism facilitates the tasks of the Zubatovs? In asserting this, however, we do not in the slightest “identify”the tactics of the Economists with those of Zubatov. 
 Asfor the “political exiles” (if the authors of the letter werenot so unpardonably careless concerning the continuity ofideas in the Russian Social-Democratic movement, they would have known that the warning about Economism sound-ed by the “political exiles”, to be precise, by the Emanci-pation of Labour group, has been strikingly confirmed!),note the manner in which Lassalle, who was active amongthe Rhine workers in 1852, judged the controversies of theexiles in London. 
 Writing to Marx, he said: “... The publication of your work against the ‘big men’, Kinkel, Ruge, etc. 
, should hardly meet with any difficultieson the part of the police.... 
 For, in my opinion, the govern-ment is not averse to the publication of such works, because it thinks that ‘the revolutionaries will cut one another’s throats’. 
 Their bureaucratic logic neither suspects nor fears the fact that it is precisely internal Party struggles that lenda party strength and vitality; that the greatest proof of aparty’s weakness is its diffuseness and the blurring of cleardemarcations; and that a party becomes stronger by purg-ing itself” (letter from Lassalle to Marx, June 24, 1852). 
 Let the numerous complacent opponents of severity, irreconcilability, and fervent polemics, etc. 
, take note! In conclusion, we shall observe that in these remarks we have been able to deal only briefly with the questions indispute. 
 We intend to devote a special pamphlet to the anal-ysis of these questions, which we hope will appear in the course of six weeks. 
 Iskra , No. 
 12, December 6, 1901 Published according to the Iskra text ON THE TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE REVOLUTIONARY ACTIVITY OF G. 
 V. 
 PLEKHANOV The Editorial Board of Iskra joins whole-heartedly in celebrating the twenty-fifth anniversary of the revolution-ary activity of G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov. 
 May this celebrationserve to strengthen the positions of revolutionary Marx-ism, which alone can guide the world struggle of the prole-tariat for emancipation and resist the attacks of eternallyold opportunism that is recurrently making its noisy appear-ance in new guises. 
 May this celebration serve to strengthen the bonds between the thousands of young Russian Social-Democrats who are devoting all their efforts to difficultpractical work and the Emancipation of Labour group,which is providing the movement with what it stands somuch in need of—a tremendous reserve of theoretical knowledge, wide political horizons, and rich revolutionary experience. 
 Long live Russian revolutionary Social-Democracy! Long live international Social-Democracy! Written in December 1901 First published in the magazine Proletarskaya Revolutsia , No. 
 7, (30)Published according to the manuscript DEMONSTRATIONS HAVE BEGUN A fortnight ago we observed the twenty-fifth anniversary of the first social-revolutionary demonstration in Russia,which took place on December 6, 1876, on Kazan Square in St. 
 Petersburg, 129 and we pointed to the enormous upswing in the number and magnitude of the demonstra-tions at the beginning of the current year. 
 We urged thatthe demonstrators should advance a political slogan moreclearly defined than “Land and Freedom” 130 (1876), and a more far-reaching demand than “Repeal the Provisional Regulations” (1901). 
 Such a slogan must be: political freedom ; and the demand to be put forward by the entire people has to be the demand for the convocation of the people ’s representatives . 
 We see now that demonstrations are being revived on the most varied grounds in Nizhni-Novgorod, in Moscow, and in Kharkov. 
 Public unrest is growing everywhere, and more and more imperative becomes the necessity to unifyit into one single current directed against the autocracy , which everywhere sows tyranny, oppression, and violence. 
On November 7, a small but successful demonstration washeld in Nizhni-Novgorod, which arose out of a farewell gathering in honour of Maxim Gorky. 
 An author of Euro-pean fame, whose only weapon was free speech (as a speakerat the Nizhni-Novgorod demonstration aptly put it), wasbeing banished by the autocratic government from hishome town without trial or investigation. 
 The bashi-bazouks accuse him of exercising a harmful influence on us, said the speaker in the name of all Russians in whom but a spark of striving towards light and liberty is alive, but wedeclare that his influence has been a good one. 
 The myrmi-dons of the tsar perpetrate their outrages in secret, and we will expose their outrages publicly and openly. 
 In Russia, workers are assaulted for demanding their right to a better life; students are assaulted for protesting against tyranny. 
Every honest and bold utterance is suppressed! The demon-stration, in which workers took part, was concluded by astudent reciting: “Tyranny shall fall, and the people shallrise—mighty, free, and strong!” In Moscow, hundreds of students waited at the station to greet Gorky. 
 Meanwhile, the police, scared out of theirwits, arrested him on the train en route and (despite the special permission previously granted him) prohibited hisentering Moscow, forcing him to change directly fromthe Nizhni-Novgorod to the Kursk line. 
 The demonstration against Gorky’s banishment failed; but on the eighteenth of November, without any preparation, a small demonstra-tion of students and “strangers” (as our Ministers put it)took place in front of the Governor General’s house againstthe prohibition of a social evening arranged for the previousday to commemorate the fortieth anniversary of the death of N. 
 A. 
 Dobrolyubov. 
 131 The representative of the autoc-racy in Moscow was howled down by people who, inunison with all educated and thinking people in Russia,held dear the memory of a writer who had passionatelyhated tyranny and passionately looked forward to a peo-ple’s uprising against the “Turks at home”, i. 
e. 
, against the autocratic government. 
 The Executive Committee of the Moscow Students’ Organisations rightly pointed out inits bulletin of November 23 that the unprepared demon-stration served as a striking indication of the prevailingdiscontent and protest. 
 In Kharkov, a demonstration called in connection with student affairs developed into a regular street battle, in which the students were not the only participants. 
 Lastyear’s experience taught the students a lesson. 
 Theyrealised that only the support of the people, especiallyof the workers, could guarantee them success, and that inorder to obtain that support, they must not restrict them-selves to struggling merely for academic (student) freedom, but for the freedom of the entire people , for political freedom . 
 The Kharkov Joint Council of Students’ Organisations definitely expressed this idea in its October manifesto and, judging from their leaflets and manifestos, the students of St. 
 Petersburg, Moscow, Kiev, Riga, and Odessa are beginning to understand the “senselessness of the dream” of academicfreedom amidst the gloom of enslavement enshrouding thepeople. 
 The infamous speech delivered by General Vannovskyin Moscow, in which he denied the “rumours” that he had atone time promised something, the unparalleled insolence of the St. 
 Petersburg detective (who seized a student in the Institute of Electrical Engineering in order to take fromhim a letter he had received by messenger), the savage as-sault upon Yaroslavl students by the police in the streetsand in the police station—these and a thousand otherfacts sound their cry for struggle, struggle, struggle against the whole of the autocratic system. 
 Patience became exhausted in the case of the Kharkov veterinaries. 
 Thefirst-year students submitted a petition for the dismissal ofProfessor Lagermark, on account of his bureaucratic atti-tude towards their studies and his intolerable rudeness inwhich he went so far as to fling copies of the syllabus in the faces of the students! Without investigating the case, the government responded by expelling the entire first-yearstudent body from the Institute, and in addition slanderedthe students by declaring in its report that they demandedthe right to appoint the professors. 
 This roused the entireKharkov student body to action, and it was resolved to organise a strike and a demonstration. 
 Between November 28 and December 2, Kharkov was for the second time in thesame year transformed into a field of battle between the“Turks at home” and the people, which protested againstautocratic tyranny. 
 On the one side, shouts of, “Down withthe autocracy!”, “Long live liberty!”—on the other, sabres, knouts, and horses trampling upon the people. 
 The police and Cossacks, mercilessly assaulting all and sundry, irrespec-tive of age and sex, gained a victory over an unarmedcrowd and are now triumphant.... 
 Shall we allow them to triumph?Workers! You know only too well the evil force that is tormenting the Russian people. 
 This evil force binds you hand and foot in your everyday struggles against the employ-ers for a better life and for human dignity. 
 This evil force snatches hundreds and thousands of your best comrades from your midst, flings them into jail, sends them into banishment, and, as if in mockery, declares them to be “persons of evil conduct”. 
 This evil force on May 7 firedon the workers of the Obukhov Works in St. 
 Petersburg,when they rose up with the cry, “We want liberty!”—andthen staged a farce of a trial, in order to send to penal ser-vitude those heroes who escaped the bullets. 
 This evil force is assaulting students today, and tomorrow it will fling itself with greater ferocity upon you. 
 Lose no time!Remember that you must support every protest and everystruggle against the bashi-bazouks of the autocratic govern-ment! Exert every effort to come to an agreement with thedemonstrating students, organise circles for the rapid trans-mission of information and for the distribution of leaflets, explain to all that you are struggling for the freedom ofthe entire people. 
 When the flames of popular indignation and open struggle flare up, first in one place and then in another, it is morethan ever necessary to direct upon them a powerful current of fresh air, to fan them into a great conflagration! Iskra , No. 
 13, December 20, 1901 Published according to the Iskra text ON A LETTER “SOUTHERN WORKERS ” We have received a letter from “Southern Workers” wel-coming the strengthening of the revolutionary current inRussian Social-Democracy and asking us to convey theirgreetings to the League of Russian Revolutionary Social-Democracy Abroad. 
 Unfortunately we cannot print the let-ter in full, due to lack of space. 
 We are in complete accord with the authors of the letter that “the methods adoptedin Russia for bringing revolutionary ideas to the massesthrough proclamations are not adequate for educating themasses to political consciousness”, that “it is essential toestablish a special literature for the political education of the Russian proletariat”. 
 But their proposal to issue, for that purpose, popular pamphlets of three or four pagesto be distributed “simultaneously throughout Russia” ishardly feasible. 
 We hold that the Russian proletariat isnow mature enough for the type of publication that isserviceable to all other classes—viz. 
, newspapers. 
 Only a political newspaper can really educate the masses to become politically conscious and, in the words of the letter,throw light on “the whole of our social life, from the fourthestate to the big bourgeoisie”. 
 Only an All-Russian news-paper, if actively supported by all committees and localstudy circles, can achieve distribution more or less “simul-taneously throughout Russia” and be published frequently enough to deserve the name of newspaper. 
 Only the firmestablishment of a revolutionary organ of this type canmark the transition of our movement from “strikes and theeconomic struggle to the broad revolutionary struggleagainst the Russian autocratic government”. 
 Iskra , No. 
 13, December 20, 1901 Published according to the Iskra text ANARCHISM AND SOCIALISM Theses: 1. 
 Anarchism, in the course of the 35 to 40 years (Bakunin and the International , 1866—) of its existence (and with Stirner included, in the course of many more years) hasproduced nothing but general platitudes against exploi-tation . 
 These phrases have been current for more than 2,000 years. 
 What is missing is ( α) an understanding of the causes of exploitation; ( β) an understanding of the devel-opment of society, which leads to socialism; ( γ) an under-standing of the class struggle as the creative force for the realisation of socialism. 
 2. 
 An understanding of the causes of exploitation. 
 Private property as the basis of commodity economy. 
 Social property in the means of production. 
 In anarchism—nil. 
 Anarchism is bourgeois individualism in reverse. 
 Indi-vidualism as the basis of the entire anarchist world outlook. 
 Defence of petty property and petty economy on the land. 
 Keine Majorität . 
 * Negation of the unifying and organising power of authority. 
 3. 
 Failure to understand the development of society— the role of large-scale production—the development ofcapitalism into socialism. 
 (Anarchism is a product of despair . 
 The psychology of the unsettled intellectual or the vagabond and not of theproletarian. 
) *No majority (i. 
e. 
, the anarchists’ non-acceptance of the sub-mission by the minority to the majority). 
— Ed. 
{ { 4. 
 Failure to understand the class struggle of the prole-tariat. 
 Absurd negation of politics in bourgeois society. 
 Failure to understand the role of the organisation and the education of the workers. 
 Panaceas consisting of one-sided, disconnected means. 
 5. 
 What has anarchism, at one time dominant in the Romance countries, contributed in recent European his-tory? — No doctrine, revolutionary teaching, or theory. 
— Fragmentation of the working-class movement. 
— Complete fiasco in the experiments of the revolution-ary movement (Proudhonism, 1871; Bakuninism, 1873). 
 — Subordination of the working class to bourgeois politics in the guise of negation of politics. 
 Published according to the manuscriptWritten in 1901 First published in 1936 in the magazine Proletarskaya , Revolutsia , No. 
 7 First page of the manuscript of Lenin’s “Anarchism and Socialism”. 
 1901 Reduced CONCERNING THE STATE BUDGET Our newspapers, as usual, have published the most re-spectful report of the Minister of Finance on the budget—the state revenues and disbursements for 1902. 
 As usual, everything, according to the Minister’s assurance, is going well: “the finances are in a most satisfactory state”, “equi-librium has been firmly maintained in the budget”, “therailway system continues its successful development”, andthere is even “a steady improvement in the people’s wel-fare”! Small wonder that so little interest is shown in questions of the state economy, despite their importance; interest is blunted by the obligatory, standard eulogies;for everyone knows that paper will put up with anything,that “anyway” the public “isn’t allowed to peep” behind the scenes of official financial juggling. 
 On this occasion, however, the following circumstance stands out particularly. 
 With his usual legerdemain the conjurer shows the public his empty hands, makes passes,and produces one gold coin after another. 
 The public ap-plauds. 
 Nevertheless, the conjurer begins to make the mostfrantic efforts to defend himself and is almost in tears whenhe assures us that he is not deceiving us, that there is no deficit, and that his liabilities are less than his assets. 
 Russians have been so well schooled in respectable behav-iour in official places that even as onlookers they feeluncomfortable, and only a few mutter the French sayingunder their breath: “He who excuses himself accuseshimself. 
” Let us see how our Witte “excuses” himself. 
 The gigantic expenditure, amounting to almost 2,000 million rubles(1,946 million), has been fully covered only because of the 144 million taken from the famous “free cash in hand” at the State Treasury, which free cash in hand was made up by last year’s 4 per cent loan of 127 million rubles (floated at 148 million rubles, of which 21 million have still not beentaken up). 
 In other words, a deficit covered by the loan?Nothing of the sort, says our magician, “the loan was cer-tainly not floated because of the need to cover expendi-tures unforeseen in the estimate”, since 114 million rubles remained “completely free” after the coverage; the loan was raised because it was desired to build new railways. 
 Well said, Mr. 
 Witte! But, first, what you say does not refute the fact of the deficit, since 114 million rubles, evenif “completely free”, cannot cover an expenditure of 144 mil-lion rubles. 
 Secondly, the free cash in hand (114 million rubles) included 63 million received in excess of the usual revenue for 1901, as compared with the budget estimate,and our press has long since revealed the fact that youartificially reduce the estimate for the budget revenue in order to effect a fictitious increase in the “free cash inhand” and steadily increase taxation. 
 Last year, for instance, stamp duties were raised (the new stamp duty regulations), the price of government-distilled vodka rose from 7 rubles to7 rubles 60 kopeks a vedro , * customs duties continued to increase (increases were introduced “temporarily” in 1900 onaccount of the war in China), and so on. 
 Thirdly, while youlaud the “cultural role” of the railways, you modestly refrain from mentioning the purely Russian and very uncultured custom of plundering the Treasury when rail-ways are built (to say nothing of the shameful exploitationof the workers and the starving peasants by railway contrac-tors!). 
 Thus, a Russian newspaper recently reported thatthe cost of building the Siberian railway was initially estimated at 350 million rubles, but that in actuality 780 million have been expended and that in the end thetotal cost will probably exceed 1,000 million (Iskra has had something to say about the plunder on the Siberianrailway: see issue No. 
 2). 
 You compute the revenues withprecision, Mr. 
 Witte, omitting nothing, but how about rendering an account of the actual extent of the expenditure ? *1 vedro —about 12. 
3 litres (21. 
7 pints). 
— Tr. 
 Another matter not to be forgotten is the fact that the building of railways in 1902 was undertaken partly because of the military purposes of our “peace-loving” government (the vast Bologoye-Sedlets line, more than 1,000 versts long) andpartly because of the absolute necessity to afford at least some“help” to oppressed industry, in whose affairs the State Bankis directly interested. 
 The State Bank has not only grantedloans with a liberal hand to tottering enterprises, but has practically taken many of them under its full control. 
 The bankruptcy of industrial enterprises threatened to lead to thebankruptcy of the state! Lastly, let us not forget, either,that it is under the administration of the “genius” Wittethat the sum of the loans and the size of the taxes are con-stantly increasing, despite the fact that the capital of the savings-banks is applied exclusively to support state cred-its. 
 This capital has already exceeded 800 million rubles. 
Taking all this into consideration, we realise that Witte’seconomy is wasteful, that the autocracy is heading slowlybut surely for bankruptcy, since taxation cannot be raisedindefinitely and the French bourgeoisie will not always come to the aid of the Russian Tsar. 
 Against the charge of having increased the national debt Witte defends himself with arguments that are sheerlyludicrous. 
 He compares liabilities with “assets”, he com-pares the sum of the state loans for 1892 and 1902 with thecosts of the state railways for the same years and produces a reduction in the “net” debt. 
 But we have still further assets: “Fortresses and warships” (I swear, the report had itso!), harbours and government factories, quit-rent, andforests. 
 Magnificent, Mr. 
 Witte! But have you not noticed that you are like the merchant summoned to court as a bank-rupt who tried to justify himself before the bailiffs who were about to make an inventory of his property? As long as anenterprise is unshakably solvent no one would dream ofasking that loans be specially guaranteed. 
 No one doubtsthat the Russian people have plenty of “assets”; but thegreater these assets, the greater the guilt of those who, de-spite the abundance, conduct the economy by increasing loans and taxation. 
 You are merely demonstrating to thepeople that they should get rid of those who squander their assets, and do so as quickly as possible. 
 In actual fact, of all the European countries, Turkey alone has so far put forward special state assets as a guarantee of state loans. 
 This action has naturally led to the assumption of control by foreign creditors over the assets that were to guarantee them the return of the loans they had advanced. 
 The economy of the “great Russian state” administered by representatives of Rothschild and of Bleichröder—what glittering prospects you open up before us, Mr. 
 Witte! * This is quite apart from the fact that there is no banker who will accept fortresses and warships as collateral, that these represent a minus, not a plus, in our economy. 
 Even railways can serve as a guarantee only when they are run at a profit. 
 However, from Mr. 
 Witte’s report we learn that up to the present all Russian railways have, in general, been run at a loss. 
 Only in 1900 was the deficit on the Siberian railways covered and a “small net profit” ob-tained—so small that Mr. 
 Witte remains modestly silent as to its amount. 
 He also remains silent in regard to the fact that in the first eight months of 1901 the takings of the railways in European Russia dropped as a result ofthe crisis. 
 We can well imagine the balance of our railway economy if the actual sums of money plundered during construction, as well as the official sums allotted for the job, were taken into consideration. 
 Is it not high time to place these valuable assets in more reliable hands? Needless to say, Witte speaks in the most soothing tones of the industrial crisis: “The hitch ... without doubt does not affect general industrial prosperity and, after a cer-tain interval of time, we shall probably [!] see a fresh period of industrial revival. 
” Fine comfort for the mil-lions of the working class, who suffer from unemployment and reduced wages! You may search in vain in the list of state expenditures for the slightest hint of the millions and *Witte himself was aware of the clumsiness of his arguments in regard to “assets” and therefore, elsewhere in his report, he triedto improve the impression by saying that the growing value of stateassets “has no particular significance with respect to the commitmentsof the Russian Treasury, since Russia’s credit does not stand in needof special guarantees”. 
 Of course not! But a detailed account with a list of these special guarantees was left ... just in case! tens of millions that the Treasury has wasted on direct and indirect support of the industrial enterprises “suffering” from the crisis. 
 What gigantic sums are involved in such support may be seen from press reports to the effect that the total sum of the loans granted by the State Bank be-tween January 1, 1899 and January 1, 1901 increased from 250 million to 449 million rubles, and that industrial loans increased from 8,700,000 to 38,800,000 rubles. 
 Even the loss of four million rubles from industrial loans did not cause the Treasury any difficulty. 
 And as for the workers who have sacrificed on the altar of “industrial success”, not the contents of their purse, but their lives and the lives of the millions dependent on them, the Treasury helped these workers by sending thousands of them from the indus-trial towns to the starving villages “free of charge”! Witte avoids the word “famine” altogether, assuring us in his report that the “detrimental effects of the poor har-vest ... will be mitigated by generous help to the needy”. 
 This generous help, according to him, amounts to 20 mil-lion rubles, while the deficit in the harvest is estimated at 250 million rubles (if one takes as the base the very lowprice of 50 kopeks a pood, compared, however, with the years of favourable harvests). 
 Indeed, how very “gener-ous”! Even if we assume that only a half of the losses is borne by the poor peasantry, it will still become evident that we underestimated the greed of the Russian Govern-ment, when we wrote (in re Sipyagin’s circular; see Iskra , No. 
 9) * that the government was cutting relief loans down to one-fifth . 
 The Russian Tsar is generous, not in his aid to the peasant, but in his police measures directed against those who really wanted to help the famine-stricken. 
 He is also generous in squandering millions in order to grab an appetising slice in China. 
 In two years, Witte informs us, 80 million rubles went in extraordinary expenditure on the war in China and “ in addition very substantial sums were expended from the ordinary budget ”. 
 This means that anything up to 100 million rubles was expended, if not more! The unemployed worker and the starving peasant *See present volume, pp. 
 231-38. 
— Ed. 
 may take comfort from the fact that Manchuria is almost sure to be ours.... 
 Lack of space keeps us from dealing at length with the remaining parts of the report. 
 Witte also defends himselfagainst the charge of scantiness in the disbursements onpublic education: to the 36 million rubles of the estimateof the Ministry of Public Education he adds the disburse-ments of other ministries on education and “cooks up” the figure of 75 million rubles. 
 But even this figure (of doubtful veracity) is extremely miserable for the whole of Russia,representing less than five per cent of the total budget. 
 The fact that “our state budget is organised mainly on the basis of a system of indirect taxation” is considered byWitte to be an advantage, and he repeats the stale bourgeois arguments on the possibility of “adjusting the consumption of taxed articles to accord with the degree of prosperity”. 
In actual fact, however, it is notorious that indirect taxa-tion affecting articles of mass consumption is distinguishedby its extreme injustice. 
 The entire burden is placed on theshoulders of the poor, while it creates a privilege for the rich. 
 The poorer a man is, the greater the share of his income that goes to the state in the form of indirect taxes. 
 Themasses who own little or nothing constitute nine-tenths ofthe population, consume nine-tenths of the taxed items,and pay nine-tenths of the total of all indirect taxes, whilethey receive no more than two-or three-tenths of the national income. 
 In conclusion, an interesting “trifle”. 
 On which items were expenditures most of all increased from 1901 to 1902?The total expenditures increased from 1,788 million to1,946 million rubles, that is, by less than one-tenth. 
 Never-theless, expenditures on two items increased by nearly a quarter : from 9,800,000 to 12,800,000 rubles “for the main-tenance of members of the royal family” and ... “for themaintenance of the special corps of gendarmes” from3,960,000 to 4,940,000 rubles. 
 We have here the answer tothe question: What are “the most urgent needs of the Russianpeople”? And what touching “unity” between the tsar and the gendarmes! Iskra , No. 
 15, January 15, 1902 Published according to the Iskra text POLITICAL AGITATION AND “THE CLASS POINT OF VIEW ” Let us begin with an illustration. 
 The reader will remember the sensation that was creat-ed by the speech delivered by M. 
 A. 
 Stakhovich, Marshal of the Nobility of Orel Gubernia, at a missionarycongress, in the course of which he urged that freedom of conscience be recognised by law. 
 The conservative press, led by Moskovskiye Vedomosti , is conducting a furious cam-paign against Mr. 
 Stakhovich. 
 It cannot find names vile enough with which to call him and almost goes so far as to accuse the entire Orel nobility of high treason for hav-ing re-elected Mr. 
 Stakhovich as Marshal. 
 Now, thisre-election is indeed very significant and to a certain degreeit bears the character of a demonstration of the nobilityagainst police tyranny and outrage. 
 Stakhovich, says Moskovskiye Vedomosti , “is not so much Marshal of the Nobility, as the oh, so gay Misha Stakh-ovich, the life and soul of the party, the clever conver-sationalist...” (No. 
 348, 1901). 
 So much the worse for you,gentlemen, defenders of the bludgeon. 
 If even our joviallandlords begin to talk about freedom of conscience, then the infamies of the priests and the police must verily be without number.... 
 “What does our ‘intellectual’, frivolous crowd that insti-gates and applauds the Stakhoviches care for the affairsof our sacred orthodox faith and our time-honoured attitudetowards it?”... Once again, so much the worse for you, gen-tlemen, champions of the autocracy, the orthodox faith, and the national essence. 
 A fine system indeed our police-ridden autocracy must be, if it has permeated even reli-gion with the spirit of the prison-cell, so that the “Stakho-viches” (who have no firm convictions in matters of reli-gion, but who are interested, as we shall see, in preserv-ing a stable religion) become utterly indifferent (if notactually hostile) to this notorious “national” faith. 
 “... They call our faith a delusion!! They mock at us because, thanksto this ‘delusion’, we fear and try to avoid sin and we carryout our obligations uncomplainingly, no matter how severe they may be; because we find the strength and courage to bear sorrow and privations and forbear pride in times ofsuccess and good fortune.... 
” So! The orthodox faith isdear to them because it teaches people to bear misery“uncomplainingly”. 
 What a profitable faith it is indeed forthe governing classes! In a society so organised that an insignificant minority enjoys wealth and power, while the masses constantly suffer “privations” and bear “severeobligations”, it is quite natural for the exploiters to sym-pathise with a religion that teaches people to bear “uncom-plainingly” the hell on earth for the sake of an alleged ce-lestial paradise. 
 But in its zeal Moskovskiye Vedomosti became too garrulous. 
 So garrulous, in fact, that unwittingly it spoke the truth . 
 We read on: “... They do not suspect that if they, the Stakhoviches, eat well, sleep peacefully,and live merrily, it is thanks to this ‘delusion’. 
” The sacred truth! This is precisely the case. 
 It is because religious “delusions” are so widespread among the masses that the Stakhoviches and the Oblomovs, 132 and all our capitalists who live by the labour of the masses, and evenMoskovskiye Vedomosti itself, “sleep peacefully”. 
 And the more education spreads among the people, the more will re-ligious prejudices give way to socialist consciousness,the nearer will be the day of victory for the proletariat—the victory that will emancipate all oppressed classes from the slavery they endure in modern society. 
 But having blurted out the truth on one point, Moskov-skiye Vedomosti disposed, far too easily, of another inter-esting point. 
 It is obviously mistaken in believing thatthe Stakhoviches “do not realise” the significance of reli-gion, and that they demand liberal forms out of sheer “thoughtlessness”. 
 Such an interpretation of a hostile polit-ical trend is too childishly naïve. 
 The fact that in this instance Mr. 
 Stakhovich came forward as advocate of the entire liberal trend was proved best of all by Moskovskiye Vedomosti itself; otherwise, what need was there for waging such a campaign against a single speech? What need wasthere for speaking, not about Stakhovich, but about theStakhoviches, about the “intellectual crowd”? Moskovskiye Vedomosti ’s error was, of course, deliberate. 
 That paper is more unwilling than it is unable to analyse the liberalism it hates from the class point of view. 
 That it does not desire to do so goes without saying; butits inability to do so interests us very much more, becausethis is a complaint that even very many revolutionaries andsocialists suffer from. 
 Thus, the authors of the letter pub-lished in No. 
 12 of Iskra , who accuse us of departing from the “class point of view” for striving in our newspaper to follow all manifestations of liberal discontent and protest, sufferfrom this complaint, as do also the authors of Proletar-skaya Borba 133 and of several pamphlets in “The Social-Democratic Library”,134 who imagine that our autocracy represents the absolutist rule of the bourgeoisie; likewise the Martynovs, who seek to persuade us to abandon the many-sided campaign of exposure (i. 
e. 
, the widest possiblepolitical agitation) against the autocracy and to concen-trate our efforts mainly upon the struggle for economic re-forms (to give something “positive” to the working class, toput forward in its name “concrete demands” for legislative and administrative measures “which promise certain palpable results”); likewise, too, the Nadezhdins, who, on readingthe correspondence in our paper on the statistical conflicts,ask in astonishment: “Good Lord, what is this—a Zemstvopaper?” All these socialists forget that the interests of the autoc-racy coincide only with certain interests of the proper-tied classes, and only under certain circumstances; fre-quently it happens that its interests do not coincide withthe interests of these classes as a whole, but only with thoseof certain of their strata. 
 The interests of other bourgeoisstrata and the more widely understood interests of the entire bourgeoisie, of the development of capitalism as a whole, necessarily give rise to a liberal opposition tothe autocracy. 
 For instance, the autocracy guarantees the bourgeoisie opportunities to employ the crudest forms of exploitation, but, on the other hand, places a thousand obstacles in the way of the extensive development of the productive forces and the spread of education; in this way itarouses against itself, not only the petty bourgeoisie, but attimes even the big bourgeoisie. 
 The autocracy guarantees (?)the bourgeoisie protection against socialism, but since thepeople are deprived of rights, this protection is necessarily transformed into a system of police outrages that rouse the indignation of the entire people. 
 What the result of theseantagonistic tendencies is, what relative strength of con-servative and liberal views, or trends, among the bourgeoi-sie obtains at the present moment, cannot be learned from acouple of general theses, for this depends on all the special features of the social and political situation at a given moment. 
 To determine this, one must study the situation indetail and carefully watch all the conflicts with the govern-ment, no matter by what social stratum they are initiated. 
It is precisely the “class point of view” that makes it imper-missible for a Social-Democrat to remain indifferent to the discontent and the protests of the “Stakhoviches”. 
 The reasoning and activity of the above-mentioned so-cialists show that they are indifferent to liberalism andthus reveal their incomprehension of the basic theses ofthe Communist Manifesto , the “Gospel” of international Social-Democracy. 
 Let us recall, for instance, the words that the bourgeoisie itself provides material for the polit-ical education of the proletariat by its struggle for power,by the conflicts of various strata and groups within it,etc. 
 135 Only in politically free countries has the proletar-iat easy access to this material (and then only to part of it). 
In enslaved Russia, however, we Social-Democrats must work hard to obtain this “material” for the working class, i. 
e. 
, we must ourselves undertake the task of conducting general political agitation, of carrying on a publicexposure campaign against the autocracy. 
 This task isparticularly imperative in periods of political ferment. 
 Wemust bear in mind that in one year of intensified political life the proletariat can obtain more revolutionary training than in several years of political calm. 
 For this reason thetendency of the above-mentioned socialists consciously or unconsciously to restrict the scope and content of political agitation is particularly harmful. 
 Let us recall also the words that the Communists support every revolutionary movement against the existing system. 
 Those words are often interpreted too narrowly, and are nottaken to imply support for the liberal opposition. 
 It mustnot be forgotten, however, that there are periods whenevery conflict with the government arising out of progressive social interests, however small, may under certain condi-tions ( of which our support is one ) flare up into a general conflagration. 
 Suffice it to recall the great social movementwhich developed in Russia out of the struggle between thestudents and the government over academic demands, 136 or the conflict that arose in France between all the progres-sive elements and the militarists over a trial in which the verdict had been rendered on the basis of forged evidence. 
137 Hence, it is our bounden duty to explain to the pro-letariat every liberal and democratic protest, to widen andsupport it, with the active participation of the workers,be it a conflict between the Zemstvo and the Ministry of the Interior, between the nobility and the police regime of the Orthodox Church, between statisticians and thebureaucrats, between peasants and the “Zemstvo” offi-cials, between religious sects and the rural police, etc. 
,etc. 
 Those who contemptuously turn up their noses at theslight importance of some of these conflicts, or at the “hopelessness” of the attempts to fan them into a general conflagration, do not realise that all-sided political agi-tation is a focus in which the vital interests of politicaleducation of the proletariat coincide with the vital inter-ests of social development as a whole, of the entire people,that is, of all its democratic elements. 
 It is our direct duty to concern ourselves with every liberal question, to determine our Social-Democratic attitude towards it, to help the pro-letariat to take an active part in its solution and to accom-plish the solution in its own, proletarian way. 
 Those whorefrain from concerning themselves in this way (whatevertheir intentions) in actuality leave the liberals in command, place in their hands the political education of the workers, and concede the hegemony in the political struggle to elementswhich, in the final analysis, are leaders of bourgeois democracy. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR The class character of the Social-Democratic movement must not be expressed in the restriction of our tasks to the direct and immediate needs of the “labour movement pure and simple”. 
 It must be expressed in our leadership of everyaspect and every manifestation of the great struggle forliberation that is being waged by the proletariat, the onlytruly revolutionary class in modern society. 
 Social-Democ-racy must constantly and unswervingly spread the influence of the labour movement to all spheres of the social and political life of contemporary society. 
 It must lead, notonly the economic, but also the political, struggle of theproletariat. 
 It must never for a moment lose sight of ourultimate goal, but always carry on propaganda for the pro-letarian ideology—the theory of scientific socialism, viz. 
, Marxism—guard it against distortion, and develop it further. 
 We must untiringly combat any and every bour-geois ideology, regardless of the fashionable and strikinggarb in which it may drape itself. 
 The socialists we havementioned above depart from the “class” point of view alsobecause, and to the extent that, they remain indifferent to the task of combating the “criticism of Marxism”. 
 Only the blind fail to see that this “criticism” has taken rootmore rapidly in Russia than in any other country, and hasbeen more enthusiastically taken up by Russian liberalpropaganda than by any other, precisely for the reason thatit is one of the elements of the bourgeois (now consciously bourgeois) democracy now in formation in Russia. 
 It is particularly in regard to the political struggle that the “class point of view” demands that the proletariat give an impetus to every democratic movement. 
 The political demands of working-class democracy do not differ in prin-ciple from those of bourgeois democracy, they differ only in degree. 
 In the struggle for economic emancipation, for the socialist revolution, the proletariat stands on a basisdifferent in principle and it stands alone (the small pro-ducer will come to its aid only to the extent that he enters,or is preparing to enter, its ranks). 
 In the struggle for polit-ical liberation, however, we have many allies, towards whom we must not remain indifferent. 
 But while our allies in the bourgeois-democratic camp, in struggling for liberalreforms, will always glance back and seek to adjust matters so that they will be able, as before, “to eat well, sleep peace-fully, and live merrily” at other people’s expense, the pro-letariat will march forward to the end, without looking back. 
 While the confreres of R. 
 N. 
 S. 
 (author of the prefaceto Witte’s Memorandum) haggle with the government overthe rights of the authoritative Zemstvo, or over a consti-tution, we will struggle for the democratic republic. 
 Wewill not forget, however, that if we want to push someone forward, we must continuously keep our hands on that someone’s shoulders. 
 The party of the proletariat mustlearn to catch every liberal just at the moment when he isprepared to move forward an inch, and make him moveforward a yard. 
 If he is obdurate, we will go forward withouthim and over him. 
 Iskra , No. 
 16, February 1, 1902 Published according to the Iskra text REPLY TO “A READER ” The following letter has been received by the Editorial Board: “In dealing with the question of agitation (if I am not mistaken, in No. 
 13) Iskra opposes agitational leaflets (pamphlets of two or three pages) on political subjects. 
 In the opinion of the editors, news-papers can successfully replace such literature. 
 Newspapers are, ofcourse, a fine thing. 
 Nobody would dream of disputing that. 
 But canthey replace leaflets that are specially intended for widespread distri-bution among the masses? The editors have received a letter from Rus-sia in which a group of workers-agitators gave their opinion on this subject. 
 Iskra ’s reply is obviously due to a misunderstanding. 
 The question of agitation is as important today as the question of demon-strations. 
 It is, therefore, to be desired that the editors raise thisquestion once again and on this occasion devote to it greater attention. 
 “A Reader ” Anyone who takes the trouble to read our reply to the letter from “Southern Workers” in No. 
 13 of Iskra* together with this letter will easily convince himself that it is pre-cisely the author of the letter who labours under an obviousmisunderstanding. 
 There was no question of Iskra ’s “oppos-ing agitational leaflets”; it never entered anyone’s head that a newspaper could “replace leaflets”. 
 Our correspondent did not notice that leaflets are in fact proclamations. 
 Suchliterature as proclamations cannot be replaced by anything and will always be absolutely essential —on this point the “Southern Workers” and Iskra are in full accord. 
 But they are also agreed that this type of litera-ture is not sufficient . 
 If we speak of good housing for the workers and at the same time say that good food is not enough *See present volume, p. 
 326. 
— Ed. 
 for them, that would hardly be taken to mean that we are “against” good food. 
 The question is—which is the highest form of agitational literature? The “Southern Workers” did not say a word about the newspaper when they raised this question. 
 Their silence could, of course, have been dueto local circumstances, but we, although we did not in theleast wish to enter into “disputes” with our correspondents,naturally could not refrain from reminding them that the proletariat should also organise its own newspaper just as the other classes of the population have done, thatfragmentary work alone is not enough, and that the regu-lar, active, and general work of all localities for a revolu-tionary organ is essential. 
 As far as the three-or four-page pamphlets are con-cerned, we did not speak “against” them in the least , but merely doubted the practicability of a plan to develop theminto regular literature distributed “simultaneously through-out Russia”. 
 If they consist of three or four pages, theywill be, essentially, only proclamations. 
 In all parts ofRussia we have many very good proclamations that are not in the least heavy reading, both student and workers’ proclamations, that sometimes run to six or eight smallpages. 
 A really popular pamphlet, capable of explaining even one single question to a completely unprepared worker,would probably be much bigger in size and there would beno need and no possibility of distributing it “simultaneously throughout Russia” (since it is not only of topical signif-icance). 
 Fully recognising, as we do, every variety of politicalliterature, old and new, so long as it is really good politi-cal literature, we would advise working, not upon aninvention of a midway type of agitational medium—something between leaflet and popular pamphlet, but for a revolutionary organ that really deserves the name of periodical (appearing, not once, but at least two or fourtimes, a month) and which is an All-Russian organ. 
 Iskra , No. 
 16, February 1, 1902 Published according to the Iskra text WHAT IS TO BE DONE? BURNING QUESTIONS OF OUR MOVEMENT 138 “...Party struggles lend a party strength and vitality; the greatestproof of a party’s weakness is itsdiffuseness and the blurring of clear demarcations; a party becomes strong-er by purging itself.... 
” (From a letter of Lassalle to Marx, of June 24, 1852) Written between the autumn of 1901 Published according to the text and February 1902 of the book checked with that First published as a separate work in the collection Twelve Years , in March 1902 by Vl. 
 Ilyin, 1907 PREFACE According to the author’s original plan, the present pamphlet was to have been devoted to a detailed develop-ment of the ideas expressed in the article “Where To Begin”(Iskra , No. 
 4, May 1901). 
 * We must first apologise to the reader for the delay in fulfilling the promise made in that article (and repeated in response to many private inquiriesand letters). 
 One of the reasons for this delay was the attempt,undertaken in June of the past year (1901), to unite allthe Social-Democratic organisations abroad. 
 It was naturalto wait for the results of this attempt, for, had the effort proved successful, it would perhaps have been necessary to expound Iskra ’s conceptions of organisation from a some-what different approach; in any case, such a success prom-ised to put an end very quickly to the existence of thetwo trends in the Russian Social-Democratic movement. 
As the reader knows, the attempt failed, and, as we propose to show, was bound to fail after the new swing of Rabo-chaya Dyelo , in its issue No. 
 10, towards Economism. 
 It was found to be absolutely essential to begin a determinedstruggle against this trend, diffuse and ill-defined, but forthat reason the more persistent, the more capable of reassert-ing itself in diverse forms. 
 Accordingly, the original plan of the pamphlet was altered and considerably enlarged. 
 Its main theme was to have been the three questions raised in the article “Where To Begin”—the character andmain content of our political agitation; our organisationaltasks; and the plan for building, simultaneously and fromvarious sides, a militant, All-Russian organisation. 
 These questions have long engaged the mind of the author, who *See present volume, pp. 
 13-24. 
— Ed. 
 tried to raise them in Rabochaya Gazeta139 during one of the unsuccessful attempts to revive that paper (see Chap-ter V). 
 But the original plan to confine the pamphlet to an analysis of only these three questions and to set forth ourviews as far as possible in a positive form, without, oralmost without, entering into polemics, proved whollyimpracticable, for two reasons. 
 On the one hand, Econo-mism proved to be much more tenacious than we had sup-posed [we employ the term Economism in the broad sense, as explained in Iskra , No. 
 12 (December 1901), in the article entitled “A Talk With Defenders of Economism”,which was a synopsis, so to speak, of the present pam-phlet *]. 
 It became clear beyond doubt that the differences re-garding the solution of the three questions mentioned were explainable to a far greater degree by the basic antithesis between the two trends in the Russian Social-Democraticmovement than by differences over details. 
 On the otherhand, the perplexity of the Economists over the practicalapplication of our views in Iskra clearly revealed that we often speak literally in different tongues and therefore cannot arrive at an understanding without beginning ab ovo , and that an attempt must be made, in the simplest possiblestyle, illustrated by numerous and concrete examples,systematically to “clarify ” all our basic points of difference with all the Economists. 
 I resolved to make such an attemptat “clarification”, fully realising that it would greatly in-crease the size of the pamphlet and delay its publication; I saw no other way of meeting my pledge I had made in the article “Where To Begin”. 
 Thus, to the apologies for thedelay, I must add others for the serious literary short-comings of the pamphlet. 
 I had to work in great haste , with frequent interruptions by a variety of other tasks. 
 The examination of the above three questions still con-stitutes the main theme of this pamphlet, but I found itnecessary to begin with two questions of a more generalnature—why such an “innocent” and “natural” slogan as“freedom of criticism” should be for us a veritable war-cry,and why we cannot come to an understanding even on the fundamental question of the role of Social-Democrats in *See present volume, pp. 
 313-20. 
— Ed. 
 relation to the spontaneous mass movement. 
 Further, the exposition of our views on the character and substance of political agitation developed into an explanation of the difference between trade-unionist politics and Social-Demo-cratic politics, while the exposition of our views on organ-isational tasks developed into an explanation of the differ-ence between the amateurish methods which satisfy theEconomists, and the organisation of revolutionaries which we hold to be indispensable. 
 Further, I advance the “plan” for an All-Russian political newspaper with all the moreinsistence because the objections raised against it areuntenable, and because no real answer has been given tothe question I raised in the article “’Where To Begin” as tohow we can set to work from all sides simultaneously to create the organisation we need. 
 Finally, in the concluding part, I hope to show that we did all we could to prevent adecisive break with the Economists, a break which never-theless proved inevitable; that Rabochaya Dyelo acquired a special significance, a “historical” significance, if you will,because it expressed fully and strikingly, not consistent Economism, but the confusion and vacillation which consti-tute the distinguishing feature of an entire period in the history of Russian Social-Democracy; and that therefore thepolemic with Rabochaya Dyelo , which may upon first view seem excessively detailed, also acquires significance, forwe can make no progress until we have completely put an end to this period. 
 N. 
 Lenin February 1902 I DOGMATISM AND “FREEDOM OF CRITICISM” A. 
 WHAT DOES “FREEDOM OF CRITICISM” MEAN? “Freedom of criticism” is undoubtedly the most fashion-able slogan at the present time, and the one most frequentlyemployed in the controversies between socialists and dem-ocrats in all countries. 
 At first sight, nothing wouldappear to be more strange than the solemn appeals to free-dom of criticism made by one of the parties to the dispute. 
 Have voices been raised in the advanced parties against the constitutional law of the majority of European countrieswhich guarantees freedom to science and scientific investi-gation? “Something must be wrong here,” will be the com-ment of the onlooker who has heard this fashionable slo-gan repeated at every turn but has not yet penetrated the essence of the disagreement among the disputants; “evidently this slogan is one of the conventional phrases which, likenicknames, become legitimised by use, and become almostgeneric terms. 
” In fact, it is no secret for anyone that two trends have taken form in present-day international * Social-Democ-*Incidentally, in the history of modern socialism this is a phenom-enon, perhaps unique and in its way very consoling, namely, thatthe strife of the various trends within the socialist movement hasfrom national become international. 
 Formerly, the disputes betweenLassalleans and Eisenachers, 140 between Guesdists and Possibilists,141 between Fabians and Social-Democrats, and between Narodnaya Volya adherents and Social-Democrats, remained confined within purely national frameworks, reflecting purely national features, andproceeding, as it were, on different planes. 
 At the present time (as isnow evident), the English Fabians, the French Ministerialists, the racy. 
 The conflict between these trends now flares up in a bright flame and now dies down and smoulders under the ashes of imposing “truce resolutions”. 
 The essence of the “new” trend, which adopts a “critical” attitude towards“obsolete dogmatic” Marxism, has been clearly enoughpresented by Bernstein and demonstrated by Millerand. 
 Social-Democracy must change from a party of social revolution into a democratic party of social reforms. 
 Bern-stein has surrounded this political demand with a whole battery of well-attuned “new” arguments and reasonings. 
Denied was the possibility of putting socialism on a scientif-ic basis and of demonstrating its necessity and inevitabil-ity from the point of view of the materialist conception ofhistory. 
 Denied was the fact of growing impoverishment, the process of proletarisation, and the intensification of capitalist contradictions; the very concept, “ ultimate aim ”, was declared to be unsound, and the idea of the dictator-ship of the proletariat was completely rejected. 
 Denied wasthe antithesis in principle between liberalism and social-ism. 
 Denied was the theory of the class struggle , on the alleged grounds that it could not be applied to a strictly democratic society governed according to the will of themajority, etc. 
 Thus, the demand for a decisive turn from revolutionary Social-Democracy to bourgeois social-reformism was ac-companied by a no less decisive turn towards bourgeois criticism of all the fundamental ideas of Marxism. 
 In view of the fact that this criticism of Marxism has long beendirected from the political platform, from university chairs,in numerous pamphlets and in a series of learned treatises,in view of the fact that the entire younger generation ofthe educated classes has been systematically reared for decades on this criticism, it is not surprising that the “new critical” trend in Social-Democracy should spring up, all German Bernsteinians, and the Russian Critics—all belong to the same family, all extol each other, learn from each other, and togethertake up arms against “dogmatic” Marxism. 
 In this first really inter-national battle with socialist opportunism, international revolution-ary Social-Democracy will perhaps become sufficiently strengthenedto put an end to the political reaction that has long reigned in Eu-rope? complete, like Minerva from the head of Jove. 
 The content of this new trend did not have to grow and take shape, it was transferred bodily from bourgeois to socialist literature. 
 To proceed. 
 If Bernstein’s theoretical criticism and polit-ical yearnings were still unclear to anyone, the Frenchtook the trouble strikingly to demonstrate the “new method”. 
In this instance, too, France has justified its old reputationof being “the land where, more than anywhere else, the historical class struggles were each time fought out to a decision...” (Engels, Introduction to Marx’s Der 18 Bru-maire ). 
 142 The French socialists have begun, not to theo-rise, but to act. 
 The democratically more highly developedpolitical conditions in France have permitted them to put“Bernsteinism into practice” immediately, with all its consequences. 
 Millerand has furnished an excellent example of practical Bernsteinism; not without reason did Bernsteinand Vollmar rush so zealously to defend and laud him. 
 In-deed, if Social-Democracy, in essence, is merely a party ofreform and must be bold enough to admit this openly, thennot only has a socialist the right to join a bourgeois cabinet, but he must always strive to do so. 
 If democracy, in essence, means the abolition of class domination, then why shouldnot a socialist minister charm the whole bourgeois world byorations on class collaboration? Why should he not remain inthe cabinet even after the shooting-down of workers by gen-darmes has exposed, for the hundredth and thousandth time, the real nature of the democratic collaboration of classes? Why should he not personally take part in greetingthe tsar, for whom the French socialists now have no othername than hero of the gallows, knout, and exile ( knouteur , pendeur et déportateur )? And the reward for this utter humili-ation and self-degradation of socialism in the face of the whole world, for the corruption of the socialist consciousness of the working masses—the only basis that can guarantee ourvictory—the reward for this is pompous projects for miserable reforms, so miserable in fact that much morehas been obtained from bourgeois governments! He who does not deliberately close his eyes cannot fail to see that the new “critical” trend in socialism is nothing more nor less than a new variety of opportunism . 
 And if we judge people, not by the glittering uniforms they don or by the high-sounding appellations they give themselves, but by their actions and by what they actually advocate, it will be clear that “freedom of criticism” means freedom for an opportunist trend in Social-Democracy, freedom toconvert Social-Democracy into a democratic party of reform,freedom to introduce bourgeois ideas and bourgeois elementsinto socialism. 
 “Freedom” is a grand word, but under the banner of freedom for industry the most predatory wars were waged, under the banner of freedom of labour, the working peoplewere robbed. 
 The modern use of the term “freedom of crit-icism” contains the same inherent falsehood. 
 Those who arereally convinced that they have made progress in sciencewould not demand freedom for the new views to continue side by side with the old, but the substitution of the new views for the old. 
 The cry heard today, “Long live freedom ofcriticism”, is too strongly reminiscent of the fable of theempty barrel. 
 We are marching in a compact group along a precipitous and difficult path, firmly holding each other by the hand. 
 We are surrounded on all sides by enemies, and we have to ad-vance almost constantly under their fire. 
 We have combined,by a freely adopted decision, for the purpose of fighting theenemy, and not of retreating into the neighbouring marsh, theinhabitants of which, from the very outset, have reproachedus with having separated ourselves into an exclusive group and with having chosen the path of struggle instead of the path of conciliation. 
 And now some among us begin tocry out: Let us go into the marsh! And when we begin toshame them, they retort: What backward people you are!Are you not ashamed to deny us the liberty to invite youto take a better road! Oh, yes, gentlemen! You are free not only to invite us, but to go yourselves wherever you will, even into the marsh. 
 In fact, we think that the marsh is yourproper place, and we are prepared to render you every assistance to get there. 
 Only let go of our hands, don’tclutch at us and don’t besmirch the grand word freedom,for we too are “free” to go where we please, free to fight not only against the marsh, but also against those who are turning towards the marsh! B. 
 THE NEW ADVOCATES OF “FREEDOM OF CRITICISM” Now, this slogan (“freedom of criticism”) has in recent times been solemnly advanced by Rabocheye Dyelo (No. 
 10), organ of the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad,not as a theoretical postulate, but as a political demand, asa reply to the question, “Is it possible to unite the Social-Democratic organisations operating abroad?”: “For a durable unity, there must be freedom of criticism” (p. 
 36). 
 From this statement two definite conclusions follow: (1) that Rabocheye Dyelo has taken under its wing the oppor-tunist trend in international Social-Democracy in general,and (2) that Rabocheye Dyelo demands freedom for opportun-ism in Russian Social-Democracy. 
 Let us examine these conclusions. 
 Rabocheye Dyelo is “particularly” displeased with the “inclination of Iskra and Zarya to predict a rupture be-tween the Mountain and the Gironde in international Social-Democracy”. 
 * “Generally speaking,” writes B. 
 Krichevsky, editor of Rabocheye Dyelo , “this talk of the Mountain and the Gironde heard in the ranks of Social-Democracy represents a shallow historical analogy, a strange thing to come from the pen of a Marxist. 
 The Mountain and the Gi-ronde did not represent different temperaments, or intellectual trends,as the historians of social thought may think, but different classes or strata—the middle bourgeoisie, on the one hand, and the petty bourgeoisie and the proletariat, on the other. 
 In the modern socialistmovement, however, there is no conflict of class interests; the social-ist movement in its entirety, in all of its diverse forms (Krichevsky’s italics), including the most pronounced Bernsteinians, stands on thebasis of the class interests of the proletariat and its class struggle for political and economic emancipation” (pp. 
 32-33). 
 *A comparison of the two trends within the revolutionary pro-letariat (the revolutionary and the opportunist), and the two trendswithin the revolutionary bourgeoisie in the eighteenth century (theJacobin, known as the Mountain, and the Girondist) was made in theleading article in No. 
 2 of Iskra (February 1901). 
 The article was written by Plekhanov. 
 The Cadets, 143 the Bezzaglavtsi,144 and the Mensheviks to this day love to refer to Jacobinism in Russian Social-Democracy. 
 But how Plekhanov came to apply this concept for thefirst time against the Right wing of Social-Democracy—about this theyprefer to keep silent or to forget. 
 (Author’s note to the 1907 edition—Ed. 
) A bold assertion! Has not Krichevsky heard of the fact, long ago noted, that it is precisely the extensive participa-tion of an “academic” stratum in the socialist movement in recent years that has promoted such a rapid spread ofBernsteinism? And what is most important—on whatdoes our author found his opinion that even “the most pro-nounced Bernsteinians” stand on the basis of the classstruggle for the political and economic emancipation of the proletariat? No one knows. 
 This determined defence of the most pronounced Bernsteinians is not supported by anyargument or reasoning whatever. 
 Apparently, the authorbelieves that if he repeats what the most pronounced Bern-steinians say about themselves his assertion requires noproof. 
 But can anything more “shallow” be imagined than this judgement of an entire trend based on nothing more than what the representatives of that trend say about them-selves? Can anything more shallow be imagined than thesubsequent “homily” on the two different and even diamet-rically opposite types, or paths, of party development?(Rabocheye Dyelo , pp. 
 34-35. 
) The German Social-Democrats, in other words, recognise complete freedom of criticism, but the French do not, and it is precisely their example thatdemonstrates the “bane of intolerance ”. 
 To this we can only say that the very example B. 
 Kri-chevsky affords us attests to the fact that the name Marx-ists is at times assumed by people who conceive history literally in the “Ilovaisky manner”. 
 145 To explain the unity of the German Socialist Party and the disunity ofthe French Socialist Party, there is no need whatever togo into the special features in the history of these countries,to contrast the conditions of military semi-absolutism in theone with republican parliamentarism in the other, to ana-lyse the effects of the Paris Commune and the effects of the Exceptional Law Against the Socialists, to compare theeconomic life and economic development of the two coun-tries, or to recall that “the unexampled growth of GermanSocial-Democracy” was accompanied by a strenuous struggle,unique in the history of socialism, not only against erroneous theories (Mühlberger, Dühring, * the Katheder -Socialists146), *At the time Engels dealt his blows at Dühring, many repre-sentatives of German Social-Democracy inclined towards the latter’s but also against erroneous tactics (Lassalle), etc. 
, etc. 
 All that is superfluous! The French quarrel among themselves because they are intolerant; the Germans are united because they are good boys. 
 And observe, this piece of matchless profundity is de-signed to “refute” the fact that puts to rout the defence ofthe Bernsteinians. 
 The question whether or not the Bern-steinians stand on the basis of the class struggle of the pro-letariat is one that can be completely and irrevocably an-swered only by historical experience. 
 Consequently, theexample of France holds greatest significance in this respect,because France is the only country in which the Bernstein-ians attempted to stand independently, on their own feet, with the warm approval of their German colleagues (and partly also of the Russian opportunists; cf. 
 Rabocheye Dyelo , No. 
 2-3, pp. 
 83-84). 
 The reference to the “intol-erance” of the French, apart from its “historical” signif-icance (in the Nozdryov 147 sense), turns out to be merely an attempt to hush up very unpleasant facts with angry invec-tives. 
 Nor are we inclined to make a present of the Germans to Krichevsky and the numerous other champions of “freedomof criticism”. 
 If the “most pronounced Bernsteinians” arestill tolerated in the ranks of the German party, it is onlyto the extent that they submit to the Hanover resolution, 148 which emphatically rejected Bernstein’s “amendments”, and to the Lübeck resolution, which (notwithstanding the diplomatic terms in which it is couched) contains adirect warning to Bernstein. 
 It is debatable, from the views, and accusations of acerbity, intolerance, uncomradely polem-ics, etc. 
, were hurled at Engels even publicly at a Party Congress. 
At the Congress of 1877, Most, and his supporters, introduced a reso-lution to prohibit the publication of Engels’s articles in Vorwärts be-cause “they do not interest the overwhelming majority of the readers”,and Vahlteich declared that their publication had caused great damageto the Party, that Dühring too had rendered services to Social-Democ-racy: “We must utilise everyone in the interests of the Party; letthe professors engage in polemics if they care to do so, but Vorwärts is not the place in which to conduct them” ( Vorwärts , No. 
 65, June 6, 1877). 
 Here we have another example of the defence of “freedom ofcriticism”, and our legal critics and illegal opportunists, who love somuch to cite the example of the Germans, would do well to ponder it! standpoint of the interests of the German party, whether diplomacy was appropriate and whether, in this case, a bad peace is better than a good quarrel; in short, opinions may differ as to the expediency of any one of the methods em-ployed to reject Bernsteinism, but that the German partydid reject Bernsteinism on two occasions, is a fact no one can fail to see. 
 Therefore, to think that the German exampleconfirms the thesis that “the most pronounced Bernstein-ians stand on the basis of the class struggle of the prole-tariat, for political and economic emancipation”, means tofail completely to understand what is going on underour very eyes. 
 * Nor is that all. 
 As we have seen, Rabocheye Dyelo demands “freedom of criticism” and defends Bernsteinism before Russian Social-Democracy. 
 Apparently it convinced itself that we were unfair to our “Critics” and Bernsteinians. 
 Butto which ones? who? where? when? What did the unfairnessrepresent? About this, not a word. 
 Rabocheye Dyelo does not name a single Russian Critic or Bernsteinian! We areleft with but one of two possible suppositions. 
 Either the un-fairly treated party is none other than Rabocheye Dyelo itself (this is confirmed by the fact that in the two articlesin No. 
 10 reference is made only to the wrongs suffered byRabocheye Dyelo at the hands of Zarya and Iskra ). 
 If that *It should be observed that Rabocheye Dyelo has always con-fined itself to a bare statement of facts concerning Bernsteinism in theGerman party and completely “refrained” from expressing its own opin-ion. 
 See, for instance, the reports of the Stuttgart Congress 149 i n No. 
 2-3 (p. 
 66), in which all the disagreements are reduced to “tactics” and the statement is merely made that the overwhelming majority re-main true to the previous revolutionary tactics. 
 Or, No. 
 4-5 (p. 
 25, et seq. 
), in which we have nothing but a paraphrasing of the speechesdelivered at the Hanover Congress, with a reprint of Bebel’s res-olution. 
 An exposition and a criticism of Bernstein’s views are againput off (as was the case in No. 
 2-3) to be dealt with in a “special arti-cle”. 
 Curiously enough, in No. 
 4-5 (p. 
 33), we read the following: “...the views expounded by Bebel have the support of the vast majorityof the Congress,” and a few lines thereafter: “... David defended Bern-stein’s views.... 
 First of all, he tried to show that ... Bernstein andhis friends, after all is said and done [ sic!], stand on the basis of the class struggle...” This was written in December 1899, and in Septem-ber 1901 Rabocheye Dyelo , apparently no longer believing that Bebel was right, repeats David’s views as, its own! is the case, how is the strange fact to be explained that Rabocheye Dyelo , which always vehemently dissociated itself from all solidarity with Bernsteinism, could not defend itself without putting in a word in defence of the “mostpronounced Bernsteinians” and of freedom of criticism? Or some third persons have been treated unfairly. 
 If this is thecase, then what reasons may there be for not naming them? We see, therefore, that Rabocheye Dyelo is continuing to play the game of hide-and-seek it has played (as we shall show below) ever since its founding. 
 And let us note furtherthis first practical application of the vaunted “freedom of criticism”. 
 In actual fact, not only was it forthwith reducedto abstention from all criticism, but also to abstention fromexpressing independent views altogether. 
 The very Rabo-cheye Dyelo , which avoids mentioning Russian Bernstein-ism as if it were a shameful disease (to use Starover’s 150 apt expression), proposes, for the treatment of this disease,to copy word for word the latest German prescription for the German variety of the malady! Instead of freedom of crit-icism—slavish (worse: apish) imitation! The very same social and political content of modern international oppor-tunism reveals itself in a variety of ways according to nation-al peculiarities. 
 In one country the opportunists have longago come out under a separate flag; in another, they haveignored theory and in fact pursued the policy of the Radi-cals-Socialists; in a third, some members of the revolution-ary party have deserted to the camp of opportunism and strive to achieve their aims, not in open struggle for prin-ciples and for new tactics, but by gradual, imperceptible,and, if one may so put it, unpunishable corruption oftheir party; in a fourth country, similar deserters employthe same methods in the gloom of political slavery, and with a completely original combination of “legal” and “illegal” activity, etc. 
 To talk of freedom of criticism and of Bern-steinism as a condition for uniting the Russian Social-Demo-crats and not to explain how Russian Bernsteinism has manifested itself and what particular fruits it has borne,amounts to talking with the aim of saying nothing. 
 Let us ourselves try, if only in a few words, to say what Rabocheye Dyelo did not want to say (or which was, perhaps, beyond its comprehension). 
 C. 
 CRITICISM IN RUSSIA The chief distinguishing feature of Russia in regard to the point we are examining is that the very beginning o f the spontaneous working-class movement, on the one hand,and of the turn of progressive public opinion towards Marx-ism, on the other, was marked by the combination ofmanifestly heterogeneous elements under a common flag to fight the common enemy (the obsolete social and political world outlook). 
 We refer to the heyday of “legal Marxism”. 
Speaking generally, this was an altogether curious phenom-enon that no one in the eighties or the beginning of thenineties would have believed possible. 
 In a country ruledby an autocracy, with a completely enslaved press, in a period of desperate political reaction in which even the tiniest outgrowth of political discontent and protest ispersecuted, the theory of revolutionary Marxism suddenlyforces its way into the censored literature and, though expounded in Aesopian language, is understood by all the“interested”. 
 The government had accustomed itself to regard-ing only the theory of the (revolutionary) Narodnaya Volya as dangerous, without, as is usual, observing itsinternal evolution, and rejoicing at any criticism levelled against it. 
 Quite a considerable time elapsed (by our Russianstandards) before the government realised what had happenedand the unwieldy army of censors and gendarmes discovered the new enemy and flung itself upon him. 
 Meanwhile, Marxist books were published one after another, Marxistjournals and newspapers were founded, nearly everyonebecame a Marxist, Marxists were flattered, Marxists werecourted, and the book publishers rejoiced at the extraordi-nary, ready sale of Marxist literature. 
 It was quite natural, therefore, that among the Marxian neophytes who were caught up in this atmosphere, there should be more than one“author who got a swelled head...” 151. 
 We can now speak calmly of this period as of an event of the past. 
 It is no secret that the brief period in which Marx-ism blossomed on the surface of our literature was called forth by an alliance between people of extreme and of very moderate views. 
 In point of fact, the latter were bourgeoisdemocrats; this conclusion (so markedly confirmed by their subsequent “critical” development) suggested itself to some even when the “alliance” was still intact. 
 * That being the case, are not the revolutionary Social-Democrats who entered into the alliance with the future“Critics” mainly responsible for the subsequent “confusion”?This question, together with a reply in the affirmative, issometimes heard from people with too rigid a view. 
 Butsuch people are entirely in the wrong. 
 Only those who are not sure of themselves can fear to enter into temporary al-liances even with unreliable people; not a single politicalparty could exist without such alliances. 
 The combinationwith the legal Marxists was in its way the first reallypolitical alliance entered into by Russian Social-Democrats. 
Thanks to this alliance, an astonishingly rapid victory was obtained over Narodism, and Marxist ideas (even though in a vulgarised form) became very widespread. 
 Moreover, thealliance was not concluded altogether without “conditions”. 
Evidence of this is the burning by the censor, in 1895, ofthe Marxist collection Material on the Question of the Eco-nomic Development of Russia . 
 152 If the literary agreement with the legal Marxists can be compared with a political alliance, then that book can be compared with a politicaltreaty. 
 The rupture, of course, did not occur because the “allies” proved to be bourgeois democrats. 
 On the contrary, therepresentatives of the latter trend are natural and desirable allies of Social-Democracy insofar as its democratic tasks, brought to the fore by the prevailing situation in Russia,are concerned. 
 But an essential condition for such an al-liance must be the full opportunity for the socialists to revealto the working class that its interests are diametricallyopposed to the interests of the bourgeoisie. 
 However, the Bernsteinian and “critical” trend, to which the majority of the legal Marxists turned, deprived the socialists of thisopportunity and demoralised the socialist consciousness byvulgarising Marxism, by advocating the theory of the blunt-ing of social contradictions, by declaring the idea of the *The reference is to an article by K. 
 Tulin directed against Struve. 
 (See present edition, Vol. 
 1, pp. 
 333-507. 
— Ed. 
) The article was based on an essay entitled “The Reflection of Marxism in BourgeoisLiterature”. 
 (Author’s note to the 1907 edition. 
— Ed. 
) social revolution and of the dictatorship of the proletariat to be absurd, by reducing the working-class movement and the class struggle to narrow trade-unionism and to a “real-istic” struggle for petty, gradual reforms. 
 This was synony-mous with bourgeois democracy’s denial of socialism’sright to independence and, consequently, of its right toexistence; in practice it meant a striving to convert thenascent working-class movement into an appendage of the liberals. 
 Naturally, under such circumstances the rupture was neces-sary. 
 But the “peculiar” feature of Russia manifested itself inthe fact that this rupture simply meant the elimination ofthe Social-Democrats from the most accessible and wide-spread “legal” literature. 
 The “ex-Marxists”, who took up the flag of “criticism” and who obtained almost a monopoly to “demolish” Marxism, entrenched themselves in thisliterature. 
 Catchwords like “Against orthodoxy” and “Longlive freedom of criticism” (now repeated by Rabocheye Dyelo ) forthwith became the vogue, and the fact that neither the censor nor the gendarmes could resist this vogue is apparent from the publication of three Russian editions of the work of the celebrated Bernstein (celebrated in theHerostratean sense) and from the fact that the works ofBernstein, Mr. 
 Prokopovich, and others were recommendedby Zubatov ( Iskra , No. 
 10). 
 A task now devolved upon the Social-Democrats that was difficult in itself and was made incredibly more difficult by purely external obstacles—the task of combating the new trend. 
 This trend did not confineitself to the sphere of literature. 
 The turn towards “criti-cism” was accompanied by an infatuation for “Economism”among Social-Democratic practical workers. 
 The manner in which the connection between, and inter-dependence of, legal criticism and illegal Economism arose and grew is in itself an interesting subject, one that couldserve as the theme of a special article. 
 We need only notehere that this connection undoubtedly existed. 
 The noto-riety deservedly acquired by the Credo was due precisely to the frankness with which it formulated this connection and blurted out the fundamental political tendency of “Economism”—let the workers carry on the economic struggle(it would be more correct to say the trade-unionist struggle, because the latter also embraces specifically working-class politics) and let the Marxist intelligentsia merge with the liberals for the political “struggle”. 
 Thus, trade-unionist work “among the people” meant fulfilling the first part ofthis task, while legal criticism meant fulfilling the second. 
This statement was such an excellent weapon against Econo-mism that, had there been no Credo , it would have been worth inventing one. 
 The Credo was not invented, but it was published with-out the consent and perhaps even against the will of itsauthors. 
 At all events, the present writer, who took partin dragging this new “programme” into the light of day, * has heard complaints and reproaches to the effect that copiesof the résumé of the speakers’ views were distributed, dubbed the Credo , and even published in the press together with the protest! We refer to this episode because it reveals avery peculiar feature of our Economism—fear of publicity. 
This is a feature of Economism generally, and not of theauthors of the Credo alone. 
 It was revealed by that most outspoken and honest advocate of Economism, Rabochaya Mysl , and by Rabocheye Dyelo (which was indignant over the publication of “Economist” documents in the Vademe-cum 155), as well as by the Kiev Committee, which two years ago refused to permit the publication of its profession de foi,** together with a repudiation of it, *** and by many other individual representatives of Economism. 
 This fear of criticism displayed by the advocates of free-dom of criticism cannot be attributed solely to craftiness(although, on occasion, no doubt craftiness is brought intoplay: it would be improvident to expose the young and as *The reference is to the Protest of the Seventeen against the Credo . 
 The present writer took part in drawing up this protest (the end of 1899). 
153 The protest and the Credo were published abroad in the spring of 1900. 
 (See present edition, Vol. 
 4, pp. 
 167-82. 
— Ed. 
) It is now known from the article written by Madame Kuskova (I think in Byloye154) that she was the author of the Credo and that Mr. 
 Prokopovich was very prominent among the “Economists” abroadat the time. 
 (Author’s note to the 1907 edition. 
— Ed. 
) **Confession of faith. 
156 *** As far as our information goes, the composition of the Kiev Committee has changed since then. 
 yet frail shoots of the new trend to attacks by opponents). 
 No, the majority of the Economists look with sincere resent-ment (as by the very nature of Economism they must) upon all theoretical controversies, factional disagreements, broadpolitical questions, plans for organising revolutionaries, etc. 
“Leave all that to the people abroad!” said a fairly consistentEconomist to me one day, thereby expressing a very wide-spread (and again purely trade-unionist) view; our concern is the working-class movement, the workers, organisations here, in our localities; all the rest is merely the invention ofdoctrinaires, “the overrating of ideology”, as the authors ofthe letter, published in Iskra , No. 
 12, expressed it, in unison with Rabocheye Dyelo , No. 
 10. 
 The question now arises: such being the peculiar fea-tures of Russian “criticism” and Russian Bernsteinism, what should have been the task of those who sought to opposeopportunism in deeds and not merely in words? First, theyshould have made efforts to resume the theoretical work thathad barely begun in the period of legal Marxism and thatfell anew on the shoulders of the comrades working under-ground. 
 Without such work the successful growth of the move-ment was impossible. 
 Secondly, they should have activelycombated the legal “criticism” that was perverting people’sminds on a considerable scale. 
 Thirdly, they should haveactively opposed confusion and vacillation in the practicalmovement, exposing and repudiating every conscious or un-conscious attempt to degrade our programme and our tactics. 
 That Rabocheye Dyelo did none of these things is well known; we shall have occasion below to deal with this well-known fact in detail and from various aspects. 
 At the mo-ment, however, we desire merely to show the glaring con-tradiction that exists between the demand for “freedom of criticism” and the specific features of our native criticism and Russian Economism. 
 It suffices but to glance at the textof the resolution in which the Union of Russian Social-Dem-ocrats Abroad endorsed the point of view of Rabocheye Dyelo . 
 “In the interests of the further ideological development of Social-Democracy, we recognise the freedom of criticism of Social-Democrat-ic theory in Party literature to be absolutely necessary insofar as thecriticism does not run counter to the class and revolutionary characterof this theory” ( Two Conferences , p. 
 10). 
 And the motivation? The resolution “in its first part coin-cides with the resolution of the Lübeck Party Congress on Bernstein”.... 
 In the simplicity of their souls the “Unionists” failed to observe what a testimonium paupertatis (attestation of poverty) they betray with this copying.... 
 “But ... in itssecond part, it restricts freedom of criticism much more thandid the Lübeck Party Congress. 
” The resolution of the Union Abroad, then, is directed against the Russian Bernsteinians? If it is not, then the reference to Lübeck would be utterly absurd. 
 But it is nottrue to say that it “restricts freedom of criticism”. 
 In adopt-ing their Hanover resolution, the Germans, point by point,rejected precisely the amendments proposed by Bernstein, while in their Lübeck resolution they cautioned Bernstein personally , by naming him. 
 Our “free” imitators, however, make not a single allusion to a single manifestation of specif-ically Russian “criticism” and Russian Economism. 
 In viewof this omission, the bare reference to the class and revolu-tionary character of the theory leaves far wider scope formisinterpretation, particularly when the Union Abroad re-fuses to identify “so-called Economism” with opportunism (Two Conferences , p. 
 8, Paragraph 1). 
 But all this, in passing. 
 The main thing to note is that the positions of the opportun-ists in relation to the revolutionary Social-Democrats inRussia are diametrically opposed to those in Germany. 
 Inthat country, as we know, the revolutionary Social-Demo-crats are in favour of preserving that which exists—the old programme and the tactics, which are universally known andhave been elucidated in all their details by many decades ofexperience. 
 But the “Critics” desire to introduce changes, andsince these Critics represent an insignificant minority, andsince they are very timid in their revisionist efforts, one can understand the motives of the majority in confining them-selves to the dry rejection of “innovations”. 
 In Russia,however, it is the Critics and the Economists who are infavour of preserving that which exists: the “Critics” want usto go on regarding them as Marxists and to guarantee them the“freedom of criticism” they enjoyed to the full (for, in fact, they never recognised any kind of party ties, * and, more-*The fact alone of the absence of public party ties and party traditions, representing as it does a cardinal difference between Rus-over, we never had a generally recognised party body that could “restrict” freedom of criticism, if only by counsel); the Economists want the revolutionaries to recognise the sov-ereign character of the present movement” ( Rabocheye Dyelo , No. 
 10, p. 
 25), i. 
e. 
, to recognise the “legitimacy” of that which exists; they want the “ideologists” not to try to“divert” the movement from the path that “is determined bythe interaction of material elements and material environ-ment” (“Letter” in Iskra , No. 
 12); they want to have that struggle recognised as desirable “which it is possible for theworkers to wage under the present conditions”, and as theonly possible struggle, that “which they are actually wagingat the present time” (“ Separate Supplement ” to Rabochaya Mysl , p. 
 14). 
 We revolutionary Social-Democrats, on the contrary, are dissatisfied with this worship of spontaneity, i. 
e. 
, of that which exists “at the present moment”. 
 We demandthat the tactics that have prevailed in recent years be changed;we declare that “before we can unite, and in order thatwe may unite, we must first of all draw firm and definitelines of demarcation” (see announcement of the publication of Iskra ). 
 * In a word, the Germans stand for that which exists and reject changes; we demand a change of that which ex-ists, and reject subservience thereto and reconciliationto it. 
 This “slight” difference our “free” copyists of German res-olutions failed to notice. 
 sia and Germany, should have warned all sensible socialists against blind imitation. 
 But here is an instance of the lengths to which “free-dom of criticism” goes in Russia. 
 Mr. 
 Bulgakov, the Russian Critic, utters the following reprimand to the Austrian Critic, Hertz: “Not-withstanding the independence of his conclusions, Hertz on this point [on the question of co-operative societies] apparently remains ex-cessively bound by the opinions of his party, and although he disa-grees with it in details, he dare not reject the common principle” ( Cap-italism and Agriculture , Vol. 
 II, p. 
 287). 
 The subject of a politically enslaved state, in which nine hundred and ninety-nine out of a thou-sand of the population are corrupted to the marrow by political sub-servience and completely lack the conception of party honour and party ties, superciliously reproves a citizen of a constitutional statefor being excessively “bound by the opinions of his party”! Our illegal organisations have nothing else to do, of course, but draw up resolu-tions on freedom of criticism.... 
 *See present edition, Vol. 
 4, p. 
 354. 
— Ed. 
 D. 
 ENGELS ON THE IMPORTANCE OF THE THEORETICAL STRUGGLE “Dogmatism, doctrinairism”, “ossification of the party— the inevitable retribution that follows the violent strait-lacing of thought”—these are the enemies against which theknightly champions of “freedom of criticism” in Rabocheye Dyelo rise up in arms. 
 We are very glad that this question has been placed on the order of the day and we would only propose to add to it one other: And who are the judges?We have before us two publishers’ announcements. 
 One, “The Programme of the Periodical Organ of the Union ofRussian Social-Democrats Abroad— Rabocheye Dyelo ” (reprint from No. 
 1 of Rabocheye Dyelo ), and the other, the “Announce-ment of the Resumption of the Publications of the Emanci-pation of Labour Group”. 
 Both are dated 1899, when the “cri-sis of Marxism” had long been under discussion. 
 And what dowe find? We would seek in vain in the first announcementfor any reference to this phenomenon, or a definite statement of the position the new organ intends to adopt on this ques-tion. 
 Not a word is said about theoretical work and the ur-gent tasks that now confront it, either in this programme orin the supplements to it that were adopted by the Third Con-gress of the Union Abroad in 1901 ( Two Conferences , pp. 
 5-18). 
 During this entire time the Editorial Board of Ra-bocheye Dyelo ignored theoretical questions, in spite of the fact that these were questions that disturbed the minds ofall Social-Democrats the world over. 
 The other announcement, on the contrary, points first of all to the declining interest in theory in recent years, im-peratively demands “vigilant attention to the theoretical aspect of the revolutionary movement of the proletariat”, and calls for “ruthless criticism of the Bernsteinian andother anti-revolutionary tendencies” in our movement. 
 Theissues of Zarya to date show how this programme has been carried out. 
 Thus, we see that high-sounding phrases against the ossification of thought, etc. 
, conceal unconcern and helpless-ness with regard to the development of theoretical thought. 
The case of the Russian Social-Democrats manifestly illus-trates the general European phenomenon (long ago noted also by the German Marxists) that the much vaunted freedom of criticism does not imply substitution of one theory for anoth-er, but freedom from all integral and pondered theory; itimplies eclecticism and lack of principle. 
 Those who have theslightest acquaintance with the actual state of our movementcannot but see that the wide spread of Marxism was accom-panied by a certain lowering of the theoretical level. 
 Quite a number of people with very little, and even a total lack of theoretical training joined the movement because of itspractical significance and its practical successes. 
 We can judgefrom that how tactless Rabocheye Dyelo is when, with an air of triumph, it quotes Marx’s statement: “Every stepof real movement is more important than a dozen pro-grammes. 
” 157 To repeat these words in a period of theoretical disorder is like wishing mourners at a funeral many happyreturns of the day. 
 Moreover, these words of Marx are takenfrom his letter on the Gotha Programme, 158 in which he sharply condemns eclecticism in the formulation of princi-ples. 
 If you must unite, Marx wrote to the party leaders, then enter into agreements to satisfy the practical aims of the movement, but do not allow any bargaining over principles,do not make theoretical “concessions”. 
 This was Marx’s idea,and yet there are people among us who seek—in his name—to belittle the significance of theory! Without revolutionary theory there can be no revolution-ary movement. 
 This idea cannot be insisted upon too strong-ly at a time when the fashionable preaching of opportunismgoes hand in hand with an infatuation for the narrowestforms of practical activity. 
 Yet, for Russian Social-Demo-crats the importance of theory is enhanced by three othercircumstances, which are often forgotten: first, by the fact that our Party is only in process of formation, its features are only just becoming defined, and it has as yet far fromsettled accounts with the other trends of revolutionarythought that threaten to divert the movement from the cor-rect path. 
 On the contrary, precisely the very recent past wasmarked by a revival of non-Social-Democratic revolutionary trends (an eventuation regarding which Axelrod long ago warned the Economists). 
 Under these circumstances, what atfirst sight appears to be an “unimportant” error may lead to most deplorable consequences, and only short-sighted peo-ple can consider factional disputes and a strict differentia-tion between shades of opinion inopportune or superfluous. 
 The fate of Russian Social-Democracy for very many yearsto come may depend on the strengthening of one or the other“shade”. 
 Secondly, the Social-Democratic movement is in its very essence an international movement. 
 This means, not only that we must combat national chauvinism, but that an inci-pient movement in a young country can be successful only ifit makes use of the experiences of other countries. 
 In order tomake use of these experiences it is not enough merely to be ac-quainted with them, or simply to copy out the latest resolu-tions. 
 What is required is the ability to treat these experiences critically and to test them independently. 
 He who real-ises how enormously the modern working-class movement hasgrown and branched out will understand what a reserve oftheoretical forces and political (as well as revolutionary) expe-rience is required to carry out this task. 
 Thirdly, the national tasks of Russian Social-Democracy are such as have never confronted any other socialist party in the world. 
 We shall have occasion further on to dealwith the political and organisational duties which the taskof emancipating the whole people from the yoke of autocracyimposes upon us. 
 At this point, we wish to state only thatthe role of vanguard fighter can be fulfilled only by a party that is guided by the most advanced theory . 
 To have a concrete understanding of what this means, let the reader recall suchpredecessors of Russian Social-Democracy as Herzen, Belin-sky, Chernyshevsky, and the brilliant galaxy of revolution-aries of the seventies; let him ponder over the world signif-icance which Russian literature is now acquiring; let him ... but be that enough! Let us quote what Engels said in 1874 concerning the significance of theory in the Social-Democratic movement. 
Engels recognises, not two forms of the great struggle of Social-Democracy (political and economic), as is the fashionamong us, but three , placing the theoretical struggle on a par with the first two . 
 His recommendations to the German working-class movement, which had become strong, practi-cally and politically, are so instructive from the standpoint /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR of present-day problems and controversies, that we hope the reader will not be vexed with us for quoting a long passage from his prefatory note to Der deutsche Bauernkrieg ,* which has long become a great bibliographical rarity: “The German workers have two important advantages over those of the rest of Europe. 
 First, they belong to the mosttheoretical people of Europe; and they have retained thatsense of theory which the so-called ‘educated’ classes of Ger-many have almost completely lost. 
 Without German philos-ophy, which preceded it, particularly that of Hegel, Germanscientific socialism—the only scientific socialism that hasever existed—would never have come into being. 
 Withouta sense of theory among the workers, this scientific socialismwould never have entered their flesh and blood as much as is the case. 
 What an immeasurable advantage this is may be seen, on the one hand, from the indifference towards alltheory, which is one of the main reasons why the Englishworking-class movement crawls along so slowly in spite ofthe splendid organisation of the individual unions; on theother hand, from the mischief and confusion wrought by Proudhonism, in its original form, among the French and Belgians, and, in the form further caricatured by Bakunin,among the Spaniards and Italians. 
 “The second advantage is that, chronologically speaking, the Germans were about the last to come into the workers’movement. 
 Just as German theoretical socialism will never forget that it rests on the shoulders of Saint-Simon, Fourier, and Owen—three men who, in spite of all their fantasticnotions and all their utopianism, have their place amongthe most eminent thinkers of all times, and whose geniusanticipated innumerable things, the correctness of which isnow being scientifically proved by us—so the practical workers’ movement in Germany ought never to forget that it has developed on the shoulders of the English and Frenchmovements, that it was able simply to utilise their dearlybought experience, and could now avoid their mistakes,which in their time were mostly unavoidable. 
 Without theprecedent of the English trade unions and French workers’ *Dritter Abdruck, Leipzig, 1875. 
 Verlag der Genossenschafts-buchdruckerei. 
 ( The Peasant War in Germany . 
 Third impression. 
 Co-operative Publishers, Leipzig, 1875. 
— Ed. 
) political struggles, without the gigantic impulse given espe-cially by the Paris Commune, where would we be now? “It must be said to the credit of the German workers that they have exploited the advantages of their situation with rareunderstanding. 
 For the first time since a workers’ move-ment has existed, the struggle is being conducted pursuantto its three sides—the theoretical, the political, and thepractical-economic (resistance to the capitalists)—in harmony and in its interconnections, and in a systematic way. 
 It is precisely in this, as it were, concentric attack, thatthe strength and invincibility of the German movement lies. 
 “Due to this advantageous situation, on the one hand, and to the insular peculiarities of the English and the for-cible suppression of the French movement, on the other, the German workers have for the moment been placed in the vanguard of the proletarian struggle. 
 How long events willallow them to occupy this post of honour cannot be foretold. 
But let us hope that as long as they occupy it, they will fillit fittingly. 
 This demands redoubled efforts in every fieldof struggle and agitation. 
 In particular, it will be the duty of the leaders to gain an ever clearer insight into all theoret-ical questions, to free themselves more and more from theinfluence of traditional phrases inherited from the old worldoutlook, and constantly to keep in mind that socialism, sinceit has become a science, demands that it be pursued as ascience, i. 
e. 
, that it be studied. 
 The task will be to spread with increased zeal among the masses of the workers the ever more clarified understanding thus acquired, to knittogether ever more firmly the organisation both of the partyand of the trade unions.... 
 “If the German workers progress in this way, they will not be marching exactly at the head of the movement— it is not at all in the interest of this movement that the workers of any particular country should march at its head—but they will occupy an honourable place in the battleline; and they will stand armed for battle when either unexpe-ctedly grave trials or momentous events demand of them in-creased courage, increased determination and energy. 
” 159 Engels’s words proved prophetic. 
 Within a few years the German workers were subjected to unexpectedly grave trialsin the form of the Exceptional Law Against the Socialists. 
 And they met those trials armed for battle and succeeded in emerging from them victorious. 
 The Russian proletariat will have to undergo trials immeas-urably graver; it will have to fight a monster compared withwhich an anti-socialist law in a constitutional country seemsbut a dwarf. 
 History has now confronted us with an immedi-ate task which is the most revolutionary of all the immediate tasks confronting the proletariat of any country. 
 The fulfil-ment of this task, the destruction of the most powerful bul-wark, not only of European, but (it may now be said) ofAsiatic reaction, would make the Russian proletariat thevanguard of the international revolutionary proletariat. 
 Andwe have the right to count upon acquiring this honourabletitle, already earned by our predecessors, the revolutionaries of the seventies, if we succeed in inspiring our movement, which is a thousand times broader and deeper, with the samedevoted determination and vigour. 
 II THE SPONTANEITY OF THE MASSES AND THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATS We have said that our movement, much more extensive and deep than the movement of the seventies, must be inspired with the same devoted determination and energy that inspired the movement at that time. 
 Indeed, no one, wethink, has until now doubted that the strength of the pres-ent-day movement lies in the awakening of the masses (prin-cipally, the industrial proletariat) and that its weaknesslies in the lack of consciousness and initiative among the rev-olutionary leaders. 
 However, of late a staggering discovery has been made, which threatens to disestablish all hitherto prevailing viewson this question. 
 This discovery was made by Rabocheye Dyelo , which in its polemic with Iskra and Zarya did not confine itself to making objections on separate points, but tried to ascribe “general disagreements” to a more profound cause—to the “different appraisals of the relative impor-tance of the spontaneous and consciously ‘methodical’ ele-ment”. 
 Rabocheye Dyelo formulated its indictment as a “belittling of the significance of the objective or the sponta-neous element of development ”. 
* To this we say: Had the polem-ics with Iskra and Zarya resulted in nothing more than causing Rabocheye Dyelo to hit upon these “general disa-greements”, that alone would give us considerable satisfaction,so significant is this thesis and so clear is the light it sheds onthe quintessence of the present-day theoretical and political differences that exist among Russian Social-Democrats. 
 For this reason the question of the relation between con-sciousness and spontaneity is of such enormous generalinterest, and for this reason the question must be dealt within great detail. 
 A. 
 THE BEGINNING OF THE SPONTANEOUS UPSURGE In the previous chapter we pointed out how universally absorbed the educated youth of Russia was in the theories ofMarxism in the middle of the nineties. 
 In the same periodthe strikes that followed the famous St. 
 Petersburg indus-trial war of 1896 assumed a similar general character. 
 Their spread over the whole of Russia clearly showed the depth ofthe newly awakening popular movement, and if we are tospeak of the “spontaneous element” then, of course, it is thisstrike movement which, first and foremost, must be regardedas spontaneous. 
 But there is spontaneity and spontaneity. 
 Strikes occurred in Russia in the seventies and sixties (and even in the first half of the nineteenth century), and theywere accompanied by the “spontaneous” destruction of ma-chinery, etc. 
 Compared with these “revolts”, the strikes ofthe nineties might even be described as “conscious”, tosuch an extent do they mark the progress which the working-class movement made in that period. 
 This shows that the “spontaneous element”, in essence, represents nothing morenor less than consciousness in an embryonic form . 
 Even the primitive revolts expressed the awakening of consciousnessto a certain extent. 
 The workers were losing their age-longfaith in the permanence of the system which oppressed them and began... I shall not say to understand, but to sense *Rabocheye Dyelo , No. 
 10, September 1901, pp. 
 17-18. 
 Rabo-cheye Dyelo ’s italics. 
 the necessity for collective resistance, definitely abandoning their slavish submission to the authorities. 
 But this was, nevertheless, more in the nature of outbursts of desperation and vengeance than of struggle . 
 The strikes of the nineties revealed far greater flashes of consciousness; definite demandswere advanced, the strike was carefully timed, known casesand instances in other places were discussed, etc. 
 The re-volts were simply the resistance of the oppressed, whereas the systematic strikes represented the class struggle in em-bryo, but only in embryo. 
 Taken by themselves, these strikeswere simply trade union struggles, not yet Social-Demo-cratic struggles. 
 They marked the awakening antagonismsbetween workers and employers; but the workers, were not,and could not be, conscious of the irreconcilable antagonism of their interests to the whole of the modern political and social system, i. 
e. 
, theirs was not yet Social-Democraticconsciousness. 
 In this sense, the strikes of the nineties, de-spite the enormous progress they represented as comparedwith the “revolts”, remained a purely spontaneous movement. 
 We have said that there could not have been Social-Demo-cratic consciousness among the workers. 
 It would have to be brought to them from without. 
 The history of allcountries shows that the working class, exclusively by itsown effort, is able to develop only trade-union consciousness,i. 
e. 
, the conviction that it is necessary to combine in unions,fight the employers, and strive to compel the government to pass necessary labour legislation, etc. 
 * The theory of social-ism, however, grew out of the philosophic, historical, andeconomic theories elaborated by educated representativesof the propertied classes, by intellectuals. 
 By their socialstatus the founders of modern scientific socialism, Marx andEngels, themselves belonged to the bourgeois intelligentsia. 
 In the very same way, in Russia, the theoretical doctrine of Social-Democracy arose altogether independently of thespontaneous growth of the working-class movement; it aroseas a natural and inevitable outcome of the development of *Trade-unionism does not exclude “politics” altogether, as some imagine. 
 Trade unions have always conducted some political (butnot Social-Democratic) agitation and struggle. 
 We shall deal with thedifference between trade-union politics and Social-Democratic poli-tics in the next chapter. 
 thought among the revolutionary socialist intelligentsia. 
 In the period under discussion, the middle nineties, this doctrine not only represented the completely formulated programme of the Emancipation of Labour group, but hadalready won over to its side the majority of the revolution-ary youth in Russia. 
 Hence, we had both the spontaneous awakening of the working masses, their awakening to conscious life and con-scious struggle, and a revolutionary youth, armed with Social-Democratic theory and straining towards the workers. 
In this connection it is particularly important to state theoft-forgotten (and comparatively little-known) fact that,although the early Social-Democrats of that period zealously carried on economic agitation (being guided in this activity by the truly useful indications contained in the pamphlet On Agitation , 160 then still in manuscript), they did not regard this as their sole task. 
 On the contrary, from the very beginning they set for Russian Social-Democracy the most far-reaching historical tasks, in general, and the task ofoverthrowing the autocracy, in particular. 
 Thus, towards the end of 1895, the St. 
 Petersburg group of Social-Demo-crats, which founded the League of Struggle for the Emanci-pation of the Working Class, prepared the first issue of anewspaper called Rabocheye Dyelo . 
 This issue was ready to go to press when it was seized by the gendarmes, on the nightof December 8, 1895, in a raid on the house of one of the mem-bers of the group, Anatoly Alexeyevich Vaneyey, * so that the first edition of Rabocheye Dyelo was not destined to see the light of day. 
 The leading article in this issue (whichperhaps thirty years hence some Russkaya Starina161 will unearth in the archives of the Department of Police) outlinedthe historical tasks of the working class in Russia and placed the achievement of political liberty at their head. 
 The issue also contained an article entitled “What Are Our MinistersThinking About?” ** which dealt with the crushing of the *A. 
 A. 
 Vaneyev died in Eastern Siberia in 1899 from consumption, which he contracted during solitary confinement in prison priorto his banishment. 
 That is why we considered it possible to publish the above information, the authenticity of which we guarantee, for it comes from persons who were closely and directly acquainted withA. 
 A. 
 Vaneyev. 
 See present edition, Vol. 
 2, pp. 
 87-92. 
— Ed. 
 elementary education committees by the police. 
 In addition, there was some correspondence from St. 
 Petersburg, and from other parts of Russia (e. 
g. 
, a letter on the massacre of the workers in Yaroslavl Gubernia). 
 This, “first effort”, ifwe are not mistaken, of the Russian Social-Democrats ofthe nineties was not a purely local, or less still, “Economic”,newspaper, but one that aimed to unite the strike movementwith the revolutionary movement against the autocracy, and to win over to the side of Social-Democracy all who were oppressed by the policy of reactionary obscurantism. 
 Noone in the slightest degree acquainted with the state of themovement at that period could doubt that such a paperwould have met with warm response among the workers of thecapital and the revolutionary intelligentsia and would have had a wide circulation. 
 The failure of the enterprise merely showed that the Social-Democrats of that period were unableto meet the immediate requirements of the time owing totheir lack of revolutionary experience and practical train-ing. 
 This must be said, too, with regard to the S. 
 Peter-burgsky Rabochy Listok162 and particularly with regard to Rabochaya Gazeta and the Manifesto of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, founded in the spring of 1898. 
 Ofcourse, we would not dream of blaming the Social-Democratsof that time for this unpreparedness. 
 But in order to profitfrom the experience of that movement, and to draw practicallessons from it, we must thoroughly understand the causes and significance of this or that shortcoming. 
 It is therefore highly important to establish the fact that a part (perhapseven a majority) of the Social-Democrats, active in the pe-riod of 1895-98, justly considered it possible even then, atthe very beginning of the “spontaneous” movement, to comeforward with a most extensive programme and a militant tactical line. 
 * Lack of training of the majority of the revolu-*“In adopting a hostile attitude towards the activities of the Social-Democrats of the late nineties, Iskra ignores the absence at that time of conditions for any work other than the struggle for pettydemands,” declare the Economists in their “Letter to Russian Social-Democratic Organs” ( Iskra , No. 
 12). 
 The facts given above show that the assertion about “absence of conditions” is diametrically opposed to the truth . 
 Not only at the end, but even in the mid-nineties, all the conditions existed for other work, besides the struggle for petty de-mands—all the conditions except adequate training of leaders. 
 Instead tionaries, an entirely natural phenomenon, could not have roused any particular fears. 
 Once the tasks were correctly defined, once the energy existed for repeated attempts to fulfil them, temporary failures represented only part mis-fortune. 
 Revolutionary experience and organisational skillare things that can be acquired, provided the desire is thereto acquire them, provided the shortcomings are recognised,which in revolutionary activity is more than half-way to-wards their removal. 
 But what was only part misfortune became full misfor-tune when this consciousness began to grow dim (it was verymuch alive among the members of the groups mentioned),when there appeared people—and even Social -Democraticorgans—that were prepared to regard shortcomings as vir-tues, that even tried to invent a theoretical basis for their slavish cringing before spontaneity . 
 It is time to draw con-clusions from this trend, the content of which is incorrectlyand too narrowly characterised as “Economism”. 
 B. 
 BOWING TO SPONTANEITY. 
 RABOCHAYA MY SL Before dealing with the literary manifestation of this subservience to spontaneity, we should like to note the fol-lowing characteristic fact (communicated to us from the above-mentioned source), which throws light on the condi-tions in which the two future conflicting trends in RussianSocial-Democracy arose and grew among the comrades work-ing in St. 
 Petersburg. 
 In the beginning of 1897, just prior totheir banishment, A. 
 A. 
 Vaneyev and several of his comrades attended a private meeting 163 at which “old” and “young” members of the League of Struggle for the Emancipation ofthe Working Class gathered. 
 The conversation centred chief-ly about the question of organisation, particularly aboutthe “rules for the workers’ mutual benefit fund”, which, in of frankly admitting that we, the ideologists, the leaders, lacked sufficient training—the “Economists” seek to shift the blame entirely upon the “absence of conditions”, upon the effect of material environ-ment that determines the road from which no ideologist will be able to divert the movement. 
 What is this but slavish cringing before spon-taneity, what but the infatuation of the “ideologists ” with their own shortcomings? their final form, were published in “ Listok ” Rabotnika ,164 No. 
 9-10, p. 
 46. 
 Sharp differences immediately showed them-selves between the “old” members (“Decembrists”, as the St. 
 Petersburg Social-Democrats jestingly called them) and sev-eral of the “young” members (who subsequently took anactive part in the work of Rabochaya Mysl ), with a heated discussion ensuing. 
 The “young” members defended the mainprinciples of the rules in the form in which they were pub-lished. 
 The “old” members contended that the prime necessity was not this, but the consolidation of the League of Struggleinto an organisation of revolutionaries to which all the var-ious workers’ mutual benefit funds, students’ propagandacircles, etc. 
, should be subordinated. 
 It goes without sayingthat the disputing sides far from realised at the time that these disagreements were the beginning of a cleavage; on the contrary, they regarded them as something isolated and cas-ual. 
 But this fact shows that in Russia, too, “Economism”did not arise and spread without a struggle against the “old” Social-Democrats (which the Economists of today are apt to forget). 
 And if, in the main, this struggle has not left “doc-umentary” traces behind it, it is solely because the member-ship of the circles then functioning underwent such constant change that no continuity was established and, consequent-ly, differences in point of view were not recorded in any doc-uments. 
 The founding of Rabochaya Mysl brought Economism to the light of day, but not at one stroke. 
 We must picture to ourselves concretely the conditions for activity and theshort-lived character of the majority of the Russian studycircles (a thing that is possible only for those who havethemselves experienced it) in order to understand how muchthere was of the fortuitous in the successes and failures of the new trend in various towns, and the length of time during which neither the advocates nor the opponents of the“new” could make up their minds—and literally had no opportunity of so doing—as to whether this really expressed a distinct trend or merely the lack of training of certainindividuals. 
 For example, the first mimeographed copies ofRabochaya Mysl never reached the great majority of Social-Democrats, and if we are able to refer to the leading articlein the first number, it is only because it was reproduced in an article by V. 
 I. 
165 ( “Listok ” Rabotnika , No. 
 9-10, p. 
 47, et seq. 
), who, of course, did not fail to extol with more zeal than reason the new paper, which was so different from the papers and projects for papers mentioned above. 
 * It is well worth dwelling on this leading article because it brings out inbold relief the entire spirit of Rabochaya Mysl and Economism generally. 
 After stating that the arm of the “blue-coats” ** could never halt the progress of the working-class movement, the leading article goes on to say: “... The virility of the working-class movement is due to the fact that the workers themselvesare at last taking their fate into their own hands, and outof the hands of the leaders”; this fundamental thesis is thendeveloped in greater detail. 
 Actually, the leaders (i. 
e. 
, the Social-Democrats, the organisers of the League of Struggle) were, one might say, torn out of the hands of the workers *** by the police; yet it is made to appear that the workers werefighting against the leaders and liberated themselves fromtheir yoke! Instead of sounding the call to go forward towardsthe consolidation of the revolutionary organisation and the expansion of political activity, the call was issued for a retreat to the purely trade-union struggle. 
 It was announced that “the economic basis of the movement is eclipsed by theeffort never to forget the political ideal”, and that the watch-word for the working-class movement was “Struggle for eco-nomic conditions” (!) or, better still, “The workers for the workers”. 
 It was declared that strike funds “are more valua-ble to the movement than a hundred other organisations”(compare this statement made in October 1897, with the *It should be stated in passing that the praise of Rabochaya Mysl in November 1898, when Economism had become fully defined, especially abroad, emanated from the selfsame V. 
 I, who very soonafter became one of the editors of Rabocheye Dyelo . 
 And yet Rabocheye Dyelo denied that there were two trends in Russian Social-Democra-cy, and continues to deny it to this day! **The tsarist gendarmes wore blue uniforms. 
— Tr. 
 *** That this simile is a correct one is shown by the following char-acteristic fact. 
 When, after the arrest of the “Decembrists”, the newsspread among the workers of the Schlüsselburg Highway that the dis-covery and arrest were facilitated by an agent-provocateur , N. 
 N. 
 Mi-khailov, a dentist, who had been in contact with a group associatedwith the “Decembrists”, the workers were so enraged that they de-cided to kill him. 
 polemic between the “Decembrists” and the young members in the beginning of 1897), etc. 
 Catchwords like “We must con-centrate, not on the ‘cream’ of the workers, but on the ‘av-erage’, mass worker”; “Politics always obediently followseconomics”, * etc. 
, etc. 
, became the fashion, exercising an irresistible influence upon the masses of the youth who wereattracted to the movement but who, in the majority ofcases, were acquainted only with such fragments of Marxism as were expounded in legally appearing publications. 
 Political consciousness was completely overwhelmed by spontaneity—the spontaneity of the “Social-Democrats”who repeated Mr. 
 V. 
 V. 
’s “ideas”, the spontaneity of thoseworkers who were carried away by the arguments that akopek added to a ruble was worth more than any socialism or politics, and that they must “fight, knowing that they are fighting, not for the sake of some future generation, but forthemselves and their children” (leader in Rabochaya Mysl , No. 
 1). 
 Phrases like these have always been a favourite weap-on of the West-European bourgeois, who, in their hatred forsocialism, strove (like the German “ Sozial-Politiker ” Hirsch) to transplant English trade-unionism to their native soil and to preach to the workers that by engaging in the purelytrade-union struggle ** they would be fighting for themselves and for their children, and not for some future generationswith some future socialism. 
 And now the “V. 
 V. 
’s of Rus-sian Social-Democracy” have set about repeating these bour-geois phrases. 
 It is important at this point to note three circumstances that will be useful to our further analysis ofcontemporary differences. 
 *** *These quotations are taken from the same leading article in the first number of Rabochaya Mysl . 
 One can judge from this the de-gree of theoretical training possessed by these “V. 
 V. 
’s of Russian So-cial-Democracy”, 166 who kept repeating the crude vulgarisation of “economic materialism” at a time when the Marxists were carrying on a literary war against the real Mr. 
 V. 
 V. 
, who had long ago beendubbed “a past master of reactionary deeds” for holding similar views on the relations between politics and economics! **The Germans even have a special expression, Nur-Gewerkschaft-ler, which means an advocate of the “pure trade-union” struggle. 
 *** We emphasise the word contemporary for the benefit of those who may pharisaically shrug their shoulders and say: It is easy enoughto attack Rabochaya Mysl now, but is not all this ancient history? Mutato nomine de te fabula narratur (change the name and the tale is In the first place, the overwhelming of political conscious-ness by spontaneity, to which we referred above, also took place spontaneously . 
 This may sound like a pun, but, alas, it is the bitter truth. 
 It did not take place as a result of an openstruggle between two diametrically opposed points of view,in which one triumphed over the other; it occurred because ofthe fact that an increasing number of “old” revolutionarieswere “torn away” by the gendarmes and increasing numbers of “young” “V. 
 V. 
’s of Russian Social-Democracy” appeared on the scene. 
 Everyone, who has, I shall not say participated in,but at least breathed the atmosphere of, the present-day Russian movement, knows perfectly well that this is preciselythe case. 
 And if, nevertheless, we insist strongly that thereader be fully clear on this generally known fact, if we cite, for explicitness, as it were, the facts of the first edition of Rabocheye Dyelo and of the polemic between the “old” and the “young” at the beginning of 1897, we do this because thepeople who vaunt their “democracy” speculate on the igno-rance of these facts on the part of the broad public (or of thevery young generation). 
 We shall return to this point fur-ther on. 
 Secondly, in the very first literary expression of Econo-mism we observe the exceedingly curious phenomenon—high-ly characteristic for an understanding of all the differencesprevailing among present-day Social-Democrats—that theadherents of the “labour movement pure and simple”, wor-shippers of the closest “organic” contacts ( Rabocheye Dye-lo’s term) with the proletarian struggle, opponents of any non-worker intelligentsia (even a socialist intelligentsia),are compelled, in order to defend their positions, to resortto the arguments of the bourgeois “pure trade-unionists”. 
 This shows that from the very outset Rabochaya Mysl began— unconsciously—to implement the programme of the Credo . 
 This shows (something Rabocheye Dyelo cannot grasp) that all worship of the spontaneity of the working-class move-ment, all belittling of the role of “the conscious element”, ofthe role of Social-Democracy, means , quite independently of whether he who belittles that role desires it or not , a strength-about you. 
— Ed. 
) is our answer to such contemporary Pharisees, whose complete subjection to the ideas of Rabochaya Mysl will be proved further on. 
 ening of the influence of bourgeois ideology upon the work-ers. 
 All those who talk about “overrating the importance of ideology”, * about exaggerating the role of the conscious ele-ment, ** etc. 
, imagine that the labour movement pure and simple can elaborate, and will elaborate, an independentideology for itself, if only the workers “wrest their fate fromthe hands of the leaders”. 
 But this is a profound mistake. 
To supplement what has been said above, we shall quote the following profoundly true and important words of Karl Kaut-sky on the new draft programme of the Austrian Social-Dem-ocratic Party: *** “Many of our revisionist critics believe that Marx asserted that economic development and the class struggle create, not only theconditions for socialist production, but also, and directly, the con-sciousness [K. 
 K. 
’s italics] of its necessity. 
 And these critics assert that England, the country most highly developed capitalistically, is more remote than any other from this consciousness. 
 Judg-ing by the draft, one might assume that this allegedly orthodox-Marxist view, which is thus refuted, was shared by the committeethat drafted the Austrian programme. 
 In the draft programme it isstated: ‘The more capitalist development increases the numbers ofthe proletariat, the more the proletariat is compelled and becomes fit to fight against capitalism. 
 The proletariat becomes conscious’ of the possibility and of the necessity for socialism. 
’ In this connectionsocialist consciousness appears to be a necessary and direct result ofthe proletarian class struggle. 
 But this is absolutely untrue. 
 Of course,socialism, as a doctrine, has its roots in modern economic relation-ships just as the class struggle of the proletariat has, and, like the lat-ter, emerges from the struggle against the capitalist-created poverty and misery of the masses. 
 But socialism and the class struggle ariseside by side and not one out of the other; each arises under differentconditions. 
 Modern socialist consciousness can arise only on the basisof profound scientific knowledge. 
 Indeed, modern economic scienceis as much a condition for socialist production as, say, modern technol-ogy, and the proletariat can create neither the one nor the other, no matter how much it may desire to do so; both arise out of the modernsocial process. 
 The vehicle of science is not the proletariat, but thebourgeois intelligentsia [K. 
 K. 
’s italics]: it was in the minds of indi-vidual members of this stratum that modern socialism originated, andit was they who communicated it to the more intellectually developed proletarians who, in their turn, introduce it into the proletarian class *Letter of the “Economists”, in Iskra , No. 
 12. 
 **Rabocheye Dyelo , No. 
 10. 
 ***Neue Zeit , 1901-02, XX, I, No. 
 3, p. 
 79. 
 The committee’s draft to which Kautsky refers was adopted by the Vienna Congress (at the end of last year) in a slightly amended form. 
 struggle where conditions allow that to be done. 
 Thus, socialist con-sciousness is something introduced into the proletarian class strugglefrom without [ von Aussen Hineingetragenes ] and not something that arose within it spontaneously [ urwüchsig ]. 
 Accordingly, the old Hainfeld programme quite rightly stated that the task of Social-De-mocracy is to imbue the proletariat [literally: saturate the proletar-iat] with the consciousness of its position and the consciousness of its task. 
 There would be no need for this if consciousness arose of itselffrom the class struggle. 
 The new draft copied this proposition from theold programme, and attached it to the proposition mentioned above. 
But this completely broke the line of thought.... 
” Since there can be no talk of an independent ideology for-mulated by the working masses themselves in the process oftheir movement, * the only choice is—either bourgeois or socialist ideology. 
 There is no middle course (for mankind has not created a “third” ideology, and, moreover, in asociety torn by class antagonisms there can never be a non-class or an above-class ideology). 
 Hence, to belittle the so-cialist ideology in any way , to turn aside from it in the slight-est degree means to strengthen bourgeois ideology. 
 There is much talk of spontaneity. 
 But the spontaneous development of the working-class movement leads to its subordination tobourgeois ideology, to its development along the lines of the Credo programme ; for the spontaneous working-class move-ment is trade-unionism, is Nur-Gewerkschaftlerei , and trade-unionism means the ideological enslavement of the workers by the bourgeoisie. 
 Hence, our task, the task of Social-Democ-racy, is to combat spontaneity , to divert the working-class movement from this spontaneous, trade-unionist striving to *This does not mean, of course, that the workers have no part in creating such an ideology. 
 They take part, however, not as workers,but as socialist theoreticians, as Proudhons and Weitlings; in otherwords, they take part only when they are able, and to the extent thatthey are able, more or less, to acquire the knowledge of their age and develop that knowledge. 
 But in order that working men may succeed in this more often , every effort must be made to raise the level of the consciousness of the workers in general; it is necessary that the workersdo not confine themselves to the artificially restricted limits of “ lit-erature for workers ” but that they learn to an increasing degree to master general literature . 
 It would be even truer to say “are not con-fined”, instead of “do not confine themselves”, because the workers themselves wish to read and do read all that is written for the intel-ligentsia, and only a few (bad) intellectuals believe that it is enough“for workers” to be told a few things about factory conditions and tohave repeated to them over and over again what has long been known. 
 come under the wing of the bourgeoisie, and to bring it under the wing of revolutionary Social-Democracy. 
 The sentence employed by the authors of the “Economist” letter publishedin Iskra , No. 
 12, that the efforts of the most inspired ide-ologists fail to divert the working-class movement from the path that is determined by the interaction of the materialelements and the material environment is therefore tanta-mount to renouncing socialism . 
 If these authors were capable of fearlessly, consistently, and thoroughly considering what they say, as everyone who enters the arena of literary and public activity should be, there would be nothing left for them but to “fold their useless arms over their empty breasts” and surrender the field of action to the Struves andProkopoviches, who are dragging the working-class movement“along the line of least resistance”, i. 
e. 
, along the line ofbourgeois trade-unionism, or to the Zubatovs, who are drag-ging it along the line of clerical and gendarme “ideology”. 
 Let us recall the example of Germany. 
 What was the historic service Lassalle rendered to the German working-class movement? It was that he diverted that movement from the path of progressionist trade-unionism and co-operativismtowards which it had been spontaneously moving ( with the benign assistance of Schulze-Delitzsch and his like ). 
 To fulfil such a task it was necessary to do something quite different from talking of underrating the spontaneous element, oftactics-as-process, of the interaction between elements andenvironment, etc. 
 A fierce struggle against spontaneity was necessary, and only after such a struggle, extending over many years, was it possible, for instance, to convert the working pop-ulation of Berlin from a bulwark of the progressionist partyinto one of the finest strongholds of Social-Democracy. 
 This struggle is by no means over even today (as might seem to those who learn the history of the German movement from Pro-kopovich, and its philosophy from Struve). 
 Even now the German working class is, so to speak, split up among a number of ideologies. 
 A section of the workers is organised in Cath-olic and monarchist trade unions; another section is organ-ised in the Hirsch-Duncker unions, 167 founded by the bour-geois worshippers of English trade-unionism; the third isorganised in Social-Democratic trade unions. 
 The last-named group is immeasurably more numerous than the rest, but the Social-Democratic ideology was able to achieve this superiority, and will be able to maintain it, only in an unswerving struggle against all other ideologies. 
 But why, the reader will ask, does the spontaneous move-ment, the movement along the line of least resistance, lead tothe domination of bourgeois ideology? For the simple reasonthat bourgeois ideology is far older in origin than socialistideology, that it is more fully developed, and that it has at its disposal immeasurably more means of dissemination. 
 * And the younger the socialist movement in any given coun-try, the more vigorously it must struggle against all attemptsto entrench non-socialist ideology, and the more resolutelythe workers must be warned against the bad counsellors whoshout against “overrating the conscious element”, etc. 
 The authors of the Economist letter, in unison with Rabocheye Dyelo , inveigh against the intolerance that is characteristic of the infancy of the movement. 
 To this we reply: Yes, ourmovement is indeed in its infancy, and in order that it maygrow up faster, it must become imbued with intoleranceagainst those who retard its growth by their subservience to spontaneity. 
 Nothing is so ridiculous and harmful as pretend-ing that we are “old hands” who have long ago experiencedall the decisive stages of the struggle. 
 Thirdly, the first issue of Rabochaya Mysl shows that the term “Economism” (which, of course, we do not propose toabandon, since, in one way or another, this designation has already established itself) does not adequately convey the real character of the new trend. 
 Rabochaya Mysl does not altogether repudiate the political struggle; the rules for aworkers’ mutual benefit fund published in its first issue con-*It is often said that the working class spontaneously gravitates towards socialism. 
 This is perfectly true in the sense that socialist theory reveals the causes of the misery of the working class more pro-foundly and more correctly than any other theory, and for that reason the workers are able to assimilate it so easily, provided , however, this theory does not itself yield to spontaneity, provided it subordi-nates spontaneity to itself. 
 Usually this is taken for granted, but it is precisely this which Rabocheye Dyelo forgets or distorts. 
 The work-ing class spontaneously gravitates towards socialism; nevertheless,most widespread (and continuously and diversely revived) bour-geois ideology spontaneously imposes itself upon the working class to a still greater degree. 
 tain a reference to combating the government. 
 Rabochaya Mysl believes, however, that “politics always obediently follows economics” ( Rabocheye Dyelo varies this thesis when it asserts in its programme that “in Russia more than in anyother country, the economic struggle is inseparable from thepolitical struggle”). 
 If by politics is meant Social-Demo-cratic politics , then the theses of Rabochaya Mysl and Ra-bocheye Dyelo are utterly incorrect. 
 The economic struggle of the workers is very often connected (although not insep-arably) with bourgeois politics, clerical politics, etc. 
, as wehave seen. 
 Rabocheye Dyelo ’s theses are correct, if by politics is meant trade-union politics, viz. 
, the common striving ofall workers to secure from the government measures for alle-viating the distress to which their condition gives rise, but which do not abolish that condition, i. 
e. 
, which do not re-move the subjection of labour to capital. 
 That striving in-deed is common to the English trade-unionists, who are hos-tile to socialism, to the Catholic workers, to the “Zubatov”workers, etc. 
 There is politics and politics. 
 Thus, we see thatRabochaya Mysl does not so much deny the political struggle, as it bows to its spontaneity , to its unconsciousness. 
 While fully recognising the political struggle (better: the politicaldesires and demands of the workers), which arises sponta-neously from the working-class movement itself, it absolutelyrefuses independently to work out a specifically Social-Democratic politics corresponding to the general tasks of socialism and to present-day conditions in Russia. 
 Further on we shall show that Rabocheye Dyelo commits the same error. 
 C. 
 THE SELF-EMANCIPATION GROUP168 AND RABOCHEYE DYELO We have dealt at such length with the little-known and now almost forgotten leading article in the first issue ofRabochaya Mysl because it was the first and most striking expression of that general stream of thought which afterwardsemerged into the light of day in innumerable streamlets. 
 V. 
 I. 
 was perfectly right when, in praising the first issue and the leading article of Rabochaya Mysl , he said that the arti-cle had been written in a “sharp and fervent” manner (“ Li-stok” Rabotnika , No. 
 9-10, p. 
 49). 
 Every man with convictions who thinks he has something new to say writes “fervently” and in such a way as to make his views stand out in bold re-lief. 
 Only those who are accustomed to sitting between two stools lack “fervour”; only such people are able to praise thefervour of Rabochaya Mysl one day and attack the “fervent polemics” of its opponents the next. 
 We shall not dwell on the “ Separate Supplement ” to Rabochaya Mysl (below we shall have occasion, on various points, to refer to this work, which expresses the ideas of the Economists more consistently than any other) but shallbriefly mention the “Appeal of the Self-Emancipation ofthe Workers Group” (March 1899, reprinted in the LondonNakanune , 169 No. 
 7, July 1899). 
 The authors of the “Appeal” rightly say that “the workers of Russia are only just awaken-ing, are just beginning to look about them, and are instinc-tively clutching at the first available means of struggle”. 
 Yet they draw from this the same false conclusion as that drawnby Rabochaya Mysl , forgetting that the instinctive is the unconscious (the spontaneous) to the aid of which socialistsmust come; that the “first available means of struggle” will always be, in modern society, the trade-union means of struggle, and the “first available” ideology the bourgeois(trade-union) ideology. 
 Similarly, these authors do not“repudiate” politics, they merely (merely!) echo Mr. 
 V. 
 V. 
that politics is the superstructure, and therefore, “politicalagitation must be the superstructure to the agitation carried on in favour of the economic struggle; it must arise on the basis of this struggle and follow in its wake. 
” As for Rabocheye Dyelo , it began its activity with the “de-fence” of the Economists. 
 It stated a downright untruth in its opening issue (No. 
 1, pp. 
 141-42) in claiming that it “does notknow to which young comrades Axelrod referred” when hewarned the Economists in his well-known pamphlet. 
 * I n the polemic that flared up with Axelrod and Plekhanov over this untruth, Rabocheye Dyelo had to admit that “in form of perplexity, it sought to defend all the younger Social-Dem-ocrats abroad from this unjust accusation” (the charge ofnarrowness levelled by Axelrod at the Economists). 
 In re-*Present Tasks and Tactics of the Russian Social-Democracy , Geneva, 1898. 
 Two letters to Rabochaya Gazeta , written in 1897. 
 ality this accusation was completely justified, and Rabocheye Dyelo knew perfectly well that, among others, it applied also to V. 
 I. 
, a member of its Editorial Board. 
 Let me note in passing that in this polemic Axelrod was entirely right andRabocheye Dyelo entirely wrong in their respective inter-pretations of my pamphlet The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats . 
* The pamphlet was written in 1897, before the appearance of Rabochaya Mysl , when I thought, rightly, that the original tendency of the St. 
 Petersburg League of Strug-gle, which I characterised above, was dominant. 
 And thistendency was dominant at least until the middle of 1898. 
Consequently, Rabocheye Dyelo had no right whatever, in its attempt to deny the existence and danger of Economism,to refer to a pamphlet that expressed views forced out b y “Economist” views in St. 
 Petersburg in 1897-98. 
 ** But Rabocheye Dyelo not only “defended” the Economists, it itself constantly fell into their fundamental errors. 
 Thesource of this confusion is to be found in the ambiguity of theinterpretation given to the following thesis of the Rabo-cheye Dyelo programme: “We consider that the most important phenomenon of Russian life, the one that will mainly de-termine the tasks [our italics] and the character of the publi-cation activity of the Union, is the mass working-class move-ment [Rabocheye Dyelo ’s italics] which has arisen in recent years. 
” That the mass movement is a most important phenom-enon is a fact not to be disputed. 
 But the crux of the mat-ter is, how is one to understand the statement that the mass working-class movement will “determine the tasks”? It may *See present edition, Vol. 
 2, pp. 
 323—51. 
— Ed. 
 **In defending its first untruth (“we do not know to which young comrades Axelrod referred”), Rabocheye Dyelo added a second, when it wrote in its Reply : “Since the review of The Tasks was published, tendencies have arisen, or become more or less clearly defined, amongcertain Russian Social-Democrats, towards economic one-sidedness,which represent a step backwards from the state of our movement asdescribed in The Tasks ” (p. 
 9). 
 This, in the Reply , published in 1900 . 
 But the first issue of Rabocheye Dyelo (containing the review) ap-peared in April 1899 . 
 Did Economism really arise only in 1899? No. 
 The year 1899 saw the first protest of the Russian Social-Democrats against Economism (the protest against the Credo ). 
 Economism arose in 1897, as Rabocheye Dyelo very well knows, for already in Novem-ber 1898 , V. 
 I. 
 was praising Rabochaya Mysl (see “ Listok ” Rabotnika , No. 
 9-10). 
 be interpreted in one of two ways. 
 Either it means bowing to the spontaneity of this movement, i. 
e. 
, reducing the role of Social-Democracy to mere subservience to the working-class movement as such (the interpretation of Rabochaya Mysl , the Self-Emancipation Group, and other Economists), or itmeans that the mass movement places before us new theoret-ical, political, and organisational tasks, far more compli-cated than those that might have satisfied us in the period be-fore the rise of the mass movement. 
 Rabocheye Dyelo in-clined and still inclines towards the first interpretation, forit has said nothing definite about any new tasks, but hasargued constantly as though the “mass movement” relieves us of the necessity of clearly understanding and fulfilling thetasks it sets before us. 
 We need only point out that Rabo-cheye Dyelo considered that it was impossible to set the over-throw of the autocracy as the first task of the mass working-class movement, and that it degraded this task (in the name ofthe mass movement) to that of a struggle for immediate polit-ical demands ( Reply , p. 
 25). 
 We shall pass over the article by B. 
 Krichevsky, editor of Rabocheye Dyelo , entitled “The Economic and the Political Struggle in the Russian Movement”, published in No. 
 7 ofthat paper, in which these very mistakes * are repeated, and *The “stages theory”, or the theory of “timid zigzags”, in the political struggle is expressed, for example, in this article, in the fol-lowing way: “Political demands, which in their character are commonto the whole of Russia, should, however, at first (this was written inAugust 1900!) correspond to the experience gained by the given stra-tum [ sic!] of workers in the economic struggle. 
 Only [!] on the basis of this experience can and should political agitation be taken up,”etc. 
 (p. 
 11). 
 On page 4, the author, protesting against what he regardsas the absolutely unfounded charge of Economist heresy, patheticallyexclaims: “What Social-Democrat does not know that according tothe theories of Marx and Engels the economic interests of certain classesplay a decisive role in history, and, consequently , that particularly the proletariat’s struggle for its economic interests must be of para-mount importance in its class development and struggle for eman-cipation?” (Our italics. 
) The word “consequently” is completely irre-levant. 
 The fact that economic interests play a decisive role does not in the least imply that the economic (i. 
e. 
, trade-union) struggle is of prime importance; for the most essential, the “decisive” interests of classes can be satisfied only by radical political changes in general. 
 In particular the fundamental economic interests of the proletariatcan be satisfied only by a political revolution that will replace the dic-proceed directly to Rabocheye Dyelo , No. 
 10. 
 We shall not, of course, enter in detail into the various objections raised by Krichevsky and Martynov against Zarya and Iskra . 
 We are here interested solely in the basis of principles on whichRabocheye Dyelo , in its tenth issue, took its stand. 
 Thus, we shall not examine the strange fact that Rabocheye Dyelo saw a “diametrical contradiction” between the proposition: “Social-Democracy does not tie its hands, it does not restrict its activities to some one preconceived plan or method of political strug-gle; it recognises all means of struggle as long as they correspond to the forces at the disposal of the Party,” etc. 
 ( Iskra , No. 
 1)*. 
 and the proposition: “Without a strong organisation skilled in waging political struggle under all circumstances and at all times, there can be no ques-tion of that systematic plan of action, illumined by firm principles andsteadfastly carried out, which alone is worthy of the name of tactics”(Iskra , No. 
 4). 
 ** To confound recognition, in principle , of all means of struggle, of all plans and methods, provided they are ex-pedient, with the demand at a given political moment to be guided by a strictly observed plan is tantamount, if we are totalk of tactics, to confounding the recognition by medicalscience of various methods of treating diseases with the ne-cessity for adopting a certain definite method of treatment for a given disease. 
 The point is, however, that Rabocheye Dyelo , itself the victim of a disease which we have called bowing to spontaneity, refuses to recognise any “method oftreatment” for that disease. 
 Hence, it has made the remark-able discovery that “tactics-as-plan contradicts the fun-damental spirit of Marxism” (No. 
 10, p. 
 18), that tactics are “ a process of growth of Party tasks , which grow together with the Party ” (p. 
 11, Rabocheye Dyelo ’s italics). 
 This remark tatorship of the bourgeoisie by the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 Krichevsky repeats the arguments of the “V. 
 V. 
’s of Russian Social-Democracy” (viz. 
, that politics follows economics, etc. 
) and of the Bern-steinians of German Social-Democracy (e. 
g. 
, by similar argumentsWoltmann sought to prove that the workers must first of all acquire“economic power” before they can think about political revolution). 
 *See present edition, Vol. 
 4, pp. 
 370-71. 
— Ed. 
 **See present volume, p. 
 18. 
— Ed. 
 has every chance of becoming a celebrated maxim, a per-manent monument to the Rabocheye Dyelo “trend”. 
 To the question, whither ? the leading organ replies: Movement is a process of changing the distance between the starting-pointand subsequent points of the movement. 
 This matchlessexample of profundity is not merely a curiosity (were itthat, it would not be worth dealing with at length), butthe programme of a whole trend , the very programme which R. 
 M. 
 (in the “ Separate Supplement ” to Rabochaya Mysl ) expressed in the words: That struggle is desirable which ispossible, and the struggle which is possible is that which isgoing on at the given moment. 
 This is precisely the trend ofunbounded opportunism, which passively adapts itself tospontaneity. 
 “Tactics-as-plan contradicts the essence of Marxism!” But this is a slander of Marxism; it means turning Marxisminto the caricature held up by the Narodniks in their struggleagainst us. 
 It means belittling the initiative and energy ofclass-conscious fighters, whereas Marxism, on the contrary,gives a gigantic impetus to the initiative and energy of the Social-Democrat, opens up for him the widest perspectives, and (if one may so express it) places at his disposal the mightyforce of many millions of workers “spontaneously” rising forthe struggle. 
 The entire history of international Social-Democracy teems with plans advanced now by one, now byanother, political leader, some confirming the far-sighted-ness and the correct political and organisational views of their authors and others revealing their short-sightedness andtheir political errors. 
 At the time when Germany was at one ofthe crucial turning-points in its history—the formationof the Empire, the opening of the Reichstag, and the grantingof universal suffrage—Liebknecht had one plan for Social-Democratic politics and work in general, and Schweitzer had another. 
 When the anti-socialist law came down on the headsof the German socialists, Most and Hasselmann had oneplan—they were prepared then and there to call for violenceand terror; Höchberg, Schramm, and (partly) Bernstein hadanother—they began to preach to the Social-Democrats that they themselves had provoked the enactment of the law by being unreasonably bitter and revolutionary, and mustnow earn forgiveness by their exemplary conduct. 
 There was yet a third plan proposed by those who prepared and carried out the publication of an illegal organ. 
 It is easy, of course, with hindsight, many years after the struggle over the selection of the path to be followed, and after history haspronounced its verdict as to the expediency of the path se-lected, to utter profound maxims about the growth ofParty tasks, which grow together with the Party. 
 But ata time of confusion, * when the Russian “Critics” and Econo-mists are degrading Social-Democracy to the level of trade-unionism, and when the terrorists are strongly advocatingthe adoption of “tactics-as-plan” that repeats the old mis-takes, at such a time, to confine oneself to profundities ofthis kind, means simply to issue to oneself a “certificate ofpoverty”. 
 At a time when many Russian Social-Democrats suffer from a lack of initiative and energy, from an inade-quate “scope of political propaganda, agitation, and organi-sation,” ** from a lack of “plans” for a broader organisation of revolutionary work, at such a time, to declare that “tac-tics-as-plan” contradicts the essence of Marxism means notonly to vulgarise Marxism in the realm of theory, but to drag the Party backward in practice. 
 Rabocheye Dyelo goes on to sermonise: “The task of the revolutionary Social-Democrat is only to accel-erate objective development by his conscious work, not to obviate itor substitute his own subjective plans for this development. 
 Iskra knows all this in theory; but the enormous importance which Marxismjustly attaches to conscious revolutionary work causes it in practice,owing to its doctrinaire view of tactics, to belittle the significance of the objective or the spontaneous element of development ” (p. 
 18). 
 Another example of the extraordinary theoretical confu-sion worthy of Mr. 
 V. 
 V. 
 and his fraternity. 
 We would askour philosopher: how may a designer of subjective plans “belittle” objective development? Obviously by losing sight of the fact that this objective development creates or strength-*“Ein Jahr der Verwirrung ” (“A Year of Confusion”) is the ti-tle Mehring gave to the chapter of his History of German Social-Democ-racy in which he describes the hesitancy and lack of determination displayed at first by the socialists in selecting the “tactics-as-plan” for the new situation. 
 **Leading article in Iskra , No. 
 1. 
 (See present edition, Vol. 
 4, p. 
 369. 
— Ed. 
) ens, destroys or weakens certain classes, strata, or groups, certain nations or groups of nations, etc. 
, and in this way serves to determine a given international political alignment of forces, or the position adopted by revolutionary parties,etc. 
 If the designer of plans did that, his guilt would not bethat he belittled the spontaneous element, but, on the con-trary, that he belittled the conscious element, for he would then show that he lacked the “consciousness” properly to understand objective development. 
 Hence, the very talk of “estimating the relative significance” ( Rabocheye Dyelo ’s italics) of spontaneity and consciousness itself reveals acomplete lack of “consciousness”. 
 If certain “spontaneouselements of development” can be grasped at all by humanunderstanding, then an incorrect estimation of them will be tantamount to “belittling the conscious element”. 
 But if they cannot be grasped, then we do not know them, andtherefore cannot speak of them. 
 What then is Krichevskydiscussing? If he thinks that Iskra ’s “subjective plans” are erroneous (as he in fact declares them to be), he should haveshown what objective facts they ignore, and only then charged Iskra with lacking political consciousness for ignoring them, with “belittling the conscious element”, to use hisown words. 
 If, however, displeased with subjective plans,he can bring forward no argument other than that of “belit-tling the spontaneous element” (!), he merely shows: (1) that,theoretically, he understands Marxism à la Kareyev and Mikhailovsky, who have been sufficiently ridiculed by Bel-tov; 170 and (2) that, practically, he is quite satisfied with the “spontaneous elements of development” that have drawnour legal Marxists towards Bernsteinism and our Social-Dem-ocrats towards Economism, and that he is “full of wrath”against those who have determined at all costs to divert Russian Social-Democracy from the path of “spontaneous” development. 
 Further, there follow things that are positively droll. 
 “Just as human beings will reproduce in the old-fashionedway despite all the discoveries of natural science, so the birth of a new social order will come about, in the future too, mainly as a result of elemental outbursts, despite all the discoveries of social science and the increase in the num-ber of conscious fighters” (p. 
 19). 
 Just as our grandfathers in their old-fashioned wisdom used to say, Anyone can bring children into the world, so today the “modern socialists” (à la Nartsis Tuporylov)171 say in their wisdom, Anyone can participate in the spontaneous birth of a new social order. 
We too hold that anyone can. 
 All that is required for par-ticipation of that kind is to yield to Economism when Econo-mism reigns and to terrorism when terrorism arises. 
 Thus, inthe spring of this year, when it was so important to utter a note of warning against infatuation with terrorism, Rabo-cheye Dyelo stood in amazement, confronted by a problem that was “new” to it. 
 And now, six months after, when theproblem has become less topical, it presents us at one andthe same time with the declaration: “We think that it is notand should not be the task of Social-Democracy to counter-act the rise of terroristic sentiments” ( Rabocheye Dyelo , No. 
 10, p. 
 23), and with the Conference resolution: “The Confer-ence regards systematic and aggressive terror as being inop-portune ” (Two Conferences , p. 
 18). 
 How beautifully clear and coherent this is! Not to counteract, but to declare inoppor-tune, and to declare it in such a way that unsystematic and defensive terror does not come within the scope of the “resolution”. 
 It must be admitted that such a resolution isextremely safe and is fully insured against error, just as aman who talks, but says nothing, insures himself againsterror. 
 All that is needed to frame such a resolution is an abil-ity to keep at the tail-end of the movement. 
 When Iskra ridiculed Rabocheye Dyelo for declaring the question of ter-ror to be new, * the latter angrily accused Iskra of “having the incredible effrontery to impose upon the Party organisa-tion solutions of tactical questions proposed by a group ofemigrant writers more than fifteen years ago” (p. 
 24). 
 Effron-tery indeed, and what an overestimation of the conscious element—first to resolve questions theoretically before-hand, and then to try to convince the organisation, the Par-ty, and the masses of the correctness of this solution! ** How much better it would be to repeat the elements and, without“imposing” anything upon anybody, swing with every *See present volume, p. 
 18-20. 
— Ed. 
 **Nor must it be forgotten that in solving “theoretically” the prob-lem of terror, the Emancipation of Labour group generalised the ex-perience of the antecedent revolutionary movement. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR “turn”—whether in the direction of Economism or in the direction of terrorism. 
 Rabocheye Dyelo even generalises this great precept of worldly wisdom and accuses Iskra and Zarya of “setting up their programme against the movement, like a spirit hovering over the formless chaos” (p. 
 29). 
 Butwhat else is the function of Social-Democracy if not to be a“spirit” that not only hovers over the spontaneous movement,but also raises this movement to the level of “its programme ”? Surely, it is not its function to drag at the tail of the move-ment. 
 At best, this would be of no service to the movement;at worst, it would be exceedingly harmful. 
 Rabocheye Dyelo , however, not only follows this “tactics-as-process”, but ele-vates it to a principle, so that it would be more correct todescribe its tendency not as opportunism, but as tail-ism (from the word tail). 
 And it must be admitted that those who are determined always to follow behind the movementand be its tail are absolutely and forever guaranteed against“belittling the spontaneous element of development”. 
 * * * And so, we have become convinced that the fundamental error committed by the “new trend” in Russian Social-Democ-racy is its bowing to spontaneity and its failure to under-stand that the spontaneity of the masses demands a highdegree of consciousness from us Social-Democrats. 
 Thegreater the spontaneous upsurge of the masses and the more widespread the movement, the more rapid, incomparably so, the demand for greater consciousness in the theoretical, po-litical and organisational work of Social-Democracy. 
 The spontaneous upsurge of the masses in Russia pro-ceeded (and continues) with such rapidity that the youngSocial-Democrats proved unprepared to meet these gigantic tasks. 
 This unpreparedness is our common misfortune, the misfortune of all Russian Social-Democrats. 
 The upsurge of the masses proceeded and spread with uninterrupted con-tinuity; it not only continued in the places where it began,but spread to new localities and to new strata of the popu-lation (under the influence of the working-class movement, there was a renewed ferment among the student youth, among the intellectuals generally, and even among the peasantry). 
 Revolutionaries, however, lagged behind this upsurge, both in their “theories” and in their activity; they failed to estab-lish a constant and continuous organisation capable of leading the whole movement. 
 In Chapter I, we established that Rabocheye Dyelo belit-tled our theoretical tasks and that it “spontaneously” repeat-ed the fashionable catchword “freedom of criticism”; thosewho repeated this catchword lacked the “consciousness” to understand that the positions of the opportunist “Critics” and those of the revolutionaries in Germany and in Russiaare diametrically opposed. 
 In the following chapters, we shall show how this bowing to spontaneity found expression in the sphere of the politi-cal tasks and in the organisational work of Social-Democ-racy. 
 III TRADE-UNIONIST POLITICS AND SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC POLITICS We shall again begin by praising Rabocheye Dyelo . 
 “Liter-ature of Exposure and the Proletarian Struggle” is the title Martynov gave the article on his differences with Iskra pub-lished in Rabocheye Dyelo , No. 
 10. 
 He formulated the sub-stance of the differences as follows: “We cannot confine our-selves solely to exposing the system that stands in its [theworking-class party’s] path of development. 
 We must also react to the immediate and current interests of the proletar-iat. 
 ... Iskra ... is in fact an organ of revolutionary opposition that exposes the state of affairs in our country, particularlythe political state of affairs.... 
 We, however, work and shallcontinue to work for the cause of the working class in closeorganic contact with the proletarian struggle” (p. 
 63). 
 One cannot help being grateful to Martynov for this formula. 
 It is of outstanding general interest, because substantially itembraces not only our disagreements with Rabocheye Dyelo , but the general disagreement between ourselves and the“Economists” on the political struggle. 
 We have shown thatthe “Economists” do not altogether repudiate “politics”, but that they are constantly straying from the Social-Demo-cratic to the trade-unionist conception of politics. 
 Martynov strays in precisely this way, and we shall therefore take his views as a model of Economist error on this question. 
 As we shall endeavour to prove, neither the authors of the “ Sepa-rate Supplement ” to Rabochaya Mysl nor the authors of the manifesto issued by the Self-Emancipation Group, nor theauthors of the Economist letter published in Iskra , No. 
 12, will have any right to complain against this choice. 
 A. 
 POLITICAL AGITATION AND ITS RESTRICTION BY THE ECONOMISTS Everyone knows that the economic * struggle of the Rus-sian workers underwent widespread development and con-solidation simultaneously with the production of “litera-ture” exposing economic (factory and occupational) conditions. 
The “leaflets” were devoted mainly to the exposure of the factory system, and very soon a veritable passion for expo-sures was roused among the workers. 
 As soon as the workersrealised that the Social-Democratic study circles desired to,and could, supply them with a new kind of leaflet that toldthe whole truth about their miserable existence, about theirunbearably hard toil, and their lack of rights, they began to send in, actually flood us with, correspondence from the fac-tories and workshops. 
 This “exposure literature” created atremendous sensation, not only in the particular factoryexposed in the given leaflet, but in all the factories to whichnews of the revealed facts spread. 
 And since the poverty andwant among the workers in the various enterprises and in the various trades are much the same, the “truth about the life of the workers” stirred everyone . 
 Even among the most backward workers, a veritable passion arose to “get into print”—a noble passion for this rudimentary form of waragainst the whole of the present social system which is based upon robbery and oppression. 
 And in the overwhelming ma-jority of cases these “leaflets” were in truth a declaration of *To avoid misunderstanding, we must point out that here, and throughout this pamphlet, by economic struggle, we imply (in keepingwith the accepted usage among us) the “practical economic struggle”,which Engels, in the passage quoted above, described as “resistance to the capitalists”, and which in free countries is known as the organ-ised-labour syndical, or trade-union struggle. 
 war, because the exposures served greatly to agitate the workers; they evoked among them common demands for the removal of the most glaring outrages and roused in them a readiness to support the demands with strikes. 
 Finally, theemployers themselves were compelled to recognise the signif-icance of these leaflets as a declaration of war, so much sothat in a large number of cases they did not even wait forthe outbreak of hostilities. 
 As is always the case, the mere publication of these exposures made them effective, and they acquired the significance of a strong moral influence. 
 On morethan one occasion, the mere appearance of a leaflet provedsufficient to secure the satisfaction of all or part of the de-mands put forward. 
 In a word, economic (factory) exposureswere and remain an important lever in the economic struggle. 
 And they will continue to retain this significance as long as there is capitalism, which makes it necessary for the workersto defend themselves. 
 Even in the most advanced countriesof Europe it can still be seen that the exposure of abuses insome backward trade, or in some forgotten branch of domesticindustry, serves as a starting-point for the awakening of class-consciousness, for the beginning of a trade-union strug-gle, and for the spread of socialism. 
 * The overwhelming majority of Russian Social-Democrats have of late been almost entirely absorbed by this work oforganising the exposure of factory conditions. 
 Suffice it torecall Rabochaya Mysl to see the extent to which they have been absorbed by it—so much so, indeed, that they have *In the present chapter we deal only with the political struggle, in its broader or narrower meaning. 
 Therefore, we note only in pass-ing, merely as a curiosity, Rabocheye Dyelo ’s charge that Iskra i s “too restrained” in regard to the economic struggle ( Two Conferences , p. 
 27, rehashed by Martynov in his pamphlet, Social-Democracy and the Working Class ). 
 If the accusers computed by the hundredweights or reams (as they are so fond of doing) any given year’s discus-sion of the economic struggle in the industrial section of Iskra , in comparison with the corresponding sections of Rabocheye Dyelo and Rabochaya Mysl combined, they would easily see that the latter lag behind even in this respect. 
 Apparently, the realisation of this simpletruth compels them to resort to arguments that clearly reveal theirconfusion. 
 “ Iskra ,” they write, “willy-nilly [!] is compelled [!] to reckon with the imperative demands of life and to publish at least [!!] correspondence about the working-class movement” ( Two Con-ferences , p. 
 27). 
 Now this is really a crushing argument! lost sight of the fact that this, taken by itself , is in essence still not Social-Democratic work, but merely trade-union work. 
 As a matter of fact, the exposures merely dealt with the relations between the workers in a given trade and their employers, and all they achieved was that the sellers of la-bour-power learned to sell their “commodity” on better termsand to fight the purchasers over a purely commercial deal. 
These exposures could have served (if properly utilised by an organisation of revolutionaries) as a beginning and a compo-nent part of Social-Democratic activity; but they could alsohave led (and, given a worshipful attitude towards sponta-neity, were bound to lead) to a “purely trade-union” struggleand to a non-Social-Democratic working-class movement. 
Social-Democracy leads the struggle of the working class, not only for better terms for the sale of labour-power, but for the abolition of the social system that compels the prop-ertyless to sell themselves to the rich. 
 Social-Democracyrepresents the working class, not in its relation to a givengroup of employers alone, but in its relation to all classes ofmodern society and to the state as an organised political force. 
 Hence, it follows that not only must Social-Democrats not confine themselves exclusively to the economic struggle,but that they must not allow the organisation of economicexposures to become the predominant part of their activities. 
We must take up actively the political education of the work-ing class and the development of its political consciousness. 
 Now that Zarya and Iskra have made the first attack upon Economism, “all are agreed” on this (although some agreeonly in words, as we shall soon see). 
 The question arises, what should political education con-sist in? Can it be confined to the propaganda of working-class hostility to the autocracy? Of course not. 
 It is not enough to explain to the workers that they are politically oppressed (any more than it is to explain to them that their interests are antagonistic to the interests of the employers). 
 Agita-tion must be conducted with regard to every concrete exam-ple of this oppression (as we have begun to carry on agitationround concrete examples of economic oppression). 
 Inasmuch as this oppression affects the most diverse classes of society, inasmuch as it manifests itself in the most varied spheresof life and activity—vocational, civic, personal, family, religious, scientific, etc. 
, etc. 
—is it not evident that we shall not be fulfilling our task of developing the political conscious-ness of the workers if we do not undertake the organisation of the political exposure of the autocracy in all its aspects ? In order to carry on agitation round concrete instances ofoppression, these instances must be exposed (as it is neces-sary to expose factory abuses in order to carry on economicagitation). 
 One might think this to be clear enough. 
 It turns out, however, that it is only in words that “all” are agreed onthe need to develop political consciousness, in all its aspects . 
 It turns out that Rabocheye Dyelo , for example, far from tackling the task of organising (or making a start in organis-ing) comprehensive political exposure, is even trying to drag Iskra , which has undertaken this task, away from it . 
 Listen to the following: “The political struggle of the work-ing class is merely [it is certainly not “merely”] the mostdeveloped, wide, and effective form of economic struggle”(programme of Rabocheye Dyelo , published in issue No. 
 1, p. 
 3). 
 “The Social-Democrats are now confronted with the task of lending the economic struggle itself, as far as possi-ble, a political character” (Martynov, Rabocheye Dyelo , No. 
 10, p. 
 42). 
 “The economic struggle is the most widely appli-cable means of drawing the masses into active politicalstruggle” (resolution adopted by the Conference of the UnionAbroad and “amendments” thereto, Two Conferences , pp. 
 11 and 17). 
 As the reader will observe, all these theses permeate Rabocheye Dyelo from its very first number to the latest “Instructions to the Editors”, and all of them evidentlyexpress a single view regarding political agitation andstruggle. 
 Let us examine this view from the standpoint ofthe opinion prevailing among all Economists, that politi-cal agitation must follow economic agitation. 
 Is it true that, in general, * the economic struggle “is the most widely appli-*We say “in general”, because Rabocheye Dyelo speaks of general principles and of the general tasks of the Party as a whole. 
 Undoubt-edly, cases occur in practice when politics really must follow econom-ics, but only Economists can speak of this in a resolution intended to apply to the whole of Russia. 
 Cases do occur when it is possible “right from the beginning” to carry on political agitation “exclusive-ly on an economic basis”; yet Rabocheye Dyelo came in the end to cable means” of drawing the masses into the political strug-gle? It is entirely untrue. 
 Any and every manifestation of police tyranny and autocratic outrage, not only in connec-tion with the economic struggle, is not one whit less “wide-ly applicable” as a means of “drawing in” the masses. 
 Therural superintendents and the flogging of peasants, the cor-ruption of the officials and the police treatment of the “com-mon people” in the cities, the fight against the famine-strick-en and the suppression of the popular striving towards enlightenment and knowledge, the extortion of taxes andthe persecution of the religious sects, the humiliating treat-ment of soldiers and the barrack methods in the treatmentof the students and liberal intellectuals—do all these anda thousand other similar manifestations of tyranny, though not directly connected with the “economic” struggle, repre-sent, in general, less “widely applicable” means and occasions for political agitation and for drawing the masses into thepolitical struggle? The very opposite is true. 
 Of the sum-total of cases in which the workers suffer (either on theirown account or on account of those closely connected with them) from tyranny, violence, and the lack of rights, un-doubtedly only a small minority represent cases of policetyranny in the trade-union struggle as such. 
 Why thenshould we, beforehand, restrict the scope of political agi-tation by declaring only one of the means to be “the most widely applicable”, when Social-Democrats must have, in addition, other, generally speaking, no less “widely appli-cable” means? In the dim and distant past (a full year ago!...) Rabo-cheye Dyelo wrote: “The masses begin to understand immedi-ate political demands after one strike, or at all events, afterseveral”, “as soon as the government sets the police and gen-darmerie against them” [ August (No. 
 7) 1900, p. 
 15]. 
 This opportunist theory of stages has now been rejected by theUnion Abroad, which makes a concession to us by declaring:“There is no need whatever to conduct political agitation the conclusion that “there is no need for this whatever” ( Two Confer-ences , p. 
 11). 
 In the following chapter, we shall show that the tactics of the “politicians” and revolutionaries not only do not ignore the trade-union tasks of Social-Democracy, but that, on the contrary, they alone can secure their consistent fulfilment. 
 right from the beginning, exclusively on an economic basis” (Two Conferences , p. 
 11). 
 The Union’s repudiation of part of its former errors will show the future historian of Russian Social-Democracy better than any number of lengthy argu-ments the depths to which our Economists have degradedsocialism! But the Union Abroad must be very naïve indeedto imagine that the abandonment of one form of restrictingpolitics will induce us to agree to another form. 
 Would it not be more logical to say, in this case too, that the economic struggle should be conducted on the widest possible basis,that it should always be utilised for political agitation, butthat “there is no need whatever” to regard the economicstruggle as the most widely applicable means of drawing the masses into active political struggle? The Union Abroad attaches significance to the fact that it has substituted the phrase “most widely applicable means”for the phrase “the best means” contained in one of the reso-lutions of the Fourth Congress of the Jewish Workers’Union (Bund). 
 We confess that we find it difficult to saywhich of these resolutions is the better one. 
 In our opinion they are both worse . 
 Both the Union Abroad and the Bund fall into the error (partly, perhaps unconsciously, under theinfluence of tradition) of giving an Economist, trade-union-ist interpretation to politics. 
 Whether this is done by em-ploying the word “best” or the words “most widely applica-ble” makes no essential difference whatever. 
 Had the Union Abroad said that “political agitation on an economic basis” is the most widely applied (not “applicable”) means, it wouldhave been right in regard to a certain period in the develop-ment of our Social-Democratic movement. 
 It would havebeen right in regard to the Economists and to many (if not the majority) of the practical workers of 1898-1901; for these practical Economists applied political agitation (to the ex-tent that they applied it at all) almost exclusively on an eco-nomic basis . 
 Political agitation on such lines was recognised and, as we have seen, even recommended by Rabochaya Mysl and the Self-Emancipation Group. 
 Rabocheye Dyelo should have strongly condemned the fact that the useful work of economic agitation was accompanied by the harmful restriction of the political struggle; instead, it declares themeans most widely applied (by the Economists ) to be the most widely applicable ! It is not surprising that when we call these people Economists, they can do nothing but pour every manner of abuse upon us; call us “mystifiers”, “disrupters”, “papal nuncios”, and “slanderers” *; go complaining to the whole world that we have mortally offended them; and de-clare almost on oath that “not a single Social-Democraticorganisation is now tinged with Economism”. 
 ** Oh, those evil, slanderous politicians! They must have deliberately invented this Economism, out of sheer hatred of mankind, in order mortally to offend other people. 
 What concrete, real meaning attaches to Martynov’s words when he sets before Social-Democracy the task of“lending the economic struggle itself a political character”?The economic struggle is the collective struggle of the work-ers against their employers for better terms in the sale of their labour-power , for better living and working condi-tions. 
 This struggle is necessarily a trade-union struggle,because working conditions differ greatly in different trades,and, consequently, the struggle to improve them can only be conducted on the basis of trade organisations (in the West-ern countries, through trade unions; in Russia, through temporary trade associations and through leaflets, etc. 
). 
Lending “the economic struggle itself a political character”means, therefore, striving to secure satisfaction of thesetrade demands, the improvement of working conditions ineach separate trade by means of “legislative and administra-tive measures” (as Martynov puts it on the ensuing page of his article, p. 
 43). 
 This is precisely what all workers’ tradeunions do and always have done. 
 Read the works ofthe soundly scientific (and “soundly” opportunist) Mr. 
 andMrs. 
 Webb and you will see that the British trade unionslong ago recognised, and have long been carrying out, the task of “lending the economic struggle itself a political char-acter”; they have long been fighting for the right to strike,for the removal of all legal hindrances to the co-operativeand trade-union movements, for laws to protect women andchildren, for the improvement of labour conditions by meansof health and factory legislation, etc. 
 *These are the precise expressions used in Two Conferences , pp. 
 31, 32, 28 and 80. 
 **Two Conferences , p. 
 32. 
 Thus, the pompous phrase about “lending the economic struggle itself a political character”, which sounds so “ter-rifically” profound and revolutionary, serves as a screen to conceal what is in fact the traditional striving to degrade Social-Democratic politics to the level of trade-union poli-tics. 
 Under the guise of rectifying the one-sidedness ofIskra , which, it is alleged, places “the revolutionising of dogma higher than the revolutionising of life”, * we are pre-sented with the struggle for economic reforms as if it were something entirely new. 
 In point of fact, the phrase “lend-ing the economic struggle itself a political character” meansnothing more than the struggle for economic reforms. 
 Marty-nov himself might have come to this simple conclusion,had he pondered over the significance of his own words. 
 “Our Party,” he says, training his heaviest guns on Iskra , “could and should have presented concrete demands to thegovernment for legislative and administrative measuresagainst economic exploitation, unemployment, famine,etc. 
” ( Rabocheye Dyelo , No. 
 10, pp. 
 42-43). 
 Concrete de-mands for measures—does not this mean demands for so-cial reforms? Again we ask the impartial reader: Are we slandering the Rabocheye Dyelo -ites (may I be forgiven for this awkward, currently used designation!) by calling themconcealed Bernsteinians when, as their point of disagree-ment with Iskra , they advance their thesis on the necessity of struggling for economic reforms? Revolutionary Social-Democracy has always included the struggle for reforms as part of its activities. 
 But it uti-lises “economic” agitation for the purpose of presenting tothe government, not only demands for all sorts of meas-ures, but also (and primarily) the demand that it ceaseto be an autocratic government. 
 Moreover, it considers it its duty to present this demand to the government on the basis, not of the economic struggle alone , but of all mani-festations in general of public and political life. 
 In a word, *Rabocheye Dyelo , No. 
 10, p. 
 60. 
 This is the Martynov variation of the application, which we have characterised above, of the thesis“every step of real movement is more important than a dozen pro-grammes” to the present chaotic state of our movement. 
 In fact, thisis merely a translation into Russian of the notorious Bernsteiniansentence: “The movement is everything, the final aim is nothing. 
” it subordinates the struggle for reforms, as the part to the whole, to the revolutionary struggle for freedom and for socialism. 
 Martynov, however, resuscitates the theory of stages in a new form and strives to prescribe, as it were,an exclusively economic path of development for the politi-cal struggle. 
 By advancing at this moment, when the revo-lutionary movement is on the upgrade, an alleged special“task” of struggling for reforms, he is dragging the Party backwards and is playing into the hands of both “Economist” and liberal opportunism. 
 To proceed. 
 Shamefacedly hiding the struggle for reforms behind the pompous thesis of “lending the economic struggleitself a political character”, Martynov advanced, as if itwere a special point, exclusively economic (indeed, exclu-sively factory) reforms . 
 As to the reason for his doing that, we do not know it. 
 Carelessness, perhaps? Yet if he had inmind something else besides “factory” reforms, then the wholeof his thesis, which we have cited, loses all sense. 
 Perhapshe did it because he considers it possible and probable thatthe government will make “concessions” only in the econom-ic sphere? * If so, then it is a strange delusion. 
 Concessions are also possible and are made in the sphere of legislationconcerning flogging, passports, land redemption payments,religious sects, the censorship, etc. 
, etc. 
 “Economic” con-cessions (or pseudo-concessions) are, of course, the cheapestand most advantageous from the government’s point of view, because by these means it hopes to win the confidence of the working masses. 
 For this very reason, we Social-Dem-ocrats must not under any circumstances or in any way whatever create grounds for the belief (or the misunderstand-ing) that we attach greater value to economic reforms,or that we regard them as being particularly important, etc. 
 “Such demands,” writes Martynov, speaking of the concrete demands for legislative and administrative measures referredto above, “would not be merely a hollow sound, because,promising certain palpable results, they might be activelysupported by the working masses.... 
” We are not Economists, *P. 
 43. 
 “Of course, when we advise the workers to present certain economic demands to the government, we do so because in the eco-nomic sphere the autocratic government is, of necessity, prepared tomake certain concessions!” oh no! We only cringe as slavishly before the “palpableness” of concrete results as do the Bernsteins, the Prokopoviches, the Struves, the R. 
 M. 
’s, and tutti quanti ! We only wish to make it understood (together with Nartsis Tuporylov)that all which “does not promise palpable results” is merelya “hollow sound”! We are only trying to argue as if the work-ing masses were incapable (and had not already proved theircapabilities, notwithstanding those who ascribe their own philistinism to them) of actively supporting every protest against the autocracy, even if it promises absolutely no pal-pable results whatever ! Let us take, for example, the very “measures” for the re-lief of unemployment and the famine that Martynov himselfadvances. 
 Rabocheye Dyelo is engaged, judging by what it has promised, in drawing up and elaborating a programme of “concrete [in the form of bills?] demands for legislativeand administrative measures”, “promising palpable results”,while Iskra , which “constantly places the revolutionising of dogma higher than the revolutionising of life”, has triedto explain the inseparable connection between unemploy-ment and the whole capitalist system, has given warning that “famine is coming”, has exposed the police “fight against thefamine-stricken”, and the outrageous “provisional penal servi-tude regulations”; and Zarya has published a special reprint, in the form of an agitational pamphlet, of a section of its“Review of Home Affairs”, dealing with the famine. 
 * But good God! How “one-sided” were these incorrigibly narrow and orthodox doctrinaires, how deaf to the calls of “lifeitself”! Their articles contained—oh horror!— not a single , can you imagine it? not a single “concrete demand” “prom-ising palpable results”! Poor doctrinaires! They oughtto be sent to Krichevsky and Martynov to be taught that tactics are a process of growth, of that which grows, etc. 
, and that the economic struggle itself should be given a political character! “In addition to its immediate revolutionary significance, the economic struggle of the workers against the employersand the government [“ economic struggle against the govern-ment”!] has also this significance: it constantly brings home *See present volume, pp. 
 253-74. 
— Ed. 
 to the workers the fact that they have no political rights” (Martynov, p. 
 44). 
 We quote this passage, not in order to repeat for the hundredth and thousandth time what has been said above, but in order to express particular thanks toMartynov for this excellent new formula: “the economicstruggle of the workers against the employers and the govern-ment”. 
 What a gem! With what inimitable skill and mas-tery in eliminating all partial disagreements and shades of differences among Economists this clear and concise prop-osition expresses the quintessence of Economism, from sum-moning the workers “to the political struggle, which theycarry on in the general interest, for the improvement ofthe conditions of all the workers”, * continuing through the theory of stages, and ending in the resolution of the Confer-ence on the “most widely applicable”, etc. 
 “Economic strug-gle against the government” is precisely trade-unionist poli-tics, which is still very far from being Social-Democraticpolitics. 
 B. 
 HOW MARTYNOV RENDERED PLEKHANOV MORE PROFOUND “What a large number of Social-Democratic Lomonosovs have appeared among us lately!” observed a comrade oneday, having in mind the astonishing propensity of many whoare inclined toward Economism to, arrive, “necessarily,by their own under standing”, at great truths (e. 
g. 
, that theeconomic struggle stimulates the workers to ponder over their lack of rights) and in doing so to ignore, with the su-preme contempt of born geniuses, all that has been producedby the antecedent development of revolutionary thoughtand of the revolutionary movement. 
 Lomonosov-Martynovis precisely such a born genius. 
 We need but glance at hisarticle “Urgent Questions” to see how by “his own under-standing” he arrives at what was long ago said by Axelrod (of whom our Lomonosov, naturally, says not a word);how, for instance, he is beginning to understand that we cannot ignore the opposition of such or such strata of thebourgeoisie ( Rabocheye Dyelo , No. 
 9, pp. 
 61, 62, 71; compare this with Rabocheye Dyelo ’s Reply to Axelrod, pp. 
 22, 23-24), Rabochaya Mysl , “Separate Supplement ”, p. 
 14. 
 etc. 
 But alas, he is only “arriving” and is only “beginning”, not more than that, for so little has he understood Axelrod’s ideas, that he talks about “the economic struggle against the employers and the government”. 
 For three years (1898-1901) Rabocheye Dyelo has tried hard to understand Axel-rod, but has so far not understood him! Can one of the rea-sons be that Social-Democracy, “like mankind”, always setsitself only tasks that can be achieved? But the Lomonosovs are distinguished not only by their ignorance of many things (that would be but half misfor-tune!), but also by their unawareness of their own ignorance. 
Now this is a real misfortune; and it is this misfortunethat prompts them without further ado to attempt to renderPlekhanov “more profound”. 
 “Much water,” Lomonosov-Martynov says, “has flowed under the bridge since Plekhanov wrote his book [ Tasks of the Socialists in the Fight Against the Famine in Russia ]. 
 The Social-Democrats who for a decade led the economic struggle of the working class ... havefailed as yet to lay down a broad theoretical basis for Party tactics. 
This question has now come to a head, and if we should wish to lay down such a theoretical basis, we should certainly have to deepen considerably the principles of tactics developed at one time by Ple-khanov.... 
 Our present definition of the distinction between propa-ganda and agitation would have to be different from Plekhanov’s[Martynov has just quoted Plekhanov’s words: “A propagandist pre-sents many ideas to one or a few persons; an agitator presents only one or a few ideas, but he presents them to a mass of people. 
”] By propa-ganda we would understand the revolutionary explanation of the pres-ent social system, entire or in its partial manifestations, whetherthat be done in a form intelligible to individuals or to broad masses. 
By agitation, in the strict sense of the word [ sic!], we would understand the call upon the masses to undertake definite, concrete actions and the promotion of the direct revolutionary intervention of the prole-tariat in social life. 
” We congratulate Russian—and international—Social-Democracy on having found, thanks to Martynov, a new terminology, more strict and more profound. 
 Hitherto we thought (with Plekhanov, and with all the leaders of theinternational working-class movement) that the propagan-dist, dealing with, say, the question of unemployment, mustexplain the capitalistic nature of crises, the cause of theirinevitability in modern society, the necessity for the trans-formation of this society into a socialist society, etc. 
 In a word, he must present “many ideas”, so many, indeed, that they will be understood as an integral whole only by a (com-paratively) few persons. 
 The agitator, however, speaking on the same subject, will take as an illustration a fact that is most glaring and most widely known to his audience, say,the death of an unemployed worker’s family from starvation,the growing impoverishment, etc. 
, and, utilising this fact,known to all, will direct his efforts to presenting a single idea to the “masses”, e. 
g. 
, the senselessness of the contradic-tion between the increase of wealth and the increase of pov-erty; he will strive to rouse discontent and indignation among the masses against this crying injustice, leaving a morecomplete explanation of this contradiction to the propagan-dist. 
 Consequently, the propagandist operates chiefly bymeans of the printed word; the agitator by means of the spoken word. 
 The propagandist requires qualities different from those of the agitator. 
 Kautsky and Lafargue, for exam-ple, we term propagandists; Bebel and Guesde we term agi-tators. 
 To single out a third sphere, or third function, ofpractical activity, and to include in this function “the callupon the masses to undertake definite concrete actions”, is sheer nonsense, because the “call”, as a single act, either naturally and inevitably supplements the theoretical trea-tise, propagandist pamphlet, and agitational speech, orrepresents a purely executive function. 
 Let us take, forexample, the struggle the German Social-Democrats are nowwaging against the corn duties. 
 The theoreticians write re-search works on tariff policy, with the “call”, say, to struggle for commercial treaties and for Free Trade. 
 The propagandistdoes the same thing in the periodical press, and the agitatorin public speeches. 
 At the present time, the “concrete action”of the masses takes the form of signing petitions to theReichstag against raising the corn duties. 
 The call for this action comes indirectly from the theoreticians, the propagan-dists, and the agitators, and, directly, from the workerswho take the petition lists to the factories and to privatehomes for the gathering of signatures. 
 According to the“Martynov terminology”, Kautsky and Bebel are both prop-agandists, while those who solicit the signatures are agi-tators. 
 Isn’t it clear? The German example recalled to my mind the German word “Verballhornung”, which, literally translated, means “Ballhorning”. 
 Johann Ballhorn, a Leipzig publisher of the sixteenth century, published a child’s reader in which, as was the custom, he introduced a drawing of a cock, but a cock without spurs and with a couple of eggs lying near it. 
On the cover he printed the legend, “ Revised edition by Jo-hann Ballhorn”. 
 Ever since then, the Germans describe any“revision” that is really a worsening as “ballhorning”. 
 Andone cannot help recalling Ballhorn upon seeing how the Martynovs try to render Plekhanov “more profound”. 
 Why did our Lomonosov “invent” this confusion? In order to illustrate how Iskra “devotes attention only to one side of the case, just as Plekhanov did a decade and a half ago”(39). 
 “With Iskra , propagandist tasks force agitational tasks into the background, at least for the present” (52). 
 If we trans-late this last proposition from the language of Martynov into ordinary human language (because mankind has not yet man-aged to learn the newly-invented terminology), we shallget the following: with Iskra , the tasks of political propagan-da and political agitation force into the background thetask of “presenting to the government concrete demands for legislative and administrative measures” that “promise cer-tain palpable results” (or demands for social reforms, thatis, if we are permitted once again to employ the old terminol-ogy of the old mankind not yet grown to Martynov’s level). 
We suggest that the reader compare this thesis with the fol-lowing tirade: “What also astonishes us in these programmes [the programmes advanced by revolutionary Social-Democrats] is their constant stress upon the benefits of workers’ activity in parliament [non-existent in Russia], though they completely ignore [thanks to their revolutionarynihilism] the importance of workers’ participation in the legislativemanufacturers’ assemblies on factory affairs [which do exist in Rus-sia] ... or at least the importance of workers’ participation in muni-cipal bodies.... 
” The author of this tirade expresses in a somewhat more forthright and clearer manner the very idea which Lomono-sov-Martynov discovered by his own understanding. 
 Theauthor is R. 
 M. 
, in the “ Separate Supplement ” to Rabochaya Mysl (p. 
 15). 
 C. 
 POLITICAL EXPOSURES AND “TRAINING IN REVOLUTIONARY ACTIVITY” In advancing against Iskra his theory of “raising the activ-ity of the working masses”, Martynov actually betrayedan urge to belittle that activity, for he declared the very eco-nomic struggle before which all economists grovel to be the preferable, particularly important, and “most widely appli-cable” means of rousing this activity and its broadest field. 
This error is characteristic, precisely in that it is by no meanspeculiar to Martynov. 
 In reality, it is possible to “raise theactivity of the working masses ” only when this activity is not restricted to “political agitation on an economic basis”. 
 A basic condition for the necessary expansion of politicalagitation is the organisation of comprehensive political expo-sure. 
 In no way except by means of such exposures can the masses be trained in political consciousness and revolution-ary activity. 
 Hence, activity of this kind is one of the most important functions of international Social-Democracy as a whole, for even political freedom does not in any wayeliminate exposures; it merely shifts somewhat their sphereof direction. 
 Thus, the German party is especially strengthen-ing its positions and spreading its influence, thanks parti-cularly to the untiring energy with which it is conducting its campaign of political exposure. 
 Working-class conscious-ness cannot be genuine political consciousness unless theworkers are trained to respond to all cases of tyranny, oppres-sion, violence, and abuse, no matter what class is affected— unless they are trained, moreover, to respond from a Social-Democratic point of view and no other. 
 The consciousness of the working masses cannot be genuine class-consciousness, unless the workers learn, from concrete, and above all fromtopical, political facts and events to observe every other so-cial class in all the manifestations of its intellectual, ethi-cal, and political life; unless they learn to apply in prac-tice the materialist analysis and the materialist estimate of all aspects of the life and activity of all classes, strata, and groups of the population. 
 Those who concentrate the at-tention, observation, and consciousness of the working classexclusively, or even mainly, upon itself alone are not So-cial-Democrats; for the self-knowledge of the working classis indissolubly bound up, not solely with a fully clear theo-retical understanding—or rather, not so much with the theoretical, as with the practical, understanding—of the relationships between all the various classes of modern society, acquired through the experience of poli-tical life. 
 For this reason the conception of the economic struggle as the most widely applicable means of drawing the masses into the political movement, which our Economistspreach, is so extremely harmful and reactionary in its prac-tical significance. 
 In order to become a Social-Democrat,the worker must have a clear picture in his mind of the eco-nomic nature and the social and political features of the landlord and the priest, the high state official and the peasant, the student and the vagabond; he must knowtheir strong and weak points; he must grasp the meaning ofall the catchwords and sophisms by which each class andeach stratum camouflages its selfish strivings and its real “inner workings”; he must understand what interests are reflected by certain institutions and certain laws and how they are reflected. 
 But this “clear picture” cannot be ob-tained from any book. 
 It can be obtained only from livingexamples and from exposures that follow close upon what isgoing on about us at a given moment; upon what is beingdiscussed, in whispers perhaps, by each one in his own way; upon what finds expression in such and such events, in such and such statistics, in such and such court sentences, etc. 
,etc. 
 These comprehensive political exposures are an essen-tial and fundamental condition for training the masses in revolutionary activity. 
 Why do the Russian workers still manifest little revolu-tionary activity in response to the brutal treatment of the people by the police, the persecution of religious sects,the flogging of peasants, the outrageous censorship, the tor-ture of soldiers, the persecution of the most innocent cultur-al undertakings, etc. 
? Is it because the “economic struggle”does not “stimulate” them to this, because such activity does not “promise palpable results”, because it produces little that is “positive”? To adopt such an opinion, we repeat,is merely to direct the charge where it does not belong, toblame the working masses for one’s own philistinism (orBernsteinism). 
 We must blame ourselves, our lagging behindthe mass movement, for still being unable to organise sufficiently wide, striking, and rapid exposures of all the shameful outrages. 
 When we do that (and we must and can do it), the most backward worker will understand, or will feel , that the students and religious sects, the peasants and the authors are being abused and outraged by those samedark forces that are oppressing and crushing him at everystep of his life. 
 Feeling that, he himself will be filled withan irresistible desire to react, and he will know how to hoot the censors one day, on another day to demonstrate outside the house of a governor who has brutally suppressed a peas-ant uprising, on still another day to teach a lesson to thegendarmes in surplices who are doing the work of the HolyInquisition, etc. 
 As yet we have done very little, almostnothing, to bring before the working masses prompt exposures on all possible issues. 
 Many of us as yet do not recognise this as our bounden duty but trail spontaneously in the wake of the “drab everyday struggle”, in the narrow confines offactory life. 
 Under such circumstances to say that “ Iskra displays a tendency to minimise the significance of the for-ward march of the drab everyday struggle in comparison with the propaganda of brilliant and complete ideas” (Mar-tynov, op. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 61), means to drag the Party back, to de-fend and glorify our unpreparedness and backwardness. 
 As for calling the masses to action, that will come of itself as soon as energetic political agitation, live and strikingexposures come into play. 
 To catch some criminal red-hand-ed and immediately to brand him publicly in all places is of itself far more effective than any number of “calls”; theeffect very often is such as will make it impossible to tellexactly who it was that “called” upon the masses and whosuggested this or that plan of demonstration, etc. 
 Calls foraction, not in the general, but in the concrete, sense of the term can be made only at the place of action; only those who themselves go into action, and do so immediately, can soundsuch calls. 
 Our business as Social-Democratic publicists isto deepen, expand, and intensify political exposures and po-litical agitation. 
 A word in passing about “calls to action”. 
 The only news-paper which prior to the spring events called upon the work-ers to intervene actively in a matter that certainly did notpromise any palpable results whatever for the workers, i. 
e. 
, the drafting of the students into the army, was Iskra . 
 Im-mediately after the publication of the order of January 11, on “drafting the 183 students into the army”, Iskra pub-lished an article on the matter (in its February issue, No. 
 2), * and, before any demonstration was begun, forthwith called upon “the workers to go to the aid of the students”, called upon the “people” openly to take up the government’sarrogant challenge. 
 We ask: how is the remarkable fact to be explained that although Martynov talks so much about “calls to action”, and even suggests “calls to action” as a spe-cial form of activity, he said not a word about this call? After this, was it not sheer philistinism on Martynov’spart to allege that Iskra was one-sided because it did not is-sue sufficient “calls” to struggle for demands “promising palpable results”? Our Economists, including Rabocheye Dyelo , were success-ful because they adapted themselves to the backward work-ers. 
 But the Social-Democratic worker, the revolutionaryworker (and the number of such workers is growing) willindignantly reject all this talk about struggle for demands “promising palpable results”, etc. 
, because he will under-stand that this is only a variation of the old song about add-ing a kopek to the ruble. 
 Such a worker will say to hiscounsellors from Rabochaya Mysl and Rabocheye Dyelo : you are busying yourselves in vain, gentlemen, and shirk-ing your proper duties, by meddling with such excessive zeal in a job that we can very well manage ourselves. 
 There is nothing clever in your assertion that the Social-Demo-crats’ task is to lend the economic struggle itself a politi-cal character; that is only the beginning, it is not the maintask of the Social-Democrats. 
 For all over the world, includ-ing Russia, the police themselves often take the initiative in lending the economic struggle a political character, and the workers themselves learn to understand whom the govern-ment supports. 
 ** The “economic struggle of the workers *See present edition, Vol. 
 4, pp. 
 414-19. 
— Ed. 
 **The demand “to lend the economic struggle itself a political char-acter” most strikingly expresses subservience to spontaneity in the sphere of political activity. 
 Very often the economic struggle spontane-ously assumes a political character, that is to say, without the interven-tion of the “revolutionary bacilli—the intelligentsia”, without the against the employers and the government”, about which you make as much fuss as if you had discovered a new Amer-ica, is being waged in all parts of Russia, even the most remote, by the workers themselves who have heard aboutstrikes, but who have heard almost nothing about socialism. 
The “activity” you want to stimulate among us workers, byadvancing concrete demands that promise palpable results,we are already displaying and in our everyday, limited trade-union work we put forward these concrete demands, very often without any assistance whatever from the intellectuals. 
But such activity is not enough for us; we are not children to be fed on the thin gruel of “economic” politics alone; we wantto know everything that others know, we want to learn thedetails of all aspects of political life and to take part active-ly in every single political event. 
 In order that we may do this, the intellectuals must talk to us less of what we alreadyknow. 
 * and tell us more about what we do not yet know intervention of the class-conscious Social-Democrats. 
 The economic struggle of the English workers, for instance, also assumed a politicalcharacter without any intervention on the part of the socialists. 
 The task of the Social-Democrats, however, is not exhausted by political agitation on an economic basis; their task is to convert trade-union-ist politics into Social-Democratic political struggle, to utilise the sparks of political consciousness which the economic struggle gener-ates among the workers, for the purpose of raising the workers to the level of Social-Democratic political consciousness. 
 The Martynovs, however, instead of raising and stimulating the spontaneously awaken-ing political consciousness of the workers, bow to spontaneity and repeat over and over ad nauseam , that the economic struggle “impels” the workers to realise their own lack of political rights. 
 It is unfortunate,gentlemen, that the spontaneously awakening trade-unionist polit-ical consciousness does not “ impel ” you to an understanding of your Social-Democratic tasks. 
 *To prove that this imaginary speech of a worker to an Econo-mist is based on fact, we shall refer to two witnesses who undoubt-edly have direct knowledge of the working-class movement and whoare least of all inclined to be partial towards us “doctrinaires”; for onewitness is an Economist (who regards even Rabocheye Dyelo as a po-litical organ!), and the other is a terrorist. 
 The first witness is the au-thor of a remarkably truthful and vivid article entitled “The St. 
 Peters-burg Working-Class Movement and the Practical Tasks of Social-De-mocracy”, published in Rabocheye Dyelo No. 
 6. 
 He divides the workers into the following categories: (1) class-conscious revolutionaries;(2) intermediate stratum; (3) the remaining masses. 
 The intermediate stratum, he says, “is often more interested in questions of political and what we can never learn from our factory and “eco-nomic” experience, namely, political knowledge. 
 You intel-lectuals can acquire this knowledge, and it is your duty to bring it to us in a hundred-and a thousand-fold greatermeasure than you have done up to now; and you must bringit to us, not only in the form of discussions, pamphlets, andarticles (which very often—pardon our frankness—are ratherdull), but precisely in the form of vivid exposures of what our government and our governing classes are doing at this very moment in all spheres of life. 
 Devote more zeal to car-rying out this duty and talk less about “raising the activity of the working masses ”. 
 We are far more active than you think, and we are quite able to support, by open streetfighting, even demands that do not promise any “palpable results ” whatever. 
 It is not for you to “raise” our activity, because activity is precisely the thing you yourselves lack . 
 Bow less in subservience to spontaneity, and think moreabout raising your own activity, gentlemen! D. 
 WHAT IS THERE IN COMMON BETWEEN ECONOMISM AND TERRORISM? In the last footnote we cited the opinion of an Economist and of a non-Social-Democratic terrorist, who showed them-selves to be accidentally in agreement. 
 Speaking generally,however, there is not an accidental, but a necessary, inher-ent connection between the two, of which we shall haveneed to speak later, and which must be mentioned here in between which and the general social conditions it has long under-stood”.... 
 Rabochaya Mysl “is sharply criticised”: “It keeps on repeat-ing the same thing over and over again, things we have long known,read long ago. 
” “Again nothing in the political review!” (pp. 
 30-31). 
But even the third stratum, “the younger and more sensitive sectionof the workers, less corrupted by the tavern and the church, who hard-ly ever have the opportunity of getting hold of political literature, discuss political events in a rambling way and ponder over the frag-mentary news they get about student riots”, etc. 
 The terrorist writesas follows: “... They read over once or twice the petty details of fac-tory life in other towns, not their own, and then they read no more... dull, they find it.... 
 To say nothing in a workers’ paper about thegovernment ... is to regard the workers as being little children.... 
 The workers are not little children” ( Svoboda , published by the Revo-connection with the question of education for revolutionary activity. 
 The Economists and the present-day terrorists have one common root, namely, subservience to spontaneity , with which we dealt in the preceding chapter as a generalphenomenon and which we shall now examine in relationto its effect upon political activity and the political struggle. 
At first sight, our assertion may appear paradoxical, so greatis the difference between those who stress the “drab ever-yday struggle” and those who call for the most self-sac-rificing struggle of individuals. 
 But this is no paradox. 
 TheEconomists and the terrorists merely bow to different polesof spontaneity; the Economists bow to the spontaneityof “the labour movement pure and simple”, while the ter-rorists bow to the spontaneity of the passionate indignation of intellectuals, who lack the ability or opportunity to con-nect the revolutionary struggle and the working-class move-ment into an integral whole. 
 It is difficult indeed for thosewho have lost their belief, or who have never believed,that this is possible, to find some outlet for their indigna-tion and revolutionary energy other than terror. 
 Thus, both forms of subservience to spontaneity we have mentioned are nothing but the beginning of the implementation of the no-torious Credo programme: Let the workers wage their “eco-nomic struggle against the employers and the government”(we apologise to the author of the Credo for expressing her views in Martynov’s words. 
 We think we have a right to do so since the Credo , too, says that in the economic struggle the workers “come up against the political régime”), and letthe intellectuals conduct the political struggle by their ownefforts—with the aid of terror, of course! This is an absolute-ly logical and inevitable conclusion which must be insist-ed on— even though those who are beginning to carry out this programme do not themselves realise that it is inevi-table. 
 Political activity has its logic quite apart from theconsciousness of those who, with the best intentions, calleither for terror or for lending the economic struggle itselfa political character. 
 The road to hell is paved with goodintentions, and, in this case, good intentions cannot save one from being spontaneously drawn “along the line of least resistance”, along the line of the purely bourgeois Credo programme. 
 Surely it is no accident either that many Rus-sian liberals—avowed liberals and liberals that wear the mask of Marxism—whole-heartedly sympathise with terror and try to foster the terrorist moods that have surged up in the present time. 
 The formation of the Revolutionary-Socialist Svoboda Group—which set itself the aim of helping the working-classmovement in every possible way, but which included in itsprogramme terror, and emancipation, so to speak, from So-cial-Democracy—once again confirmed the remarkable perspicacity of P. 
 B. 
 Axelrod, who literally foretold these results of Social-Democratic waverings as far back as the end of 1897 (Present Tasks and Tactics ), when he outlined his famous “two perspectives”. 
 All the subsequent disputes anddisagreements among Russian Social-Democrats are con-tained, like a plant in the seed, in these two perspectives. 
 * From this point of view it also becomes clear why Rabo-cheye Dyelo , unable to withstand the spontaneity of Econo-mism, has likewise been unable to withstand the spontanei-ty of terrorism. 
 It is highly interesting to note here the spe-cific arguments that Svoboda has advanced in defence of terrorism. 
 It “completely denies” the deterrent role of ter-rorism ( The Regeneration of Revolutionism , p. 
 64), but in-stead stresses its “excitative significance”. 
 This is character-istic, first, as representing one of the stages of the break-upand decline of the traditional (pre-Social-Democratic)cycle of ideas which insisted upon terrorism. 
 The admission *Martynov “conceives of another, more realistic [?] dilemma” (Social-Democracy and the Working Class , p. 
 19): “Either Social-De-mocracy takes over the direct leadership of the economic struggle ofthe proletariat and by that [!] transforms it into a revolutionaryclass struggle.... 
” “By that”, i. 
e. 
, apparently by the direct leader-ship of the economic struggle. 
 Can Martynov cite an instance in whichleading the trade-union struggle alone has succeeded in transforming a trade-unionist movement into a revolutionary class movement? Can he not understand that in order to bring about this “transforma-tion” we must actively take up the “direct leadership” of all-sided po-litical agitation?... “Or the other perspective: Social-Democracy re-frains from assuming the leadership of the economic struggle of the work-ers and so ... clips its own wings...” In Rabocheye Dyelo ’s opinion, quoted above, it is Iskra that “refrains”. 
 We have seen, however, that the latter does far more than Rabocheye Dyelo to lead the economic struggle, but that, moreover, it does not confine itself thereto anddoes not narrow down its political tasks for its sake. 
 that the government cannot now be “terrified”, and hence disrupted, by terror, is tantamount to a complete condem-nation of terror as a system of struggle, as a sphere of activ-ity sanctioned by the programme. 
 Secondly, it is still morecharacteristic as an example of the failure to understand ourimmediate tasks in regard to “education for revolutionaryactivity”. 
 Svoboda advocates terror as a means of “exciting” the working-class movement and of giving it a “strong im-petus”. 
 It is difficult to imagine an argument that more thor-oughly disproves itself. 
 Are there not enough outrages com-mitted in Russian life without special “excitants” havingto be invented? On the other hand, is it not obvious thatthose who are not, and cannot be, roused to excitement evenby Russian tyranny will stand by “twiddling their thumbs” and watch a handful of terrorists engaged in single combat with the government? The fact is that the working massesare roused to a high pitch of excitement by the social evilsin Russian life, but we are unable to gather, if one may soput it, and concentrate all these drops and streamlets ofpopular resentment that are brought forth to a far larger extent than we imagine by the conditions of Russian life, and that must be combined into a single gigantic torrent. 
 That this can be accomplished is irrefutably proved by theenormous growth of the working-class movement and theeagerness, noted above, with which the workers clamour forpolitical literature. 
 On the other hand, calls for terror and calls to lend the economic struggle itself a political charac-ter are merely two different forms of evading the most pres-sing duty now resting upon Russian revolutionaries, namely,the organisation of comprehensive political agitation. 
 Svo-boda desires to substitute terror for agitation, openly admitting that “as soon as intensified and strenuous agita-tion is begun among the masses the excitative function of terror will be ended” ( The Regeneration of Revolutionism , p. 
 68). 
 This proves precisely that both the terrorists and theEconomists underestimate the revolutionary activity of the masses, despite the striking evidence of the events that tookplace in the spring, * and whereas the one group goes out in *The big street demonstrations which began in the spring of 1901 . 
 (Author’s note to the 1907 edition. 
— Ed. 
) search of artificial “excitants”, the other talks about “con-crete demands”. 
 But both fail to devote sufficient attention to the development of their own activity in political agita-tion and in the organisation of political exposures. 
 And noother work can serve as a substitute for this task either at the present time or at any other. 
 E. 
 THE WORKING CLASS AS VANGUARD FIGHTER FOR DEMOCRACY We have seen that the conduct of the broadest political agitation and, consequently, of all-sided political exposuresis an absolutely necessary and a paramount task of our activ-ity, if this activity is to be truly Social-Democratic. 
 How-ever, we arrived at this conclusion solely on the grounds of the pressing needs of the working class for political knowl-edge and political training. 
 But such a presentation of thequestion is too narrow, for it ignores the general democrat-ic tasks of Social-Democracy, in particular of present-dayRussian Social-Democracy. 
 In order to explain the point more concretely we shall approach the subject from an as-pect that is “nearest” to the Economist, namely, from thepractical aspect. 
 “Everyone agrees” that it is necessary todevelop the political consciousness of the working class. 
The question is, how that is to be done and what is required to do it. 
 The economic struggle merely “impels” the workers to realise the government ’s attitude towards the working class. 
 Consequently, however much we may try to “lend the economic, struggle itself a political character”, we shall never be able to develop the political consciousness of the workers (to the level of Social-Democratic political conscious-ness) by keeping within the framework of the economic struggle, for that framework is too narrow . 
 The Martynov for-mula has some value for us, not because it illustrates Mar-tynov’s aptitude for confusing things, but because itpointedly expresses the basic error that all the Econo-mists commit, namely, their conviction that it is possibleto develop the class political consciousness of the workers from within , so to speak, from their economic struggle, i. 
e. 
, by making this struggle the exclusive (or, at least, the main)starting-point, by making it the exclusive (or, at least, the main) basis. 
 Such a view is radically wrong. 
 Piqued by our polemics against them, the Economists refuse to ponder deeply over the origins of these disagreements, with the re-sult that we simply cannot understand one another. 
 It isas if we spoke in different tongues. 
 Class political consciousness can be brought to the workers only from without , that is, only from outside the economic struggle, from outside the sphere of relations between work-ers and employers. 
 The sphere from which alone it is pos-sible to obtain this knowledge is the sphere of relationshipsof all classes and strata to the state and the government, the sphere of the interrelations between all classes. 
 For that reason, the reply to the question as to what must bedone to bring political knowledge to the workers cannot be merely the answer with which, in the majority of cases, the practical workers, especially those inclined towards Econo-mism, mostly content themselves, namely: “To go amongthe workers. 
” To bring political knowledge to the workers the Social-Democrats must go among all classes of the pop-ulation ; they must dispatch units of their army in all directions . 
 We deliberately select this blunt formula, we deliberate-ly express ourselves in this sharply simplified manner, notbecause we desire to indulge in paradoxes, but in order to“impel” the Economists to a realisation of their tasks whichthey unpardonably ignore, to suggest to them strongly the difference between trade-unionist and Social-Democratic pol-itics, which they refuse to understand. 
 We therefore begthe reader not to get wrought up, but to hear us patientlyto the end. 
 Let us take the type of Social-Democratic study circle that has become most widespread in the past few years and examine its work. 
 It has “contacts with the workers” and rests content with this, issuing leaflets in which abuses inthe factories, the government’s partiality towards the capi-talists, and the tyranny of the police are strongly condemned. 
At workers’ meetings the discussions never, or rarely ever,go beyond the limits of these subjects. 
 Extremely rare are the lectures and discussions held on the history of the revo-lutionary movement, on questions of the government’shome and foreign policy, on questions of the economic evo-lution of Russia and of Europe, on the position of the various classes in modern society, etc. 
 As to systematically acquir-ing and extending contact with other classes of society, no one even dreams of that. 
 In fact, the ideal leader, asthe majority of the members of such circles picture him, issomething far more in the nature of a trade-union secretarythan a socialist political leader. 
 For the secretary of any,say English, trade union always helps the workers to carry on the economic struggle, he helps them to expose factory abuses, explains the injustice of the laws and of measuresthat hamper the freedom to strike and to picket (i. 
e. 
, towarn all and sundry that a strike is proceeding at a certainfactory), explains the partiality of arbitration court judgeswho belong to the bourgeois classes, etc. 
, etc. 
 In a word, every trade-union secretary conducts and helps to conduct “the economic struggle against the employers and the govern-ment”. 
 It cannot be too strongly maintained that this is still not Social-Democracy, that the Social-Democrat’s ideal should not be the trade-union secretary, but the tribune of the people , who is able to react to every manifesta-tion of tyranny and oppression, no matter where it appears, no matter what stratum or class of the people it affects;who is able to generalise all these manifestations and pro-duce a single picture of police violence and capitalist exploi-tation; who is able to take advantage of every event, how-ever small, in order to set forth before all his socialist con-victions and his democratic demands, in order to clarify for all and everyone the world-historic significance of the struggle for the emancipation of the proletariat. 
 Compare,for example, a leader like Robert Knight (the well-knownsecretary and leader of the Boiler-Makers’ Society, one ofthe most powerful trade unions in England), with Wilhelm Liebknecht, and try to apply to them the contrasts that Martynov draws in his controversy with Iskra . 
 You will see—I am running through Martynov’s article—that Rob-ert Knight engaged more in “calling the masses to certainconcrete actions ” (Martynov, op. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 39), while Wilhelm Liebknecht engaged more in “the revolutionary elucidation of the whole of the present system or partial manifestations of it” (38-39); that Robert Knight “formulated the imme-diate demands of the proletariat and indicated the means by which they can be achieved” (41), whereas Wilhelm Lieb-knecht, while doing this, did not hold back from “simulta-neously guiding the activities of various opposition strata”, “dictating a positive programme of action for them” * (41); that Robert Knight strove “as far as possible to lend theeconomic struggle itself a political character” (42) andwas excellently able “to submit to the governmentconcrete demands promising certain palpable results” (43), whereas Liebknecht engaged to a much greater degree in “one-sided” “exposures” (40); that Robert Knight attachedmore significance to the “forward march of the drab everydaystruggle” (61), whereas Liebknecht attached more signifi-cance to the “propaganda of brilliant and completed ideas”(61); that Liebknecht converted the paper he was directing into “an organ of revolutionary opposition that exposed the state of affairs in our country, particularly the political stateof affairs, insofar as it affected the interests of the mostvaried strata of the population” (63), whereas Robert Knight“worked for the cause of the working class in close organicconnection with the proletarian struggle” (63)—if by “close and organic connection” is meant the subservience to spon-taneity which we examined above, by taking the examplesof Krichevsky and Martynov—and “restricted the sphere ofhis influence”, convinced, of course, as is Martynov, that“by doing so he deepened that influence” (63). 
 In a word,you will see that de facto Martynov reduces Social-Democracy to the level of trade-unionism, though he does so, of course, not because he does not desire the good of Social-Democra-cy, but simply because he is a little too much in a hurry torender Plekhanov more profound, instead of taking thetrouble to understand him. 
 Let us return, however, to our theses. 
 We said that a Social-Democrat, if he really believes it necessary to devel-op comprehensively the political consciousness of theproletariat, must “go among all classes of the population”. 
This gives rise to the questions: how is this to be done?have we enough forces to do this? is there a basis for suchwork among all the other classes? will this not mean a re-*For example, during the Franco-Prussian War, Liebknecht dictated a programme of action for the whole of democracy ; to an even greater extent Marx and Engels did this in 1848. 
 treat, or lead to a retreat, from the class point of view? Let us deal with these questions. 
 We must “go among all classes of the population” as theo-reticians, as propagandists, as agitators, and as organisers. 
No one doubts that the theoretical work of Social-Democratsshould aim at studying all the specific features of the socialand political condition of the various classes. 
 But extremelylittle is done in this direction as compared with the work that is done in studying the specific features of factory life. 
 In the committees and study circles, one can meet peoplewho are immersed in the study even of some special branchof the metal industry; but one can hardly ever find membersof organisations (obliged, as often happens, for some reasonor other to give up practical work) who are especially engaged in gathering material on some pressing question of social and political life in our country which could serve as a meansfor conducting Social-Democratic work among other strataof the population. 
 In dwelling upon the fact that the major-ity of the present-day leaders of the working-class movementlack training, we cannot refrain from mentioning training in this respect also, for it too is bound up with the “Econo-mist” conception of “close organic connection with the pro-letarian struggle”. 
 The principal thing, of course, is prop-aganda and agitation among all strata of the people. 
 The work of the West European Social-Democrat is in this re-spect facilitated by the public meetings and rallies which all are free to attend, and by the fact that in parliament he addresses the representatives of all classes. 
 We have neither a parliament nor freedom of assembly; nevertheless, we areable to arrange meetings of workers who desire to listen toa Social-Democrat . 
 We must also find ways and means of calling meetings of representatives of all social classes that desire to listen to a democrat ; for he is no Social-Demo-crat who forgets in practice that “the Communists supportevery revolutionary movement”, that we are obliged forthat reason to expound and emphasise general democratic tasks before the whole people , without for a moment conceal-ing our socialist convictions. 
 He is no Social-Democrat who forgets in practice his obligation to be ahead of all in rais-ing, accentuating, and solving every general democratic question. 
 “But everyone agrees with this!” the impatient reader will exclaim, and the new instructions adopted by the last conference of the Union Abroad for the Editorial Board of Rabocheye Dyelo definitely say: “All events of social and po-litical life that affect the proletariat either directly as a spe-cial class or as the vanguard of all the revolutionary forces in the struggle for freedom should serve as subjects for political propaganda and agitation” ( Two Conferences , p. 
 17, our italics). 
 Yes, these are very true and very good words, and we would be fully satisfied if Rabocheye Dyelo under-stood them and if it refrained from saying in the next breath things that contradict them . 
 For it is not enough to call our-selves the “vanguard”, the advanced contingent; we mustact in such a way that all the other contingents recognise and are obliged to admit that we are marching in the vanguard. 
 And we ask the reader: Are the representa-tives of the other “contingents” such fools as to take ourword for it when we say that we are the “vanguard”? Justpicture to yourselves the following: a Social-Democratcomes to the “contingent” of Russian educated radicals, or liberal constitutionalists, and says, We are the vanguard; “the task confronting us now is, as far as possible, to lendthe economic struggle itself a political character”. 
 The radi-cal, or constitutionalist, if he is at all intelligent (and thereare many intelligent men among Russian radicals and con-stitutionalists), would only smile at such a speech and would say (to himself, of course, for in the majority of cases he is an experienced diplomat): “Your ‘vanguard’ must be madeup of simpletons. 
 They do not even understand that it isour task, the task of the progressive representatives ofbourgeois democracy to lend the workers’ economic struggleitself a political character. 
 Why, we too, like the West-European bourgeois, want to draw the workers into politics, but only into trade-unionist , not into Social-Democratic politics . 
 Trade-unionist politics of the working class is pre-cisely bourgeois politics of the working class, and this ‘van-guard’s’ formulation of its task is the formulation of trade-unionist politics! Let them call themselves Social-Democrats to their heart’s content, I am not a child to get excited over a label. 
 But they must not fall under the influence of thosepernicious orthodox doctrinaires, let them allow ‘freedom of criticism’ to those who unconsciously are driving Social-Democracy into trade-unionist channels. 
” And the faint smile of our constitutionalist will turn into Homeric laughter when he learns that the Social-Demo-crats who talk of Social-Democracy as the vanguard, today,when spontaneity almost completely dominates our move-ment, fear nothing so much as “belittling the spontaneouselement”, as “underestimating the significance of the forward movement of the drab everyday struggle, as compared with the propaganda of brilliant and completed ideas”, etc. 
, etc. 
!A “vanguard” which fears that consciousness will outstripspontaneity, which fears to put forward a bold “plan” thatwould compel general recognition even among those whodiffer with us. 
 Are they not confusing “vanguard” with “rearguard”? Indeed, let us examine the following piece of reasoning by Martynov. 
 On page 40 he says that Iskra is one-sided in its tactics of exposing abuses, that “however much we mayspread distrust and hatred of the government, we shall notachieve our aim until we have succeeded in developing suf-ficient active social energy for its overthrow”. 
 This, it may be said parenthetically, is the familiar solicitude for theactivation of the masses, with a simultaneous striving torestrict one’s own activity. 
 But that is not the main pointat the moment. 
 Martynov speaks here, accordingly, of revo-lutionary energy (“for overthrowing”). 
 And what conclusion does he arrive at? Since in ordinary times various social strata inevitably march separately, “it is, therefore, clearthat we Social-Democrats cannot simultaneously guide theactivities of various opposition strata, we cannot dictateto them a positive programme of action, we cannot pointout to them in what manner they should wage a day-to-day struggle for their interests.... 
 The liberal strata will them-selves take care of the active struggle for their immediateinterests, the struggle that will bring them face to face withour political régime” (p. 
 41). 
 Thus, having begun with talkabout revolutionary energy, about the active struggle forthe overthrow of the autocracy, Martynov immediately turns toward trade-union energy and active struggle for immediate interests! It goes without saying that we can-not guide the struggle of the students, liberals, etc. 
, for their “immediate interests”; but this was not the point at issue, most worthy Economist! The point we were discussing was the possible and necessary participation of various social strata in the overthrow of the autocracy; and not only are weable , but it is our bounden duty, to guide these “activities of the various opposition strata”, if we desire to be the “van-guard”. 
 Not only will our students and liberals, etc. 
, them-selves take care of “the struggle that brings them face to face with our political régime ”; the police and the officials of the autocratic government will see to this first and fore-most. 
 But if “we” desire to be front-rank democrats, we mustmake it our concern to direct the thoughts of those who are dissatisfied only with conditions at the university, or in theZemstvo, etc. 
, to the idea that the entire political system is worthless. 
 We must take upon ourselves the task of organ-ising an all-round political struggle under the leadershipof our Party in such a manner as to make it possible for all oppositional strata to render their fullest support to thestruggle and to our Party. 
 We must train our Social-Democrat-ic practical workers to become political leaders, able to guide all the manifestations of this all-round struggle, able at the right time to “dictate a positive programme of action”for the aroused students, the discontented Zemstvo people,the incensed religious sects, the offended elementary school-teachers, etc. 
, etc. 
 For that reason, Martynov’s assertion that“with regard to these, we can function merely in the negative role of exposers of abuses ... we can only dissipate their hopes in various government commissions” is completely false (our italics). 
 By saying this, Martynov shows that he abso-lutely fails to understand the role that the revolutionary “vanguard” must really play. 
 If the reader bears this in mind,he will be clear as to the real meaning of Martynov’s conclud-ing remarks: “ Iskra is the organ of the revolutionary oppo-sition which exposes the state of affairs in our country, par-ticularly the political state of affairs, insofar as it affectsthe interests of the most varied strata of the population. 
 We,however, work and will continue to work for the cause of theworking class in close organic contact with the proletarian struggle. 
 By restricting the sphere of our active influence we deepen that influence” (63). 
 The true sense of thisconclusion is as follows: Iskra desires to elevate the trade-unionist politics of the working class (to which, through misconception, through lack of training, or through conviction, our practical workers frequently confine them-selves) to the level of Social-Democratic politics. 
 Rabo-cheye Dyelo , however, desires to degrade Social-Democratic politics to trade-unionist politics. 
 Moreover, it assures theworld that the two positions are “entirely compatible withinthe common cause” (63). 
 0, sancta simplicitas! To proceed. 
 Have we sufficient forces to direct our prop-aganda and agitation among all social classes? Most cer-tainly. 
 Our Economists, who are frequently inclined to denythis, lose sight of the gigantic progress our movement hasmade from (approximately) 1894 to 1901. 
 Like real “tail-enders” they often go on living in the bygone stages of the movement’s inception. 
 In the earlier period, indeed, we had astonishingly few forces, and it was perfectly natural andlegitimate then to devote ourselves exclusively to activi-ties among the workers and to condemn severely any devia-tion from this course. 
 The entire task then was to consoli-date our position in the working class. 
 At the present time, however, gigantic forces have been attracted to the movement. 
 The best representatives of the younger generation of theeducated classes are coming over to us. 
 Everywhere in theprovinces there are people, resident there by dint of circum-stance, who have taken part in the movement in the pastor who desire to do so now and who, are gravitating towards Social-Democracy (whereas in 1894 one could count the So-cial-Democrats on the fingers of one’s hand). 
 A basic politi-cal and organisational shortcoming of our movement isour inability to utilise all these forces and give them appro-priate work (we shall deal with this more fully in the nextchapter). 
 The overwhelming majority of these forces entire-ly lack the opportunity of “going among the workers”, so that there are no grounds for fearing that we shall divertforces from our main work. 
 In order to be able to providethe workers with real, comprehensive, and live politicalknowledge, we must have “our own people”, Social-Demo-crats, everywhere, among all social strata, and in all positions from which we can learn the inner springs of our state mechanism. 
 Such people are required, not only for propagandaand agitation, but in a still larger measure for organisation. 
 Is there a basis for activity among all classes of the popu-lation? Whoever doubts this lags in his consciousness behind the spontaneous awakening of the masses. 
 The working-class movement has aroused and is continuing to arouse discon-tent in some, hopes of support for the opposition in others,and in still others the realisation that the autocracy is un-bearable and must inevitably fall. 
 We would be “politicians”and Social-Democrats in name only (as all too often happens in reality), if we failed to realise that our task is to utilise every manifestation of discontent, and to gather and turn tothe best account every protest, however small. 
 This is quiteapart from the fact that the millions of the labouring peas-antry, handicraftsmen, petty artisans, etc. 
, would always listeneagerly to the speech of any Social-Democrat who is at all qualified. 
 Indeed, is there a single social class in which there are no individuals, groups, or circles that are discon-tented with the lack of rights and with tyranny and, there-fore, accessible to the propaganda of Social-Democrats as thespokesmen of the most pressing general democratic needs?To those who desire to have a clear idea of what the political agitation of a Social-Democrat among all classes and strata of the population should be like, we wouldpoint to political exposures in the broad sense of the word as the principal (but, of course, not the sole) form of thisagitation. 
 “We must arouse in every section of the population that is at all politically conscious a passion for political exposure,” I wrote in my article “Where To Begin” [ Iskra , May (No. 
 4), 1901], with which I shall deal in greater detail later. 
 “We must not be discouraged by the fact that the voice of political exposure is today so feeble, timid, andinfrequent. 
 This is not because of a wholesale submission to police despotism, but because those who are able and ready to make expo-sures have no tribune from which to speak, no eager and encouragingaudience, they do not see anywhere among the people that force to which it would be worth while directing their complaint against the ‘omnipotent’ Russian Government.... 
 We are now in a position toprovide a tribune for the nation-wide exposure of the tsarist govern-ment, and it is our duty to do this. 
 That tribune must be a Social-Democratic newspaper. 
” * The ideal audience for political exposure is the working class, which is first and foremost in need of all-round and *See present volume, pp. 
 21-22. 
— Ed. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR live political knowledge, and is most capable of converting this knowledge into active struggle, even when that strug-gle does not promise “palpable results”. 
 A tribune for na-tion-wide exposures can be only an All-Russian newspaper. 
 “Without a political organ, a political movement deservingthat name is inconceivable in the Europe of today”; in thisrespect Russia must undoubtedly be included in present-day Europe. 
 The press long ago became a power in our coun-try, otherwise the government would not spend tens of thou-sands of rubles to bribe it and to subsidise the Katkovs andMeshcherskys. 
 And it is no novelty in autocratic Russiafor the underground press to break through the wall of cen-sorship and compel the legal and conservative press to speak openly of it. 
 This was the case in the seventies and even in the fifties. 
 How much broader and deeper are now the sec-tions of the people willing to read the illegal undergroundpress, and to learn from it “how to live and how to die”,to use the expression of a worker who sent a letter to Iskra (No. 
 7). 
 172 Political exposures are as much a declaration of war against the government as economic exposures are a declaration of war against the factory owners. 
 The moral sig-nificance of this declaration of war will be all the greater,the wider and more powerful the campaign of exposure willbe and the more numerous and determined the social class that has declared war in order to begin the war . 
 Hence, political exposures in themselves serve as a powerful instru-ment for disintegrating the system we oppose, as a means for diverting from the enemy his casual or temporary allies, as a means for spreading hostility and distrust among the permanent partners of the autocracy. 
 In our time only a party that will organise really nation-wide exposures can become the vanguard of the revolutionary forces. 
 The word “nation-wide” has a very profound meaning. 
The overwhelming majority of the non-working-class expos-ers (be it remembered that in order to become the vanguard, we must attract other classes) are sober politicians and lev-el-headed men of affairs. 
 They know perfectly well how dan-gerous it is to “complain” even against a minor official, let alone against the “omnipotent” Russian Government. 
 And they will come to us with their complaints only when they see that these complaints can really have effect, and that we represent a political force . 
 In order to become such a force in the eyes of outsiders, much persistent and stubborn work is required to raise our own consciousness, initiative, and energy. 
 To accomplish this it is not enough to attacha “vanguard” label to rearguard theory and practice. 
 But if we have to undertake the organisation of a really nation-wide exposure of the government, in what way willthen the class character of our movement be expressed?—the overzealous advocate of “close organic contact with the proletarian struggle” will ask us, as indeed he does. 
 The replyis manifold: we Social-Democrats will organise these nation-wide exposures; all questions raised by the agitation willhe explained in a consistently Social-Democratic spirit,without any concessions to deliberate or undeliberate dis-tortions of Marxism; the all-round political agitation will be conducted by a party which unites into one inseparablewhole the assault on the government in the name of the en-tire people, the revolutionary training of the proletariat,and the safeguarding of its political independence, the guid-ance of the economic struggle of the working class, and the utilisation of all its spontaneous conflicts with its exploiters which rouse and bring into our camp increasing numbers ofthe proletariat. 
 But a most characteristic feature of Economism is its failure to understand this connection, more, this identityof the most pressing need of the proletariat (a comprehen-sive political education through the medium of political agitation and political exposures) with the need of the gen-eral democratic movement. 
 This lack of understanding isexpressed, not only in “Martynovite” phrases, but in thereferences to a supposedly class point of view identical inmeaning with these phrases. 
 Thus, the authors of the “Econ-omist” letter in Iskra , No. 
 12, state *: “This basic drawback *Lack of space has prevented us from replying in detail, in Is-kra, to this letter, which is highly characteristic of the Economists. 
 We were very glad at its appearance, for the allegations that Iskra did not maintain a consistent class point of view had reached us long before that from various sources, and we were waiting for an appro-priate occasion, or for a formulated expression of this fashionable charge, to give our reply. 
 Moreover, it is our habit to reply to attacks, not by defence, but by counter-attack. 
 of Iskra [overestimation of ideology] is also the cause of its inconsistency on the question of the attitude of Social-De-mocracy to the various social classes and tendencies. 
 By theoretical reasoning [not by “the growth of Party tasks,which grow together with the Party”], Iskra solved the prob-lem of the immediate transition to the struggle againstabsolutism. 
 In all probability it senses the difficulty ofsuch a task for the workers under the present state of affairs [not only senses, but knows full well that this task appears less difficult to the workers than to the “Economist” intel-lectuals with their nursemaid concern, for the workers areprepared to fight even for demands which, to use the languageof the never-to-be-forgotten Martynov, do not “promisepalpable results”] but lacking the patience to wait until the workers will have gathered sufficient forces for this struggle, Iskra begins to seek allies in the ranks of the lib-erals and intellectuals”.... 
 Yes, we have indeed lost all “patience” “waiting” for the blessed time, long promised us by diverse “conciliators”, whenthe Economists will have stopped charging the workers with their own backwardness and justifying their own lack of energy with allegations that the workers lack strength. 
We ask our Economists: What do they mean by “the gather-ing of working-class strength for the struggle”? Is it not evi-dent that this means the political training of the workers, sothat all the aspects of our vile autocracy are revealed to them? And is it not clear that precisely for this work w e need “allies in the ranks of the liberals and intellectuals”,who are prepared to join us in the exposure of the politicalattack on the Zemstvos, on the teachers, on the statisti-cians, on the students, etc. 
? Is this surprisingly “intricatemechanism” really so difficult to understand? Has not P. 
 B. 
 Axelrod constantly repeated since 1897 that “the task before the Russian Social-Democrats of acquiring adherentsand direct and indirect allies among the non-proletarianclasses will be solved principally and primarily by the char-acter of the propagandist activities conducted among theproletariat itself ”? But the Martynovs and the other Econo-mists continue to imagine that “by economic struggle against the employers and the government” the workers mustfirst gather strength (for trade-unionist politics) and then “go over”—we presume from trade-unionist “training for activity”—to Social-Democratic activity! “... In this quest,” continue the Economists, “ Iskra not infrequently departs from the class point of view, obscuresclass antagonisms, and puts into the forefront the commonnature of the discontent with the government, althoughthe causes and the degree of the discontent vary considera-bly among the ‘allies’. 
 Such, for example, is Iskra ’s attitude towards the Zemstvo.... 
” Iskra , it is alleged, “promises the nobles that are dissatisfied with the government’s sopsthe assistance of the working class, but it does not say aword about the class antagonism that exists between thesesocial strata. 
” If the reader will turn to the article “TheAutocracy and the Zemstvo” ( Iskra , Nos. 
 2 and 4), to which, in all probability , the authors of the letter refer, he will find that they * deal with the attitude of the government towards the “mild agitation of the bureaucratic Zemstvo, which isbased on the social-estates”, and towards the “independentactivity of even the propertied classes”. 
 The article statesthat the workers cannot look on indifferently while the gov-ernment is waging a struggle against the Zemstvo, and the Zemstvos are called upon to stop making mild speeches andto speak firmly and resolutely when revolutionary Social-Democracy confronts the government in all its strength. 
What the authors of the letter do not agree with here is notclear. 
 Do they think that the workers will “not understand” the phrases “propertied classes” and “bureaucratic Zemstvo based on the social-estates”? Do they think that urging the Zemstvo to abandon mild speeches and to speak firmly is“overestimating ideology”? Do they imagine the workerscan “gather strength” for the struggle against the autocracyif they know nothing about the attitude of the autocracy to-wards the Zemstvo as well ? All this too remains unknown. 
 One thing alone is clear and that is that the authors ofthe letter have a very vague idea of what the politicaltasks of Social-Democracy are. 
 This is revealed still moreclearly by their remark: “Such, too, is Iskra ’s attitude towards the student movement” (i. 
e. 
, it also “obscures the class antag-*In the interval between these articles there was one ( Iskra , No. 
 3), which dealt especially with class antagonisms in the countryside. 
 (See present edition, Vol. 
 4, pp. 
 420-28. 
— Ed. 
) onisms”). 
 Instead of calling on the workers to declare by means of public demonstrations that the real breeding-place of unbridled violence, disorder, and outrage is not the uni-versity youth but the Russian Government ( Iskra , No. 
 2 *), we ought probably to have inserted arguments in the spiritof Rabochaya Mysl ! Such ideas were expressed by Social-Democrats in the autumn of 1901, after the events of Febru-ary and March, on the eve of a fresh upsurge of the student movement, which reveals that even in this sphere the “spon-taneous” protest against the autocracy is outstripping t he conscious Social-Democratic leadership of the movement. 
The spontaneous striving of the workers to defend the stu-dents who are being assaulted by the police and the Cossackssurpasses the conscious activity of the Social-Democratic organisation! “And yet in other articles,” continue the authors of the letter, “ Iskra sharply condemns all compromise and defends, for instance, the intolerant conduct of the Guesdists. 
” Wewould advise those who are wont so conceitedly and frivo-lously to declare that the present disagreements among the Social-Democrats are unessential and do not justify a split, to ponder these words. 
 Is it possible for people to work to-gether in the same organisation, when some among themcontend that we have done extremely little to explain thehostility of the autocracy to the various classes and to informthe workers of the opposition displayed by the various so-cial strata to the autocracy, while others among them see in this clarification a “compromise”—evidently a compro-mise with the theory of “economic struggle against theemployers and the government”? We urged the necessity of carrying the class struggle into the rural districts in connection with the fortieth anniver-sary of the emancipation of the peasantry (issue No. 
 3 ** and spoke of the irreconcilability of the local governmentbodies and the autocracy in relation to Witte’s secret Mem-orandum (No. 
 4). 
 In connection with the new law we at-tacked the feudal landlords and the government whichserves them (No. 
 8 ***) and we welcomed the illegal Zemstvo *See present edition, Vol. 
 4, pp. 
 414-19. 
— Ed. 
 **See present edition, Vol. 
 4, pp. 
 420-28. 
— Ed. 
 *** See present volume, pp. 
 95-100. 
— Ed. 
 congress. 
 We urged the Zemstvo to pass over from abject petitions (No. 
 8 *) to struggle. 
 We encouraged the stu-dents, who had begun to understand the need for the politi-cal struggle, and to undertake this struggle (No. 
 3), while,at the same time, we lashed out at the “outrageous incompre-hension” revealed by the adherents of the “purely student”movement, who called upon the students to abstain fromparticipating in the street demonstrations (No. 
 3, in con-nection with the manifesto issued by the Executive Commit-tee of the Moscow students on February 25). 
 We exposedthe “senseless dreams” and the “lying hypocrisy” of the cun-ning liberals of Rossiya 173 (No. 
 5), while pointing to the violent fury with which the government-gaoler persecuted“peaceful writers, aged professors, scientists, and well-known liberal Zemstvo members” (No. 
 5, “Police Raid on Litera-ture”). 
 We exposed the real significance of the programmeof “state protection for the welfare of the workers” andwelcomed the “valuable admission” that “it is better, bygranting reforms from above, to forestall the demand forsuch reforms from below than to wait for those demands to be put forward” (No. 
 6 **). 
 We encouraged the protesting sta-tisticians (No. 
 7) and censured the strike-breaking statis-ticians (No. 
 9). 
 He who sees in these tactics an obscuringof the class-consciousness of the proletariat and a compro-mise with liberalism reveals his utter failure to understand the true significance of the programme of the Credo and carries out that programme de facto , however much he may repudiate it. 
 For by such an approach he drags So-cial-Democracy towards the “economic struggle against theemployers and the government” and yields to liberalism , abandons the task of actively intervening in every “liberal” issue and of determining his own , Social-Democratic, atti-tude towards this question. 
 F. 
 ONCE MORE “SLANDERERS”, ONCE MORE “MYSTIFIERS” These polite expressions, as the reader will recall, be-long to Rabocheye Dyelo , which in this way answers our charge that it “is indirectly preparing the ground for convert-*See present volume, pp. 
 101-02. 
— Ed. 
 ing the working-class movement into an instrument of bour-geois democracy”. 
 In its simplicity of heart Rabocheye Dyelo decided that this accusation was nothing more than a polem-ical sally: these malicious doctrinaires are bent on sayingall sorts of unpleasant things about us, and, what can be moreunpleasant than being an instrument of bourgeois democracy?And so they print in bold type a “refutation”: “Nothing butdownright slander”, “mystification”, “mummery” ( Two Con-ferences , pp. 
 30, 31, 33). 
 Like Jove, Rabocheye Dyelo (although bearing little resemblance to that deity) is wrathful becauseit is wrong, and proves by its hasty abuse that it is incapableof understanding its opponents’ mode of reasoning. 
 Andyet, with only a little reflection it would have understoodwhy any subservience to the spontaneity of the mass move-ment and any degrading of Social-Democratic politics to the level of trade-unionist politics mean preparing the groundfor converting the working-class movement into an instru-ment of bourgeois democracy. 
 The spontaneous working-classmovement is by itself able to create (and inevitably doescreate) only trade-unionism, and working-class trade-union-ist politics is precisely working-class bourgeois politics. 
 The fact that the working class participates in the politicalstruggle, and even in the political revolution, does not initself make its politics Social-Democratic politics. 
 WillRabocheye Dyelo make bold to deny this? Will it, at long last, publicly, plainly, and without equivocation explain how it understands the urgent questions of international and of Russian Social-Democracy? Hardly. 
 It will never doanything of the kind, because it holds fast to thetrick, which might be described as the “not here” method—“It’s not me, it’s not my horse, I’m not the driver. 
 We arenot Economists; Rabochaya Mysl does not stand for Econo-mism; there is no Economism at all in Russia. 
” This is a remarkably adroit and “political” trick, which suffers fromthe slight defect, however, that the publications practisingit are usually nicknamed, “At your service, sir”. 
 Rabocheye Dyelo imagines that bourgeois democracy in Russia is, in general, merely a “phantom” ( Two Conferences , p. 
 32). 
 * Happy people! Ostrich-like, they bury their heads *There follows a reference to the “concrete Russian conditions in the sand and imagine that everything around has disap-peared. 
 Liberal publicists who month after month proclaim to the world their triumph over the collapse and even the disappearance of Marxism; liberal newspapers ( S. 
 Peterburg-skiye Vedomosti ,174 Russkiye Vedomosti , and many others) which encourage the liberals who bring to the workers theBrentano 175 conception of the class struggle and the trade-unionist conception of politics; the galaxy of critics of Marx-ism, whose real tendencies were so very well disclosed by the Credo and whose literary products alone circulate in Rus-sia without let or hindrance; the revival of revolutionarynon-Social-Democratic tendencies, particularly after the February and March events—all these, apparently, are justphantoms! All these have nothing at all to do with bourgeois democracy! Rabocheye Dyelo and the authors of the Economist letter published in Iskra , No. 
 12, should “ponder over the reason why the events of the spring brought about such a revivalof revolutionary non-Social-Democratic tendencies insteadof increasing the authority and the prestige of Social-Democ-racy”. 
 The reason lies in the fact that we failed to cope with our tasks. 
 The masses of the workers proved to be more activethan we. 
 We lacked adequately trained revolutionaryleaders and organisers possessed of a thorough knowledgeof the mood prevailing among all the opposition strata and able to head the movement, to turn a spontaneous demon-stration into a political one, broaden its political char-acter, etc. 
 Under such circumstances, our backwardnesswill inevitably be utilised by the more mobile and moreenergetic non-Social-Democratic revolutionaries, and theworkers, however energetically and self-sacrificingly they may fight the police and the troops, however revolutionary their actions may be, will prove to be merely a force support-lutionary path”. 
 But these people refuse to understand that the revo-lutionary path of the working-class movement might not be a Social-Democratic path. 
 When absolutism reigned, the entire West-Euro-pean bourgeoisie “impelled”, deliberately impelled, the workerson to the path of revolution. 
 We Social-Democrats, however, cannot be satisfied with that. 
 And if we, by any means whatever, degrade Social-Democratic politics to the level of spontaneous trade-unionistpolitics, we thereby play into the hands of bourgeois democracy. 
 ing those revolutionaries, the rearguard of bourgeois de-mocracy, and not the Social-Democratic vanguard. 
 Let us take, for example, the German Social-Democrats, whose weak aspects alone our Economists desire to emulate. 
 Whyis there not a single political event in Germany that does not add to the authority and prestige of Social-Democracy?Because Social-Democracy is always found to be in advanceof all others in furnishing the most revolutionary appraisal of every given event and in championing every protest against tyranny. 
 It does not lull itself with arguments thatthe economic struggle brings the workers to realise that theyhave no political rights and that the concrete conditionsunavoidably impel the working-class movement on to thepath of revolution. 
 It intervenes in every sphere and in every question of social and political life; in the matter of Wilhelm’s refusal to endorse a bourgeois progressist as citymayor (our Economists have not yet managed to educatethe Germans to the understanding that such an act is, infact, a compromise with liberalism!); in the matter of thelaw against “obscene” publications and pictures; in the matter of governmental influence on the election of pro-fessors, etc. 
, etc. 
 Everywhere the Social-Democrats are foundin the forefront, rousing political discontent among allclasses, rousing the sluggards, stimulating the laggards, andproviding a wealth of material for the development of thepolitical consciousness and the political activity of the pro-letariat. 
 As a result, even the avowed enemies of socialism are filled with respect for this advanced political fighter,and not infrequently an important document from bour-geois, and even from bureaucratic and Court circles, makesits way by some miraculous means into the editorial officeof Vorwärts . 
 This, then, is the resolution of the seeming “contradiction” that surpasses Rabocheye Dyelo ’s powers of understanding to such an extent that it can only throw up its hands and cry, “Mummery!” Indeed, just think of it: We, Rabocheye Dyelo , regard the mass working-class movement as the corner-stone (and say so in bold type!); we warn all and sundry againstbelittling the significance of the element of spontaneity;we desire to lend the economic struggle itself— itself —a polit-ical character; we desire to maintain close and organic contact with the proletarian struggle. 
 And yet we are told that we are preparing the ground for the conversion of the work-ing-class movement into an instrument of bourgeois demo-cracy! And who are they that presume to say this? Peoplewho “compromise” with liberalism by intervening in every“liberal” issue (what a gross misunderstanding of “organiccontact with the proletarian struggle”!), by devoting somuch attention to the students and even (oh horror!) to the Zemstvos! People who in general wish to devote a greater percentage (compared with the Economists) of their effortsto activity among non-proletarian classes of the population!What is this but “mummery”? Poor Rabocheye Dyelo ! Will it ever find the solution to this perplexing puzzle? IV THE PRIMITIVENESS OF THE ECONOMISTS AND THE ORGANISATION OF THE REVOLUTIONARIES Rabocheye Dyelo ’s assertions, which we have analysed, that the economic struggle is the most widely applicablemeans of political agitation and that our task now is tolend the economic struggle itself a political character, etc. 
,express a narrow view, not only of our political, but alsoof our organisational tasks. 
 The “economic struggle against the employers and the government” does not at all require an All-Russian centralised organisation, and hence thisstruggle can never give rise to such an organisation aswill combine, in one general assault, all the manifestationsof political opposition, protest, and indignation, an organ-isation that will consist of professional revolutionaries and be led by the real political leaders of the entire people. 
 This stands to reason. 
 The character of any organisation isnaturally and inevitably determined by the content of itsactivity. 
 Consequently, Rabocheye Dyelo , by the assertions analysed above, sanctifies and legitimises not only narrownessof political activity, but also of organisational work. 
 In this case, Rabocheye Dyelo , as always, proves itself an or-gan whose consciousness yields to spontaneity. 
 Yet subser-vience to spontaneously developing forms of organisation, failure to realise the narrowness and primitiveness of our organisational work, of our “handicraft” methods in this most important sphere, failure to realise this, I say, is a veritable ailment from which our movement suffers. 
 Itis not an ailment that comes with decline, but one, of course,that comes with growth. 
 It is however at the present time,when the wave of spontaneous indignation, as it were, issweeping over us, leaders and organisers of the movement, that an irreconcilable struggle must be waged against all defence of backwardness, against any legitimation of nar-rowness in this matter. 
 It is particularly necessary to arousein all who participate in practical work, or are preparingto take up that work, discontent with the amateurism prevailing among us and an unshakable determination to rid ourselves of it. 
 A. 
 WHAT IS PRIMITIVENESS? We shall try to answer this question by giving a brief description of the activity of a typical Social-Democratic study circle of the period 1894-1901. 
 We have noted that the entire student youth of the period was absorbed in Marx-ism. 
 Of course, these students were not only, or even not somuch, interested in Marxism as a theory; they were inter-ested in it as an answer to the question, “What is to be done?”,as a call to take the field against the enemy. 
 These new warriors marched to battle with astonishingly primitive equip-ment and training. 
 In a vast number of cases they hadalmost no equipment and absolutely no training. 
 Theymarched to war like peasants from the plough, armed onlywith clubs. 
 A students’ circle establishes contacts with workersand sets to work, without any connection with the old mem-bers of the movement, without any connection with study circles in other districts, or even in other parts of the samecity (or in other educational institutions), without anyorganisation of the various divisions of revolutionary work,without any systematic plan of activity covering any lengthof time. 
 The circle gradually expands its propaganda and agitation; by its activities it wins the sympathies of fairly large sections of workers and of a certain section of the edu-cated strata, which provide it with money and from among whom the “committee” recruits new groups of young people. 
 The attractive power of the committee (or League of Struggle) grows, its sphere of activity becomes wider, and the committee expands this activity quite spontaneously; the very peoplewho a year or a few months previously spoke at the students’circle gatherings and discussed the question, “Whither?”, whoestablished and maintained contacts with the workers andwrote and published leaflets, now, establish contacts with other groups of revolutionaries, procure literature, set to work to publish a local newspaper, begin to talk of organis-ing a demonstration, and finally turn to open warfare (whichmay, according to circumstances, take the form of issuingthe first agitational leaflet or the first issue of a newspaper,or of organising the first demonstration). 
 Usually the initia-tion of such actions ends in an immediate and complete fiasco. 
 Immediate and complete, because this open warfarewas not the result of a systematic and carefully thought-out and gradually prepared plan for a prolonged and stubbornstruggle, but simply the result of the spontaneous growthof traditional study circle work; because, naturally, the police, in almost every case, knew the principal leaders of the local movement, since they had already “gained a rep-utation” for themselves in their student days, and the po-lice waited only for the right moment to make their raid. 
They deliberately allowed the study circle sufficient time todevelop its work so that they might, obtain a palpable corpus delicti , and they always permitted several of the per-sons known to them to remain at liberty “for breeding”(which, as far as I know, is the technical term used both by ourpeople and by the gendarmes). 
 One cannot help comparingthis kind of warfare with that conducted by a mass of peas-ants, armed with clubs, against modern troops. 
 And one can only wonder at the vitality of the movement which expand-ed, grew, and scored victories despite the total lack oftraining on the part of the fighters. 
 True, from the historicalpoint of view, the primitiveness of equipment was not onlyinevitable at first, but even legitimate as one of the condi-tions for the wide recruiting of fighters, but as soon as se-rious war operations began (and they began in fact with the strikes in the summer of 1896), the defects in our fightingorganisations made themselves felt to an ever-increasing degree. 
 The government, at first thrown into confusion and committing a number of blunders (e. 
g. 
, its appeal to the public describing the misdeeds of the socialists, or the ban-ishment of workers from the capitals to provincial indus-trial centres), very soon adapted itself to the new conditions ofthe struggle and managed to deploy well its perfectly equippeddetachments of agents provocateurs , spies, and gendarmes. 
 Raids became so frequent, affected such a vast number of people, and cleared out the local study circles so thoroughly that the masses of the workers lost literally all their leaders,the movement assumed an amazingly sporadic character,and it became utterly impossible to establish continuity andcoherence in the work. 
 The terrible dispersion of the localleaders; the fortuitous character of the study circle member-ships; the lack of training in, and the narrow outlook on, theoretical, political, and organisational questions were allthe inevitable result of the conditions described above. 
Things have reached such a pass that in several places theworkers, because of our lack of self-restraint and the inabilityto maintain secrecy, begin to lose faith in the intellectuals and to avoid them; the intellectuals, they say, are much too careless and cause police raids! Anyone who has the slightest knowledge of the movement is aware that all thinking Social-Democrats have at lastbegun to regard these amateurish methods as a disease. 
In order that the reader who is not acquainted with the movement may have no grounds for thinking that we are “in-venting” a special stage or special disease of the movement,we shall refer once again to the witness we have quoted. 
We trust we shall be forgiven for the length of the passage: “While the gradual transition to more extensive practical activi-ty,” writes B—v in Rabocheye Dyelo , No. 
 6, “a transition that is di-rectly dependent on the general transitional period through whichthe Russian working-class movement is now passing, is a characteris-tic feature, ... there is, however, another, no less interesting feature in the general mechanism of the Russian workers’ revolution. 
 We re-fer to the general lack of revolutionary forces fit for action , * which is felt not only in St. 
 Petersburg, but throughout Russia. 
 With thegeneral revival of the working-class movement, with the generaldevelopment of the working masses, with the growing frequencyof strikes, with the increasingly open mass struggle of the workers, *All italics ours. 
 and with the intensified government persecution, arrests, deporta-tion, and exile, this lack of highly skilled revolutionary forces is be-coming more and more marked and, without a doubt, cannot but affect the depth and the general character of the movement . 
 Many strikes take place without any strong and direct influence upon them by the revo-lutionary organisations.... 
 A shortage of agitational leaflets and ille-gal literature is felt.... 
 The workers’ study circles are left without agi-tators.... 
 In addition, there is a constant dearth of funds. 
 In a word,the growth of the working-class movement is outstripping the growthand development of the revolutionary organisations . 
 The numerical strength of the active revolutionaries is too small to enable them to concentrate in their own hands the influence exercised upon the wholemass of discontented workers, or to give this discontent even a shad-ow of coherence and organisation.... 
 The separate study circles, theseparate revolutionaries, scattered, uncombined, do not representa single, strong, and disciplined organisation with proportionately developed parts.... 
” Admitting that the immediate organisation of fresh study circles to replace those that have been broken up “merelyproves the vitality of the movement ... but does not prove the existenceof an adequate number of adequately prepared revolutionary work-ers”, the author concludes: “The lack of practical training among theSt. 
 Petersburg revolutionaries is seen in the results of their work. 
 The recent trials, especially that of the Self-Emancipation Group and the Labour-against-Capital group, 176 clearly showed that the young agi-tator, lacking a detailed knowledge of working class conditions and,consequently, of the conditions under which agitation can be carriedon in a given factory, ignorant of the principles of secrecy, and under-standing only the general principles of Social-Democracy [if he does] is able to carry on his work for perhaps four, five, or six months. 
 Then come arrests, which frequently lead to the break-up of the entireorganisation, or at all events, of part of it. 
 The question arises, there-fore, can the group conduct successful activity if its existence ismeasured by months?... Obviously, the defects of the existing organi-sations cannot be wholly ascribed to the transitional period.... 
 Obvi-ously, the numerical, and above all the qualitative, make-up of the functioning organisations is no small factor, and the first task ourSocial-Democrats must undertake ... is that of effectively combining the organisations and making a strict selection of their membership . 
” B. 
 PRIMITIVENESS AND ECONOMISM We must now deal with a question that has undoubtedly come to the mind of every reader. 
 Can a connection be es-tablished between primitiveness as growing pains thataffect the whole movement, and Economism, which is one o f the currents in Russian Social-Democracy? We think thatit can. 
 Lack of practical training, of ability to carry onorganisational work is certainly common to us all , includ-ing those who have from the very outset unswervingly stood for revolutionary Marxism. 
 Of course, were it only lack of practical training, no one could blame the practicalworkers. 
 But the term “primitiveness” embraces something more than lack of training; it denotes a narrow scope of revolutionary work generally, failure to understand that agood organisation of revolutionaries cannot be built on the basis of such narrow activity, and lastly—and this is the main thing—attempts to justify this narrowness and to ele-vate it to a special “theory”, i. 
e. 
, subservience to sponta-neity on this question too. 
 Once such attempts were re-vealed, it became clear that primitiveness is connected withEconomism and that we shall never rid ourselves of this nar-rowness of our organisational activity until we rid our-selves of Economism generally (i. 
e. 
, the narrow conceptionof Marxist theory, as well as of the role of Social-Democra-cy and of its political tasks). 
 These attempts manifested themselves in a twofold direction. 
 Some began to say thatthe working masses themselves have not yet advanced the broad and militant political tasks which the revolutionaries are attempting to “impose” on them; that they must con-tinue to struggle for immediate political demands, to conduct “the economic struggle against the employers and the gov-ernment” * (and, naturally, corresponding to this struggle which is “accessible” to the mass movement there must be an organisation that will be “accessible” to the most untrained youth). 
 Others, far removed from any theory of “gradualness”,said that it is possible and necessary to “bring about a polit-ical revolution”, but that this does not require building a strong organisation of revolutionaries to train the prole-tariat in steadfast and stubborn struggle. 
 All we need do is to snatch up our old friend, the “accessible” cudgel. 
 To drop metaphor, it means that we must organise a general strike, ** or that we must stimulate the “spiritless” progress of the working-class movement by means of “excitative terror” *** *Rabochaya Mysl and Rabocheye Dyelo , especially the Reply to Plekhanov. 
 **See “Who Will Bring About the Political Revolution?” in the collection published in Russia, entitled The Proletarian Struggle . 
 Re-issued by the Kiev Committee. 
 ***Regeneration of Revolutionism and the journal Svoboda . 
 Both these trends, the opportunists and the “revolutionists”, bow to the prevailing amateurism; neither believes that it can be eliminated, neither understands our primary and imperative practical task to establish an organisation of revolutionaries capable of lending energy, stability, and continuity to the political struggle. 
 We have quoted the words of B—v: “The growth of the working-class movement is outstripping the growth and development of the revolutionary organisations. 
” This “valuable remark of a close observer” ( Rabocheye Dyelo ’s comment on B—v’s article) has a twofold value for us. 
 Itshows that we were right in our opinion that the principalcause of the present crisis in Russian Social-Democracy isthe lag of the leaders (“ideologists”, revolutionaries, So-cial-Democrats) behind the spontaneous upsurge of the masses . 
 It shows that all the arguments advanced by the authors of the Economist letter (in Iskra , No. 
 12), by Krichevsky and by Martynov, as to the danger of belittl-ing the significance of the spontaneous element, of thedrab everyday struggle, as to tactics-as-process, etc. 
, are nothing more than a glorification and a defence of primitive-ness. 
 These people who cannot pronounce the word “theore-tician” without a sneer, who describe their genuflections tocommon lack of training and backwardness as a “sense forthe realities of life”, reveal in practice a failure to under-stand our most imperative practical tasks. 
 To laggards they shout: Keep in step! Don’t run ahead! To people suffering from a lack of energy and initiative in organisational work,from a lack of “plans” for wide and bold activity, theyprate about “tactics-as-process”! The worst sin we commitis that we degrade our political and organisational tasks to the level of the immediate, “palpable”, “concrete” in-terests of the everyday economic struggle; yet they keep singing to us the same refrain: Lend the economic struggleitself a political character! We repeat: this kind of thingdisplays as much “sense for the realities of life” as was dis-played by the hero in the popular fable who cried out to apassing funeral procession, “Many happy returns of the day!” Recall the matchless, truly “Nartsis-like” supercilious-ness with which these wiseacres lectured Plekhanov onthe “workers’ circles generally” ( sic!) being “unable to cope with political tasks in the real and practical sense of the word, i. 
e. 
, in the sense of the expedient and successful practical struggle for political demands” ( Rabocheye Dyelo ’s Reply , p. 
 24). 
 There are circles and circles, gentlemen! Circles of “amateurs” are not, of course, capable of cop-ing with political tasks so long as they have not becomeaware of their amateurism and do not abandon it. 
 If, besidesthis, these amateurs are enamoured of their primitive methods, and insist on writing the word “practical” in ital-ics, and imagine that being practical demands that one’stasks be reduced to the level of understanding of the mostbackward strata of the masses, then they are hopeless ama-teurs and, of course, certainly cannot in general cope with any political tasks . 
 But a circle of leaders, of the type of Alexeyev and Myshkin, of Khalturin and Zhelyabov, is capable of coping with political tasks in the genuine andmost practical sense of the term, for the reason and to theextent that their impassioned propaganda meets with re-sponse among the spontaneously awakening masses, and theirsparkling energy is answered and supported by the energy of the revolutionary class. 
 Plekhanov was profoundly right, not only in pointing to this revolutionary class and provingthat its spontaneous awakening was inevitable, but in set-ting even the “workers’ circles” a great and lofty politicaltask. 
 But you refer to the mass movement that has sprungup since that time in order to degrade this task, to curtail the energy and scope of activity of the “workers’ circles”. 
 If you are not amateurs enamoured of your primitive methods,what are you then? You boast that you are practical, but youfail to see what every Russian practical worker knows,namely, the miracles that the energy, not only of a circle,but even of an individual person is able to perform in the revolutionary cause. 
 Or do you think that our movement cannot produce leaders like those of the seventies? If so,why do you think so? Because we lack training? But we aretraining ourselves, we will go on training ourselves, and wewill be trained! Unfortunately it is true that the surfaceof the stagnant waters of the “economic struggle against the employers and the government” is overgrown with fungus; people have appeared among us who kneel in prayer to spon-taneity, gazing with awe (to take an expression from Plekhanov) upon the “posterior” of the Russian proletariat. 
 But we will get rid of this fungus. 
 The time has come when Russian revolutionaries, guided by a genuinely revolutionary theory, relying upon the genuinely revolutionary and spon-taneously awakening class, can at last—at long last!—riseto full stature in all their giant strength. 
 All that is requiredis for the masses of our practical workers, and the still larg-er masses of those who dreamed of practical work when they were still at school, to pour scorn and ridicule upon any suggestion that may be made to degrade our political tasksand to restrict the scope of our organisational work. 
 Andwe will achieve that, rest assured, gentlemen! In the article “Where To Begin”, I wrote in opposition to Rabocheye Dyelo : “The tactics of agitation in relation to some special question, or the tactics with regard to some detail of party organisation may be changed in twenty-four hours;but only people devoid of all principle are capable of chang-ing, in twenty-four hours, or, for that matter, in twenty-four months, their view on the necessity—in general, con-stantly, and absolutely—of an organisation of struggle and of political agitation among the masses. 
” * To this Rabo-cheye Dyelo replied: “This, the only one of Iskra ’s charges that makes a pretence of being based on facts,is totally without foundation. 
 Readers of Rabocheye Dyelo know very well that from the outset we not only called forpolitical agitation, without waiting for the appearance of Iskra ... [saying at the same time that not only the workers’ study circles, “but also the mass working-class movementcould not regard as its first political task the overthrow ofabsolutism”, but only the struggle for immediate politi-cal demands, and that “the masses begin to understand im-mediate political demands after one, or at all events, after several strikes”],... but that with our publications which we furnished from abroad for the comrades working in Rus-sia, we provided the only Social-Democratic political and agitational material ... [and in this sole material you notonly based the widest political agitation exclusively on theeconomic struggle, but you even went to the extent of claim-ing that this restricted agitation was the “most widely *See present volume, p. 
 18. 
— Ed. 
 applicable”. 
 And do you not observe, gentlemen, that your own argument—that this was the only material provided— proves the necessity for Iskra ’s appearance, and its struggle against Rabocheye Dyelo ?]. 
 ... On the other hand, our publish-ing activity actually prepared the ground for the tacticalunity of the Party ... [unity in the conviction that tacticsis a process of growth of Party tasks that grow together withthe Party? A precious unity indeed!] ... and by that rendered possible the creation of a ‘militant organisation’ for which the Union Abroad did all that an organisation abroad coulddo” ( Rabocheye Dyelo , No. 
 10, p. 
 15). 
 A vain attempt at eva-sion! I would never dream of denying that you did all youpossibly could. 
 I have asserted and assert now that thelimits of what is “possible” for you to do are restricted by the narrowness of your outlook. 
 It is ridiculous to talk of a “militant organisation” to fight for “immediate politicaldemands”, or to conduct the economic struggle against theemployers and the government”. 
 But if the reader wishes to see the pearls of “Economist” infatuation with amateurism, he must, of course, turn from the eclectic and vacillating Rabocheye Dyelo to the consistent and determined Rabochaya Mysl . 
 In its Separate Supple-ment , p. 
 13, R. 
 M. 
 wrote: “Now two words about the so-called revolutionary intelligentsia proper. 
 True, on morethan one occasion it has proved itself prepared ‘to enterinto determined battle with tsarism’. 
 The unfortunate thing, however, is that our revolutionary intelligentsia, ruthlessly persecuted by the political police, imagined the struggleagainst the political police to be the political struggle againstthe autocracy. 
 That is why, to this day, it cannot understand‘where the forces for the struggle against the autocracy areto be obtained’. 
” Truly matchless is the lofty contempt for the struggle against the police displayed by this worshipper (in theworst sense of the word) of the spontaneous movement! He is prepared to justify our inability to organise secret activity by the argument that with the spontaneous mass movementit is not at all important for us to struggle against the polit-ical police! Very few people indeed would subscribe to this appalling conclusion; to such an extent have our deficienciesin revolutionary organisations become a matter of acute importance. 
 But if Martynov, for example, refuses to sub-scribe to this, it will only be because he is unable, or lacks the courage, to think out his ideas to their logical conclusion. 
 Indeed, does the “task” of advancing concrete demands bythe masses, demands that promise palpable results, callfor special efforts to create a stable, centralised, militantorganisation of revolutionaries? Cannot such a “task” becarried out even by masses that do not “struggle against the political police” at all? Could this task, moreover, be fulfilled if, in addition to the few leaders, it were not under-taken by such workers (the overwhelming majority) as arequite incapable of “struggling against the political police”? Such workers, average people of the masses, are capable ofdisplaying enormous energy and self-sacrifice in strikes and in street battles with the police and the troops, and are ca-pable (in fact, are alone capable) of determining the outcome of our entire movement—but the struggle against the po-litical police requires special qualities; it requires profes-sional revolutionaries. 
 And we must see to it, not only that the masses “advance” concrete demands, but that the masses of the workers “advance” an increasing number of such pro-fessional revolutionaries. 
 Thus, we have reached the questionof the relation between an organisation of professional rev-olutionaries and the labour movement pure and simple. 
Although this question has found little reflection in litera-ture, it has greatly engaged us “politicians” in conversations and polemics with comrades who gravitate more or less to-wards Economism. 
 It is a question meriting special treat-ment. 
 But before taking it up, let us offer one further quota-tion by way of illustrating our thesis on the connectionbetween primitiveness and Economism. 
 In his Reply , Mr. 
 N. 
 N. 
 177 wrote: “The Emancipation of Labour group demands direct struggle against the govern-ment without first considering where the material forces forthis struggle are to be obtained, and without indicatingthe path of the struggle . 
” Emphasising the last words, the author adds the following footnote to the word “path”:“This cannot be explained by purposes of secrecy, because the programme does not refer to a plot but to a mass move-ment . 
 And the masses cannot proceed by secret paths. 
 Can we conceive of a secret strike? Can we conceive of secret demonstrations and petitions?” ( Vademecum , p. 
 59. 
) Thus, the author comes quite close to the question of the “mate-rial forces” (organisers of strikes and demonstrations) and to the “paths” of the struggle, but, nevertheless, is still ina state of consternation, because he “worships” the massmovement, i. 
e. 
, he regards it as something that relieves us of the necessity of conducting revolutionary activityand not as something that should encourage us and stimulate our revolutionary activity. 
 It is impossible for a strike to remain a secret to those participating in it and to thoseimmediately associated with it, but it may (and in the major-ity of cases does) remain a “secret” to the masses of theRussian workers, because the government takes care to cutall communication with the strikers, to prevent all news of strikes from spreading. 
 Here indeed is where a special “struggle against the political police” is required, a strug-gle that can never be conducted actively by such large massesas take part in strikes. 
 This struggle must be organised,according to “all the rules of the art”, by people who areprofessionally engaged in revolutionary activity. 
 The fact that the masses are spontaneously being drawn into the move-ment does not make the organisation of this struggle less necessary . 
 On the contrary, it makes it more necessary ; for we socialists would be failing in our direct duty to themasses if we did not prevent the police from making a secretof every strike and every demonstration (and if we did not ourselves from time to time secretly prepare strikes and demonstrations). 
 And we will succeed in doing this , because the spontaneously awakening masses will also produce i n-creasing, numbers of “professional revolutionaries” from their own ranks (that is, if we do not take it into our heads to advise the workers to keep on marking time). 
 C. 
 ORGANISATION OF WORKERS AND ORGANISATION OF REVOLUTIONARIES It is only natural to expect that for a Social-Democrat whose conception of the political struggle coincides with the conception of the “economic struggle against the em-ployers and the government”, the “organisation of revolution-aries” will more or less coincide with the “organisation of workers”. 
 This, in fact, is what actually happens; so that when we speak of organisation, we literally speak in different tongues. 
 I vividly recall, for example, a conversation I once had with a fairly consistent Economist, with whom I had not been previously acquainted. 
 We were discussing the pamphlet, Who Will Bring About the Political Revolution? and were soon of a mind that its principal defect was its ig-noring of the question of organisation. 
 We had begun to as-sume full agreement between us; but, as the conversation proceeded, it became evident that we were talking of differ-ent things. 
 My interlocutor accused the author of ignoring strike funds, mutual benefit societies, etc. 
, whereas I had in mind an organisation of revolutionaries as an essentialfactor in “bringing about” the political revolution. 
 As soon as the disagreement became clear, there was hardly, as I re-member, a single question of principle upon which I was inagreement with the Economist! What was the source of our disagreement? It was the fact that on questions both of organisation and of politicsthe Economists are forever lapsing from Social-Democracy into trade-unionism. 
 The political struggle of Social-De-mocracy is far more extensive and complex than the econom-ic struggle of the workers against the employers and the government. 
 Similarly (indeed for that reason), the organi-sation of the revolutionary Social-Democratic Party mustinevitably be of a kind different from the organisation of the workers designed for this struggle. 
 The workers’ organi-sation must in the first place be a trade-union organisation;secondly, it must be as broad as possible; and thirdly, it must be as public as conditions will allow (here, and fur-ther on, of course, I refer only to absolutist Russia). 
On the other hand, the organisation of the revolutionaries must consist first and foremost of people who make revolu-tionary activity their profession (for which reason I speakof the organisation of revolutionaries , meaning revolutionary Social-Democrats). 
 In view of this common characteristic of the members of such an organisation, all distinctions as between workers and intellectuals , not to speak of distinctions of trade and profession, in both categories, must be effaced . 
 Such an organisation must perforce not be very extensive and must be as secret as possible. 
 Let us examine this threefold distinction. 
 In countries where political liberty exists the distinction between a trade-union and a political organisation is clearenough, as is the distinction between trade unions andSocial-Democracy. 
 The relations between the latter and theformer will naturally vary in each country according tohistorical, legal, and other conditions; they may be more or less close, complex, etc. 
 (in our opinion they should be as close and as little complicated as possible); but therecan be no question in free countries of the organisation oftrade unions coinciding with the organisation of the Social-Democratic Party. 
 In Russia, however, the yoke of theautocracy appears at first glance to obliterate all distinc-tions between the Social-Democratic organisation and the workers’ associations, since all workers’ associations and all study circles are prohibited, and since the principal manifestation and weapon of the workers’ economic struggle—the strike—is regarded as a criminal (and sometimes evenas a political!) offence. 
 Conditions in our country, there-fore, on the one hand, strongly “impel” the workers engaged in economic struggle to concern themselves with politicalquestions, and, on the other, they “impel” Social-Democratsto confound trade-unionism with Social-Democracy (and ourKrichevskys, Martynovs, and Co. 
, while diligently discussingthe first kind of “impulsion”, fail to notice the second). 
 Indeed, picture to yourselves people who are immersed nine-ty-nine per cent in “the economic struggle against the em-ployers and the government”. 
 Some of them will never, dur-ing the entire course of their activity (from four to six months), be impelled to think of the need for a more complexorganisation of revolutionaries. 
 Others, perhaps, will come across the fairly widely distributed Bernsteinian literature, from which they will become convinced of the profoundimportance of the forward movement of “the drab everydaystruggle”. 
 Still others will be carried away, perhaps, by theseductive idea of showing the world a new example of “close and organic contact with the proletarian struggle”—contact between the trade-union and the Social-Democratic move-ments. 
 Such people may argue that the later a country en-ters the arena of capitalism and, consequently, of the working-class movement, the more the socialists in that coun-try may take part in, and support, the trade-union movement, and the less the reason for the existence of non-Social-Dem-ocratic trade unions. 
 So far the argument is fully correct;unfortunately, however, some go beyond that and dream ofa complete fusion of Social-Democracy with trade-unionism. 
We shall soon see, from the example of the Rules of theSt. 
 Petersburg League of Struggle, what a harmful effect such dreams have upon our plans of organisation. 
 The workers’ organisations for the economic struggle should be trade-union organisations. 
 Every Social-Demo-cratic worker should as far as possible assist and actively workin these organisations. 
 But, while this is true, it is certain-ly not in our interest to demand that only Social-Democrats should be eligible for membership in the “trade” unions, since that would only narrow the scope of our influence upon themasses. 
 Let every worker who understands the need tounite for the struggle against the employers and the govern-ment join the trade unions. 
 The very aim of the trade unionswould be impossible of achievement, if they did not unite all who have attained at least this elementary degree of understanding, if they were not very broad organisations. 
 The broader these organisations, the broader will be our influ-ence over them—an influence due, not only to the “sponta-neous” development of the economic struggle, but to thedirect and conscious effort of the socialist trade-union mem-bers to influence their comrades. 
 But a broad organisation cannot apply methods of strict secrecy (since this demandsfar greater training than is required for the economic strug-gle). 
 How is the contradiction between the need for a largemembership and the need for strictly secret methods to bereconciled? How are we to make the trade unions as public as possible? Generally speaking, there can be only two ways to this end: either the trade unions become legalised (insome countries this preceded the legalisation of the socialistand political unions), or the organisation is kept secret, butso “free” and amorphous, lose * as the Germans say, that the need for secret methods becomes almost negligible as far as the bulk of the members is concerned. 
 *Lose (German)—“loose”. 
— Ed. 
 The legalisation of non-socialist and non-political labour unions in Russia has begun, and there is no doubt that every advance made by our rapidly growing Social-Democratic working-class movement will multiply and encourage at-tempts at legalisation—attempts proceeding for the mostpart from supporters of the existing order, but partly alsofrom the workers themselves and from liberal intellectuals. 
The banner of legality has already been hoisted by the Va-silyevs and the Zubatovs. 
 Support has been promised and rendered by the Ozerovs and the Wormses, 178 and followers of the new tendency are now to be found among the workers. 
Henceforth, we cannot but reckon with this tendency. 
 Howwe are to reckon with it, on this there can be no two opin-ions among Social-Democrats. 
 We must steadfastly expose any part played in this movement by the Zubatovs and the Vasilyeys, the gendarmes and the priests, and explain theirreal intentions to the workers. 
 We must also expose all theconciliatory, “harmonious” notes that will be heard in thespeeches of liberal politicians at legal meetings of the work-ers, irrespective of whether the speeches are motivated by an earnest conviction of the desirability of peaceful class collaboration, by a desire to curry favour with the powersthat be, or whether they are simply the result of clumsiness. 
Lastly, we must warn the workers against the traps oftenset by the police, who at such open meetings and permittedsocieties spy out the “fiery ones” and try to make use of le-gal organisations to plant their agents provocateurs in the illegal organisations. 
 Doing all this does not at all mean forgetting that in the long run the legalisation of the working-class movement will be to our advantage, and not to that of the Zubatovs. 
 On thecontrary, it is precisely our campaign of exposure that will help us to separate the tares from the wheat. 
 What the tares are, we have already indicated. 
 By the wheat we mean attract-ing the attention of ever larger numbers, including the mostbackward sections, of the workers to social and politicalquestions, and freeing ourselves, the revolutionaries, fromfunctions that are essentially legal (the distribution of legal books, mutual aid, etc. 
), the development of which will inevitably provide us with an increasing quantity ofmaterial for agitation. 
 In this sense, we may, and should, say to the Zubatovs and the Ozerovs: Keep at it, gentlemen, do your best! Whenever you place a trap in the path of the workers (either by way of direct provocation, or by the “honest” demoralisation of the workers with the aid of“Struve-ism”) we will see to it that you are exposed. 
 Butwhenever you take a real step forward, though it be themost “timid zigzag”, we will say: Please continue! And theonly step that can be a real step forward is a real, if small, extension of the workers’ field of action. 
 Every such exten-sion will be to our advantage and will help to hasten the ad-vent of legal societies of the kind in which it will not beagents provocateurs who are detecting socialists, but socialists who are gaining adherents. 
 In a word, our task is to fightthe tares. 
 It is not our business to grow wheat in flower-pots. 
 By pulling up the tares, we clear the soil for the wheat. 
 And while the Afanasy Ivanoviches and Pulkheria Ivanov-nas 179 are tending their flower-pot crops, we must prepare the reapers, not only to cut down the tares of today, but toreap the wheat of tomorrow. 
 * Thus, we cannot by means of legalisation solve the prob-lem of creating a trade-union organisation that will be as little secret and as extensive as possible (but we shouldbe extremely glad if the Zubatovs and the Ozerovs disclosedto us even a partial opportunity for such a solution—tothis end, however, we must strenuously combat them). 
There remain secret trade-union organisations, and we must give all possible assistance to the workers who (as we def-initely know) are adopting this course. 
 Trade-union organi-sations, not only can be of tremendous value in developingand consolidating the economic struggle, but can also become *Iskra ’s campaign against the tares evoked the following angry outburst from Rabocheye Dyelo : “For Iskra , the signs of the times lie not so much in great events [of the spring], as in the miserableattempts of the agents of Zubatov to ‘legalise’ the working-class move-ment. 
 It fails to see that these facts tell against it; for they testifythat the working-class movement has assumed menacing proportionsin the eyes of the government” ( Two Conferences , p. 
 27). 
 For all this we have to blame the “dogmatism” of the orthodox who “turn a deafear to the imperative demands of life”. 
 They obstinately refuse to seethe yard-high wheat and are combating inch-high tares! Does this notreveal a “distorted sense of perspective in regard to the Russian work-ing-class movement” (ibid. 
, p. 
 27)? a very important auxiliary to political agitation and rev-olutionary organisation. 
 In order to achieve this purpose, and in order to guide the nascent trade-union movement in the channels desired by Social-Democracy, we must firstunderstand clearly the absurdity of the plan of organisa-tion the St. 
 Petersburg Economists have been nursing fornearly five years. 
 That plan is set forth in the “Rules for aWorkers’ Mutual Benefit Fund” of July 1897 (“ Listok ” Ra-botnika , No. 
 9-10, p. 
 46, taken from Rabochaya Mysl , No. 
 1), as well as in the “Rules for a Trade-Union Workers’Organisation” of October 1900 (special leaflet printed inSt. 
 Petersburg and referred to in Iskra , No. 
 1). 
 Both these sets of rules have one main shortcoming: they set up the broadworkers’ organisation in a rigidly specified structure and confound it with the organisation of revolutionaries. 
 Let us take the last-mentioned set of rules, since it is drawn upin greater detail. 
 The body consists of fifty-two paragraphs. 
 Twenty-three deal with the structure, the method of function-ing, and the competence of the “workers’ circles”, whichare to be organised in every factory (“a maximum of ten per-sons”) and which elect “central (factory) groups”. 
 “The cen-tral group,” says paragraph 2, “observes all that goes on inits factory or workshop and keeps a record of events. 
” “Thecentral group presents to subscribers a monthly financialaccount” (par. 
 17), etc. 
 Ten paragraphs are devoted to the“district organisation”, and nineteen to the highly complex interconnection between the Committee of the Workers’ Organisation and the Committee of the St. 
 Petersburg Leagueof Struggle (elected representatives of each district andof the “executive groups ”—“groups of propagandists, groups for maintaining contact with the provinces, and with theorganisation abroad, groups for managing stores, publica-tions, and funds”). 
 Social-Democracy =“executive groups” in relation to the economic struggle of the workers! It would be difficult toshow more glaringly how the Economists’ ideas deviate fromSocial-Democracy to trade-unionism, and how alien to themis any idea that a Social-Democrat must concern himself first and foremost with an organisation of revolutionaries capable of guiding the entire proletarian struggle for eman-cipation. 
 To talk of “the political emancipation of the working class” and of the struggle against “tsarist despotism”, and at the same time to draft rules like these, means to have no idea whatsoever of the real political tasks of Social-Democracy. 
 Not one of the fifty or so paragraphs revealseven a glimmer of understanding that it is necessary toconduct the widest possible political agitation among themasses, an agitation highlighting every aspect of Russianabsolutism and the specific features of the various social classes in Russia. 
 Rules like these are of no use even for the achievement of trade-union, let alone political, aims, sincetrade unions are organised by trades , of which no mention is made. 
 But most characteristic, perhaps, is the amazing top-heaviness of the whole “system”, which attempts to bind each single factory and its “committee” by a permanent string of uniform and ludicrously petty rules and a three-stage system of election. 
 Hemmed in by the narrow outlookof Economism, the mind is lost in details that positivelyreek of red tape and bureaucracy. 
 In practice, of course,three-fourths of the clauses are never applied; on the other hand, a “secret” organisation of this kind, with its cen-tral group in each factory, makes it very easy for the gen-darmes to carry out raids on a vast scale. 
 The Polish comradeshave passed through a similar phase in their movement,with everybody enthusiastic about the extensive organisa-tion of workers’ benefit funds; but they very quickly aban-doned this idea when they saw that such organisations only provided rich harvests for the gendarmes. 
 If we have inmind broad workers’ organisations, and not widespreadarrests, if we do not want to provide satisfaction to the gen-darmes, we must see to it that these organisations remainwithout any rigid formal structure. 
 But will they be able to function in that case? Let us see what the functions are: “... To observe all that goes on in the factory and keep a record of events” (par. 
 2of the Rules). 
 Do we really require a formally establishedgroup for this purpose? Could not the purpose be better servedby correspondence conducted in the illegal papers with-out the setting up of special groups? “... To lead the strug-gles of the workers for the improvement of their workshop conditions” (par. 
 3). 
 This, too, requires no set organisational form. 
 Any sensible agitator can in the course of ordinary conversation gather what the demands of the workers are and transmit them to a narrow—not a broad—organisation of revolutionaries for expression in a leaflet. 
 “... To organisea fund ... to which subscriptions of two kopeks per ruble * should be made” (par. 
 9)—and then to present to sub-scribers a monthly financial account (par. 
 17), to expelmembers who fail to pay their contributions (par. 
 10), and so forth. 
 Why, this is a very paradise for the police; for nothing would be easier for them than to penetrate intosuch a secrecy of a “central factory fund”, confiscate themoney, and arrest the best people. 
 Would it not be simplerto issue one-kopek or two-kopek coupons bearing the officialstamp of a well-known (very narrow and very secret) organi-sation, or to make collections without coupons of any kind and to print reports in a certain agreed code in an illegalpaper? The object would thereby be attained, but it wouldbe a hundred times more difficult for the gendarmes to pickup clues. 
 I could go on analysing the Rules, but I think that what has been said will suffice. 
 A small, compact core of the most reliable, experienced, and hardened workers, with responsi-ble representatives in the principal districts and connected byall the rules of strict secrecy with the organisation of revolu-tionaries, can, with the widest support of the masses and with-out any formal organisation, perform all the functions of a trade-union organisation, in a manner, moreover, desirable to Social-Democracy. 
 Only in this way can we secure theconsolidation and development of a Social-Democratic trade-union movement, despite all the gendarmes. 
 It may be objected that an organisation which is so lose that it is not even definitely formed, and which has not even an enrolled and registered membership, cannot be called an organisation at all. 
 Perhaps so. 
 Not the name is important. 
What is important is that this “organisation without mem-bers” shall do everything that is required, and from thevery outset ensure a solid connection between our futuretrade unions and socialism. 
 Only an incorrigible utopian would have a broad organisation of workers, with elections, reports, universal suffrage, etc. 
, under the autocracy. 
 *Of wages earned. 
— Tr. 
 The moral to be drawn from this is simple. 
 If we begin with the solid foundation of a strong organisation of revolu-tionaries, we can ensure the stability of the movement as a whole and carry out the aims both of Social-Democracy andof trade unions proper. 
 If, however, we begin with a broadworkers’ organisation, which is supposedly most “acces-sible” to the masses (but which is actually most accessibleto the gendarmes and makes revolutionaries most accessible to the police), we shall achieve neither the one aim nor the other; we shall not eliminate our rule-of-thumb methods,and, because we remain scattered and our forces are constant-ly broken up by the police, we shall only make trade unionsof the Zubatov and Ozerov type the more accessible to themasses. 
 What, properly speaking, should be the functions of the organisation of revolutionaries? We shall deal with thisquestion in detail. 
 First, however, let us examine a very typ-ical argument advanced by our terrorist, who (sad fate!)in this matter also is a next-door neighbour to the Economist. 
 Svoboda , a journal published for workers, contains in its first issue an article entitled “Organisation”, the author of which tries to defend his friends, the Economist workersof Ivanovo-Voznesensk. 
 He writes: “It is bad when the masses are mute and unenlightened, when the movement does not come from the rank and file. 
 For instance, the students of a university town leave for their homes during the summerand other holidays, and immediately the workers’ movement comes to a standstill. 
 Can a workers’ movement which has to be pushed on from outside be a real force? No, indeed.... 
 It has not yet learned to walk,it is still in leading-strings. 
 So it is in all matters. 
 The students go off, and everything comes to a standstill. 
 The most capable are seized; the cream is skimmed and the milk turns sour. 
 If the ‘committee’is arrested, everything comes to a standstill until a new one can be formed. 
 And one never knows what sort of committee will be set up next—it may be nothing like the former. 
 The first said one thing, thesecond may say the very opposite. 
 Continuity between yesterday and tomorrow is broken, the experience of the past does not serve as a guide for the future. 
 And all because no roots have been struck in depth,in the masses; the work is carried on not by a hundred fools, but by a dozen wise men. 
 A dozen wise men can be wiped out at a snap, but when the organisation embraces masses, everything proceeds from them,and nobody, however he tries, can wreck the cause” (p. 
 63). 
 The facts are described correctly. 
 The picture of our amateurism is well drawn. 
 But the conclusions are worthy of Rabochaya Mysl , both as regards their stupidity and their lack of political tact. 
 They represent the height of stupid-ity, because the author confuses the philosophical and social-historical question of the “depth” of the “roots” ofthe movement with the technical and organisational questionof the best method in combating the gendarmes. 
 They repre-sent the height of political tactlessness, because, instead ofappealing from bad leaders to good leaders, the author ap-peals from the leaders in general to the “masses” . 
 This is as much an attempt to drag us back organisationally as the ideaof substituting excitative terrorism for political agitationdrags us back politically. 
 Indeed, I am experiencing a veri-table embarras de richesses , and hardly know where to be-gin to disentangle the jumble offered up by Svoboda . 
 For clarity, let me begin by citing an example. 
 Take the Germans. 
 It will not be denied, I hope, that theirs is a mass organisa-tion, that in Germany everything proceeds from the masses,that the working-class movement there has learned to walk. 
Yet observe how these millions value their “dozen” triedpolitical leaders, how firmly they cling to them. 
 Members of the hostile parties in parliament have often taunted the socialists by exclaiming: “Fine democrats you are indeed!Yours is a working-class movement only in name; in actual fact the same clique of leaders is always in evidence, the same Bebel and the same Liebknecht, year in and year out, and that goes on for decades. 
 Your supposedly elected work-ers’ deputies are more permanent than the officials appoint-ed by the Emperor!” But the Germans only smile with con-tempt at these demagogic attempts to set the “masses” againstthe “leaders”, to arouse bad and ambitious instincts in the former, and to rob the movement of its solidity and stability by undermining the confidence of the masses in their “doz-en wise men”. 
 Political thinking is sufficiently developedamong the Germans, and they have accumulated sufficientpolitical experience to understand that without the “doz-en” tried and talented leaders (and talented men are not born by the hundreds), professionally trained, schooled by long experience, and working in perfect harmony, no classin modern society can wage a determined struggle. 
 The Ger-mans too have had demagogues in their ranks who have flat-tered the “hundred fools”, exalted them above the “dozen /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR wise men”, extolled the “horny hand” of the masses, and (like Most and Hasselmann) have spurred them on to reck-less “revolutionary” action and sown distrust towards the firm and steadfast leaders. 
 It was only by stubbornly andrelentlessly combating all demagogic elements within thesocialist movement that German socialism has managed togrow and become as strong as it is. 
 Our wiseacres, however,at a time when Russian Social-Democracy is passing through a crisis entirely due to the lack of sufficiently trained, developed, and experienced leaders to guide the spontane-ously awakening masses, cry out with the profundity offools: “It is a bad business when the movement does notproceed from the rank and file. 
” “A committee of students is of no use; it is not stable. 
” Quite true. 
 But the conclusion to be drawn from this is that we must have a committee of professional revolutionaries , and it is immaterial whether a student or a worker is capableof becoming a professional revolutionary. 
 The conclusionyou draw, however, is that the working-class movementmust not be pushed on from outside! In your political inno-cence you fail to notice that you are playing into the hands of our Economists and fostering our amateurism. 
 Wherein,may I ask, did our students “push on” our workers? In the sense that the student brought to the worker the frag-ments of political knowledge he himself possesses, thecrumbs of socialist ideas he has managed to acquire (for the principal intellectual diet of the present-day student, legal Marxism, could furnish only the rudiments, onlyscraps of knowledge). 
 There has never been too much ofsuch “pushing on from outside”; on the contrary, there has so far been all too little of it in our movement, for we havebeen stewing too assiduously in our own juice; we have bowed far too slavishly to the elementary “economic strug-gle of the workers against the employers and the govern-ment”. 
 We professional revolutionaries must and will makeit our business to engage in this kind of “pushing on” a hun-dred times more forcibly than we have done hitherto. 
 Butthe very fact that you select so hideous a phrase as “pushing on from outside”—a phrase which cannot but rouse in the workers (at least in the workers who are as unenlightened asyou yourselves) a sense of distrust towards all who bring them political knowledge and revolutionary experience from outside, which cannot but rouse in them an instinctive de-sire to resist all such people—proves you to be demagogues , and demagogues are the worst enemies of the working class. 
 And, please—don’t hasten howling about my “uncom-radely methods” of debating. 
 I have not the least desire todoubt the purity of your intentions. 
 As I have said,one may become a demagogue out of sheer political innocence. 
 But I have shown that you have descended to demagogy, and I will never tire of repeating that demagogues are theworst enemies of the working class. 
 The worst enemies, be-cause they arouse base instincts in the masses, because theunenlightened worker is unable to recognise his enemiesin men who represent themselves, and sometimes sincerely so, as his friends. 
 The worst enemies, because in the period of disunity and vacillation, when our movement is justbeginning to take shape, nothing is easier than to employdemagogic methods to mislead the masses, who can realisetheir error only later by bitter experience. 
 That is whythe slogan of the day for the Russian Social-Democrat must be—resolute struggle against Svoboda and Rabocheye Dyelo , both of which have sunk to the level of demagogy. 
 Weshall deal with this further in greater detail. 
 * “A dozen wise men can be more easily wiped out than a hundred fools. 
” This wonderful truth (for which the hun-dred fools will always applaud you) appears obvious only because in the very midst of the argument you have skipped from one question to another. 
 You began by talking andcontinued to talk of the unearthing of a “committee”, ofthe unearthing of an “organisation”, and now you skip to thequestion of unearthing the movement’s “roots” in their“depths”. 
 The fact is, of course, that our movement cannot be unearthed, for the very reason that it has countless thousands of roots deep down among the masses; but that isnot the point at issue. 
 As far as “deep roots” are concerned, *For the moment let us observe merely that our remarks on “pushing on from outside” and Svoboda ’s other disquisitions on organ-isation apply in their entirety to all the Economists, including the adherents of Rabocheye Dyelo ; for some of them have actively preached and defended such views on organisation, while others among themhave drifted into them. 
 we cannot be “unearthed” even now, despite all our amateur-ism, and yet we all complain, and cannot but complain, that the “ organisations ” are being unearthed and as a result it is impossible to maintain continuity in the movement. 
 Butsince you raise the question of organisations being unearthed and persist in your opinion, I assert that it is far moredifficult to unearth a dozen wise men than a hundred fools. 
This position I will defend, no matter how much you insti-gate the masses against me for my “anti-democratic” views, etc. 
 As I have stated repeatedly, by “wise men”, in connec-tion with organisation, I mean professional revolutionaries , irrespective of whether they have developed from amongstudents or working men. 
 I assert: (1) that no revolutionarymovement can endure without a stable organisation of lead-ers maintaining continuity; (2) that the broader the popu-lar mass drawn spontaneously into the struggle, which formsthe basis of the movement and participates in it, the more ur-gent the need for such an organisation, and the more solidthis organisation must be (for it is much easier for all sortsof demagogues to side-track the more backward sections of the masses); (3) that such an organisation must consist chiefly of people professionally engaged in revolutionaryactivity; (4) that in an autocratic state, the more we con-fine the membership of such an organisation to people who are professionally engaged in revolutionary activity andwho have been professionally trained in the art of combating the political police, the more difficult will it be to unearth the organisation; and (5) the greater will be the number of people from the working class and from the other socialclasses who will be able to join the movement and performactive work in it. 
 I invite our Economists, terrorists, and “Economists-terrorists” * to confute these propositions. 
 At the moment, *This term is perhaps more applicable to Svoboda than the former, for in an article entitled “The Regeneration of Revolutionism” the pub-lication defends terrorism, while in the article at present underreview it defends Economism. 
 One might say of Svoboda that “it would if it could, but it can’t”. 
 Its wishes and intentions are of the very best—but the result is utter confusion; this is chiefly due to the fact that, while Svoboda advocates continuity of organisation, it refuses to recognise continuity of revolutionary thought and Social-Democrat-ic theory. 
 It wants to revive the professional revolutionary (“The I shall deal only with the last two points. 
 The question as to whether it is easier to wipe out “a dozen wise men” or “a hundred fools” reduces itself to the question, above considered, whether it is possible to have a mass organisa-tion when the maintenance of strict secrecy is essential. 
 We can never give a mass organisation that degree of secrecywithout which there can be no question of persistent and con-tinuous struggle against the government. 
 To concentrate all secret functions in the hands of as small a number of pro-fessional revolutionaries as possible does not mean that thelatter will “do the thinking for all” and that the rank andfile will not take an active part in the movement . 
 On the contrary, the membership will promote increasing numbersof the professional revolutionaries from its ranks; for it will know that it is not enough for a few students and for a few working men waging the economic struggle to gatherin order to form a “committee”, but that it takes years totrain oneself to be a professional revolutionary; and the rankand file will “think”, not only of amateurish methods, butof such training. 
 Centralisation of the secret functions of the organisation by no means implies centralisation of all the functions of the movement . 
 Active participation of the widest masses in the illegal press will not diminish becausea “dozen” professional revolutionaries centralise the se-cret functions connected with this work; on the contrary, itwill increase tenfold. 
 In this way, and in this way alone, shall we ensure that reading the illegal press, writing for it, and to some extent even distributing it, will almost cease to be secret work , for the police will soon come to realise the folly and impossibility of judicial and adminis-trative red-tape procedure over every copy of a publicationthat is being distributed in the thousands. 
 This holds not only for the press, but for every function of the movement, even for demonstrations. 
 The active and widespread partic-ipation of the masses will not suffer; on the contrary, itwill benefit by the fact that a “dozen” experienced revolution-Regeneration of Revolutionism”), and to that end proposes, first, excit-ative terrorism, and, secondly, “an organisation of average workers”( Svoboda , No. 
 1, p. 
 66, et seq. 
), as less likely to be “pushed on from outside”. 
 In other words, it proposes to pull the house down to use thetimber for heating it. 
 aries, trained professionally no less than the police, will centralise all the secret aspects of the work—the drawing up of leaflets, the working out of approximate plans; and the appointing of bodies of leaders for each urban district,for each factory district, and for each educational institution,etc. 
 (I know that exception will be taken to my “undemocrat-ic” views, but I shall reply below fully to this anything butintelligent objection. 
) Centralisation of the most secret functions in an organisation of revolutionaries will not diminish, but rather increase the extent and enhance the qual-ity of the activity of a large number of other organisations,that are intended for a broad public and are therefore asloose and as non-secret as possible, such as workers’ tradeunions; workers’ self-education circles and circles for reading illegal literature; and socialist, as well as democratic, cir-cles among all other sections of the population; etc. 
, etc. 
 We must have such circles, trade unions, and organisationseverywhere in as large a number as possible and with the widest variety of functions; but it would be absurd and harm-ful to confound them with the organisation of revolutionaries , to efface the border-line between them, to make still more hazy the all too faint recognition of the fact that in order to“serve” the mass movement we must have people who willdevote themselves exclusively to Social-Democratic activ-ities, and that such people must train themselves patiently and steadfastly to be professional revolutionaries. 
 Yes, this recognition is incredibly dim. 
 Our worst sin with regard to organisation consists in the fact that by our primitiveness we have lowered the prestige of revolutionariesin Russia . 
 A person who is flabby and shaky on questions of theory, who has a narrow outlook, who pleads the sponta-neity of the masses as an excuse for his own sluggishness, who resembles a trade-union secretary more than a spokes-man of the people, who is unable to conceive of a broad andbold plan that would command the respect even of opponents,and who is inexperienced and clumsy in his own professionalart—the art of combating the political police—such a manis not a revolutionary, but a wretched amateur! Let no active worker take offence at these frank remarks, for as far as insufficient training is concerned, I apply themfirst and foremost to myself. 
 I used to work in a study circle 180 that set itself very broad, all-embracing tasks; and all of us, members of that circle, suffered painfully and acutely from the realisation that we were acting as amateurs at a moment in history when we might have been able to say,varying a well-known statement: “Give us an organisationof revolutionaries, and we will overturn Russia” The moreI recall the burning sense of shame I then experienced, thebitterer become my feelings towards those pseudo-Social-Democrats whose preachings “bring disgrace on the calling of a revolutionary ”, who fail to understand that our task is not to champion the degrading of the revolutionary to thelevel of an amateur, but to raise the amateurs to the level of revolutionaries. 
 D. 
 THE SCOPE OF ORGANISATIONAL WORK We have heard B—v tell us about “the lack of revolution-ary forces fit for action which is felt not only in St. 
 Peters-burg, but throughout Russia”. 
 Hardly anyone will disputethis fact. 
 But the question is, how is it to be explained? B—v writes: “We shall not go into an explanation of the historical causes of this phenomenon; we shall merely state that a society, demoralisedby prolonged political reaction and split by past and present economicchanges, promotes from its own ranks an extremely small number of persons fit for revolutionary work ; that the working class does produce revolutionary workers who to some extent reinforce the ranks of the illegal organisations, but that the number of such revolutionaries is inadequate to meet the requirements of the times. 
 This is all the moreso because the worker who spends eleven and a half hours a day in thefactory is in such a position that he can, in the main, perform onlythe functions of an agitator; but propaganda and organisation, thedelivery and reproduction of illegal literature, the issuance of leaflets, etc. 
, are duties which must necessarily fall mainly upon the shoulders of an extremely small force of intellectuals” ( Rabocheye Dyelo , No. 
 6, pp. 
 38-39). 
 On many points we disagree with B—v, particularly with those we have emphasised, which most saliently reveal that,although weary of our amateurism (as is every thinking prac-tical worker), B—v cannot find the way out of this intole-rable situation because he is weighted down by Economism. 
The fact is that society produces very many persons fit for “the cause”, but we are unable to make use of them all. 
 The critical, transitional state of our movement in this respect may be formulated as follows: There are no people—yet there is a mass of people . 
 There is a mass of people, because the working class and increasingly varied social strata, yearafter year, produce from their ranks an increasing number ofdiscontented people who desire to protest, who are ready torender all the assistance they can in the struggle against absolutism, the intolerableness of which, though not yet recognised by all, is more and more acutely sensed by increas-ing masses of the people. 
 At the same time, we have no peo-ple, because we have no leaders, no political leaders, no tal-ented organisers capable of arranging extensive and at thesame time uniform and harmonious work that would employ all forces, even the most inconsiderable. 
 “The growth and de-velopment of the revolutionary organisations” lag, not onlybehind the growth of the working-class movement, whicheven B—v admits, but behind that of the general democraticmovement among all strata of the people. 
 (In passing, prob-ably B—v would now regard this as supplementing his conclusion. 
) The scope of revolutionary work is too narrow, as compared with the breadth of the spontaneous basis of the movement. 
 It is too hemmed in by the wretched theory of “economic struggle against the employers and the govern-ment”. 
 Yet, at the present time, not only Social-Democratic political agitators, but Social-Democratic organisers must “go among all classes of the population”. 
 * There is hardly a single practical worker who will doubt that the Social-Dem-ocrats could distribute the thousand and one minute func-tions of their organisational work among individual repre-sentatives of the most varied classes. 
 Lack of specialisation is one of the most serious defects of our technique, about which B—v justly and bitterly complains. 
 The smaller each sep-arate “operation” in our common cause the more people *Thus, an undoubted revival of the democratic spirit has recent-ly been observed among persons in military service, partly as a con-sequence of the more frequent street battles with “enemies” like work-ers and students. 
 As soon as our available forces permit, we must with-out fail devote the most serious attention to propaganda and agita-tion among soldiers and officers, and to the creation of “militaryorganisations” affiliated to our Party. 
 we can find capable of carrying out such operations (people who, in the majority of cases, are completely incapable of becoming professional revolutionaries); more diffi-cult will it be for the police to “net” all these “detail workers”,and the more difficult will it be for them to frame up, out ofan arrest for some petty affair, a “case” that would justifythe government’s expenditure on “security”. 
 As for the num-ber of people ready to help us, we referred in the preced-ing chapter to the gigantic change that has taken place in this respect in the last five years or so. 
 On the other hand,in order to unite all these tiny fractions into one whole, inorder not to break up the movement while breaking up itsfunctions, and in order to imbue the people who carry outthe minute functions with the conviction that their work is necessary and important, without which conviction they will never do the work, * it is necessary to have a strong organisation of tried revolutionaries. 
 The more secret suchan organisation is, the stronger and more widespread will bethe confidence in the Party. 
 As we know, in time of war, itis not only of the utmost importance to imbue one’s own ar-my with confidence in its strength, but it is important also to convince the enemy and all neutral elements of this strength; *I recall that once a comrade told me of a factory inspector who wanted to help the Social-Democrats, and actually did, but com-plained bitterly that he did not know whether his “information”reached the proper revolutionary centre, how much his help was really required, and what possibilities there were for utilising his small and petty services. 
 Every practical worker can, of course, cite many similarinstances in which our primitiveness deprived us of allies. 
 These serv-ices, each “small” in itself, but invaluable when taken in the mass,could and would be rendered to us by office employees and officials,not only in factories, but in the postal service, on the railways, in the Customs, among the nobility, among the clergy, and in every other walk of life, including even the police and the Court! Had we areal party, a real militant organisation of revolutionaries, we wouldnot make undue demands on every one of these “aides”, we would nothasten always and invariably to bring them right into the very heartof our “illegality”, but, on the contrary, we would husband them most carefully and would even train people especially for such func-tions, bearing in mind that many students could be of much greaterservice to the Party as “aides” holding some official post than as “short-term” revolutionaries. 
 But, I repeat, only an organisation that is firm-ly established and has no lack of active forces would have the rightto apply such tactics. 
 friendly neutrality may sometimes decide the issue. 
 If such an organisation existed, one built up on a firm theoret-ical foundation and possessing a Social-Democratic organ, we should have no reason to fear that the movement might bediverted from its path by the numerous “outside” elementsthat are attracted to it. 
 (On the contrary, it is precisely atthe present time, with amateurism prevalent, that we seemany Social-Democrats leaning towards the Credo and only imagining that they are Social-Democrats. 
) In a word, spe-cialisation necessarily presupposes centralisation, and inturn imperatively calls for it. 
 But B—v himself, who has so excellently described the necessity for specialisation, underestimates its im-portance, in our opinion, in the second part of the argu-ment we have quoted. 
 The number of working-class revolu-tionaries is inadequate, he says. 
 This is perfectly true,and once again we stress that the “valuable communication ofa close observer” fully confirms our view of the causes ofthe present crisis in Social-Democracy, and, consequently,of the means required to overcome it. 
 Not only are revolu-tionaries in general lagging behind the spontaneous awaken-ing of the masses, but even worker-revolutionaries are lag-ging behind the spontaneous awakening of the working-class masses. 
 This fact confirms with clear evidence, from the “practical” point of view, too, not only the absurditybut even the politically reactionary nature of the “peda-gogics” to which we are so often treated in the discussion of our duties to the workers. 
 This fact proves that our veryfirst and most pressing duty is to help to train working-class revolutionaries who will be on the same level in re-gard to Party activity as the revolutionaries from amongst the intellectuals (we emphasise the words “in regard to Party activity”, for, although necessary, it is neither so easy nor so pressingly necessary to bring the workers up to the level of intellectuals in other respects). 
 Attention, therefore, must be devoted principally t o raising the workers to the level of revolutionaries; it is not at all our task to descend to the level of the “working masses” as the Economists wish to do, or to the level of the “average worker” as Svoboda desires to do (and by this ascends to the second grade of Econ-omist “pedagogics”). 
 I am far from denying the necessity for popular literature for the workers, and especially popular (of course, not vulgar) literature for the especially backward workers. 
 But what annoys me is this constant confusion of pedagogics with questions of politics and organisation. 
 You,gentlemen, who are so much concerned about the “averageworker”, as a matter of fact, rather insult the workers by yourdesire to talk down to them when discussing working-class politics and working-class organisation. 
 Talk about seri-ous things in a serious manner; leave pedagogics to the pedagogues, and not to politicians and organisers! Are therenot advanced people, “average people”, and “masses” amongthe intelligentsia too? Does not everyone recognise that pop-ular literature is also required for the intelligentsia, and isnot such literature written? Imagine someone, in an ar-ticle on organising college or high-school students, repeating over and over again, as if he had made a new discovery, thatfirst of all we must have an organisation of “average stu-dents”. 
 The author of such an article would be ridiculed,and rightly so. 
 Give us your ideas on organisation, if youhave any, he would be told, and we ourselves will decide who is “average”, who above average, and who below. 
 But if you have no organisational ideas of your own , then all your exertions in behalf of the “masses” and “average people”will be simply boring. 
 You must realise that these questionsof “politics” and “organisation” are so serious in themselvesthat they cannot be dealt with in any other but a serious way. 
 We can and must educate workers (and university and Gymnasium students) so that we may be able to discuss these questions with them. 
 But once you do bring up these ques-tions, you must give real replies to them; do not fall backon the “average”, or on the “masses”; do not try to dispose ofthe matter with facetious remarks and mere phrases. 
 * *Svoboda , No. 
 1, p. 
 66, in the article “Organisation”: “The heavy tread of the army of workers will reinforce all the demands that willbe advanced in behalf of Russian Labour”—Labour with a capital L, of course. 
 And the author exclaims: “I am not in the least hostile to-wards the intelligentsia, but [ but—the word that Shchedrin translat-ed as meaning: The ears never grow higher than the forehead!]—but I always get frightfully annoyed when a man comes to me utter-ing beautiful and charming words and demands that they be accept-ed for their [his?] beauty and other virtues” (p. 
 62). 
 Yes, I “always get frightfully annoyed”, too. 
 To be fully prepared for his task, the worker-revolu-tionary must likewise become a professional revolutionary. 
 Hence B—v is wrong in saying that since the worker spends eleven and a half hours in the factory, the brunt of all oth-er revolutionary functions (apart from agitation) “ must necessarily fall mainly upon the shoulders of an extremely small force of intellectuals”. 
 But this condition does not ob-tain out of sheer “necessity”. 
 It obtains because we are back-ward, because we do not recognise our duty to assist every capable worker to become a professional agitator, organ-iser, propagandist, literature distributor, etc. 
, etc. 
 In thisrespect, we waste our strength in a positively shameful man-ner; we lack the ability to husband that which should be tend-ed and reared with special care. 
 Look at the Germans: their forces are a hundredfold greater than ours. 
 But they un-derstand perfectly well that really capable agitators, etc. 
,are not often promoted from the ranks of the “average”. 
For this reason they immediately try to place every capableworking man in conditions that will enable him to developand apply his abilities to the fullest: he is made a pro-fessional agitator, he is encouraged to widen the field of his activity, to spread it from one factory to the whole ofthe industry, from a single locality to the whole country. 
 Heacquires experience and dexterity in his profession; hebroadens his outlook and increases his knowledge; he ob-serves at close quarters the prominent political leaders from other localities and of other parties; he strives to rise to their level and combine in himself the knowledgeof the working-class environment and the freshness of so-cialist convictions with professional skill, without whichthe proletariat cannot wage a stubborn struggle against its excellently trained enemies. 
 In this way alone do the work-ing masses produce men of the stamp of Bebel and Auer. 
 But what is to a great extent automatic in a politicallyfree country must in Russia be done deliberately and sys-tematically by our organisations. 
 A worker-agitator whois at all gifted and “promising” must not be left to work eleven hours a day in a factory. 
 We must arrange that he be maintained by the Party; that he may go underground in good time; that he change the place of his activity, if heis to enlarge his experience, widen his outlook, and be able to hold out for at least a few years in the struggle against the gendarmes. 
 As the spontaneous rise of their movement becomes broader and deeper, the working-class masses promote from their ranks not only an increasing num-ber of talented agitators, but also talented organisers, prop-agandists, and “practical workers” in the best sense of theterm (of whom there are so few among our intellectualswho, for the most part, in the Russian manner, are somewhat careless and sluggish in their habits). 
 When we have forces of specially trained worker-revolutionaries whohave gone through extensive preparation (and, of course,revolutionaries “of all arms of the service”), no politicalpolice in the world will then be able to contend withthem, for these forces, boundlessly devoted to the rev-olution, will enjoy the boundless confidence of the widest masses of the workers. 
 We are directly to blame for doing too little to “stimulate” the workers to take this path,common to them and to the “intellectuals”, of professionalrevolutionary training, and for all too often dragging themback by our silly speeches about what is “accessible” to the masses of the workers, to the “average workers”, etc. 
 In this, as in other respects, the narrow scope of our organisational work is without a doubt due directly to thefact (although the overwhelming majority of the “Econo-mists” and the novices in practical work do not perceiveit) that we restrict our theories and our political tasks to a narrow field. 
 Subservience to spontaneity seems to in-spire a fear of taking even one step away from what is“accessible” to the masses, a fear of rising too high abovemere attendance on the immediate and direct requirementsof the masses. 
 Have no fear, gentlemen! Remember that westand so low on the plane of organisation that the very idea that we could rise too high is absurd! E. 
 “CONSPIRATORIAL” ORGANISATION AND “DEMOCRATISM” Yet there are many people among us who are so sensi-tive to the “voice of life” that they fear it more than any-thing in the world and charge the adherents of the viewshere expounded with following a Narodnaya Volya line, with failing to understand “democratism”, etc. 
 These accusa-tions, which, of course, have been echoed by Rabocheye Dyelo , need to be dealt with. 
 The writer of these lines knows very well that the St. 
 Petersburg Economists levelled the charge of NarodnayaVolya tendencies also against Rabochaya Gazeta (which is quite understandable when one compares it with Rabochaya Mysl ). 
 We were not in the least surprised, therefore, when, soon after the appearance of Iskra , a comrade informed us that the Social-Democrats in the town of X describe Iskra as a Narodnaya Volya organ. 
 We, of course, were flatteredby this accusation; for what decent Social-Democrat hasnot been accused by the Economists of being a NarodnayaVolya sympathiser? These accusations are the result of a twofold misunder-standing. 
 First, the history of the revolutionary movementis so little known among us that the name “Narodnaya Volya”is used to denote any idea of a militant centralised organ-isation which declares determined war upon tsarism. 
 But themagnificent organisation that the revolutionaries had in the seventies, and that should serve us as a model, was not established by the Narodnaya Volya, but by the Zemlya i Volya , which split up into the Chorny Peredel and the Na-rodnaya Volya. 
 Consequently, to regard a militant revolu-tionary organisation as something specifically NarodnayaVolya in character is absurd both historically and logical-ly; for no revolutionary trend, if it seriously thinks of strug-gle, can dispense with such an organisation. 
 The mistakethe Narodnaya Volya committed was not in striving to en-list all the discontented in the organisation and to direct this organisation to resolute struggle against the autocracy;on the contrary, that was its great historical merit. 
 The mistake was in relying on a theory which in substance was not a revolutionary theory at all, and the Narodnaya Volyamembers either did not know how, or were unable, to linktheir movement inseparably with the class struggle in thedeveloping capitalist society. 
 Only a gross failure to under-stand Marxism (or an “understanding” of it in the spirit of “Struve-ism”) could prompt the opinion that the rise of a mass, spontaneous working-class movement relieves us of the duty of creating as good an organisation of revolutionaries as the Zemlya i Volya had, or, indeed, an incomparably better one. 
 On the contrary, this movement imposes the duty upon us; for the spontaneous struggle of the proletariat will not be-come its genuine “class struggle” until this struggle is led bya strong organisation of revolutionaries. 
 Secondly, many people, including apparently B. 
 Kri-chevsky ( Rabocheye Dyelo , No. 
 10, p. 
 18), misunderstand the polemics that Social-Democrats have always waged against the “conspiratorial” view of the political struggle. 
 We have always protested, and will, of course, continue to protestagainst confining the political struggle to conspiracy. 
 * But this does not, of course, mean that we deny the need fora strong revolutionary organisation. 
 Thus, in the pamphletmentioned in the preceding footnote, after the polemics against reducing the political struggle to a conspiracy, a description is given (as a Social-Democratic ideal) of an or-ganisation so strong as to be able to “resort to ... rebellion”and to every other form of attack, in order to “deliver asmashing blow against absolutism”. 
 ** In form such a strong revolutionary organisation in an autocratic country may also be described as a “conspiratorial” organisation, because the French word “conspiration” is the equivalent of the Rus-sian word “ zagovar ” (“conspiracy”), and such an organisa-tion must have the utmost secrecy. 
 Secrecy is such a neces-sary condition for this kind of organisation that all the oth-er conditions (number and selection of members, functions, *Cf. 
 The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats , p. 
 21, polemics against P. 
 L. 
 Lavrov. 
 (See present edition, Vol. 
 2, pp. 
 340-41. 
— Ed. 
) **The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats , p. 
 23. 
 (See present edition, Vol. 
 2, p. 
 342. 
— Ed. 
) Apropos, we shall give another illustra-tion of the fact that Rabocheye Dyelo either does not understand what it is talking about or changes its views “with the wind”. 
 In No. 
 1 ofRabocheye Dyelo , we find the following passage in italics: “ The sub-stance set forth in the pamphlet accords entirely with the editorial programme of Rabocheye Dyelo ” (p. 
 142). 
 Really? Does the view that the overthrow of the autocracy must not be set as the first task of themass movement accord with the views expressed in The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats ? Do the theory of “the economic struggle against the employers and the government” and the stages theory accord with the views expressed in that pamphlet? We leave it to the reader to judge whether a periodical that understands themeaning of “accordance in opinion” in this peculiar manner can havefirm principles. 
 etc. 
) must be made to conform to it. 
 It would be extremely naïve indeed, therefore, to fear the charge that we Social-Democrats desire to create a conspiratorial organisation. 
 Such a charge should be as flattering to every opponent ofEconomism as the charge of following a Narodnaya Volyaline. 
 The objection may be raised that such a powerful and strictly secret organisation, which concentrates in its hands all the threads of secret activities, an organisation which of necessity is centralised, may too easily rush intoa premature attack, may thoughtlessly intensify the move-ment before the growth of political discontent, the inten-sity of the ferment and anger of the working class, etc. 
,have made such an attack possible and necessary. 
 Our reply to this is: Speaking abstractly, it cannot be denied, of course, that a militant organisation may thoughtlessly engage in battle, which may end in a defeat entirely avoidable under other conditions. 
 But we cannot confine ourselves toabstract reasoning on such a question, because every battlebears within itself the abstract possibility of defeat, and there is no way of reducing this possibility except by organ-ised preparation for battle. 
 If, however, we proceed from theconcrete conditions at present obtaining in Russia, we mustcome to the positive conclusion that a strong revolutionaryorganisation is absolutely necessary precisely for the pur-pose of giving stability to the movement and of safeguard-ing it against the possibility of making thoughtless attacks. 
 Precisely at the present time, when no such organisationyet exists, and when the revolutionary movement is rapid-ly and spontaneously growing, we already observe two op-posite extremes (which, as is to be expected, “meet”). 
 Theseare: the utterly unsound Economism and the preaching of moderation, and the equally unsound “excitative terror”, which strives “artificially to call forth symptoms of the endof the movement, which is developing and strengtheningitself, when this movement is as yet nearer to the start thanto the end” (V. 
 Zasulich, in Zarya , No. 
 2-3, p. 
 353). 
 And the instance of Rabocheye Dyelo shows that there exist So-cial-Democrats who give way to both these extremes. 
 This is not surprising, for, apart from other reasons, the “econom-ic struggle against the employers and the government” can never satisfy revolutionaries, and opposite extremes will therefore always appear here and there. 
 Only a centralised, militant organisation that consistently carries out a Social-Democratic policy, that satisfies, so to speak, all revolution-ary instincts and strivings, can safeguard the movementagainst making thoughtless attacks and prepare attacksthat hold out the promise of success. 
 A further objection may be raised, that the views on or-ganisation here expounded contradict the “democratic principle”. 
 Now, while the earlier accusation was specificallyRussian in origin, this one is specifically foreign in charac-ter. 
 And only an organisation abroad (the Union of Rus-sian Social-Democrats Abroad) was capable of giving itsEditorial Board instructions like the following: “Organisational Principle . 
 In order to secure the successful devel-opment and unification of Social-Democracy, the broad democraticprinciple of Party organisation must be emphasised, developed, andfought for; this is particularly necessary in view of the anti-democratictendencies that have revealed themselves in the ranks of our Party”(Two Conferences , p. 
 18). 
 We shall see in the next chapter how Rabocheye Dyelo combats Iskra ’s “anti-democratic tendencies”. 
 For the pres-ent, we shall examine more closely the “principle” thatthe Economists advance. 
 Everyone will probably agree that“the broad democratic principle” presupposes the two fol-lowing conditions: first, full publicity, and secondly, elec-tion to all offices. 
 It would be absurd to speak of democracy without publicity, moreover, without a publicity that is notlimited to the membership of the organisation. 
 We call theGerman Socialist Party a democratic organisation becauseall its activities are carried out publicly; even its partycongresses are held in public. 
 But no one would call an or-ganisation democratic that is hidden from every one but its members by a veil of secrecy. 
 What is the use, then, of ad-vancing “the broad democratic principle” when the fun-damental condition for this principle cannot be fulfilled by a secret organisation? “The broad principle” proves it-self simply to be a resounding but hollow phrase. 
 Moreover, it reveals a total lack of understanding of the urgent tasks of the moment in regard to organisation. 
 Everyone knowshow great the lack of secrecy is among the “broad” masses of our revolutionaries. 
 We have heard the bitter complaints of B—v on this score and his absolutely just demand for a “strict selection of members” ( Rabocheye Dyelo , No. 
 6, p. 
 42). 
 Yet, persons who boast a keen “sense of realities”urge , in a situation like this, not the strictest secrecy and the strictest (consequently, more restricted) selection, ofmembers, but “the broad democratic principle”! This is what you call being wide of the mark. 
 Nor is the situation any better with regard to the second attribute of democracy, the principle of election. 
 In politi-cally free countries, this condition is taken for granted. 
“They are members of the Party who accept the principlesof the Party programme and render the Party all possiblesupport,” reads Clause 1 of the Rules of the German Social-Democratic Party. 
 Since the entire political arena is as open to the public view as is a theatre stage to the au-dience, this acceptance or non-acceptance, support or opposi-tion, is known to all from the press and from public meetings. 
Everyone knows that a certain political figure began in suchand such a way, passed through such and such an evolution, behaved in a trying moment in such and such a manner, and possesses such and such qualities; consequently, all party members, knowing all the facts, can elect or refuse to electthis person to a particular party office. 
 The general control(in the literal sense of the term) exercised over every act of aparty man in the political field brings into existence an au-tomatically operating mechanism which produces what in biology is called the “survival of the fittest”. 
 “Naturalselection ” by full publicity, election, and general control provides the assurance that, in the last analysis, every polit-ical figure will be “in his proper place”, do the work for whichhe is best fitted by his powers and abilities, feel the effects of his mistakes on himself, and prove before all the world his ability to recognise mistakes and to avoid them. 
 Try to fit this picture into the frame of our autocracy! Is it conceivable in Russia for all who accept the principlesof the Party programme and render the Party all possiblesupport to control every action of the revolutionary work-ing in secret? Is it possible for all to elect one of these rev-olutionaries to any particular office, when, in the very in-terests of the work, the revolutionary must conceal his iden-tity from nine out of ten of these “all”? Reflect somewhat over the real meaning of the high-sounding phrases to which Rabocheye Dyelo gives utterance, and you will realise that “broad democracy” in Party organisation, amidst the gloomof the autocracy and the domination of gendarmerie, isnothing more than a useless and harmful toy . 
 It is a useless toy because, in point of fact, no revolutionary organisationhas ever practiced, or could practice, broad democracy, however much it may have desired to do so. 
 It is a harmful toy because any attempt to practise “the broad democratic principle”will simply facilitate the work of the police in carrying outlarge-scale raids, will perpetuate the prevailing primitiveness,and will divert the thoughts of the practical workers fromthe serious and pressing task of training themselves to be-come professional revolutionaries to that of drawing up de-tailed “paper” rules for election systems. 
 Only abroad,where very often people with no opportunity for conductingreally active work gather, could this “playing at democracy”develop here and there, especially in small groups. 
 To show the unseemliness of Rabocheye Dyelo ’s favour-ite trick of advancing the plausible “principle” of democra-cy in revolutionary affairs, we shall again summon a witness. 
This witness, Y. 
 Serebryakov, editor of the London mag-azine, Nakanune , has a soft spot for Rabocheye Dyelo and is filled with a great hatred for Plekhanov and the “Ple-khanovites”. 
 In its articles on the split in the Union of Rus-sian Social-Democrats Abroad, Nakanune definitely sided with Rabocheye Dyelo and poured a stream of petty abuse upon Plekhanov. 
 All the more valuable, therefore, is this witness inthe question at issue. 
 In Nakanune for July (No. 
 7) 1899, an article entitled “Concerning the Manifesto of the Self-Emancipation of the Workers Group”, Serebryakov argued that it was “indecent” to talk about such things as “self-deception, leadership, and the so-called Areopagus in a se-rious revolutionary movement” and, inter alia , wrote: “Myshkin, Rogachov, Zhelyabov, Mikhailov, Perovskaya, Figner, and others never regarded themselves as leaders, and no one ever elect-ed or appointed them as such, although in actuality, they were lead-ers, because, in the propaganda period, as well as in the period of the struggle against the government, they took the brunt of the work upon themselves, they went into the most dangerous places, and their activities were the most fruitful. 
 They became leaders, not because they wished it, but because the comrades surrounding them had con-fidence in their wisdom, in their energy, in their loyalty. 
 To beafraid of some kind of Areopagus (if it is not feared, why write about it?) that would arbitrarily govern the movement is far too naïve. 
 Who would pay heed to it?” We ask the reader, in what way does the “Areopagus” differ from “anti-democratic tendencies”? And is it not evident that Rabocheye Dyelo ’s “plausible” organisational principle is equally naïve and indecent; naïve, becauseno one would pay heed to the “Areopagus”, or people with“anti-democratic tendencies”, if “the comrades surroundingthem had” no “confidence in their wisdom, energy, and loy-alty”; indecent, because it is a demagogic sally calculated to play on the conceit of some, on the ignorance of othersregarding the actual state of our movement, and on the lackof training and the ignorance of the history of the revolution-ary movement on the part of still others. 
 The only seriousorganisational principle for the active workers of our move-ment should be the strictest secrecy, the strictest selection of members, and the training of professional revolutiona-ries. 
 Given these qualities, something even more than “dem-ocratism” would be guaranteed to us, namely, complete,comradely, mutual confidence among revolutionaries. 
 Thisis absolutely essential for us, because there can be no ques-tion of replacing it by general democratic control in Russia. 
 It would be a great mistake to believe that the impossibilityof establishing real “democratic” control renders the membersof the revolutionary organisation beyond control altogether. 
They have not the time to think about toy forms of democrat-ism (democratism within a close and compact body of com-rades in which complete, mutual confidence prevails), but they have a lively sense of their responsibility , knowing as they do from experience that an organisation of real revolu-tionaries will stop at nothing to rid itself of an unworthymember. 
 Moreover, there is a fairly well-developed publicopinion in Russian (and international) revolutionary cir-cles which has a long history behind it, and which sternly and ruthlessly punishes every departure from the duties ofcomradeship (and “democratism”, real and not toy democra-tism, certainly forms a component part of the conception of comradeship). 
 Take all this into consideration and you will realise that this talk and these resolutions about “anti-democratic tendencies” have the musty odour of the playing at generals which is indulged in abroad. 
 It must be observed also that the other source of this talk, viz. 
, naïveté, is likewise fostered by the confusionof ideas concerning the meaning of democracy. 
 In Mr. 
 andMrs. 
 Webb’s book on the English trade unions there is an interesting chapter entitled “Primitive Democracy”. 
 In it the authors relate how the English workers, in the firstperiod of existence of their unions, considered it an in-dispensable sign of democracy for all the members to do allthe work of managing the unions; not only were all ques-tions decided by the vote of all the members, but all official duties were fulfilled by all the members in turn. 
 A long period of historical experience was required for workersto realise the absurdity of such a conception of democracyand to make them understand the necessity for representa-tive institutions, on the one hand, and for full-time offi-cials, on the other. 
 Only after a number of cases of financial bankruptcy of trade-union treasuries had occurred did the work-ers realise that the rates of contributions and benefits can-not be decided merely by a democratic vote, but that thisrequires also the advice of insurance experts. 
 Let us takealso Kautsky’s book on parliamentarism and legislation bythe people. 
 There we find that the conclusions drawn by the Marxist theoretician coincide with the lessons learned from many years of practical experience by the workers who or-ganised “spontaneously”. 
 Kautsky strongly protests againstRittinghausen’s primitive conception of democracy; heridicules those who in the name of democracy demand that“popular newspapers shall be edited directly by the people”; he shows the need for professional journalists, parliamen-tarians, etc. 
, for the Social-Democratic leadership of the pro-letarian class struggle; he attacks the socialism of anarchistsand littérateurs who in their “striving for effect” extol di-rect legislation by the whole people, completely failingto understand that this idea can be applied only relatively in modern society. 
 Those who have performed practical work in our movement know how widespread the “primitive” conception of democ-racy is among the masses of the students and workers. 
 It is not surprising that this conception penetrates also into rules of organisations and into literature. 
 The Economists of the Bernsteinian persuasion included in their rules thefollowing: “§ 10. 
 All affairs affecting the interests of the wholeof the union organisation shall be decided by a majorityvote of all its members. 
” The Economists of the terroristpersuasion repeat after them. 
 “The decisions of the committee shall become effective only after they have been referred to all the circles” ( Svoboda , No. 
 1, p. 
 67). 
 Observe that this proposal for a widely applied referendum is advanced in addition to the demand that the whole of the organisation be built on an elective basis! We would not, of course, on thisaccount condemn practical workers who have had too few opportunities for studying the theory and practice of real democratic organisations. 
 But when Rabocheye Dyelo , which lays claim to leadership, confines itself, under such condi-tions, to a resolution on broad democratic principles, canthis be described as anything but a mere “striving for effect”? F. 
 LOCAL AND ALL-RUSSIA WORK The objections raised against the plan of organisation here outlined on the grounds that it is undemocratic andconspiratorial are totally unsound. 
 Nevertheless, there re-mains a question which is frequently put and which deserves detailed examination. 
 This is the question of the relations between local work and All-Russian work. 
 Fears are ex-pressed that the formation of a centralised organisation mayshift the centre of gravity from the former to the latter, dam-age the movement through weakening our contacts with theworking masses and the continuity of local agitation general-ly. 
 To these fears we reply that our movement in the past few years has suffered precisely from the fact that local workers have been too absorbed in local work; that therefore it isabsolutely necessary to shift the centre of gravity somewhatto national work; and that, far from weakening this wouldstrengthen our ties and the continuity of our local agita-tion. 
 Let us take the question of central and local news-papers. 
 I would ask the reader not to forget that we cite the publication of newspapers only as an example illustrat-ing an immeasurably broader and more varied revolutionary activity in general. 
 In the first period of the mass movement (1896-98), an attempt was made by local revolutionary workers to publishan All-Russian paper— Rabochaya Gazeta . 
 In the next pe-riod (1898-1900), the movement made an enormous strideforward, but the attention of the leaders was wholly ab-sorbed by local publications. 
 If we compute the total number of the local papers that were published, we shall find that on the average one issue per month was published. 
 * Does this not clearly illustrate our amateurism? Does this not clear-ly show that our revolutionary organisation lags behind thespontaneous growth of the movement? If the same number of issues had been published, not by scattered local groups, but by a single organisation, we would not only have saved an enormous amount of effort, but we would have securedimmeasurably greater stability and continuity in our work. 
This simple point is frequently lost sight of by those practi-cal workers who work actively and almost exclusively on lo-cal publications (unfortunately this is true even now in the overwhelming majority of cases), as well as by the publi-cists who display an astonishing quixotism on this question. 
The practical workers usually rest content with the argu-ment that “it is difficult” ** for local workers to engage in the organisation of an All-Russian newspaper, and thatlocal newspapers are better than no newspapers at all. 
 This argument is, of course, perfectly just, and we, no less than any practical worker, appreciate the enormous importanceand usefulness of local newspapers in general . 
 But not this is the point. 
 The point is, can we not overcome the frag-mentation and primitiveness that are so glaringly expressedin the thirty issues of local newspapers that have been published throughout Russia in the course of two and a half years? Do not restrict yourselves to the indisputable, but too *See Report to the Paris Congress ,181 p. 
 14. 
 “From that time (1897) to the spring of 1900, thirty issues of various papers were pub-lished in various places.... 
 On an average, over one issue per monthwas published”. 
 **This difficulty is more apparent than real. 
 In fact, there is not a single local study circle that lacks the opportunity of taking up some function or other in connection with All-Russian work. 
 “Don’t say, I can’t; say, I won’t. 
” general, statement about the usefulness of local newspapers generally; have the courage frankly to admit their nega-tive aspects revealed by the experience of two and a half years. 
 This experience has shown that under the condi-tions in which we work, these local newspapers prove, inthe majority of cases, to be unstable in their principles,devoid of political significance, extremely costly in regardto expenditure of revolutionary forces, and totally unsatis-factory from a technical point of view (I have in mind, of course, not the technique of printing, but the frequency andregularity of publication). 
 These defects are not acciden-tal; they are the inevitable outcome of the fragmentationwhich, on the one hand, explains the predominance of localnewspapers in the period under review, and, on the other, is fostered by this predominance. 
 It is positively beyond the strength of a separate local organisation to raise its news-paper to the level of a political organ maintaining stabili-ty of principles; it is beyond its strength to collect and uti-lise sufficient material to shed light on the whole of ourpolitical life. 
 The argument usually advanced to support the need for numerous local newspapers in free countries that the cost of printing by local workers is low and thatthe people can be kept more fully and quickly informed—this argument as experience has shown, speaks against local newspapers in Russia. 
 They turn out to be excessively cost-ly in regard to the expenditure of revolutionary forces, and appear very rarely, for the simple reason that the publica-tion of an illegal newspaper, however small its size, re-quires an extensive secret apparatus, such as is possiblewith large-scale factory production; for this apparatus can-not be created in a small, handicraft workshop. 
 Very fre-quently, the primitiveness of the secret apparatus (every practical worker can cite numerous cases) enables the police to take advantage of the publication and distribution ofone or two issues to make mass arrests, which result in such a clean sweep that it becomes necessary to start all overagain. 
 A well-organised secret apparatus requires profes-sionally well-trained revolutionaries and a division of labour applied with the greatest consistency, but both these requirements are beyond the strength of a separate localorganisation, however strong it may be at any given moment. 
 Not only the general interests of our movement as a whole (training of the workers in consistent socialist and political principles) but also specifically local interests are better served by non-local newspapers . 
 This may seem paradoxical at first sight, but it has been proved to the hilt by the twoand a half years of experience referred to. 
 Everyone willagree that had all the local forces that were engaged in thepublication of the thirty issues of newspapers worked on a single newspaper, sixty, if not a hundred, issues could easi-ly have been published, with a fuller expression, in conse-quence, of all the specifically local features of the movement. 
True, it is no easy matter to attain such a degree of organi-sation, but we must realise the need for it. 
 Every local studycircle must think about it and work actively to achieve it, without waiting for an impetus from outside, without being tempted by the popularity and closer proximity of a localnewspaper which, as our revolutionary experience has shown,proves to a large extent to be illusory. 
 And it is a bad service indeed those publicists render to the practical work who, thinking themselves particu-larly close to the practical workers, fail to see this illu-soriness, and make shift with the astoundingly hollow andcheap argument that we must have local newspapers, we musthave district newspapers, and we must have All-Russiannewspapers. 
 Generally speaking, of course, all these are nec-essary, but once the solution of a concrete organisational problem is undertaken, surely time and circumstances must be taken into consideration. 
 Is it not quixotic for Svo-boda (No. 
 1, p. 
 68) to write in a special article “dealing with the question of a newspaper ”: “It seems to us that every lo-cality, with any appreciable number of workers, shouldhave its own workers’ newspaper; not a newspaper imported from somewhere, but its very own. 
” If the publicist who wrote these words refuses to think of their meaning, then atleast the reader may do it for him. 
 How many scores, if nothundreds, of “localities” with any appreciable numberof workers there are in Russia, and what a perpetuation ofour amateurish methods this would mean if indeed every local organisation set about publishing its own newspaper! How this diffusion would facilitate the gendarmerie’s taskof netting—and without “any appreciable” effort—the local revolutionary workers at the very outset of their activity and of preventing them from developing into real revolutionaries. 
 A reader of an All-Russian newspaper, continues the author, would find little interest in the descriptions of the malprac-tices of the factory owners and the “details of factory lifein various towns not his own”. 
 But “an inhabitant of Orelwould not find Orel affairs dull reading. 
 In every issue hewould learn who had been ‘picked for a lambasting’ and who had been ‘flayed’, and he would be in high spirits” (p. 
 69). 
 Certainly, the Orel reader is in high spirits, but ourpublicist’s flights of imagination are also high—too high. 
He should have asked himself whether such concern withtrivialities is tactically in order. 
 We are second to none inappreciating the importance and necessity of factory expo-sures, but it must be borne in mind that we have reached a stage when St. 
 Petersburg folk find it dull reading the St. 
Petersburg correspondence of the St. 
 Petersburg Rabochaya Mysl . 
 Leaflets are the medium through which local factory exposures have always been and must continue to be made, but we must raise the level of the newspaper , not lower it to the level of a factory leaflet. 
 What we ask of a newspaper is not so much “petty” exposures, as exposures of the major,typical evils of factory life, exposures based on especiallystriking facts and capable, therefore, of arousing the inter-est of all workers and all leaders of the movement, of real-ly enriching their knowledge, broadening their outlook, and serving as a starting-point for awakening new districts and workers from ever-newer trade areas. 
 “Moreover, in a local newspaper, all the malpractices of the factory administration and other authorities may bedenounced then and there. 
 In the case of a general, distantnewspaper, however, by the time the news reaches it the facts will have been forgotten in the source localities. 
 The reader, on getting the paper, will exclaim: ‘When was that—who remembers it?’” (ibid. 
). 
 Precisely—who remembersit! From the same source we learn that the 30 issues ofnewspapers which appeared in the course of two and a halfyears were published in six cities. 
 This averages one issue per city per half-year ! And even if our frivolous publicist trebled his estimate of the productivity of local work (which would be wrong in the case of an average town, since it is impossible to increase productivity to any considerable ex-tent by our rule-of-thumb methods), we would still get only one issue every two months, i. 
e. 
, nothing at all like “de-nouncing then and there”. 
 It would suffice, however, for tenlocal organisations to combine and send their delegates totake an active part in organising a general newspaper, toenable us every fortnight to “denounce”, over the whole of Russia , not petty, but really outstanding and typical evils. 
 No one who knows the state of affairs in our organisations can have the slightest doubt on that score. 
 As for catchingthe enemy red-handed—if we mean it seriously and notmerely as a pretty phrase—that is quite beyond the abilityof an illegal paper generally. 
 It can be done only by a leaflet,because the time limit for exposures of that nature can be a day or two at the most (e. 
g. 
, the usual brief strikes, violent factory clashes, demonstrations, etc. 
). 
 “The workers live not only at the factory, but also in the city,” continues our author, rising from the particular tothe general, with a strict consistency that would have donehonour to Boris Krichevsky himself; and he refers to matters like municipal councils, municipal hospitals, municipal schools, and demands that workers’ newspapers should notignore municipal affairs in general. 
 This demand—excellent in itself—serves as a particularly vivid illustration of the empty abstraction to which discus-sions of local newspapers are all too frequently limited. 
 In the first place, if indeed newspapers appeared “in every locality with any appreciable number of workers” with suchdetailed information on municipal affairs as Svoboda de-sires, this would, under our Russian conditions, inevitablydegenerate into actual concern with trivialities, lead toa weakening of the consciousness of the importance of an All-Russian revolutionary assault upon the tsarist autocracy, and strengthen the extremely virile shoots—not uprootedbut rather hidden or temporarily suppressed—of the tendencythat has become noted as a result of the famous remark aboutrevolutionaries who talk a great deal about non-existent par-liaments and too little about existent municipal councils. 
 We say “inevitably”, in order to emphasise that Svoboda obviously does not desire this, but the contrary, to come about. 
But good intentions are not enough. 
 For municipal affairs to be dealt with in their proper perspective, in relation to our entire work, this perspective must first be clearly conceived, firmly established, not only by argument, but by numerous examples, so that it may acquire the stability ofa tradition . 
 This is still far from being the case with us. 
 Yet this must be done first , before we can allow ourselves to think and talk about an extensive local press. 
 Secondly, to write really well and interestingly about municipal affairs, one must have first-hand knowledge, not book knowledge, of the issues. 
 But there are hardly anySocial-Democrats anywhere in Russia who possess such knowl-edge. 
 To be able to write in newspapers (not in popularpamphlets) about municipal and state affairs, one must havefresh and varied material gathered and written up by able people. 
 And in order to be able to gather and write up such material, we must have something more than the “primitivedemocracy” of a primitive circle, in which everybody doeseverything and all entertain themselves by playing at ref-erendums. 
 It is necessary to have a staff of expert writ-ers and correspondents, an army of Social-Democratic re-porters who establish contacts far and wide, who are able to fathom all sorts of “state secrets” (the knowledge of whichmakes the Russian government official so puffed up, but theblabbing of which is such an easy matter to him), who areable to penetrate “behind the scenes”—an army of peoplewho must, as their “official duty”, be ubiquitous and omnis-cient. 
 And we, the Party that fights against all economic, political, social, and national oppression, can and mustfind, gather, train, mobilise, and set into motion such anarmy of omniscient people—all of which requires still to bedone. 
 Not only has not a single step in this direction beentaken in the overwhelming majority of localities, but even the recognition of its necessity is very often lacking. 
 One will search in vain in our Social-Democratic press for lively andinteresting articles, correspondence, and exposures dealingwith our big and little affairs—diplomatic, military, eccle-siastical, municipal, financial, etc. 
, etc. 
 There is almost nothing , or very little, about these matters. 
 * That is why *That is why even examples of exceptionally good local news-papers fully confirm our point of view. 
 For example, Yuzhny Rabo-chy182 is an excellent newspaper, entirely free of instability of prin-“it always annoys me frightfully when a man comes to me, utters beautiful and charming words” about the need for newspapers in “every locality with any appreciable number of workers” that will expose factory, municipal, and govern-ment evils. 
 The predominance of the local papers over a central press may be a sign of either poverty or luxury. 
 Of poverty,when the movement has not yet developed the forces for large-scale production, continues to flounder in amateurism, and is all but swamped with “the petty details of factorylife”. 
 Of luxury, when the movement has fully mastered the task of comprehensive exposure and comprehensive agi-tation, and it becomes necessary to publish numerous localnewspapers in addition to the central organ. 
 Let each decide for himself what the predominance of local newspapers implies in present-day Russia. 
 I shall limit myself to a preciseformulation of my own conclusion, to leave no grounds formisunderstanding. 
 Hitherto, the majority of our local organ-isations have thought almost exclusively in terms of localnewspapers, and have devoted almost all their activities to this work. 
 This is abnormal; the very opposite should have been the case. 
 The majority of the local organisationsshould think principally of the publication of an All-Rus-sian newspaper and devote their activities chiefly to it. 
 Un-til this is done, we shall not be able to establish a single news-paper capable, to any degree, of serving the movement with comprehensive press agitation. 
 When this is done, however, normal relations between the necessary central newspaperand the necessary local newspapers will be established auto-matically. 
 ciple. 
 But it has been unable to provide what it desired for the local movement, owing to the infrequency of its publication and to exten-sive police raids. 
 Principled presentation of the fundamental ques-tions of the movement and wide political agitation, which our Party most urgently requires at the present time, has proved too big a job for the local newspaper. 
 The material of particular value it has pub-lished, like the articles on the mine owners’ convention and on unem-ployment, was not strictly local material, it was required for the whole of Russia , not for the South alone. 
 No such articles have appeared in any of our Social-Democratic newspapers. 
 * * * It would seem at first glance that the conclusion on the necessity for shifting the centre of gravity from local toAll-Russian work does not apply to the sphere of the spe-cifically economic struggle. 
 In this struggle, the immediateenemies of the workers are the individual employers orgroups of employers, who are not bound by any organisation having even the remotest resemblance to the purely military, strictly centralised organisation of the Russian Government—our immediate enemy in the political struggle—which isled in all its minutest details by a single will. 
 But that is not the case. 
 As we have repeatedly pointed out, the economic struggle is a trade struggle, and for that reason it requires that the workers be organised according to trades, not only according to place of employment. 
 Organ-isation by trades becomes all the more urgently necessary,the more rapidly our employers organise in all sorts of compa-nies and syndicates. 
 Our fragmentation and our amateurismare an outright hindrance to this work of organisation which requires the existence of a single, All-Russian body of rev-olutionaries capable of giving leadership to the All-Russian trade unions. 
 We have described above the type of organisation that is needed for this purpose; we shall now add but a few words on the question of our press in this connection. 
 Hardly anyone will doubt the necessity for every So-cial-Democratic newspaper to have a special department devoted to the trade-union (economic) struggle. 
 But the growth of the trade-union movement compels us to think about the creation of a trade-union press. 
 It seems to us, however, that with rare exceptions, there can be no ques-tion of trade-union newspapers in Russia at the present time; they would be a luxury, and many a time we lack even our daily bread. 
 The form of trade-union press that would suit the conditions of our illegal work and is already re-quired at the present time is trade-union pamphlets . 
 In these pamphlets, legal * and illegal material should be *Legal material is particularly important in this connection, and we are particularly behind in our ability to gather and utilise it gathered and grouped systematically, on the working condi-tions in a given trade, on the differences in this respect in the various parts of Russia; on the main demands advanced by the workers in the given trade; on the inadequacies oflegislation affecting that trade; on outstanding instances ofeconomic struggle by the workers in the trade; on the begin-nings, the present state, and the requirements of their trade-union organisation, etc. 
 Such pamphlets would, in the first place, relieve our Social-Democratic press of a mass of trade details that are of interest only to workers in the giventrade. 
 Secondly, they would record the results of our expe-rience in the trade-union struggle, they would preserve thegathered material, which now literally gets lost in a massof leaflets and fragmentary correspondence; and they would summarise this material. 
 Thirdly, they could serve as guides for agitators, because working conditions change rela-tively slowly and the main demands of the workers in a giv-en trade are extremely stable (cf. 
, for example, the demandsadvanced by the weavers in the Moscow district in 1885and in the St. 
 Petersburg district in 1896). 
 A compilation of such demands and needs might serve for years as an excel-somehow compile a trade-union pamphlet on the basis solely of legal material, but it could not be done on the basis of illegal materialalone. 
 In gathering illegal material from workers on questionslike those dealt with in the publications of Rabochaya Mysl , we waste a great deal of the efforts of revolutionaries (whose place in this work could very easily be taken by legal workers), and yet we never obtain good material. 
 The reason is that a worker who very of-ten knows only a single department of a large factory and almost al-ways the economic results, but not the general conditions and stan-dards of his work, cannot acquire the knowledge which is possessedby the office staff of a factory, by inspectors, doctors, etc. 
, and which is scattered in petty newspaper reports and in special industrial, medi-cal, Zemstvo, and other publications. 
 I vividly recall my “first experiment”, which I would never like to repeat. 
 I spent many weeks “examining” a worker, who would of-ten visit me, regarding every aspect of the conditions prevailing inthe enormous factory at which he was employed. 
 True, after great effort, I managed to obtain material for a description (of the one sin-gle factory!), but at the end of the interview the worker would wipethe sweat from his brow, and say to me smilingly: ‘I find it easier towork overtime than to answer your questions. 
 ” The more energetically we carry on our revolutionary struggle, the more the government will be compelled to legalise part of the lent handbook for agitators on economic questions in back-ward localities or among the backward strata of the workers. 
 Examples of successful strikes in a given region, informa-tion on higher living standards, on improved working con-ditions, in one locality, would encourage the workers inother localities to take up the fight again and again. 
 Fourth-ly, having made a start in generalising the trade-unionstruggle and in this way strengthening the link between the Russian trade-union movement and socialism, the Social-Democrats would at the same time see to it that our trade-union work occupied neither too small nor too large a placein our Social-Democratic work as a whole. 
 A local organisa-tion that is cut off from organisations in other towns findsit very difficult, sometimes almost impossible, to maintain a correct sense of proportion (the example of Rabochaya Mysl shows what a monstrous exaggeration can be made in the direction of trade-unionism) But an All-Russianorganisation of revolutionaries that stands undeviatinglyon the basis of Marxism, that leads the entire politicalstruggle and possesses a staff of professional agitators, will never find it difficult to determine the proper proportion. 
 V THE “PLAN” FOR AN ALL-RUSSIA POLITICAL NEWSPAPER “The most serious blunder Iskra committed in this con-nection” writes B. 
 Krichevsky ( Rabocheye Dyelo , No. 
 10, p. 
 30), charging us with a tendency to “convert theory intoa lifeless doctrine by isolating it from practice”, “was its‘plan’ for a general party organisation” (viz. 
, the article entitled “Where To Begin” *). 
 Martynov echoes this idea in declaring that “ Iskra ’s tendency to belittle the significance of the forward march of the drab everyday struggle incomparison with the propaganda of brilliant and completedideas ... was crowned with the plan for the organisation ofa party which it sets forth in the article entitled ‘Where To Begin’ in issue No. 
 4” (ibid. 
, p. 
 61). 
 Finally, L. 
 Nadezhdin *See present volume, pp. 
 13-24. 
— Ed. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR has of late joined in the chorus of indignation against this “plan” (the quotation marks were meant to express sarcasm). 
 In his pamphlet, which we have just received, entitled The Eve of the Revolution (published by the “Revolutionary-Socialist Group” Svoboda , whose acquaintance we have made), he declares (p. 
 126): “To speak now of an organisa-tion held together by an All-Russian newspaper meanspropagating armchair ideas and armchair work” and represents a manifestation of “bookishness”, etc. 
 That our terrorist turns out to be in agreement with the champions of the “forward march of the drab everydaystruggle” is not surprising, since we have traced the rootsof this intimacy between them in the chapters on politicsand organisation. 
 But we must draw attention here to the fact that Nadezhdin is the only one who has conscientiously tried to grasp the train of thought in an article he dislikedand has made an attempt to reply to the point, whereasRabocheye Dyelo , has said nothing that is material to the subject, but has tried merely to confuse the question by aseries of unseemly, demagogic sallies. 
 Unpleasant though the task may be, we must first spend some time in cleansing this Augean stable. 
 A. 
 WHO WAS OFFENDED BY THE ARTICLE “WHERE TO BEGIN” Let us present a small selection of the expletives and ex-clamations that Rabocheye Dyelo hurled at us. 
 “It is not a newspaper that can create a party organisation, but viceversa.... 
” A newspaper, standing above the party, outside of its control , and independent of it, thanks to its having its own staff of agents.... 
” “By what miracle has Iskra forgotten about the actually existing Social-Democratic organisations of the party to which it belongs?...” “Those who possessfirm principles and a corresponding plan are the supremeregulators of the real struggle of the party and dictate to ittheir plan.... 
” “The plan drives our active and virile organ-isations into the kingdom of shadows and desires to call into being a fantastic network of agents.... 
” “Were Iskra ’s plan carried into effect, every trace of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, which is taking shape, would be obliterated.... 
” “A propagandist organ becomes an uncon-trolled autocratic law-maker for the entire practical revolu-tionary struggle.... 
” “How should our Party react to the suggestion that it be completely subordinated to an autono-mous editorial board?”, etc. 
, etc. 
 As the reader can see from the contents and the tone of these above quotations, Rabocheye Dyelo has taken offence . 
 Offence, not for its own sake, but for the sake of the organi-sations and committees of our Party which it alleges Iskra desires to drive into the kingdom of shadows and whose verytraces it would obliterate. 
 How terrible! But a curious thingshould be noted. 
 The article “Where To Begin” appeared inMay 1901. 
 The articles in Rabocheye Dyelo appeared in Sep-tember 1901. 
 Now we are in mid-January 1902. 
 During these five months (prior to and after September), not a single committee and not a single organisation of the Party protest-ed formally against this monster that seeks to drive theminto the kingdom of shadows; and yet scores and hundredsof communications from all parts of Russia have appearedduring this period in Iskra , as well as in numerous local and non-local publications. 
 How could it happen that those who would be driven into the realm of shadows are notaware of it and have not taken offence, though a third partyhas? The explanation is that the committees and other organi-sations are engaged in real work and are not playing at “democracy”. 
 The committees read the article “Where To Begin”, saw that it represented an attempt “to elaborate adefinite plan for an organisation, so that its formation may be undertaken from all aspects ”; and since they knew and saw very well that not one of these “sides” would dream of “set-ting about to build it” until it was convinced of its neces-sity, and of the correctness of the architectural plan, it has naturally never occurred to them to take offence at the bold-ness of the people who said in Iskra : “In view of the pressing importance of the question we, on our part, take the libertyof submitting to the comrades a skeleton plan to be devel-oped in greater detail in a pamphlet now in preparation for the print. 
” With a conscientious approach to the work, was it possible to view things otherwise than that if the comradesaccepted the plan submitted to them, they would carry it out, not because they are “subordinate”, but because they would be convinced of its necessity for our common cause, and that if they did not accept it , then the “skeleton” (a pre-tentious word, is it not?) would remain merely a skeleton?Is it not demagogy to fight against the skeleton of a plan, notonly by “picking it to pieces” and advising comrades to rejectit, but by inciting people inexperienced in revolutionary matters against its authors merely on the grounds that they dare to “legislate” and come out as the “supreme regulators”, i. 
e. 
, because they dare to propose an outline of a plan? Can our Party develop and make progress if an attempt toraise local functionaries to broader views, tasks, plans, etc. 
, is objected to, not only with the claim that these viewsare erroneous, but on the grounds that the very “desire” to “raise ” us gives “offence”? Nadezhdin, too, “picked” our plan “to pieces”, but he did not sink to such demagogy as cannotbe explained solely by naïveté or by primitiveness of polit-ical views. 
 From the outset, he emphatically rejected thecharge that we intended to establish an “inspectorship overthe Party”. 
 That is why Nadezhdin’s criticism of the plan can and should be answered on its merits, while Rabocheye Dyelo deserves only to be treated with contempt. 
 But contempt for a writer who sinks so low as to shout about autocracy and “subordination” does not relieve usof the duty of disentangling the confusion that such peoplecreate in the minds of their readers. 
 Here we can clearly dem-onstrate to the world the nature of catchwords like “broad democracy”. 
 We are accused of forgetting the committees,of desiring or attempting to drive them into the kingdom ofshadows, etc. 
 How can we reply to these charges when, outof considerations of secrecy, we can give the reader almost no facts regarding our real relationships with the committees? Persons hurling vehement accusations calculated to provoke the crowd prove to be ahead of us because of their brazennessand their disregard of the duty of a revolutionary to concealcarefully from the eyes of the world the relationships andcontacts which he maintains, which he is establishing ortrying to establish. 
 Naturally, we refuse once and for all to compete with such people in the field of “democratism”. 
 As to the reader who is not initiated in all Party affairs, theonly way in which we can discharge our duty to him is to acquaint him, not with what is and what is im Werden but with a particle of what has taken place and what may be told as a thing of the past. 
 The Bund hints that we are “impostors” *; the Union Abroad accuses us of attempting to obliterate all traces of theParty. 
 Gentlemen, you will get complete satisfaction whenwe relate to the public four facts concerning the past. 
 First fact. 
 ** The members of one of the Leagues of Strug-gle, who took a direct part in founding our Party and in sending a delegate to the Inaugural Party Congress, reachedagreement with a member of the Iskra group regarding the publication of a series of books for workers that were to servethe entire movement. 
 The attempt to publish the seriesfailed and the pamphlets written for it, The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats and The New Factory Law ,*** b y a circuitous course and through the medium of third parties,found their way abroad, where they were published. 
 184 Second fact. 
 Members of the Central Committee of the Bund approached a member of the Iskra group with the pro-posal to organise what the Bund then described as a “liter-ary laboratory”. 
 In making the proposal, they stated that unless this was done, the movement would greatly retro-gress. 
 The result of these negotiations was the appearanceof the pamphlet The Working-Class Cause in Russia . 
 **** Third fact. 
 The Central Committee of the Bund, via a provincial town, approached a member of the Iskra group with the proposal that he undertake the editing of the re-vived Rabochaya Gazeta and, of course, obtained his consent. 
 The offer was later modified: the comrade in question wasinvited to act as a contributor, in view of a new plan for the *Iskra , No. 
 8. 
 The reply of the Central Committee of the Gen-eral Jewish Union of Russia and Poland to our article on the na-tional question. 
 **We deliberately refrain from relating these facts183 in the sequence of their occurrence. 
 *** See present edition, Vol. 
 2, pp. 
 323-51 and 267-315. 
— Ed. 
 **** The author requests me to state that, like his previous pam-phlets, this one was sent to the Union Abroad on the assumption thatits publications were edited by the Emancipation of Labour group(owing to certain circumstances, he could not then—February 1899—know of the change in editorship). 
 The pamphlet will be republishedby the League 185 at an early date. 
 composition of the Editorial Board. 
 Also this proposal, of course, obtained his consent. 
186 Articles were sent (which we managed to preserve): “Our Programme” which was a direct protest against Bernsteinism, against the change inthe line of the legal literature and of Rabochaya Mysl ; “Our Immediate Task” (“to publish a Party organ that shall ap-pear regularly and have close contacts with all the localgroups”, the drawbacks of the prevailing “amateurism”); “An Urgent Question” (an examination of the objection that it is necessary first to develop the activities of local groups before undertaking the publication of a common organ; aninsistence on the paramount importance of a “revolutionaryorganisation” and on the necessity of “developing organisa-tion, discipline, and the technique of secrecy to the highest degree of perfection”). 
 * The proposal to resume publication of Rabochaya Gazeta was not carried out, and the articles were not published. 
 Fourth fact. 
 A member of the committee that was organis-ing the second regular congress of our Party communicatedto a member of the Iskra group the programme of the con-gress and proposed that group as editorial board of the re-vived Rabochaya Gazeta . 
 This preliminary step, as it were, was later sanctioned by the committee to which this memberbelonged, and by the Central Committee of the Bund. 
 187 The Iskra group was notified of the place and time of the congress and (uncertain of being able, for certain reasons, to send a delegate) drew up a written report for the congress. 
 In the report, the idea was suggested that the mere electionof a Central Committee would not only fail to solve the ques-tion of unification at a time of such complete disorder asthe present, but would even compromise the grand idea ofestablishing a party, in the event of an early, swift, and thorough police round-up, which was more than likely in view of the prevailing lack of secrecy; that therefore, a begin-ning should be made by inviting all committees and all otherorganisations to support the revived common organ, whichwould establish real contacts between all the committees and really train a group of leaders for the entire movement; and that the committees and the Party would very easily *See present edition, Vol. 
 4, pp. 
 210-14, 215-20, 221-26. 
— Ed. 
 be able to transform such a group into a Central Committee as soon as the group had grown and become strong. 
 In conse-quence of a number of police raids and arrests, however, the congress could not take place. 
 For security reasons the re-port was destroyed, having been read only by a few comrades,including the representatives of one committee. 
 Let the reader now judge for himself the character of the methods employed by the Bund in hinting that we were impostors, or by Rabocheye Dyelo , which accuses us of try-ing to relegate the committees to the kingdom of shadowsand to “substitute” for the organisation of a party an organi-sation disseminating the ideas advocated by a single news-paper. 
 It was to the committees, on their repeated invitation , that we reported on the necessity for adopting a definite plan of concerted activities. 
 It was precisely for the Party organisation that we elaborated this plan, in articles sentto Rabochaya Gazeta , and in the report to the Party con-gress, again on the invitation of those who held such an in-fluential position in the Party that they took the initiativein its (actual) restoration. 
 Only after the twice repeated at-tempts of the Party organisation, in conjunction with our-selves , officially to revive the central organ of the Party had failed, did we consider it our bounden duty to publish anunofficial organ, in order that with the third attempt the comrades might have before them the results of experience and not merely conjectural proposals. 
 Now certain results of this experience are present for all to see, and all comrades may now judge whether we properly understood our dutiesand what should be thought of people that strive to misleadthose unacquainted with the immediate past, simply becausethey are piqued at our having pointed out to some their in-consistency on the “national” question, and to others the inadmissibility of their vacillation in matters of principle. 
 B. 
 CAN A NEWSPAPER BE A COLLECTIVE ORGANISER? The quintessence of the article “Where To Begin” consists in the fact that it discusses precisely this question and gives an affirmative reply to it. 
 As far as we know, the only attemptto examine this question on its merits and to prove that it must be answered in the negative was made by L. 
 Nadezh-din, whose argument we reproduce in full: “... It pleased us greatly to see Iskra (No. 
 4) present the question of the need for an All-Russian newspaper; but we cannot agree that this presentation bears relevance to the title ‘Where To Begin’. 
 Undoubt-edly this is an extremely important matter, but neither a newspaper, nor a series of popular leaflets, nor a mountain of manifestoes, can serve as the basis for a militant organisation in revolutionary times. 
 We must set to work to build strong political organisations in the lo-calities. 
 We lack such organisations; we have been carrying on our work mainly among enlightened workers, while the masses have been engaged almost exclusively in the economic struggle. 
 If strong polit-ical organisations are not trained locally , what significance will even an excellently organised All-Russian newspaper have? It will be a burning bush, burning without being consumed, but firing no one! Iskra thinks that around it and in the activities in its behalf people will gather and organise. 
 But they will find it far easier to gather and organise around activities that are more concrete . 
 This some-thing more concrete must and should be the extensive organisation of local newspapers, the immediate preparation of the workers’ forces for demonstrations, the constant activity of local organisations among the unempIoyed (indefatigable distribution of pamphlets and leaflets, convening of meetings, appeals to actions of protest against the gov-ernment, etc. 
). 
 We must begin live political work in the localities, and when the time comes to unite on this real basis, it will not be an artificial, paper unity; not by means of newspapers can such a uni-fication of local work into an All-Russian cause be achieved!” ( The Eve of the Revolution , p. 
 54. 
) We have emphasised the passages in this eloquent tirade that most clearly show the author’s incorrect judgement ofour plan, as well as the incorrectness of his point of viewin general, which is here contraposed to that of Iskra . 
 Unless we train strong political organisations in the localities, even an excellently organised All-Russian newspaper will be of no avail. 
 This is incontrovertible. 
 But the whole point isthat there is no other way of training strong political organisations except through the medium of an All-Russiannewspaper. 
 The author missed the most important statementIskra made before it proceeded to set forth its “plan”: that it was necessary “to call for the formation of a revolutionary organisation, capable of uniting all forces and guiding themovement in actual practice and not in name alone , that is, an organisation ready at any time to support every protestand every outbreak and use it to build up and consolidate the fighting forces suitable for the decisive struggle”. 
 But now after the February and March events, everyone will agree with this in principle, continues Iskra . 
 Yet what we need is not a solution of the question in principle, but its practical solution ; we must immediately advance a definite constructive plan through which all may immediately setto work to build from every side . 
 Now we are again being dragged away from the practical solution towards somethingwhich in principle is correct, indisputable, and great, but which is entirely inadequate and incomprehensible to the broad masses of workers, namely, “to rear strong politicalorganisations”! This is not the point at issue, most worthyauthor. 
 The point is how to go about the rearing and how to accomplish it. 
 It is not true to say that “we have been carrying on our work mainly among enlightened workers, while the masses have been engaged almost exclusively in the economicstruggle”. 
 Presented in such a form, the thesis reduces itselfto Svoboda ’s usual but fundamentally false contraposition of the enlightened workers to the “masses”. 
 In recent years,even the enlightened workers have been “engaged almost exclusively in the economic struggle”. 
 That is the first point. 
 On the other hand, the masses will never learn to conductthe political struggle until we help to train leaders for this struggle, both from among the enlightened workers andfrom among the intellectuals. 
 Such leaders can acquire train-ing solely by systematically evaluating all the everyday aspects of our political life, all attempts at protest and struggle on the part of the various classes and on various grounds. 
Therefore, to talk of “rearing political organisations” and atthe same time to contrast the “paper work” of a political newspaper to “live political work in the localities” is plainlyridiculous. 
 Iskra has adapted its “plan” for a newspaper to the “plan” for creating a “militant preparedness” to support the unemployed movement, peasant revolts, discontentamong the Zemstvo people, “popular indignation againstsome tsarist bashi-bazouk on the rampage”, etc. 
 Anyonewho is at all acquainted with the movement knows full wellthat the vast majority of local organisations have never even dreamed of these things; that many of the prospects of “live political work” here indicated have never been realised by a single organisation; that the attempt, for example, to call attention to the growth of discontent and protest among the Zemstvo intelligentsia rouses feelings of consternation and perplexity in Nadezhdin (“Good Lord, is this newspaper intended for Zemstvo people?”— The Eve , p. 
 129), among the Economists (Letter to Iskra , No. 
 12), and among many practical workers. 
 Under these circumstances, it is possibleto “begin” only by inducing people to think about all these things, to summarise and generalise all the diverse signs of ferment and active struggle. 
 In our time, when Social-Demo-cratic tasks are being degraded, the only way “live political work” can be begun is with live political agitation, which is impossible unless we have an All-Russian newspaper, fre-quently issued and regularly distributed. 
 Those who regard the Iskra “plan” as a manifestation of “bookishness” have totally failed to understand its substance and take for the goal that which is suggested as the mostsuitable means for the present time. 
 These people have nottaken the trouble to study the two comparisons that weredrawn to present a clear illustration of the plan. 
 Iskra wrote: The publication of an All-Russian political newspaper must be the main line by which we may unswervingly develop, deepen, and expand the organisation (viz. 
, the revolutionaryorganisation that is ever ready to support every protest andevery outbreak). 
 Pray tell me, when bricklayers lay bricksin various parts of an enormous, unprecedentedly large struc-ture, is it “paper” work to use a line to help them find the correct place for the bricklaying; to indicate to them the ultimate goal of the common work; to enable them to use,not only every brick, but even every piece of brick which,cemented to the bricks laid before and after it, forms a fin-ished, continuous line? And are we not now passing throughprecisely such a period in our Party life when we have bricks and bricklayers, but lack the guide line for all to see and fol-low? Let them shout that in stretching out the line, we wantto command. 
 Had we desired to command, gentlemen, wewould have written on the title page, not “ Iskra , No. 
 1”, but “ Rabochaya Gazeta , No. 
 3”, as we were invited to do by certain comrades, and as we would have had a perfect right to do after the events described above. 
 But we did not do that. 
 We wished to have our hands free to wage an irreconcilablestruggle against all pseudo-Social-Democrats; we wanted our line, if properly laid, to be respected because it was correct, and not because it had been laid by an official organ. 
 “The question of uniting local activity in central bodies runs in a vicious circle,” Nadezhdin lectures us; “unificationrequires homogeneity of the elements, and the homogeneitycan be created only by something that unites; but the uni-fying element may be the product of strong local organisa-tions which at the present time are by no means distin-guished for their homogeneity. 
” This truth is as revered and as irrefutable as that we must train strong political organisa-tions. 
 And it is equally barren. 
 Every question “runs in a vicious circle” because political life as a whole is an endlesschain consisting of an infinite number of links. 
 The wholeart of politics lies in finding and taking as firm a grip as we can of the link that is least likely to be struck from our hands, the one that is most important at the given moment, the onethat most of all guarantees its possessor the possession of thewhole chain. 
 * If we had a crew of experienced bricklayers who had learned to work so well together that they couldlay their bricks exactly as required without a guide line (which, speaking abstractly, is by no means impossible), then perhaps we might take hold of some other link. 
 But it isunfortunate that as yet we have no experienced bricklayerstrained for teamwork, that bricks are often laid where theyare not needed at all, that they are not laid according tothe general line, but are so scattered that the enemy can shatter the structure as if it were made of sand and not of bricks. 
 Another comparison: “A newspaper is not only a collective propagandist and a collective agitator, it is also a collec-tive organiser. 
 In this respect it may be compared to the scaffolding erected round a building under construction; it marks the contours of the structure and facilitates commu-nication between the builders, permitting them to distributethe work and to view the common results achieved by their *Comrade Krichevsky and Comrade Martynov! I call your atten-tion to this outrageous manifestation of “autocracy”, “uncontrolledauthority”, “supreme regulating”, etc. 
 Just think of it: a desire to possess the whole chain!! Send in a complaint at once. 
 Here you have a ready-made topic for two leading articles for No. 
 12 of Rabocheye Dyelo ! organised labour. 
” * Does this sound anything like the at-tempt of an armchair author to exaggerate his role? The scaffolding is not required at all for the dwelling; it is made of cheaper material, is put up only temporarily, and is scrappedfor firewood as soon as the shell of the structure is com-pleted. 
 As for the building of revolutionary organisations,experience shows that sometimes they may be built withoutscaffolding, as the seventies showed. 
 But at the present time we cannot even imagine the possibility of erecting the building we require without scaffolding. 
 Nadezhdin disagrees with this, saying: “ Iskra thinks that around it and in the activities in its behalf people will gath-er and organise. 
 But they will find it far easier to gather and organise around activities that are more concrete !” Indeed, “far easier around activities that are more concrete”. 
 A Russian proverb holds: “Don’t spit into a well, you may want to drinkfrom it. 
” But there are people who do not object to drinkingfrom a well that has been spat into. 
 What despicable thingsour magnificent, legal “Critics of Marxism” and illegal ad-mirers of Rabochaya Mysl have said in the name of this some-thing more concrete! How restricted our movement is by our own narrowness, lack of initiative, and hesitation, whichare justified with the traditional argument about finding it“far easier to gather around something more concrete”! AndNadezhdin—who regards himself as possessing a particularlykeen sense of the “realities of life”, who so severely condemns “armchair” authors and (with pretensions to wit) accuses Iskra of a weakness for seeing Economism everywhere, and who sees himself standing far above the division betweenthe orthodox and the Critics—fails to see that with hisarguments he contributes to the narrowness that arouseshis indignation and that he is drinking from the most spat-in well! The sincerest indignation against narrowness, the most passionate desire to raise its worshippers from their knees,will not suffice if the indignant one is swept along withoutsail or rudder and, as “spontaneously” as the revolutionariesof the seventies, clutches at such things as “excitative *Martynov, in quoting the first sentence of this passage in Ra-bocheye Dyelo (No. 
 10, p. 
 62), omitted the second, as if desiring to em-phasise either his unwillingness to discuss the essentials of the ques-tion or his inability to understand them. 
 terror”, “agrarian terror”, “sounding the tocsin”, etc. 
 Let us take a glance at these “more concrete” activities around which he thinks it will be “far easier” to gather and organise: (1) local newspapers; (2) preparations for demonstrations; (3)work among the unemployed. 
 It is immediately apparentthat all these things have been seized upon at randomas a pretext for saying something; for, however we mayregard them, it would be absurd to see in them anything especially suitable for “gathering and organising”. 
 The self-same Nadezhdin says a few pages further: “It is time we sim-ply stated the fact that activity of a very pitiable kind isbeing carried on in the localities, the committees are notdoing a tenth of what they could do ... the coordinatingcentres we have at present are the purest fiction, representing a sort of revolutionary bureaucracy, whose members mutually grant generalships to one another; and so it will continueuntil strong local organisations grow up. 
” These remarks,though exaggerating the position somewhat, no doubt con-tain many a bitter truth; but can it be said that Nadezhdindoes not perceive the connection between the pitiable activ-ity in the localities and the narrow mental outlook of the functionaries, the narrow scope of their activities, inevitablein the circumstances of the lack of training of Party workersconfined to local organisations? Has he, like the author ofthe article on organisation, published in Svoboda , forgotten how the transition to a broad local press (from 1898) was accompanied by a strong intensification of Economism and “primitiveness”? Even if a “broad local press” could be estab-lished at all satisfactorily (and we have shown this to be im-possible, save in very, exceptional cases)—even then thelocal organs could not “gather and organise” all the revolution-ary forces for a general attack upon the autocracy and for leadership of the united struggle. 
 Let us not forget that we are here discussing only the “rallying”, organising significance of the newspaper, and we could put to Nadezhdin, who defendsfragmentation, the question he himself has ironically put:“Have we been left a legacy of 200,000 revolutionary organis-ers?” Furthermore, “preparations for demonstrations” cannot be contraposed to Iskra ’s plan, for the very reason that this plan includes the organisation of the broadest possible demon-strations as one of its aims ; the point under discussion is the selection of the practical means . 
 On this point also Na-dezhdin is confused, for he has lost sight of the fact that only forces that are “gathered and organised” can “prepare for” demonstrations (which hitherto, in the overwhelming major-ity of cases, have taken place spontaneously) and that welack precisely the ability to rally and organise. 
 “Work among the unemployed. 
” Again the same confusion; for this too re-presents one of the field operations of the mobilised forces and not a plan for mobilising the forces. 
 The extent to which Nadezhdin here too underestimates the harm caused by ourfragmentation, by our lack of “200,000 organisers”, can beseen from the fact that: many people (including Nadezhdin)have reproached Iskra for the paucity of the news it gives on unemployment and for the casual nature of the correspond-ence it publishes about the most common affairs of rural life. 
 The reproach is justified; but Iskra is “guilty without sin”. 
 We strive “to stretch a line” through the countrysidetoo, where there are hardly any bricklayers anywhere, andwe are obliged to encourage everyone who informs us even as regards the most common facts, in the hope that this will increase the number of our contributors in the given field and will ultimately train us all to select facts that are really the most outstanding. 
 But the material on which we cantrain is so scanty that, unless we generalise it for the whole ofRussia, we shall have very little to train on at all. 
 No doubt,one with at least as much ability as an agitator and as much knowledge of the life of the vagrant as Nadezhdin manifests could render priceless service to the movement by carryingon agitation among the unemployed; but such a person wouldbe simply hiding his light under a bushel if he failed to in-form all comrades in Russia as regards every step he took in his work, so that others, who, in the mass, still lack the abil-ity to undertake new kinds of work, might learn from his example. 
 All without exception now talk of the importance of uni-ty, of the necessity for “gathering and organising”; but inthe majority of cases what is lacking is a definite idea ofwhere to begin and how to bring about this unity. 
 Probably all will agree that if we “unite”, say, the district circles in a given town, it will be necessary to have for this purposecommon institutions , i. 
e. 
, not merely the common title of “League”, but genuinely common work, exchange of materi-al, experience, and forces, distribution of functions, not only by districts, but through specialisation on a town-wide scale. 
 All will agree that a big secret apparatus will not pay itsway (to use a commercial expression) “with the resources”(in both money and manpower, of course) of a single district,and that this narrow field will not provide sufficient scopefor a specialist to develop his talents. 
 But the same thing applies to the co-ordination of activities of a number of towns, since even a specific locality will be and, in the history of our Social-Democratic movement, has proved to be, far too nar-row a field; we have demonstrated this above in detail withregard to political agitation and organisational work. 
 Whatwe require foremost and imperatively is to broaden the field, establish real contacts between the towns on the basis of regular , common work; for fragmentation weighs down on the people and they are “stuck in a hole” (to use the expressionemployed by a correspondent to Iskra ), not knowing what is happening in the world, from whom to learn, or how to ac-quire experience and satisfy their desire to engage in broad activities. 
 I continue to insist that we can start establishing real contacts only with the aid of a common newspaper, as the only regular, All-Russian enterprise, one which will sum-marise the results of the most diverse forms of activity andthereby stimulate people to march forward untiringly along all the innumerable paths leading to revolution, in the same way as all roads lead to Rome. 
 If we do not want unity in name only, we must arrange for all local study circles im-mediately to assign , say, a fourth of their forces to active work for the common cause, and the newspaper will immedi-ately convey to them * the general design, scope, and charac-ter of the cause; it will give them a precise indication of the most keenly felt shortcomings in the All-Russian activity, where agitation is lacking and contacts are weak, and it willpoint out which little wheels in the vast general mechanism *A reservation : that is, if a given study circle sympathises with the policy of the newspaper and considers it useful to become a col-laborator, meaning by that, not only for literary collaboration, butfor revolutionary collaboration generally. 
 Note for Rabocheye Dyelo : Among revolutionaries who attach value to the cause and not to play-ing at democracy, who do not separate “sympathy” from the mostactive and lively participation, this reservation is taken for granted. 
 a given study circle might repair or replace with better ones. 
 A study circle that has not yet begun to work, but which is only just seeking activity, could then start, not like a crafts-man in an isolated little workshop unaware of the earlierdevelopment in “industry” or of the general level of produc-tion methods prevailing in industry, but as a participant inan extensive enterprise that reflects the whole general revo-lutionary attack on the autocracy. 
 The more perfect the finish of each little wheel and the larger the number of detail workers engaged in the common cause, the closer will ournetwork become and the less will be the disorder in the ranksconsequent on inevitable police raids. 
 The mere function of distributing a newspaper would help to establish actual contacts (if it is a newspaper worthy of the name, i. 
e. 
, if it is issued regularly, not once a month like a magazine, but at least four times a month). 
 At the presenttime, communication between towns on revolutionary busi-ness is an extreme rarity, and, at all events, is the exceptionrather than the rule. 
 If we had a newspaper, however, suchcommunication would become the rule and would secure, not only the distribution of the newspaper, of course, but (what is more important) an exchange of experience, of mate-rial, of forces, and of resources. 
 Organisational work wouldimmediately acquire much greater scope, and the successof one locality would serve as a standing encouragement tofurther perfection; it would arouse the desire to utilise the experience gained by comrades working in other parts of the country. 
 Local work would become far richer and morevaried than it is at present. 
 Political and economic exposuresgathered from all over Russia would provide mental foodfor workers of all trades and all stages of development ; they would provide material and occasion for talks and readings on the most diverse subjects, which would, in addition, be suggested by hints in the legal press, by talk among the peo-ple, and by “shamefaced” government statements. 
 Every out-break, every demonstration, would be weighed and discussed in its every aspect in all parts of Russia and would thusstimulate a desire to keep up with, and even surpass, theothers (we socialists do not by any means flatly reject allemulation or all “competition”!) and consciously preparethat which at first, as it were, sprang up spontaneously, a desire to take advantage of the favourable conditions in a given district or at a given moment for modifying the plan of attack, etc. 
 At the same time, this revival of local work would obviate that desperate, “convulsive” exertionof all efforts and risking of all forces which every single dem-onstration or the publication of every single issue of a lo-cal newspaper now frequently entails. 
 On the one hand, thepolice would find it much more difficult to get at the “roots”, if they did not know in what district to dig down for them. 
 On the other hand, regular common work would train ourpeople to adjust the force of a given attack to the strength of the given contingent of the common army (at the presenttime hardly anyone ever thinks of doing that, because in ninecases out of ten these attacks occur spontaneously); such regular common work would facilitate the “transportation” from one place to another, not only of literature, but also ofrevolutionary forces. 
 In a great many cases these forces are now being bled white on restricted local work, but under the circumstanceswe are discussing it would be possible to transfer a capable agitator or organiser from one end of the country to the other, and the occasion for doing this would constantlyarise. 
 Beginning with short journeys on Party business at theParty’s expense, the comrades would become accustomed tobeing maintained by the Party, to becoming professionalrevolutionaries, and to training themselves as real political leaders. 
 And if indeed we succeeded in reaching the point when all, or at least a considerable majority, of the local committees,local groups, and study circles took up active work for thecommon cause, we could, in the not distant future, establisha weekly newspaper for regular distribution in tens of thou-sands of copies throughout Russia. 
 This newspaper would become part of an enormous pair of smith’s bellows that wouldfan every spark of the class struggle and of popular indig-nation into a general conflagration. 
 Around what is in it-self still a very innocuous and very small, but regular andcommon , effort, in the full sense of the word, a regular army of tried fighters would systematically gather and receive their training. 
 On the ladders and scaffolding of this generalorganisational structure there would soon develop and come to the fore Social-Democratic Zhelyabovs from among our revolutionaries and Russian Bebels from among our workers, who would take their place at the head of the mobilised army and rouse the whole people to settle accounts with the shameand the curse of Russia. 
 That is what we should dream of! * * * “We should dream!” I wrote these words and became alarmed. 
 I imagined myself sitting at a “unity conference” andopposite me were the Rabocheye Dyelo editors and contribu-tors. 
 Comrade Martynov rises and, turning to me, says sternly:“Permit me to ask you, has an autonomous editorial board the right to dream without first soliciting the opinion of the Party committees?” He is followed by Comrade Krichevsky,who (philosophically deepening Comrade Martynov, who longago rendered Comrade Plekhanov more profound) continueseven more sternly: “I go further. 
 I ask, has a Marxist anyright at all to dream, knowing that according to Marx, man-kind always sets itself the tasks it can solve and that tactics is a process of the growth of Party tasks which grow togetherwith the Party?” The very thought of these stern questions sends a cold shiver down my spine and makes me wish for nothing buta place to hide in. 
 I shall try to hide behind the back of Pisarev. 
 “There are rifts and rifts,” wrote Pisarev of the rift be-tween dreams and reality. 
 “My dream may run ahead of thenatural march of events or may fly off at a tangent in a di-rection in which no natural march of events will ever pro-ceed. 
 In the first case my dream will not cause any harm; it may even support and augment the energy of the working men.... 
 There is nothing in such dreams that would distortor paralyse labour-power. 
 On the contrary, if man were com-pletely deprived of the ability to dream in this way, if hecould not from time to time run ahead and mentally conceive,in an entire and completed picture, the product to which his hands are only just beginning to lend shape, then I cannot at all imagine what stimulus there would be to induce man toundertake and complete extensive and strenuous work in the sphere of art, science, and practical endeavour.... 
 The rift between dreams and reality causes no harm if only the person dreaming believes seriously in his dream, if he attentively observes life, compares his observations with his castles inthe air, and if, generally speaking, he works conscientiouslyfor the achievement of his fantasies. 
 If there is some connec-tion between dreams and life then all is well. 
” 188 Of this kind of dreaming there is unfortunately too little in our movement. 
 And the people most responsible for this are those who boast of their sober views, their “closeness” tothe “concrete”, the representatives of legal criticism and ofillegal “tail-ism”. 
 C. 
 WHAT TYPE OF ORGANISATION DO WE REQUIRE? From what has been said the reader will see that our “tactics-as-plan” consists in rejecting an immediate call for assault; in demanding “to lay effective siege to the enemyfortress”; or, in other words, in demanding that all effortsbe directed towards gathering, organising, and mobilising a permanent army. 
 When we ridiculed Rabocheye Dyelo for its leap from Economism to shouting for an assault (for whichit clamoured in April 1901, in “ Listok ” Rabochevo Dyela , No. 
 6), it of course came down on us with accusations of being“doctrinaire”, of failing to understand our revolutionary duty,of calling for caution, etc. 
 Of course, we were not in the least surprised to hear these accusations from those who totally lack principles and who evade all arguments by references toa profound “tactics-as-process”, any more than we were sur-prised by the fact that these charges were repeated by Nadezh-din, who in general has a supreme contempt for durableprogrammes and the fundamentals of tactics. 
 It is said that history does not repeat itself. 
 But Nadezhdin exerts every effort to cause it to repeat itself and he zealouslyimitates Tkachov 189 in strongly condemning “revolution-ary culturism”, in shouting about “sounding the tocsin”and about a special “ eve-of-the-revolution point of vi ew”, etc. 
 Apparently, he has forgotten the well-known maxim that while an original historical event represents a tragedy, its replica is merely a farce. 
 190 The attempt to seize power, which was prepared by the preaching of Tkachov and carried out by means of the “terrifying” terror that did really terri-fy, had grandeur, but the “excitative” terror of a Tkachov the Little is simply ludicrous, particularly so when it is supple-mented with the idea of an organisation of average people. 
 “If Iskra would only emerge from its sphere of bookish-ness,” wrote Nadezhdin, “it would realise that these [instanceslike the worker’s letter to Iskra , No. 
 7, etc. 
] are symptoms of the fact that soon, very soon, the ‘assault’ will begin, and to speak now [ sic!] of an organisation linked with an All-Russian newspaper means to propagate armchair ideas andarmchair activity. 
” What an unimaginable muddle—on theone hand, excitative terror and an “organisation of averagepeople”, along with the opinion that it is far “easier” to gath-er around something “more concrete”, like a local newspa-per, and, on the other, the view that to talk “now” about an All-Russian organisation means to propagate armchairthoughts, or, bluntly put, “now” it is already too late! Butwhat of the “extensive organisation of local newspapers”—isit not too late for that, my dear L. 
 Nadezhdin? And comparewith this Iskra ’s point of view and tactical line: excitative terror is nonsense; to talk of an organisation of average peo-ple and of the extensive publication of local newspapers means to fling the door wide open to Economism. 
 We must speakof a single All-Russian organisation of revolutionaries, andit will never be too late to talk of that until the real, not apaper, assault begins. 
 “Yes, as far as organisation is concerned the situation is anything but brilliant,” continues Nadezhdin. 
 “Yes, Iskra is entirely right in saying that the mass of our fighting forces consists of volunteers andinsurgents.... 
 You do well to give such a sober picture of the state ofour forces. 
 But why, at the same time, do you forget that the masses are not ours at all , and consequently, will not ask us when to begin military operations; they will simply go and ‘rebel’.... 
 When the crowd itself breaks out with its elemental destructive force it may overwhelm and sweep aside the ‘regular troops’ among whom we prepared all thetime to introduce extremely systematic organisation, but never man-aged to do so. 
” (Our italics. 
) Astounding logic! For the very reason that the “masses are not ours” it is stupid and unseemly to shout about an imme-diate “assault”, for assault means attack by regular troops and not a spontaneous mass upsurge. 
 For the very reason that the masses may overwhelm and sweep aside the regular troops we must without fail “manage to keep up” with the spontaneous upsurge by our work of “introducing extremely systematic organisation” in the regular troops, for the more we “manage” to introduce such organisation the more probab-ly will the regular troops not be overwhelmed by the masses,but will take their place at their head. 
 Nadezhdin is confusedbecause he imagines that troops in the course of systematicorganisation are engaged in something that isolates them from the masses, when in actuality they are engaged exclu-sively in all-sided and all-embracing political agitation, i. 
e. 
,precisely in work that brings closer and merges into a single whole the elemental destructive force of the masses and the conscious destructive force of the organisation of revolution-aries. 
 You, gentlemen, wish to lay the blame where it does not belong. 
 For it is precisely the Svoboda group that, by including terror in its programme , calls for an organisation of terrorists, and such an organisation would indeed preventour troops from establishing closer contacts with the masses,which, unfortunately, are still not ours, and which, unfor-tunately, do not yet ask us, or rarely ask us, when and how to launch their military operations. 
 “We shall miss the revolution itself,” continues Nadezhdin in his attempt to scare Iskra , “in the same way as we missed the recent events, which came upon us like a bolt from theblue. 
” This sentence, taken in connection with what has beenquoted above, clearly demonstrates the absurdity of the “eve-of-the-revolution point of view” invented by Svoboda . 
* Plain-ly put, this special “point of view” boils down to this thatit is too late “now” to discuss and prepare. 
 If that is the case,most worthy opponent of “bookishness”, what was the use ofwriting a pamphlet of 132 pages on questions of theory ** *The Eve of the Revolution , p. 
 62. 
 **In his Review of Questions of Theory , Nadezhdin, by the way, made almost no contribution whatever to the discussion of questionsof theory, apart, perhaps, from the following passage, a most peculiarone from the “eve-of-the-revolution point of view”: “Bernsteinism, onthe whole, is losing its acuteness for us at the present moment, as is the question whether Mr. 
 Adamovich will prove that Mr. 
 Struve has already earned a lacing, or, on the contrary, whether Mr. 
 Struve willrefute Mr. 
 Adamovich and will refuse to resign—it really makes nodifference, because the hour of revolution has struck” (p. 
 110). 
 Onecan hardly imagine a more glaring illustration of Nadezhdin’s and tactics”? Don’t you think it would have been more becoming for the “eve-of-the-revolution point of view” to have issued 132,000 leaflets containing the summary call, “Bang them—knock’em down!”? Those who make nation-wide political agitation the cornerstone of their programme, their tactics , and their organisational work , as Iskra does, stand the least risk of missing the revolution. 
 The people who are now engaged throughout Russia in weaving the network of connections that spread from the All-Russian newspaper not only didnot miss the spring events, but, on the contrary, gave us anopportunity to foretell them. 
 Nor did they miss the demon-strations that were described in Iskra , Nos. 
 13 and 14; on the contrary, they took part in them, clearly realising that it was their duty to come to the aid of the spontaneously rising masses and, at the same time, through the medium of thenewspaper, help all the comrades in Russia to inform them-selves of the demonstrations and to make use of their gatheredexperience. 
 And if they live they will not miss the revolu-tion, which, first and foremost, will demand of us experience in agitation, ability to support (in a Social-Democratic man-ner) every protest, as well as direct the spontaneous move-ment, while safeguarding it from the mistakes of friends andthe traps of enemies. 
 We have thus come to the last reason that compels us so strongly to insist on the plan of an organisation centred round an All-Russian newspaper, through the common work for the common newspaper. 
 Only such organisation willensure the flexibility required of a militant Social-Democrat-ic organisation, viz. 
, the ability to adapt itself immedi-ately to the most diverse and rapidly changing conditions of struggle, the ability, “on the one hand, to avoid an open battle against an overwhelming enemy, when the enemy has con-centrated all his forces at one spot and yet, on the other, to infinite disregard for theory. 
 We have proclaimed “the eve of the revo-lution”, therefore “it really makes no difference” whether or not the orthodox will succeed in finally driving the Critics from their posi-tions! Our wiseacre fails to see that it is precisely during the revolutionthat we shall stand in need of the results of our theoretical battles with the Critics in order to be able resolutely to combat their practi-cal positions! take advantage of his unwieldiness and to attack him when and where he least expects it”. 
 * It would be a grievous error indeed to build the Party organisation in anticipation onlyof outbreaks and street fighting, or only upon the “forwardmarch of the drab everyday struggle”. 
 We must always conduct our everyday work and always be prepared for everysituation, because very frequently it is almost impossible toforesee when a period of outbreak will give way to a period of calm. 
 In the instances, however, when it is possible to do so, we could not turn this foresight to account for the pur-pose of reconstructing our organisation; for in an autocraticcountry these changes take place with astonishing rapidity,being sometimes connected with a single night raid by thetsarist janizaries. 
 191 And the revolution itself must not by any means be regarded as a single act (as the Nadezhdinsapparently imagine), but as a series of more or less powerfuloutbreaks rapidly alternating with periods of more or lesscomplete calm. 
 For that reason, the principal content of theactivity of our Party organisation, the focus of this activity,should be work that is both possible and essential in the period of a most powerful outbreak as well as in the period of complete calm, namely, work of political agitation, con-nected throughout Russia, illuminating all aspects of life,and conducted among the broadest possible strata of themasses. 
 But this work is unthinkable in present-day Russia without an All-Russian newspaper, issued very frequently. 
 The organisation, which will form round this newspaper, the organisation of its collaborators (in the broad sense of the word, i. 
e. 
, all those working for it), will be ready for *Iskra , No. 
 4, “Where To Begin”. 
 “Revolutionary culturists, who do not accept the eve-of-the-revolution point of view, are not in the least perturbed by the prospect of working for a long period of time,” writes Nadezhdin (p. 
 62). 
 This brings us to observe: Unless we are able to devise political tactics and an organisational plan for work over a very long period , while ensuring, in the very process of this work , our Party’s readiness to be at its post and fulfil its duty in every contingency whenever the march of events is accelerated—unlesswe succeed in doing this, we shall prove to be but miserable political adventurers. 
 Only Nadezhdin, who began but yesterday to describe himself as a Social-Democrat, can forget that the aim of Social-Democ-racy is to transform radically the conditions of life of the whole of mankind and that for this reason it is not permissible for a Social-Democrat to be “perturbed” by the question of the duration of the work. 
 everything , from upholding the honour, the prestige, and the continuity of the Party in periods of acute revolutionary “de-pression” to preparing for, appointing the time for, and carry-ing out the nation-wide armed uprising . 
 Indeed, picture to yourselves a very ordinary occurrence in Russia—the total round-up of our comrades in oneor several localities. 
 In the absence of a single , common, regular activity that combines all the local organisations, such round-ups frequently result in the interruption of the work for many months. 
 If, however, all the local organisa-tions had one common activity, then, even in the event of avery serious round-up, two or three energetic persons couldin the course of a few weeks establish contact between thecommon centre and new youth circles, which, as we know, spring up very quickly even now. 
 And when the common ac-tivity, hampered by the arrests, is apparent to all, new cir-cles will be able to come into being and make connectionswith the centre even more rapidly. 
 On the other hand, picture to yourselves a popular upris-ing. 
 Probably everyone will now agree that we must think of this and prepare for it. 
 But how ? Surely the Central Com-mittee cannot appoint agents to all localities for the purposeof preparing the uprising. 
 Even if we had a Central Commit-tee, it could achieve absolutely nothing by such appoint-ments under present-day Russian conditions. 
 But a networkof agents * that would form in the course of establishing and distributing the common newspaper would not have to “sit about and wait” for the call for an uprising, but could carryon the regular activity that would guarantee the highest *Alas, alas! Again I have let slip that awful word “agents”, which jars so much on the democratic cars of the Martynovs! I wonderwhy this word did not offend the heroes of the seventies and yet offends the amateurs of the nineties? I like the word, because it clearly and trenchantly indicates the common cause to which all the agents bend their thoughts and actions, and if I had to replacethis word by another, the only word I might select would be theword “collaborator”, if it did not suggest a certain bookishnessand vagueness. 
 The thing we need is a military organisation of agents. 
 However, the numerous Martynovs (particularly abroad), whose favourite pastime is “mutual grants of generalships to oneanother”, may instead of saying “passport agent” prefer to say,“Chief of the Special Department for Supplying Revolutionarieswith Passports”. 
 etc. 
 probability of success in the event of an uprising. 
 Such activ-ity would strengthen our contacts with the broadest strata of the working masses and with all social strata that are dis-contented with the autocracy, which is of such importancefor an uprising. 
 Precisely such activity would serve to cul-tivate the ability to estimate correctly the general politicalsituation and, consequently, the ability to select the propermoment for an uprising. 
 Precisely such activity would train all local organisations to respond simultaneously to the same political questions, incidents, and events that agitate thewhole of Russia and to react to such “incidents” in the mostvigorous, uniform, and expedient manner possible; for anuprising is in essence the most vigorous, most uniform, andmost expedient “answer” of the entire people to the govern-ment. 
 Lastly, it is precisely such activity that would train all revolutionary organisations throughout Russia to main-tain the most continuous, and at the same time the mostsecret, contacts with one another, thus creating real Party unity; for without such contacts it will be impossible collec-tively to discuss’ the plan for the uprising and to take the nec-essary preparatory measures on the eve, measures that must be kept in the strictest secrecy. 
 In a word, the “plan for an All-Russian political newspa-per”, far from representing the fruits of the labour of armchairworkers, infected with dogmatism and bookishness (as itseemed to those who gave but little thought to it), is the most practical plan for immediate and all-round preparation of the uprising, with, at the same time, no loss of sight for amoment of the pressing day-to-day work. 
 CONCLUSION The history of Russian Social-Democracy can be distinc-tly divided into three periods: The first period embraces about ten years, approximately from 1884 to 1894. 
 This was the period of the rise and consol-idation of the theory and programme of Social-Democracy. 
The adherents of the new trend in Russia were very few innumber. 
 Social-Democracy existed without a working-classmovement, and as a political party it was at the embryonic stage of development. 
 The second period embraces three or four years—1894-98. 
 In this period Social-Democracy appeared on the scene asa social movement, as the upsurge of the masses of the people,as a political party. 
 This is the period of its childhood andadolescence. 
 The intelligentsia was fired with a vast and gen-eral zeal for struggle against Narodism and for going among the workers; the workers displayed a general enthusiasm forstrike action. 
 The movement made enormous strides. 
 Themajority of the leaders were young people who had not reached“the age of thirty-five” which to Mr. 
 N. 
 Mikhailovskyappeared to be a sort of natural border-line. 
 Owing to their youth, they proved to be untrained for practical work and they left the scene with astonishing rapidity. 
 But in the major-ity of cases the scope of their activity was very wide. 
 Manyof them had begun their revolutionary thinking as adherentsof Narodnaya Volya. 
 Nearly all had in their early youth en-thusiastically worshipped the terrorist heroes. 
 It required a struggle to abandon the captivating impressions of those heroic traditions, and the struggle was accompanied by thebreaking off of personal relations with people who were deter-mined to remain loyal to the Narodnaya Volya and for whom the young Social-Democrats had profound respect. 
 The strug-gle compelled the youthful leaders to educate themselves to read illegal literature of every trend, and to study closelythe questions of legal Narodism. 
 Trained in this struggle,Social-Democrats went into the working-class movementwithout “for a moment” forgetting either the theory of Marx-ism, which brightly illumined their path, or the task of overthrowing the autocracy. 
 The formation of the Par-ty in the spring of 1898 was the most striking and atthe same time the last act of the Social-Democrats of this period. 
 The third period, as we have seen, was prepared in 1897 and it definitely cut off the second period in 1898 (1898-?). 
 This was a period of disunity, dissolution, and vacillation. 
 During adolescence a youth’s voice breaks. 
 And so, in thisperiod, the voice of Russian Social-Democracy began tobreak, to strike a false note—on the one hand, in the writ-ings of Messrs. 
 Struve and Prokopovich, of Bulgakov andBerdyaev, and on the other, in those of V. 
 I—n and R. 
 M. 
, of B. 
 Krichevsky and Martynov. 
 But it was only the leaders who wandered about separately and drew back; the movementitself continued to grow, and it advanced with enormousstrides. 
 The proletarian struggle spread to new strata of theworkers and extended to the whole of Russia, at the sametime indirectly stimulating the revival of the democratic spirit among the students and among other sections of the population. 
 The political consciousness of the leaders, how-ever, capitulated before the breadth and power of the sponta-neous upsurge; among the Social-Democrats, another typehad become dominant—the type of functionaries, trainedalmost exclusively on “legal Marxist” literature, which proved to be all the more inadequate the more the spontaneity of the masses demanded political consciousness on the partof the leaders. 
 The leaders not only lagged behind in regard totheory (“freedom of criticism”) and practice (“primitiveness”),but they sought to justify their backwardness by all mannerof high-flown arguments. 
 Social-Democracy was degraded to the level of trade-unionism by the Brentano adherents in legal literature, and by the tail-enders in illegal literature. 
The Credo programme began to be put into operation, espe-cially when the “primitive methods” of the Social-Democrats caused a revival of revolutionary non-Social-Democratic tendencies. 
 If the reader should feel critical that I have dealt at too great length with a certain Rabocheye Dyelo , I can say only that Rabocheye Dyelo acquired “historical” signifi-cance because it most notably reflected the “spirit” of thisthird period. 
 * It was not the consistent R. 
 M. 
, but the weathercock Krichevskys and Martynovs who were able properly to express the disunity and vacillation, the read-iness to make concessions to “criticism” to “Economism”,and to terrorism. 
 Not the lofty contempt for practicalwork displayed by some worshipper of the “absolute” ischaracteristic of this period, but the combination of petti-fogging practice and utter disregard for theory. 
 It was not so much in the direct rejection of “grandiose phrases” that theheroes of this period engaged as in their vulgarisation. 
 Sci-entific socialism ceased to be an integral revolutionary theo-ry and became a hodgepodge “freely” diluted with the contentof every new German textbook that appeared; the slogan “class struggle” did not impel to broader and more energetic activity but served as a balm, since “the economic struggleis inseparably linked with the political struggle”; the ideaof a party did not serve as a call for the creation of a mili-tant organisation of revolutionaries, but was used to justifysome sort of “revolutionary bureaucracy” and infantile play-ing at “democratic” forms. 
 When the third period will come to an end and the fourth (now heralded by many portents) will begin we do not know. 
We are passing from the sphere of history to the sphere ofthe present and, partly, of the future. 
 But we firmly believethat the fourth period will lead to the consolidation of mili-tant Marxism, that Russian Social-Democracy will emerge from the crisis in the full flower of manhood, that the oppor-*I could also reply with the German proverb: Den Sack schlägt man , den Esel meint man (you beat the sack, but you mean the donkey). 
 Not Rabocheye Dyelo alone, but also the broad mass o f practical workers and theoreticians was carried away by the “criti-cism” à la mode , becoming confused in regard to the question of spontaneity and lapsing from the Social-Democratic to the trade-un-ionist conception of our political and organisational tasks. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR tunist rearguard will be “replaced” by the genuine vanguard of the most revolutionary class. 
 In the sense of calling for such a “replacement” and by way of summing up what has been expounded above, wemay meet the question, What is to be done? with the briefreply: Put an End to the Third Period. 
 Appendix192 THE ATTEMPT TO UNITE ISKRA WITH RABOCHEYE DYELO It remains for us to describe the tactics adopted and consistently pursued by Iskra in its organisational relations with Rabocheye Dyelo . 
 These tactics were fully expressed in Iskra , No. 
 1, in the article entitled “The Split in the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad”. 
 * From the outset we adopted the point of view that the real Union of RussianSocial-Democrats Abroad, which at the First Congress ofour Party was recognised as its representative abroad, had split into two organisations; that the question of the Party’s representation remained an open one, having been settledonly temporarily and conditionally by the election, at theInternational Congress in Paris, of two members to representRussia on the International Socialist Bureau, 193 one from each of the two sections of the divided Union Abroad. 
 We declared that fundamentally Rabocheye Dyelo was wrong; in principle we emphatically took the side of the Emanci-pation of Labour group, at the same time refusing to enterinto the details of the split and noting the services renderedby the Union Abroad in the sphere of purely practicalwork. 
 ** Consequently, ours was, to a certain extent, a waiting policy. 
 We made a concession to the opinions prevailingamong the majority of the Russian Social-Democrats thatthe most determined opponents of Economism could work *See present edition, Vol. 
 4, pp. 
 378-79. 
— Ed. 
 **Our judgement of the split was based, not only upon a study of the literature on the subject, but also on information gathered abroadby several members of our organisation. 
 hand in hand with the Union Abroad because it had repeat-edly declared its agreement in principle with the Emanci-pation of Labour group, without, allegedly, taking an inde-pendent position on fundamental questions of theory andtactics. 
 The correctness of our position was indirectly provedby the fact that almost simultaneously with the appearanceof the first issue of Iskra (December 1900) three members separated from the Union, formed the so-called “Initiators’Group”, and offered their services: (1) to the foreign sectionof the Iskra organisation, (2) to the revolutionary So-tsial-Demokrat organisation, and (3) to the Union Abroad, as mediators in negotiations for reconciliation. 
 The first twoorganisations at once announced their agreement; the third turned down the offer. 
 True, when a speaker related these facts at the “Unity” Conference last year, a member of theAdministrative Committee of the Union Abroad declaredthe rejection of the offer to have been due entirely to the fact that the Union Abroad was dissatisfied with the composi-tion of the Initiators’ Group. 
 While I consider it my duty tocite this explanation, I cannot, however, refrain from observ-ing that it is an unsatisfactory one; for, knowing that twoorganisations had agreed to enter into negotiations, the Uni-on Abroad could have approached them through anotherintermediary or directly. 
 In the spring of 1901 both Zarya (No. 
 1, April) and Iskra (No. 
 4, May) * entered into open polemics with Rabo-cheye Dyelo . 
 Iskra particularly attacked the article “A Historic Turn” in Rabocheye Dyelo , which, in its April supplement, that is, after the spring events, revealed instability on thequestion of terror and the calls for “blood”, with which manyhad been carried away at the time. 
 Notwithstanding thepolemics, the Union Abroad agreed to resume negotiationsfor reconciliation through the instrumentality of a new groupof “conciliators”. 
 A preliminary conference of representa-tives of the three cited organisations, held in June, frameda draft agreement on the basis of a very detailed “accord onprinciples”, which the Union Abroad published in thepamphlet Two Conferences , and the League Abroad in the pamphlet Documents of the “Unity ” Conference . 
 *See present volume, pp. 
 13-24. 
— Ed. 
 The contents of this accord on principles (more frequently named the Resolutions of the June Conference) make it per-fectly clear that we put forward as an absolute condition forunity the most emphatic repudiation of any and every mani-festation of opportunism generally, and of Russian opportun-ism in particular. 
 Paragraph 1 reads: “We repudiate allattempts to introduce opportunism into the proletarian classstruggle—attempts that have found expression in the so-called Economism, Bernsteinism, Millerandism, etc. 
” “Thesphere of Social-Democratic activities includes ... ideolog-ical struggle against all opponents of revolutionary Marx-ism” (4, c); “In every sphere of organisational and agitationalactivity Social-Democracy must never for a moment forgetthat the immediate task of the Russian proletariat is theoverthrow of the autocracy” (5, a); “… agitation, not only on the basis of the everyday struggle between wage-labourand capital” (5, b); “... we do not recognise ... a stage of purely economic struggle and of struggle for partial politi-cal demands” (5, c); “... we consider it important for the move-ment to criticise tendencies that make a principle of theelementariness and narrowness of the lower forms of themovement” (5, d). 
 Even a complete outsider, having readthese resolutions at all attentively, will have realised fromtheir very formulations that they are directed against peoplewho were opportunists and Economists, who, even for amoment, forgot the task of overthrowing the autocracy, whorecognised the theory of stages, who elevated narrowness toa principle, etc. 
 Anyone who has the least acquaintance withthe polemics conducted by the Emancipation of Labour group,Zarya , and Iskra against Rabocheye Dyelo cannot doubt for a single moment that these resolutions repudiate, pointby point, the very errors into which Rabocheye Dyelo strayed. 
 Hence, when a member of the Union Abroad declared at the“Unity” Conference that the articles in No. 
 10 of Rabocheye Dyelo had been prompted, not by a new “historic turn” on the part of the Union Abroad, but by the excessive “ab-stractness” of the resolution, * the assertion was justly ridi-culed by one of the speakers. 
 Far from being abstract, he said,the resolutions were incredibly concrete: one could see at aglance that they were “trying to catch somebody”. 
 *This assertion is repeated in Two Conferences , p. 
 25. 
 This remark occasioned a characteristic incident at the Conference. 
 On the one hand, Krichevsky, seizing upon the word “catch” in the belief that this was a slip of the tongue which betrayed our evil intentions (“to set a trap”), pathet-ically exclaimed: “Whom are they out to catch?” “Whomindeed?” rejoined Plekhanov sarcastically. 
 “Let me come tothe aid of Comrade Plekhanov’s lack of perspicacity,” repliedKrichevsky. 
 “Let me explain to him that the trap was set for the Editorial Board of Rabocheye Dyelo [general laughter] but we have not allowed ourselves to be caught!” (A remarkfrom the left: “All the worse for you!”) On the other hand,a member of the Borba group (a group of conciliators),opposing the amendments of the Union Abroad to theresolutions and desiring to defend our speaker, declared that obviously the word “catch” was dropped by chance in the heat of polemics. 
 For my part, I think the speaker responsible for uttering the word will hardly be pleased with this “defence”. 
 I thinkthe words “trying to catch somebody” were “true wordsspoken in jest”; we have always accused Rabocheye Dyelo o f instability and vacillation, and, naturally, we had to try to catch it in order to put a stop to the vacillation. 
 There is not the slightest suggestion of evil intent in this, forwe were discussing instability of principles And we succeed-ed in “catching” the Union Abroad in such comradelymanner * that Krichevsky himself and one other member of the Administrative Committee of the Union signed the June resolutions. 
 The articles in Rabocheye Dyelo , No. 
 10 (our comrades saw the issue for the first time when they arrived at the Confer-*Precisely: In the introduction to the June resolutions we said that Russian Social-Democracy as a whole always stood by the prin-ciples of the Emancipation of Labour group and that the particular service of the Union Abroad was its publishing and organising activi-ty. 
 In other words, we expressed our complete readiness to forget, thepast and to recognise the usefulness (for the cause) of the work of ourcomrades of the Union Abroad provided it completely ceased the vac-illation we tried to “catch”. 
 Any impartial person reading the June resolutions will only thus interpret them. 
 If the Union Abroad, after having caused a split by its new turn towards Economism (in its ar-ticles in No. 
 10 and in the amendments), now solemnly charges us withuntruth (Two Conferences , p. 
 30), because of what we said about its services, then, of course, such an accusation can only evoke a smile. 
 ence, a few days before the meetings started) clearly showed that a new turn had taken place in the Union Abroad in the period between the summer and the autumn: the Economists had once more gained the upper hand, and the EditorialBoard, which veered with every “wind”, again set out to de-fend “the most pronounced Bernsteinians” and “freedom ofcriticism”, to defend “spontaneity”, and through the lipsof Martynov to preach the “theory of restricting” the sphere of our political influence (for the alleged purpose of rendering this influence more complex). 
 Once again Parvus’ apt obser-vation that it is difficult to catch an opportunist witha formula has been proved correct. 
 An opportunist willreadily put his name to any formula and as readily abandon it, because opportunism means precisely a lack of definite and firm principles. 
 Today, the opportunists have repudiated all attempts to introduce opportunism, repudiated all narrow-ness, solemnly promised “never for a moment to forget aboutthe task of overthrowing the autocracy” and to carry on “agi-tation not only on the basis of the everyday struggle betweenwage-labour and capital”, etc. 
, etc. 
 But tomorrow they will change their form of expression and revert to their old tricks on the pretext of defending spontaneity and the forwardmarch of the drab everyday struggle, of extolling demandspromising palpable results, etc. 
 By continuing to assert thatin the articles in No. 
 10 “the Union Abroad did not and doesnot now see any heretical departure from the general prin-ciples of the draft adopted at the conference” ( Two Confer-ences , p. 
 26), the Union Abroad merely reveals a complete lack of ability, or of desire, to understand the essentialpoints of the disagreements. 
 After the tenth issue of Rabocheye Dyelo , we could make one effort: open a general discussion in order to ascertain whether all the members of the Union Abroad agreed with the articles and with the Editorial Board. 
 The Union Abroadis particularly displeased with us because of this and accusesus of trying to sow discord in its ranks, of interfering in oth-er people’s business, etc. 
 These accusations are obvi-ously unfounded, since with an elected editorial board that “veers” with every wind, however light, everything depends upon the direction of the wind, and we defined the directionat private meetings at which no one was present, except mem-bers of the organisations intending to unite. 
 The amendments to the June resolutions submitted in the name of the Union Abroad have removed the last shadow of hope of arriving at agreement. 
 The amendments are documentary evidence ofthe new turn towards Economism and of the fact that themajority of the Union members are in agreement with Rabo-cheye Dyelo , No. 
 10. 
 It was moved to delete the words “so-called Economism” from the reference to manifestations of opportunism (on the plea that “the meaning” of these words “was vague”; but if that were so, all that was requiredwas a more precise definition of the nature of the wide-spread error), and to delete “Millerandism” (although Kri-chevsky had defended it in Rabocheye Dyelo , No. 
 2-3, pp. 
 83-84, and still more openly in Vorwärts *). 
 Notwithstand-ing the fact that the June resolutions definitely indicated that the task of Social-Democracy is “to guide every mani-festation of the proletarian struggle against all forms of po-litical, economic , and social oppression”, thereby calling for the introduction of system and unity in all these manifesta-tions of the struggle, the Union Abroad added the wholly superfluous words that “the economic struggle is a powerful stimulus to the mass movement” (taken by itself, this asser-tion cannot be disputed, but with the existence of narrowEconomism it could not but give occasion for false interpre-tations). 
 Moreover, even the direct constriction of “politics” was suggested for the June resolutions, both by the dele-tion of the words “not for a moment” (to forget the aim of overthrowing the autocracy) and by the addition of thewords “the economic struggle is the most widely applicable means of drawing the masses into active political struggle”. 
Naturally, upon the submission of such amendments, thespeakers on our side refused, one after another, to take the floor, considering it hopeless to continue negotiations with people who were again turning towards Economism and werestriving to secure for themselves freedom to vacillate. 
 “It was precisely the preservation of the independent features and the autonomy of Rabocheye Dyelo , considered by the Union to be the sine qua non of the durability of *A polemic on the subject started in Vorwärts between its present editor, Kautsky, and the Editorial Board of Zarya . 
 We shall not fail to acquaint the Russian reader with this controversy. 
194 our future agreement, that Iskra regarded as the stumbling-block to agreement” ( Two Conferences , p. 
 25). 
 This is most inexact. 
 We never had any designs against Rabocheye Dyelo ’s autonomy. 
 * We did indeed absolutely refuse to recognise the independence of its features, if by “independent features”is meant independence on questions of principle in theo-ry and tactics. 
 The June resolutions contain an utter repu-diation of such independence of features, because, in prac-tice, such “independence of features” has always meant, as we have pointed out, all manner of vacillations fostering thedisunity which prevails among us and which is intolerablefrom the Party point of view. 
 Rabocheye Dyelo ’s articles in its tenth issue, together with its “amendments” clearly re-vealed its desire to preserve this kind of independence of features, and such a desire naturally and inevitably led to a rupture and a declaration of war. 
 But all of us were readyto recognise Rabocheye Dyelo ’s “independence of features” in the sense that it should concentrate on definite lit-erary functions. 
 A proper distribution of these functionsnaturally called for: (1) a theoretical magazine, (2) a politi-cal newspaper, and (3) popular collections of articles and pop-ular pamphlets. 
 Only by agreeing to such a distribution offunctions would Rabocheye Dyelo have proved that it sincere-ly desired to abandon once and for all its errors, against which the June resolutions were directed. 
 Only such a dis-tribution of functions would have removed all possibility of friction, effectively guaranteed a durable agreement, and, at the same time, served as a basis for a revival and for newsuccesses of our movement. 
 At present not a single Russian Social-Democrat can have any doubts that the final rupture between the revolutionaryand the opportunist tendencies was caused, not by any “organ-isational” circumstances, but by the desire of the opportun-ists to consolidate the independent features of opportunismand to continue to cause confusion of mind by the disquisi-tions of the Krichevskys and Martynovs. 
 *That is, if the editorial consultations in connection with the es-tablishment of a joint supreme council of the combined organisations are not to be regarded as a restriction of autonomy. 
 But in June Ra-bocheye Dyelo agreed to this. 
 CORRECTION TO WHAT IS TO BE DONE? The Initiators’ Group of whom I speak in the pamphlet What Is To Be Done? , p. 
 141, * have asked me to make the following correction to my description of the part they playedin the attempt to reconcile the Social-Democratic organisa-tions abroad: “Of the three members of this group, only oneleft the Union Abroad at the end of 1900; the others left in1901, only after becoming convinced that it was impossible to obtain the Union’s consent to a conference with the Iskra organisation abroad and the revolutionary Sotsial-Demo-krat organisation, which the Initiators’ Group had proposed. 
 The Administrative Committee of the Union Abroad atfirst rejected this proposal, contending that the personscomprising the Initiators’ Group were ‘not competent’ to act as mediators, and it expressed the desire to enter into di-rect contact with the Iskra organisation abroad. 
 Soon there-after, however, the Administrative Committee of the UnionAbroad informed the Initiators’ Group that following theappearance of the first number of Iskra containing the report of the split in the Union, it had altered its decision and no longer desired to maintain relations with Iskra . 
 After this, how can one explain the statement made by a member ofthe Administrative Committee of the Union Abroad that thelatter’s rejection of a conference was called forth entirely b y its dissatisfaction with the composition of the Initiators’Group? It is true that it is equally difficult to explain why the *See present volume, p. 
 521-22. 
— Ed. 
 Administrative Committee of the Union Abroad agreed to a conference in June of last year, for the article in the first issue of Iskra still remained in force and Iskra ’s ‘negative’ attitude to the Union Abroad was still more strongly expressed in thefirst issue of Zarya , and in No. 
 4 of Iskra , both of which ap-peared prior to the June Conference. 
” N. 
 Lenin Iskra , No. 
 19, April 1, 1902 Published according to the Iskra text N O T E S 1 2 3 4 5“Where To Begin ” was published in Iskra and reissued by local Social-Democratic organisations as a separate pamphlet. 
 TheSiberian Social-Democratic League printed 5,000 copies of thepamphlet and distributed it throughout Siberia. 
 The pamphletwas also distributed in Samara, Tambov, Nizhni-Novgorod, andother Russian cities. 
 p. 
 13 Rabocheye Dyelo (The Workers ’ Cause )—a journal with “Economist” views, organ of the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad. 
It appeared irregularly and was published in Geneva from April1899 to February 1902 under the editorship of B. 
 N. 
 Krichevsky,A. 
 S. 
 Martynov, and V. 
 P. 
 Ivanshin. 
 Altogether 12 numbersappeared in nine issues. 
 Lenin criticised the views of the Rabocheye Dyelo group in his What Is To Be Done? (see present volume, pp. 
 347-529). 
 p. 
 17 “Listok ” Rabochevo Dyela (Rabocheye Dyelo Supplement )—of which eight numbers were issued in Geneva, at irregular intervals,between June 1900 and July 1901. 
 p. 
 17 Rabochaya Mysl (Workers ’ Thought) —an “Economist” newspa-per, organ of the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad,published from October 1897 to December 1902. 
 Altogether 16issues appeared: numbers 3 to 11 and number 16 were published inBerlin, the remaining numbers in St. 
 Petersburg. 
 It was edited byK. 
 M. 
 Takhtarev and others. 
 Lenin characterised the paper’s views as a Russian variety of international opportunism and criticised them in a number ofhis articles published in Iskra and in other works including What Is To Be Done? p. 
 17 The reference is to the article “The Urgent Tasks of Our Movement”, which was published as the leading article in Iskra , No. 
 1, Decem-ber 1900 (see present edition, Vol. 
 4, pp. 
 366-71). 
 Iskra (The Spark )—the first All-Russian illegal Marxist news-paper, founded by Lenin in 1900. 
 The foundation of a militantorgan of revolutionary Marxism was the main task confrontingRussian Social-Democrats at the time. 
 Since the publication of a revolutionary newspaper in Russia was impossible, owing to police persecution, Lenin, while stillin exile in Siberia, worked out all the details of a plan to publish the paper abroad. 
 When his term of exile ended in January 1900, he immediately began to put his plan into effect. 
 In February he conducted negotiations with Vera Zasulich, who had come ille-gally to St. 
 Petersburg from abroad, on the participation of the Emancipation of Labour group in the publication of an All-Rus-sian Marxist newspaper. 
 The so-called Pskov Conference was held in April, with V. 
 I. 
 Lenin, L. 
 Martov (Y. 
 O. 
 Tsederbaum), A. 
 N. 
 Potresov, S. 
 I. 
 Radchenko, and the “legal Marxists” (P. 
 B. 
 Struve and M. 
 I. 
 Tugan-Baranovsky) participating. 
 The conference heard and discussed Lenin’s draft editorial declaration on the programme and the aims of the All-Russian newspaper ( Iskra ) and the scientific and political magazine ( Zarya ). 
 Lenin visited a number of Russian cities—St. 
 Petersburg, Riga, Pskov, Nizhni-Novgorod, Ufa, and Samara—establishing contact with Social-Democratic groups and individual Social-Democrats and obtain-ing their support for Iskra . 
 In August, when Lenin arrived in Switzerland, he and Potresov held a conference with the Eman-cipation of Labour group on the programme and the aims of the newspaper and the magazine on possible contributors, on the com-position of Editorial Board, and on the problem of residence. 
 For an account of the founding of Iskra see the article “How the ‘Spark’ was Nearly Extinguished” (see present edition, Vol. 
 4, pp. 
 333-49). 
 The first issue of Lenin’s Iskra was published in Leipzig in December 1900; the ensuing issues were published in Munich; from July 1902 it was published in London; and from the spring of 1903 in Geneva. 
 The Editorial Board consisted of V. 
 I. 
 Lenin, G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov, L. 
 Martov, P. 
 B. 
 Axelrod, A. 
 N. 
 Potresov, and V. 
 I. 
 Zasulich. 
 The first secretary of the Editorial Board was I. 
 G. 
 Smidovich-Leman. 
 From the spring of 1901 the post was taken over by N. 
 K. 
 Krup-skaya, who was also in charge of all correspondence between Iskra and Russian Social-Democratic organisations. 
 Lenin was actually Editor-in-Chief and the leading figure in Iskra . 
 He published his articles on all important questions of Party organisation and the class struggle of the proletariat in Russia and dealt with the most important events in world affairs. 
 Iskra became, as Lenin had planned, a rallying centre for the Party forces, a centre for the training of leading Party work-ers. 
 In a number of Russian cities (St. 
 Petersburg, Moscow Samara, and others) groups and committees of the Russian So-cial-Democratic Labour Party (R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
) were organised along Lenin’s Iskra line. 
 Iskra organisations sprang up and worked under the direct leadership of Lenin’s disciples and comrades-in-arms: N. 
 E. 
 Bauman, I. 
 V. 
 Babushkin, S. 
 I. 
 Gusev, M. 
 I. 
 Kalinin, G. 
 M. 
 Krzhizhanovsky, and others. 
 The newspaper played a decisive role in the struggle for the Marxist Party, in the defeat of the “Econ-omists”, and in the unification of the dispersed Social-Democratic study circles. 
 On the initiative and with the direct participation of Lenin, the Editorial Board drew up a draft programme of the Party 6 7(published in Iskra , No. 
 21) and prepared the Second Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, which was held in July and August 1903. 
 By the time the Congress was convened the majority of the local Social-Democratic organisations in Russia had joined forces with Iskra , approved its programme, organisational plan, and tacti-cal line, and accepted it as their leading organ. 
 By a special resolution, which noted the exceptional role played by Iskra in the struggle to build the Party, the Congress adopted the news-paper as the central organ of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 and approved an edi-torial board consisting of Lenin, Plekhanov, and Martov. 
 Despite the decision of the Congress, Martov refused to participate, and Nos. 
 46 to 51 were edited by Lenin and Plekhanov. 
 Later Ple-khanov went over to the Menshevik position and demanded that all the old Menshevik editors, notwithstanding their rejection by the Congress, be placed on the Editorial Board. 
 Lenin could not agree to this, and on October 19 (November 1, new style), 1903, he left the Iskra Editorial Board to strengthen his position in the Central Committee and from there to conduct a struggle against the Menshevik opportunists. 
 Issue No. 
 52 of Iskra was edited by Plekhanov alone. 
 On November 13 (26), 1903, Plekhanov, on his own initiative and in violation of the will of the Congress, co-opted all the old Menshevik editors on to the Editorial Board. 
 Beginning with issue No. 
 52, the Mensheviks turned Iskra into their own, opportunist, organ. 
 p. 
 18 This passage refers to the mass revolutionary actions of students and workers—political demonstrations, meetings, strikes—that took place in February and March 1901, in St. 
 Petersburg, Moscow, Kiev, Kharkov, Kazan, Yaroslavl, Warsaw, Belostok, Tomsk, Odessa, and other cities in Russia. 
 The student movement of 1900-01, which began with academ-ic demands, acquired the character of revolutionary action against the reactionary policy of the autocracy; it was supported by the advanced workers and it met with a response among all strata of Russian society. 
 The direct cause of the demonstrations and strikes in February and March 1901, was the drafting of 183 Kiev University students into the army as a punitive act for their participation in a students’ meeting (see present edition, Vol. 
 4, pp. 
 414-19). 
 The government launched a furious attack on par-ticipants in the revolutionary actions; the police and the Cossacks dispersed demonstrations and assaulted the participants; hun-dreds of students were arrested and expelled from colleges and uni-versities. 
 On March 4 (17), 1901, the demonstration in the square in front of the Kazan Cathedral, in St. 
 Petersburg, was dispersed with particular brutality. 
 The February-March events were evidence of the revolutionary upsurge in Russia; the participation of workers in the movement under political slogans was of tre-mendous importance. 
 p. 
 20 The reference is to Lenin’s work What Is To Be Done? Burning Questions of Our Movement (see present volume, pp. 
 347-529). 
 p. 
 20 8 9 10 11 12 13Lenin refers to a contribution to Iskra , No. 
 5 (June 1901), enti-tled “The First of May in Russia”, which was published in the sec-tion “Chronicle of the Working-Class Movement and Letters from Factories”. 
 p. 
 27 Lenin refers to Frederick Engels’ Introduction to Karl Marx’s work The Class Struggles in France , 1848 to 1850 ; the 1895 edi-tion of the Introduction was distorted by the German Social-Democrats and construed by them to mean a rejection of armed uprising and barricade fighting. 
 The full text of the Introduction was first published according to Engels’ manuscript in the U. 
S. 
S. 
R. 
 (see Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 118-38). 
 p. 
 29 Lenin refers here to the clash between the police and the striking workers of the Maxwell factory in St. 
 Petersburg in December 1898. 
 For several hours the police (200 on foot and 100 mounted police), who had arrived to arrest the “ringleaders” of the strike, could not penetrate into the workers’ barracks. 
 The workers, who had barricaded themselves, fought against the police with logs, with bottles, and with boiling water which they poured on the police. 
 p. 
 29 Lenin refers here to the brutality of the tsarist police and Cos-sacks in dispersing a demonstration in Kazan Square, St. 
 Peters-burg, on March 4 (17), 1901. 
 Thousands of students and workers took part in this protest demonstration against the drafting of students into the army. 
 The tsarist government used armed force to disperse the demonstration. 
 The demonstrators were brutally beaten, several were killed and many crippled. 
 A detailed report of the event was given in Iskra , No. 
 3, in April 1901. 
 p. 
 30 “The Persecutors of the Zemstvo and the Hannibals of Liberalism ” is a criticism of the confidential Memorandum, “The Autocracy and the Zemstvo”, written by the tsarist minister S. 
 Y. 
 Witte and published abroad illegally, and of the preface to it written by the liberal P. 
 B. 
 Struve. 
 Lenin’s article occasioned serious disagreement among the edi-tors of Iskra , Plekhanov and several other members of the Edito-rial Board expressing themselves against it. 
 The polemic over the article which the Board members conduct-ed in their correspondence lasted about a month. 
 Lenin accept-ed some suggestions to alter certain particular formulations but emphatically refused to modify the sharp tone of exposure and the direction of the article. 
 p. 
 31 Zarya (Dawn )—a Marxist scientific and political magazine pub-lished in Stuttgart in 1901-02 by the Iskra Editorial Board. 
 The following articles of Lenin were published in Zarya : “Casual Notes”, “The Persecutors of the Zemstvo and the Hanni-bals of Liberalism”, the first four chapters of “The Agrarian Ques-14 15 16 17tion and the ‘Critics of Marx’” (published under the title “The ‘Critics’ on the Agrarian Question”), “Review of Home Affairs”, “The Agrarian Programme of Russian Social-Democracy”. 
 Alto-gether four numbers (in three issues) appeared: No. 
 1—April 1901 (actually on March 23, new style), Nos. 
 2-3—December 1901, and No. 
 4—August 1902. 
 p. 
 35 The “Regulations Governing Redemption by Peasants Who Have Emerged from Serf Dependence ” signed by Alexander II on Feb-ruary 19, 1861, together with the Manifesto announcing the abo-lition of serfdom. 
 Kolokol (The Bell )—a revolutionary periodical published under the motto of Vivos voco! (I call on the living!) by A. 
 I. 
 Herzen and N. 
 P. 
 Ogaryov from July 1, 1857 to April 1865, in London and from 1865 to December 1868, in Geneva. 
 In 1868 the periodical was published in French with a supplement in Russian. 
 Kolokol wa s published in an edition of 2,500 copies and spread throughout Rus-sia. 
 It exposed the tyranny of the autocracy, the plunder and em-bezzlement of the civil servants, and the ruthless exploitation of the peasants by the landlords. 
 Kolokol was the leading organ of the revolutionary uncensored press and the precursor of the working-class press in Russia; it played an important role in the development of the general-dem-ocratic and revolutionary movement, in the struggle against the autocracy and against serfdom. 
 La Revue des deux mondes (Review of the Two Worlds )—a French bourgeois-liberal monthly published in Paris from 1829 to 1940. 
 It began as a literary and art journal, but subsequently began to devote considerable space to philosophy and politics. 
 Some of the most eminent writers contributed to the review— among them Victor Hugo, George Sand, Honoré de Balzac, and Alexandre Dumas. 
 Since 1948 it has been published under the title La Revue. 
 Literature , histoire , arts et sciences des deux Katkov , M. 
 N. 
 —reactionary journalist. 
 From 1851 he edited Moskovskiye Vedomosti (Moscow Recorder ). 
 He was a rabid oppo-progress. 
 Civil Mediator —an administrative office instituted by the tsar-ist government at the time of the implementation of the “Peas-ant Reform” of 1861. 
 The civil mediators, appointed by the gov-ernor from among the local nobility, where empowered to inves-tigate and render decisions on conflicts between peasants and land-lords that occurred during the implementation of the “Regula-tions” on the emancipation of the peasants; they were actually intended to be protectors of the interests of the ruling classes. 
 The chief function of the civil mediators was to draw up “titlep. 
 37p. 
 37 nent, not only of the revolutionary movement, but of all socialthe two world s). 
 p. 
 37mondes (The Review . 
 The literature , history , arts and sciences of 18 19 20 21 22deeds” which gave the precise dimensions of the peasants’ al-lotments and their location, as well as details of the obligations of the peasants; the mediators were also charged with the supervi-sion of peasant local self-government bodies. 
 The mediators approved the elected officials of the peasant administration, had the right to impose penalties upon them, to arrest or fine them, and to annul the decisions of village meetings. 
 In this passage Lenin refers to the liberal-minded civil medi-ators in Tver Gubernia, who refused to implement the “Regula-tions” and who decided to be guided in their work by the decisions of the Assembly of the Nobility in their gubernia; this Assembly, in February 1862, had formally recognised the unsatisfactory nature of the “Regulations” and the necessity for the immediate redemption of peasant lands with state aid, as well as the introduction of a number of democratic institutions. 
 The Tver civil mediators were arrested by the tsarist government and each was sentenced to over two years’ imprisonment. 
 p. 
 38 Raznochintsi (i. 
e. 
, “men of different estates”)—the Russian com-moner-intellectuals, drawn from the small townsfolk, the clergy, the merchant classes, the peasantry, as distinct from those drawn from the nobility. 
 p. 
 38 To Young Russia —a proclamation issued by P. 
 G. 
 Zaichnevsky’s revolutionary group in May 1862. 
 The proclamation called for revolutionary action against the autocracy and advanced the slogan for “a social and democratic Russian republic” in the form of a federation of the regions. 
 p. 
 38 Chernyshevsky, N. 
 G. 
 (1828-1889)—the great Russian revolutionary democrat, materialist philosopher, scholar, critic, and author; the leader of the revolutionary movement in the sixties of the past century. 
 In 1862 Chernyshevsky was arrested and sentenced to 14 years’ penal servitude and exile for life in Siberia, he was al-lowed to return only in 1883. 
 Chernyshevsky had a tremendous in-fluence on the development of Russian progressive social thought. 
 p. 
 38 At the Glorious Post —a collection published by the Narodniks to commemorate forty years of literary and social activity (1860-1900) of the Narodnik ideologist N. 
 K. 
 Mikhailovsky. 
 p. 
 39 Sovremennik (The Contemporary )—a monthly scientific, politi-cal, and literary journal founded by Alexander Pushkin; published in St. 
 Petersburg from 1836 to 1866. 
 From 1847 it was published by N. 
 A. 
 Nekrasov and I. 
 I. 
 Panayev. 
 Among the contribu-tors were V. 
 G. 
 Belinsky, N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky, N. 
 A. 
 Dobrolyu-bov, N. 
 V. 
 Shelgunov, M. 
 Y. 
 Saltykov-Shchedrin, and M. 
 A. 
 Anto-novich. 
 Sovremennik was the most progressive journal of its day; it voiced the aspirations of revolutionary democracy. 
 It was closed down by the tsarist government in 1866. 
 p. 
 39 23 24 25 26 27 28Russkoye Slovo (Russian Word )—a prominently progressive lite-rary and political monthly published in St. 
 Petersburg from 1859 to 1866, among its contributors were D. 
 I. 
 Pisarev and N. 
 V. 
 Shel-gunov. 
 The journal had considerable influence among the youth of the sixties. 
 It was closed down by the tsarist government in 1866. 
 p. 
 39 Dyen (The Day )—a weekly newspaper published in Moscow from 1861 to 1865 by I. 
 S. 
 Aksakov. 
 p. 
 39 Literary Fund (The Literary Fund Society for Aid to Indigent Writers and Scientists and Their Families)—a legal benevolent society founded in St. 
 Petersburg in 1859 with the participation of N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky. 
 Under the pretext of helping indigent writers and scientists, the organisers made an attempt to muster the progressive, revolutionary-minded section of the intelligentsia. 
 In April 1862 an attempt was made by progressives to establish a legal student society through the founding of a “Department for Aid to Poor Students”. 
 The Department was headed by a student committee. 
 A considerable section of the committee was connected with the illegal revolutionary organisation Zemlya i Volya (Land and Freedom). 
 In June 1862 the Department was closed by the tsarist government. 
 p. 
 40 The Chess Club was founded on the initiative of N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshev-sky and his closest associates in St. 
 Petersburg in January 1862. 
 Among the leading members of the Club were N. 
 A. 
 Nekrasov, the brothers A. 
 A. 
 and N. 
 A. 
 Serno-Solovyevich, the brothers V. 
 S. 
 and N. 
 S. 
 Kurochkin, P. 
 L. 
 Lavrov, G. 
 Y. 
 Blagosvetlov, G. 
 Z. 
 Yeliseyev, and N. 
 G. 
 Pomyalovsky. 
 Members of the illegal Zem-lya i Volya organisation also belonged to the Club. 
 The Chess Club was actually a literary club, the centre of the St. 
 Petersburg revo-lutionary-minded intelligentsia. 
 In June 1862 the Club was closed by the Tsarist government. 
 p. 
 40 Radishchev , A. 
 N. 
 (1749-1802)—Russian writer and revolution-ary. 
 In his famous work A Journey from St. 
 Petersburg to Moscow , he made the first open attack on serfdom in Russia. 
 By order of Catherine II he was sentenced to death for the book, but the sen-tence was commuted to 10 years’ exile in Siberia. 
 He returned from exile under amnesty, but when the tsarist government threatened him with new persecutions he committed suicide. 
 Lenin considered Radishchev to have been one of the most out-standing champions of progress among the Russian people. 
 p. 
 41 Arakcheyev , A. 
 A . 
—reactionary tsarist statesman at the end of the eighteenth and the beginning of nineteenth centuries; he greatly influenced home and foreign policies during the reigns of Paul I and Alexander I. 
 An epoch of unlimited police despotism and the outrages of the controlling military is associated with his name (“Arakcheyevshchina”). 
 p. 
 41 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36The Decembrist Revolt —led by a group of revolutionaries from the nobility who opposed the autocracy and serfdom. 
 p. 
 41 Lenin refers to the participation of the troops of Tsar Nicholas I in the suppression of the revolutionary movement in Europe in 1848-49, particularly the revolution in Hungary in 1849. 
 p. 
 41 États généraux (The States General )—a representative body of the social-estates of France from the fourteenth to the eighteenth cen-tury, consisting of deputies from the nobility, the clergy, and the Third Estate, it was convened by the king for the settlement of administrative and financial questions. 
 The States General were not convened for 175 years—from 1614 to 1789. 
 When they were convened in 1789 by Louis XVI for the purpose of settling the financial crisis, the body was proclaimed as the National Assembly by a decision of the deputies representing the Third Estate. 
 p. 
 41 Herzen, A. 
 I. 
 (1812-1870)—prominent Russian revolutionary democrat, materialist philosopher, publicist, and author. 
 p. 
 42 General Vannovsky , appointed Minister of Education in 1901, made use of liberal phrases such as “love” and “heartfelt solicitude” for the student youth, with the aim of quietening the student disturb-ances. 
 After introducing a number of insignificant reforms in the sphere of education, he resorted to renewed repressive measures against the revolutionary students—arrests, banishment, expul-sions from universities, etc. 
 p. 
 44 Volnoye Slovo (Free Word )—a weekly, and from No. 
 37 a fort-nightly, periodical published in Geneva from 1881 to 1883; alto-gether 62 issues appeared. 
 Volnoye Slovo claimed to have as its pur-pose the unification of opposition elements and propagated liberal ideas on the need to reform the Russian social system on “princi-ples of freedom and self-government”. 
 Actually it was founded with the knowledge of the secret police by members of the Holy Guard (a secret organisation promoted by the biggest landed nobility and high government officials, headed by Prince A. 
 P. 
 Shuvalov and others) for purposes of political provocation. 
 Volnoye Slovo was edited by the police agent A. 
 P. 
 Malshinsky. 
 At the end of 1882 the Holy Guard collapsed and Volnoye Slovo , beginning with No. 
 52 (January 8, 1883), was edited by M. 
 P. 
 Dra-gomanov; it claimed to be the organ of the Zemstvo League, which did not exist as a permanent and properly-constituted organisation. 
 p. 
 50 Pravitelstvenny Vestnik (Government Herald )—official government newspaper published in St. 
 Petersburg from 1869 to 1917. 
 p. 
 50 The Assembly of Notables of Louis XVI —an assembly of the highest representatives of the privileged social-estates of France convened by King Louis XVI in 1787 and 1788 to settle the country’s financial 37 38 39crisis. 
 The Assembly refused to pass an ordinance taxing the priv-ileged social-estates and Louis XVI was forced to convene the States General. 
 p. 
 52 Dictatorship of the heart —the name given ironically to the short-lived policy of flirting with the liberals, pursued by the tsarist official Loris-Melikov, who, in 1880, was appointed chief of the Supreme Administrative Commission to combat “sedition” and, later, Minister of the Interior. 
 p. 
 53 Sotsial-Demokrat (Social-Democrat )—a literary-political review published abroad by the Emancipation of Labour group in the period 1890-92. 
 Altogether four issues appeared. 
 Lenin quotes an article by Vera Zasulich entitled “Revolution-aries from the Bourgeois Milieu”, published in No. 
 1 for 1890. 
 p. 
 54 Narodnaya Volya (The People ’s Will )—a secret Narodnik terrorist organisation, whose members carried out the assassination of Alex-ander II, on March 1, 1881; it came into being in August 1879, following the split in the secret society Zemlya i Volya (Land and Freedom). 
 The Narodnaya Volya was headed by an Executive Com-mittee which included A. 
 I. 
 Zhelyabov, A. 
 D. 
 Mikhailov, M. 
 F. 
 Frolenko, N. 
 A. 
 Morozov V. 
 N. 
 Figner, S. 
 L. 
 Perovs-kaya, and A. 
 A. 
 Kvyatkovsky. 
 The immediate aim of the Narod-naya Volya was the overthrow of the tsarist autocracy, while its programme provided for the establishment of a “permanent popu-lar representative body” elected on the basis of universal suf-frage, the proclamation of democratic liberties, the transfer of land to the people, and the elaboration of measures for the fac-tories to pass into the hands of the workers. 
 The Narodnaya Volya, however, was unable to find the road to the masses of the people and took to political conspiracy and individual terror. 
 The terrorist struggle of the Narodnaya Volya was not supported by a mass revolutionary movement; this enabled the government to crush the organisation by fierce persecution, death sentences, and provocation. 
 After 1881 the Narodnaya Volya ceased to exist as an organisa-tion. 
 Repeated attempts to revive it, made during the 1880s ended in failure. 
 An instance was the terrorist group that was formed in 1886, headed by A. 
 I. 
 Ulyanov (Lenin’s brother) and P. 
 Y. 
 She-vyrev; after an unsuccessful attempt to assassinate Alexander III the group was exposed and its active members were executed. 
 Although he criticised the erroneous, utopian programme of the Narodnaya Volya, Lenin showed great respect for the selfless struggle waged by its members against tsarism. 
 In 1899, in “A Pro-test by Russian Social-Democrats”, Lenin stated that “the members of the old Narodnaya Volya managed to play an enormous role in the history of Russia, despite the fact that only narrow social strata supported the few heroes, and despite the fact that it was by no means a revolutionary theory which served as the banner of the movement” (see present edition, Vol. 
 4, p. 
 181). 
 p. 
 54 40 41 42 43 44 45Land redemption payments were fixed by the “Regulations Govern-ing Redemption by Peasants Who Have Emerged from SerfDependence”, approved on February 19, 1861. 
 The tsarist govern-ment compelled peasants to pay redemption money for the land al-lotted to them at a rate several times higher than the actual valueof the land. 
 Upon the conclusion of the redemption deal, the govern-ment paid a sum of money to the landlord as redemption money, which sum was regarded as a debt to be repaid by the peasant inannual instalments over a period of 49 years. 
 The “land redemptionpayments” were unbearably burdensome for the peasants and ledto mass ruin and pauperisation. 
 Peasants who had formerly beenlandlord’s serfs alone paid a sum of about 2,000 million rubles to the tsarist government, while the land they received was not worth more than 544 million rubles. 
 Since the deals did not take effectimmediately, but at various times up to 1883, the payments wereto have continued until 1932. 
 The peasant movement at the timeof the First Russian Revolution (1905-07), however, compelledthe tsarist government to cancel the land redemption payments as from January 1907. 
 p. 
 56 Rural superintendent —an office instituted by the tsarist govern-ment in 1889 to increase the power of the landlords over the peas-antry. 
 The rural superintendents, appointed from among the locallanded nobility, were granted tremendous powers, not only admin-istrative, but juridical, which included the right to arrest peasants and order corporal punishment. 
 p. 
 59 “ Separate Supplement ” to Rabochaya Mysl— a pamphlet published by the editors of the “Economist” newspaper Rabochaya Mysl i n September 1899. 
 The pamphlet, especially the included article “Our Reality”, signed R. 
 M. 
, was a candid expose of the oppor-tunist views of the “Economists”. 
 Lenin criticised the pamphlet inhis article “A Retrograde Trend in Russian Social-Democracy”(see present edition, Vol. 
 4, pp. 
 255-85), and in his book What Is To Be Done? (see present volume, pp. 
 361-67, 397, 407-08). 
 p. 
 67 Bernsteinism —an anti-Marxist trend in international Social-Democracy which arose in Germany at the end of the nineteenthcentury and derived its name from the German Social-DemocratEduard Bernstein. 
 Bernstein set out to revise the revolutionaryteachings of Marx in the spirit of bourgeois liberalism. 
 In Russia Bernsteinism had its adherents in the “legal Marxists” the “Economists”, the Bundists, and the Mensheviks. 
 p. 
 73 Listok ( Small Paper )—a monthly newspaper of constitutional lib-eral views published illegally abroad by Prince P. 
 V. 
 Dolgo-rukov. 
 Altogether twenty-two numbers were issued between No-vember 1862 and July 1864. 
 The first five numbers were issued in Brussels, the others in London. 
 p. 
 76 Narodnoye Pravo (People ’s Right ) Party —an underground organi-sation of the democratic intelligentsia formed in 1893, with the 46 47 48 49 50 51assistance of ex-members of the Narodnaya Volya (M. 
 A. 
 Natanson and others), and crushed by the tsarist government in the springof 1894. 
 The Narodnoye Pravo issued two programmatic documents“An Urgent Question” and “Manifesto”. 
 Most of the NarodnoyePravo members subsequently joined the Socialist-RevolutionaryParty. 
 p. 
 79 Lenin refers here to a thesis in Marx’s The Class Struggles in France , 1848 to 1850 (see Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1858, p. 
 139). 
 p. 
 79 Novoye Vremya (New Times )—a St. 
 Petersburg newspaper pub-lished from 1868 to October 1917. 
 At first moderately liberal, it be-came after 1876 the organ of the most reactionary circles of thenobility and the state bureaucracy. 
 The paper conducted a struggle,not only against the revolutionary, but also against the bourgeois-liberal, movement. 
 From 1905 onwards it became an organ of theBlack Hundreds. 
 p. 
 81 The circular referred to was sent out by the Central Press Board to all newspaper and magazine editors after Novoye Vremya pub-lished the article “Apropos of the Labour Unrest”. 
 The circular wasreproduced in Iskra , No. 
 6 (July 1901) in the article “St. 
 Peters-burg” (section “From Our Social Life”). 
 p . 
 81 The strike movement of 1885 involved many textile enterprises in Vladimir, Moscow, Tver, and other gubernias of the industrial centre of Russia. 
 The January strike of the workers at the Nikol-skoye Mill, near Orekhovo-Zuyevo, belonging to Morozov, was thebiggest and had the greatest significance. 
 The principal demandsof the strikers were the reduction of fines, the introduction of a reg-ular hiring system, etc. 
 The strike was led by the advanced work-ers P. 
 Moiseyenko, L. 
 Ivanov, and V. 
 Volkov. 
 The Morozov strike, in which over 8,000 workers took part, was crushed by tsar-ist troops and over 600 workers were arrested. 
 Under pressure ofthe strike movement of 1885-86, the tsarist government was forcedto issue a law on fines (the Law of June 3, 1886), according towhich fine-moneys were to be used for the needs of the workers and were not to go into the employer’s pocket. 
 p. 
 83 Moskovskiye Vedomosti (Moscow Recorder )—a newspaper founded in 1756; beginning with the 1860s, it expressed the views of themost reactionary monarchist elements among the landlords and theclergy; from 1905 onwards, it was one of the chief organs of theBlack Hundreds. 
 It continued publication until the October Revo-lution of 1917. 
 p. 
 83 Lenin refers to mass strikes of St. 
 Petersburg workers, mainly in the textile industry, in 1895 and, particularly, 1896. 
 The 1896strike began on the Kalinkin Cotton-Spinning Mill on May 23. 
 Theimmediate cause of the strike was the employers’ refusal to pay the 52 53 54workers in full for holidays on the occasion of the coronation of Nicholas II. 
 The strike spread rapidly to all the main cotton-spin-ning and weaving mills of St. 
 Petersburg, and then to large ma-chine-building plants, a rubber factory, a paper factory, and a sugar refinery. 
 For the first time the proletariat of the capital launched a struggle against its exploiters on a broad front. 
 Over 30,000 workers went on strike. 
 The strike was conducted under the leader-ship of the St. 
 Petersburg League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class, which issued leaflets and manifestos calling on the workers to stand solid and steadfast in defence of their rights; the League published and distributed the strikers’ main demands, which included the ten-and-a-half-hour working day, increased rates of pay, and payment of wages on time. 
 The report of the strike produced a tremendous impression abroad. 
 The Berlin Vorwärts (Forward ) and the Vienna Arbeiter Zeitung (Workers ’ Gazette ) carried accounts of the strike. 
 An address from English workers, signed by the leaders of all socialist and trade-union organisations, was translated into Russian and distributed by the League of Struggle among the St. 
 Petersburg workers. 
 At a meeting of London trade unions a report on the strike by Vera Zasulich and a speech by Eleanor Marx-Aveling were greeted with great enthusiasm and the audience took up a collection to aid the strikers; similar collections were taken up in other trade unions. 
 Collections for the St. 
 Petersburg strikers were organised in Ger-many, Austria, and Poland. 
 The London Congress of the Second International, which took place in July 1896, cheered Plekhanov’s report of the 1896 strike and adopted a special resolution greeting the Russian workers who were “struggling against one of the last bastions of European reaction”. 
 The St. 
 Petersburg strikes gave an impetus to the working-class movement in Moscow and other Russian cities, they forced the gov-ernment to speed up the review of the factory laws and to issue the Law of June 2 (14), 1897 limiting the working day at all facto-ries and mills to eleven and a half hours. 
 The strikes, as Lenin subsequently wrote, “ushered in an era of steady advance in the working-class movement, that most powerful factor in the whole of our revolution” (see present edition, Vol. 
 13, “Preface to the Col-lection Twelve Years ”). 
 p. 
 83 The pamphlet The Secret Documents on the Law of June 2, 1897 was published in Geneva in 1898 by the Union of Russian Social-Dem-ocrats Abroad. 
 p. 
 83 Grazhdanin (The Citizen )—a reactionary newspaper published in St. 
 Petersburg from 1872 to 1914. 
 From the 1880s on, it spoke for the extreme monarchists. 
 The newspaper existed mainly on subsi-dies from the tsarist government. 
 p. 
 99 Sipyagin , D . 
 S. 
—reactionary statesman in tsarist Russia; Minis-ter of the Interior from 1899 to 1902. 
 Shakhovskoi , D. 
 I. 
 —prince, Zemstvo leading figure. 
 p. 
 101 55 56 57 58 59Manilov —a character from Gogol’s Dead Souls whose name has become a synonym for complacency, sentimentality, and futile day-dreaming. 
 p. 
 102 “The Agrarian Question and the ‘Critics of Marx ’” was written between June and September 1901. 
 The first four chapters were published in the journal Zarya , Nos. 
 2-3, in December 1901, un-der the title “the ‘Critics’ on the Agrarian Question. 
 First Essay”; the contribution bore the signature of N. 
 Lenin . 
 The chapters were later published legally in Odessa (with the inscription “Permitted by the Censor”. 
 Odessa July 23, 1905) by the Burevestnik Publish-ers as a separate pamphlet The Agrarian Question and the “Critics of Marx ”, by N. 
 Lenin. 
 The title was retained by the author for further publications of the essay in whole or in part. 
 Chapter V-IX were first published in the legal magazine Obrazovaniye (Education ), No. 
 2, February 1906. 
 They had subti-tles; chapters I-IV, published in Zarya and in the 1905 pamphlet had none. 
 The nine chapters with two additional ones (X and XI) were first published together in 1908 in St. 
 Petersburg in The Agrarian Ques-tion , Part I, by V. 
 I. 
 Ilyin (V. 
 I. 
 Lenin), chapters I-IV had subti-tles; some editorial changes were made in the text and some notes added. 
 Chapter XII (the last) was, first printed in the collection Cur-rent Life in 1908. 
 The first nine chapters are included in the present volume; chap-ters X, XI, and XII, written in 1907, will appear in Volume 13 of the present edition of the Collected Works of V. 
 I. 
 Lenin. 
 p. 
 103 Obrazovaniye (Education )—a literary, popular-scientific, social and political monthly published in St. 
 Petersburg from 1892 to 1909. 
 There were Marxists among its contributors from 1902 to 1908. 
 p. 
 103 Russkoye Bogatstvo (Russian Wealth )—a monthly magazine pub-lished in St. 
 Petersburg from 1876 to the middle of 1918. 
 In the early 1890s it became an organ of the liberal Narodniks and was edited by S. 
 N. 
 Krivenko and N. 
 K. 
 Mikhailovsky. 
 It preached concili-ation with the tsarist government and abandonment of all revolu-tionary struggle against it. 
 The magazine was bitterly hostile to Marxism and the Russian Marxists. 
 p. 
 107 Nachalo (The Beginning )—a literary, scientific, and political month-ly published by the “legal Marxists”; it appeared in St. 
 Peters-burg in the first half of 1899, with P. 
 B. 
 Struve and M. 
 I. 
 Tugan-Baranovsky among its editors. 
 Besides the “legal Marxists”, the contributors included G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov and V. 
 I. 
 Zasulich. 
 The tsarist government suppressed the journal in June 1899. 
 Lenin published in Nachalo several reviews (see present edition, Vol. 
 4, pp. 
 65-73 and pp. 
 94-103) and part of the third chapter of his Development of Capitalism in Russia , entitled “The Land-60 61 62 636465 66 67 68 69 70owners’ Transition from Corvée to Capitalist Economy” (see present edition, Vol. 
 3, pp. 
 191-219). 
 Lenin refers to Bulgakov’s article “A Contribution to the Ques-tion of the Capitalist Evolution of Agriculture” published in Nos. 
 1-2 and 3 of the journal for January-February and March 1899. 
 p. 
 107 Zhizn (Life )—a monthly magazine published in St. 
 Petersburg from 1897 to 1901; in 1902 it was published abroad. 
 Beginning with 1899 the magazine was an organ of the “legal Marxists ”. 
 In the December 1899 issue (No. 
 12) Lenin published “Reply to Mr. 
 P. 
 Nezhdanov” and in the issues of January and February 1900 (Nos. 
 1 and 2), two articles under the heading “Capitalism in Agriculture (Kautsky’s Book and Mr. 
 Bulgakov’s Article)” (see present edition, Vol. 
 4, pp. 
 160-65 and pp. 
 105-59). 
 Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 III, Moscow, 1959, p. 
 644. 
 p. 
 117 Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 III, Moscow, 1959, p. 
 728. 
 p. 
 118 p. 
 118 Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 III, Moscow, 1959, pp. 
 727-28. 
 p. 
 118 lin, 1923. 
 Sozialistische Monatshefte (Socialist Monthly )—the principal or-gan of the opportunists in German Social-Democracy and one of the organs of international opportunism. 
 During the imperialist world war (1914-18) the magazine adopted a social-chauvinist position. 
 It was published in Berlin from 1897 to 1933. 
 p. 
 134 Die Neue Zeit (New Times )—a German Social-Democratic magazine published in Stuttgart from 1883 to 1923. 
 Between 1885 and 1895 the magazine published some of Engels’ articles. 
 Engels often gave pointers to the editors of Die Neue Zeit and sharply criticised their deviations from Marxism. 
 Beginning with the middle nineties,after Engels’ death, the magazine propagated Karl Kautsky’s views and regularly published articles by revisionists. 
 During the imperialist world war (1914-18) the magazine occupied a Centrist position and in actuality supported the social-chauvinists. 
 The Exceptional Law Against the Socialists was promulgated in Germany in 1878. 
 Under this law all organisations of the Social-p. 
 140See Karl Marx, Theorien über den Mehrwert , II, S. 
 80-81, Ber-Clan property —the land owned by the clan . 
 p. 
 121 Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 III, Moscow, 1959, pp. 
 635-36 . 
Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 III, Moscow, 1959, pp. 
 724-27. 
p. 
 108 p. 
 127p. 
 123 71 72 73 7475 76 77Democratic Party, all workers’ mass organisations, and the work-ing-class press were prohibited, socialist literature was confis-cated, and the banishment of Social-Democrats was begun. 
 The law was annulled in 1890 under pressure of the mass working-class movement. 
 p. 
 150 Vorwärts (Forward )—the central organ of German Social-Democra-cy. 
 It began publication in 1876, with Wilhelm Liebknecht as one of its editors. 
 Frederick Engels conducted a struggle against all manifestations of opportunism in its columns. 
 In the late nine-ties, after Engels’ death, Vorwärts regularly published articles by the opportunists who dominated German Social-Democracy and the Second International. 
 p. 
 150 See Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 I, “The Manifesto of the Communist Party”, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 38. 
 p. 
 154 See Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 627. 
 p. 
 154 See Frederick Engels, Anti-Dühring , Moscow, 1959, pp. 
 394-411. 
 p. 
 155 N. 
—on, Nikolai —on—pseudonyms of N. 
 F. 
 Danielson, one of the ideologists of the liberal Narodniks in the eighties and nineties of the last century. 
 p. 
 158 Proudhonism —an unscientific trend in petty-bourgeois socialism, hostile to Marxism, so called after its ideologist, the French anar-chist Pierre Joseph Proudhon. 
 Proudhon criticised big capitalist property from the petty-bourgeois position and dreamed of perpet-uating petty property ownership; he proposed the foundation of“people s” and “exchange” banks, with the aid of which the workers would be able to acquire the means of production, become handi-craftsmen, and ensure the “just” marketing of their wares. 
 Prou-dhon did not understand the role and significance of the proletariat and displayed a negative attitude towards the class struggle, the proletarian revolution, and the dictatorship of the proletariat;as an anarchist he denied the necessity for the state. 
 Marx and En-gels struggled persistently against Proudhon’s efforts to impose his views on the First International. 
 Proudhonism was subjected to aruthless criticism in Marx’s Poverty of Philosophy . 
 The deter-mined struggle waged by Marx, Engels, and their supporters ended in the complete victory of Marxism over Proudhonism in theFirst International. 
 Lenin called Proudhonism the “dull thinking of a petty-bourgeois and a philistine” incapable of comprehending the viewpoint of theworking class. 
 The ideas of Proudhonism are widely utilised by bourgeois “theoreticians” in their class-collaboration propaganda. 
 p. 
 158 Der Volksstaat (The People ’s State)—the central newspaper of the German Social-Democratic (Eisenacher) Party; published in 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87Leipzig from 1869 to 1876 under the editorship of Wilhelm Lieb-knecht. 
 Marx and Engels contributed to the paper. 
 p. 
 158 See Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 613. 
 p. 
 158 Lenin quotes here Frederick Engels’ Preface to the second edition of his The Housing Question (see Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 548). 
 p. 
 159 Ruth —in the biblical legend Ruth gleaned ears of corn in an alien field. 
 The expression “ Ruth ’s gleaning ” is here used in the sense of easy, carefree labour. 
 p. 
 169 The younger brother , i . 
e. 
, the people—a patronising expression used in liberal literature in tsarist times. 
 p. 
 177 In this Suzdal fashion —in a primitive superficial fashion. 
 The expression originates from the fact that before the Revolution, crude, gaudily painted, and cheap icons were made in SuzdalUyezd. 
 p. 
 178 The League for Social and Political Questions (Verein für Sozialpo-litik )—an association of German bourgeois economists, founded in 1872. 
 The purpose of the association was to counteract the influence of Social-Democracy among the working class and tosubordinate the working-class movement to the interests of thebourgeoisie. 
 p. 
 180 Erhebungen über die Lage der Landwirtschaft in Grossherzogthum Baden , 1883 . 
 Veranstaltet durch das grossherzogliche Ministerium des Innern. 
 Bd. 
 IV. 
 (An Inquiry into the State of Agriculture in the Grand Duchy of Baden, 1883. 
 Undertaken by the Ministry ofthe Interior of the Grand Duchy. 
 Vol. 
 IV. 
). 
 p. 
 184 See Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 III, Moscow, 1959, p. 
 787. 
 p. 
 186 From M. 
 Y. 
 Saltykov-Shchedrin’s Modern Idyll . 
 p. 
 193 It may be seen from the text of Chapters VII and IX, first pub-lished in the magazine Obrazovaniye , that Lenin intended to examine French agricultural statistics in this essay and to analyse the “crit-ical” views of the French economist Maurice. 
 This plan was notput into effect, and in the 1908 edition Lenin changed the passagesshowing his original design. 
 Thus he omitted two words “andFrench” from the sentence: “The proletarisation of the peasantry continues, as we shall prove below by the mass of German and French statistics.... 
” In the phrase: “The rapid growth of the townscauses a steady increase in the number of such ‘dairy farmers’,and, of course, there will always be the Hechts, Davids, Hertzes,and Chernovs (and, not to offend France, the Maurices as well, whomwe’ll mention later)...”, the words in parenthesis were omitted. 
 88 89 90The end of the sentence, “For this reason, to confound the two proc-esses, or to ignore either of them, may easily lead to the crudest blunders, an example of which we shall see later, when studying Bulgakov’s analysis of the French data”, was changed to: “numer-ous examples of which are scattered through Bulgakov’s book”. 
 p. 
 221 The “Unity ” Conference , held in Zurich on September 21-22 (October 4-5), 1901, was an attempt to unite the Russian Social-Democratic organisations abroad on a platform of Marxist princi-ples. 
 The Conference was attended by representatives of the foreign department of the Iskra and Zarya organisation, the Sotsial-Demo-krat organisation (which included the Emancipation of Labour group), the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad, the Bund, and the Borba (Struggle) group. 
 The Conference was preceded by a preliminary conference of representatives of these organisations in Geneva (June 1901). 
 The Geneva Conference adopted a resolution containing fundamen-tal principles for agreement and joint action. 
 This apparent initial rapprochement was to have been officially constituted at the “Unity” Conference; but articles by the leaders of the Union Abroad, published in Rabocheye Dyelo , No. 
 10 (September 1901), as well as amendments and addenda to the reso-lution of the Geneva Conference, submitted by the Union Abroad during the “Unity” Conference, showed that the Union Abroad still adhered to its opportunist position. 
 The representatives of Iskra and Sotsial-Demokrat read a declaration and withdrew from the Conference. 
 Lenin took part in the “Unity” Conference under the name of Frey and spoke under that name. 
 This was his first public appear-ance among the Russian Social-Democrats abroad. 
 p. 
 223 The Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad was founded in Geneva in 1894 on the initiative of the Emancipation of Labour group, which at first supervised its activities and edited its publi-cations. 
 Opportunist elements (the “young” Social-Democrats the “Economists”) later gained the upper hand in the Union. 
 At the Union’s first conference, in November 1898, the Emancipation of Labour group refused to bear further responsibility for the editor-ship of its publications. 
 The final break with the Union and the withdrawal of the Emancipation of Labour group took place in April 1900, at the Union’s second conference, when the Emancipa-tion of Labour group and its supporters left the Conference and founded the autonomous organisation Sotsial-Demokrat . 
 p. 
 225 The Sotsial-Demokrat organisation was founded by the Eman-cipation of Labour group and its supporters after the split in the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad (May 1900). 
 In a leaflet-manifesto the organisation declared its purposes to be “the promo-tion of the socialist movement among the Russian proletariat” and the struggle against every opportunist attempt to distort Marx-91 92 93ism. 
 The organisation published a Russian translation of The Manifesto of the Communist Party , a number of works by Marx and Engels, and several pamphlets by Plekhanov, Kautsky, and others. 
 In October 1901, on Lenin’s initiative, the Sotsial-Demokrat organisation joined forces with the Iskra-Zarya organisation abroad and formed the League of Russian Revolutionary Social-Democracy Abroad. 
 p. 
 225 This group, consisting of D. 
 B. 
 Ryazanov, Y. 
 M. 
 Steklov (Nev-zorov, E. 
 L. 
 Gurevich (V. 
 Danevich, Y. 
 Smirnov), which was formed in Paris in 1900, adopted, in May 1901, the name of “Borba” (struggle). 
 In an attempt to reconcile the revolutionary and oppor-tunist trends in Russian Social-Democracy, the Borba group pro-posed the unification of the Social-Democratic organisations ab-road and for this purpose entered into negotiations with the Iskra-Zarya and Sotsial-Demokrat organisations and with the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad; the group also took part in the Geneva Conference (June 1901) and in the “Unity” Conference (October 1901). 
 In the autumn of 1901 the Borba group took shape as an independent literary group and announced its publications. 
 In these publications (“Material for a Party Programme”, Issues I-III; “Leaflet” No. 
 1, 1902, etc. 
) the group distorted the revolu-tionary theory of Marxism and displayed hostility to the Leninist principles of organisation and the tactical line of Russian revolu-tionary Social-Democracy. 
 On account of its deviation from So-cial-Democratic views and tactics, its disorganising activitiesand its lack of contact with Social-Democratic organisations in Russia, the Borba group was not allowed to participate in the Sec-ond Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 By decision of the Second Congress, the Borba group was dissolved. 
 p. 
 225 Millerandism —an opportunist trend called after the French so-cial-reformist Millerand, who, in 1899, entered the reactionary bourgeois government of General Galiffet, the butcher of the Paris Commune. 
 p. 
 226 Mountain and Gironde —the two political groups of the bourgeoisie during the French bourgeois revolution at the end of the eighteenth century. 
 La Montagne (Mountain) was the name given to the Jaco-bins, the most consistent representatives of the revolutionary class of the period—bourgeoisie; they advocated the abolition of absolut-ism and the feudal system. 
 The Girondists, as distinct from them, vacillated between revolution and counter-revolution, and chose the way of compromise with the royalists. 
 Lenin applied the term “Socialist Gironde” to the opportunist tendency in Social-Democracy and the term “Mountain” or proletar-ian Jacobins, to the revolutionary Social-Democrats. 
 After the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 had split into Bolsheviks and Mensheviks, Lenin, on many occasions, stressed the point that the Mensheviks were the Girondist tendency in the working-class movement. 
 p. 
 227 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR 94 95 96 97The Lübeck Parteitag of the German Social-Democratic Party was held between September 9 and 15 (22-28), 1901. 
 The central is-sue at the Congress was the struggle against revisionism, which had by that time taken form as the Right Wing of the Party, with its own programme and periodical press ( Sozialistische Monatshef-te). 
 Bernstein, the leader of the revisionists, had long been advo-cating the revision of scientific socialism; at the Congress he de-manded “freedom to criticise” Marxism. 
 The Congress rejected the resolution introduced by Bernstein’s supporters and adopted a reso-lution that gave a direct warning to Bernstein, though without lay-ing down the principle that Bernsteinian views were incompatible with membership of the working-class party. 
 p. 
 228 Jaurèists —followers of the French socialist J. 
 J. 
 Jaurès, who head-ed the Right reformist Wing of the French Socialist Party. 
 Un-der the pretext of defending “freedom of criticism”, they sought to revise the Marxist principles and preached the class collaboration of the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. 
 In 1902 they formed the French Socialist Party, which adhered to reformist principles. 
 p. 
 228 The Workers ’ Party for the Political Liberation of Russia —a small Narodnik-type organisation; existed in Minsk, Belostok and sever-al other cities from 1899 to 1902. 
 In 1902 the members of the party joined the Socialist Revolutionary Party. 
 p. 
 228 The Bund —the General Jewish Workers’ Union of Lithuania, Po-land, and Russia; founded in 1897, it embraced mainly the Jewish artisans in the western regions of Russia. 
 The Bund joined the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 at its First Congress in March 1898. 
 At the Second Con-gress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Bund delegates insisted on the recognition of their organisation as the sole representative of the Jewish pro-letariat in Russia. 
 The Congress rejected this organisational na-tionalism, whereupon the Bund withdrew from the Party. 
 In 1906, following the Fourth (“Unity”) Congress, the Bund reaffiliated with the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 The Bundists constantly support-ed the Mensheviks and waged an incessant struggle against the Bolsheviks. 
 Despite its formal affiliation with the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, the Bund remained an organisation of a bourgeois-nationalist char-acter. 
 As opposed to the Bolshevik programmatic demand for the right of nations to self-determination, the Bund put forward the demand for cultural-national autonomy. 
 During the First World War of 1914-18 the Bund took the stand of social-chauvinism. 
 In 1917 the Bund supported the counter-revolutionary Provisional Government and fought on the side of the enemies of the October Socialist Revolution. 
 During the Civil War, prominent Bundists joined forces with the counter-revolution. 
 At the same time, a turn began among the rank and file in favour of support to the Soviet Government. 
 When the victory of the dictatorship of the proletar-iat over the internal counter-revolution and foreign intervention became apparent, the Bund declared its abandonment of the strug-98 99 100 101 102gle against the Soviet system In March 1921, the Bund dissolved itself and part of the membership joined the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) as new members. 
 p. 
 229 Code of Laws of the Russian Empire —a collected edition of the laws operative in the Russian Empire, published in fifteen volumes in 1833 and effective from 1835; a sixteenth volume was published in 1892. 
 p. 
 231 The reference is to the proclamation entitled “ A First Letter to the Famine-Stricken Peasants ”, which appeared in 1892 over the sig-nature “Peasant Well-Wishers”. 
 About 1,800 copies of the procla-mation were printed at the illegal Lakhta Press belonging to the Narodnaya Volya Group in St. 
 Petersburg. 
 p. 
 236 Lenin refers to Judas Golovlyov—a sanctimonious, hypocritical landlord serf-owner described in M. 
 Saltykov-Shchedrin’s The Golovlyov Family . 
 p. 
 237 The committee here referred to is the St. 
 Petersburg Committee of the League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class which functioned in the period following the arrest of Lenin and the majority of the League leaders in December 1895; the leader-ship of the League fell into the hands of the “young” Social-Demo-crats, who supported the “Economist” position. 
 The League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class , founded by Lenin in the autumn of 1895 united all the Marx-ist workers’ study circles in St. 
 Petersburg. 
 It was headed by a Central Group (S. 
 I. 
 Radchenko, A. 
 A. 
 Vaneyev, A. 
 A. 
 Yakubova, N. 
 K. 
 Krupskaya, G. 
 M. 
 Krzhizhanovsky, V. 
 V. 
 Starkov, and others) under Lenin’s direction. 
 The League of Struggle headed by Lenin led the revolutionary working-class movement, linking the workers’ struggle in support of economic demands with the political struggle against tsarism. 
 It was the first organisation in Russia to combine socialism with the working-class movement and to go over from the propaganda of Marxism among a restricted range of advanced workers to politi-cal agitation among the working-class masses on an extended scale. 
 The League issued leaflets and pamphlets for the workers and direct-ed their strike struggles. 
 It was the embryo of the revolutionary working-class Marxist Party. 
 The influence of the League was felt far beyond St. 
 Petersburg, and similar Leagues of Struggle, pat-terned upon it, were formed in other cities. 
 p. 
 239 The Emancipation of Labour group was the first Russian Marxist group. 
 It was founded in Geneva by G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov in 1883; the group included P. 
 B. 
 Axelrod, L. 
 G. 
 Deutsch, V. 
 I. 
 Zasulich, and V. 
 N. 
 Ignatov. 
 The group did much to spread Marxism in Russia. 
 It translated such Marxist works as The Manifesto of the Communist Party b y Marx and Engels; Wage-Labour and Capital by Marx; Socialism: 103 104Utopian and Scientific by Engels; it published them abroad and organised their distribution in Russia. 
 Plekhanov and his group dealt a serious blow at Narodism. 
 In 1883 Plekhanov drafted a pro-gramme for the Russian Social-Democrats and in 1885 drew up another. 
 The two drafts were published by the Emancipation of Labour group and marked an important step towards the establish-ment of a Social-Democratic Party in Russia. 
 Plekhanov’s Social-ism and the Political Struggle (1883), Our Differences (1885), and The Development of the Monist View of History (1895) played an important role in disseminating Marxist views. 
 The group, how-ever, made some serious mistakes; it clung to remnants of Narod-nik views, overestimated the role of the liberal bourgeoisie, while underestimating the revolutionary capacity of the peasantry. 
 These errors were the first projections of the future Menshevik views held by Plekhanov and other members of the group. 
 The group had no practical ties with the working-class movement. 
 Lenin pointed out that the Emancipation of Labour group “only theoretically found-ed the Social-Democracy and took the first step in the direction of the working-class movement” (see present edition, Vol. 
 20, “The Ideological Struggle in the Working-Class Movement”). 
 At the Sec-ond Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, in August 1903, the Emancipa-tion of Labour group announced its dissolution. 
 p. 
 239 The League of Russian Revolutionary Social-Democracy Abroad was founded on Lenin’s initiative in October 1901. 
 The Iskra-Zarya organisation abroad and the Sotsial-Demokrat organisation (which included the Emancipation of Labour group) entered the League. 
 The task of the League was to disseminate the ideas of rev-olutionary Social-Democracy and promote the foundation of a mil-itant Social-Democratic organisation. 
 Actually, the League was the representative of Iskra abroad. 
 It recruited supporters for Iskra from among Social-Democrats living abroad, gave it materi-al support, organised its delivery to Russia, and published popular Marxist literature. 
 The League issued several Bulletins and pamph-lets. 
 The Second Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 approved the League as the sole Party organisation abroad, accorded it the full rights of a committee working under the leadership and control of the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 After the Second Congress the Mensheviks entrenched them-selves in the League and launched their struggle against Lenin and the Bolsheviks. 
 At the Second Congress of the League in October 1903, the Mensheviks libelled the Bolsheviks, following which Lenin and his supporters walked out. 
 The Mensheviks adopted new Rules for the League that contradicted the Rules of the Party adopt-ed at the Second Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 From that time onwards the League became a bulwark of Menshevism; it continued its existence until 1905. 
 p. 
 241 Military settlements —a special organisation of the Russian army introduced under Tsar Alexander I. 
 By organising these settlements the tsarist government expected to curtail expenditure on the main-105 106 107 108 109 110 111tenance of the army, ensure a source of trained reserves, and ob-tain a reliable force for use against the growing revolutionary movement. 
 The arch-reactionary A. 
 A. 
 Arakcheyev, Minister for War, was appointed head of the military settlements (hence the name—Arakcheyev settlements). 
 All peasants living on the territory allotted to the settlements were made soldiers for life. 
 Army units were made up of settlers between the ages of 18 and 45 years (“farmers”) and all other peasants fit for military service became “assistant farmers”. 
 Every farmer-settler had to feed three of the soldiers quartered on the settlement. 
 All the settlers had to wear army uniform and undergo constant army training. 
 Their whole lives were subordinated to a severe regime, everything, even family relations, coming under the strict regulations. 
 Army drill and compulsory army work did not leave the peasants sufficient time for work on their farms which gradual-ly fell into ruin The unbearable, prison-like conditions of life and work in the military settlements led to a number of large-scale revolts, which were suppressed with incredible cruelty. 
 Military settlements were abolished in 1857. 
 p. 
 245 See Note 49. 
 p. 
 248The first chapter of Lenin’s Review of Home Affairs was published as a separate pamphlet in two editions under the title of “Fighting the Famine-Stricken”. 
 The first edition appeared as a separate re-print from Zarya , No. 
 2-3; the second edition of 3,000 copies was printed at the Iskra illegal press in Kishinev. 
 p. 
 253 The reference is to Arkady Pavlych Penochkin, a character in I. 
 Turgenev’s story “The Village Elder”. 
 p. 
 256 Lenin quotes from M. 
 Y. 
 Saltykov-Shchedrin’s The History of a Town . 
 p. 
 262 Priazovsky Krai (Azov Region )—a daily newspaper published in Rostov-on-Don from 1891 to 1916; it was a continuation of the newspaper Donskoye Polye (The Don Field ) published from 1889 to 1891. 
 p. 
 266 Collective liability —the compulsory collective responsibility of the peasants of each village commune for the making of timely and full payments and for the fulfilment of all sorts of services to the state and to the landlords (payment of poll-taxes and of redemp-tion instalments, provision of recruits for the army, etc. 
). 
 This form of bondage, which was retained even after serfdom had been abol-ished, remained in force until 1906. 
 p. 
 267 “Inventory ”—a criminal list maintained by the gubernia authorities; it contained detailed information on convicts banished to Siberia. 
 p. 
 271 112 113 114 115 116 117 118 119 120 121 122The book referred to is Nik. 
 —on’s (N. 
 F. 
 Danielson’s) Sketches on Our Post-Reform Social Economy , St. 
 Petersburg, 1893. 
 p. 
 278 Russkiye Vedomosti (Russian Recorder )—a newspaper published in Moscow from 1863 onwards by liberal professors of Moscow Univer-sity and Zemstvo personalities; it expressed the views of the liber-al landlords and bourgeoisie. 
 From 1905 onwards it was an organ of the Right Cadets; it was banned after the October Revolution together with other counter-revolutionary newspapers. 
 p. 
 279 Assizes —an institution of the tsarist courts of justice established by the judicial reform of 1864; it examined special civil and crim-inal cases and was a court of appeal for cases tried by the guber-nia courts. 
 Each assizes was established for several gubernias. 
 p. 
 280 The character referred to is Akaky Akakiyevich Bashmachkin, the hero of Gogol’s story “The Greatcoat”. 
 p. 
 282 The Man in a Case —the central character in Chekhov’s story of that name. 
 p. 
 282 The reference is to the “Ordinance on Gubernia and Uyezd Zemstvo Institutions”, approved by Alexander II on January 1, 1864. 
 p. 
 283 Kit Kitych —the nickname given to Tit Titych (Kit is Russian for “whale” and Tit is the Russian form of Titus) in A. 
 N. 
 Ostrov-sky’s comedy Shouldering Another ’s Troubles . 
 p. 
 284 Missionerskoye Obozreniye (Missionary Review )—a monthly theo-logical journal published from 1896 to 1898 in Kiev and from 1899 to 1916 in St. 
 Petersburg. 
 The journal fought against all non-Ortho-dox Christians and was supported by the most reactionary clergy, notorious for their obscurantism and operating in close contact with the police. 
 p. 
 291 Orlovsky Vestnik (Orel Herald )—a daily newspaper, moderately liberal, with a social, political, and literary content, it was pub-lished in Orel from 1876 to 1918. 
 p. 
 292 Stundists —one of the religious sects persecuted in tsarist Russia. 
 p. 
 292 Vera i Razum (Faith and Reason )—a fortnightly theological and philosophical journal published by the Kharkov Theological Semi-nary from 1884 to 1916. 
 The journal maintained an extreme reac-tionary position and made violent attacks on the democratic movement and on progressive ideas. 
 p. 
 294 123 124 125 126 127 128Svobodnoye Slovo (Free Word )—a publishing house that issued abroad (in England and Switzerland) the works of Lev Tolstoi bannedby the Russian censor and pamphlets against the oppression of non-Orthodox Christians by the tsarist government. 
 From 1899 to 1901 the house published the journal Svobodnaya Mysl (Free Thought ) and from 1901 to 1905 the journal Svobodnoye Slovo (Free Word ). 
 p. 
 294 Okhotny Ryad —a street market in pre-revolutionary Moscow where mainly poultry and cooked foods were sold; the Okhotny Ryad traders were active participants in raids organised by the police,especially in breaking up student meetings and demonstrations. 
 p. 
 299 Frey —one of Lenin’s pseudonyms. 
 p. 
 303 Svoboda (Freedom )—a journal published in Switzerland in 1901-02 by the Svoboda group that was formed in May 1901 and thatreferred to itself as “a revolutionary socialist group”. 
 Two issues appeared—No. 
 1 in 1901 and No. 
 2 in 1902. 
 The Svoboda group also issued The Eve of the Revolution: A Non-Periodical Review of Questions of Theory and of Tactics , No. 
 1; the publication Otkli-ki (Responses ), No. 
 1; the pamphlet The Renaissance of Revolu-tionism in Russia , by L. 
 Nadezhdin and others The Svoboda group was devoid of “serious, lasting ideas, of programme tactics, organisation, or roots in the masses” (see pres-ent edition Vol. 
 20, “On Adventurism”). 
 Its publications advocat-ed the ideas of “Economism” and of terrorism and supported theanti-Iskra groups in Russia. 
 The Svoboda group ceased to exist in 1903. 
 p. 
 311 Yuzhny Rabochy ( Southern Worker )—a Social-Democratic newspa-per published illegally by a group of the same name from January1900 to April 1903; altogether 12 issues appeared. 
 The newspapercirculated chiefly among Social-Democratic organisations in thesouth of Russia. 
 Lenin said of the Yuzhny Rabochy group that it was one of those organisations “which in words accepted Iskra as the guiding organ but in deeds followed their own particular plans and weredistinguished for their instability on questions of principle”. 
 Thegroup existed until the Second Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Subse-quently the majority of the leading members of the group became Mensheviks. 
 p. 
 313 Zubatov —Colonel of the Gendarmes, tried to introduce “police so-cialism”. 
 He set up fake workers’ organisations under the protec-tion of the gendarmerie and the police in an effort to divert the workers from the revolutionary movement. 
 p. 
 314 129 130 131 132 133 134 135 136The demonstration on December 6(18) 1876 was organised by work-ers and students as a protest against the tyrannical actions ofthe autocracy. 
 Plekhanov, who took part in the demonstration, de-livered a revolutionary speech. 
 The demonstration was broken up by the police, and many participants were arrested and sentenced to banishment or penal servitude. 
 p. 
 322 The slogan “ Land and Freedom ” was released at that time by an illegal organisation of the same name (Zemlya i Volya), founded bythe Narodniks in Russia in 1876. 
 Among the leading members wereG. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov, A. 
 D. 
 Mikhailov, O. 
 V. 
 Aptekman, A. 
 A. 
 Kvyat-kovsky, S. 
 M. 
 Kravchinsky (Stepnyak), S. 
 L. 
 Perovskaya, N. 
 A. 
 Morozov, and V. 
 N. 
 Figner. 
 The Zemlya i Volya organisation viewed the peasantry as the chief revolutionary force in Russia and sought to bring about anuprising of the peasantry against tsarism. 
 It conducted revolution-ary activity in a number of Russian gubernias—Tambov, Voro-nezh, and others. 
 In 1879 a terrorist grouping was formed in Zem-lya i Volya which regarded individual terror to be the chief meansof fighting against tsarism. 
 At a congress held in Voronezh thatyear Zemlya i Volya split into two groups: Narodnaya Volya (ThePeople’s Will) and Chorny Peredel (General Redistribution). 
 p. 
 322 N. 
 A. 
 Dobrolyubov (1836-1861)—Russian revolutionary democrat, materialist philosopher and literary critic. 
 p. 
 323 Oblomov —the central character in the novel of that name by I. 
 Gon-charov. 
 Oblomov was the personification of routine, stagnation,and inertia. 
 p. 
 338 The collection Proletarskaya Borba (Proletarian Struggle ), No. 
 1, was published by the Ural Social-Democratic Group in 1899. 
 Theauthors, who espoused “Economist” views, denied the necessityof establishing an independent working-class political party andbelieved that a political revolution could be accomplished bymeans of a general strike, without the preliminary organisation and preparation of the masses and without an armed uprising. 
 p. 
 339 “The Social-Democratic Workers ’ Library ”—a series of pamphlets published illegally in Vilno and St. 
 Petersburg in 1900-01. 
 p. 
 339 See The Manifesto of the Communist Party , Marx and Engels Selected Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1959, pp. 
 21-65. 
 p. 
 340 The reference is to the general strike of students organised in the winter of 1901-02. 
 Some 30,000 students took part in the strike. 
 p. 
 341 137 138 139 140Lenin refers to the case of Dreyfus, a French General Staff officer, a Jew, who, in 1894, was court-martialled and sentenced to life imprisonment on an obviously trumped-up charge of espionage and high treason. 
 That provocative trial was organised by French reactionary circles. 
 The general movement for the defence of Drey-fus that developed in France exposed the corruption of the court and sharpened the struggle between republicans and royalists. 
 In 1899 Dreyfus was pardoned and released. 
 It was not until 1906, after a fresh examination of the case, that Dreyfus was rehabilit-ated. 
 p. 
 341 Lenin’s work What Is To Be Done? was written at the end of 1901 and early in 1902. 
 In “Where To Begin”, published in Iskra , No. 
 4 (May 1901), Lenin said that the article represented “a skeleton plan to be developed in greater detail in a pamphlet now in preparation for print”. 
 Lenin began the actual writing of the book in the autumn of 1901. 
 In his “Preface to the Pamphlet Documents of the ‘Unity ’ Conference ”, written in November 1901, Lenin said that the book was in preparation “to be published in the near future”. 
 In Decem-ber Lenin published (in Iskra , No. 
 12) his article “A Talk with Defenders of Economism”, which he later called a conspectus of What Is To Be Done? He wrote the Preface to the book in Feb-ruary 1902 and early in March the book was published by Dietz in Stuttgart. 
 An announcement of its publication was printed in Iskra , No. 
 18, March 10, 1902. 
 In republishing the book in 1907 as part of the collection Twelve Years , Lenin omitted Section A of Chapter V, “Who Was Offended by the Article ‘Where To Begin’”, stating in the Preface that the book was being published with slight abridgements representing the omission solely of details of the organisational relationships and minor polemical remarks. 
 Lenin added five footnotes to the new edition. 
 The text of this volume is that of the 1902 edition, verified with the 1907 edition. 
 p. 
 347 Rabochaya Gazeta (Workers ’ Gazette )—an illegal newspaper issued by the Kiev group of Social-Democrats. 
 Two issues appeared—No. 
 1 in August and No. 
 2 in December (dated November) 1897. 
 The First Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 adopted Rabochaya Gazeta as the official organ of the Party, but the newspaper discontinued publi-cation shortly after the Congress, as a result of a police raid on the printing-press and the arrest of the Central Committee. 
 p. 
 350 Lassalleans and Eisenachers —two parties in the German working-class movement in the sixties and early seventies of the nineteenth century. 
 Lassalleans —supporters of Ferdinand Lassalle (1825-1864) and adherents of his theories; Lassalle was a German petty-bour-141geois socialist who played an active part in organising (in 1863) the General Association of German Workers, a political organi-sation that existed up to 1875. 
 The programmatic demands of the Association were formulated by Lassalle in a number of arti-cles and speeches. 
 Lassalle regarded the state as a supra-class organisation and, in conformity with that philosophically ideal-ist view, believed that the Prussian state could bo utilised to solve the social problem through the setting up of producers’ co-operatives with its aid. 
 Marx said that Lassalle advocated a “Royal-Prussian state socialism”. 
 Lassalle directed the workers towards peaceful, parliamentary forms of struggle, believing that the introduction of universal suffrage would make Prussia a “free people’s state”. 
 To obtain universal suffrage he promised Bis-marck the support of his Association against the liberal opposition and also in the implementation of Bismarck’s plan to reunite Ger-many “from above” under the hegemony of Prussia. 
 Lassalle repudiated the revolutionary class struggle, denied the impor-tance of trade unions and of strike action, ignored the international tasks of the working class, and infected the German workers with nationalist ideas. 
 His contemptuous attitude towards the peasant-ry, which he regarded as a reactionary force, did much damage to the German working-class movement. 
 Marx and Engels fought his harmful utopian dogmatism and his reformist views. 
 Their criticism helped free the German workers from the influence of Lassallean opportunism. 
 Eisenachers —members of the Social-Democratic Workers’ Party of Germany, founded in 1869 at the Eisenach Congress. 
 The leaders of the Eisenachers were August Bebel and Wilhelm Lieb-knecht, who were under the ideological influence of Marx and En-gels. 
 The Eisenach programme stated that the Social-Democratic Workers’ Party of Germany considered itself “a section of the In-ternational Working Men’s Association and shared its aspira-tions”. 
 Thanks to the regular advice and criticism of Marx and Engels, the Eisenachers pursued a more consistent revolutionary policy than did Lassalle’s General Association of German Workers; in particular, on the question of German reunification, they followed “the democratic and proletarian road, struggling against the slightest concession to Prussianism, Bismarckism, and nation-alism” (see present edition, Vol. 
 19, “August Bebel”). 
 Under the influence of the growing working-class movement and of increased government repressions, the two parties united at the Gotha Con-gress in 1875 to form the Socialist Workers’ Party of Germany, of which the Lassalleans formed the opportunist wing. 
 p. 
 352 Guesdists and Possibilists —two trends in the French socialist movement arising out of the split in the French Workers’ Party in 1882. 
 Guesdists —followers of Jules Guesde, constituted the Marxist wing of the movement and advocated an independent revolutionary policy of the proletariat. 
 In 1901 they formed the Socialist Party of France. 
 Possibilists —a petty-bourgeois reformist trend that sought to divert the proletariat from revolutionary methods of struggle. 
The Possibilists advocated the restriction of working-class activ-ity to what is “possible” under capitalism. 
 In 1902, in conjunc-tion with other reformist groups, the Possibilists organised theFrench Socialist Party. 
 In 1905 the Socialist Party of France and the French Socialist Party united to form a single party. 
 During the imperialist war of1914-18, Jules Guesde, together with the entire leadership of theFrench Socialist Party, went over to the camp of social-chauvinism. 
 p. 
 352 Karl Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte , Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1959, p. 
 245. 
 p. 
 354 Cadets —the Constitutional-Democratic Party, the principal bour-geois party in Russia, representing the liberal-monarchist bour-geoisie. 
 It was formed in October 1905. 
 Parading as democrats andcalling themselves the party of “people’s freedom”, the Cadetstried to win the following of the peasantry. 
 Their aim was to pre-serve tsarism in the form of a constitutional monarchy. 
 After thevictory of the October Socialist Revolution, the Cadets organisedcounter-revolutionary conspiracies and revolts against the SovietRepublic. 
 p. 
 356 Bezzaglavtsi —from the title of the journal Bez Zaglaviya (Without a Title )—were organisers of, and contributors to, the journal pub-lished in St. 
 Petersburg in 1906 by S. 
 N. 
 Prokopovich, Y. 
 D. 
 Kus-kova, V. 
 Y. 
 Bogucharsky, and others. 
 The journal openly advo-cated revisionism, supported the Mensheviks and liberals and op-posed an independent proletarian policy. 
 Lenin called the group“pro-Menshevik Cadets or pro-Cadet Mensheviks”. 
 p. 
 356 Ilovaisky , D. 
 I. 
 (1832-1920)—historian; author of numerous of-ficial textbooks of history that were extensively used in primaryand secondary schools in pre-revolutionary Russia. 
 In Ilovai-sky’s texts history was reduced mainly to acts of kings and gener-als; the historical process was explained through secondary andfortuitous circumstances. 
 p. 
 357 Katheder-Socialism —a trend in bourgeois political economy that emerged in Germany in the seventies and eighties of the nineteenthcentury. 
 Under the guise of socialism the Katheder -Socialists preached bourgeois-liberal reformism from university chairs(Katheder ). 
 They maintained that the bourgeois state was above classes, that it was capable of reconciling hostile classes and grad-ually introducing “socialism”, without affecting the interestsof the capitalists, while, at the same time, taking the demandsof the workers as far as possible into consideration. 
 In Russia the142 143 144 145 146 147 148 149 150 151 152 153views of the Katheder -Socialists were disseminated by the “legal Marxists”. 
 p. 
 357 Nozdryov —a character in Gogol’s Dead Souls whom the author called “an historical personage” for the reason that wherever hewent he left behind him a scandalous “history”. 
 p. 
 358 The Hanover resolution —resolution on “Attacks on the Fundamen-tal Views and Tactics of the Party”, adopted by the GermanSocial-Democratic Party Congress at Hanover, September 27-Octo-ber 2 (October 9-14), 1899. 
 A discussion of this question at the Con-gress and the adoption of a special resolution were necessitated bythe fact that the opportunists, led by Bernstein, launched a revi-sionist attack on Marxist theory and demanded a reconsiderationof Social-Democratic revolutionary policy and tactics. 
 The reso-lution adopted by the Congress rejected the demands of the revi-sionists, but failed to criticise and expose Bernsteinism. 
 Bernstein’ssupporters also voted for the resolution. 
 p. 
 358 The Stuttgart Congress of the German Social-Democratic Party held on September 21-26 (October 3-8), 1898, was the first congressto discuss the question of revisionism in the German Social-Demo-cratic Party. 
 A statement from Bernstein (who did not attend)was read to the Congress; it amplified and defended the opportun-ist views he had previously set forth in a number of articles. 
There was, however, no unity among his opponents at the Congress. 
Some (Bebel, Kautsky, and others) called for an ideological strug-gle and a criticism of Bernstein’s errors, but opposed the adoptionof organisational measures toward him. 
 The others, led by RosaLuxemburg—the minority—urged a more vigorous struggle againstBernsteinism. 
 p. 
 359 Starover (Old Believer)—the pseudonym of A. 
 N. 
 Potresov, a member of the Iskra Editorial Board, he subsequently became a Menshevik. 
 p. 
 360 “The Author Who Got a Swelled Head ”—the title of one of Maxim Gorky’s early stories. 
 p. 
 361 The reference is to the collection Material for a Characterisation of Our Economic Development , printed legally in an edition of 2,000 copies in April 1895. 
 The collection included Lenin’s article(signed K. 
 Tulin ) “The Economic Content of Narodism and the Cri-ticism of It in Mr. 
 Struve’s Book ( The Reflection of Marxism in Bourgeois Literature )”, directed against the “legal Marxists” (see present edition, Vol. 
 1, pp. 
 333-507). 
 p. 
 362 “A Protest by Russian Social-Democrats ” was written by Lenin in 1899, in exile. 
 It was a reply to the Credo of a group of “Econo-154 155 156 157 158 159mists” (S. 
 N. 
 Prokopovich, Y. 
 D. 
 Kuskova, and others, who sub-sequently became Cadets). 
 On receiving a copy of the Credo from his sister, A. 
 I. 
 Yelizarova, Lenin wrote a sharp protest in whichhe exposed the real nature of the declaration. 
 The Protest was discussed and unanimously endorsed by a meet-ing of 17 exiled Marxists convened by Lenin in the village ofYermakovskoye, Minusinsk District (Siberia). 
 Exiles in TurukhanskDistrict (Siberia) and Orlovo (Vyatka Gubernia) subsequently as-sociated themselves with the Protest. 
 Lenin forwarded a copy of the Protest abroad to the Emancipa-tion of Labour group; Plekhanov published it in his Vademecum (Handbook—Ed . 
) for the Editors of Rabocheye Dyelo . 
 p. 
 364 Byloye (The Past )—a monthly journal on historical problems pub-lished in St. 
 Petersburg in 1906-07; in 1908 it changed its name toMinuvshiye Gody (Years Past ). 
 It was banned by the tsarist govern-ment in 1908, but resumed publication in Petrograd in July 1917and continued in existence until 1926. 
 p. 
 364 Vademecum for the Editors of Rabocheye Dyelo —a collection of ar-ticles and documents compiled and prefaced by G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanovand published by the Emancipation of Labour Group in Genevain 1900; it exposed the opportunist views of the Union of RussianSocial-Democrats Abroad and of the Editorial Board of its period-ical, Rabocheye Dyelo . 
 p. 
 364 Profession de foi —a manifesto setting forth the opportunist views of the Kiev Committee, issued at the end of 1899. 
 It was identicalwith the “Economist” Credo on many points. 
 Lenin criticised the document in his article “Apropos of the Profession de foi ” (see present edition, Vol. 
 4, pp. 
 286-96). 
 p. 
 364 See Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 16. 
 p. 
 369 The Gotha Programme —the programme adopted by the German Social-Democratic Party at the Gotha Congress in 1875 when theEisenachers and Lassalleans united. 
 The programme suffered fromeclecticism and opportunism, since the Eisenachers made conces-sions to the Lassalleans on the most important points and acceptedtheir formulations. 
 Marx and Engels subjected the Gotha Programmeto scathing criticism and characterised it as a retrograde stepas compared with the Eisenach Programme of 1869 (See Karl Marx,Critique of the Gotha Programme , Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 13-48). 
 p. 
 369 See Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 652-54. 
 p. 
 372 160 161 162 163 164 165The pamphlet On Agitation was written by A. 
 Kremer (later an organiser of the Bund) and edited by Y. 
 O. 
 Tsederbaum (Martov)in Vilno in 1894; it was at first circulated in handwritten and hecto-graphed copies, but at the end of 1897 it was printed in Geneva andsupplied with a preface and a concluding piece by P. 
 B. 
 Axelrod. 
The pamphlet summarised the experiences gained in Social-Demo-cratic work in Vilno and exerted a great influence on Russian So-cial-Democrats, since it called on them to reject narrow study-cir-cle propaganda and to go over to mass agitation among the workerson issues of their everyday needs and demands. 
 It exaggerated therole of the purely economic struggle, however, to the detriment ofpolitical agitation on issues of general democratic demands,and was the embryo of the future “Economism”. 
 P. 
 B. 
 Axelrod not-ed the one-sidedness of the “Vilno Economism” in his concludingpiece to the Geneva edition, G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov made a critical ana-lysis of the pamphlet On Agitation in his Once More on Socialism and the Political Struggle . 
 p. 
 376 Russkaya Starina (The Russian Antiquary )—a monthly magazine dealing with historical problems published in St. 
 Petersburg from1870 to 1918. 
 p. 
 376 S. 
 Peterburgsky Rabochy Listok (St. 
 Petersburg Workers ’ Paper )— an illegal newspaper, organ of the St. 
 Petersburg League ofStruggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class. 
 Two issuesappeared: No. 
 1 in February 1897 (dated January and mimeographedin Russia in an edition of 300-400 copies) and No. 
 2 in Sep-tember 1897 in Geneva. 
 p. 
 377 A private meeting referred to here was held in St. 
 Petersburg be-tween February 14 and 17 (February 26 and March 1), 1897. 
 It wasattended by V. 
 I. 
 Lenin, A. 
 A. 
 Vaneyev, G. 
 M. 
 Krzhizhanovsky,and other members of the St. 
 Petersburg League of Struggle forthe Emancipation of the Working Class, that is, by the “veterans”who had been released from prison for three days before being sentinto exile to Siberia, as well as by the “young” leaders of the Leagueof Struggle who had taken over the leadership of the Leagueafter Lenin’s arrest in December 1895. 
 p. 
 378 “Listok ” Rabotnika (The Workingman ’s Paper )—published in Ge-neva by the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad from 1896to 1899; altogether there appeared 10 issues. 
 Issues 1-8 were edit-ed by the Emancipation of Labour group. 
 But after the majorityof the Union Abroad went over to “Economism”, the Emancipationof Labour group refused to continue editing the paper. 
 Nos. 
 9 and10 were issued by a new editorial board set up by the Union ofRussian Social-Democrats Abroad. 
 p. 
 379 The “ article by V. 
 I. 
 ”—an article by V. 
 P. 
 Ivanshin. 
 p. 
 380 166 167 168 169 170 171 172V. 
 V. 
 — pseudonym of V. 
 P. 
 Vorontsov, an ideologist of liberal Na-rodism in the eighties and nineties of the nineteenth century. 
 By the “ V. 
 V. 
 ’s of Russian Social-Democracy ” Lenin understands the “Economists” who represented the opportunist trend in the RussianSocial-Democratic movement. 
 p. 
 381 The Hirsch-Duncker Unions were established in Germany in 1868 by Hirsch and Duncker, two bourgeois liberals. 
 They preached the “harmony of class interests”, drew the workers away from the revo-lutionary class struggle against the bourgeoisie, and restricted therole of the trade unions to that of mutual benefit societies and edu-cational bodies. 
 p. 
 385 The Self-Emancipation of the Workers Group —a small group of “Economists” formed in St. 
 Petersburg in the autumn of 1898; it existed for only a few months and published a manifesto settingforth its aims [published in Nakanune (On the Eve ) in London], a set of rules and several leaflets addressed to the workers. 
 p. 
 387 Nakanune (On the Eve )—a journal expressing Narodnik views. 
 It was published in Russian in London from January 1899 to Febru-ary 1902—altogether 37 issues. 
 The journal was a rallying pointfor representatives of various petty-bourgeois parties. 
 p. 
 388 G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov published his well-known work The Development of the Monist View of History legally in St. 
 Petersburg in 1895 under the pseudonym of N. 
 Beltov . 
 p. 
 394 Nartsis Tuporylov (Narcissus Blunt-Snout ) was the pseudonym un-der which Y. 
 O. 
 Martov published his satirical poem “Hymn of the Contemporary Russian Socialist” in Zarya , No. 
 I, April 1901. 
 The “Hymn” ridiculed the “Economists” and their adaptations to spontaneous events. 
 p. 
 395 The letter in Iskra , No. 
 7 (August 1901), was from a weaver. 
 It was published in the section “Workers’ Movement and Letters from the Factories”. 
 The letter testified to the great influenceof Lenin’s Iskra among the advanced workers. 
 The letter reads in part: “... I showed Iskra to many fellow-workers and the copy was read to tatters; but we treasure it.... 
 Iskra writes about our cause, about the All-Russian cause which cannot be evaluated in kopeks or measured in hours, when you read the paper you understandwhy the gendarmes and the police are afraid of us workers and of the intellectuals whom we follow. 
 It is a fact that they are a threat, not only to the bosses’ pockets, but to the tsar, the employers,and all the rest.... 
 It will not take much now to set the working people aflame. 
 All that is wanted is a spark, and the fire will break out. 
 How true are the words ‘The Spark will kindle a flame!’ (Themotto of Iskra . 
—Ed. 
) In the past every strike was an important 173 174 175 176 177 178 179 180event, but today everyone sees that strikes alone are not enough and that we must now fight for freedom, gain it through struggle. 
Today everyone, old and young, is eager to read but the sad thing is that there are no books. 
 Last Sunday I gathered eleven people and read to them ‘Where To Begin’. 
 We discussed it until late inthe evening. 
 How well it expressed everything, how it gets to the very heart of things.... 
 And we would like to write a letter to your Iskra and ask you to teach us, not only how to begin, but how to live and how to die. 
” p. 
 431 Rossiya (Russia )—a moderate liberal newspaper published in St. 
 Petersburg from 1899 to 1902. 
 p. 
 436 S. 
 Peterburgskiye Vedomosti (St. 
 Petersburg Recorder )—a newspa-per that began publication in St. 
 Petersburg in 1728 as a continua-tion of the first Russian newspaper Vedomosti , founded in 1703. 
 From 1728 to 1874 the S. 
 Peterburgskiye Vedomosti was published by the Academy of Sciences and from 1875 onwards by the Min-istry of Education; it continued publication until the end of 1917. 
 p. 
 438 L. 
 Brentano —a German bourgeois economist, a champion of so-called “state socialism”, who tried to prove the possibility of achiev-ing social equality within the framework of capitalism by reforms and through the reconciliation of the interests of the capitalists and of the workers. 
 Using Marxist phraseology as a cover, Bren-tano and his followers tried to subordinate the working-class move-ment to the interests of the bourgeoisie. 
 p. 
 438 The full name of this small organisation was Workers ’ Group for the Struggle Against Capital , its views were close to those of the “Economists”. 
 The group was formed in St. 
 Petersburg in thespring of 1899, it prepared a mimeographed leaflet, “Our Pro-gramme”, which was never circulated, owing to the arrest of the group. 
 p. 
 444 N. 
 N. 
 —pseudonym of S. 
 N. 
 Prokopovich, an active “Economist” who later became a Cadet. 
 p. 
 450 Vasilyev , N. 
 V. 
 —Colonel of the Gendarmes, supporter of the Zu-batov “police socialism”. 
 (See Note 128. 
) Ozerou , I. 
 Kh. 
 and Worms , A. 
 E. 
 —professors at Moscow Uni-versity, spokesmen for the “police socialism” of Zubatov. 
 p. 
 455 Afanasy Ivanovich and Pulkheria Ivanovna —a patriarchal family of petty provincial landlords in Gogol’s Old-Time Landowners . 
 p. 
 456 Lenin refers here to his own revolutionary activity in St. 
 Peters-burg in 1893-95. 
 p. 
 466 181 182 183 184 185 186 187 188 189190 191The reference is to the pamphlet Report on the Russian Social-Democratic Movement to the International Socialist Congress in Paris , 1900 . 
 The Report was submitted to the Congress by the Editorial Board of Rabocheye Dyelo on behalf of the Union of Rus-sian Social-Democrats Abroad and was published as a separatepamphlet in Geneva in 1901; the pamphlet also contained the re-port of the Bund (“The History of the Jewish Working-Class Move-ment in Russia and Poland”). 
 p. 
 483 Yuzhny Rabochy (The Southern Worker )—a Social-Democratic newspaper, illegally published from January 1900 to April 1903by a group of that name; twelve issues appeared. 
 p. 
 488 Lenin added this footnote for purposes of secrecy. 
 The facts are enumerated in the order in which they actually took place. 
 p. 
 496 The reference is to the negotiations between the St. 
 Petersburg League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class and Lenin who, in the second half of 1897, wrote the two pamphlets mentioned. 
 p. 
 496 The reference is to the League of Russian Revolutionary Social-Democracy Abroad. 
 (See Note 103. 
) p. 
 496 The reference is to the negotiations between Lenin and the Central Committee of the Bund. 
 p. 
 497 The “fourth fact ” of which Lenin speaks was the attempt of the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad and the Bund toconvene the Second Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in the spring of 1900. 
 The “ member of the committee ” referred to was I. 
 H. 
 Lalayants (a member of the Ekaterinoslav Social-Democratic Committee)who came to Moscow in February 1900 for talks with Lenin. 
 p. 
 497 Lenin cites the article by D. 
 I. 
 Pisarev “Blunders of Immature Thinking”. 
 p. 
 510 Tkachov , P. 
 N. 
 (1844-1885)—one of the ideologists of revolutionary Narodism, a follower of the Auguste Blanqui. 
 p. 
 510 Lenin refers to the following passage from Marx’s The Eigh-teenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte : “Hegel remarks somewhere that all facts and personages of great importance in world historyoccur, as it were, twice. 
 He forgot to add: the first time as tragedy, the second as farce” (see Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 247). 
 p. 
 510 Janizaries —privileged Turkish infantry, abolished in 1826. 
 The janizaries plundered the population and were known for their un-usual brutality. 
 Lenin called the tsarist police “janizaries”. 
 p. 
 514 192 193 194Lenin omitted this appendix when What Is To Be Done? w a s republished in the collection Twelve Years in 1907 p. 
 521 The International Socialist Bureau —the executive body of the Second International established by decision of the Paris Congress in 1900. 
 From 1905 onwards Lenin was a member of the Bureauas a representative of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Par-ty. 
 p. 
 521 Iskra , No. 
 18 (March 10, 1902) published in the section “From the Party” an item entitled “ Zarya ’s Polemic with Vorwärts ”, sum-ming up the controversy. 
 p. 
 526 THE LIFE AND WORK OF V. 
 I. 
 LENIN Chronology (May 1901-February 1902 ) May, prior to 13 (26) May 13-15(20-28 ) May-June June, prior to 24 (beginning of July ) June 24 and 26(July 7 and 9 ) June 24-July 17(July 7-30 ) June1901 Lenin begins work on his book What Is To Be Done? Lenin’s “Where To Begin” is published in Iskra , No. 
 4; in this article Lenin outlined a concrete plan for the building of a revolutionary party of the work-ing class, which was later developed in What Is To Be Done? Lenin guides the organising of the transport of Iskra to Russia. 
 Lenin conducts negotiations with the Iskra group in Baku for reprinting Iskra in the local under-ground print-shop organised by V. 
 Z. 
 Ketskhoveli. 
 In letters to Iskra agents Lenin gives instructions on the reprinting of material published in the news-paper at the Iskra underground press in Kishinev. 
 Lenin writes his “Persecutors of the Zemstvo andthe Hannibals of Liberalism”. 
 Lenin poses to the Iskra editors the question of drafting a Party programme. 
 The discussion on Lenin’s article “Persecutors of the Zemstvo and the Hannibals of Liberalism” bythe Iskra editors reveals differences between Lenin and Plekhanov on the question of the atti-tude to the liberals. 
 Lenin refuses to change thegeneral tone of the article or to revise his positionof principle on the question of the attitude to theliberals. 
 Lenin’s article “Another Massacre”, on the workers’ defence at the Obukhov Works, published inIskra , No. 
 5. 
 June-September July July 31-Au-gust 12 (August 13-25 ) August September 10 (23) September 20 (October 3 ) September 21(October 4 ) September 22(October 5 ) Late Septem-ber-early Octo-ber (October )Lenin writes “The Agrarian Question and the ‘Cri-tics of Marx’”, directed against the revisionist“Critics” of the Marxist theory of the agrarian ques-tion. 
 In a letter to an Iskra adherent Lenin protests emphatically against the publication, in St. 
 Pe-tersburg, of a local periodical of the Russian Iskra organisation, believing that plan to be a returnto amateur methods of work. 
Lenin’s article “A Valuable Admission” publishedin Iskra , No. 
 6 . 
 Lenin receives from Russia N. 
 K. 
 Krupskaya’sfirst pamphlet, The Woman Worker, printed in theIskra underground press at Kishinev. 
 Lenin’s article “The Lessons of the Crisis” pub-lished in Iskra , No. 
 7. 
 Lenin sends to Iskra agents in Russia the plan he has elaborated for an All-Russian Iskra organisation. 
 Lenin’s article “The Serf-Owners at Work” pub-lished in Iskra , No. 
 8. 
 Lenin participates in a conference of representa-tives of Iskra and Sotsial-Demokrat organisations abroad held in Zurich. 
 The conference instructsLenin to speak at the “Unity” Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 organisations abroad. 
 Lenin speaks at the “Unity” Conference of Iskra and Sotsial-Demokrat organisations, the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad, the Bund, and the Borba group, and exposes the opportunism of the leaders of the Union Abroad. 
 After reading a declaration on the final rupture with the Union Abroad, Lenin and the representa-tives of Iskra and Sotsial-Demokrat organisations abroad leave the “Unity” Conference. 
 Lenin negotiates with an Iskra agent from Russia and gives instructions on the formation of an All-Russian Iskra organisation. 
 Lenin participates in the organisation—undertak-en on his initiative—of the League of Russian Revolutionary Social-Democracy Abroad, whichunited the adherents of Iskra and the Sotsial-Demokrat organisation. 
 October November, prior to 20 (December, prior to 3 ) November 20(December 3 ) December, prior to 5 (18) December 5 (18) December, prior to 6 (19) December 6 (19) December, be-tween 6 and 10(19 and 23 ) December 20 (January 2, 1902 ) December 21 (January 3 1902 ) Early January(mid-January ) January 8 (21 )Lenin’s articles “Fighting the Famine-Stricken”“A Reply to the St. 
 Petersburg Committee”, and“Party Affairs Abroad” published in Iskra , No. 
 9. 
 Lenin’s article “Penal Servitude Regulations andPenal Servitude Sentences” published in Iskra , No. 
 10. 
 Lenin’s article “The Protest of the Finnish Peo-ple” published in Iskra , No. 
 11. 
 In a letter to the Iskra organisations in Russia Lenin presents the information that What Is To Be Done? wiIl shortly be published. 
 In a letter to an Iskra agent Lenin objects strongly to the use of the Iskra press at Kishinev for print-ing writings of an “Economist” tendency. 
 In the name of the Iskra Editorial Board Lenin writes a letter of congratulation to G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov on the anniversary of his twenty-five years ofrevolutionary activity. 
 Lenin’s article “A Talk with Defenders of Econom-ism” published in Iskra , No. 
 12. 
 Zarya , No. 
 2-3 publishes Lenin’s “The Persecutors of the Zemstvo and the Hannibals of Liberalism”,the first four chapters of his work “The Agrarian Question and the ‘Critics of Marx’” under the title “The ‘Critics’ on the Agrarian Question” (the firstarticle signed N. 
 Lenin ), and “Review of Home Affairs”. 
 Lenin’s article “Demonstrations Have Begun” pub-lished in Iskra , No. 
 13. 
 Lenin receives the first copy of Iskra , No. 
 10, printed at the Iskra underground press in Kishi-nev. 
 1902 Lenin writes critical notes to the first draft pro-gramme of the Russian Social-Democratic LabourParty, composed by Plekhanov. 
 Lenin, in a speech at a conference of the Iskra Editorial Board in Munich criticises the first draft programme composed by Plekhanov and intro-duces his corrections and proposals. 
 January (be-tween 8 and 25 ) (between Janua-ry 21 and Feb-ruary 7 ) January 15 (28) End of January(first half of February ) February 1 (14) February End of Feb-r uar y t o mi d-March (March ) March 5 (18) Beginning ofMarch (mid-March )Lenin composes a new draft programme of the Rus-sian Social-Democratic Labour Party. 
 Lenin’s article “Concerning the State Budget” published in Iskra , No. 
 15. 
 Following Lenin’s instructions, the All-RussianIskra organisation is founded at a conference of Iskra adherents in Samara. 
 Lenin’s article “Political Agitation and ‘The ClassPoint of View’” published in Iskra , No. 
 16. 
 Lenin writes the Preface to his What Is To Be Done? Lenin writes the critical notes to the second draftprogramme of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 composed by Ple-khanov. 
 Lenin writes for the Belostok Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 the “Report of the Iskra Editorial Board to the Meeting of R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Committees”and a draft resolution; he takes part in the confer-ence of the Iskra Editorial Board and gives instruc-tions to the Iskra delegate to the Belostok Confer-ence. 
 The book What Is To Be Done? Burning Questions of Our Movement is published in Stuttgart; in this work Lenin elaborated the ideological foundations of the Marxist Party. 
 Printed in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics B. 
 n. 
 leHnH coЧnHeHnr Tom 5 На английскот языке