A Note on the Transcription This digital edition of Lenin’s Philosophical Notebooks, the whole of Volume 38 of the Fourth (English language) Edition of the Collected Works , might be regarded as a “syn-thesis” of the Third (1972) and Fourth (1976) Printing of the volume. 
 We began our preparation of this volume using the Fourth Printing, having assumed that this edition marked an im-provement over the previous one. 
 Only much later did it be-come clear, after some spot-checking with the Third Print-ing, that in certain very important respects the newer print-ing reflected a carelessness that rendered it inferior to its the inconsistent use of Greek and German characters for the same words which introduced unnecessary confusion; there were also instances where verticle lines that Lenin placed in the margins adjacent to his comment were omitted. 
 On acouple of other ocassions small blocks of text were re-ordered,and while such practice can clearly fall within the purview ofeditorial discretion, there were also a couple of places wherea few lines of text are repeated, word for word, with no ac-where there were disrepancies between the Third and Fourth printings, be they substantive or merely annoying, the greaterconfidence in the Third Printing prevailed. 
 Notwithstanding such carelessness, we proceeded to use the Fourth Printing as the basis for the formatting, layoutand pagination of this digital edition. 
 The afore-mentionedfaux pas were removed and this required some reformatting, and this proceeded on the basis of the 1972 printing. 
 Perhapsit is worth noting that neither edition was particulaly gener-ous in translating into English the German expressions and phrases Lenin’s frequently used in the body of the texts. 
 Norcompanying editorial note to indicate that such a faux pas the problem was with the editorial staff). 
 In nearly all caseshad its source in Lenin’s reading notes (which suggests thatpredecessor. 
 For example, in the Fourth Printing there was was it ever indicated why some German text was rendered into English and other text (by far most) never was. 
 In thoseinstances when translations were ventured, unlike the1972 edition which placed them in the footnotes, the 1976 edi-tion placed the English translations directly in the body of the text and omitted the German altogether. 
 The latter edi-tion also revised some of the editors’ endnotes, expandingon a few items, reducing others, and most salient of all: omit-ting the repetative phrase “reactionary philosophy” fromevery note pertaining to idealist philosophers. 
 Although Marx to Mao has always tried to limit its role to that of transcription, we are confident that in spite of, orperhaps because of, our ocassional editorial intrusion in thisinstance, nothing has been done to degrade the integrity ofthe material we are placing before the reader. 
 In preparing this digital edition of the Philosophical Note-books we encountered one nagging technical problem: estab-lishing a consistent and uniform appearance for the veriticalparallel lines (both “normal” and “bold” faced) appearingthroughout the volume. 
 We have reached the limit (as we tested on two different versions of Acrobat Reader (4. 
0 and 6. 
0), but there has been no cross-platform testing. 
 We can only apologize if these marginal markings are aesthetic di-sasters on your particular system. 
 1 May 2008 From Marx to Mao M-L Digital Reprintsknow it) of what we can do to control this. 
 The file has been L E N I N COLLECTED WORkS 38 IN ACCORDANCE WITH A DECISION OF THE NINTH CONGRESS OF THE R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) AND THE SECOND CONGRESS OF SOVIETS OF THE U. 
S. 
S. 
R. 
 B. 
 n. 
 l d H n H С О Ч И Н E Н И Я И з д a н u е ч е m в е p m o e ГОСУДАРСТВ ЕНН ОЕ ИЗ ДАТ ЕЛЬ СТВО ПОЛИТИЧЕ СКОЙ ЛИ ТЕРАТУ РЫ M О С К В А /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR www. 
marx 2mao. 
comV. 
 I. 
 L E N I N COLLECTE D WO RkS VOLUME 38 Philosophical Notebooks PROGRESS PUBLISHERS MOSCOW 1976 BY C L E M E N C E D U T T EDITED BY STEWART SMITH First printing 1961 Second printing 1963 Third printing 1972 Fourth printing 1976 From Marx to Mao M L © Digital Reprints 2008 www. 
marx 2mao. 
com CONTENTS 1895 1903 1904 1909 1914-1916Preface ............................ 
 CONSPECTUS OF THE BOOK THE HOLY FAMILY BY A N D E N G E L S ......................... 
 FR. 
 ÜBERWEG. 
 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY . 
 (Revised by Max Heinze) 3 volumes. 
 1876-1880 . 
 Leipzig ... FR. 
 PAULSEN. 
 INTRODUCTION TO PHILOSOPHY . 
 1899 ... NOTE ON A REVIEW OF THE WORKERS OF LIFE AND THE RID-DLE OF THE UNIVERSE BY E. 
 HAECKEL ......... REMARKS ON BOOKS ON THE NATURAL SCIENCES AND PHI-LOSOPHY IN THE SORBONNE LIBRARY ............ CONSPECTUS OF FEUERBACH’S BOOK LECTURES ON THE ESSENCE OF RELIGION ................... 
 CONSPECTUS OF HEGEL’S BOOK THE SCIENCE OF LOGIC . 
 Preface to the First Edition ............. 
 Preface to the Second Edition .......... 
. 
 Introduction : General Concept of Logic ...... Book One: T h e D o c t r i n e o f B e i n g .......... 
. 
13 19 52 53 56 57 61 85 87 89 95 101 With What Should One Begin Science? .... 
. 
 Section One: Determinateness (Quality) .... 
. 
 Section Two: Magnitude (Quantity) ....... 
 Section Three: Measure ............. 
 Book Two: E s s e n c e ...................... 
 Section One: Essence as Reflection in Itself .... 
 Section Two: Appearance ............ Section Three: Actuality ............ Book Three: S u b j e c t i v e L o g i c o r t h e D o c t r i n e o f t h e N o t i o n ...................... 
 On the Notion in General ............ Section One: Subjectivity ............ Section Two: Objectivity ............ Section Three: the Idea ............ NOTES ON REVIEWS OF HEGEL’S LOGIC .......... 
 CONSPECTUS OF HEGEL’S BOOK LECTURES ON THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY ...................... 
. 
 Introduction to the History of Philosophy ....... 
. 
 Volume XIII. 
 Volume I of The History of Philosophy. 
 History of Greek Philosophy ............. 
 Ionic Philosophy .................. Pythagoras and Pythagoreans .......... 
. 
 The Eleatic School ................ 
 The Philosophy of Heraclitus .......... 
. 
 Leucippus ..................... Democritus ................... 
. 
 The Philosophy of Anaxagoras .......... 
 Volume XIV. 
 Volume II of The History of Philosophy . 
. 
 The Philosophy of the Sophists .......... 
 The Philosophy of Socrates ............ The Socratics ................... 
 The Philosophy of Plato ............. 
. 
 The Philosophy of Aristotle ............ The Philosophy of the Stoics .......... 
. 
 The Philosophy of Epicurus ............ The Philosophy of the Sceptics .......... 
 Volume XV. 
 Volume III of The History of Philosophy . 
 (The End of Greek Philosophy, Medieval and ModernPhilosophy up to Schelling, pp. 
 1-692 ) ....... 
103105 116 120 127 129 148 156 165 167 176 185 192 238 243 245 247 247 247 250 259 263 265 266 269 269 272275 277 280 288 289295 301 The Neo-Platonists ................ 
 Hegel on Plato’s Dialogues ............ CONSPECTUS OF HEGEL’S BOOK LECTURES ON THE PHI-LOSOPHY OF HISTORY ................... 
. 
 Hegel on World History ................ 
 PLAN OF HEGEL’S DIALECTICS (LOGIC). 
 (Contents of the Small Logic (Encyclopaedia)) ................... 
. 
 GEORGES NOËL: HEGEL’S LOGIC . 
 Paris, 1897 ....... 
. 
 J. 
 PERRIN. 
 TREATISE ON PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY. 
 PRINCIPLES. 
 Paris, 1903 ......................... 
. 
 PETER GENOV. 
 FEUERBACHS ERKENNTNISTHEORIE UND METAPHYSIK . 
 Zürich, 1911 (Berner Dissertation) (S. 
 89). 
. 
 PAUL VOLKMANN. 
 EPISTEMOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF THE NATURAL SCIENCES (“Sciences and Hypothesis,” IX) . 
 Second Edition. 
 Leipzig, 1910 ................... 
. 
 MAX VERWORN. 
 THE HYPOTHESIS OF BIOGENESIS . 
 Jena, 1903 ............................ 
. 
 FR. 
 DANNEMANN. 
 HOW DID OUR PICTURE OF THE WORLD ARISE? (Kosmos). 
 Stuttgart, 1912 ............. 
. 
 LUDWIG DARMSTAEDTER. 
 HANDBOOK ON THE HISTORY OF THE NATURAL SCIENCES AND TECHNIQUE . 
 Berlin, 1908 , 2nd edition ......................... 
 NAPOLÉON. 
 PENSÉES . 
 Paris, 1913 . 
 Bibliothèque Miniature No. 
 14 ............................ 
 ARTUR ERICH HAAS. 
 THE SPIRIT OF HELLENISM IN MODERN PHYSICS . 
 Leipzig, 1914 (32 pp. 
) (Veit & Co. 
) .... 
 THEODOR LIPPS. 
 NATURAL SCIENCE AND WORLD OUTLOOK . 
 (Speech at the 78th Congress of German Natural Scientists in Stuttgart). 
 Heidelberg, 1906 ................ 
. 
 CONSPECTUS OF LASSALLE'S BOOK THE PHILOSOPHY OF HERACLITUS THE OBSCURE OF EPHESUS ......... ON THE QUESTION OF DIALECTICS ............. 
. 
 CONSPECTUS OF ARISTOTLE’S BOOK METAPHYSICS .... 
 NOTE ON THE COLLECTED WORKS OF FEUERBACH AND HEGEL CONSPECTUS OF FEUERBACH'S BOOK EXPOSITION, ANALY-SIS AND CRITIQUE OF THE PHILOSOPHY OF LEIBNITZ . 
. 
 DR. 
 JOHANN PLENGE. 
 AND HEGEL. 
 Tübingen, 1911 ... NOTES ON BOOKS ...................... 
301 302 303 313 315 319 325 326 328 329 331 338334 335 336 337 355 363 373 375 388 392 392 392 393 393 394 395 395 395 396 396 397 398399 400 401 403 407 475 484 501 559 590 608 627F. 
 Raab. 
 Die Philosophie von R. 
 Avenarius. 
 Systema-tische Darstellung und immanente Kritik . 
 Leipzig, 1912 . 
 ......................... 
 Perrin. 
 Les atomes . 
 Paris (Alcan) .......... 
 Gideon Spicker. 
 Über das Verhältnis der Naturwissenschaft zur Philosophie . 
 Berlin, 1874 ............ Hegel. 
 Phänomenologie (hrs. 
 Bolland, 1907 ).... 
. 
 Albrecht Rau. 
 Fr. 
 Paulsen über E. 
 Haeckel . 
 2-te Aufl. 
 Brackwede, 1907 ................... 
 E. 
 Haeckel. 
 Gott-Natur . 
 Leipzig, 1914 ......... Ühde. 
 Feuerbach . 
 Leipzig, 1914 ............ A. 
 Zart. 
 Bausteine des Weltalls: At ome, Moleküle Stuttgart, 1913 ................... 
. 
 Ruttmann. 
 Die Hauptergebnisse der modernen Psychologie Suter. 
 Die Philosophie von Richard Avenarius . 
 1910 ON THE REVIEW OF JOH. 
 PLENGE'S BOOK AND HEGEL ............................ 
 ON THE REVIEW OF R. 
 B. 
 PERRY'S BOOK PRESENT PHILO-SOPHICAL TENDENCIES ................... 
 ON THE REVIEW OF A. 
 ALIOTTA'S BOOK THE IDEALIST REACTION AGAINST SCIENCE ............... REMARKS ON HILFERDING'S VIEWS ON MACH ( IN FINANCE CAPITAL )........................... REMARKS IN BOOKS ..................... G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov. 
 Fundamental Questions of Marxism . 
 St. 
 Ptsbrg, 1908 ................... 
. 
 Abel Rey. 
 Modern Philosophy . 
 Paris, 1908 ...... A. 
 Deborin. 
 Dialectical Materialism ......... V. 
 Shulyatikov. 
 The Justification of Capitalism in West-European Philosophy . 
 (From Descartes to E. 
 Mach). 
 Moscow, 1908 ..................... G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov. 
 N. 
 C. 
 Chernyshevsky . 
 “Shipovnik” Publishing House. 
 St. 
 Petersburg, 1910 ....... 
. 
 Notes . 
 ........................... Index of Sources Mentioned by Lenin ............ Name Index ......................... 
 Subject Index ........................1908-1911 18-19 21 79 86-87 224-225 338-339 356-357 545Portrait of V. 
 I. 
 Lenin. 
— 1917 ................ 
 First page of V. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s manuscript: Conspectus of the Book The Holy Family by Marx and Engels. 
— 1895 ....... 
 A page from V. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s manuscript: Conspectus of Feuer-bach’s book Lectures on the Essence of Religion . 
—1909 ... The cover of the first notebook containing Conspectus of Hegel’s book The Science of Logic . 
—September-December 1914 ... A page from V. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s manuscript: Conspectus of Hegel's book The Science of Logic . 
—September-December 1914 ... Reading Hall of the Berlin Library. 
 V. 
 I. 
 Lenin worked here in 1914-16 ......................... 
. 
 A page from V. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s manuscript On the Question of Dialec-tics. 
—1915 ......................... 
. 
 A page from G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov’s book N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky with V. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s notes .....................ILLUSTRATIONS P R E F A C E Volume 38 of the Fourth Edition of the Collected Works of V. 
 I. 
 Lenin comprises resumes and excerpts from books, plus his critical remarks and evaluations concerning variousaspects of Marxist philosophy; it also includes notes, frag-ments and other philosophical material. 
 The volume includes Lenin’s philosophical writings first published in Lenin Miscellanies IX and XII in 1929-30, and then, from 1933 to 1947, published repeatedly as a sepa-rate book under the title of Philosophical Notebooks . 
 This material comprises the contents of ten notebooks, eight ofwhich, relating to 1914-15, were entitled by Lenin Note-books on Philosophy . 
 In addition, the volume includes com-ments on books dealing with problems of philosophy and the natural sciences made by Lenin as separate notes in other notebooks containing preparatory material, as well as ex-cerpts from books by various authors, with notes and under-lineation by Lenin. 
 Unlike previous editions of Philosophical Notebooks , this volume contains Lenin's comments and markings in G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov's pamphlet Fundamental Questions of Marxism and in V. 
 Shulyatikov's book The Justification of Capitalism in West-European Philosophy, from Descartesto E. 
 Mach , markings and underlinings on those pages of A. 
 Deborin's article “Dialectical Materialism” which werenot included in earlier editions; comments in G. 
 V. 
 Ple-khanov's book N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky , including markings, which in the course of work on this edition were proved tohave been made by Lenin; and a number of notes on books and reviews of books on philosophy and the natural sciences. 
 Published in this volume for the first time is a note which Lenin wrote late in 1904 on a review of The Wonders of Life and The Riddle of the Universe , two works by the German biologist Ernst Haeckel. 
 A large number of the items included in Philosophical Notebooks relate to 1914-16. 
 It is no coincidence that Lenin devoted so much attention to philosophy, and above all, to Marxist dialectics, precisely during the First World War, a period in which all the contradictions of capitalismbecame extremely acute and a revolutionary crisis matured. 
Only materialist dialectics provided the basis for makinga Marxist analysis of the contradictions of imperialism,revealing the imperialist character of the First World War, exposing the opportunism and social-chauvinism of the lead-ers of the Second International and working out the strat-egy and tactics of struggle of the proletariat. 
 All the worksof Lenin written during that period — the classical treatiseImperialism as the Highest Stage of Capitalism, Socialismand War, The United States of Europe Slogan, The Junius Pamphlet, Socialist Revolution and the Right of Nations to Self-Determination and other writings — are inseparable from Philosophical Notebooks . 
 The creative elaboration of Marxist philosophy, the Marxist dialectical method, anda profound scientific analysis of the new historical periodwere the basis for Lenin’s great discoveries, which equipped the proletariat with a new theory of socialist revolution. 
 Philosophical Notebooks is inspired by a creative approach to Marxist philosophy, which is indissolubly bound up withreality, the struggle of the working class and the policyof the Party. 
 The volume opens with Lenin’s conspectus of The Holy Family, or Critique of Critical Criticism by Marx and Engels. 
 The conspectus written in 1895 traces the formationof the philosophical and political world outlook of Marxand Engels. 
 Lenin quotes and marks those passages in thebook which show how Marx approached “the concept of thesocial relations of production” (p. 
 30 of this volume) and which characterise “Marx’s view—already almost fully de-veloped—concerning the revolutionary role of the proletariat”(p. 
 26). 
 Lenin gives prominence to Marx and Engels’ crit-icism of the subjective sociology of Bruno and Edgar Bauer and their followers and their idealist views on the role of critical-minded people. 
” Lenin stresses the theses advanced by the founders of scientific communism: that the real andactual makers of history are the people, the workingmasses; and that “with the thoroughness of the historicalaction, the size of the mass who perform it will thereforeincrease” (p. 
 82). 
 These theses are organically linked with the struggle waged by Lenin at that time against idealist Narodnik views on “heroes” and “the crowd,” againstattempts to provide a theoretical basis for the cult of theindividual. 
 Lenin made a detailed résumé of the chapterof the book in which Marx thoroughly characterises the sig-nificance of 17th-18th century English and French material-ism. 
 Philosophical Notebooks pays great attention to German classical philosophy, one of the sources of Marxism. 
 In asummary of Ludwig Feuerbach’s book, Lectures on the Es-sence of Religion , which he wrote apparently in 1909, Lenin emphasises Feuerbach’s contributions as a materialist and atheist. 
 He also points out those propositions in the Lec-tures expressing the materialist conjectures contained inFeuerbach’s views on society. 
 On the other hand, Lenin re-veals the weaknesses and limitations of Feuerbach’s materi-alism, noting that “both the anthropological principle andnaturalism are only inexact, weak descriptions of m a t e-r i a l i s m ” (p. 
 82). 
 In comparing Marx and Engels’ works of the same period with Lectures on the Essence of Religion , which Feuerbach delivered in 1848-49 and which were published in 1851, Lenin writes: “How far, even a t t h i s time (1848-1851), h a d Feuerbach l a g g e d b e h i n d M a r x (The Communist Manifesto , 1847, Neue Rheinische Zeitung, etc. 
) and Engels (1845: Lage )” (p. 
 77). 
 In elaborating the theory of materialist dialectics, Lenin paid special attention to the study and critical analysisof Hegel’s philosophical legacy. 
 His résumés of Hegel’sThe Science of Logic, Lectures on the History of Philosophyand Lectures on the Philosophy of History occupy a central place in Philosophical Notebooks . 
 Lenin sharply criticises Hegel’s idealism and the mys-ticism of his ideas. 
 But Lenin also reveals the significance of Hegelian dialectics and points out the necessity for evaluating it from a materialist standpoint. 
 “Hegel’s logic,” wrote V. 
 I. 
 Lenin, “cannot be applied in its given form, it cannot be taken as given. 
 One must s e p a r a t e o u t from it the logical (epistemological) nuances, after puri-fying them from Ideenmystik ...” (p. 
 266). 
 In summarising Hegel’s writings, Lenin formulates a series of highly impor-tant propositions on the essence of materialist dialectics. 
 The brilliant article “On the Question of Dialectics,” written in 1915, is related to Lenin’s summary of Hegel’sworks. 
 Though small in size, this article is a crystallisa-tion of unsurpassed depth and richness of thought of allthe important and essential elements in materialist dia-lectics. 
 Lenin’s résumés of Lassalle’s The Philosophy of Heraclitus the Obscure of Ephesus , Aristotle’s Metaphys-ics and Feuerbach’s Exposition, Analysis and Critique of the Philosophy of Leibnitz trace the historical preparation of materialist dialectics. 
 Lenin examines the history ofphilosophy from Heraclitus and Democritus to Marx and En-gels, and presents a profound Marxist evaluation of the work of outstanding thinkers. 
 He reveals the progressive contri-bution which they made to the development of philosophicalthought, and at the same time, discloses the historical lim-itations of their views. 
 In his comments on books concerned with the natural sciences, as well as elsewhere in the volume, Lenin criti-cises attempts to reconcile a scientific explanation of naturewith a religious world outlook, the vacillations of naturalscientists—spontaneous materialists—between materialismand idealism, and their inability to distinguish betweenmechanistic and dialectical materialism. 
 He inveighs against a contemptuous attitude toward philosophy and philosophical generalisations and demonstrates the vast importance ofmaterialist dialectics for the natural sciences and for phil-osophical generalisations based on the discoveries of mod-ern science. 
 The last section of Philosophical Notebooks is made up of markings and comments by Lenin in books on philosophy (by G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov, V. 
 M. 
 Shulyatikov, A. 
 M. 
 Deborinand other authors), which show how scathingly Lenin crit-icised distortions of dialectical and historical materialism. 
 This criticism is a vivid example of the uncompromising struggle by Lenin against vulgar matorialism and the slight-est deviations from Marxist philosophy. 
 The remarks made by Lenin in Plekhanov’s book on Cher-nvshevsky are of considerable interest. 
 They are evidenceof his great attention to the history of Russian social thoughtand his high opinion of its progressive, materialist tradi-tions. 
 Lenin stresses the revolutionary democracy and materialisrm of Chernyshevsky and his determined struggieagainst idealism. 
 In pointing out tho shortcomings of Ple-khanov’s book and Plekhanov’s failure to see the class contentof Chernyshevsky’s activity, Lenin writes: “Because of thetheoretical difference between the idealist and materialist views of history, Plekhanov overlooked the practical-politi-cal and class difference between the liberal and the demo-crat” (p. 
 546). 
 In Philosophical Notebooks , Lenin consistently upholds the principle of partisanship in philosophy, and demonstratesthe organic connection between dialectical materialism and revolutionary practice. 
 Philosophical Notebooks contains invaluable ideological richness, and is of immense theoretical and political sig-nificance. 
 In it Lenin elaborates dialectical and historicalmaterialism, the history of philosophy, focussing his atten-tion on the problems of materialist dialectics. 
 Along with his basic philosophical work, Materialism and Empirio-crit-icism , Philosophical Notebooks is an outstanding achieve-ment of Lenin’s creative genius. 
 Lenin’s excerpts and comments provide a definition of dialectics as the science of the most general laws of de-velopment and cognition of the objective world. 
 Of excep-tional importance is his proposition on the identity of dialectics, logic and the theory of knowledge. 
 He pointedout that the fundamental failure of metaphysical materialismwas its inability to apply dialectics to the process anddevelopment of cognition; dialectics, he stressed, is thetheory of knowledge of Marxism. 
 In his Philosophical Note-books Lenin advanced Marxist dialectics still further by elab-orating the question of the dialectical process of cog-nition and the dictum that the dialectical way of cognising objective reality consists in the transition from living perception to abstract thought and from this to practice. 
 In elaborating materialist dialectics, Lenin concentrat-ed on the problem of contradictions. 
 It is in Philosophical Notebooks that he explains that the doctrine of the unity and struggle of opposites is the essence and core of dialec-tics, that the struggle of opposites is the source of devel-opment. 
 “The splitting of a single whole and the cognition of its contradictory parts ... is the e s s e n c e (one of the ‘essentials,’ one of the principal, if not the principal,characteristics or features) of dialectics” (p. 
 359). 
 It may be presumed that the preparatory material of Notebooks on Philosophy is evidence of Lenin’s intention to write a special work on materialist dialectics, a task which he had no opportunity to fulfil. 
 Although the ma-terial in Philosophical Notebooks does not constitute a com-plete work written by Lenin for publication, it is an im-portant contribution to the development of dialecticalmaterialism. 
 The study of the great ideological content ofPhilosophical Notebooks is of tremendous importance for a thorough grasp of Marxist-Leninist philosophy, the theo-retical foundation of scientific communism. 
 * ** The summaries as well as the rest of this volume are given chiefly in chronological order. 
 Remarks made in bookshave also been arranged chronologically in a separate sec-tion. 
 All of Lenin’s underlineation has been reproduced in type. 
 Words underscored by a wavy or a straight thin line have been set in italics; those underscored by two lines — in spaced italics; those underscored by three straight thinlines — in boldface, etc. 
 The text of this edition has been checked with Lenin’s manuscripts; quotations have been verified with originalsources. 
 Notes, an index of the sources mentioned by Lenin, name and subject indexes are appended. 
 Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the C. 
C. 
, C. 
P. 
S. 
U . 
 V. 
 I. 
 L E N I N 1917 THE HOLY FAMILY BY AND ENGELS1 Published according to the manuscriptWritten not earlier than April 25 (May 7) but not later than September 1895 First published in 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII First page of V. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s manuscript Conspectus of the book The Holy Family by Marx and Engels. 
—1895 Reduced First page of V. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s manuscript Conspectus of the book The Holy Family by Marx and Engels. 
—1895 Reduced /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR THE HOLY FAMILY, OR CRITIQUE OF CRITICAL CRITICISM AGAINST BRUNO BAUER & CO. 
 BY FREDERICK ENGELS AND KARL FRANKFORT-ON-MAIN, LITERARY PUBLISHING HOUSE (J. 
 RUTTEN) 18452 This little book, printed in octavo, consists of a fore-word (pp. 
 III-IV)* (dated Paris , September 1844), a table of contents (pp. 
 V-VIII) and text proper (pp. 
 1-335), dividedinto nine chapters (Kapitel). 
 Chapters I, II and III werewritten by Engels, Chapters V, VIII and IX by Marx, Chapters IV, VI and VII by both, in which case, however, each has signed the particular chapter section or subsec-tion, supplied with its own heading, that was written byhim. 
 All these headings are satirical up to and includingthe “Critical Transformation of a Butcher into a Dog” (theheading of Section 1 of Chapter VIII). 
 Engels is responsible for pages 1-17 (Chapters I, II, III and sections 1 and 2 of Chapter IV), pages 138-142 (Section 2a of ChapterVI) and pages 240-245 (Section 2b of Chapter VII); i. 
e. 
, 26 pages out of 335. 
 The first chapters are entirely criticism of the style (t h e w h o l e (!) first chapter, pp. 
 1-5) of the Literary Gazette Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung of Bruno Bauer 3—in their foreword Marx and Engels say that their criticism is directed against its first eight numbers , criticism of its distortion of history (Chapter II, pp. 
 5-12, especially of English history), criticism of its themes (Chapter III, pp. 
 13-14ridiculing the Gründlichkeit** of the account of some dispute * Engels, F. 
 und Marx, K. 
, Die heilige Familie, oder Kritik der kritischen Kritik , Frankfurt a. 
 M. 
, 1845. 
— Ed. 
 of Herr Nauwerk with the Berlin Faculty of Philosophy), criticism of views on love (Chapter IV, 3 by Marx), criticism of the account of Proudhon in the Literary Gazette ((IV,4)— Proudhon, p. 
 22 u. 
 ff. 
 bis* 74. 
 At the beginning there isa mass of corrections of the translation : they have confused formule et signification,** they have translated la justiceas Gerechtigkeit*** instead of Rechtpraxis,**** etc. 
). 
 Thiscriticism of the translation (Marx entitles it—Charakteri-sierende Übersetzung No. 
 I, II u. 
s. 
w. 
*****) is followed by Kritische Randglosse No. 
 I u. 
s. 
w. 
,****** where Marxdefends Proudhon against the critics of the Literary Gazette , counterposing his clearly socialist ideas to speculation. 
 Marx’s tone in relation to Proudhon is very laudatory (although there are minor reservations, for example refer-ence to Engels’ Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalöko-nomie 4 in the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher5). 
 Marx here advances from Hegelian philosophy to social-ism: the transition is clearly observable—it is evident whatMarx has already mastered and how he goes over to thenew sphere of ideas. 
 (36) “Accepting the relations of private property as human and rational, political economy comes into contin-ual contradiction with its basic premise, private property,a contradiction analogous to that of the theologian, whoconstantly gives a human interpretation to religious concep-tions and by that very fact comes into constant conflict with his basic premise, the superhuman character of re-ligion. 
 Thus, in political economy wages appear at the be-ginning as the proportionate share of the product due tolabour. 
 Wages and profit on capital stand in the mostfriendly and apparently most human relationship, recipro-cally promoting one another. 
 Subsequently it turns out that they stand in the most hostile relationship, in inverse pro-portion to each other. 
 Value is determined at the beginningin an apparently rational way by the cost of production * und folgende bis—and following up to— Ed. 
 **formula and significance— Ed. 
 *** justice— Ed. 
 **** juridical practice— Ed. 
 ***** characterising translation No. 
 I, II, etc. 
— Ed. 
 ****** critical gloss No. 
 I, etc. 
— Ed. 
 of an object and its social usefulness. 
 Later it turns out that value is determined quite fortuitously, not bearing any relation to cost of production or social usefulness. 
 The mag-nitude of wages is determined at the beginning by free agreement between the free worker and the free capitalist. 
Later it turns out that the worker is compelled to agreeto the determination of wages by the capitalist, just asthe capitalist is compelled to fix it as low as possible. 
 Free-dom of the contracting Parthei*” [this is the way the word is spelled in the book] “has been supplanted by compul-sion . 
 The same thing holds good of trade and all other eco-nomic relations. 
 The economists themselves occasionallysense these contradictions, and the disclosure of these con-tradictions constitutes the main content of the conflicts between them. 
 When, however, the economists in one way or another become conscious of these contradictions, they themselves attack private property in any one of its private forms as the falsifier of what is in itself (i. 
e. 
, in their imag-ination) rational wages, in itself rational value, in itselfrational trade. 
 Adam Smith, for instance, occasionally po-lemises against the capitalists, Destutt de Tracy against the bankers, Simonde de Sismondi against the factory sys-tem, Ricardo against landed property, and nearly all mod-ern economists against the non-industrial capitalists, in whom private property appears as a mere consumer . 
 “Thus, as an exception—and all the more so when they attack some special abuse—the economists sometimes stress the semblance of the humane in economic relations, while,more often than not, they take these relations preciselyin their marked difference from the humane, in their strictly economic sense. 
 They stagger about within that contra-diction without going beyond its limits. 
 “Proudhon put an end to this unconsciousness once for all. 
 He took the humane semblance of the economic relations seriously and sharply opposed it to their inhumane reality . 
 He forced them to be in reality what they imagine themselvesto be, or, more accurately, to give up their own idea ofthemselves and confess their real inhumanity. 
 He there-fore quite consistently represented as the falsifier of econom-* party— Ed. 
 ic relations not one or another particular type of private property, as other economists have done, but private prop-erty as such, in its entirety. 
 He has done all that can be done by criticism of political economy from the stand-point of political economy. 
” (39) Herr Edgar’s reproach (Edgar of the Literary Gazette ) that Proudhon makes a “god” out of “justice,” Marx brushesaside by saying that Proudhon’s treatise of 1840 6 does not adopt “the standpoint of German development of 1844” (39), that this is a general failing of the French, and thatone must also bear in mind Proudhon’s reference to theimplementation of justice by its negation—a referencemaking it possible to have done with this Absolute in his-tory as well (um auch dieses Absoluten in der Geschichte überhoben zu sein)—at the end of p. 
 39. 
 “If Proudhon does not arrive at this consistent conclusion, it is owing to hismisfortune in being born a Frenchman and not a German. 
”(39-40) Then follows Critical Gloss No. 
 II (40-46), setting out in very clear relief Marx’s view—already almost fully devel-oped—concerning the revolutionary role of the proletariat. 
 ...“Hitherto political economy proceeded from the wealth that the movement of private property supposedly createsfor the nations to an apology of private property. 
 Proudhon proceeds from the opposite side, which political economysophistically conceals, from the poverty bred by the move-ment of private property, to his conclusions negating pri-vate property. 
 The first criticism of private property pro-ceeds, of course, from the fact in which its contradictory es-sence appears in the form that is most perceptible andmost glaring and most directly arouses man’s indignation—from the fact of poverty, of misery. 
” (41) “Proletariat and wealth are opposites. 
 As such they form a single whole. 
 They are both begotten by the worldof private property. 
 The question is what particular placeeach occupies within the antithesis. 
 It is not sufficient todeclare them two sides of a single whole. 
 “Private property as private property, as wealth, is com-pelled to maintain itself , and thereby its opposite, the pro-letariat, in existence . 
 That is the positive side of the contra-diction, self-satisfied private property. 
 “The proletariat, on the other hand, is compelled as proletariat to abolish itself and thereby its opposite, the condition for its existence, that which makes it the pro-letariat, i. 
e. 
, private property. 
 That is the negative side of the contradiction, its restlessness within its very self,dissolved and self-dissolving private property. 
 “The propertied class and the class of the proletariat present the same human self-alienation. 
 But the former class feels happy and confirmed in this self-alienation, it recognises alienation as its own power , and has in it the semblance of human existence. 
 The class of the proletariat feels annihilated in its self-alienation; it sees in it its ownpowerlessness and the reality of an inhuman existence. 
 Touse an expression of Hegel’s, the class of the proletariat is in abasement indignation at this abasement, an indigna-tion to which it is necessarily driven by the contradictionbetween its human nature and its conditions of life, which are the outright, decisive and comprehensive negationof that nature. 
 “Within this antithesis the private property-owner is therefore the conservative side, the proletarian, the destruc-tive, side. 
 From the former arises the action of preserving the antithesis, from the latter, that of annihilating it. 
 “In any case, in its economic movement private prop-erty drives towards its own dissolution, but only througha development which does not depend on it, of which it is unconscious and which takes place against its will, through the very nature of things, only inasmuch as it produces theproletariat as proletariat, misery conscious of its spiritual and physical misery, dehumanisation conscious of its dehu-manisation and therefore self-abolishing. 
 The proletariatexecutes the sentence that private property pronounced on itself by begetting the proletariat, just as it executes the sentence that wage-labour pronounced on itself by be-getting wealth for others and misery for itself. 
 When theproletariat is victorious, it by no means becomes the ab-solute side of society for it is victorious only by abolishingitself and its opposite. 
 Then the proletariat disappears as well as the opposite which determines it, private property. 
 “When socialist writers ascribe this historic role to the proletariat, it is not, as Critical Criticism would have one think, because they consider the proletarians as gods . 
 Rather the contrary. 
 Since the abstraction of all humanity, even of the semblance of humanity, is practically complete in the fully-formed proletariat; since the conditions of lifeof the proletariat sum up all the conditions of life of so-ciety today in their most inhuman and acute form; sinceman has lost himself in the proletariat, yet at the same timehas not only gained theoretical consciousness of that loss, but through the no longer removable, no longer disguis-able, absolutely imperative need —the practical expression of necessity —is driven directly to revolt against that in-humanity; it follows that the proletariat can and mustfree itself. 
 But it cannot free itself without abolishingthe conditions of its own life. 
 It cannot abolish the conditions of its own life without abolishing all the inhuman conditions of life of society today which are summed up in its ownsituation. 
 Not in vain does it go through the stern butsteeling school of labour . 
 It is not a question of what this or that proletarian, or even the whole proletariat, at themoment considers as its aim. 
 It is a question of what the proletariat is, and what, in accordance with this being, it will historically be compelled to do. 
 Its aim and his-torical action is irrevocably and clearly foreshadowed in itsown life situation as well as in the whole organisation of bour-geois society today. 
 There is no need here to show that a largepart of the English and French proletariat is already con-scious of its historic task and is constantly working to de-velop that consciousness into complete clarity. 
” (42-45) CRITICAL GLOSS NO. 
 3 “Herr Edgar cannot be unaware that Herr Bruno Bauer based all his arguments on ‘ infinite self-consciousness’ and that he also saw in this principle the creative principleof the gospels, which, by their infinite unconsciousness,appear to be in direct contradiction to infinite self-con-sciousness. 
 In the same way Proudhon considers equalityas the creative principle of private property, which is in direct contradiction to equality. 
 If Herr Edgar compares French equality with German self-consciousness for an in-stant, he will see that the latter principle expresses in Ger-man , i. 
e. 
, in abstract thought, what the former says in French , that is, in the language of politics and of thoughtful observation. 
 Self-consciousness is man’s equality with himself in pure thought. 
 Equality is man’s consciousnessof himself in the element of practice, i. 
e. 
, therefore, man’sconsciousness of other men as his equals and man’s attitudeto other men as his equals. 
 Equality is the French expressionfor the unity of human essence, for man’s consciousness of his species and his attitude towards his species, for the practical identity of man with man, i. 
e. 
, for the socialor human relation of man to man. 
 As therefore destructivecriticism in Germany, before it had progressed in Feuerbach to the consideration of real man , tried to solve everything definite and existing by the principle of self-consciousness , destructive criticism in France tried to do the same by the principle of equality . 
” (48-49) “The opinion that philosophy is the abstract expression of existing conditions does not belong originally to HerrEdgar. 
 It belongs to Feuerbach , who was the first to describe philosophy as speculative and mystical empiricism, and proved it. 
” (49-50) “‘We always come back to the same thing... Proudhon writes in the interests of the proletarians. 
’* He does notwrite in the interests of self-sufficient criticism or out ofany abstract, self-made interest, but out of a massive,real, historical interest, an interest that goes beyond crit-icism , that will go as far as a crisis . 
 Not only does Prou-dhon write in the interests of the proletarians, he is himselfa proletarian, un ouvrier. 
 His work is a scientific manifestoof the French proletariat and therefore has quite a differenthistorical significance from that of the literary botchworkof a Critical Critic. 
” (52-53) “Proudhon’s desire to abolish non-owning and the old form of owning is exactly identical to his desire to abol-ish the practically alienated relation of man to his ob-jective essence , to abolish the political-economic expression of human self-alienation. 
 Since, however, his criticismof political economy is still bound by the premises of polit-ical economy, the reappropriation of the objective world * Marx is quoting Edgar. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR is still conceived in the political-economic form of posses-sion. 
 “Proudhon indeed does not oppose owning to non-owning as Critical Criticism makes him do, but possession to the old form of owning, to private property . 
 He declares posses-sion to be a ‘ social function . 
’ In a function, ‘interest’ is not directed however toward the ‘exclusion’ of another, buttoward setting into operation and realising my own powers, the powers of my being. 
 “Proudhon did not succeed in giving this thought appro-priate development. 
 The concept of ‘ equal possession’ is a political-economic one and therefore itself still an alienatedexpression for the principle that the object as being for man , as the objective being of man , is at the same time the existence of man for other men , his human relation to other men , the social behaviour of man in relation to man . 
 Prou-dhon abolishes political-economic estrangement within po-litical-economic estrangement. 
” (54-55) This passage is highly characteristic, for it shows how Marx approached the basic idea of his entire “system,” sit venia verbo,* namely the concept of the social relations of production. 
 As a trifle, it may be pointed out that on p. 
 64 Marx devotes five lines to the fact that “Critical Criticism” trans-lates maréchal as “Marschall” instead of “Hufschmied. 
”** Very interesting are: pp. 
 65-67 (Marx approaches the labour theory of value); pp 70-71 (Marx answers Edgar’s charge that Proudhon is muddled in saying that the worker cannot buy back his product), 71-72 and 72-73 (spec-ulative, idealistic, “ethereal” (ätherisch) socialism—and“mass” socialism and communism). 
p. 
 76. 
 (Section 1, first paragraph: Feuerbach disclosed real mysteries, Szeliga—vice versa. 
) p. 
 77. 
 (Last paragraph: anachronism of the n a ï v e rela-tion of rich and poor: “si le riche le savait!”***) pp. 
 79-85 . 
 (All these seven pages are extremely interesting. 
 This is Section 2, “ The Mystery of Speculative Con-* if the Word may be allowed— Ed. 
 **“blacksmith”— Ed. 
 *** “if the rich only knew it!”— Ed. 
 struction ”—a criticism of speculative philosophy using the well-known example of “fruit”— der Frucht—a crit-icism aimed directly a g a i n s t H e g e l as well . 
 Here too is the extremely interesting remark that Hegel “very often” gives a real presentation, embracing the thing itself—die S a c h e selbst—within the speculative pre-sentation. 
) pp. 
 92, 93— f r a g m e n t a r y remarks against Degradie-rung der Sinnlichkeit. 
* p. 
 101. 
 “He” (Szeliga) “is unable ... to see that industry and trade found universal kingdoms that are quite different from Christianity and morality, family hap-piness and civic welfare. 
” p. 
 102. 
 (End of the first paragraph—barbed remarks on the significance of notaries in modern society.... 
 “The notary is the temporal confessor. 
 He is a puritan by profes-sion and ‘honesty,’ Shakespeare says, is ‘no puritan. 
’ He is at the same time the go-between for all possible purposes, the manager of civil intrigues and plots. 
”) p. 
 110. 
 Another example of ridiculing abstract specula-tion: the “construction” of how man becomes masterover beast; “ beast ” (das Tier) as an abstraction is changed from a lion into a pug, etc. 
 p. 
 111. 
 A characteristic passage regarding Eugène Sue 7: owing to his hypocrisy towards the bourgeoisie, he ideal-ises the grisette morally, evading her attitude to mar-riage, her “naïve” liaison with un étudiant** or ouv-rier. 
*** “It is precisely in that relation that she” (gri-sette) “constitutes a really human contrast to the sanc-timonious, narrow-hearted, self-seeking wife of the bourgeois, to the whole circle of the bourgeoisie, that is, to the official circle. 
” p. 
 117. 
 The “mass” of the sixteenth and of the nineteenth centuries was different “von vorn herein. 
”**** pp. 
 118-121 . 
 This passage (in Chapter VI: “Absolute Crit-ical Criticism, or Critical Criticism in the Person of Herr Bruno. 
” 1) Absolute Criticism’s First Campaign. 
 *debassing of sensuousness— Ed. 
 **a student— Ed. 
 *** worker— Ed. 
 “from the outset”— Ed. 
 a) “Spirit ” and “ Mass ”) is e x t r e m e l y important: a criticism of the view that history was unsuccessful owing to the interest in it by the mass and its reliance on the mass, which was satisfied with a “superficial” com-prehension of the “idea. 
” “If, therefore, Absolute Criticism condemns some-thing as ‘superficial,’ it is simply previous history, theactions and ideas of which were those of the ‘masses. 
’ It rejects mass history to replace it by critical history (see Herr Jules Faucher on Topical Questions in Eng-land 8). 
” (119) “The ‘ idea ’ always exposed itself to ridicule inso-far as it differed from ‘ interest . 
’ On the other hand, it is easy to understand that every mass ‘ interest ’ that asserts itself historically goes far beyond its real limits in the ‘ idea ’ or ‘ imagination ’ when it first comes on the scene, and is confused with human interest in general. 
 This illusion constitutes what Fourier calls the tone of each historical epoch” (119)—as an illus-tration of this the example of the French Revolu-tion (119-120) and the well-known words ( 1 2 0 in fine*): “With the thoroughness of the historical action, the size of the mass who perform it will therefore increase. 
” How far the sharpness of Bauer’s division into Geist** and Masse*** goes is evident from this phrase that Marxattacks: “In the mass, not somewhere else, is the true enemy of the spirit to be sought. 
” (121) Marx answers this by saying that the enemies of prog-ress are the products endowed with independent being (ver-selbständigten) of the self-abasement of the mass, althoughthey are not ideal but material products existing in an out-ward way. 
 As early as 1789, Loustalot’s journal 9 had the motto: Les grands ne nous paraissent grands Que parceque nous sommes à genoux. 
Leuons-nous! **** *at the end— Ed. 
 **spirit— Ed. 
 *** mass— Ed. 
 **** The great only seem great to us Because we are on our kneesLet us rise! —Ed. 
NB NB But in order to rise (122), says Marx, it is not enough to do so in thought, in the idea. 
 “Yet Absolute Criticism has learnt from Hegel’s Phenom-enology10 at least the art of converting real objective chains that exist outside me into merely ideal , merely subjective chains existing merely within me , and thus of converting all exterior palpable struggles into pure struggles of thought. 
” (122) In this way it is possible to prove, says Marx bitingly, the pre-established harmony between Critical Criticism andthe censorship, to present the censor not as a police hangman(Polizeischerge) but as my own personified sense of tactand moderation. 
 Preoccupied with its “Geist,” Absolute Criticism does not investigate whether the phrase, self-deception and pithlessness (Kernlosigkeit) are not in its own empty (win-dig) pretensions. 
 “The situation is the same with ‘ progress . 
’ In spite of the pretensions of ‘ progress ,’ continual retrogressions a nd circular movements are to be observed. 
 Far from suspecting that the category ‘ progress ’ is completely empty and ab-stract, Absolute Criticism is instead so ingenious as to rec-ognise ‘ progress ’ as being absolute, in order to explain retrogression by assuming a ‘ personal adversary ’ of progress, the mass . 
” (123-124) “All communist and socialist writers proceeded from the observation that, on the one hand, even the most favour-able brilliant deeds seemed to remain without brilliantresults, to end in trivialities, and, on the other, all prog-ress of the spirit had so far been progress against the mass of mankind , driving it to an ever more dehumanised situation. 
 They therefore declared ‘ progress ’ (see Fourier ) to be an inadequate abstract phrase ; they assumed (see Owen , among others) a fundamental flaw in the civilised world; that iswhy they subjected the real bases of contemporary society to incisive criticism . 
 This communist criticism immediate-ly had its counterpart in practice in the movement of thegreat mass , in opposition to which the previous historical development had taken place. 
 One must be acquaintedwith the studiousness, the craving for knowledge, the moralenergy and the unceasing urge for development of the French and English workers to be able to form an idea of the human nobility of this movement. 
” (124-125) “What a fundamental superiority over the communist writers it is not to have traced spiritlessness, indolence,superficiality and self-complacency to their origin but tohave denounced them morally and exposed them as the opposite of the spirit, of progress!” (125) “The relation between ‘spirit and mass,’ however, has still a hidden sense, which will be completely revealed in the course of the reasoning. 
 We only make mentionof it here. 
 That relation discovered by Herr Bruno is, in fact, nothing but a critically caricatured culmination of Hegel’s conception of history ; which, in turn, is nothing but the speculative expression of the Christian-Germanic dogma of the antithesis between spirit and matter , between God and the world . 
 This antithesis is expressed in history, in the human world itself, in such a way that a few chosenindividuals as the active spirit stand opposed to the rest of mankind, as the spiritless mass , as matter . 
” (126) And Marx points out that Hegel’s conception of his-tory (Geschichtsauffassung) presupposes an abstract and absolute spirit, the embodiment of which is the mass. 
 Par-allel with Hegel’s doctrine there developed in France thetheory of the Doctrinaires 11 (126) who proclaimed the sove-reignty of reason in opposition to the sovereignty of thepeople in order to exclude the mass and rule alone (al-lein). 
 Hegel is “guilty of a double half-heartedness” (127): 1) while declaring that philosophy is the being of the Abso-lute Spirit, he does not declare this the spirit of the philo-sophical individual; 2) he makes the Absolute Spirit thecreator of history only in appearance (nur zum Schein), only post festum,* only in consciousness. 
 Bruno does away with this half-heartedness, he declares that Criticism is the Absolute Spirit and the creator of histo-ry in actual fact. 
 “On the one side stands the Mass, as the passive, spirit-less, unhistorical material element of history, on the other— the Spirit , Criticism , Herr Bruno and Co. 
 as the active ele-* after the event— Ed. 
 ment from which all historical action arises. 
 The act of the transformation of society is reduced to the brain work of Critical Criticism. 
” (128) As the first example of “the campaigns of Absolute Crit-icism against the Mass,” Marx adduces Bruno Bauer’sattitude to the Judenfrage , and he refers to the refutation of Bauer in Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher . 
 12 “One of the chief pursuits of Absolute Criticism con-sists in first bringing all questions of the day into their right setting . 
 For it does not answer, of course, the real questions—but substitutes quite different ones.... 
 It thus distorted the ‘Jewish question,’ too, in such a way that itdid not need to investigate political emancipation , which is the subject-matter of that question, but could instead be satisfied with a criticism of the Jewish religion and a descrip-tion of the Christian-German state. 
 “This method, too, like all Absolute Criticism’s original-ities, is the repetition of a speculative verbal trick. 
 Spec-ulative philosophy, in particular Hegel’s philosophy, must transpose all questions from the form of common sense to the form of speculative reason and convert the real ques-tion into a speculative one to be able to answer it. 
 Having distorted my questions and having, like the catechism, placed its own questions into my mouth, speculative philosophy could, of course, again like the catechism, have its readyanswer to each of my questions. 
” (134-135) In Section 2a (...“‘Criticism’ and ‘Feuerbach’—Damna-tion of Philosophy...”)—pp. 
 138-142—written by Engels,one finds Feuerbach warmly praised. 
 In regard to “Criti-cism’s” attacks on philosophy, its contrasting to philosophythe actual wealth of human relations, the “immense content of history,” the “significance of man,” etc. 
, etc. 
, right up to the phrase: “the mystery of the system revealed,” En-gels says: “But who, then, revealed the mystery of the ‘system’? Feuerbach . 
 Who annihilated the dialectics of concepts, the war of the gods known to the philosophers alone? Feuer-bach . 
 Who substituted for the old rubbish and for ‘infinite self-consciousness’ not, it is true, ‘ the significance of man ’— as though man had another significance than that of being man—but still ‘ Man ’? Feuerbach , and only Feuerbach . 
 And he did more. 
 Long ago he did away with the very cate-gories that ‘ Criticism ’ now wields—the ‘real wealth of human relations, the immense content of history, the strug-gle of history, the fight of the mass against the spirit,’etc. 
, etc. 
 “Once man is conceived as the essence, the basis of all human activity and situations, only ‘ Criticism ’ can invent new categories and transform man himself again into a cate-gory and into the principle of a whole series of categoriesas it is doing now. 
 It is true that in so doing it takes theonly road to salvation that remained for frightened andpersecuted theological inhumanity. 
 History does nothing , it possesses no immense wealth,’ it ‘wages no battles. 
’ It is man , and not ‘history,’ real living man, that does all that, that possesses and fights; ‘history’ is not, as it were, a personapart, using man as a means to achieve its own aims; history is nothing but the activity of man pursuing his aims. 
 If Ab-solute Criticism, after Feuerbach’s brilliant reasoning, still dares to reproduce the old trash in a new form...” (139-140) etc. 
—then, Engels says, this fact alone is sufficient to assess the Critical naïveté, etc. 
 And after this, in regard to the opposition of Spirit and “Matter” (Criticism calls the mass “ matter ”), Engels says: “Is Absolute Criticism then not genuinely Christian-German ? After the old contradiction between spiritualism and materialism has been fought out on all sides and over-come once for all by Feuerbach , ‘Criticism’ again makes a basic dogma of it in its ugliest form and gives the victoryto the ‘ Christian-German spirit . 
’” (141) In regard to Bauer’s words: “To the extent of the prog-ress now made by the Jews in theory, they are emancipated; to the extent that they wish to be free, they are free” (142),Marx says: “From this proposition one can immediately measure the critical gap which separates mass profane communism and socialism from absolute socialism. 
 The first proposition of profane socialism rejects emancipation in mere theory as an illusion and for real freedom it demands besides the idealistic ‘ will ,’ very tangible, very material conditions. 
 How low ‘ the Mass ’ is in comparison with holy Criticism, the Mass which considers material, practical upheavals necessary, merely to win the time and means required to deal with ‘ theory ’!” (142) Further, (pp. 
 143-167), the most boring, incredibly caviling criticism of the Literary Gazette , a sort of word by word commentary of a “blasting” type; Absolutely noth-ing of interest. 
 The end of the section ((b) The Jewish Question No. 
 II. 
 Pp. 
 142-185)—pp. 
 167-185 provides an interesting answer by Marx to Bauer on the latter’s defence of his book Judenfrage , which was criticised in the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher . 
 (Marx constantly refers to the latter. 
) Marx here sharplyand clearly stresses the basic principles of his entire world outlook. 
 “Religious questions of the day have at present a social sig-nifcance” (167)—this was already pointed out in the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher . 
 It characterised the “ real position of Judaism in civil society today. 
” “Herr Bauer explainsthe real Jew by the Jewish religion , instead of explaining the mystery of the Jewish religion by the real Jew . 
” (167-168) Herr Bauer does not suspect “that real, worldly Judaism, and hence religious Judaism too, is being continuallyproduced by present-day civil life and finds its final develop-ment in the money system . 
” It was pointed out in the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher that the development of Judaism has to be sought “in der kommerziellen und industriellen Praxis”* (169),—that prac-tical Judaism “vollendete Praxis der christlichen Weltselber ist. 
”** (169) “It was proved that the task of abolishing the essence of Judaism is in truth the task of abolishing Judaism in civil society , abolishing the inhumanity of the present-day practice of life, the summit of which is the money system . 
” (169) In demanding freedom, the Jew demands something that in no way contradicts political freedom (172)—it isa question of political freedom. 
 * “in commercial and industrial practice”— Ed. 
 **“is the perfected practice of the Christian world itself”— Ed. 
 “Herr Bauer was shown that it is by no means contrary to political emancipation to divide man into the non-re-ligious citizen and the religious private individual . 
” (172) And immediately following the above:“He was shown that as the state emancipates itself from religion by emancipating itself from state religion and leaving religion to itself within civil society, so the indi-vidual emancipates himself politically from religion by re-garding it no longer as a public matter but as a private matter . 
 Finally, it was shown that the terroristic attitude of the French Revolution to religion far from refuting this conception, bears it out. 
” (172) The Jews desire allgemeine Menschenrechte. 
*“In the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher it was expounded to Herr Bauer that this ‘free humanity’ and the ‘recogni-tion’ of it are nothing but the recognition of the selfish , civil individual and of the uncurbed movement of the spir-itual and material elements which are the content of hislife situation, the content of civil life today ; that the Rights of Man do not, therefore, free man from religion but give him freedom of religion ; that they do not free him from property, but procure for him freedom of property ; that they do not free him from the filth of gain but give him freedom of choice of a livelihood . 
 “He was shown that the recognition of the Rights of Man by the modern state means nothing more than did the recog-nition of slavery by the ancient state. 
 In fact, just as the ancient state had slavery as its natural basis the modern state has civil society and the man of civil society, i. 
e. 
, the independent man connected with other men only by theties of private interest and unconscious natural necessity, the slave of labour for gain and of his own as well as other men’s selfish need. 
 The modern state has recognised this as its natural basis as such in the universal Rights of Man . 
” 13 (175) “The Jew has all the more right to the recognition of his ‘free humanity’” “as ‘free civil society’ is of a thoroughlycommercial and Jewish nature and the Jew is a necessarylink in it. 
” (176) * the universal rights or man— Ed. 
 That the “Rights of Man” are not inborn, but arose histor-ically, was known already to Hegel. 
 (176) Pointing out the contradictions of constitutionalism , “Criticism” does not generalise them (faßt nicht den allge-meinen Widerspruch des Konstitutionalismus*). 
 (177-178)If it had done so, it would have proceeded from constitu-tional monarchy to the democratic representative state , to the perfect modern state. 
 (178) Industrial activity is not abolished by the abolition of privileges (of the guilds, corporations, etc. 
); on the con-trary it develops more strongly. 
 Property in land is notabolished by the abolition of privileges of landownership,“but, rather, first begins its universal movement with theabolition of its privileges and through the free division and free alienation of land. 
” (180) Trade is not abolished by the abolition of trade privileges but only then does it become genuinely free trade, so alsowith religion, “so religion develops in its practical univer-sality only where there is no privileged religion (one calls to mind the North American States). 
” ...“Precisely the slavery of bourgeois society is in appear-ance the greatest freedom .... 
” (181) To the dissolution (Auflösung) (182) of the political existence of religion (the abolition of the state church),of property (the aboIition of the property qualification for electors), etc. 
—corresponds their “most vigorous life, which now obeys its own laws undisturbed and develops to its full scope. 
” Anarchy is the law of bourgeois society emancipated from privileges. 
 (182-183) ... C) CRITICAL BATTLE AGAINST THE FRENCH REVOLUTION “The ideas”—Marx quotes Bauer—“which the French Revolution gave rise to did not, however, lead beyond theorder that it wanted to abolish by force. 
 * does not conceive the general contradiction or constitutional-ism— Ed. 
 “Ideas can never lead beyond an old world order but only beyond the ideas of the old world order. 
 Ideas cannot carry anything out at all. 
 In order to carry out ideas men are needed who dispose of a certain practical force. 
” (186) The French Revolution gave rise to the ideas of commu-nism (Babeuf), which, consistently developed, containedthe idea of a new Weltzustand. 
* In regard to Bauer’s statement that the state must hold in check the separate egotistic atoms, Marx says (188-189) that the members of civil society are, properly speaking, by no means atoms, but only imagine themselves to be such, for they are not self-sufficient like atoms, but depend on other persons, their needs continually forcing this dependence upon them. 
 “Therefore, it is natural necessity , essential human prop-erties , however alienated they may seem to be, and interest that hold the members of civil society together; civil , not political life is their real tie.... 
 Only political superstition still imagines today that civil life must be held together by the state, whereas in reality, on the contrary, the state is held together by civil life. 
” (189) Robespierre, Saint-Just and their party fell because they confused the ancient realistically-democratic society, based on slavery, with the modern, spiritualistically-democraticrepresentative state, based on bourgeois society. 
 Beforehis execution Saint-Just pointed to the table (Tabellea poster? hanging) of the Rights of Man and said: “C’est pourtant moi qui ai fait cela. 
”** “This very table proclaimed the rights of a man who cannot be the man of the ancient republic any more than his economic and industrial relations are those of the ancient times . 
” (192) On the 18th Brumaire, 14 not the revolutionary movement but the liberal bourgeoisie became the prey of Napoleon. 
After the fall of Robespierre, under the Directorate, the prosaic realisation of bourgeois society begins: Sturm und Drang*** of commercial enterprise, the whirl (Taumel)of the new bourgeois life; “ real enlightenment of the land * world order— Ed. 
 **“Yet it was I who made that. 
”— Ed. 
 *** storm and stress— Ed. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR of France, the feudal structure of which had been smashed by the hammer of revolution, and which the numerous new owners in their first feverish enthusiasm now put under all-round cultivation; the first movements of an industrythat had become free—these are a few of the signs of lifeof the newly arisen bourgeois society. 
” (192-193) CHAPTER VI. 
 ABSOLUTE CRITICAL CRITICISM, OR CRITICAL CRITICISM IN THE PERSON OF HERR BRUNO . 
 . 
 . 
 3) A B S O L U T E C R I T I C I S M ’ S T H I R D C A M P A I G N . 
 . 
 . 
 d) CRITICAL BATTLE AGAINST FRENCH MATERIALISM (195-211 ) This chapter (subsection d in the third section of Chap-ter VI) is one of the most valuable in the book. 
 Here there is absolutely no word by word criticism, but a completelypositive exposition. 
 It is a short sketch of the history of French materialism . 
 Here one ought to copy out the whole chapter, but I shall limit myself to a short summary of the contents. 
 The French Enlightenment of the eighteenth century and French materialism are not only a struggle against the existing political institutions, but equally an open struggleagainst the metaphysics of the seventeenth century, namely, against the metaphysics of Descartes, Malebranche, Spinoza and Leibnitz . 
 “Philosophy was opposed to metaphysics as Feuerbach, in his first decisive attack on Hegel, opposed sober philosophy to drunken speculation. 
” (196) The metaphysics of the seventeenth century, defeated by the materialism of the eighteenth century, underwent a vic-torious and weighty (gehaltvolle) restoration in Germanphilosophy, especially in speculative German philosophy ofthe nineteenth century. 
 Hegel linked it in a masterly fashion with the whole of metaphysics and with German idealism, and he founded ein metaphysisches Universalreich. 
* This * a metaphysical universal kingdom— Ed. 
 was followed again by an “attack on speculative metaphysics and metaphysics in general. 
 It will be defeated for everby materialism, which has now been perfected by the workof speculation itself and coincides with humanism. 
 Justas Feuerbach in the theoretical field, French and Englishsocialism and communism in the practical field representedmaterialism coinciding with humanism. 
” (196-197) There are two trends of French materialism: 1) from Descartes, 2) from Locke. 
 The latter mündet direkt in denSocialismus. 
* (197) The former, mechanical materialism, turns into French natural science. 
 Descartes in his physics declares matter the only sub-stance. 
 Mechanical French materialism takes over Des-cartes’ physics and rejects his metaphysics. 
 “This school begins with the physician Le Roy , reaches its zenith with the physician Cabanis , and the physician Lamettrie is its centre. 
” (198) Descartes was still living when Le Roy transferred the mechanical structure of animals to man and declared thesoul to be a modus of the body , and ideas to be mechanical movements. 
 (198) Le Roy even thought that Descartes had concealed his real opinion. 
 Descartes protested. 
 At the end of the eighteenth century Cabanis perfected Cartesian materialism in his book Rapports du physique et du moral de l’homme . 
 15 From the very outset the metaphysics of the seventeenth century had its adversary in materialism. 
 Descartes— Gas-sendi , the restorer of Epicurean materialism, in England— Hobbes . 
 Voltaire (199) pointed out that the indifference of the Frenchmen of the eighteenth century to the disputes of theJesuits and others was due less to philosophy than to Law’s financial speculations. 
 The theoretical movement towardsmaterialism is explained by the practical Gestaltung** ofFrench life at that time. 
 Materialistic theories correspondedto materialistic practice. 
 * flows directly into socialism— Ed. 
 **mould— Ed. 
 The metaphysics of the seventeenth century (Descartes, Leibnitz) was still linked with a positive (positivem) content. 
It made discoveries in mathematics, physics, etc. 
 In theeighteenth century the positive sciences became separatedfrom it and metaphysics war fad geworden. 
* In the year of Malebranche’s death, Helvétius and Con-dillac were born. 
 (199-200) Pierre Bayle , through his weapon of scepticism, theo-retically undermined seventeenth-century metaphysics. 
 Herefuted chiefly Spinoza and Leibnitz. 
 He proclaimed atheis-tic society. 
 He was, in the words of a French writer, “thelast metaphysician in the seventeenth-century sense of theword and the first philosopher in the sense of the eighteenthcentury. 
” (200-201) This negative refutation required a positive, anti-meta-physical system. 
 It was provided by Locke . 
 Materialism is the son of Great Britain. 
 Its scholastic Duns Scotus had already raised the question: “ ob die Ma-terie nicht denken könne? ”** He was a nominalist. 
 Nomi-nalism is in general the first expression of materialism. 
 16 The real founder of English materialism was Bacon . 
 (“The first and most important of the inherent qualitiesof matter is motion, not only as mechanical and mathe-matical movement, but still more as impulse, vital spirit,tension, or ... the throes (Qual) ... of matter. 
”—202) “In Bacon , its first creator, materialism has still con-cealed within it in a naïve way the germs of all-round devel-opment. 
 Matter smiles at man as a whole with poeticalsensuous brightness. 
” In Hobbes, materialism becomes one-sided , menschen-feindlich, mechanisch. 
*** Hobbes systematised Bacon, buthe did not develop (begründet) more deeply Bacon’s funda-mental principle: the origin of knowledge and ideas fromthe world of the senses (Sinnenwelt). 
—P. 
 203. 
 Just as Hobbes did away with the theistic prejudices of Bacon’s materialism, so Collins, Dodwell, Coward, Hartley,Priestley, etc. 
, destroyed the last theological bounds ofLocke’s sensualism. 
 17 *became insipid— Ed. 
 **“whether matter can think? ”—Ed. 
 *** misanthropic, mechanical— Ed. 
 Condillac directed Locke’s sensualism against seventeenth-century metaphysics; he published a refutation of the sys-tems of Descartes, Spinoza, Leibnitz and Malebranche. 
 The French “civilised” (205) the materialism of the En-glish. 
 In Helvétius (who also derives from Locke), materialism was given a properly French character. 
 Lamettrie is a combination of Cartesian and English materialism. 
 Robinet has the most connection with metaphysics. 
 “Just as Cartesian materialism passes into natural science proper , the other trend of French materialism flows directly into socialism and communism . 
” (206) Nothing is easier than to derive socialism from the prem-ises of materialism (reconstruction of the world of the senses—linking private and public interests—destroyingthe anti-social Geburtsstätten* of crime, etc. 
). 
 Fourier proceeds immediately from the teaching of the French materialists. 
 The Babouvists 18 were crude, immature materialists. 
 Bentham based his system on the morality of Helvétius, while Owen takes Bentham’s system as his starting-point for founding English communism. 
 Cabet brought communist ideas from England into France (po-pulärste wenn auch flachste** representative of commu-nism) 208. 
 The “more scientific” are Dézamy , Gay , etc. 
, who developed the teaching of materialism as real humanism . 
 On pp. 
 209 -211 Marx gives in a note (two pages of small print) extracts from Helvétius , Holbach and Bentham , in order to prove the connection of the materialism of the eigh-teenth century with English and French communism of the nineteenth century. 
 Of the subsequent sections the following passage is worth noting: “The dispute between Strauss and Bauer over Substance and Self-Consciousness is a dispute within Hegelian specu-lation. 
 In Hegel there are three elements: Spinoza’s Sub-stance , Fichte’s Self-Consciousness a nd Hegel’s necessary * sources— Ed. 
 **the most popular, though most superficial— Ed. 
 and contradictory unity of the two, the Absolute Spirit . 
 The first element is metaphysically disguised nature i n separation from man; the second is metaphysically dis-guised spirit in separation from nature; the third is the metaphysically disguised unity of both, real man a nd t he real human race ” (220), and the paragraph with its assess-ment of Feuerbach: “In the domain of theology, Strauss quite consistently expounded Hegel from Spinoza’s point of view , and Bauer did the same from Fichte’s point of view . 
 Both criticised Hegel insofar as with him each of the two elements wasfalsified by the other, while they carried each of the elements to its one-sided and hence consistent development. 
—Both of them therefore go beyond Hegel in their Criticism, but both of them also remain within the framework of his specu-lation and each represents only one side of his system. 
 Feuer-bach was the first to bring to completion and criticise Hegel from Hegel’s point of view , by resolving the metaphysical Absolute Spirit into ‘ real man on the basis of nature ,’ and the first to bring to completion the Criticism of religion b y sketching in a masterly manner the general basic features of the Criticism of Hegel’s speculation and hence of every kind of metaphysics . 
” (220-221) Marx ridicules Bauer’s “theory of self-consciousness” on account of its idealism (the sophisms of absolute ideal-ism—222), points out that this is a periphrasing of Hegel, and quotes the latter’s Phenomenology and Feuerbach’s critical remarks (from Philosophie der Zukunft , 19 p. 
 35, that philosophy negates—negiert—the “materially sensuous,”just as theology negates “nature tainted by original sin”). 
 The following chapter (VII) again begins with a series of highly boring, caviling criticisms 1). 
 Pp. 
 228-235 . 
 In section 2a there is an interesting passage. 
 Marx quotes from the Literary Gazette the letter of a “representative of the Mass,” who calls for the study ofreality of natural science and industry (236), and who onthat account was reviled by “criticism”: “Or”(!), exclaimed “the critics” against this representa-tive of the Mass,—“do you think that the knowledge of his-torical reality is already complete? Or (!) do you know of any single period in history which is actually known?” “Or does Critical Criticism”—Marx replies—“believe that it has reached even the beginning of a knowledge of histori-cal reality so long as it excludes from the historical move-ment the theoretical and practical relation of man to na-ture, natural science and industry? Or does it think that itactually knows any period without knowing, for example,the industry of that period, the immediate mode of pro-duction of life itself? True, spiritualistic, theological Crit-ical Criticism only knows (at least it imagines it knows)the major political, literary and theological acts of his-tory. 
 Just as it separates thinking from the senses, thesoul from the body and itself from the world, it separateshistory from natural science and industry and sees the origin of history not in vulgar material production on the earth but in vaporous clouds in the heavens. 
” ( 238) Criticism dubbed this representative of the mass a mas-senhafter Materialist . 
* (239) “The criticism of the French and the English is not an abstract, preternatural personality outside mankind; it is the real human activity of individuals who are active members of society and who as human beings suffer, feel,think and act. 
 That is why their criticism is at the sametime practical, their communism a socialism in which theygive practical, tangible measures, and in which they do notonly think but even more act; it is the living real crit-icism of existing society, the discovery of the causes of ‘decay’. 
” (244) The whole of Chapter VII (228-257), apart from the passages quoted above, consists only of the most incredible captious criticisms and mockery, noting contradictions ofthe most petty character, and ridiculing each and every stupidity in the Literary Gazette , etc. 
 In Chapter VIII ( 258-333) we have a section on the “Crit-ical Transformation of a Butcher into a Dog”—and furtheron E u g è n e S u e ’s Fleur de Marie 20 (evidently a novel with this title or the heroine of some novel or other) withcertain “radical” but uninteresting observations by Marx. 
 * mass materialist —Ed. 
No-ta be-ne Worth mentioning perhaps are only p. 
 2 8 5 ;—a few comments on Hegel’s theory of punishment, p. 
 2 9 6 — against Eugène Sue’s defence of the prison cell system (Cellularsystem). 
 ((Apparently , Marx here attacks the superficial socialism propagated by Eugène Sue and which, apparently , was de-fended in the Literary Gazette . 
)) Marx, for example, ridicules Sue for the concept of state reward for virtue, just as vice is punished (pp. 
 300-301, giving even a comparative table of justice criminelle andjustice vertueuse!*). 
 Pp. 
 3 0 5 – 3 0 6 : Critical remarks against Hegel’s Phe-nomenology . 
 3 0 7 : But sometimes Hegel in his Phenomenology —in spite of his theory—gives a true description of human relations. 
 3 0 9 : Philanthropy as a Spiel ** of the rich. 
 ( 309-310 ) 312-313 : Quotations from F o u r i e r on the humili-ation of women, very striking contra the moderate aspi-rations of “Criticism” and of Rudolf—Eugène Sue’s hero? ;“According to Hegel, the criminal in his punishment passes sentence on himself. 
 Gans developed this theory at greater length. 
 In Hegel this is the speculative disguise o f the old jus talionis *** that Kant expounded as the only ju-ridical penal theory. 
 For Hegel, self-judgment of the criminal remains a mere ‘ Idea ,’ a mere speculative interpretation of the current empirical penal code . 
 He thus leaves the mode of application to the respective stages of development of the state, i. 
e. 
, he leaves punishment just as it is. 
 Pre-cisely in that does he show himself more critical than hiscritical echoer. 
 A penal theory that at the same time sees in the criminal the man can do so only in abstraction , in imagination, precisely because punishment , coercion , is contrary to human conduct. 
 Besides, the practical realisation of such a theory would be impossible. 
 Pure subjective arbitrariness would replace abstract law because in each * criminal justice and justice for virtue!— Ed. 
 **plaything —Ed. 
 *** the law of the talion—an eye for an eye —Ed. 
 case it would depend on official ‘honest and decent’ men to adapt the penalty to the individuality of the criminal. 
 Plato long ago had the insight to see that the law must be one-sided and must make abstraction of the individual. 
 On the other hand, under human conditions punishment will really be nothing but the sentence passed by the cul-prit on himself. 
 There will be no attempt to persuade himthat violence from without , exerted on him by others, is violence exerted on himself by himself. 
 On the contrary, he will see in other men his natural saviours from the sen-tence which he has pronounced on himself; in other words,the relation will be exactly reversed. 
” (285-286) “The mystery of this” (305) (there was a quotation from Anekdota 21 above) “courage of Bauer’s is Hegel’s Phenom-enology . 
 Since Hegel here puts self-consciousness in the place of man, the most varied human reality appears only as a definite form, as a determination of self-consciousness . 
 But a mere determination of self-consciousness is a ‘ pure category ,’ a mere ‘thought’ which I can consequently also transcend in ‘pure’ thought and overcome through purethought. 
 In Hegel’s Phenomenology the material , sensuous , objective bases of the various alienated forms of human self-consciousness are left as they are. 
 The whole destructive work results in the most conservative philosophy sic! because it thinks it has overcome the objective world , the sensuously real world, by merely transforming it intoa ‘thing of thought,’ a mere determination of self-conscious-ness , and can therefore dissolve its opponent, which has become ethereal , in the ‘ ether of pure thought . 
’ The Phenom-enology is therefore quite consistent in ending by replacing all human reality by ‘ Absolute Knowledge ’—Knowledge , because this is the only mode of existence of self-conscious-ness, and because self-consciousness is considered as theonly mode of existence of man;— Absolute Knowledge for the very reason that self-consciousness knows only itself and is no more disturbed by any objective world. 
 Hegelmakes man the man of self-consciousness instead of making self-consciousness the self-consciousness of man , of the real man, and therefore of man living also in a real objectiveworld and determined by that world. 
 He stands the world on its head and can therefore in his head dissolve all limita-tions, which nevertheless, of course, remain in existence for evil sensuousness , for real man. 
 Moreover, everything which betrays the limitations of general self-consciousness — all sensuousness, reality, individuality of men and of theirworld—is necessarily held by him to be a limit. 
 The wholeof the Phenomenology is intended to prove that self-con-sciousness is the only reality and all reality .... 
” (306) ...“Finally, it goes without saying that if Hegel’s Phe-nomenology , in spite of its speculative original sin, gives in many instances the elements of a true description of hu-man relations, Herr Bruno and Co. 
, on the other hand,provide only an empty caricature.... 
” (307) “Thereby Rudolph unconsciously revealed the mystery, long ago exposed, that human misery itself, the infiniteabjectness which is obliged to receive alms, has to serve asa plaything to the aristocracy of money and education to satisfy their self-love, tickle their arrogance and amusethem. 
 “The numerous charitable associations in Germany, the numerous charitable societies in France and the great num-ber of charitable quixotic societies in England, the concerts,balls, plays, meals for the poor and even public subscrip-tions for victims of accidents have no other meaning. 
”(309-310) And Marx quotes from Eugène Sue: “Ah, Madame, it is not enough to have danced for the benefit of these poor Poles.... 
 Let us be philanthropic tothe end.... 
 Let us have supper now for the benefit of the poor !” (310) On pp. 
 312-313 quotations f r o m F o u r i e r (adul-tery is good tone, infanticide by the victims of seduction— a vicious circle.... 
 “The degree of emancipation of womanis the natural measure of general emancipation.... 
” (312) Civilisation converts every vice from a simple into a com-plex, ambiguous, hypocritical form), and Marx adds: “It is superfluous to contrast to Rudolph’s thoughts Fourier’s masterly characterisation of marriage or the works of the materialist section of French communism. 
”(313) /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR P. 
 313 u. 
 ff. 
, against the political-economic projects of Eugène Sue and Rudolph (presumably the hero of Sue’s novel?), projects for the association of rich and poor, and the organisation of labour (which the state ought to do), etc. 
—e. 
g. 
, also the Armenbank * 7)—b) “The Bank for the Poor” pp. 
 314-318 = interest-free loans to the unemployed. 
 Marx takes the f i g u r e s of the project and exposes their meagreness in relation to need. 
 And the idea of an Armen-bank, says Marx, is no better than Sparkassen**..., i. 
e. 
, die Einrichtung*** of the bank “rests on the delusion thatonly a different distribution of wages is needed for the workers to be able to live through the whole year. 
” (316-317) Section c) “ Model Farm at Bouqueval ” 318-320, Rudolph’s project for a model farm, which was praised by “Criticism,” is subjected to devastating criticism: Marx declares it to be a utopian project, for on the average one French-man gets only a quarter of a pound of meat per day, only93 francs in annual income, etc. 
; in the project they worktwice as much as before, etc. 
, etc. 
 ((Not interesting. 
)) 320: “The miraculous means by which Rudolph accom-plishes all his redemptions and marvellous cures is not his fine words but his ready money . 
 That is what the moral-ists are like, says Fourier. 
 One must be a millionaire to beable to imitate their heroes. 
 “Morality is ‘Impuissance mise en action. 
’**** Every time it fights a vice it is defeated. 
 And Rudolph does not even rise to the standpoint of independent morality based at least on the consciousness of human dignity . 
 On the contrary, his morality is based on the consciousness of human weak-ness. 
 He represents theological morality . 
” (320-321) ...“As in reality all differences boil down more and more to the difference between poor and rich , so in the idea d o all aristocratic differences become resolved into the oppo-sition between good and evil . 
 This distinction is the last form that the aristocrat gives to his prejudices.... 
”(323-324) * bank for the poor —Ed. 
 **savings-banks— Ed. 
 *** the institution— Ed. 
 **** “impotence in action”— Ed. 
 ...“Every movement of his soul is of infinite importance to Rudolph. 
 That is why he constantly observes and ap-praises them.... 
” (Examples. 
) “This great lord is like the members of ‘ Young England ,’ who also wish to reform the world, to perform noble deeds, and are subject to sim-ilar hysterical fits.... 
” (326) Has not Marx in mind here the English Tory philanthropists whopassed the Ten Hours Bill? 22 FR. 
 ÜBERWEG. 
 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY (REVISED BY MAX HEINZE) THREE VOLUMES. 
 1876-1880 . 
 LEIPZIG23 The book is rather strange in character: rather short sections with a few words on the content of doctrines and very long explanations given in small print, consisting three-quarters of names and titles of books moreover, out of date: bibliography up to the sixties and seventies . 
 Something unleserliches! * A history of names and books! *unreadable!— Ed. 
Published according to the manuscriptWritten in 1903 First published in 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII, p. 
 347 FR. 
 PAULSEN. 
 INTRODUCTION TO PHILOSOPHY 189924 Highly characteristic is the frank formulation of the question in the introduction: the task of modern philos-ophy is “to reconcile the religious world outlook and thescientific explanation of nature” (p. 
 IV *). 
 Sic! And this idea is developed most circumstantially: there is said to bea struggle on two fronts—against materialism and “Je-suitism” (both Catholic and Protestant). 
 Materialism, ofcourse, is understood (described?) as rein mechanisch, phy-sikalisch u. 
s. 
w. 
 ** The author also says directly that modern philosophy rests on Kant and is the representative of “idealistic mon-ism. 
” Up to p. 
 10 ...”Peace between science and faith...”And p. 
 11: “The real corner-stone of Kant’s philosophy” (to create this peace) ...“is to give to both their due: toknowledge against the scepticism of Hume, to faith againstits dogmatic negation in materialism—that is the sum-total of his undertaking. 
” (12) “What is capable of disappointing this hopeful” (the hope of this peace ) “expectation is the absolutely anti-religious radicalism that is at present becoming widespread in thebroad mass of the population.... 
 Thus atheism now ap-pears” (as formerly among the bourgeoisie) “as an articleof faith of Social-Democracy” (pp. 
 14-15). 
 “It is the cat-echism turned inside out. 
 And like the old dogmatism,this new, negative dogmatism, too, is hostile to science, * Paulsen, Fr. 
, Einleitung in die Philosophie , Berlin, 1899. 
— Ed. 
 **purely mechanical, physical, etc. 
— Ed. 
? insofar as by its dogmas it puts fetters on the spirit of criticism and doubt. 
” (He recalls the term Antipfaffen * and assures us that Christianity has no predilection for the rich, that it (Christianity) will go through the samestruggle towards which Europe is advancing. 
) Refuting materialism and defending the theory of All-beseelung ** (which he interprets in an idealist sense), Paul-sen ignores: 1) that he is not refuting materialism, but merely some arguments of some materialists; 2) that he contradicts himself in interpreting modern psychology in an idealist sense. 
 9 Cf. 
 p. 
 126. 
 “A force ... is nothing but a tendency to a certain action, and hence in its general essence coincideswith an unconscious will. 
” (Ergo—Seelenvorgänge und Kraft *** are by no means so unüberbrückbar **** as it previously seemed to the author, p. 
 90 u. 
 ff. 
 ***** ) Pp. 
 112-116: Why could not the Weltall ****** be the bearer of des Weltgeistes? ******* (because man and his brain are the highest development of mind, as the author himself admits. 
 When Paulsen criticises materialists—he counterposes the highest forms of mind to matter. 
 When he defends idealism and interprets modern psychology idealistically—he approx-imates the lowest forms of mind to Kräfte, ******** etc. 
 That is the Achilles heel of his philosophy). 
 Cf. 
 especially pp. 
 106-107, where Paulsen opposes the view that matter is something dead . 
BBBBBBBBBBBBBB 9 Contra p. 
 86: “Motion has absolutely nothing of thought in it.... 
” The author seems to dispose too lightly of the concept that Gedanke ist Bewegung. 
 ********* His arguments *anti-clericalism —Ed. 
 **universal soul embodiment— Ed. 
 *** soul processes and force— Ed. 
 **** incompatible— Ed. 
 ***** und folgende—et seq. 
— Ed. 
 ****** universe— Ed. 
 ******* universal spirit— Ed. 
 ******** forces— Ed. 
 ********* thought is motion— Ed. 
NB BBBBBBB amount only to “ordinary common sense: senseless,” “thought is not motion, but thought” (87). 
 Perhaps heat, too, is not motion, but heat?? Quite stupid are the author’s arguments that a physiol-ogist will not cease to speak about thoughts, instead ofmovements equivalent to these thoughts? And no one willever cease to speak about heat. 
 One who has fallen in love does not speak to “his lady-love about the corresponding vascular-motor process.... 
 That is obviously nonsense” (86-87). 
 Precisely what is doneby Herr Paulsen! And if we experience a lack of heat, wedo not speak about heat being a form of motion, but ofhow to get some coal. 
 Paulsen considers that the statement that thought is Bewegung * is sinnlos. 
 ** But he himself is against dualism, and speaks about the “equivalent” ( 140 and 143)—“the phys-ical equivalent of the psychical” (or Begleiterscheinung ***). 
 Is not that the same begriffliche Konfusion **** for which he contemptuously abuses Büchner? When Paulsen declares that his parallelism is “not local” but “ideal” (p. 
 146), his dualist character shows still more clearly. 
 That is no explanation of the matter, nor a theory,but a simple verbal trick. 
 * motion— Ed. 
 **senseless— Ed. 
 *** accompanying phenomenon— Ed. 
 **** conceptual confusion— Ed. 
Published according to the manuscriptWritten in 1903 First published in 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII NOTE ON A REVIEW OF THE WONDERS OF LIFE AND THE RIDDLE OF THE UNIVERSE BY E. 
 HAECKEL F r a n k f u r t e r Z e i t u n g , 1904, No. 
 348 (De-cember 15). 
 First morning edition A Feuilleton on New Biological Books25 E r n s t H a e c k e l : Lebenswunder (Gemeinverständ-liche Studien über biologische Philosophie). 
 Stuttgart. 
(Alfred Kröner. 
) (To Haeckel, “the spirit is a physiological function of the cerebral cortex. 
” P. 
 378 of his book. 
 To be sure, the re-viewer is against this opinion. 
) Welträtseln by the same author ((published earlier)) (in which it is demonstrated that, properly speaking, thereare no world riddles). 
 Written late in 1904 Published for the first time according to the manuscript REMARKS ON BOOKS ON THE NATURAL SCIENCES AND PHILOSOPHY IN THE SORBONNE LIBRARY 26 Sorbonne. 
 New books: C. 
 819 (7) * Richard Lucas, Bibliographie der radioaktiven Stoffe , Hamburg und Leipzig, 1908, 8 °. 
 (A. 
 47. 
 191). 
 * Mach, Grundriss der Physik (bearbeitet von Harbordt und Fischer), Leipzig, 1905-8, 2 Volumes, 8 °. 
 (A. 
 46. 
 979) * S. 
 Φ. 
 ϕ. 
 587. 
 * Max Planck, Das Prinzip der Erhaltung der Energie , Leipzig, 1908 (2 Auflage) 12 °. 
 (A. 
 47. 
 232). 
 * S. 
 ϕ. 
 ϕ. 
 63. 
* Eduard Riecke, Handbuch der Physik , 4 Auflage, Leip-zig, 1908, 2 Volumes, 8 °. 
 (A. 
 47. 
 338). 
 * S. 
 Φ. 
 ϕ. 
 301a. 
* Fénelon Salignac, Questions de Physique générale et d’Ast-ronomie , Toulouse, 1908, 4 °. 
 (D. 
 55. 
 745). 
 * C. 
 818 (2). 
 * J. 
 J. 
 Thomson, Die Korpuskulartheorie der Materie , Braunschweig, 1908, 8 °. 
 S. 
 D. 
 e. 
 101 (25). 
 * In the Sorbonne library: I. 
Vierteiljahrsschrift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie , p. 
 5 3 (8°) (A. 
 16. 
 404). 
 * II. 
 Archiv für Philosophie , 2-te Abteilung, p. 
 48. 
 (A. 
 17, 027). 
 * *Letters and numbers denote press-marks— Ed. 
 Vierteiljahrsschrift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie , 1909, Heft I. 
 Raoul Richter’s review (sympathetic, indeed laud-atory) of: Ludwig Stein, Philosophie Strömungen der Gegenwart , Stuttgart, 1908, (Enke) XVI #452 Seiten. 
 (12 Mark. 
) Seiten 1-293—philosophical trends— 294-445—philosophical problemsTen trends in philosophy 27: 1) neo-idealism (voluntarist metaphysics)2) neo-positivism (pragmatism) of W. 
 James3) “new movement in natural philosophy” (Ostwald and the “triumph” of energetics over materialism) 4) “neo-romanticism” (H. 
 St. 
 Chamberlain, etc. 
)5) neo-vitalism6) evolutionism (Spencer)7) individualism (Nietzsche)8) geisteswissenschaftliche Bewegung * (Dilthey) 9) philosophiegeschichtliche ** 10) neo-realism (Eduard von Hartmann!!!). 
 New books: Max Schinz, Die Wahrheit der Religion nach den neues-ten Vertretern der Religionsphilosophie , Zürich, 1908, 8 °. 
 (307 pages. 
 6. 
 50 Mark. 
) Kr. 
 Guenther, Vom Urtier zum Menschen , (Ein Bilder-atlas. 
) Stuttgart, 1909. 
 (7-19 issues x1 Mark. 
) A. 
 Pelazza, R. 
 Avenarius e l’empiriocriticismo , 1908? 9? Torino (Bocca). 
 130 Seiten. 
 Spaventa, La filosofia italiana nelle sue relazioni con la filosofia europea , 1908? 9? Ban (Laterza). 
 New books (1909): L. 
 Boltzmann, Wiener wissenschaftliche Abhandlungen , Leipzig, (Barth). 
 H. 
 Strache, Die Einheit der Materie, des Weltäthers und der Naturkräfte , Wien (Deuticke). 
 *humanities movement— Ed. 
 **philosophical-historical— Ed. 
 Published according to the manuscriptWritten in the first half of 1909 First published in 1933 in Lenin Miscellany XXV -P. 
 48. 
 Archiv für Philosophie, 2 Abteilung = Archiv für s y s -t e m t a t i s c h e Philosophie, 1908, Heft 4. 
 Vitalis Nor-ström’s s e c o n d article (Seiten 447-496) ((interesting; almost all of it about Mach)). 
 Where is the first?? Note—is it late?? CONSPECTUS OF FEUERBACH’S BOOK LECTURES ON THE ESSENCE OF RELIGION 28 Written not earlier than 1909 First published in 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XIIPublished according to the manuscript /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR *Feuerbach, L. 
, Sämtliche Werke , Bd. 
 8, Leipzig, 1851. 
— Ed. 
 **sense of place and time— Ed. 
 *** of the monarch— Ed. 
 **** “God-believing world”— Ed. 
8°. 
 R. 
 807 Feuerbach did not understand the 1848 revolution Sic!!The preface is dated 1. 
 X. 
 1851. 
—Feu-erbach speaks here of the reasons whyhe did not take part in the 1848 revolu-tion, which had “such a shameful, sucha barren end” (VII). 
* The revolution of1848 had no Orts-und Zeitsinn,** the constitutionalists expected freedom from the word des Herrn,*** the republicans (VII-VIII) from their desire (“it was only nec-essary to desire a republic for it to come into being”).... 
 (VIII) “If a revolution breaks out again and I take an active part in it, then you can ... be sure that this revolution will be vic-torious, that Judgment Day for the mon-archy and hierarchy has arrived. 
” (VII) F i r s t l e c t u r e (1-11). 
 P. 
 2: “We have had enough of political as well as philosophical idealism; we now want to be political materialists. 
” 3-4—Why Feuerbach fled to the seclusion of the country: the break with the“gottesgläubigen Welt”**** p. 
 4L. 
 FEUERBACH. 
 COLLECTED WORKS VOL. 
 8, 1851 LECTURES ON THE ESSENCE OF RELIGION *Zeile 7 von unten—line 7 from bottom— Ed. 
 **at the end— Ed. 
 *** to discard— Ed. 
 **** “extravagant”— Ed. 
 ***** s e n s u o s n e s s —Ed. 
 ****** sensuous— Ed. 
 ******* stomach— Ed. 
 ******** head— Ed. 
down with “Überspann-tes”! “sensuous-ness” in Feuerbach(Z. 
 7 v. 
 u. 
*) (cf. 
 p. 
 3 in f. 
**)—to live with “nature” (5), ablegen*** all überspannten”**** ideas. 
 7-11 Feuerbach gives an outline of his works (7-9): Geschichte der neuren Phi-losophie (9-11 Spinoza, Leibnitz). 
S e c o n d L e c t u r e (12-20). 
 12-14—Bayle. 
 1 5: S i n n l i c h k e i t ***** for me means “the true unity of the material andthe spiritual, a unity not thought upand prepared, but existing, and whichtherefore has the same significance asreality for me. 
” Sinnlich****** is not only the Magen,******* but also theKopf ******** (15). 
 (16-20: Feuerbach’s work on Immortality: paraphrased. 
)T h i r d L e c t u r e (21-30). 
 The objection was raised to my Essence of Christianity 29 that for me man does not depend on anything, “there was oppositionto this alleged deification of man by me. 
”(24) “The being, whom man presupposes ... isnothing other than nature , not your God. 
” (25) “The unconscious being of nature is for me the eternal being, without origin, thefirst being, but first in point of time, andnot in point of rank, the physically butnot morally first being.... 
” (27) My denial includes also affirmation.... 
 “It is, of course, a consequence of my doc-trine that there is no God” (29), but this *“fear”— Ed. 
 **und folgende—et seq. 
— Ed. 
cf. 
 Marx und Engels30 “egoism” and its significancefollows from the conception of the essence of God ( =an expression of the essence of nature, of the essence of man). 
 Fourth Lecture. 
“The feeling of dependence is the basis of religion. 
” (31) (“Furcht”* 33-4-5-6) “The so-called speculative philosophers are ... those philosophers who do not con-struct their notions in accordance with things, but rather construct things accord-ing to their notions. 
 (31) (Fifth Lecture. 
)—it is especially d e a t h that arouses fear, belief in God. 
 (41) “I hate the idealism that divorces man from nature; I am not ashamed of my de-pendence on nature. 
” (44) “As little as I have deified man in Wesen des Christenthums , a deification with which I have been stupidly reproached ... so little do I want to deify nature in the sense of theology .... 
” (46-47) Sixth Lecture—The cult of animals (50 u. 
 ff. 
**). 
 “What man is dependent on is ... nature, an object of the senses ... all the impressions which nature makes on man through the senses ... can become motives of religiousveneration. 
” (55) (Seventh Lecture. 
)By egoism I understand, not the egoism of the “philistine and bourgeois” (63), but the philosophical principle of conformity with nature, with human reason, against“theological hypocrisy, religious and spec-ulative fantasy, political despotism. 
” (63i. 
 f. 
) Cf. 
 6 4, v e r y i m p o r t a n t . 
 Idem 68 i. 
 f. 
 and 69 i. 
 f. 
—Egoism (in the philosophical sense) is the root of religion. 
 on the question of the word energy the sensuous=the prima-ry, the self-existing and true(70: Die Gelehrten* can only be beaten with their own weapons, i. 
e. 
, by quo-tations) ... “man die Gelehrten nurdurch ihre eigenen Waffen, d. 
 h. 
Zitate, schlagen kann.... 
” (70) Incidentally, on p. 
 78 Feuerbach uses the expression: Energie d. 
 h. 
 Thätigkeit. 
**This is worth noting. 
 There is, indeed,a subjective moment in the concept of ener-gy, which is absent, for example, in theconcept of movement. 
 Or, more correctly,in the concept or usage in speech of theconcept of energy there is something thatexcludes objectivity. 
 The energy of themoon (cf. 
) versus the movement of the moon. 
 107 i. 
 f. 
 ...“Nature is a primordial, pri-mary and final being.... 
”111: ...“For me ... in philosophy ... the sensuous is primary; but primary notmerely in the sense of speculativephilosophy, where the primary sig-nifies that beyond the bounds of whichit is necessary to go, but primaryin the sense of not being derived, ofbeing self-existing and true. 
”...“The spiritual is nothing outsideand without the sensuous. 
” NB in general p. 
 111 ... “the truth and essentiality (NB) of the senses, fromwhich ... philosophy ... proceeds.... 
”112 ...“Man thinks only by means of his sensuously existing head, reason hasa firm sensuous foundation in thehead, the brain, the focus of thesenses. 
” See p. 
 112 on the veracity (Urkunden***) of the senses. 
 *the pundits— Ed. 
 **energy, i. 
e. 
, activity— Ed. 
 *** evidence— Ed. 
 *underivable primordial being— Ed. 
114: Nature =the primary, unableitbares, ursprüngliches Wesen. 
* “Thus, Die Grundsätze der Philosophie is interconnected with the Wesen der Re-ligion . 
”31 (113) “I deify nothing, consequently not even nature. 
” (115) 116—Answer to the reproach that Feuer-bach does not give a d e f i n i t i o n o f n a t u r e : “I understand by nature the total-ity of all sensuous forces, things andbeings which man distinguishes fromhimself as not human.... 
 Or, if the word is taken in practice: nature is everything that for man—indepen-dent of the supernatural whisperingsof theistic faith—proves to be imme-diate and sensuous, the basis andobject of his life. 
 Nature is light, electricity, magnetism, air, water, fire, earth, animal, plant, man, in-sofar as he is a being acting involun-tarily and unconsciously—by the word‘nature’ I understand nothing morethan this, nothing mystical, nothing nebulous, nothing theological” (above: in contrast to Spinoza). 
 ...“Nature is ... everything that you see and that is not derived from human handsand thoughts. 
 Or if we penetrate into theanatomy of nature, nature is the being,or totality of beings and things, whoseappearances, expressions or effects, in whichprecisely their existence and essence aremanifested and consist, have their basisnot in thoughts or intentions and decisionsof the will, but in astronomical, or cosmic,mechanical, chemical, physical, physiolo-gical or organic forces or causes. 
” (116-117)NB It turns out that nature = everything except the supernatural. 
 Feuerbach is brilliant but not profound. 
 Engels defines more profound-ly the distinc-tion between materialism and idealism. 
((( *summation— Ed. 
 **objective = outside ourselves— Ed. 
objectiv = außer uns**Here too it amounts to opposing matter to mind, the physical to the psychical. 
 121—against the argument that there must be a prime cause (= God). 
 “It is only man’s narrowness and love of convenience that cause him to put eternityin place of time, infinity in place of the endless progress from cause to cause, a stat-ic divinity in place of restless nature,eternal rest instead of eternal movement. 
”(121 i. 
 f. 
) 124-125. 
 Owing to their subjective needs, men replace the concrete by the ab-stract, perception by the concept, the many by the one, the infinite Σ* of causes by the single cause. 
 Yet, “no objective validity and exist-ence, no existence outside ourselves” mustbe ascribed to these abstractions. 
 (125) “Nature has no beginning and no end. 
 Everything in it is in mutual interaction,everything is relative, everything at onceeffect and cause, everything in it is all-sided and reciprocal.... 
” (129) there is no place there for God (129-130; simple arguments against God). 
 ...“The cause of the first and general cause of things in the sense of thetheists, theologians and so-called spec-ulative philosophers is man’s under-standing.... 
” (130) “God is ... cause in general, the concept of cause as essence personified and become independent.... 
”(131) “God is abstract nature, i. 
e. 
, nature re-moved from sensuous perception, mentallyconceived, made into an object or being *the moral highest (= the ideal)— Ed. 
 **the natural highest (= nature)— Ed. 
of the understanding; nature in the proper sense is sensuous, real nature, as immedi-ately manifested and presented to us by the senses. 
” (133) The theists see in God the cause of the movement in nature (which they make intoa dead mass or matter). 
 (134) The power ofGod, however, is in reality the power of nature (Naturmacht: 135). 
 ...“Indeed it is only through their effects that we perceive the properties of things.... 
”(136) Atheism (136-137) abolishes neither das moralische Über (=das Ideal)* nor das natürliche Über (= die Natur. 
)** ...“Is not time merely a form of the world, the manner in which particularbeings and effects follow one another? Howthen can I ascribe a temporal beginningto the world?” (145) ...“God is merely the world in thought.... 
 The distinction between God and the worldis merely the distinction between spiritand sense, thought and perception .... 
” (146) God is presented as a being existing out-side ourselves. 
 But is that not precisely an admission of the truth of sensuous being? Is it not (thereby) “recognised that thereis no being outside sensuous being? For,apart from sensuousness, have we anyother sign, any other criterion, of an exist-ence outside ourselves, of an existence in-dependent of thought?” (148) ...“Nature ... in isolation from its mate-riality and corporeality ... is God.... 
” (149)immediately time and world being outside ourselves = independent of thought NB nature out-side, inde-pendent of matter = God *perversity of endowing abstractions with independence— Ed. 
NB theory of “the copy” time outside temporal things = God time and space cf. 
 Engels idem in Lud-wig Feuer-bach32“To derive nature from God is equivalent to wanting to derive the original from the image, from the copy, to derive a thing from the thought of the thing. 
” (149) Characteristic of man is Verkehrtheit (149 i. 
 f. 
) verselbständigen abstractions*—for example, time and space (150): “Although ... man has abstracted space and time from spatial and temporal things, nevertheless he presupposes those as theprimary grounds and conditions of thelatter’s existence. 
 Hence he thinks of theworld, i. 
e. 
, the sum-total of real things,matter, the content of the world, as having its origin in space and time. 
 Even Hegel makes matter arise not only in, but out of,space and time.... 
” (150) “Also, it is reallyincomprehensible why time, separated fromtemporal things, should not be identifiedwith God. 
” (151) “In reality, exactly the opposite holds good, ...it is not things that presupposespace and time, but space and time thatpresuppose things, for space or extensionpresupposes something that extends, andtime, movement, for time, is indeed only a concept derived from movement, presup-poses something that moves. 
 Everything isspatial and temporal.... 
” (151-152) “The question whether a God has created the world ... is the question of the relationof mind to sensuousness” (152—the most important and difficult question of philos-ophy (153), the whole history of philosophyturns on this question 153)—the conflictbetween the Stoics and the Epicureans,the Platonists and the Aristotelians, theSceptics and the Dogmatists, in ancient philosophy; between the nominalists and realists in the Middle Ages; between the idealists and the “realists or empiricists” (sic! 153) in modern times. 
 It depends in part on the nature of people (academic, versus practical types) whetherthey incline to one or another philosophy. 
 “I do not deny ... wisdom, goodness, beauty; I deny only that, as such generic notions, they are beings, whether in the shape of gods or properties of God, or asPlatonic ideas, or as self-posited Hegelianconcepts.... 
” (158)—they exist only as prop-erties of men . 
 Another cause of belief in God: man transfers to nature the idea of his own purposive creation. 
 Nature is purposive—ergo it was created by a rational being. 
 (160) “That which man calls the purposiveness of nature and conceives as such is in real-ity nothing but the unity of the world, the harmony of cause and effect, the in-terconnection in general in which every-thing in nature exists and acts. 
” (161) ...“Nor have we any grounds for imagin-ing that if man had more senses or organshe would also cognise more properties or things of nature. 
 There is nothing more in the external world, in inorganic nature,than in organic nature. 
 Man has just asmany senses as are necessary for him toconceive the world in its totality, in itsentirety. 
” (163) important against agnosticism 168—Against Liebig on account of the phrases about the “infinite wisdom” (of God).... 
 Feuerbach and natural science!! NB. 
 Cf. 
 Mach and Co. 
 33 today. 
153 (materialism) contra theol-ogy and idealism (in theory ) If man had more senses, would he discover more things in the world? No. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR *too lofty, too noble (!!) an idea— Ed. 
 Ed. 
NB (cf. 
 Dietz-gen)34 witty! Idem Dietzgen35 nature is material the necessity of nature174-175-178—Nature = a republican; God = a monarch. 
 This occurs not only once in Feuerbach! 188-190—God was a patriarchal monarch, and he is now a constitutional monarch: he rules, but according to laws. 
 Where does spirit (Geist) come from?— ask the theists of the atheist. 
 (196) Theyhave too disdainful (despektierliche: 196)an idea of nature, too lofty an idea of spir-it (zu hohe, zu vornehme (!!) Vorstel-lung*). 
 Even a Regierungsrath** cannot be directly explained from nature. 
 (197) “The spirit develops together with the body, with the senses ... it is connectedwith the senses ... whence the skull, whence the brain, thence also the spirit; whence an organ, thence also its functioning” ((197):cf. 
 above (197) “the spirit is i n t he he ad ”). 
 “Mental activity is also a bodily activi-ty. 
” (197-198) The origin of the corporeal world from the spirit, from God, leads to the creation of the world from nothing—“for whence doesthe spirit get the matter, corporeal sub-stances, if not from nothing?” (199) ...“Nature is corporeal, material, sen-suous.... 
” (201) Jakob Boehme = a “ m a t e r i a l i s t i c t h e i s t ” (202): he deifies not only the mind but also matter. 
 For him God is ma-terial—therein lies his mysticism. 
 (202) ...“Where the eyes and hands begin, there the gods end. 
” (203) (The theists) have “blamed matter or the i n e v i t a b l e n e c e s s i t y o f n a-t u r e ... for the evil in nature” (212)   *the “natural” and “civil world”— Ed. 
 **spiritual religion— Ed. 
 *** feeling— Ed. 
 **** comfortless— Ed. 
 ***** “natural necessity”— Ed. 
 “necessity of nature”— Ed. 
2 1 3 in the middle and 2 1 5 in the middle “natürliche” und “bürgerlicheWelt. 
”* (226): Feuerbach says that he is ending the first part here (on nature as the basisof religion) and passing to the secondpart: the qualities of the human spir-it are manifested in Geistesreligion. 
** (232)—“Religion is poetry”—it can be said, for faith = fantasy. 
 But do I (Feuer-bach) not then abolish poetry? No. 
I abolish (aufhebe) religion “only in-sofar ” (Feuerbach’s italics) “as it is not poetry, but ordinary prose. 
” (233) Art does not require the recognition of its works as reality . 
 (233) Besides fantasy, of great importance in religion are das Gemüth*** (261), the prac-tical aspect (258), the search for the better, for protection, help, etc. 
 (263)—In religion one seeks consolation (atheism is alleged to be trostlos****). 
——— “A concept, however, congenial to man’s self-love, is that nature does not act withimmutable necessity, but that above the necessity of nature is ... a being that loves mankind. 
” (264) A n d i n t h e n e x t s e n t e n c e “Naturnotwendigkeit”***** of the falling of a stone. 
 (264) p. 
 287 twice in the middle: likewise “Notwendigkeit der Natur. 
”****** Religion = childishness, the childhood of mankind (269), Christianity has madea god of morality , it has created a moral God . 
 (274)a germ of historical materialism NB the necessity of nature NB *“course of nature”— Ed. 
Feuerbach against misuse of the word religion NB the necessity of nature NB NB NBReligion is rudimentary education—one can say: “education is true religion.... 
”(275) “However, this is ... a misuse ofwords, for superstitious and inhuman ideasare always linked with the word religion. 
”(275) Eulogy of education —277. 
 “Superficial view and assertion ... that religion is absolutely of no concern tolife, namely to public, political life. 
” (281)I would not give a farthing for a politicalfreedom that allows man to be a slaveof religion. 
 (281) Religion is innate in man (“this state-ment ... Simply means”) = superstition is innate in man. 
 (283) “The Christian has a free cause of nature, a lord of nature, whose will, whose word,nature obeys, a God who is not bound by theso-called causal nexus, by necessity, by thechain which links effect to cause and causeto cause, whereas the heathen god is boundby the necessity of nature and cannot saveeven his favourites from the fatal necessityof dying. 
” (301) (Thus Feuerbach says sys-tematically; Notwendigkeit d e r Natur. 
) “The Christian, however, has a free cause because in his wishes he is not bound bythe interconnection of nature, nor by thenecessity of nature,” (301) ((And t h r e e t i m e s more on t h i s page: Notwendig-keit der Natur. 
)) And p. 
 302; “...all the laws or natural necessities to which human existence is subjected.... 
” (302) cf. 
 307: “Lauf der Natur. 
”* “To make nature dependent on God, means to make the world order, the necessity ofnature, dependent on the will. 
” (312) Andp. 
 313 (above)—“Naturnotwendigkeit”!! e eee ee *disembodied spirit— Ed. 
 **sensuous, physical— Ed. 
320: “necessity of nature” (der Natur)... In religious ideas “we have ... examples how in general man converts the subjec-tive into the objective, that is to say,he makes that which exists only in histhought, conception, imagination, intosomething existing o u t s i d e thought, conception, imagination .... 
” (328) “So Christians tear the spirit, the soul, of man out of his body and make thistorn-out, disembodied spirit into their God. 
”(332) Religion gives (332) man an ideal. 
 Man needs an ideal, but a human ideal corres-ponding to nature and not a supernatural ideal: “Let our ideal be no castrated, disem-bodied, abstract being, let our ideal be thewhole, real, all-sided, perfect, developedman. 
” (334) Mikhailovsky’s ideal is only a vulgarised repetition of thisideal of advanced bourgeoisdemocracy or of revolutionarybourgeois democracy. 
 “Man has no idea, no conception, of any other reality, of any other existence, than sensuous, physical existence.... 
” (334) “If one is not ashamed to allow the sen-suous, corporeal world to arise from thethought and will of a spirit, if one is notashamed to assert that things are notthought of because they exist, but thatthey exist because they are thought of;then let one also not be ashamed to allowwhat is the objective ? (according to Feuerbach) Entleibter Geist* = God Sinnlich physisch** excellent equating! NB(( (( Feuerbach’s italics A germ of historical materialism!things to arise from the word; then let one also not be ashamed to assert that words exist not because things exist, but that things exist only because words exist. 
”(341-342) A God without the immortality of the soul of man is only a God in name: ...“Such a God is ... the God of some rationalist natural scientists, who is noth-ing but personified nature or natural ne-cessity, the universe, with which of coursethe idea of immortality is incompatible. 
” 349 The last (30th) lecture, pp. 
 (358-370), could be put forward almost in its entirety as a typical example of an enlighteningatheism with a socialist tint (concerningthe mass that suffers want, etc. 
, p. 
 365middle), etc. 
 Final words: it was my taskto make you, my hearers, “from friends of God into friends of man, from men of faith into thinkers, from menof prayer into workers, from candidatesfor the beyond into students of this world,from Christians, who, as they themselvesacknowledge and confess, are ‘ half-beast , half-angel ,’ into men , whole men” (370 end). 
 Next follow Additions and Notes . 
 (371-463) Here there are many details, quotations, which contain repetitions. 
 I pass over all that. 
 I note only the most important of that which affords some interest: thebasis of morality is egoism (392). 
 (“Loveof life, interest, egoism”)... “there isnot only a singular or personal, butalso a social egoism, a family egoism, a corporation egoism, a community, egoism, a patriotic egoism. 
” (393) ...“The good is nothing but that which corresponds to the egoism of all men.... 
” (397) “One has only to cast a glance at history! Where does a new epoch in history begin?Only wherever an oppressed mass or major-ity makes its well-justified egoism effec-tive against the exclusive egoism of a na-tion or caste, wherever classes of men (sic!) or whole nations, by gaining victory overthe arrogant self-conceit of a patrician mi-nority, emerge into the light of historicalglory out of the miserable obscurity ofthe proletariat. 
 So, too, the egoism of the now oppressed majority of mankind must and will obtain its rights and found a newepoch in history. 
 It is not that the aristoc-racy of culture, of the spirit, must be abol-ished; no indeed! it is merely that notjust a handful should be aristocrats and all others plebeians, but that all should— at least should —be cultured; it is not that property in general should be abolished;no indeed! it is merely that not just a hand-ful should have property, and all othersnothing; all should have property. 
” (398) These lectures were delivered from 1. 
XII. 
1848 to 2. 
III. 
1849 (Preface, p. 
 V), and the preface to the book is dated 1. 
I. 
1851. 
 How far, even at t h i s time (1848-1851), h a d Feuerbach l a g g e d b e h i n d M a r x (The Communist Manifesto 1847, Neue Rheinische Zeitung , etc. 
) and Engels (1845: Lage37) Examples from the classics of the use of the words God and nature without dis-tinction. 
 (398-399)NB NB A germ of historical materialism, cf. 
 Cherny-shevsky36 NB Feuerbach’s “socialism” *thought entity— Ed. 
NB NB NB Sehr gut! Sehr gut! an excellent passage!Pp. 
 402-411 —an e x c e l l e n t , phi-losophical (and at the same time simple and clear) explanation of the essence of religion. 
 “In the final analysis, the secret of reli-gion is only the secret of the combinationin one and the same being of consciousnesswith the unconscious, of the will with the involuntary. 
” (402). 
 The Ego and the non-Ego are inseparably connected in man. 
 “Man does not grasp or endure the depthsof his own being and therefore splits it intoan ‘Ego’ without a ‘non-Ego,’ which hecalls God, and a ‘non-Ego’ without an ‘Ego,’ which he calls nature. 
” (406) P. 
 408—an excellent quotation from Sen-eca (against the atheists) that they makenature into a god. 
 Pray!—Work! 38 (p. 
 411) Nature is God in religion, but nature as Gedankenwesen. 
* “ The secret of re-ligion is the identity of the subjective and objective, ’ i. 
e. 
, the unity of the being of man and nature, but as distinct from thereal being of nature and mankind. 
” (411) “Human ignorance is bottomless and the human force of imagination is boundless; the power of nature deprived of its foun-dation by ignorance, and of its boundsby fantasy, is divine omnipotence. 
” (414) ...“Objective essence as subjective, the essence of nature as different from nature,as human essence, the essence of man as different from man, as non-human essence— that is the divine being, that is the essenceof religion, that is the secret of mysticismand speculation.... 
” (415) Speculation in Feuerbach = ideal-ist philosophy. 
 NB. 
 A page from V. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s manuscript: Conspectus of Feuerbach’s book Lectures on the Essence of Religion . 
— 1909 Reduced A page from V. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s manuscript : Conspectus of Feuerbach’ s book Lectures on the Essence of Religion . 
— 1909 Reduced *being, essence— Ed. 
 **All that is not God is nothing, i. 
e. 
, all that is not I is nothing. 
— Ed. 
“Man separates in thought the adjective from the substantive, the property from the essence.... 
 And the metaphysical Godis nothing but the compendium, the total-ity of the most general properties extracted from nature, which, however, man bymeans of the force of imagination—and indeed in just this separation from sen-suous being, matter, nature—reconvertsinto an independent subject or being. 
” (417) The same role is played by Logic ( (418)— obviously Hegel is meant)—which converts das Sein, das Wesen* into a special real-ity—“how stupid it is to want to makemetaphysical existence into a physical one, subjective existence into an objective one, and again logical or abstract existence intoall illogical real existence!” (418) ...“‘Is there, therefore, an eternal gulf and contradiction between being and think-ing?’ Yes, but only in the mind; however in reality the contradiction has long been resolved, to be sure only in a way corres-ponding to reality and not to your school notions, and, indeed, resolved by not fewer than five senses. 
” (418)428: Tout ce qui n’est pas Dieu, n’est rien, i. 
e. 
, tout ce qui n’est pas Moi, n’est rien. 
** 431-435. 
 A good quotation from Gassendi. 
 A very good passage: especially 433 God = a collection of adjectival words (without matter) about the concrete and the abstract. 
 435 “The head is the house of representa-tives of the universe—and if ourNB profoundly correct! NB Excellent (against Hegel and idealism) beautifully said! bien dit! NB NB *generic concepts— Ed. 
 **dramatic psychology— Ed. 
heads are stuffed with abstractions, Gattungsbegriffen,* then of course we derive (ableiten) “the individual from the universal, i. 
e. 
, ... naturefrom God. 
” 436-437: (Note No. 
 16. 
) I am not against constitutional monarchy, but only thedemocratic republic is “‘ immediately reasonable’ as the form of state ‘cor-responding to the essence of man. 
’” ...“The clever manner of writing consists, among other things, in assuming that thereader also has a mind, in not expressing everything explicitly, in allowing the read-er to formulate the relations, conditionsand restrictions under which alone a prop-osition is valid and can be conceived. 
”(447) Interesting is the answer to (Feuerbach’s) critic Professor v o n S c h a d e n (448-449) and to S c h a l l e r . 
 (449-450-463) ...“I do indeed expressly put nature in place of being, and man in place of think-ing,” i. 
e. 
, not an abstraction, but something concrete———die dramatische Psycholo-gie. 
** (449) That is why the term “the anthropolog-ical principle” in philosophy,39 used by Feuerbach and Chernyshevsky, is n a r-r o w . 
 Both the anthropological principle and naturalism are only inexact, weakdescriptions of m a t e r i a l i s m . 
 “Jesuitism, the unconscious original and ideal of our speculative philosophers. 
” (455)the individu-al and the universal = Nature and God ha-ha!! hits the mark! NB “being and nature,” “thinking and man” bien dit! “Thinking posits the discreteness of real-ity as a continuum, the infinite multiplic-ity of life as an identical singularity. 
 Knowledge of the essential, inextinguishabledifference between thought and life (orteal ity) is the beginning of all wisdomin thinking and living. 
 Only the distinc-tion is here the true connection. 
” (458) End of Volume 8 Volume 9 = “Theogony ” (1857). 
40 There does not seem to be anything of interesthere, to judge from skimming over the pages. 
 Incidentally, p. 
 320, Pars. 
 34, 36 (p. 
 334) and following should be read. 
NB Par. 
 36 (p. 
 334)—on looking through it, nothing appears of interest. 
 Quotations, and again quotations, to confirm whatFeuerbach has already said. 
concerning the question of the funda-mentals of philosophical materialism CONSPECTUS OF HEGEL’S BOOK THE SCIENCE OF LOGIC 41 Published according to the manuscriptWritten in September-December 1914 First published in 1930 in Lenin Miscellany IX Bern: Log. 
 I. 
 175 H e g e l s W e r k e Bd. 
 I. 
 Philosophische Abhandlungen ” II. 
 The Phenomenology of Mind ” III-V. 
 The Science of Logic ” VI-VII. 
 (1 and 2) The Encyclopaedia ” VIII. 
 The Philosophy of Law ”I X . 
 The Philosophy of History ” X. 
 (3 parts) Aesthetics ” XI-XII. 
 The History of Religion ” XIII-XV. 
 The History of Philosophy ” XVI-XVII. 
 Miscellaneous Writings ” XVIII. 
 Philosophical Propaedeutic ” XIX. 
 (1 and 2) Hegel’s Correspondence The cover of the first notebook containing Conspectus of Hegel’s Book The Science of Logic . 
— September-December 1914 Reduced The cover of the first notebook containing Conspectus of Hegel’s Book The Science of Logic . 
— September-December 1914 Reduced /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR C o l l e c t e d W o r k s o f G. 
 W. 
 Fr. 
 H e g e l , Vol. 
 III (Berlin, 1833) (468 pages) “T h e S c i e n c e o f L o g i c . 
”43 Part 1. 
 Objective Logic . 
 Section 1. 
 The Doctrine of Being . 
 (Bern: Log. 
 I. 
 175 Vol. 
 III, * p. 
 5—a shrewd statement about logic: it is a “prejudice” that it “teach-es how to think” (just as physiology “teaches ... to digest”??) ...“logical science, which is the true con-tent of genuine metaphysics or pure spec-ulative philosophy.... 
” (6) ...“Philosophy cannot borrow its method from a subordinate science, such as mathe-matics.... 
” (6-7) ...“But it can be only the nature of the content which stirs in scientific cognition,while at the same time it is this veryreflection of the content which itself ini-tially posits and produces its determina-tion. 
” (7) (The m o v e m e n t of scientific cog-nition—that is the essential thing. 
) “Understanding (Verstand) makes deter-* Hegel, Werke , Bd. 
 III, Berlin, 1833. 
— Ed. 
PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITIONFull title of Collected Works G. 
 W. 
 Fr. 
 Hegel42 “Complete edition by circle of friends of the deceased: Marheineke, Schulze, Gans, Hen-ning, Hotho, Michelet, Förster. 
 ” *In the manuscript the words “from ignorance to knowledge” are struck out with a horizontal line, apparently instead of beingunderlined. 
— Ed. 
 **the nature of pure essentialities— Ed. 
minations” (bestimmt), Reason (Ver-nunft) is negative and dialectical because it dissolves into nothing (“in Nichts auflöst”) the determinations of Understanding. 
 (7)The combination of these two—“Reasonwhich understands or Understanding whichreasons” (7) = the positive. 
 Negation of “the simple” ... “movement of Mind.... 
” (7) “It is along this path of self-construction alone that Philosophy can become objec-tive, demonstrative science. 
” (7-8) (The “path of self-construction” = the path (this is the crux, in my opinion) of real cognition, of the process of cognising, of movement from ignorance to knowl edge. 
 *) The movement of consciousness, “like the development of all natural and spiri-tual life,” rests on “the nature of the pureessentialities which make up the content of Logic” (Natur der reinen Wesenheiten **). 
 Turn it round: Logic and the theory of knowledge must be derived from “the development of all natural and spiritual life. 
” Up to here: preface to the First Edition. 
This is char-acteristic “To present the realm of thought in its philosophical aspect—that is, in its own (NB) immanent activity, or (which comesto the same thing) in its necessary (NB)development.... 
” (10) “The familiar forms of thought”—an im-portant beginning, “die leblosen Knochen eines Skeletts. 
 * (11) What is necessary is not leblose Knochen, but living life. 
 The connection between thought and language (the Chinese language, inciden-tally, and its lack of development: 11),the formation of nouns and verbs. 
 (11)In the German language words sometimeshave “entgegengesetzte Bedeutung” ** (12) (not simply “different” but opposed mean-ings)—“a joy to thought...” The concept of force in Physics—and of polarity (“the things distinguished insep-arably (Hegel’s italics) bound up to-gether”). 
 (12) The transition from forceto polarity—a transition to “higher Denk-verhältnisse. 
” *** (12) *“the lifeless bones of a skeleton”— Ed. 
 **opposed meanings— Ed. 
 *** relations of thought”— Ed. 
 **** “the mental”— Ed. 
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION nature and “das Geistige” ****NB also p. 
 11.... 
 “But if Nature in general is opposed, as physical, to what ismental, then it must be said that logic is rather something supernatural.... 
”excellent! OO OO the history of thought = the history of language?? *are familiar to all— Ed. 
 **“what is familiar is not on that account necessarily known ”—Ed. 
 *** abbreviations —Ed. 
 **** epitomised— Ed. 
 ***** s e r v e —Ed. 
Logical forms Allbekanntes sind, * but ... “was bekannt ist, darum noch nicht erkannt . 
”** (13) “Infinite progress”—“liberation” of “forms of thought” from the matter (von demStoffe), ideas, desires, etc. 
, elaboration ofthe general (Plato, Aristotle): the beginningof Knowledge.... 
 “It was only after nearly everything that was necessary ... was available, that peoplebegan to trouble themselves about philo-sophic knowledge,” says Aristotle (13-14); and the selfsame: the leisure of the Egyp-tian priests, the beginning of the mathe-matical sciences. 
 (14) Preoccupation with “pure thought” presupposes “a long stretchof road already traversed by the mindof man. 
” In this kind of thought “those interests are hushed which move the lives of peoples and individuals. 
” (14) The categories of Logic are Abbreviatu-ren *** (“epitomiert” **** in another pas-sage) for the “endless multitude” of “par-ticulars of external existence and of ac-tion.... 
” (15) In turn, these categories d i e-n e n ***** people in practice (“in the intellectual exercise of living content, inproduction and interchange”). 
 (15) “We do not say of our feelings, impulses and interests that they serve us—rather,they are regarded as independent faculties and powers... all this is just what we are. 
”(15) And concerning forms of thought (Denk-formen) it cannot be said that they serveinterests “move the lives of peoples” the relation of thought to interests and impulses... us, for they permeate “all our ideas” (16), they are “the Universal as such. 
” Objectivism: the categories of thought are not an auxiliary toolof man, but an expression of lawsboth of nature and of man—com-pare further the antithesis— of “subjective thinking” and “the objec-tive concept of the very essence of things. 
”We cannot “get beyond the nature ofthings. 
” (16) “Also the remark against the “Critical Philosophy. 
” (17) It conceives the relationbetween “three terms” (We, Thought,Things) so that thoughts stand “in the mid-dle” between things and us, and so thatthis middle term “separates” (abschließt) “rather than ... connects” (zusammenschli-eßen) us. 
 This view may be met, saysHegel, by the “simple observation” that“these very things which are supposedto stand beyond (jenseits) our thoughts ...are themselves thought entities (Gedanken-dinge)” ... and “the so-called Thing-in-it-self is only ein Gedankending der leerenAbstraktion. 
 *” In my opinion, the essence of the argu-ment is: (1) In Kant, cognition demar-cates (divides) nature and man; actually it unites them; (2) In Kant, “the e m p t y a b s t r a c t i o n ” of the Thing-in-it-self instead of living Gang, Bewegung, ** deeper and deeper, of our knowledgeabout things. 
 * a thought entity of empty abstraction— Ed. 
 **progress, the movement— Ed. 
against Kantianism *the Thing-in-itself— Ed. 
 **the essence —Ed. 
 *** “the objective concept of things constitutes their very essence”— Ed. 
 **** a “means,” “for use”— Ed. 
 ***** “external forms”— Ed. 
 ****** forms with content— Ed. 
In Kant, Ding an sich * is an empty abstraction, but Hegel demands abstrac-tions which correspond to der Sache **: “der objective Begriff der Dinge dieSache selbst ausmacht,” *** which cor-respond—speaking materialistically—to the real deepening of our knowledge of the world. 
 It is incorrect to say that Denkformen are only “Mittel,” “zum Gebrauch. 
” **** (17) It is also incorrect to say that they are “äußere Fomen,” ***** “Formen, die nur an dem Gehalt, nicht der Gehalt selbst seien” (forms which are merely forms at-tached to the content, and not the contentitself). 
 (17)... What Hegel demands is a Logic, the forms of which would be ge-haltvolle Formen, ****** forms of living, real content, inseparablyconnected with the content. 
 And Hegel draws attention to “thoughts of all natural and spiritual things,” to the“substantial content.... 
” (18) —“To bring into clear consciousness this logical character, which gives soul to mindand drives and operates in it, this is ourproblem. 
” (18) Logic is the science not of ex-ternal forms of thought, but of the laws of development “of all material, natural and spiritualNB things,” i. 
e. 
, of the development of the entire concrete content of the world and of its cognition, i. 
e. 
, the sum-total, the conclusion of theHistory of knowledge of the world. 
 “Instinctive action” (instinktartiges Tun) “is broken up ... into an infinitely diverse matter. 
” On the other hand, “intelligent and conscious action” brings out “the con-tent of that which motivates” (den Inhaltdes Treibenden) “out of its immediate unitywith the subject” and makes it “an objectfor it” (for the subject). 
 “In this web, strong knots are formed now and then, which are foci of the arrest and direction of its” the spirit’s, or the subject’s “life and consciousness.... 
” How is this to be understood? Man is confronted with a web of natural phenomena. 
 Instinctiveman, the savage, does not distin-guish himself from nature. 
 Con-scious man does distinguish, cate-gories are stages of distinguishing,i. 
e. 
, of cognising the world, focalpoints in the web, which assistin cognising and mastering it. 
 ...“Truth is infinite” (19)—its finiteness is its denial, “its end. 
” The forms (Denk-formen *), if one regards them as forms, “distinct from the substance and merely at-tached to it” (19), are incapable of embrac-ing truth. 
 The inaneness of these forms of formal logic makes them deserving of “contempt” (19) and “derision. 
” (20) The *forms of thought— Ed. 
 *“insufferable”— Ed. 
 **“content”— Ed. 
 *** things, but the essence, the concept of things— Ed. 
 **** The word “laws” is linked by an arrow with the word “logos” in the next Paragraph— Ed. 
NBLaw of Identity, A = A,—vacuousness, “unerträglich. 
” * (19) It is unfair to forget that these categories “have their place and validity in cognition. 
”(20) But as “indifferent forms” they can be“instruments of error and sophistry” (20),not of truth. 
 “Contemplative thought” should include “der Inhalt” ** as well as the “external form. 
” (20) ...“With this introduction of Content into logical consideration,” the subject becomesnot Dinge but die Sache, der Begriff derDingo. 
 *** not things, but the laws **** of their movement, materialistically ...“the logos, the reason of that which is. 
” (21) And on page (22) at the beginning, the subject of logic is expressed in thewords: ...“Entwicklung des Denkens in seiner Notwendigkeit. 
” The categories have to be derived (and not taken arbitrarily or mechanically) (notby “exposition,” not by “assurances,” butwith p r o o f s ) (24) proceeding from the simplest, most fundamental (Being, Noth-ing, Becoming (das Werden)) (withouttaking others)—here, in them, “in thisgerm, the whole development. 
” (23)NB “develop-ment” of thinking in accordance with its necessity Logic is usually understood as being the “science of thinking,” the “bare form ofcognition. 
” (27) Hegel refutes this view. 
 He is against Ding an sich * as “something beyond thought. 
” (29) Forms of thinking apparently “have no applicability to Things-in-themselves. 
” (31)Ungereimt wahre Erkenntnis, ** which does not cognise the Thing-in-itself. 
 But is notVerstand *** also a Thing-in-itself? (31) “Transcendental idealism, carried more consistently to its logical conclusion, hasperceived the nullity of the spectre of theThing-in-itself left over from the critical philosophy—that abstract shadow detachedfrom all content—and has had the aimof demolishing it altogether. 
 Also, this phi-losophy (Fichte?) made a beginning of mak-ing reason develop its own determinationsout of itself. 
 But the subjective attitudeof this attempt did not admit of its beingcarried to completion. 
” (32) Logical forms are tote Formen **** — for they are not regarded as an “organicunity,” (33) as “their living concrete unity”(ibidem). 
 * Thing-in-itself— Ed. 
 **True cognition is absurd. 
— Ed. 
 *** understanding— Ed. 
 dead forms— Ed. 
INTRODUCTION : GENERAL CONCEPT OF LOGIC *disrepute— Ed. 
 **It has fallen into disrepute. 
— Ed. 
 *** and others— Ed. 
In the Phenomenology of Mind I have examined the movement of consciousness, from the first direct contradiction (Gegen-satz) between itself and the object, upto absolute knowledge. 
 (34) This path goesthrough all the forms of the relation of con-sciousness to the object.... 
” “Truth, as science, is pure self-conscious-ness unfolding itself...” (35) “objective think-ing” ... “the concept, as such, is that whichexists in and for itself. 
” (35) (36: clerical-ism, God, the realm of truth, etc. 
, etc. 
)37: Kant imparted “an essentially subjec-tive signification” to “logical determi-nations. 
” But “thought determinations” have “an objective value and exist-ence. 
” (37)The old logic has fallen into Verach-ting. 
 * (38) It requires transformation.... 
 39—The old, formal logic is exactly like a child’s game, making pictures out of jig-saw pieces (in Verachtung ge-kommen **: (38)) 40 Philosophy must have its own method (not that of mathematics, contra Spi-noza, Wolff und Andere ***). 
 40-41: “For method is the consciousness of the form taken by the inner sponta-neous movement of its content,”and the rest of page 41 gives a goodexplanation of dialectics ...“es ist der Inhalt in sich, die Dia-lektik, die er an ihm selbst hat, welche ihn fortbewegt. 
” (42) “The given sphere of phenomena is moved forward by the content itselfof this sphere, the dialectic, whichNB *“a n i n n e r , n e c e s s a r y c o n n e c t i o n ”—Ed. 
 **“transition”— Ed. 
it (this content) has in (an) itself” (i. 
e. 
, the dialectic of its own move-ment). 
 “The negative is to an equal extent pos-itive” (41)—negation is something defi-nite, has a definite content, the inner con-tradictions lead to the replacement of theold content by a new, higher one. 
 In the old logic there is no transition, development (of concept and thought), thereis not “ e i n e s i n n e r e n , n o t w e n -d i g e n Z u s a m m e n h a n g s ” * (43) of all the parts and “Übergang” ** of some parts into others. 
 And Hegel puts forward two basic require-ments:1) “The necessity of connection” and 2) “the immanent emergence of distinctions. 
 Very important!! This is what it means, in my opinion: 1. 
 N e c e s s a r y connection, the ob-jective connection of all the aspects, forces, tendencies, etc. 
, of the given sphere of phenomena; 2. 
 The “immanent emergence of dis-tinctions”—the inner objective logic ofevolution and of the struggle of thedifferences, polarity. 
 Shortcomings of the Platonic dialectics in Parmenides. 
 44 “Dialectic is generally regarded as an external and negative procedure, that does not belong to the subject-matter itself,that is based on pure vanity, as a subjec-tive craving to shake and break down whatis fixed and true,—or that at best leadsDDDDDDDDDDD /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR *“the semblance or arbitrariness”— Ed. 
 **the objectivity of semblance— Ed. 
 *** the necessity of contradiction— Ed. 
 **** self-moving soul ***** essence— Ed. 
( (NB: unclear, return to it!!to nothing but the inaneness of the dialec-tically treated matter. 
” (43) (44)—The great merit of Kant was that he removed “den Schein von Willkür” * from dialectics. 
 Two important things: (1) Die Objektivität# des Scheins ** (2) die Notwendigkeit des Wider-spruchs *** selbstbewegende Seele **** ... (“inherent negativity”) ... “the principle of all physi-cal and spiritual life. 
” (44) # Is not the thought here that semblance also is objective, for it contains one of the aspects of the o b j e c t i v e world? Not only Wesen, ***** but Schein, too, is objective. 
 There is a difference betweenthe subjective and the objective, BUT IT, TOO, HAS ITS LIMITS . 
 The dialectical == “comprehending the antithesis in its unity.... 
” 45 Logic resembles grammar, being one thing for the beginner and another thing for one who knows the language (and lan-guages) and the spirit of language. 
 “It isone thing to him who approaches Logicand the Sciences in general for the firsttime and another thing for him who comes back from the sciences to Logic. 
” Then logic gives “the essential character of this wealth” (des Reichtums der Welt-subtle and profound! vorstellung *), “the inner nature of spir-it and of the world.... 
” (46) “Not merely an abstract universal, but a universal which comprises in itself thewealth of the particular. 
” (47) A beautiful formula: “Not merely an abstract universal, but a uni-versal which comprises in itselfthe wealth of the particular, theindividual, the single” (all thewealth of the particular and sin-gle!)!! Très bien! “—Just as one and the same moral maxim in the mouth of a youth whounderstands it quite accurately doesnot have the significance and scope which it has in the mind of a man of years and experience, for whom itexpresses the full force of its con-tent. 
 Thus, the value of logic only receives due appreciation when it is the result of ex-perience of the sciences; then it presentsitself to the mind as universal truth, notas a particular department of knowledge alongside other departments and realities, but as the essence of all this other con-tent.... 
” (47) “The system of logic is the realm of shades” (47), free from “all sensuous con-creteness.... 
” * the wealth of the world view— Ed. 
cf. 
 Capital a good comparison (materialist) “sum-total of experience of the sciences” NB (“Essence”) the “essential content of all other knowledge” (50)—...“not abstract, dead and immo-bile, but concrete.... 
” [This is characteristic! The spirit and essence of dialectics!] (52) Note ... the results of Kant’s philos-ophy...: “that reason can cognise novalid content, and with regard toabsolute truth must be referred to faith.... 
” (53) Once again, that Ding an sich = an abstraction, the product of thinking that abstracts. 
Kant: to res-trict “reason” and strength-en faith45 B O O K O N E: THE DOCTRINE OF BEING BOOK ONE: THE DOCTRINE OF BEING (59) * ...(en passant) “the nature of cognition” (idemp. 
 6 1) (60) ...“There is nothing (Hegel’s italics) in Heaven, Nature, Spirit, or anywhere else, which does not contain immedia-cy as well as mediacy.... 
” 1) Heaven—Nature—Spirit. 
 Heaven away: materialism. 
 2) Everything is vermittelt = mediat-ed, bound into One, connected by transi-tions. 
 Away with Heaven—law-governed connection of the whole (p r o c e s s ) of the world. 
 (62) “Logic is pure science, that is, pure knowledge in the WHOLE extent of its DEVELOPMENT .... 
” 1st line nonsense. 
 2nd line brilliant. 
 What should one begin with? “Pure Be-ing” (Sein) (63)—“no assumption to be *Hegel, Werke , Bd. 
 III, Berlin, 1833. 
— Ed. 
The theme of logic. 
 To be compared to present-day “epistemol-ogy. 
”( ( NBWITH WHAT SHOULD ONE BEGIN SCIENCE? /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR *of knowledge— Ed. 
 **“nothing”— Ed. 
 *** “being”— Ed. 
NBmade,” the beginning. 
 “Not hold in itself any content.... 
” “to be mediated by noth-ing.... 
” (66) ...“The advance” (des Erken-nens*)... “must be determined bythe nature of the subject and thecontent itself.... 
” (68) Be ginning contains both “Nichts”** and “Sein,”*** it is theirunity:...“that which is beginning, as yetis not: it is merely advancing to-wards Being .... 
” (from n o t -B e -i n g t o Be i n g : “not-Being, which is also Being”). 
 Nonsense about the absolute (68-69). 
 I am in general trying to read Hegel materialistically: Hegel is materialism which has been stood on its head (accord-ing to Engels 46)—that is to say, I cast aside for the most part God, the Abso-lute, the Pure Idea, etc. 
 (70-71) One cannot begin philosophy with the “Ego. 
” There is no “objectivemovement. 
” (71) (77) Pure Being—“without any further de-termination. 
”(Bestimmung* is already Qualität. 
**) Transitionof Sein—into Dasein *** Sein—Nichts—Werden**** “Pure Being and pure Nothing are ... the same. 
” (78) (81: This seems to be a “paradox. 
”) Their union is Werden . 
 “Movement of immediate disappearance of the one into the other.... 
” Nichts is opposed to dem Et-was . 
***** But Etwas is already a determinate Being distinguish-ed from another Etwas , but it is a question here of simpleNichts. 
 (79) (The Eleatics and Parmenides , especially the former, arrivedat this abstraction of Being . 
) According to Heraclitus “all things flow” (80)..., i. 
e. 
, “every-thing is Becoming. 
” * determination— Ed. 
 **quality— Ed. 
 *** Existent Being —Ed. 
 **** Being—Nothing—Becoming— Ed. 
 ***** Something— Ed. 
Existent (?) Being Finite Being—and this into Fürsich-sein (Being for Self?) ( (S E C T I O N O N E: DETERMINATENESS (QUALITY) *Out or nothing comes nothing?— Ed. 
 **D e t e r m i n a t e Being— Ed. 
 *** in fine—at the end— Ed. 
Ex nihilo nihil fit?* Out of Nichts comes Sein (Werden).... 
 (81): “It would not be difficult to dem-onstrate this unity of Being and Noth-ing ... in every (Hegel’s italics) example, in every fact and thought” ... “ neither in heaven nor on earth is there anythingnot containing both Being and Nothing . 
” Objections presume b e s t i m m t e s Sein** (I have 100 taler or not) 82 i. 
 f. 
***,—but that is not the question.... 
 “A determinate or finite Being is such as refers itself to another; it is a contentwhich stands in a relation of necessity with other content or with the whole world. 
 In view of the mutually determinant connec-tion of the whole, metaphysics could makethe assertion—which is really a tautology—that if the least grain of dust were destroyedthe whole universe must collapse. 
” (83) (86): “What is first in science has had to show itself first, too, historically. 
” It sounds very materialistic! (91): “Becoming is the subsistence of Be-ing as much as of not-Being.... 
” “Transition is the same thing asBecoming.... 
” (92 i. 
 f. 
) (94) “Parmenides, equally with Spinoza, will not admit transition from Being,or the absolute Substance, to the neg-ative, finite. 
” For Hegel, however, the unity or indi-visibility (p. 
 9 0 this term is some-times better than unity) of “Being” and“Nothing’ gives the transition , Werden. 
“The neces-sary connec-tion of the whole world”... “the mutually determinant connection of the whole” NB *Perhaps so?— Ed. 
 **“external reflection”— Ed. 
 *** “incomprehensibility of the beginning”— Ed. 
 **** sophistry —Ed. 
 ***** arising and passing away— Ed. 
 ****** The superseding of Becomnig. 
— Ed. 
The absolute and the relative, the fin-ite and the infinite = parts, stages of one and the same world. 
 So etwa?* (92: “We shall reserve for such Being as is mediated the term Existence . 
”) 102: According to Plato in the “Parme-nides,” the transition from Being and the One = “äußere Reflexion. 
”** 104: It is said that darkness is the ab-sence of light. 
 But “as little is seen in pure light as in pure darkness.... 
” 107—Reference to infinitely small mag-nitudes, which are taken in process of disappearing.... 
 “There exists nothing that is not a mean condition between Being and Nothing. 
” “Unbegreiflichkeit des Anfangs”***—if Nothing and Being exclude each other, but that is not dialectics, but Sophisterei . 
**** (108) “For sophistry is an argument proceeding from a baseless supposition which is allowedwithout criticism or reflection; while weterm dialectic that higher movement ofReason where terms appearing absolutely distinct pass into one another through them-selves, through what they are, and the as-sumption of their separateness cancels it-self. 
” (108) Werden . 
 Its Moments: Entstehen und Vergehen. 
***** (109) Das Aufheben des Werdens******— das Dasein . 
 concrete, determinate Being (?)NB Sophistry and dialec tics *supersede = terminate-maintain (simultaneously to pre-serve)— Ed. 
 **Existent Being is Determinate Being— Ed. 
 *** “concrete”— Ed. 
 **** an other— v a r i a b l e a n d f i n i t e —Ed. 
 ***** every determination is negation— Ed. 
 ****** abstract and obscure Hegelianism. 
— Ed. 
 ******* Thing-in-itself— Ed. 
 ******** being-for-other— Ed. 
110: aufheben = ein Ende machen= erhalten (aufbewahren zugleich)* 112: Dasein ist bestimmtes Sein** ( NB 114 “ein Konkretes”***),—Quality,separate from Anderes,— v e r ä n d e r-l i c k u n d e n d l i c h . 
**** 114 “Determinateness, taken thus isolated and by itself as existent determinate-ness, is Quality. 
. 
,. 
” “Quality, which isto count as something separately exist-ing, is Reality. 
” (115) 117 ...“Determinateness is negation.... 
” (Spinoza) Omnis determinatio est ne-gatio,***** “this statement is of im-measurable importance.... 
” 120: “Something is the first negation of negation.... 
” 125—...Two pairs of determinations: 1) “Something and Other”; 2) “Being-for-Other and Being-in-Self. 
” 127— Ding an sich *******—“a very simple abstraction. 
” The proposition that wedo not know what Things-in-themselvesare seems sagacious. 
 The Thing-in-itselfis an abstraction from all determi-nation Se in-für-Anderes *******Here the exposition’ is somewhat fragment-ary and highly obscure. 
 ( (abstrakte und abstruse Hege-lie******— EngelsNB *the question, in thoughtlessness, is so put as to render an answer impossible— Ed. 
 **in reading Hegel— Ed. 
 *** Something— Ed. 
from all relation to Other , i. 
e. 
, a Nothing. 
 Consequently, the Thing-in-itself is “nothing but an abstraction,void of truth and content. 
” This is very profound: the Thing-in-it-self and its conversion into a Thing-for-others (cf. 
 Engels 47). 
 The Thing-in-itself is altogether an empty, lifeless abstraction. 
 In life, in movement, eachthing and everything is usually both in itself” and “for others” in relationto an Other, being transformed fromone state to the other. 
 129 En passant: dialectical philosophy, which is unknown to “metaphysical philosophy, which includes also the critical philosophy. 
” D i a l e c t i c s is the teaching which shows how O p p o s i t e s can be and how they happen to be (how theybecome) i d e n t i c a l ,—under what con-ditions they are identical, becomingtransformed into one another,—why thehuman mind should grasp these oppos-ites not as dead, rigid, but as living, con-ditional, mobile, becoming transformedinto one another. 
 En lisant Hegel**.... 
 134: “ L i m i t (is) simple negation or first negation” (das Etwas. 
*** Every Some-thing has its L i m i t ) “while Other is at the same time negation of negation.... 
”NB Sehr gut!! If we ask what Things-i n -t h e m s e l v e s are, so ist in die Frage ge-dankenloser Weise die Unmöglich-keit der Beantwort-ung ge-legt*.... 
 (127) Kantian-ism = metaphysics NB thoughts on dialectics en lisant Hegel137: “Etwas mit seiner immanenten Gren-ze gesetzt als der Widerspruch seinerselbst, durch den es über sich hinaus-gewiesen und getrieben wird, ist dasEndliche . 
” (“S o m e t h i n g , taken from the point of view of its imma-nent Limit—from the point ofview of its self-contradiction,a contradiction which drives it this Something and leads itbeyond its limits, is the Finite . 
) When things are described as finite,— that is to admit that their not-Beingis their nature (“not-Being constitutes their Being”). 
 “They” (things) “ are, but the truth of this being is their end . 
” Shrewd and clever! Hegel analyses concepts that usually appear to be deadand shows that there is movement in them. 
 Finite? That means moving t o an end! Something?—means n o t t h a t which is Other. 
 Being in general?— means such indeterminateness that Be-ing = not-Being. 
 All-sided, univer-sal flexibility of concepts, a flexibil-ity reaching to the identity of oppo-sites,—that is the essence of the matter. 
 This flexibility, applied subjectively = eclecticism and sophistry. 
 Flexibility, applied objectively , i. 
e. 
, reflecting the all-sidedness of the material processand its unity, is dialectics, is the correctreflection of the eternal development of the world. 
 139—The Infinite and the Finite, it is said, are opposite to one another?(see p. 
 148) (cf. 
 p. 
 151). 
 *Ought, or Should-be ; and Bound or Boundary —Ed. 
 **the Finite— Ed. 
 *** In the MS. 
, the Russian letter “ и” appears above the last letter of the word for “evolution”. 
 In Russian, the ending “ и” forms the plural of the word— Ed. 
 **** impulse, pain— Ed. 
sehr gut! The dialect-ics of things themselves, of Nature itself, of the course of events itself141— Sollen und Schranke *—Moments of des Endlichen. 
** 143—“At Ought the transgression beyond finitude, Infinity, begins. 
” 143—It is said that reason has its bounds. 
 “When this assertion is made it is notseen that by the very fact that some-thing has been determined as a bound-ary, it has already been surpassed. 
” 144: A stone does not think, therefore its restrictedness (Beschränktheit) is nobound (Schranke) for it . 
 But the stone also has its bounds, for instance itsoxydisability, if it “is a base capableof being oxydised. 
” Evolution*** of the stone 144-145:—Everything (human) passes be-yond its bounds (Trieb, Schmerz,****etc. 
), but Reason , if you please, “can-not pass beyond its bounds”! “It is true that not every passage beyond the bound is a veritable eman-cipation from it!” A magnet, if it had consciousness, would consider its turning to the northas freely made (Leibnitz). 
—No, itwould know then all directions of space, and it would consider the one direction as a boundary to its freedom, a limi-tation of it. 
 148 ...“It is the nature of the finite to pass beyond itself, to negate its nega-tion and to become infinite.... 
” Notexternal (fremde) power (Gewalt) (149)converts the finite into the infin-*“bad infinity”— Ed. 
 **on this side —Ed. 
 *** on that side —Ed. 
 **** they are— Ed. 
 ***** inseparable —Ed. 
To be applied to atoms ver-sus electrons. 
 In general the infinite-ness of mat-ter deep within... The connec-tion (of all parts) of infi-nite progressite, but its (finite’s) nature (seine Natur). 
 151: “Schlechte Unendlichkeit”*—infini-ty qualitatively counterposed to fini-tude, not connected with it, separatedfrom it, and if the finite were dies-seits ,** and the infinite jenseits ,*** as if the infinite stood above the finite, outside it.... 
 153: In fact, however, sind sie**** (the finite and the infinite) untrennbar . 
***** They are a unity . 
 (155) 158-159: ...“The unity of finite and infinite is not an external juxtapositionof these terms, nor an improper con-nection contrary to their determinat-ion, and binding together entitiesseparate and opposed and mutuallyindependent and hence incompatible;on the contrary, each in itself is thisunity, and is so only in transcending itself, neither excelling the other in Being-in-Self and affirmative ExistentBeing. 
 It has been demonstrated abovethat finitude exists only as a passingbeyond itself; it thus contains infin-ity, which is its Other.... 
” ...“The infinite progress, however, asserts more than this” (than the mere compar-ison of the finite with the infinite): “in it isalso posited the connection (Hegel’s italics) of terms which also are distinct.... 
” (160)167 “The nature of speculative thought ... consists solely in seizing the opposed moments in their unity. 
”The question how the infinite arrivesat finite is sometimes considered as the essence of philosophy. 
 But this question amounts to elucidating their connection.... 
 168 ...“In the other subjects, too, the art of putting questions demands some education; still more so in philosoph-ical subjects, if a better answer is to bereceived than that the question is idle. 
” The relation to the Other has disappeared; what has remained is the relation to Self . 
 173-174: Fürsichsein —Being-for-Self—in-finite Being, consummated qualitative Being. 
 The relation to the Other has dis-appeared; what has remained is the relat-ion to Self . 
 Quality reaches its climax (auf die Spitze) and becomes quantity. 
 The idealism of Kant and Fichte... (181) “remains in the dualism” ((unclear)) “ofexistent Being and Being-for-Self...,” i. 
e. 
, that there is no transition of the Thing-in-itself (mentioned in the fol-lowing sentence) to the appearance? of the object to the subject? Why Fürsichsein is Eins * is not clear to me. 
 Here Hegel is extremely obscure, in my opinion. 
 The One is the old principle of the äτο− µον** (and the void). 
 The void is considered Quell der Bewegung *** (185) not only in the sense that space is not filled, butalso enthüllt**** “this profounder thought, * One —Ed. 
 **atom (indivisible)— Ed. 
 *** source of motion —Ed. 
 **** contains— Ed. 
 ***** self-movement— Ed. 
Bien dit! NB: Selbstbeweg-ung. 
***** *inordinate— Ed. 
 **the One —Ed. 
that the negative in general contains the ground of Becoming, the unrest of self-movement. 
” (186) 1 8 3: “The ideality of Being-for-Self as totality thus, first, passes into reality,and into the most fixed and abstractof all, as One . 
” Dark waters... The thought of the ideal passing into the real is profound : very important for history. 
 But also in the personallife of man it is clear that this contains much truth. 
 Against vulgar materialism. 
 NB. 
 The difference of the ideal from thematerial is also not unconditional, notüberschwenglich. 
* 189—Note: The monads of Leibnitz. 
 The principle of Eins ** and its incomplete-ness in Leibnitz. 
 Obviously, Hegel takes his self-de-velopment of concepts, of categories,in connection with the entire history of philosophy. 
 This gives still a new aspect to the whole Logic . 
 193 ...“It is an old proposition that One is Many , and more especially that the M a n y are O n e .... 
” 195 ...“The distinction of One and Many has determined itself to be that of theirrelation to one another; this is dividedinto two relations, Repulsion and At-traction .... 
” /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR In general, all this Fürsichsein* was, probably, in part required by Hegel to deduce the transition of quality into quantity ” (199)—quality is determi-nateness, determinateness for self, Ge-setzte,* it is the One—this gives theimpression of being very far fetched andempty. 
 Note, page 203, the remark, which is not devoid of irony, against that “procedure of knowledge reflecting on experience, which first perceives determi-nations in the phenomenon, next makes them the basis, and assumes for their so-called explanation corresponding funda-mental materials or forces which are sup-posed to produce these determinations ofthe phenomenon.... 
” * Being-for-self— Ed. 
 **the posited— Ed. 
 S E C T I O N T W O: MAGNITUDE (QUANTITY) *continuity —Ed. 
 **discreteness —Ed. 
 *** true dialectics— Ed. 
 **** In the MS. 
, the word “separateness” is crossed out. 
— Ed. 
 ***** In the MS. 
, the words “contiguity, successiveness” are crossed out. 
— Ed. 
Kant has four “antinomies. 
” In fact, every concept, every category is similarly antinomous. 
 (217) “The old scepticism did not shrink from the labour of demonstrating this contra-diction or antinomy in every concept which it found in the sciences. 
” Analysing Kant very captiously (and shrewdly), Hegel comes to the conclusionthat Kant simply repeats in his conclusionswhat was said in the premises, namely he repeats that there is a category of Kon-tinuität * and a category of Diskretion . 
** From this it follows merely “that, taken alone, neither determination has truth,but only their unity. 
 This is the true dia-lectic consideration of them, and the true result. 
” (226) 229: “ Die Diskretion translation? sepa-rateness,**** d i s m e m b e r m e n t like die Kontinuität continuity (?), successiveness (?),***** continuity i s a moment of Q u a n t i t y .... 
”The role of scepticism in the history of philosophy Wahrhafte Dialek-tik*** 232: “Quantum —which, first, means quan-tity having any determinateness or lim-it at all—is, in its complete determi-nateness, Number .... 
” 234: “ A n z a h l amount enumeration? and Unit constitute the moments of Num-ber. 
” 248—On the problem of the role and sig-nificance of number (much about Py-thagoras, etc. 
, etc. 
) Among other things, an apt remark:“The richer in determinateness, and hence in relation, thoughts become, the more con-fused, on the one hand, and the more arbit-rary and senseless, on the other hand, be-comes their representation in such formsas numbers. 
” (248-249) ((Valuation ofthoughts: richness in determinations a n d c o n s e q u e n t l y in relations. 
)) In regard to Kant’s antinomies (world without beginning, etc. 
) Hegel again dem-onstrates des Längeren* that the premisestake as proved that which has to be proved. 
(267-278) Further the transition of quantity into quality in the abstract-theoretical expo-sition is so obscure that nothing can beunderstood. 
 Return to it!! 2 8 3: the infinite in mathematics. 
 Hither-to the justification has consisted o n l y in the correctness of the results (“welche aus sonstigen Gründen erwie-sen ist”**),... and not in the clear-ness of the subject cf. 
 Engels 48 . 
 *in detail— Ed. 
 **“demonstrated on other grounds”— Ed. 
NB *justification— Ed. 
 **abstruse— Ed. 
 *** Reflections on the Metaphysics of the Infintesimal Calcul-us—Ed. 
 **** relation— Ed. 
285: In the infinitesimal calculus a certain inexactitude (conscious) is ig-nored, nevertheless the result obtainedis not approximate but absolutely exact! 285: Notwithstanding this, to demand Rechtfertigung* here is “not as super-fluous” “as to ask in the case of the nosefor a demonstration of the right touse it. 
” 49 Hegel’s answer is complicated, abst-rus, ** etc. 
, etc. 
 It is a question of h i g h e r mathematics; cf. 
 E n g e l s on the differential and integral calcu-lus. 
 50 Interesting is Hegel’s remark made in passing—“transcendentally, that is reallysubjective and psychological”... “tran-scendental, that is, in the subject. 
” (288) Pp. 
 282-327 u. 
 ff. 
—379 A most detailed consideration of the differential and integral calculus, withquotations—Newton, Lagrange, Carnot,Euler, Leibnitz, etc. 
, etc. 
,—showinghow interesting Hegel found this “vanish-ing” of infinitely small magnitudes,this “intermediate between Being and not-Being. 
” Without studying highermathematics all this is incomprehens-ible. 
 Characteristic is the title Carnot : “Réflexions sur la Métaphysique du calculinfinitésimal”!!!*** The development of the concept Verhält-nis**** (379-394) extremely obscure. 
 Note only, p. 
 394, the remark on symbols , that there is nothing to be said against them in general. 
 But “ against all Symbolism ” it must be said that it sometimes is “a con-venient means of escaping from compre-hending, stating and justifying the concep-tual determinations ” (Begriffsbestimmun-gen). 
 But precisely this is the concern of philosophy. 
 “The common determinations of force, or substantiality, cause and effect, andothers, are themselves too only symbolsused to express, for example, vital andspiritual relations; that is, they are untrue determinations of those relations. 
” (394)NB? S E C T I O N T H R E E: M E A S U R E “In Measure, to put it abstractly, Qual-ity and Quantity are united. 
 Being as such is the immediate self-identity of de-terminateness. 
 This immediacy of determi-nateness has transcended itself. 
 Quantity isBeing which has returned upon itself insuch a manner that it is simple self-identity as indifference to determinateness. 
” (395) The third term is Measure. 
 Kant introduced the category of modal-ity (possibility, actuality, necessity) and Hegel remarks that in Kant: “This category means that it is the rela-tion of the object to thought. 
 In the sense of this idealism, thought in general isessentially external to the Thing-in-itself ...,objectivity, which is a quality of the othercategories, is lacking in the categories ofmodality. 
” (396) En passant: (397) Indian philosophy, in which Brahma passes to Siva (change = disappearance, arising).... 
 The peoples deify M e a s u r e . 
 (399) ? Measure passes into Essence (Wesen). 
 (Regarding the question of Measure it is not without interest to note the remarkmade in passing by Hegel that “in devel-oped civil society aggregates of individ-uals belonging to different trades are in a certain relation to one another. 
”) (402) On the question of the category of Grad-ualness (Allmähligkeit), Hegel remarks: “Recourse is so readily made to this cat-egory in order to render intelligible to theeye or to the mind the disappearance of a Quality or of Something; for thus the illu-sion is created that one can almost beeye-witness of disappearance; for, Quantumbeing posited as limit external and variableby its very nature, change (as a change of Quantum only) needs no explanation. 
 But in fact nothing is thereby explained; the change is also essentially the transitionof one Quality into another, or (a more ab-stract transition) of one existence into anon-existence; and this contains a determi-nation different from that of gradual, which is only a decrease or increase and a one-sided retention of magnitude. 
 “But already the ancients were aware of the connection by which a change appearingas merely quantitative turns into one whichis qualitative, and they illustrated the confusions which arise from ignorance of this connection by popular examples...”(405 -406) (“bald”—the removal of one hair from a head; a “heap”—the removal of onegrain...) “what” (here) “is refuted is” daseinseitige Festhalten an der abstrakten Quantumsbestimmtheit (“the one-sided clinging to abstract quantitative deter-minateness,” i. 
e. 
, “without taking accountof the manifold changes and concrete quali-ties,” etc. 
). 
 ...“Therefore those changes areno idle and pedantic joke; they are in them-selves correct and the product of a conscious-ness which takes an interest in the phenom-ena which occur in thought. 
NB *law, or measure— Ed. 
 **higher proof— Ed. 
 *** qualities or determinate concepts (like space and time) that are related— Ed. 
 **** measure— Ed. 
 ***** specific quantity— Ed. 
 ****** real measure— Ed. 
 ******* elective affinities— Ed. 
Gesetz oder Maß* ?“Quantum when it is taken as indiffer-ent limit is that side from which an Exist-ent Being can unsuspectedly be attacked and destroyed. 
 It is the cunning of the Notion to seize it from this side, where itsQuality does not appear to come into play;and this so much so that the aggrandise-ment of a state or of a property, and so on, which leads in the end to disaster for the state or the owner of the property, mayat first actually appear as their good for-tune. 
” (407) “It is a great merit to become acquainted with the empirical numbers of nature (as the distances of the planets from one another), but an infinitely greater meritto cause the empirical Quanta to disappearand to raise them into a universal form o f quantitative determinations, so that theybecome moments of a law or Measure”; the merit of Galileo and Kepler... “They demonstrated the laws which they discov-ered by showing that the totality of detailsof perception corresponds to these laws. 
”(416) But höheres Beweisen** of these lawsmust be demanded in order that their quantitative determinations be known from Qualitäten oder bestimmten Begriffen, diebezogen sind (wie Baum und Zeit). 
*** The development of the concept des Maßes,**** as a spezifische Quantität****and as reales Maß****** (including Wahl-verwandtschaften*******—for example, /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR chemical elements, musical tones), very ob-scure. 
 A lengthy note on chemistry, with a polemic against Berzelius and histheory of electro-chemistry. 
 (433-445) The “nodal line of measure relations” (Knotenlinie von Maßverhältnissen)—tran-sitions of quantity into quality... Gradual-ness and leaps . 
 In Hegel’s note as always, factual mate-rial, examples, the concrete (hence Feuer-bach said jestingly on one occasion that Hegel banished nature to his notes , Feuer-bach, Works, II, p. 
 ?). 
 51 Pp. 
 448-452, a note included in the table of contents (not in the text!! pedant-ry!!): “Examples of such Nodal Lines;in this connection, that there are no leaps in nature. 
” Examples: chemistry; musical tones; wa-ter (steam, ice)— p. 
 449 —birth and death. 
 Abbrechen der Allmähligkeit, p. 
 (450) “It is said that there are no leaps in nature; and ordinary imagination, when it has toconceive an arising or passing away, thinksit has conceived them (as was mentioned)when it imagines them as a gradual emer-gence or disappearance. 
 But we saw that the changes of Being were in general notonly a transition of one magnitude intoanother, but a transition from the quali-tative into the quantitative, and converse-ly: a process of becoming other whichNB NB Leaps! Breaks in gradualness Leaps! Leaps!And again p. 
 448 , that gradualness explains nothing without leaps. 
 ee breaks off graduality and is qualitatively other as against the preceding Existent Being. 
 Water on being cooled does not little by little become hard, gradually reachingthe consistency of ice after having passedthrough the consistency of paste, but issuddenly hard; when it already has quiteattained freezing-point it may (if it stands still) be wholly liquid, and a slight shake brings it into the condition ofhardness. 
 “The gradualness of arising is based upon the idea that that which arises is already,sensibly or otherwise, actually there, and is imperceptible only on account of its smallness; and the gradualness of vanishingis based on the idea that not-Being or theOther which is assuming its place equallyis there, only is not yet noticeable;—there, not in the sense that the Other is contained in the Other which is there in itself, but that it is there as existence,only unnoticeable. 
 This altogether can-cels arising and passing away; or the In-itself, that inner thing in which some-thing is before it attains its existence, is transmuted into a smallness of external existence, and the essential or conceptualdistinction into a difference external andmerely magnitudinal. 
—The procedure whichmakes arising and passing away conceiv-able from the gradualness of change is boring in the manner peculiar to tautol-ogy; that which arises or passes away isprepared beforehand, and the change isturned into the mere changing of an exter-nal distinction; and now it is indeed a meretautology. 
 The difficulty for such Under-standing which attempts to conceive con-sists in the qualitative transition of Some-thing into its Other in general and its op-posite; Understanding, on the other hand, fancies identity and change to be of that indifferent and external kind which applies to the quantitative. 
 “In the moral sphere, insofar as it is con-sidered in the sphere of Being, the sametransition from quantitative to qualitativetakes place, and different qualities appear to base themselves on differences in magni-tude. 
 A ‘more’ or ‘less’ suffices to trans-gress the limit of levity, where somethingquite different, namely, crime, appears;whereby right passes over into wrong, andvirtue into vice. 
—Thus too do states— other things being equal—derive a differ-ent qualitative character from magnitu-dinal difference.... 
” (450-452) Further:Transition of Being into Essence (Wesen), expounded extremely obscurely. 
 End of Volume I. 
 B O O K T W O: ESSENCE B O O K T W O: ESSENCE Volume IV. 
 (Berlin, 1834) Part I. 
 Objective Logic. 
 Book II: The Doctrine of Essence S E C T I O N O N E: ESSENCE AS REFLECTION IN ITSELF *Hegel, Werke , Bd. 
 IV, Berlin, 1834. 
— Ed. 
 **Incidentally, Hegel more than once pokes fun at cf. 
 the passages cited above on gradualness the word (and the concept)erklären (explanation), obviously opposing to the metaphysical solu-tion once for all (“it has been explained”!!) the eternal process of cogni-tion penetrating deeper and deeper. 
 Cf. 
 Volume III, p. 
 463: “can be cognised or, as they say, explained . 
” movement— Ed. 
“The truth of Being is Essence. 
” (3)* Such is the first sentence, sounding thor-oughly idealistic and mystical. 
 But immediately afterwards, a fresh wind, so to speak, begins to blow: “Being is theimmediate. 
 Knowledge seeks to understandthat truth** which Being, in and for itself , is, and therefore it does not halt” (d o e s n o t h a l t NB) “at the imme-diate and its determinations, but p e n e-r a t e s (NB) through ( NB) it, assum-ing that behind (Hegel’s italics) this Being there is something other than Being itself,and that this background constitutes thetruth of Being. 
 This cognition is mediated knowledge, for it is not lodged immedi-ately with and in Essence, but begins atan Other, at Being, and has to make a pre-liminary passage, the passage of transitionbeyond Being, or rather of entrance intoit.... 
” This Bewegung,*** the path of knowledge, seems to be the “activity of cognition”theory of knowledge “p a s s a g e ” O b j e c t i v e s i g i f i-c a n c e *The Essential and the Unessential. 
— Ed. 
 **approximately— Ed. 
(Tätigkeit des Erkennens) “external to Be-ing. 
” “However, this movement is the move-ment of Being itself. 
” “Essence ... is what it is ... by virtue of its own infinite movement of Being. 
” (4) “Absolute Essence has no Determinate Being . 
 Into this, however, it must pass. 
” (5) Essence stands midway between Being and the Notion, as the transition to the Not-ion (=Absolute). 
 Subdivisions of Essence : Semblance or Show (Schein), Appearance (Erscheinung), Actuality (Wirklichkeit). 
 Das Wesentliche und das Unwesentli-che. 
* (8) Der Schein. 
 (9) In the unessential, in Semblance, there is a moment of not-Being. 
 (10) i. 
e. 
, the unessential, seeming, super-ficial, vanishes more often, does nothold so “tightly,” does not “sit so firmly” as “Essence. 
” Etwa**: the movement of a river—the foam above and thedeep currents below. 
 B u t e v e n t h e f o a m is an expression of essence! Semblance and scepticism, Kantianism, respectively: “Semblance then is the phenomenon of scepticism; or again the appearance of ideal-ism, such an immediacy, which is neither Something nor Thing, and, generally, isnot an indifferent Being which could beoutside its determinateness and relationto the subject. 
 Scepticism did not dare to NB the imme-diacy of Semblance they did not go deeper!affirm ‘it is’; modern idealism did not dare to regard cognition as a knowledge of the Thing-in-itself; with the former, Semblance was supposed to have no basisat all in any Being; with the latter, theThing-in-itself was supposed incapable ofentering into cognition. 
 But at the sametime scepticism admitted manifold deter-minations of its Semblance, or rather its Semblance had for content all the manifoldriches of the world. 
 In the same mannerthe appearance of idealism comprehendsthe whole range of these manifold determi-natenesses. 
” You include in Schein* all the wealth of the world and you deny the objectivityof Schein!! “Semblance and appearance are immediate-ly determined so diversely. 
 The content may then have no basis in any Being nor inany thing nor Thing-in-itself; for itself itremains as it is: it has only been translatedfrom being into Semblance; thus Semblancecontains these manifold determinatenesses, which are immediate, existent and recip-rocally other. 
 Semblance itself is, then,immediately determinate. 
 It may have thisor that content; but whatever content ithas is not posited by itself but belongs to itimmediately. 
 The idealism of Leibnitz, Kant or Fichte, like any other form of ideal-ism, did not reach beyond Being as deter-minateness, beyond this immediacy anymore than scepticism. 
 Scepticism allows the content “that which is immediately given”!! of its Semblance to be given * Semblance or Show— Ed. 
 to it; for it, it is immediate , whatever con-tent it is to have. 
 The monad of Leibnitz develops its presentations out of itself; but it is no creative and connecting force,—the presentations arise in it like bubbles;they are indifferent and immediate rela-tive to one another, and therefore to themonad itself. 
 Similarly Kant’s phenomenon is a given content of perception; it presup-poses affections, determinations of the sub-ject which are immediate to one anotherand to the subject. 
 The infinite limitationor check of Fichte’s idealism refuses, per-haps, to be based on any Thing-in-itself, so that it becomes purely a determinate-ness in the Ego. 
 But this determinatenessis immediate and a limit to the Ego, which, transcending its externality, incorporatesit; and though the Ego can pass beyondthe limit, the latter has in it an aspect of indifference by virtue of which it contains an immediate not-Being ofthe Ego, though itself contained in theEgo. 
” (10-11) ...“Determinations which distinguish it” (den Schein) “from Essence are deter-minations of Essence.... 
” (12) It is the immediacy of not-Being which constitutes Semblance; in Essence,Being is not-Being. 
 Its nullity in itself is the negative nature of Essence itself.... 
” (12) ...“These two moments thus constitute Semblance: Nullity, which however persists, and Being, which however is Moment; oragain negativity which is in itself, andreflected immediacy. 
 Consequently thesemoments are the moments of Essence it-self.... 
” “Semblance is Essence itself in the deter-minateness of Being.... 
” (12-13)cf. 
 Machism!! Semblance = the negative nature of Essence Semblance is (1) nothing, non-exist-ent (Nichtigkeit) whichexists—(2) Being as moment “Thus Semblance is Essence itself, but Essence in a determinateness, and this insuch a manner that determinateness is onlyits moment: Essence is the showing of it-self in itself. 
” (14) That which shows itself is essence in one of its determinations, in one of its aspects, in one of its moments. 
 Essence seems to be just that. 
 Semblance is the showing (Scheinen) of essence itself initself. 
 ...“Essence ... contains Semblance within itself, as infinite internal movement.... 
” (14) ...“In this its self-movement Essence is Reflection. 
 Semblance is the same as Re-flection. 
” (14) Semblance (that which shows itself) is the R e f l e c t i o n of Essence in (it) itself. 
 ...“Becoming in Essence—its reflective movement—is hence the movement fromNothing to Nothing and through Nothingback to itself.... 
” (15) This is shrewd and profound. 
 Move-ments “to nothing” occur in nature andin life. 
 Only there are certainly none “from nothing. 
” Always from something. 
 “Commonly Reflection is taken in the subjective meaning of the movement of judgment which passes beyond a given im-mediate presentation, seeking universal de-*If it may be called that— Ed. 
 **Variants of the translation of the German word “die Reflex-ion” into Russian are given within the parentheses. 
— Ed. 
 *** The word Gegensatz is crossed out in the MS. 
— Ed. 
terminations for it or comparing them with it. 
” (21) (Quotation from Kant— Critique of the Power of Judgment52).... 
 “Here, how-ever, neither the reflection of conscious-ness nor the more determinate reflection of understanding, which has the particular andthe universal for its determinations, is inquestion, but only Reflection in general.... 
” Thus here, too, Hegel charges Kant with subjectivism . 
 This NB. 
 Hegel is for the “objective validity” (sit veniaverbo*) of Semblance, “of that whichis immediately given” [the expression “t h a t w h i c h i s g i v e n ” is gener-ally used by Hegel, and here see p. 
 21i. 
 f. 
; p. 
 22]. 
 The more petty philosophersdispute whether essence or that which is immediately given should be takenas basis (Kant, Hume, all the Machists). 
 Instead of or, Hegel puts and, explain-ing the concrete content of this “and. 
” “Die Reflexion is the showing of Essence into itself” (27) (translation? Reflectivity?Reflective determination? Реzлексия is not suitable). 
** ...“It” (das Wesen) “is a movement through different moments, absolute self-media-tion.... 
” (27)Identity — Difference — Contradiction #Gegensatz*** (Ground)... in particular antithesis Therefore Hegel elucidates the one-sided-ness, the incorrectness of the “law of iden-tity” (A =A), of the category (all determi-( ( nations of that which is are categories— pp. 
 2 7 -2 8 ). 
 “If everything is self-identical it is not distinguished: it contains no oppositionand has no ground. 
” (29) “Essence is ... simple self-identity. 
” (30)Ordinary thinking places resemblance and difference next to (“daneben”) each other, not understanding “this movement of transition of one of these determinationsinto the other. 
” (31) And again, against the law of identity (A =A): its adherents “since they cling to this rigid Identity which has its opposite in Variety, they do not see that they are thereby making itinto a one-sided determinateness, which as such has no truth. 
” (33) (“Empty tautology”: 32)(“It contains only f o r m a l truth, which is a b s t r a c t and incomplete. 
” (33) Kinds of reflection: external , etc. 
; ex-pounded very obscurely. 
 The principles of difference: “All things are different.... 
” “A is also not A.... 
” (44) “There are no two things which are en-tirely alike.... 
” There is a difference in one or another aspect (Seite), Rücksicht, etc. 
, “insofern,”* etc. 
 bien dit !! “The customary tenderness for things, whose only care is that they shall notcontradict one another, forgets here as else-where that this is no solution of the contra-diction, which is merely planted elsewhere,namely, into subjective or external re-flection; and that the latter does in fact * consideration, etc. 
, “insofar as,” etc. 
— Ed. 
NB terms under-lined by me /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR contain the two moments—which this re-moval and transplantation proclaim to be a mere positedness—in one unity as tran-scended and related to each other. 
” (47) (This irony is exquisite! “Tenderness” for nature and history (among the philis-tines)—the endeavour to cleanse them fromcontradictions and struggle.... 
) The result of the addition of plus and mi-nus is nought. 
 “ The result of contradiction is not only nought . 
” (59) The solution of the contradiction, the re-duction of positive and negative to “onlydeterminations” (61) converts Essence (das Wesen) into Ground (Grund) (ibidem) ...“Resolved Contradiction is, then, Grund, that is, Essence as unity of Positiveand Negative.... 
” (62) “Even a slight experience in reflective thought will perceive that, if anything has just been determined as Positive, it straight-way turns into Negative if any progress is made from that base, and conversely that a Negative determination turns into Positive; that reflective thought becomes confused in these determinations and con-tradicts itself. 
 Insufficient acquaintance with the nature of these determinations leads to the conclusion that this confusion is a fault which should not occur, and attributes it to a subjective error. 
 And in fact this transition does remain mere confusion insofar as the necessity for this m e t a m o r p h o s i s is not present to consciousness. 
” (63) ...“The opposition of Positive and Nega-tive is especially taken in the meaningthat the former (although etymologicallyit expresses being posited or positedness)is to be an objective entity, and the latter subjective, belonging only to externalNB reflection and in no way concerned with the objective, which is in and for itself and quite ignores it. 
” (64) “And indeed if the Negative expresses nothing but theabstraction of subjective caprice.... 
” (thenit, this Negative, does not exist “für dasobjective Positive”*).... 
 “Truth , too, is the Positive, as knowl-edge, corresponding with its object but it is this self-equality only insofar asknowledge has already taken up a negativeattitude to the Other, has penetrated the object , and transcended that negation which the object is. 
 Error is a Positive, as an opinion affirming that which is not in and for itself, an opinion which knowsitself and asserts itself. 
 But ignorance iseither indifference to truth and error, andthus determined neither as positive nor asnegative,—and if it is determined as a de-ficiency, this determination belongs to ex-ternal reflection; or else, objectively andas proper determination of a nature, itis the impulse, which is directed againstitself, a negative which contains a positivedirection. 
—It is of the greatest impor-tance to recognise this nature of the Deter-minations of Reflection which have beenconsidered here, that their truth consistsonly in their relation to each other, andtherefore in the fact that each contains theother in its own concept. 
 This must be understood and remembered, for without his understanding not a step can reallybe taken in philosophy. 
” (65-66) Thisfrom the Note 1. 
———— Note 2. 
 “ The Law of the Excluded Middle . 
” Hegel quotes this proposition of the ex-cluded middle. 
 “Something is either A ornot A; there is no third” (66) and “ a n a l -* “for the objective positive”— Ed. 
Truth and Object that which is in and for itself *“everything is a term of an opposition”— Ed. 
y s e s ” it. 
 If this implies that “alles ein Entgegengesetztes ist,”* that everything has its positive and its negative determi-nation, then it is all right. 
 But if it isunderstood as it is generally understood,that, of all predicates, either a givenone, or its not-Being, applies, then thisis a “triviality”!! Spirit ... sweet, not sweet? green, not green? The determination should lead to determinateness, but in this triv-iality it leads to nothing. 
 And then—Hegel says wittily—it is said that there is no third. 
 There is a third in this thesis itself. 
 A itself is the third, for A can be both # A and — A. 
 “The Some-thing thus is itself the third term whichwas supposed to be excluded. 
” (67) This is shrewd and correct. 
 Every con-crete thing, every concrete something, stands in multifarious and often con-tradictory relations to everything else,ergo it is itself and some other. 
 Note 3 (at the end of Chapter 2, Sec-tion 1 of Book II of the Logic ). 
 “T h e L a w o f C o n t r a d i c t i o n . 
” “If now the primary Determinations of Reflection—Identity, Variety and Oppo-sition—are established in a proposition,then the determination into which theypass over as into their truth (namely Con-tradiction) should much more so be com-prehended and expressed in a proposition:a l l t h i n g s a r e c o n t r a d i c t o-r y i n t h e m s e l v e s , in this meaning, that this proposition as opposed to the others expresses much better the truth and essence of things . 
—Contradiction, which emerges in Opposition, is no more than developed Nothing; and this is alreadycontained in Identity, and occurred in theexpression that the law of identity states nothing. 
 This negation further determines itself into Variety and into Opposition,which now is posited Contradiction. 
 “But it has been a fundamental prejudice of hitherto existing logic and of ordinaryimagination that Contradiction is a deter-mination having less essence and immanence than Identity; but indeed, if there wereany question of rank, and the two deter-minations had to be fixed as separate, Con-tradiction would have to be taken as themore profound and more fully essential. 
 For as opposed to it Identity is only the determination of simple immediacy, orof dead Being, while Contradiction is the root of all movement and v i t a l i -t y, and it is only insofar as it contains a Con-tradiction that anything m o v e s a n d h a s i m p u l s e a n d a c t i v i t y . 
 “Ordinarily Contradiction is removed, first of all from things, from the existentand the true in general; and it is assertedthat there is nothing contradictory. 
 Nextit is shifted into subjective reflection, which alone is said to posit it by relat-ing and comparing it. 
 But really it doesnot exist even in this reflection, for it isimpossible to imagine or to think anythingcontradictory. 
 Indeed, Contradiction, bothin actuality and in thinking reflection, is considered an accident, a kind of abnormal-ity or paroxysm of sickness which will soonpass away. 
 “With regard to the assertion that Con-tradiction does not exist, that it is non-existent, we may disregard this statement. 
 In every experience there must be an ab-solute determination of Essence—in every actuality as well as in every concept. 
 The same remark has already been made above, under Infinity, which is Contradic-tion as it appears in the sphere of Being. 
But ordinary experience itself declares thatat least there are a number of contradic-tory things, arrangements and so forth, the contradiction being present in them and not merely in an external reflection. 
 Butit must further not be taken only as anabnormality which occurs just here andthere; it is the Negative in its essentialdetermination, the principle of all self-movement , which consists of nothing else but an exhibition of Contradiction. 
 Exter-nal, sensible motion is itself its immediateexistence. 
 Something moves, not becauseit is here at one point of time and thereat another, but because at one and the same point of time it is here and not here, and in this here both is and is not. 
 Wemust grant the old dialecticians the contra-dictions which they prove in motion; butwhat follows is not that there is no mo-tion, but rather that motion is existent Contradiction itself. 
 “And similarly internal self-movement proper, or impulse in general (the appe-titive force or nisus of the monad, the en-telechy of absolutely simple Essence), isnothing else than the fact that something isin itself and is also the deficiency or the neg-ative of itself, in one and the same respect. 
 A b s t r a c t self-identity h a s n o v i -t a l i t y but the fact that Positive in itself is negativity causes it to pass outside itselfand t o c h a n g e . 
 Something therefore is living only insofar as it contains Contra-diction, and is that force which can bothcomprehend and endure Contradiction. 
 But if an existent something cannot in its pos-itive determination also encroach on its negative, cannot hold fast the one in the other and contain Contradiction within it-self, then it is not living unity, or Ground,but perishes in Contradiction. 
 Speculativethought consists only in this, that thoughtholds fast Contradiction and itself in Con-tradiction and not in that it allows itself to be dominated by it—as happens to imag-ination—or suffers its determinations to beresolved into others, or into Nothing. 
”(67-70) Movement and “ self -m o v e m e n t ” (this NB! arbitrary (independent), spon-taneous, internally-necessary movement), “change,’’ “movement and vitality,” “theprinciple of all self-movement,” “impulse”(Trieb) to “movement” and to “activity”—the opposite to “ d e a d B e i n g ”—who would believe that this is the core of “He-gelianism,” of abstract and abstrusen (pon-derous, absurd?) Hegelianism?? This corehad to be discovered, understood, hin-überretten,* laid bare, refined, which isprecisely what Marx and Engels did. 
 The idea of universal movement and change (1813 Logic ) was conjectured before its application to life and society. 
 In regardto society it was proclaimed earlier (1847)than it was demonstrated in applicationto man (1859). 
 53 “In movement, impulse, and the like, the simplicity of these determinations con-ceals the contradiction from imagination; but this contradiction immediately standsrevealed in the determinations of relation. 
The most trivial examples—above and be-low, right and left, father and son, and so * rescued— Ed. 
 on without end—all contain Contradiction in one term. 
 That is above which is not below; ‘above’ is determined only as not being ‘below,’ and is only insofar as thereis a ‘below,’ and conversely: one deter-mination implies its opposite. 
 Father isthe Other of son, and son of father, andeach exists only as this Other of the other; and also the one determination exists only in relation to the other: their Being is onesubsistence......... (70) “Thus although Imagination everywhere has Contradiction for content, it neverbecomes aware of it; it remains an external reflection, which passes from Likeness to Unlikeness, or from negative relation tointro-reflectedness of the different terms. 
It keeps these two determinations externalto each other, and has in mind only theseand not their transition, which is the es-sential matter and contains the Contradic-tion. 
—On the other hand, intelligent reflec-tion, if we may mention this here, consistsin the understanding and enunciating ofContradiction. 
 It does not express the con-cept of things and their relations, and has only determinations of imagination for ma-terial and content; but still it relates them,and the relation contains their contradic-tion, allowing their concept to show throughthe contradiction. 
—Thinking Reason, onthe other hand, sharpens (so to speak) the blunt difference of Variety, the mere manifold of imagination, into essentialdifference, that is, Opposition. 
 The mani-fold entities acquire activity and vitalityin relation to one another only when drivenon to the sharp point of Contradiction; thence they draw negativity, which is the inherent pulsation of self-movement andvitality.... 
” (70-71) *The word “received” is crossed out in the MS. 
— Ed. 
NB (1) Ordinary imagination grasps dif-ference and contradiction, but not thetransition from the one to the other, t h i s h o w e v e r i s t h e m o s t i m p o r t a n t . 
 (2) Intelligence and understanding. 
 Intelligence grasps contradiction, enunciates it, brings things into rela-tion with one another, allows the “concept to show through the contra-diction,” but does not express the concept of things and their relations. 
 (3) Thinking reason (understanding) sharpens the blunt difference of vari-ety, the mere manifold of imagination, into essential difference, into opposi-tion . 
 Only when raised to the peak of contradiction, do the manifold enti-ties become active (regsam) and livelyin relation to one another, they re-ceive* acquire that negativity which is the i n h e r e n t p u l s a t i o n o f s e l f -m o v e m e n t a n dv i t a l i t y . 
 Subdivisions: Der Grund—(ground) (1) Absolute Ground—die Grundlage (the foundation). 
 “Form and Matter. 
” “Con-tent. 
” (2) Determinate Ground (as the ground [for] a determinate content) Its transition to Conditioning Media-tion die bedingende Vermittelung (3) The Thing-in-itself (transition to Exist-ence ). 
 Note. 
 “ The Law of Ground . 
” *“relation” of causes— Ed. 
 **matter— Ed. 
Customary proposition: “Everything has its sufficient Ground. 
” “In general this just means that what is must be considered not as an existent im-mediate, but as a posited entity. 
 We mustnot remain at immediate Determinate Be-ing or at determinateness in general, butmust pass back to its Ground.... 
” (76) It is superfluous to add: sufficient Ground. 
 What is insufficient, is not Ground. 
 Leibnitz, who made the law of sufficient ground the basis of his philosophy, un-derstood this more profoundly. 
 “ L e i b -n i t z especially opposed the sufficiency of Ground to c a u s a l i t y in its strict meaning of m e c h a n i c a l efficacy. 
” (76) He looked for “Beziehung” der Ursach-en* (77),— —“the whole as essential unity. 
” He looked for ends , but teleology does not belong here, according to Hegel, but to the doctrine of the No-tion. 
 ...“The question cannot therefore be asked, how Form is added to Essence; for Form is only the showing of Essence in itself—it is its own immanent (sic!) Re-flection.... 
” (81) Form is essential. 
 Essence is formed. 
 In one way or another also in dependence on Essence.... 
 Essence as formless identity (of itself with itself) becomes matter . 
 (82) “...It” (die Materie**) “is the real foun-dation or substratum of Form.... 
” (82) “If abstraction is made from every de-termination and Form of a Something, indeterminate Matter remains. 
 Matter is a pure abstract. 
 (—Matter cannot be seen or felt, etc. 
—what is seen or felt is a de-terminate Matter , that is, a unity of Matter and Form). 
” (82) Matter is not the Ground of Form, but the unity of Ground and Grounded. 
 (83)Matter is the passive , Form is the active (tätiges). 
 (83) “Matter must be formed, and Form must materialise itself.... 
” (84) “Now this, which appears as the activity of Form, is equally the proper movementof Matter itself.... 
” (85-86) ...“Both—the activity of Form and the movement of Matter—are the same.... 
 Mat-ter is determined as such or necessarily hasa Form; and Form is simply material,persistent Form. 
” (86) Note: “Formal Method of Explanation from Tautological Grounds. 
” Very often, Hegel says, especially in the physical sciences, “Grounds” are explainedtautologically: the movement of the earthis explained by the “attractive force” ofthe sun. 
 And what then is attractive force?It is also movement!! (92) Empty tautol-ogy: why does this man go to town? Be-cause of the attractive force of the town!(93) It also happens in science that at firstmolecules, the ether, “electrical matter”(95-96), etc. 
, are put forward as “groundand then it turns out “that they’’ (these con-cepts) “are determinations deduced from that for which they are meant to be thegrounds—hypotheses and figments derivedby an uncritical reflection.... 
” (96) Or it issaid that we “do not know the inner natureitself of these forces and classes of matter...” (96) then there remains indeed nothing to “explain,” but one must simply limit one-self to the facts.... 
NB *real Ground— Ed. 
 **“multiple”—“content determinations, relations and consid-erations”— Ed. 
 *** empty— Ed. 
 **** Hegel materialistically turned upside down— Ed. 
 ***** It coincides. 
— Ed. 
Der reale Grund*... is not tautology, but already “some other determination of Content. 
” (97) On the question of “Ground” (Grund), Hegel remarks inter alia: “If it is said of Nature that it is the ground of the world, then what is calledNature is identical with the world, and the world is nothing but Nature itself. 
” (100) On the other hand, “if Nature is to bethe world, a manifold of determinationsis added externally.... 
” Since everything has “mehrere”—“Inhalts-bestimmungen, Verhältnisse und Rücksich-ten,”** so any number of arguments for and against can be put forward. 
 (103) That is what Socrates and Plato calledsophistry. 
 Such arguments do not contain“the whole extent of the thing,” they do not“exhaust” it (in the sense “of constituting its connections” and “containing all” its sides). 
 The transition of Ground (Grund) into condition (Bedingung). 
 If I am not mistaken, there is much mysticism and leeres*** pedantry inthese conclusions of Hegel, but the basicidea is one of genius: that of the univer-sal, all-sided, vital connection of every-thing with everything and the reflec-tion of this connection—materialistischauf den Kopf gestellter Hegel****—inhuman concepts, which must likewisebe hewn, treated, flexible, mobile, rel-ative, mutually connected, united in opposites in order to embrace the world. 
And purely logical elaboration? Das fällt zusam-men***** It must coincide, as induction and deduction in Capital /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR Continuation of the work of Hegel and Marx must consist in the d i a l e c -t i c a l elaboration of the history of hu-man thought, science and technique. 
 A river and the drops in this river. 
 The position of every drop, its relation to the others; its connection with the others; the direction of its movement; its speed; the line of the movement—straight, curved, circular, etc. 
—upwards,downwards. 
 The sum of the movement. 
Concepts, as registration of individual aspects of the movement, of individ-ual drops ( =“things”), of individual “streams ,” etc. 
 There you have à peu près* the picture of the world accordingto Hegel’s Logic ,—of course minus God and the Absolute. 
 “When all the Conditions of a thing are present, it enters into existence.... 
” (116) Very good! What has the Absolute Idea and idealism to do with it? Amusing, this “derivation” of ... exis-tence .... 
The word “moment ” is often used by Hegel in the sense of moment of c o n n e c -t i o n , moment of concate-nation S E C T I O N T W O: APPEARANCE The first phrase: “ Essence must appear .... 
” (119) The appearance of Essence is (1) Existenz (Thing); (2) Appearance (Erschei-nung). 
 (“Appearance is what the Thingis in itself, or its truth” p. 
 120. 
 “The intro-reflected self-existent world stands opposedto the world of Appearance.... 
” (120) (3)Verhältnis (relation) and Actuality . 
 Incidentally: “Demonstration in general is mediated cognition.... 
” (121). 
 ...“The various kinds of Being demand or contain their own kind of mediation;consequently the nature of demonstrationtoo is different for each....... 
” (121) And again ... on the existence of God!! This wretched God, as soon asthe word existence is mentioned, hetakes offence. 
 Existence differs from Being by its medi-ation (Vermittlung: 124). 
 [?By concrete-ness and Connection?] ...“The Thing-in-itself and its mediated Being are both contained in Existence,and each is an Existence; the Thing-in-it-self exists and is the essential Existence of the Thing, while mediated Being is itsunessential Existence.... 
” (125) ?The Thing-in-itself is related to Being as the essential to the non-essential? ...“The latter” (Ding-an-sich) “is not sup-posed to contain in itself any determinatemultiplicity, and consequently obtains this only when brought under external reflec-tion, but remains indifferent to it (—TheThing-in-itself has colour only in relationto the eye, smell in relation to the nose,and so forth. 
)...” (126) ...“A Thing has the Property of effecting this or that in an Other, and of disclosing itself in a peculiar manner in its relationto it.... 
” (129) “The Thing-in-itself thusexists essentially.... 
” (131) The Note deals with “The Thing-in-itself of Transcendental Idealism.... 
” ...“The Thing-in-itself as such is no more than the empty abstraction from all deter-minateness, of which it is admitted thatnothing can be known just because it ismeant to be the abstraction from all deter-mination.... 
” (131) Transcendental idealism ... places “all determinateness of things (both with regardto form and to content) in consciousness...”(131) “accordingly, from this point of view,it falls within me, the subject, that I seethe leaves of a tree not as black but as green, the sun as round and not as square, and taste sugar as sweet and not as bit-ter; that I determine, the first and secondstrokes of a clock as successive and not assimultaneous, and determine the first to beneither the cause nor the effect of the second, and so forth” (131).... 
 Hegel further makes the reservation that he has hereinvestigated only the question of the *“external reflection”— Ed. 
 **thinghood— Ed. 
 *** property— Ed. 
 **** “substance”— Ed. 
the core = against sub-jectivism and the split between the Thing-in-itself and appearances law (of appearances)Thing-in-itself and “äußerliche Refle-xion. 
”* “The essential inadequacy of the stand-point at which this philosophy halts con-sists in this, that it clings to the abstractThing-in-itself as to an ultimate determi-nation; it opposes Reflection, or the deter-minateness and multiplicity of the Prop-erties, to the Thing-in-itself; while in fact the Thing-in-itself essentially has thisExternal Reflection in itself, and deter-mines itself as an entity endowed with itsproper determinations, or Properties; whenceit is seen that the abstraction of the Thing, which makes it pure Thing-in-itself, is an untrue determination. 
” (132) ...“Many different Things are in essen-tial Reciprocal Action by virtue of theirProperties; Property is this very recipro-cal relation, and apart from it the Thing is nothing.... 
” (133) Die Dingheit** passes over into Eigen-schaft. 
*** (134) Eigenschaft into “matter” or “Stoff”**** (“things consist of sub-stance”), etc. 
 “Appearance at this point is Essence in its Existence.... 
” (144) “Appearance is the unity of semblance and Existence.... 
”(145) Unity in appearances: “This unity is the Law of Appearance. 
 Law therefore is thepositive element in the mediation of the Apparent. 
” (148) Here in general utter obscurity. 
 But there is a vital thought, evident-ly: the concept of law is one of the stages of the cognition by man of unity and connection , of the recip-rocal dependence and totality of the world process. 
 The “treatment” and “twisting” of words and concepts towhich Hegel devotes himself here isa struggle against making the con-cept of law absolute, against simplify-ing it, against making a fetish of it. 
 NB for modern physics!!! “This enduring persistence which belongs to Appearance in Law.... 
” (149) “Law is the Reflection of Appearance into identity with itself. 
” (149) (Law is the identical in appearances: “the Reflectionof Appearance into identity with itself. 
”) ...“This identity, the foundation of Ap-pearance, which constitutes Law, is thepeculiar moment of Appearance.... 
” (150) “Hence Law is not beyond Appearance, but is immediately present in it; the realm of Laws is the quiescent (Hegel’s italics) reflection of the existing or appearingworld.... 
” This is a remarkably materialistic and remarkably appropriate (withthe word “ruhige”*) determination. 
Law takes the quiescent—and there-fore law, every law, is narrow, in-complete, approximate. 
 * “quiescent”— Ed. 
NB Law is the endur-ing (the persisting) in appearances (Law is the identical in appearances) NB Law = the quiescent reflection of appearances NB *deficiency— Ed. 
 **Totality of Appearance— Ed. 
“Existence passes back into Law as into its Ground; Appearance contains them both—simple Ground and the dissolving movement of the appearing universe, ofwhich Ground is the essentiality. 
”“Hence law is essential appearance. 
” (150) Ergo, law and essence are concepts of the same kind (of the same order),or rather, of the same degree, expressingthe deepening of man’s knowledge ofphenomena, the world, etc. 
 The movement of the universe in ap-pearances (Bewegung des erscheinenden Uni-versums), in the essentiality of this move-ment, is law. 
 “The realm of Laws is the q u i e s -c e n t content of Appearance; Appearance is this same content, but presents itselfin unquiet change and as Reflection intoother.... 
 Appearance, therefore, as againstLaw is the totality , for it contains Law, b u t a l s o m o r e , namely the moment of self-moving Form. 
” (151) But further on, although unclearly, it is admitted, it seems, p. 
 154,that law can make imp for this Man-gel* and embrace both the negative side and the Totalität, der Erschei-nung** (especially 154 i. 
 f. 
). 
 Re-turn to this! The World in and for itself is identical with the World of Appearances, but at theNB Law is essential appear-ance NB (Law is the reflection of the essential in the move-ment of the universe) (appearance, totality) ((law = part)) (Appearance is r i c h e r than law)ee same time it is opposite to it. 
 (158) What is positive in the one is negative in the other. 
 What is evil in the World of Appear-ances is good in the world which is in andfor itself, Cf. 
—Hegel says here— The Phe-nomenology of Mind , p. 
 121 et seq. 
 “The Appearing and the Essential World are each ... the independent whole of Exist-ence. 
 One was to have been only reflectedExistence, and the other only immediateExistence; but each continues itself inthe other, and consequently in itself is theidentity of these two moments.... 
 Both in the first instance are independent, but they are independent only as totalities,and they are this insofar a each essentiallyhas in itself the moment of the other.... 
”(150-160) The essence here is that both the world of appearances and the world initself are moments of man’s knowledge of nature, stages, alterations or deepen-ings (of knowledge). 
 The shifting ofthe world in itself further and furtherfrom the world of appearances—that is what is so far still not to be seen in Hegel. 
NB. 
 Have not Hegel’s “moments” of the concept the significance of “mo-ments” of transition? ...“ Thus Law is E s s e n t i a l R e -l a t i o n . 
” (160) (Hegel’s italics) (Law is r e l a t i o n . 
 This NB for the Machists and other agnostics, and for theKantians, etc. 
 Relation of essences or be-tween essences. 
 The term world expresses the formless totality of multifariousness.... 
” (160) And the third chapter (“ Essential Rela-tion ”) begins with the proposition: “The( ( truth of Appearance is Essential Relation.... 
” (161) S u b d i v i s i o n s : The relation of W h o l e to P a r t s ; this relation passes into the followingone (sic!! (p. 
 168)):—of Force to its Man-ifestation ;—of Inner to Outer . 
—The tran-sition to Substance , Actuality . 
 ...“The truth of the relation consists, then, in mediation .... 
” (167) “Transition” to Force: “Force is the neg-ative unity into which the contradictionof Whole and Parts has resolved itself; itis the truth of that first Relation. 
” (170) ((This is one of 1,000 similar passages in Hegel, which arouse the fury of naïve philosophers like Pearson, the author ofThe Grammar of Science . 
 54—He quotes a similar passage and exclaims in fury: What a galimatias is being taught in our schools!! And in a certain limited sense he is right. 
 To teach that is stupid. 
 One must first of all e x t r a c t the material-istic dialectics from it. 
 Nine-tenths of it,however, is chaff, rubbish. 
)) Force makes its appearance as “belong-ing” (als angehörig) (171) “to the existingThing or Matter.... 
” “When therefore it isasked how the Thing or Matter comes tohave a Force, then the Force appears as connected with it externally, and impressed on the Thing by all alien power. 
” (171) ...“This is apparent in all natural, scientfic, and, in general, intellectualdevelopment; and it is essential to under-stand that the First, when as yet Somethingis internal , or in its concept , is, for this reason, only its immediate and passive ex-istence.... 
” (181) Feuerbach daran “knüpft an. 
”*** Down with Gott, there remains Natur . 
****T The beginning of everything can be regarded as inner—passive—andat the same time as outer. 
 But what is interesting here is not that, but something else: Hegel’scriterion of dialectics that has acci-dentally slipped in: “ i n a l l n a t -u r a l, s c i e n t i f i c a n d i n -t e l l e c t u a l d e v e l o p m e n t ”: here we have a g r a i n of profound truth in the mystical integument ofHegelianism! Example: the germ of a man, says Hegel, is only internal man, dem Anderssein Preis-gegebenes,* the passive. 
 Gott** at first is not yet Spirit. 
 “ I m m e d i a t e l y, t h e r e f o r e, G o d i s only N a t u r e . 
” (182) (This is also characteristic!!) * something given up to otherness— Ed. 
 **God— Ed. 
 *** “links up to this”— Ed. 
 **** nature— Ed. 
 S E C T I O N T H R E E: A C T U A L I T Y *Here Lenin’s manuscript gives the list of chapters of Section III: 1) “The Alsolute”; 2) “Actuality”; 3) “The Absolute Relation. 
”— Ed.... 
“Actuality is the unity of Essence and Existence.... 
” (184) Subdivisions: 1) “ T h e A b s o l u t e ”— 2) Actuality proper. 
 “ Actuality , Possibil-ity and Necessity constitute the formal moments of the Absolute. 
” 3) “AbsoluteRelation”: Substance . 
* “In it itself” (dem Absoluten) “there is no Becoming” (187)—and other nonsense about the Absolute .... 
 The Absolute is the absolute Absolute...The Attribute is a relative Absolute...In a “note” Hegel speaks (all too gener-ally and obscurely) of the defects of the philosophy of Spinoza and Leibnitz. 
 Inter alia note:“The one-sidedness of one philosophic principle is generally faced by its oppositeone-sidedness, and, as everywhere, totalityat least is found as a dispersed complete-ness . 
” (197) Actuality is higher than Being , and higher than Existence . 
 (1) Being is Imme-diate“B e i n g i s n o t y e t a c t u a l . 
” (200) It passes into other. 
usually: from one extreme to the other totality = (in the shape of) dispersed completenessBBBBBB *At this point Lenin’s manuscript continues in a new notebook. 
— Ed. 
 Hegel, Werke , Bd. 
 VI, Berlin, 1840. 
— Ed. 
(2) Existence (it passes into Ap-pearance) (3) Actuality ...“Actuality also stands higher than Exist-ence” (200).... 
 ...“Real Necessity is a relation which is full of content ”.... 
 “But this Necessity is at the same time relative.... 
” (211) “Absolute Necessity then is the truth into which Actuality and Possibility in general pass back, as well as Formal andReal Necessity. 
” (215) (Continued)*...(End of Volume II of the Logic , the Doc-trine of Essence)... It is to be noted that in the small Logic (the Encyclopaedia ) 55 the same thing is expounded very often more clearly, withconcrete examples. 
 Cf. 
 idem Engels andKurio Fischer. 
 56 On the question of “possibility,” Hegel notes the emptiness of this category and says in the E n c y c l o p a e d i a : “Whether a thing is possible or impossible depends on the content, i. 
e. 
, on the sum-total of the moments of Actuality which inits unfolding discloses itself to be Ne-cessity. 
” ( Encyclopaedia , Vol. 
 VI, p. 
 287,** § 143, Addendum. 
) “T h e s u m -t o t a l, t h e e n -t i r e t y o f t h e m o m e n t s o fA c t u a l i t y , which in its unfold-ing discloses itself to be Necessity. 
”—arises out of Ground, out of conditions, but it still lacks the unity of “Reflectionand immediacy. 
”unity of Existenceand Being-in-Self(Ansichsein) BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR *to man— Ed. 
 **Logic —Ed. 
 *** Hegel, Werke , Bd. 
 IV, Berlin, 1834. 
— Ed. 
The unfolding of the sum-total of the moments of actuality NB = the essence of dialectical cognition. 
 Cf. 
 in the same Encyclopaedia , Vol. 
 VI, p. 
 289, the eloquent words on the vanity ofmore delight at the wealth and flux of thephenomena of nature and on the neces-sity ...“of advancing to a closer insight into the i n n e r harmony and u n i f o r m i t y o f n a t u r e .... 
” (289) ( C l o s e n e s s t o m a t e r i a l i s m . 
) Ibidem. 
 Encyclopaedia , p. 
 292: “Developed Actuality, as the coincident alternation of Inner and Outer, the alternation of theiropposite motions combined in a singlemotion, is Necessity. 
” E n c y c l o p a e d i a , Vol. 
 VI, p. 
 294: ...“Necessity is blind only insofar as it is not understood.... 
” Ibidem, p. 
 295 “it happens to him” (dem Menschen*)... “that from his activity therearises something quite different from whathe had meant and willed.... 
” Ibidem, p. 
 301 “ Substance is an essen-tial s t a g e i n t h e p r o c e s s o f d e v e l o p m e n t of the Idea .... 
” Read: an important stage in the proc-ess of development of human knowl-edge of nature and matter . 
 Logik ,** Vol. 
 IV ...“It” (die Substanz) “is the Being in all Being.... 
” (220)*** The Relation of Substantiality passes over into the Relation of Causality. 
 (223)BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB ...“Substance attains ... Actuality only when it has become Cause.... 
” (225) On the one hand, knowledge of mat-ter must be deepened to knowledge (tothe concept) of Substance in order tofind the causes of phenomena. 
 On theother hand, the actual cognition of the cause is the deepening of knowledge from the externality of phenomena tothe Substance. 
 Two types of examplesshould explain thus: 1) from the his-tory of natural science, and 2) from thehistory of philosophy. 
 More exactly: it is not “examples” that should be here—comparaison n’est pas raison,*—but the quintessence of the history of both the one and the other # the his-tory of technique. 
 ...“Effect contains nothing whatever which Cause does not contain...” (226) und um-gekehrt **.... 
 Cause and effect, ergo, are merely mo-ments of universal reciprocal dependence,of (universal) connection, of the recip-rocal concatenation of events, merely links in the chain of the development of matter. 
 NB: “It is the same fact which displays itself first as Cause and then as Effect,—here as peculiar persistence and there as posited-ness or determination in an Other. 
” (227) The all-sidedness and all-embrac-ing character of the interconnection NB of the world, which is only one-* comparison is not proof— Ed. 
 **and vice versa —Ed. 
NB *external stimulus— Ed. 
sidedly, fragmentarily and incom-pletely expressed by causality. 
 “But we may here and now observe that, insofar as the relation of cause and effect is admitted (although in an improper sense), effect cannot be greater than cause; foreffect is nothing further than the manifes-tation of cause. 
” (230) And further about history. 
 Hegel says that it is customary in history to quote anecdotes as the minor “causes” of major events—in fact they are only occasions , only äußere Erregung,* which “the innerspirit of the event would not have required. 
”(230) “Consequently, these arabesques ofhistory, where a huge shape is depicted as growing from a slender stalk, are a spright-ly but a most superficial treatment. 
” (Ibi-dem) This “inner spirit”—cf. 
 Plekhanov 57— is an idealistic, mystical , but a very profound indication of the historicalcauses of events. 
 Hegel subsumes his-tory completely under causality and un-derstands causality a thousand times more profoundly and richly than themultitude of “savants” nowadays. 
 “Thus a stone in motion is cause; its movement is a determination which it has,while besides this it contains many otherdeterminations of colour, shape, and soon, which do not enter into its causal na-ture. 
” (232) Causality, as usually understood by us, is only a small particle of universal interconnection, but (a materialist ex-in history “minor causes of major events” tension) a particle not of the subjective, but of the objectively real intercon-nection. 
 “But the m o v e m e n t of the Determi-nate Relation of C a u s a l i t y has now resulted in this, that the cause is notmerely extinguished in the effect, and with it the effect too (as happens in Formal Causality),—but the cause in its extinction,in the effect, becomes again; that effectvanishes into cause, but equally becomesagain in it. 
 Each of these determinationscancels itself in its positing and posits it-self in its cancellation; what takes place is not an external transition of causalityfrom one substratum to another, but thisits becoming other is at the same timeits own positing. 
 Causality, then, presup-poses or conditions itself. 
” (235) “The movement of the relation of cau-sality” = in fact: the movement of mat-ter, respective the movement of history,grasped, mastered in its inner connec-tion up to one or other degree of breadth or depth.... 
 “At this point Reciprocity presents itself as a reciprocal causality of presupposedsubstances conditioning each other; eachis, in relation to the other, at once active and passive substance. 
” (240) “In Reciprocity, original Causality pre-sents itself as an arising out of its negation(or passivity) and as a passing away intoit—as a Becoming.... 
 “Necessity and Causality have, then, van-ished in it; they contain both the imme-diate identity (as connection and relation ) and the absolute substantiality of dis-“connection and relation” “unity of sub-stance in the distinct” relation, mediation necessity does not disap-pear, when it becomes freedomtincts , and therefore their absolute con-tingency,—the original unity of substan-tial variety, hence absolute contradiction. 
 Necessity is Being, because it is;—the self-unity of Being, which has itself for ground ; but, conversely, because it has a ground,it is not Being, it is nothing whateverbut Semblance , relation or mediation . 
 Cau-sality is this posited transition of original Being, or cause, into Semblance or merepositedness, and conversely of positednessinto originality; but the identity itselfof Being and Semblance is, still, inner Ne-cessity. 
 This internality (or Being-in-Self) transcends the movement of Causality; and concurrently, the substantiality of the sideswhich are in relation is lost—Necessityreveals itself. 
 Necessity does not becomeFreedom because it vanishes, but onlybecause its identity (as yet an inner iden-tity) is manifested. 
” (241-242) When one reads Hegel on causality, it appears strange at first glance that he dwells so relatively lightly on this theme, beloved of the Kantians. 
 Why?Because, indeed, for him causality isonly one of the determinations of univer-sal connection, which he had alreadycovered earlier, in his entire exposition, much more deeply and all-sidedly; al-ways and from the very outset empha-sising this connection, the reciprocaltransitions, etc. 
, etc. 
 It would be veryinstructive to compare the “ b i r t h -p a n g s ” of neo-empiricism (respective “physical idealism”) with the solutions or rather with the dialectical methodof Hegel. 
 It is to be noted also that in the E n c y -c l o p a e d i a Hegel stresses the inadequacy and emptiness of the bare concept of “re-ciprocal action. 
” Vol. 
 VI, p. 
 308*: “Reciprocity is undoubtedly the proxi-mate truth of the relation of cause andeffect, and stands, so to say, on the thresh-old of the Notion, nevertheless, precisely on this account one should not rest con-tent with applying this relation, inso-far as it is a matter of conceptual cogni-tion. 
 If one gets no further than considering a given content merely from the pointof view of reciprocity, then such an atti-tude is in fact quite without concept; it is then merely a matter of a dry fact, andthe requirement of mediation, which isthe point of immediate concern in apply-ing the relation of causality, still remainsunsatisfied. 
 On closer examination, the deficiency in the application of the rela-tion of reciprocal action is seen to be thatthis relation, instead of being the equiva-lent of the Notion, has itself to be graspedfirst of all. 
 And this occurs through itstwo sides not being left as an immediate datum but, as was shown in the two pre-ceding paragraphs, being recognised as mo-ments of a third, higher determination,which is precisely the Notion. 
 If, forexample, we regard the customs of theSpartans as the effect of their constitu-tion, and the latter, conversely, as the effect of their customs, such a view mayperhaps be correct, but it is a conception that gives no final satisfaction , because in point of fact it enables neither the con-stitution nor the customs of this people * Hegel, Werke , Bd. 
 VI, Berlin, 1840. 
— Ed. 
NBmere “recipro-city” = emptiness the require-ment of med-iation, (of connection), that is the point at issue in applying the relation of causality NB to be understood. 
 Such understanding can only come about when these two aspects, and likewise all the other special aspects of the life and the history of the Spartansare recognised to be grounded in thisNotion. 
” (308-309)— — — — — At the end of the second volume of the Logic , Vol. 
 IV , p. 
 243 , in the transition to the “Notion,” the determination is given:“the Notion, the realm of Subjectivity, orof Freedom.... 
” NB Freedom = Subjectivity (“or”) End, Consciousness, Endeavour NBall the “spe-cial aspects” and the whole (Begriff”*) B O O K T H R E E: SUBJECTIVE LOGIC OR THE DOCTRINE OF THE NOTION BOOK THREE: SUBJECTIVE LOGIC OR THE DOCTRINE OF THE NOTION Vol. 
 V. 
 The Science of Logic Part II: S u b j e c t i v e L o g i c or t h e D o c t r i n e o f t h e N o t i o n ON THE NOTION IN GENERAL *previous works— Ed. 
 **“ossified material”— Ed. 
 *** “to render fluid”— Ed. 
 **** Hegel, Werke , Bd. 
 V, Berlin, 1834. 
— Ed. 
 ***** of the Notion— Ed. 
In the first two parts, says Hegel, I had no Vorarbeiten,* but here, on the otherhand, there is “verknöchertes Material”** (which it is necessary “in Flüssigkeit brin-gen”***...) (3)**** “Being and Essence are the moments of its becoming” (= des Begriffs). 
***** (5) Should be inverted: concepts are the highest product of the brain, the highest product of matter. 
 “Accordingly Objective Logic, which con-siders Being and Essence , really constitutes the genetic exposition of the Notion . 
” (6) 9-10: The great significance of the phi-losophy of Spinoza as the philosophyof substance (this standpoint is veryadvanced , but it is incomplete and not the most advanced: in generalthe refutation of a philosophic system does not mean discarding it, but de-veloping it further, not replacing itby another, one-sided opposed system,but incorporating it into something *in fine—at the end— Ed. 
 **“to speak ill” of imagination and memory— Ed. 
 *** “the summit of thought”— Ed. 
 **** “the incomprehensible”— Ed. 
 ***** truth— Ed. 
 ****** sensation on and intuition— Ed. 
more advanced). 
 In Spinoza’s system there is no free, independent, conscious subject (it lacks “ the freedom and inde-pendence of the self-conscious subject ”) (10), but in Spinoza also t h o u g h t is an attribute of substance (10 i. 
 f. 
*) 13 i. 
 f. 
: Incidentally—just as at one time it was the fashion in philosophy “das Schlimme nachzusagen” der Einbil-dungskraft und den Gedächtnisse**—sonow it is the fashion to belittle thesignificance of the “notion” ( = “das höchste des Denkens”***) and to praise “das Unbegriefliche ”**** allusion to Kant? . 
 Passing to criticism of K a n t i a n -i s m , Hegel regards as Kant’s great merit (15) the advancement of the idea of the “transcendental unity ofapperception” (the unity of the con-sciousness in which the Begriff is cre-ated), but he reproaches Kant for hiso n e -s i d e d n e s s and s u b j e c -t i v i s m : “The object is truly in and for it-self only as it is in thought; as it is inintuition or ideation, it is appear-ance.... 
” (16) (Hegel raises Kant’s ideal-ism from being subjective to being objective and absolute).... 
 Kant admits the objectivity of con-cepts (Wahrheit***** is their object),but all the same leaves them subjective. 
 He makes Gefühl und Anschau-ung****** p recede understanding (Ver-from intui-tion to cognition of objective reality... /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR stand). 
 Hegel speaks of this as follows: “Now, first, with regard to this relation of the understanding or the Notion to thestages which are supposed to precede it,it is of importance what science it is thatis being treated, in order to determine theform of these stages. 
 In our science, since it is pure logic, these stages are Being and Essence . 
 In psychology, sensation and in-tuition and also ideation in general pre-cede understanding. 
 In the Phenomenologyof Mind, since it is the doctrine of con-sciousness, the ascent was made through the stages of sensuous consciousness and,next, perception, to understanding. 
” (17) In Kant the exposition is very “incom-plete” here. 
 After that—the CHIEF THING — ...“The Notion must not here be con-sidered as an act of self-consciousunderstanding, or as subjective under-standing: what we have to do with is the Notion in and for itself, whichconstitutes a STAGE AS WELL OF NATURE AS OF SPIRIT. 
 LIFE, OR ORGANIC NATURE, IS THAT STAGEOF NATURE AT WHICH THE NO-TION EMERGES . 
” (18) There follows a very interesting passage (pp. 
 19-27) where Hegel refutes Kant , precisely epistemologcally (Engels probably had this passage in mind when he wrote in Ludwig Feuerbach58 that the main point against Kant had already been made by Hegel, insofar as this was possiblefrom an idealistic standpoint),—exposing Kant’s duality and inconsistency, his, so to speak, vacillation between empiricism( = materialism) and idealism, Hegel him-self arguing w h o l l y a n d e x c l u -The “eve” of Kant belittles the power of reason the more consistent idealist clings to G o d !s i v e l y from the standpoint of a more consistent idealism. 
 Begriff is still not the highest concept: still higher is the I d e a = the unity of Begriff and Reality. 
 “‘It is only a notion’ is a thing com-monly said; and not only the Idea, but sen-suous, spatial, and temporally palpableexistence is opposed to the Notion, assomething which is more excellent thanit. 
 And the abstract is counted of lessworth than the concrete, because from the former so much of that kind of material has been omitted. 
 To those who hold thisview, the process of abstraction means thatfor our subjective needs one or another char-acteristic is taken out of the concrete insuch a manner that, while so many other properties and modifications of the ob-ject are omitted, it loses nothing in valueor dignity. 
 They are the real and are reck-oned as counting in full, only they areleft on the other side; and it is only theincapacity of understanding to absorb such riches that forces it to rest content with meagre abstraction. 
 But if the given ma-terial of intuition and the manifold ofideation are taken as the real in opposi-tion to that which is thought and to theNotion, then this is a view the renuncia-tion of which is not only a condition of philosophy, but is assumed even by reli-gion; for how can these be needed andhave significance if the fugitive and super-ficial appearance of the sensuous and the in-dividual are taken for the truth?. 
. 
 Con-sequently, abstracting thought must not be considered as a mere setting-aside ofthe sensuous material, whose reality is said not to be lowered thereby; but it is its transcendence, and the reduction of it (as mere appearance) to the essential, which manifests itself in the Notion only. 
” (19-21) Essentially , Hegel is completely right as opposed to Kant. 
 Thought proceedingfrom the concrete to the abstract— provided it is correct (NB) (and Kant, like all philosophers, speaks of correctthought)—does not get away f r o m the truth but comes closer to it. 
 Theabstraction of matter , of a law of nature, the abstraction of value , etc. 
, in short all scientific (correct, serious, not ab-surd) abstractions reflect nature moredeeply, truly and c o m p l e t e l y . 
 From living perception to abstract thought,and from this to practice ,—such is the dialectical path of the cognition of truth , of the cognition of objective real-ity. 
 Kant disparages knowledge in orderto make way for faith: Hegel exaltsknowledge, asserting that knowledge isknowledge of God. 
 The materiatist exaltsthe knowledge of matter, of nature, consigning God, and the philosophical rabble that defends God, to the rubbishheap. 
 “A principal misapprehension here is that the natural principle or the beginning, which is the starting-point in natural de-velopment or in the history of the individ-ual in its formation, is taken as the trueand as that which is first also in the No-tion. 
” (21) (—It is correct that peoplebegin with that , but truth lies not in the beginning but in the end, or rather, in the continuation. 
 Truth is not the ini-tial impression).... 
 “But, philosophy is not *constitutive— Ed. 
 **objective— Ed. 
 dispenses with the material of sensuousness— Ed. 
meant to be a narrative of what happens, but the cognition of what is true in happen-ings. 
” (21) In Kant there is “psychological ideal-ism” (22): Kant’s categories “are only determinations which are derived from self-consciousness. 
” (22) Rising from under-standing (Verstand) to reason (Vernunft),Kant belittles the significance of thought,denying it the capacity to “reach perfectedtruth. 
” (23) “It is declared” (Kant) “to be an abuse if logic, which ought to be merely a canon of judgment , is regarded as an organ for the production of objective discoveries. 
 The notions of Reason, in which a higherforce (an idealistic phrase!) and a deeper(c o r r e c t !!) content were of necessity divined, are less Konstitutives * it should be: Objektives** than even the categories;they are mere ideas. 
 Their use may cer-tainly be permissible, but these intelligibleessences, which should wholly unlock thetruth, are to signify no more than hypothe-ses; and it would be completely arbitrary and reckless to ascribe any truth to themin and for themselves, since they can occur in no kind of experience . 
 Could it ever have been thought that philosophy would gain-say the validity of the intelligible essencesbecause they are without the spatial andtemporal material of sensuousness?” (23) Here, too, Hegel is essentially right : value is a category which entbehrt des Stoffes der Sinnlichkeit,* but it ist r u e r than the law of supply and demand. 
 Only Hegel is an idealist: hence the nonsense of “ k o n s t i t u t i v e s ,”* etc. 
 Kant, on the one hand, quite clearly recog-nises the “ o b j e c t i v i t y ” (24) of thought (“des Denkens”) (“an identity of the Notionand the thing” (24))—but, on the other hand, “the assertion is made again that we sure-ly cannot know things as they are in andfor themselves, and that truth does notallow cognising reason to approach it; thattruth which consists in the unity of objectand Notion is after all only appearance, andthe reason now is that content is only themanifold of intuition. 
 Of this argument ithas been remarked that this manifoldness,insofar as it belongs to intuition as op-posed to the Notion, is transcended preciselyin the Notion, and that the object is led backby the Notion into its non-contingent essen-tiality; the latter enters into appearance,and for this very reason the appearance isnot merely non-essential, but manifesta-tion of Essence. 
” (24-25) “It will always remain a matter for aston-ishment how the Kantian philosophy knewthat relation of thought to sensuous exist-ence, where it halted, for a merely rela-tive relation of bare appearance, and fullyacknowledged and asserted a higher unityof the two in the Idea in general, and, forexample, in the idea of an intuitive under-standing; but yet stopped dead at this rel-ative relation and at the assertion that theNotion is and remains utterly separatedfrom reality;—so that it affirmed as truth what it pronounced to be finite knowledge,and declared to be superfluous, improper,and figments of thought that which itrecognised as truth , and of which it estab-lished the definite notion. 
” (26) c o n s t i t u t i v e —Ed. 
Hegel in favour of the cognisabilityof the Thing-in-itself appearance is manifestation of essence NB NBNBee *“formal science”— Ed. 
 **“pure truth”— Ed. 
!! Ha-ha! ?In logic, the Idea “becomes the creator of Nature. 
” (26) Logic is “formelle Wissenschaft”* (27) as against the concrete sciences (of nature and mind), but its object matter is “diereine Wahrheit”**.... 
 (27) Kant himself, in asking what truth is (27) (the Critique of Pure Reason , p. 
 83) and giving a trivial answer (“correspondence of knowledge with its object”), strikes athimself, for “the fundamental assertionof transcendental idealism” is —that “cognition is not capable of appre-hending Things-in-themselves” (27)— —and it is clear that all this is “an untrue idea. 
” (28) In arguing against the purely formal con-ception of logic (which Kant, too, is saidto have)—saying that from the ordinarystandpoint (truth is the correspondence “Übereinstimmung” of knowledge with the object) correspondence “essentially de-mands two sides” (29), Hegel says that the formal element in logic is “pure truth” (29)and that ...“this formal element must therefore be thought of as being in itself much richerin determinations and content, and as hav-ing infinitely more influence upon the concrete, than it is generally held to have.... 
”(29) ...“But, even if the logical forms are to be regarded as nothing more than formalfunctions of thought, yet this character would make them worthy of an investi-gation as to how far they correspond tothe truth in themselves. 
 A system of logicwhich neglects this can claim at most to have the value of a natural-historical description of the empirical phenomena of thought . 
” (30-31) (Herein is said to lie the immortal merit of Aristotle), but “itis necessary to go further.... 
” (31) Thus, not only a description of the forms of thought and not only a n a t -u r a l -h i s t o r i c a l d e s c r i p -t i o n o f t h e p h e n o m e n a of thought (wherein does that differ froma description of the forms??) but alsoc o r r e s p o n d e n c e w i t h t r u t h , i. 
e. 
??, the quintessence or, more sim-ply, the results and outcome of the his-tory of thought?? Here Hegel is ideal-istically unclear, and fails to speakout fully. 
 Mysticism . 
 Not psychology, not the phenomenology of mind, but logic = the question of truth. 
 Cf. 
 Encyclopaedia , Vol. 
 VI, p. 
 319*; “But in point of fact they” (die logischen Formen**), “turned round as forms of the notion, constitute the living spirit of the actual .... 
” Begriff in its development into “adäquaten Begriff,”*** becomes the Idea. 
 (33)****“Notion in its objectivity is the object which is in and for itself. 
” (33) = objectivism # mysticism and betrayal of development *Hegel, Werke , Bd. 
 VI, Berlin, 1840. 
— Ed. 
 **the logical forms— Ed. 
 *** “adequate notion”— Ed. 
 **** Hegel, Werke , Bd. 
 V, Berlin, 1834. 
— Ed. 
 ? In this con-ception, log-ic coincides with the t h e o r y o f k n o w l -e d g e . 
 This is in general a very important question. 
 The general laws of move-ment of the w o r l d and of t h o u g h t NB NBa e e ee e ee e ee e ee e ee e b S E C T I O N O N E: SUBJECTIVITY *Hegel, Werke , Bd. 
 V, Berlin, 1834. 
— Ed. 
 **Lenin wrote this in English. 
— Ed. 
En lisant... These parts of the work should be called: a best means for getting a headache!**The dialectical movement of the “No-tion”—from the purely “formal” notion at the beginning—to the Judgment (Urteil), then—to the Syllogism (Schluß) and—fi-nally to the transformation of the subjectiv-ity of the Notion into its objectivity . 
 (34-35)* The first distinguishing feature of the Notion is Universality (Allgemeinheit). 
 NB: The Notion grew out of Essence , and the latter out of Being . 
 The further development of the Uni-versal , the Particular (Besonderes) and the Individual (Einzelnes) is in the highest degree abstract and “ a b s t r u s e . 
” Kuno Fischer expounds these “abstruse” considerations very poorly, taking upthe lighter points—examples from the E n c y c l o p a e d i a , and adding ba-nalities (against the French revolution. 
 Kuno Fischer, Vol. 
 8, 1901, p. 
 530),etc. 
, but not showing the reader how to look for the key to the difficulttransitions, nuances, ebbs and flows ofHegel’s abstract concepts. 
 FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF Obviously, here too the chief thing for Hegel is to trace the t r a n s i t i o n s . 
 From a certain point of view, undercertain conditions, the universal is theindividual, the individual is the uni-versal. 
 Not only (1) connection , and inseparable connection, of all conceptsand judgments, but (2) transitions from one into the other, and not only transi-tions, but also (3) identity of opposites — that is the chief thing for Hegel. 
 Butthis merely “glimmers” through the fog ofextremely abstruse exposition. 
 The his-tory of thought from the standpointof the development and application ofthe general concepts and categories ofthe Logic—voilà ce qu’il faut!** Quoting, on p. 
 125, the “famous” syllo-gism—“all men are mortal, Gaius is a man,therefore he is mortal”—Hegel shrewdlyadds: “Boredom immediately descends whensuch a syllogism is heard approaching”—this is declared to be due to the “unnützenForm,”*** and Hegel makes the profoundremark: “All things are a Syllogism , a universal which is bound together with individualitythrough particularity; but of course theyare not wholes consisting of three propo-sitions . 
” (126) Very good! The most common logical “figures”—(all this in the Par. 
 on the“First Figure of the Syllogism”) are themost common relations of things, setforth with the pedantic thoroughness ofa school textbook, sit venia verho. 
**** * notion-determinations— Ed. 
 **That’s what is needed!— Ed. 
 *** “otiose form”— Ed. 
 **** If I may be allowed to say so. 
— Ed. 
Or is this after all a tribute to old formal logic? Yes! And another trib-ute—a trib-ute to mys-ticism = idealism Voilà, an abundance of “determina-tions” and of Begriffsbe-stimmungen* in this part of the Logic ! True! “All things are a s y l l o-g i s m ”... NBNB FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF NB: Umkeh-ren***** Marx applied Hegel’s dialectics in its rational form to political economyThe formation of (abstract) notions and operations with them already includes idea, conviction, c o n s c i o u s n e s s of the law-governed characterof the objective connectionof the world. 
 To distinguishcausality from this connection is stupid. 
 To deny the objec-tivity of notions, the objec-tivity of the universal inthe individual and in theparticular, is impossible. 
 Con-sequently, Hegel is much more profound than Kant, and others, in tracing the reflec-tion of the movement of theobjective world in the move-ment of notions. 
 Just asthe simple form of value, the individual act of exchange ofOne would have to return to Hegel for a step-by-step anal-ysis of any cur-rent logic and t h e o-r y o f k n o w l-e d g e of a Kantian, etc. 
N B Con-cerning the ques-tion of the true signifi-cance of Hegel’s Logic *individual— Ed. 
 **particular— Ed. 
 *** universal— Ed. 
 **** Chapter I of Capital —Ed. 
 ***** to be inverted— Ed. 
Hegel’s analysis of syllogisms (E. 
— B. 
—A. 
, Eins*; Besonderes**; Allge-meines,*** B. 
—E. 
—A. 
, etc. 
) recallsMarx’s imitation of Hegel in ChapterI. 
**** On Kant Inter alia: “Kant’s Antinomies of Reason are just this, that first one determination of a No-tion is made the foundation of the Notion,and next, and with equal necessity, the other.... 
” (128-129) one given commodity for another, already includes in an undeveloped form all the main contradictions of capi-talism,—so the simplest gen-eralisation , the first and simplest formation of no-tions (judgments, syllogisms, etc. 
) already denotes man’s ever deeper cognition ofthe objective connection of the world. 
 Here is where oneshould look for the truemeaning, significance and role of Hegel’s Logic . 
 This NB. 
 Concerning the question of the criti-cism of mod-ern Kantian-ism, Mach-ism, etc. 
:Two aphorisms: 1. 
 Plekhanov criticises Kantianism (and agnosticism in general) more from a vul-gar-materialistic standpoint than from adialectical-materialistic standpoint, inso-far as he merely rejects their views a li-mine,* but does not correct them (as He-gel corrected Kant), deepening, generalis-ing and extending them, showing the c o n n e c t i o n and t r a n s i t i o n s of each and every concept. 
 2. 
 Marxists criticised (at the beginning of the twentieth century) the Kantiansand Humists more in the manner of Feuer-bach (and Büchner) than of Hegel. 
 ...“An experience which rests upon in-duction is taken as valid although admitted-ly the perception is not completed ; but no more can be assumed than that no example * from the threshold— Ed. 
NB /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR can be produced contrary to this experience, insofar as the latter is true in and for itself. 
” (154) This passage is in the §: “The Syllo-gism of Induction. 
” The simplest truth obtained in the simplest inductive way is always incomplete, for experience is always unfinished. 
 Ergo: the connection of induction with analogy—with sur-mise (scientific foresight), the relativity of all knowledge and the absolute con-tent in each step forward in cognition. 
 Aphorism: It is impossible completely to understand Marx’s Capital , and es-pecially its first chapter, without having thoroughly studied and understood the whole of Hegel’s Logic . 
 Consequently, half a century later none of the Marxists understood Marx!! The t r a n s i t i o n from the syllogism of analogy (about analogy) to the syllogismof necessity,—from the syllogism of induc-tion to the syllogism of analogy,—the syllogism from the universal to the individ-ual—the syllogism from the individual to the universal,—the exposition of c o n-n e c t i o n and t r a n s i t i o n s con-nection is transition , that is Hegel’s task. 
 Hegel actually p r o v e d that logical forms and laws are not an emptyshell, but the reflection of the objec-tive world. 
 More correctly, he did not prove, but made a brilliant guess . 
aphorism In the E n c y c l o p a e d i a Hegel re-marks that the division of Understanding and Reason , of N o t i o n s of one kind or the other must be understood in such a way “that our mode of behaviour is either to stop short at the merely negative andabstract form of the Notion, or to conceivethe latter, in accordance with its true nature, as that which is at once positive and concrete. 
 Thus, for example, if freedomis regarded as the abstract opposite of ne-cessity, this is merely the Notion of under-standing of freedom, whereas the true andrational Notion of freedom contains ne-cessity as transcended within it. 
” (Pp. 
 347-348, Vol. 
 VI*) Ibidem p. 
 349: Aristotle described the logical forms so completely that “essen-tially” there has been nothing to add. 
 Usually the “figures of the syllogism” are regarded as empty formalism. 
 “They”(these figures) “have, however, a very fun-damental meaning, based on the necessitythat every moment , as determination of the Notion, itself becomes the whole andthe mediating Ground . 
” (352, Vol. 
 VI) Encyclopaedia (Vol. 
 VI, pp. 
 353-354) “The objective meaning of the figures of the syllogism is in general that every-thing rational is manifested as a threefoldsyllogism, such that each of its membersassumes the position of one of the extremesas well as that of the mediating middle. 
Such, for example, is the case with the threebranches of philosophy, i. 
e. 
, the LogicalIdea, Nature and Mind. 
 Here it is Naturethat is first of all the middle, connectingmember. 
 Nature, this immediate totality,unfolds itself in the two extremes of the Log-ical Idea and Mind. 
” * Hegel, Werke , Bd. 
 VI, Berlin, 1840. 
— Ed. 
abstract and concrete notions Freedom and Necessity NB NB( NB NB: Hegel “only ” deifies this “logical idea,” obe-dience to law, univer-sality#“Spirit, however, is only spirit through being mediated by Nature.... 
” “It is Spirit that recognises the logical Idea in Nature and so raises it to its essence.... 
” “Thelogical Idea is the absolute Substanceboth of Spirit and of Nature, the universal,the all-pervading. 
” (353-354) “Nature, this immediate totality, un-folds itself in the Logical Idea andMind. 
” Logic is the science of cognition. 
It is the theory of knowledge. 
 Knowl-edge is the reflection of nature by man. 
But this is not a simple, not an imme-diate, not a complete reflection, but the process of a series of abstractions,the formation and development of con-cepts, laws, etc. 
, and these concepts,laws, etc. 
 (thought, science = “the log-ical Idea”) embrace conditionally, ap-proximately, the universal law-governed character of eternally moving and de-veloping nature. 
 Here there are actually , objectively, three members: 1) nature; 2) human cognition = the human b r a i n (as the highest product of this same nature), and 3) the form of reflec-tion of nature in human cognition, andthis form consists precisely of con-cepts, laws, categories, etc. 
 Man cannotcomprehend = reflect = mirror nature as a whole , in its completeness, its “imme-diate totality,” he can only eternally come closer to this, creating abstrac-tions, concepts, laws, a scientific pic-ture of the world, etc. 
, etc. 
 In regard to analogy an acute observation: It is the instinct of reason which allows one to divine that one or another empiri-cally found determination has its roots in(( *The word “logic” in the manuscript is linked to the word “here” in the following quotation from Hegel. 
— Ed. 
Against himself!the inner nature or genus of an object, and which bases itself further on this de-termination. 
” (357) (Vol. 
 VI, p. 
 359) And p. 
 358: justifiable contempt for the philosophy of nature has beenevoked by the futile play with empty analogies. 
 In ordinary logic* thought is forma-listically divorced from objectivity. 
 “Thought is held here to be a mere sub-jective and formal activity, and what isobjective is held to be, in contrast to thought, something firm and present for itself. 
 This dualism, however, is not thetruth, and it is thoughtless procedure toaccept the determinations of subjectivityand objectivity in this way without fur-ther question, and without inquiring into their origin.... 
” (359-360) In reality, sub-jectivity is only a stage of developmentfrom Being and Essence—whereupon thissubjectivity “dialectically ‘breaks throughits Barrier’” and “opens out into objectiv-ity by means of the syllogism. 
” (360) Very profound and clever! The laws of logic are the reflections of the objec-tive in the subjective consciousness ofman. 
 Vol. 
 VI, p. 
 360 “The realised Notion” is the object. 
This transition from the subject, from the notion, to the object is said to seem“strange,” but by the object one shouldunderstand not simply Being, but some-thing definitive, “something independent, concrete and complete in itself.... 
” (361) “The world is the other being of the Idea. 
” Subjectivity (or the Notion) and the object— are the same and not the same .... 
 (362) Nonsense about the ontological argu-ment, about God! ...“It is wrong to regard subjectivity and objectivity as a fixed and abstract antithe-sis. 
 Both are wholly dialectical.... 
” (367)NB S E C T I O N T W O: OBJECTIVITY *Hegel, Werke , Bd. 
 IV, Berlin, 1834. 
— Ed. 
 **of objective reality— Ed. 
(Logic) V, 178: * The twofold significance of objectivity: ...“similarly a twofold significance appears for Objectivity: it stands opposed to the in-dependent Notion, but also is that whichis in and for itself.... 
” (178) ...“The knowledge of truth is placed in the cognition of the object ‘as object without the addition of any subjective reflection...” (178) Discourses on “mechanism”—further on—extremely abstruse and almost com-plete nonsense. 
 Further, idem about chemism , the stages of “judgment,” etc. 
 The paragraph entitled “ L a w ” (198-199) does not give what could be expectedfrom Hegel on such an interesting question. 
It is strange why “law” is referred to “mech-anism”? The concept of law approximates here the concepts “order” (Ordnung);uniformity (Gleichförmigkeit); necessi-ty; the “soul” der objective’s Totalität,**the “principle of self-movement. 
”objectivity cognition of the object this approxi-mation is very important *“natural necessity”— Ed. 
All this from the standpoint that mech-anism is the other-being of spirit, of the Notion, etc. 
, of the soul, of individ-uality.... 
 Obviously, playing withempty analogies! To be noted: on p. 
 210 the concept of ‘Naturnotwendigkeit”* is encountered— “both Mechanism and Chemism are, then,comprehended under natural necessity”...for we see here “its” (des Begriffs) “submer-sion into externality” (ibidem). 
 “It was mentioned that the opposition be-tween Teleology and Mechanism is, in the first instance, the more general opposition between freedom and necessity. 
 Kant setsout the opposition in this form under theAntinomies of Reason, as the ‘Third Con-flict of Transcendental Ideas. 
”’ (213) Brieflyrepeating Kant’s proofs, thesis and antith-esis, Hegel notes the hollowness of these proofs and directs attention to the resultof Kant’s considerations: “Kant’s solution of this Antinomy is the same as the general solution of theothers: that reason can prove neither of these propositions, since we can have no determinant principle a priori about the pos-sibility of things according to mere empiri-cal laws of nature; consequently the two must not be regarded as objective prop-ositions but as subjective maxims; on the one hand I ought always to reflect“nature = submersion of the No-tion into externality” (ha-ha!) freedom and necessity Hegel versus Kant (on freedom and necessity)((( (( upon all natural events according to the principle of pure natural mechanism; but this does not prevent me from investigat-ing certain forms of nature, should theoccasion be given, according to anothermaxim, namely, that of final causes;—asthough these two maxims (which furtherare supposed to be required only by human reason) were not in the same opposition in which the propositions stand. 
—As wasobserved above, from this whole standpointthe only question which is demanded byphilosophic interest is not looked into,namely, which of these two principles is true in and for itself; but, for this point of view, it is irrelevant whether the prin-ciples are to be considered as objective de-terminations of nature (that is here, as de-terminations existing externally) or as meremaxims of a subjective cognition. 
—But in fact this is a subjective, that is, a contingent, cognition, which applies one or the other maxim as the occasion may suggest according to whether it thinks it appropriate to the given objects, butotherwise does not ask about the truth of these determinations themselves, wheth-er both are determinations of the objectsor of cognition. 
” (215-216)Bien! M a t e r i a l i s t D i a le c -t i c s: The laws of the external world, of nature, which are divided into m e c h a n i c a l and c h e m i c a l (this is very important) are the bases ofman’s purposive activity. 
 In his practical activity, man is confronted with the objective world, is depend-H e g e l : ...“The End has turned out to be the third term with respect to Mechanism and Chemism; it is their truth. 
 Since it still stands withinthe sphere of Objectivity orof the immediacy of the to-tal Notion, it is still affec-ted by externality as such; an objective world to which it relates itself still stands opposed to it. 
 From thisside mechanical causality(in which generally Chem-ism must be included)still appears in this End-relation (which is external),but as subordinated to itand as transcended in andfor itself. 
” (216-217) ...“From this results the nature of the subordinationof the two previous formsof the objective process: theOther, which in them liesin the infinite progress, isthe Notion which at firstis posited as external tothem, which is End; notonly is the Notion theirsubstance, but also exter-nality is the moment whichis essential to them and con-stitutes their determinate-ness. 
 Thus mechanical orchemical technique sponta-neously offers itself to theEnd-relation by reason ofits character of being deter-mined externally; and thisrelation must now befurther considered. 
” (217)ent on it, and determines his activity by it. 
 From this aspect, from the aspect of the practical(purposive) activity of man,the mechanical (and chemi-cal) causality of the world(of nature) appears as thoughsomething external , as though something second-ary, as though somethinghidden. 
 Two forms of the o b -j e c t i v e process: nature (mechanical and chemical)and the p u r p o s i v e ac-tivity of man. 
 The mutualrelation of these forms. 
 Atthe beginning, man’s endsappear foreign (“other”) inrelation to nature. 
 Humanconsciousness, science (“derBegriff”), reflects the essence,the substance of nature,but at the same time thisconsciousness is somethingexternal in relation to na-ture (not immediately, notsimply, coinciding with it). 
 MECHANICAL AND CHEMICAL TECHNIQUE serves human ends just be-cause its character (essence)consists in its being deter-mined by external condi-tions (the laws of nature). 
 ((T E C H N I Q U E and the O B J E C T I V E world. 
 T E C H N I Q U E and E N D S )) ...“It” (der Zweck*) “has before it an *the End— Ed. 
 objective, Mechanical and Chemical world, to which its activity relates itself as to something already given.... 
” (219-220) “To this extent it still has a truly extra-mundane existence, namely, insofar asthis objectivity stands opposed to it.... 
”(220) In actual fact, men’s ends are engen-dered by the objective world and pre-suppose it,—they find it as somethinggiven, present. 
 But it seems to man as if his ends are taken from outsidethe world, and are independent of the world (“freedom”). 
 ((NB. 
 All this in the § on “The Sub-jective End. 
” NB)) (217-221) “The End binds itself with objectivity through a Means, and in objectivity with itself. 
” (221 §: “The Means. 
”) “Further, since the End is finite it has a finite content; accordingly it is notabsolute or utterly in and for itself reason-able. 
 The Means however is the externalmiddle of the syllogism which is the realisa-tion of the End; in it therefore reason-ableness manifests itself as such—as pre-serving itself in this external Other andprecisely through this externality. 
 To thatextent the Means is higher than the finiteEnds of external usefulness: the plough is more honourable than those immediate enjoyments which are procured by it, andserve as Ends. 
 The instrument is preserved,while the immediate enjoyments pass awayand are forgotten. 
 IN HIS TOOLS MAN POSSESSES POWER OVER EXTERNAL NATURE, ALTHOUGH AS REGARDS HIS ENDS, HE FREQUENTLY IS SUB-JECTED TO IT . 
” (226)the germs of historical materialism in Hegel Hegel and historical materialism NB Vorbericht, i. 
e. 
, preface, of the book dated: Nuremberg, 21. 
 VII. 
 1816 This is in the §: “The Realised End” HISTORICAL MATERIALISM AS ONE OF THE APPLICATIONS AND DEVELOPMENTS OF THE IDEAS OF GENIUS—SEEDS EXISTING IN EMBRYO IN HEGEL . 
 “The teleological process is the transla-tion into objectivity of the Notion (sic!)which exists distinctly as Notion.... 
” (227) When Hegel endeavours—sometimes even huffs and puffs—to bring man’spurposive activity under the categoriesof logic, saying that this activityis the “syllogism” (Schluß), that thesubject ‘(man) plays the role of a “mem-ber” in the logical “figure” of the “syllogism,” and so on,— THEN THAT IS NOT MERELY STRETCHING APOINT, A MERE GAME. 
 THIS HASA VERY PROFOUND, PURELY MA-TERIALISTIC CONTENT. 
 It has to be inverted: the practical activity of man had to lead his consciousness to therepetition of the various logical figuresthousands of millions of times in order that these figures could obtain the sig-nificance of axioms . 
 This nota bene. 
 “The movement of the End has now achieved that the moment of externalityis posited not only in the Notion, andthe Notion is not only Ought and tendency,but, as concrete totality, is identical NB NBTHE CATEGO-RIES OF LOGIC AND HUMAN PRACTICE NB /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR www. 
marx 2mao. 
comwith immediate Objectivity. 
” (235) At the end of the § on “The Realised End,” at the end of the section (Chapter III: Te-leology)—of S e c t i o n II: “ O b j e c t i v i -t y,” the transition to Section III: “ The Idea. 
 ” Remarkable: Hegel comes to the “Idea” as the coincidence of the Notion and the object, as t r u t h , t h r o u g h the practical, purposive activity of man. 
A very close approach to the view thatman by his practice proves the objective correctness of his ideas, concepts, knowl-edge, science. 
NB From the subjective Notion and subjective end to o b j e c t i v e truth S E C T I O N T H R E E: THE IDEA The beginning of Section III: “ T h e I d e a ” ...“The Idea is the adequate Notion: o b -j e c t i v e t r u t h , or the truth as such. 
” (236) In general, the introduction to Section III (“The Idea”) of Part II to the L o g i c (“Subjective Logic”) Volume V, pp. 
 236-243 and the corresponding §§ of the Encyclopaedia (§§ 213-215)— ARE PER-HAPS THE BEST EXPOSITION OF DIALECTICS . 
 Here too, the coincidence, so to speak, of logic and epistemology isshown in a remarkably brilliant way. 
 The expression “Idea” is used also in the sense of a simple representation. 
Kant. 
 “Kant has claimed the expression idea again for the Notion of reason. 
 Now accord-ing to Kant the Notion of reason is to bethe Notion of the unconditioned, and, withrespect to phenomena, to be transcen-dental, which means that it is impossible to make any adequate empirical use of it. 
 Notions of reason (according to Kant)are to serve for the conceptual compre-hension, and Notions of understandingfor the bare understanding, of percep-tions. 
 But, in fact, if the latter really are Notions then they are Notions,—con-NB Hegel against Kant against the transcenden-tal in the sense of the sepa-ration of (objective) truth from empiricism NB ceptual comprehension takes place through them.... 
” (236) See also below on Kant It is equally incorrect to regard the Idea as something “unreal”—as people say: “ it is merely an idea . 
” ...“If thoughts are merely subjective an d contingent they certainly have no furthervalue; but in this they are not inferiorto temporal and contingent actualities , which also have no further value except thatwhich is proper to contingencies and phe-nomena. 
 And if conversely the Idea is not to be rated as true because, with respectto phenomena, it is transcendental , and no object can be assigned to it, in the sen-suous world, coinciding with it, thisis a strange lack of understanding,—for so the Idea is denied objective validity because it lacks that which constitutesappearance, or the untrue being of the ob-jective world. 
” (237-238) In relation to practical ideas, Kant him-self admits that the appeal to experience against ideas is pöbelhaft*: he holds ideas as a Maximum to which one should endeav-our to bring actuality closer. 
 And Hegelcontinues: “But, the result having been reached that the Idea is the unity of the Notion and Objectivity, the truth, it must not merely be considered as a goal which must be approached while it still remains a kindof beyond ; it must be held that whatever is actual is only insofar as it containsand expresses the Idea. 
 The object, and the objective and subjective world, not * vulgar— Ed. 
 **“beyond”— Ed. 
très bien! très bien! Hegel against “Jenseits”** of Kant The confor-mity of con-cepts with objects is n o t subjectivemerely ought to conform to the Idea, but are themselves the conformity of Notion and reality; that reality which does not correspond to the Notion is mere appear-ance , or that subjective, contingent, ca-pricious entity which is not the truth. 
” (238) “It” (die Idee) “is, first , simple truth, the identity of the Notion and Objec-tivity as a universal.... 
(242) ...“Secondly , it is the re-lation of the Subjectivity, which is for itself, of the simple Notion to its Ob-jectivity which is distinct from it, the former is es-sentially the impulse to tran-scend this separation.... 
 ...“As this relation, the Idea is the process in which it sunders itself into in-dividuality and its inor-ganic nature, and againbrings the latter back un-der the power of the sub-ject, returning to the firstsimple universality. 
 Theself-identity of the Idea isone with the process ; and the thought which frees ac-tuality from the semblance of purposeless changeabili-ty and transfigures it intothe Idea must not imaginethis truth of actuality asa dead repose or bare pic-ture , matt, without im-pulse or notion, or as a gen-ius, number, or abstractThe Idea (read: man’s knowledge) is the coinci-dence (conformity) of no-tion and objectivity (the“universal”). 
 This—first. 
 Secondly, the Idea is the relation of the subjectiv-ity (= man) which is for itself ( = independent, as it were) to the objectivitywhich is d i s t i n c t (from this Idea).... 
 Subjectivity is the im-pulse to destroy this sepa-ration (of the idea fromthe object). 
 Cognition is the process of the submersion (ofthe mind) in an inorganic nature for the sake of subordinating it to thepower of the subject andfor the sake of gener-alisation (cognition of theuniversal in its phenome-na).... 
 The coincidence of thought with the object is aprocess : thought ( = man) must not imagine truth inthe form of dead repose, in the form of a bare pic-ture (image), pale (matt),without impulse, without BBBBBBBBBBB Cognition is the eternal, endless approximation of thought to the object. 
 The reflection of nature in man’s thought must be understoodnot “lifelessly,” not “abstractly,” n o t d e v o i d o f m o v e m e n t , not without contradictions, but in the eternal process of movement, the aris-ing of contradictions and their solution. 
thought. 
 In the Idea the Notion reaches freedom, and because of this the Idea contains also the harshest opposition ; its repose con-sists in the security andcertainty with which it eter-nally creates and eternally overcomes it, coinciding in it with itself. 
” “The Idea is ... the Idea of the True and of the Good , as Cognition and Vo-lition .... 
 The process of this finite cognition and (NB) a c t i o n (NB) makes the universality, which at firstis abstract, into a totali-ty, whence it becomes per-fected objectivity . 
” (243) Also in the E n c y c l o -p a e d i a (Vol. 
 VI). 
* E n -c y c l o p a e d i a § 2 1 3 (p. 
 385) ...“The Idea is truth , for truth is the correspond-motion, like a genius, like a number, like abstract thought. 
 The idea contains also the strongest contradiction,repose (for man’s thought)consists in the firmness andcertainty with which he eternally creates (this con-tradiction between thoughtand object) and eternallyovercomes it.... 
 The Idea is Cognition an d aspiration (volition) [ofman]... The process of (tran-sitory, finite, limited) cog-nition and action converts abstract concepts into per-fected objectivity . 
 Individual Being (an ob-ject, a phenomenon, etc. 
) NB NB The t o t a l i t y o f all sides of the phenomenon, of reality and their (re-ciprocal) r e l a t i o n s —that is what truth is composed of. 
 The relations( = transitions = contradictions) of notions = the main content of logic, by which these concepts (and their relations, transitions, contradictions)are shown as reflections of the objec-tive world. 
 The dialectics of t h i n g s produces the dialectics of ideas , and not vice versa. 
 T This aphorism should be expressed more popularly, without the word dia-lectics: approximately as follows: Inthe alternation, reciprocal dependenceof a l l notions, in the identity of their opposites , in the transitions of one no-* existing specially for themselves. 
— Ed. 
ence of objectivity with the Notion.... 
 But also everything actual, insofar as it is true, is the Idea.... 
The individual Being issome one aspect of theIdea; hence it requires alsoother actualities, which likewise appear as existing specially for themselves; itis only in all of them to-gether and in their rela-tion that the Notion is realised. 
 The individual by itself does not correspond to its Notion; this limi-tation of its determinateexistence constitutes its fi-nitude and its downfall.... 
”is (only) one side of the Idea (of truth). 
 Truth re-quires still other sides of reality , which likewise ap-pear only as independentand individual (besondersfür sich bestehende*). 
O n l y i n t h e i r t o -t a l i t y (zusammen), and in their r e l a t i o n (Be-ziehung) is truth realised. 
        Hegel brilliantly d i v i n e d the dialectics of things (phenom-ena, the world, n a t u r e ) in the dialectics of concepts T indeed divined, not more tion into another, in the eternal change, movement of notions, Hegel brilliantly divined PRECISELY THIS RELATION OF THINGS, OF NATURE. 
 “Truth is first of all taken to mean that I know how something is. 
 This is truth, however, only in reference to con-sciousness, or formal truth, bare correct-ness. 
 (§ 213, 386) Truth in the deepersense, on the contrary, consists in theidentity between objectivity and theNotion.... 
 “A bad man is an untrue man, i. 
e. 
, a man who does not behave in confor-mity with the notion of him, or his posi-tion. 
 Nothing, however, can exist entire-ly devoid of identity between the no-tion and reality. 
 Even what is bad and untrue has being only insofar as its real-ity still, somehow, conforms to its no-tion.... 
 ...“Everything deserving the name of philosophy has always been based onthe consciousness of an absolute unity of that which the understanding accepts as valid only in its sep-aration.... 
”what constit-utes dialec-tics?=............ mutual dependence of notions ” ” a l l ” without exception transitions of notions from one into another ” all ” without exception. 
 The relativity of opposition between notions... the identity of opposites between notions. 
= NB Every notion oc-curs in a certain r e l a t i o n , in a certain connection with a l l the others “The stages of Being and Essence hith-erto considered, as well as those of No-tion and of Objectivity, are not, when so distinguished, something permanent, resting upon themselves . 
 But they have proved to be dialectical, and their truth con-sists only in being moments of the idea . 
” (387-388) Vol. 
 VI, 388 The moments of the cognition ( = o f the “idea”) of nature by man—theseare the categories of logic. 
 Vol. 
 VI, p. 
 388 ( 214): “The Idea may be described in many ways. 
 It may be called reason (this is theproper philosophical signification of rea-son); also subject-object; the unity of the ideal and the real, of the finite and the infinite, of soul and body; the possibilitywhich has its actuality in its own self;that whose nature can be conceived onlyas existent, etc. 
 All these descriptionsapply, because the Idea contains all the relations of understanding, but contains them in their infinite self-return and self-identity. 
 “It is easy work for the understanding to show that everything said of the Idea isself-contradictory . 
 But that can quite as well be rendered to the understanding or rather it is already accomplished in the idea. 
 Andthis work, which is the work of reason, iscertainly not so easy as that of the under-standing. 
—The understanding may demon-strate that the Idea is self-contradictory, because, for instance, the subjective is only subjective and is always confrontedby the objective; that Being is somethingThe differ-ences between Being and Essence, be-tween Notion and Objec-tivity, are relative (the idea) truth is all-sided quite different from the notion and there-fore cannot be extracted out of it; and thatlikewise the finite is only finite and theexact antithesis of the infinite, and there-fore not identical with it; and so on withall the determinations. 
 Logic, however, demonstrates the opposite of all this, name-ly, that the subjective, which is to besubjective only, the finite, which is to befinite only, the infinite, which is to beinfinite only, and so on, have no truth,but contradict themselves, and pass into their opposites. 
 Thus, this transition, and the unity in which the extremes are in-cluded as transcended, as appearance ormoments, is revealed as their truth. 
 (388) “The understanding, when it tackles the Idea, falls into a double misunderstand-ing. 
 First, it takes the extremes of the Idea (be they expressed as they will, solong as they are in their unity) still inthat sense and determination in whichthey are not in their concrete unity, but remain abstractions outside of the Idea. 
 “It” (der Verstand*) “no less mistakes therelation between them, even when it has been expressly stated; thus, for example, it overlooks even the nature of the cop-ula in the judgment , which affirms that the individual , the subject, is just as much not individual, but univer-sal. 
 —In the second place, the understand-ing believes its reflection,—that the self-identical Idea contains its own negative,the contradiction,—to be an external reflec-tion which does not lie within the Idea itself. 
 In fact, however, this is not theunderstanding’s own wisdom. 
 The Idea itself is the dialectic which for ever sepa-*the understanding— Ed. 
NB: Abstractions and the “concrete unity” of opposites. 
 A beautiful example: thesimplest and clearest. 
 The dialectic of notions and its material-its roots The dialectic is not in man’s understand-ing, but in the “idea,” i. 
e. 
, in objec-tive realityNB the in-divid-ual = the uni-versal /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR “eternal life” = dialectics The idea is ... a process This NB *false —Ed. 
rates and distinguishes the self-identical from the differentiated, the subjective from the objective, the finite from the infinite, the soul from the body. 
 Only insofar is it an eternal creation, eternal vitality,and eternal spirit.... 
 ” (389) VI, § 215, p. 
 390: ...“The Idea is essentially a process , be-cause its identity is the absolute and freeidentity of the notion, only insofar asit is absolute negativity and for thatreason dialectical. 
” Hence, Hegel says, the expression “uni-ty” of thinking and being, of finite and infinite, etc. 
, is falsch ,* because it ex-presses “ quietly persisting identity. 
”** It is not true that the finite simply neutral-ises (“neutralisiert”) the infinite and vice versa . 
 Actually, we have a process . 
 If one calculates ... every second more than ten persons in the world die, and still more are born. 
 “Movement” and “mo-ment”: catch it. 
 At every given moment... catch this moment, Idem in simplem e c h a n i c a l motion (contra Chernov). 
 59 “The idea as a process runs through three stages in its development. 
 The firstform of the idea is Life .... 
 The second form is ... the idea in the form of Knowledge , which appears under the double aspect of the theoretical and practical idea. 
 The process of knowledge results in the resto-ration of unity enriched by difference,and this gives the third form, that ofthe Absolute Idea.... 
” (391) BBBBBBBBBBBBB *Hegel, Werke , Bd. 
 V, Berlin, 1834. 
— Ed. 
 **e s s e n t i a l l y i s i n c o g n i t i o n —Ed. 
The idea is “truth’’ (p. 
 365, § 213). 
 The idea, i. 
e. 
, truth as a process— for truth is a p r o c e s s —passes in its development (Entwicklung) through three stages: 1) life; 2) the process of knowl-edge, which includes human practice and technique (see above); 3) the stage of the absolute idea (i. 
e. 
, of complete truth). 
 Life gives rise to the brain. 
 Nature is reflected in the human brain. 
 Bychecking and applying the correctnessof these reflections in his practice and technique, man arrives at objective truth. 
 The question of Life does not belong to “logic as it is commonly imagined. 
” (Bd. 
 V, p. 
 244*) If, however, the subject-mat-ter of logic is truth , and “ t r u t h a s s u c h w e s e n t l i c h i m E r k e n n e ni s t ,**” then cognition has to be dealt with—in connection with cognition it isalready (p. 
 245) necessary to speak of life. 
 Sometimes so-called “pure logic” is fol-lowed by “applied” (angewandte) logic, butthen... ...“every science must be absorbed in logic, since each is an applied logic in-sofar as it consists in apprehending its object in forms of thought and of theNotion. 
” (244)Truth is a process. 
 From the subjective idea, man advances towards objec-tive truth t h r o u g h “practice” (and technique). 
 every science is applied logicLogic. 
 Volume V. 
 Section III. 
 Idea. 
 Chapter I. 
 Life. 
 *Hegel, Werke , Bd. 
 VI, Berlin, 1840. 
— Ed. 
 **Hegel, Werke , Bd. 
 V, Berlin, 1834, pp. 
 248-262. 
— Ed. 
The idea of including L i f e i n logic is comprehensible—and brilliant—from the standpoint of the process o f the reflection of the objective worldin the (at first individual) consciousness of man and of the testing of this consciousness (reflection) through prac-tice—see: If one considers the relation of sub-ject to object in logic, one must take into account also the general premisesof Being of the concrete subject ( = l i f e o f m a n ) in the objective surroundings. 
 Subdivisions:** 1) Life, as “the living individual ” (§ A) 2) “The Life-process”3) “The Process of Kind” (Gattung), re-production of man , and transition to cognition . 
 (1) “ subjective totality ” and “indiffer-ent” “objectivity ” (2) The unity of subject and object...“Consequently, the original Judg-ment of Life con-sists in this, thatit separates itselfas individual sub-ject from the objec-tive.... 
” (248)Encyclopaedia* § 216: Only in their connection are the individual limbs of the body what they are. 
 A hand, separated from the body, is a hand only in name (Aristotle). 
Life = indi-vidual sub-ject separates itself from the objective ...“This objectivity of the Living Entity is Organism ; the objectivity is the means and instru-ment of the End.... 
” (251) The comic in HegelEncyclopaedia § 219: ...“Inorganic nature which is subdued by the livingbeing suffers this because it is in itself the same as life is for itself . 
” Invert it = pure materialism. 
 Ex-cellent, profound, correct!! And also NB: shows how extremely correct and apt are the terms “an sich” and “fürsich”!!! NB Further, the “subsumption” under log-ical categories of “sensibility” (Sensi-bilität), “irritability” (irritabilität)—this is said to be the particular in con-trast to the universal!!—and “reproduc-tion” is an idle game. 
 Forgotten is thenodal line , the transition into a d i f -f e r e n t plane of natural phe nomena. 
 And so on. 
 Pain is “actual existence” of contradiction in the living individual. 
 ...“Its” (des Begriffs**) “reality in gener-al is the form of its determinate existence , and what matters is the determinationHegel and the play with “organic Notions” !!! Hegel and the play with “organism” subjective consciousnessOr again: reproduction of man ... “is their” (of twoindividuals of different sex)“realised identity, is the negative unity of the kind which intro-reflects itselfout of the division.... 
” (261) Logic. 
 Volume V. 
 Section III. 
 The Idea. 
 Chapter II. 
 T h e I d e a o f C o g n i t i o n (pp. 
 262-327) *“in itself” and “for itself”!!!— Ed. 
 **the Notions— Ed. 
 *abstract one-sided determinations of “former—pre-Kantian— metaphysics”— Ed. 
and its sub-mersion in objectivity mysticism! H e g e l a g a i n s t K a n t ? i. 
e. 
, that in Kant the “Ego” is an empty form (“self-extraction”) without concrete analysis of the process of cognition NB: Kant and Hume— scepticsof this form; upon this depends the distinction of that which the Notion is in itself or as subjective, and of what it is as submerged into Objectivity, and nextin the Idea of Life. 
” (263) ...“Spirit not only is infi-nitely richer than Nature, but the absolute unity of opposites in the Notion con-stitutes its essence.... 
” (264) In Kant “the Ego” is “as a transcenden-tal subject of thoughts” (264); “At the same time this Ego, according to Kant’s own expression, is awkward in this respect,that we must always make use of it inorder to make any judgment about it.... 
” (p. 
 265) “In his” ( = Kant’s) “criticism of these determinations” (namely: absrakte ein-seitige Bestimmungen “der vormaligen— pre-Kantian—Metaphysik”* concerning the“soul”) “he” (Kant) “simply followed Hume’ssceptical manner: holds fast to that whichappears as Ego in self-consciousness, from? mysticism! NB which however everything empirical must be omitted, since the aim is to know its essence, or the Thing-in-itself. 
 Now noth-ing remains but the phenomenon of theI think which accompanies every idea; and nobody has the slightest notion of this‘I think. 
’” (266) T T T Apparently, Hegel perceives scepti-cism here in the fact that Hume andKant do not see the appearing Thing-in-itself in “phenomena, ” divorce phenom-ena from objective truth, doubt theobjectivity of cognition, remove, weg-lassen, alles Empirische* from the Ding-an-sich.... 
** And Hegel contin-ues: T T T ...“It must certainly be admitted that it is impossible to have the slightest notion of Ego or anything else (the No-tion included), if no Notion is formed and a halt is made at the simple, fixed,general idea and name . 
” (266) In order to understand, it is necessary empirically to begin understanding,study, to rise from empiricism to the uni-versal. 
 In order to learn to swim, it is necessary to get into the water. 
 According to Hegel, the old metaphysics, in the endeavour to cognise truth , divided objects in accordance with the characteris-tic of truth into substances and phenome-* everything empirical— Ed. 
 **Thing-in-itself— Ed. 
Wherein does Hegel see the scepticism of Hume and Kant? It is impossi-ble to under-stand without the process of understand-ing (of cog-nition, con-crete study, etc. 
) *“Beyond”— Ed. 
Kant restricts himself to “phenomena” Kant elevated o n e side to the Abso-lute in Kant, the Thing-in-itself is an absolute “Jenseits”*Kant’s Critique rejected the investigation of truth .... 
 (269) “But to stand fast at appearance and what proves to be mere sensuous representation in everyday consciousnessis tantamount to a renunciation of theNotion and of philosophy. 
” (269) § A: “The Idea of the True . 
 At first the sub-jective Idea is impulse .... 
 Consequently, the impulse has the determinateness ofcancelling its own subjectivity, of making concrete its reality (which was abstract at first), and of filling it, for content , with the world which is presupposed byits subjectivity.... 
 As Cognition is the Ideaas End or as subjective idea, so the ne-gation of the world which is presupposed as being in itself is first negation.... 
” (274-275) i. 
e. 
, the first stage , moment, begin-ning, approach of cognition is its fini-tude (Endlichkeit) and subjectivity, thenegation of the world-in-itself—the endof cognition is at first subjective.... 
 “Strangely enough this side of finitude has latterly” (ob-viously Kant) “been seized uponand has been taken to be theabsolute relation of Cognition— as though the finite as such was to be the absolute! From thispoint of view the Object isassigned the unknown propertyof being a Thing-in-itself beyond cognition, which, together with truth, is considered an absolute. 
 Beyond for Cognition. 
 Hegel against Kant: The determinations of thought in general, the categories and the determinations of reflection as well as the formal Notion and its moments, are here given the posi-tion not that they are finite determina-tions in and for themselves, but that theyare so in the sense that they are subjectiveas against that empty Thinghood-in-itself ; the error of taking this relation of the untruth of Cognition as valid has becomethe universal opinion of modern times. 
”(276) Kant took the finite, transitory, rel-ative, conditional character of humancognition (its categories, causality, etc. 
,etc. 
) as subjectivism , and not as the dialectics of the idea ( = of nature it self), divorcing cognition from the object. 
 ...“But cognition must by its own proc-ess resolve its finitude and therefore its contradiction. 
” (277) ...“It is one-sided to imagine analysis in such a manner as though nothing werein the object except what has been put into it; and it is equally one-sided to think that the determinations which re-sult are simply taken out of it. 
 The former idea is, as is known, the thesis of sub-jective idealism, which in analysis takesthe activity of Cognition only as a one-sided positing , beyond which the Thing-in-itself remains hidden; the latter idea belongs to so-called realism, which takesthe subjective Notion as an empty iden-tity that absorbs the thought determina-tions from without . 
” (280) ...“But the two moments cannot be sep-arated; in its abstract form, into whichKant’s subjec-tivism But the proc-ess of cogni-tion leads it to objective truth Hegel against subjective idealism and “realism” *At this point Lenin’s manuscript continues in a new notebook “Hegel. 
 Logic. 
 Section III”— Ed. 
analysis elaborates it, the logical is cer-tainly present only in Cognition; while conversely it is not only something posited but also something which is in itself . 
” (280) Logical concepts are subjective so long as they remain “abstract,” in their ab-stract form, but at the same time theyexpress also the Things-in-themselves. 
Nature is both concrete and abstract, both phenomenon and essence, both mo -ment and relation. 
 Human concepts are subjective in their abstractness, sepa-rateness, but objective as a whole, inthe process, in the sum-total, in thetendency, in the source. 
 Very good is § 225 of the Encyclopae-dia where “ cognition ” (“theoretical”) and “will,” “practical activity,” are depictedas two sides, two methods, two meansof abolishing the “one-sidedness” bothof subjectivity and of objectivity. 
 And further 2 8 1 -2 8 3 very important on the t r a n s i t i o n of the categories into one another (and against Kant, p. 
 282). 
 Logic, VoI. 
 V, p. 
 282 (the end) * ...“Kant ... takes up the determiniate connection (the relation-notions and the synthetic principles themselves) from for-mal logic as given . 
 They ought to have been deduced by the exposition of the transition of this simple unity of self-con-sciousness into these its determinations anddistinctions; but Kant spared himself the trouble of demonstrating this veritably synthetic p r o g r e s s, that of the self-producing Notion . 
” (282)The Objectiv-ity of logic NB Kant did not show the t r a n s i -t i o n of the categories into one another. 
 280-287—Turning once more to higher mathematics (showing, inter alia, thathe is familiar with Gauss’ solution ofthe equation X m—1=060), Hegel again touches on the differential and integralcalculus, and says that: “to this day mathematics by itself, that is, in a mathematical manner, has failedin justifying these operations, which arebased upon this transition” (from one mag-nitude to another), “for the transition isnot of a mathematical nature. 
” Hegel says that Leibnitz , to whom is ascribed the hon-our of having discovered the differentialcalculus, effected this transition “in a mostinadequate manner, a manner both thor-oughly notionless and unmathematical.... 
”(287) “Analytic cognition is the first premise of the whole syllogism,—the immediaterelation of the Notion to the Object. 
 Con-sequently, identity is the determinationwhich it recognises as its own: it is onlythe apprehension of what is. 
 Synthetic Cognition endeavours to form a Notion of what is, that is, to grasp the multiplic-ity of determinations in its unity. 
 Henceit is the second premise of the syllogismin which terms various as such are related. 
Its goal is therefore necessity in general. 
” (288) Regarding the practice in certain sciences (e. 
g. 
, physics) of taking various “forces,”etc. 
, for “explanation,” and of pulling in(stretching), adjusting the facts, etc. 
, Hegelmakes the following clever remark: “It is now seen that the so-called expla-nation and proof of the concrete element which is brought into Propositions is partly a tautology and partly a confusion of the true relationship; partly, too, it is seen that this confusion served to disguise the trickof Cognition, which takes up the data ofexperience one-sidedly (the only mannerin which it could reach its simple defini-tions and formulas), and does away with refutation from experience by proposing and taking as valid experience not in itsconcrete totality but as example, and onlyin that direction which is serviceable forthe hypotheses and the theory. 
 Concreteexperience being thus subordinated to the presupposed determinations, the foundation of the theory is obscured, and is exhibitedonly from that side which is in conformitywith the theory. 
” (315-316) The old metaphysics (e. 
g. 
, of Wolff [example: ridiculous pomposity over tri-vialities, etc. 
]) was overthrown by Kant and Jacobi . 
 Kant showed that “strict de-monstration” led to antinomies, “but he” (Kant) “did not reflect upon the nature of this demonstration, which isbound to a finite content; yet the two stand and fall together. 
” (317) Synthetic cognition is still not complete, for “the Notion does not become unity withitself in its object or its reality.... 
 Hencein this Cognition the Idea does not yetreach truth because of the inadequacy of the object to the subjective Notion. 
—But the sphere of Necessity is the highestpoint of Being and of Reflection: in andfor itself it passes over into the freedomof the Notion, while the inner identitypasses over into its manifestation, which is the Notion as Notion.... 
” ...“The Idea, insofar as the Notion is now for itself the Notion determinate inremarkably correct and profound cf. 
 the polit-ical econo-my of the bourgeoisie against sub-jectivism and one-sidedness i. 
e. 
, Kant did not un-derstand the u n i v e r s a l law of the dialectics of the “Finite”?( ( and for itself, is the Practical Idea, or Action . 
” (319) And the following § is headed “B: The Idea of the Good. 
” Theoretical cognition ought to give the object in its necessity, in its all-sided relations, in its contradictory mo-vement, an-und für-sich. 
* But the human notion “definitively” catches this objecti-ve truth of cognition, seizes and masters it,only when the notion becomes “being-for-itself” in time sense of practice. 
 Thatis, the practice of man and of mankindis the test, the criterion of the objecti-vity of cognition. 
 Is that Hegel’s idea? It is necessary to return to this. 
 Why is the transition from practice, from action, only to the “good,” dasGute? That is narrow, one-sided! And the useful ? There is no doubt the useful also comes in. 
 Or is this, according to H egel, also das Gute? All this in the chapter “The Idea of Cognition” (Chapter II)—in the tran-sition to the “Absolute Idea” (ChapterIII)—i. 
e. 
, undoubtedly, in Hegel prac-tice serves as a link in the analysisof the process of cognition, and indeedas the transition to objective (“abso-lute,” according to Hegel) truth. 
 Marx, consequently, clearly sides with Hegelin introducing the criterion of practiceinto the theory of knowledge: see theTheses on Feuerbach. 
 61 *in and for itself— Ed. 
Hegel on practice and the objectiv-ity of cog-nition Practice in the theory of knowledge: (320) “As subjective It” (der Begrifi) “has again the presupposition of an other-ness which is in itself; it isthe impulse to realise itself, or the end which tries togive itself objectivity in the objective world, and to car-ry itself out, through itself. 
In the Theoretical Idea thesubjective Notion stands op-posed, as the universalwhich is indeterminate in and for itself, to the ob-jective world, from whichit draws determinate con-tent and fulfilment. 
 But inthe Practical Idea it standsopposed as actual to the actual. 
 But the self-certain-ty which the subject hasin the fact of its deter-minateness in and for itself,is a certainty of its ownactuality and of the non-actuality of the world;.... 
” ......Alias: Man’s consciousness not only reflects the ob-jective world, but cre-ates it. 
 The notion ( = man), as subjective, again presup-poses an otherness whichis in itself (= nature inde-pendent of man). 
 This no-tion (= man) is the im-pulse to realise itself, to give itself objectivity in the objective world throughitself, and to realise (ful-fil) itself. 
 In the theoretical idea (in the sphere of theory) the subjective notion (cog-nition?), as the universaland in and for itself inde-terminate, stands opposedto the objective world, fromwhich it obtains determi-nate content and fulfilment. 
 In the practical idea (in the sphere of practice) thisnotion as the actual (act-ing?) stands opposed to theactual. 
 The self-certainty which the subject here sudden-ly instead of “Notion” has in its being in and for it-self, as a determinate sub-ject, is a certainty of its own actuality and of the non-actuality of the world. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR ...“The realised Good is good by virtue of what it is already in the Subjective End, in its Idea; realisation gives...“This determinateness, which is contained in the Notion, and is equal to it, and includes within itselfthe demand of the individ-ual external actuality, isthe Good . 
 It appears with the dignity of absoluteness, because it is the totality of the Notion within itself—the objective in the formsimultaneously of free unityand subjectivity. 
 This Ideais higher than the Idea of Cognition which has already been consid-ered, for it has not only the dignity of the universal butalso of the simply ac-tual .... 
” (320-321) ...“Consequently, the ac-tivity of the end is not di-rected against itself, for thepurpose of absorbing andassimilating a given deter-mination; it aims rather at positing its own determi-nation, and, by transcend-ing the determinations ofthe external world, at giv-ing itself reality in the formof external actuality.... 
” (321)i. 
e. 
, that the world does not satisfy man andman decides to changeit by his activity. 
 The essence: The “good is a “demand of external actuality,” i. 
e. 
, by the “good” is understood man’s practice = the de-mand (1) also of external actuality (2). 
 Practice is higher than (theoretical)knowledge , for it has not only the dignity of univer-sality, but also of immedi-ate actuality. 
 “The activity of the end is not directed against it-self.... 
 but aims, by destroying definite (sides, features,phenomena) of the e x t e r -n a l world, at giving itself reality in the form of ex-ternal actuality .... 
” it an external existence.... 
” (322) Presupposed to it (the Good) is the objective world , in the presupposition of which the subjectivity and finitude of the Good consists and which, as being other, pursues its own course ; and in it even the realisation of the Good is exposed to obstacles, and may even be made impossible.... 
. 
” # (322-323) The “objective world” “pursues its own course,” and man’s practice, confrontedby this objective world, encounters “ob-stacles in the realisation” of the End, even “impossibility.... 
” # ...“Thus the Good remains an Ought ; it is in and for itself, but Being, as lastand abstract immediacy, remains deter-mined against it as a not-Being too.... 
 ## (323) The Good, welfare, well-meaning aspirations remain a SUBJECTIVE OUGHT .... 
 ## ...“Although the Idea of the perfected Good is an absolute postulate, it is no more than a postulate,—that is, the absolute infected with the determinateness of subjectivity . 
 There are still two worlds in opposition : one a realm of s u b j e c -t i v i t y in the p u r e spaces of t r a n s -p a r e n t thought, the other a realm of objectivity in the element of an exter-nally manifold actuality , which is an unexplored realm of darkness. 
 The com-plete development of the unresolved con-tradiction, of that absolute end which thebarrier of this actuality insuperably op-poses, has been considered more closely in Phänomenologie des Geistes , p. 
 453 et seq.... 
” (323) NB NB Two worlds: subjective and objective A gibe at the pure “spaces of transparent thought” in the realm of subjectivity, which is confronted by the “darkness” of “objective,” “manifold” actuality. 
 ...“In the latter” ( = der theoretischen Idee* in contrast to der praktischen Idee**) ...“Cognition knows itself only as appre-hension, as the self-identity of the No-tion, which for itself is indeterminate; fulfilment, that is, objectivity determinedin and for itself, is given to it, and that which truly is is the actuality that is present independently of subjectivepositing . 
 The Practical Idea on the other hand counts this actuality (which at the same time opposes it as an insuperablebarrier) as that which in and for itself is null, which is to receive its true deter-mination and sole value through the endsof the Good. 
 Will itself consequently bars the way to its own goal insofar as it separates itself from Cognition andexternal actuality does not, for it, retain the form of that which truly is; consequently the Idea of the Good can find its complement only in the Idea of the True. 
” (323-324) Cognition ... finds itself faced by that which truly is as actuality presentindependently of subjective opinions (Setzen***). 
 (This is pure materi-alism!) Man’s will, his practice, itselfblocks the attainment of its end ...in that it separates itself from cog-nition and does not recognise externalactuality for that which truly is (for * the Theoretical Idea— Ed. 
 **the Practical Idea— Ed. 
 *** positing— Ed. 
 NB Nota bene objective truth). 
 What is necessary is the u n i o n o f c o g n i t i o n and p r a c t i c e . 
 And immediately following this: ...“But it makes this transition through itself” (the transition of the idea of truthinto the idea of the Good, of theory intopractice, and vice versa). 
 “In the syllo-gism of action one premise is the immediate relation of the good end to actuality , of which it makes itself master, directingit (in the second premise) as external m e a n s against external actuality. 
” (324) The “syllogism of action” ... For He-gel action , practice, is a l o g i c a l s y l l o g i s m ,” a figure of logic. 
 And that is true! Not, of course, in the sensethat the figure of logic has its otherbeing in the practice of man ( = abso-lute idealism), but vice versa: man’s practice, repeating itself a thousand million times, becomes consolidated inman’s consciousness by figures of logic. 
Precisely (and only) on account of thisthousand-million-fold repetition, thesefigures have the stability of a preju-dice, an axiomatic character. 
 First premise: The good end (subjective-end) versus actuality(“external actuality”). 
 Second premise: The external means (in-strument), (objective). 
 Third premise or conclusion: The coin-cidence of subjectiveand objective, the testof subjective ideas, thecriterion of objectivetruth. 
 ...“The realisation of the Good in theNB NB teeth of an opposing and other actuality is the mediation which is essential for the immediate relation and actualisation of the Good.... 
” (325) ...“If now in spite of this” (through activ-ity) “the end of the Good should not berealised, then this is a relapse of the Notionto the standpoint which the Notion has before its activity—the standpoint of that actuality which was determined as nulland yet was presupposed as real. 
 Thisrelapse becomes a progress to bad infin-ity; it has its only ground in the factthat in the transcendence of this abstract reality the transcendence is equally imme-diately forgotten, or that it is forgottenthat this reality has already been presup-posed as non-objective actuality which isnull in and for itself. 
” (325) The non-fulfilment of ends (of human activity) has as its cause (Grund) the fact that reality is taken as non-existent(nichtig), that its (reality’s) objectiveactuality is not being recognised. 
 “By the activity of the objective No-tion external actuality is altered, and its determination is accordingly transcended; and by this very process it loses merelyapparent reality, external determinability,and nullity, and it is thus posited as being in and for itself.... 
” (326) # The activity of man, who has constructed an objective picture of the world for himself, c h a n g e s external actuality, abolishesits determinateness ( = alters some sides or other, qualities, of it),and thus removes from it the fea-tures of Semblance, externality and nullity, and makes it as being in and for itself ( = objectively true). 
 # ...“Presupposition in general is here transcended,—that is, the determinationof the Good as an end which is merely subjective and restricted in its content, the necessity of realising it by subjective activity, and this activity itself. 
 I n t h e r e s u l t mediation transcends itself; the result is an immediacy which is not thereconstitution of the presupposition butrather the fact of its transcendedness. 
 TheIdea of the Notion which is determined in and for itself is thus posited no longer merely in the active subject , but equally as an immediate actuality; and the latterconversely is posited as it is in Cogni-tion, as objectivity which truly is . 
” (326) ...“In this result then Cognition is re-constructed and united with the Prac-tical Idea ; the actuality which is found as given is at the same time determinedas the realised absolute end,—not however(as in inquiring Cognition) merely as ob-jective world without the subjectivity of the Notion, but as objective world whoseinner ground and actual persistence is theNotion. 
 This is the Absolute Idea. 
” (327)((End of Chapter II. 
 Transition to Chap-ter III: “The Absolute Idea. 
”)) Chapter III: “The Absolute Idea. 
” (327) ...“The Absolute Idea has turned out to be the identity of the Theoretical and thePractical Idea; each of these by itselfis one-sided.... 
” (327)The result of activity is the test of subjective cognition and the criterion of OBJECTIVITY WHICH TRULY IS . 
 The unity of the theoretical idea (of knowledge) a n d o f p r a c t i c e —this NB—and this unity p r e c i s e l y i n t h e t h e o r y o f k n o w l e d g e , for the resulting sum is the “absolute, idea” (and the idea = “das objektive Wahre”*). 
 Vol. 
 V, 236 What remains to be considered is no long-er Inhalt,** but ... “the universal elementof its form—that is, the method . 
” (329) “In inquiring cognition the method is likewise in the position of a tool , of a means which stands on the subjective side, whereby the subjective side relates itself to the object.... 
 But in true cognition the meth-od is not merely a quantity of certaindeterminations; it is the fact that the No-tion is determined in and for itself, andis the middle member” (in the logical figure of the syllogism) “only because it equally has the significance of objective.... 
” (331) ...“The absolute method” (i. 
e. 
, the meth-od of cognition of objective truth) “onthe other hand does not behave as exter-nal reflection; it draws the determinate element directly from its object itself, since it is the object’s immanent principleand soul. 
—It was this that Plato demanded of cognition, that it should consider things in and for themselves , and that while part-ly considering them in their universality, it should also hold fast to them, not catch-ing at externals, examples and compari-sons, but contemplating the things aloneand bringing before consciousness whatis immanent in them.... 
” (335-336) This method of “absolute cognition is ana-lytic ... “but equally it is synthetic ”.... 
 (336) * “the objectively true”— Ed. 
 **content— Ed. 
 *In the manuscript, there is an arrow from the parenthesis pointing to the paragraph: “Dialectics is .... 
” located on the followingpage of the manuscript. 
 (See p. 
 223 of this volume. 
)— Ed. 
 **the other of itself— Ed. 
“Dieses so sehr synthetische als analy-tische Moment des Urteils , wodurch das anfängliche Allgemeine aus ihm selbst alsdas Andere seiner sich bestimmt, ist das dialektische zu nennen”... (336) ( # see the next page). 
* “This equally synthetic and analytic moment of the Judgment , by which (the moment) the original universality gen-eral concept determines itself out of itself as other in relation to itself, must be called dialectical. 
” A determination which is not a clear one!! 1) The determination of the concept out of itself the thing itself must be consid-ered in its relations and in its develop-ment ; 2) the contradictory nature of the thing itself (das Andere seiner**), the contra-dictory forces and tendencies in each phe-nomenon; 3) the union of analysis and synthesis. 
Such, apparently, are the elements of dialectics. 
 One could perhaps present these ele-ments in greater detail as follows: 1) the o b j e c t i v i t y of consideration (not examples, not divergences, butthe Thing-in-itself) 9 2) the entire totality of the manifold r e l a t i o n s of this thing to others. 
 3) the d e v e l o p m e n t of this thing,One of the defini-tions of dialectics E l e m e n t s o f d i a l e c-t i c s (phenomenon, respectively), its own movement, its own life, 4) the internally contradictory t e n d e n -c i e s (and sides) in this thing. 
 5) the thing (phenomenon, etc. 
) as the sum a n d # u n i t y o f o p p o s i t e s 6) the s t r u g g l e , respectively unfold-ing, of these opposites, contradictorystrivings, etc. 
 7) the union of analysis and synthesis— the break-down of the separate partsand the totality, the summation of these parts. 
 8) the relations of each thing (phenome-non, etc. 
) are not only manifold, butgeneral, universal. 
 Each thing (phe-nomenon, process, etc. 
) is connectedwith e v e r y o t h e r . 
 9) not only the unity of opposites, but the t r a n s i t i o n s of e v e r y de-termination, quality, feature, side, property into e v e r y o the r i nto i ts opposite? . 
 10) the endless process of the discovery of n e w sides, relations, etc. 
 11) the endless process of the deepening of man’s knowledge of the thing, ofphenomena, processes, etc. 
, from ap-pearance to essence and from less pro-found to more profound essence. 
 12) from co-existence to causality and from one form of connection and reciprocaldependence to another, deeper, moregeneral form. 
 13) the repetition at a higher stage of certain features, properties, etc. 
, of the lower and9 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR In brief, dialectics can be defined as the doctrine of the unity of opposites. 
 This embodies the essence of dialectics, but it requires explanations and develop-ment. 
 * See p. 
 220 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
14) the apparent return to the old (nega-tion of the negation). 
 15) the struggle of content with form and conversely. 
 The throwing off of theform, the transformation of the con-tent. 
 16) the transition of quantity into quality and vice versa . 
 ((1 5 and 1 6 are e x a m -p l e s of 9)) # (continuation. 
 See the previous page. 
*) ...“Dialectics is One of those ancient sciences which has been most misjudged in modern metaphysics here obviously = the-ory of knowledge and logic and in the popular philosophy of ancients and mod-erns alike.... 
” (336) Diogenes Laertius said of Plato that he was the father of dialectics , the third philosophical science (as Thales was the father of natural phi-losophy and Socrates of moral philoso-phy), but that those who are particularlyloud in talking about this merit of Plato’s give little thought to it.... 
 ...“Dialectics has often been considered an art, as though it rested upon a sub-jective talent and did not belong to the objectivity of the Notion.... 
” (336-337)It is an important merit of Kant’s to have re-introduced dialectics, to have recognised it as “necessary” (a property) “of reason”(337) but the result (of the applicationof dialectics) must be “opposite” (to Kant-ianism). 
 See below . 
Plato and dialectics The objec-tivity of dialectics{ There follows a very interesting, clear and important outline of dialectics . 
 ...“Besides generally appearing as con-tingent, dialectics usually has this more detailed form, that when in respect of any particular object, e. 
g. 
, the world, mo-tion, point etc. 
, it is shown that it has any particular determination—e. 
g. 
 (in the order of the above-mentioned objects)finitude in space or time, presence at this place, absolute negation of space— it is, however, shown further that it haswith equal necessity the opposite deter-mination, e. 
g. 
, infinity in space and time, non-presence at this place, and a rela-tion to space, consequently spatiality. 
 The older Eleatic school applied its dialec-tics chiefly against motion; Plato frequent-ly against contemporary ideas and con-cepts (especially those of the Sophists), but also against pure categories and re-flection-determinations; the developed lat-er scepticism extended it not only to the immediate so-called data of conscious-ness and maxims of ordinary life, but also to all the concepts of science. 
 The conclusion which is drawn from such dia-lectics is contradiction and the nullity o f the assertions made. 
 But it may occur in a double sense,—in the objective sense,the object which thus contradicts itself being held to cancel itself and to be null (—this was, for instance, the Eleatic con-clusion, by which, for example, the world, motion, and the point were deprived of truth ), or in the subjective seuse, cogni-tion being held to be defective . 
 The latter conclusion is sometimes understood to mean that it is only this dialectics that effectsthe trick of an illusive show. 
 This is the ordinary view of so-called sound commonfrom the history of dialectics the role of scepticism in the history of dialectics dialectics is understood to be a trick *nothing else—Ed. 
sense, which holds fast to the evidence of the senses and to customary ideas and expressions.... 
” (337-338) Diogenes the Dog,62 for example, proved movement by walking up and down, “a vuI-gar refutation” (338), says Hegel. 
 ...“Or again the result reached—that of subjective nullity—relates, not to the dia-lectic, itself, but rather to the cognition against which it is directed, and in thesense of scepticism and likewise of theKantian philosophy, to cognition in gener-al.... 
” (338). 
 ...“The fundamental prejudice here is that the dialectic has only a negatitve re-sult . 
” (338) Among other things, it is said that it is a merit of Kant’s to have drawnattention to dialectics and to the con-sideration “of the determinations of t hought in and for themselves. 
”* (339) “The object in its existence without thought and Notion is an image or a name:it is what it is in the determinations of thought and Notion.... 
” ...“It must not therefore be considered the fault of an object, or of cognition, that theymanifest themselves as dialectical by theirnature and by an external connection.... 
” ...“Thus all opposites which are taken as fixed, such as, for example, finite andinfinite, or individual and universal, arecontradictory not by virtue of some exter-nal connection, but rather are transitionsin and for themselves, as the considera-tion of their nature showed.... 
” (339)Kantian-ism = (also) scepticism That is cor-rect! I m a g e and t h o u g h t , the develop-ment of both, nil aliud* The object manifests itself as dialectical Concepts are not immobile but—in and for them-selves, by their na-ture = t r a n s i t i o n A page from V. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s manuscript: Conspectus of Hegel’s book The Science of Logic . 
— A page from V. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s manuscript : Conspectus of Hegel’s book The Science of Logic . 
— Not empty negation, not futile negation, not scepti-cal negation, vacillation and doubt is characteristic and essential in dialectics,—which undoubtedly containsthe element of negation and indeed as its most impor-tant element—no, but negation as a moment of con-nection, as a moment of development, retaining thepositive, i. 
e. 
, without any vacillations, without anyeclecticism. 
“Now this is the standpoint which was referred to above, in which a universal # first term considered in and for itself shows itself to be its own Other.... 
” (340) ...“But the Other is essentially not the empty negative or Nothing which is com-monly taken as the result of dialec-tics, it is the Other of the first, the negative of the immediate; it is thus determined as mediated—and altogether contains thedetermination of the first. 
 The first is thusessentially contained and preserved in the Other. 
—To hold fast the positive in its neg-ative, and the content of the presupposition in the result, is the most important part of rational cognition; also only the simplestreflection is needed to furnish convictionof the absolute truth and necessity of thisrequirement, while with regard to theexamples of proofs, the whole of Logic consists of these. 
” (340) Dialectics consists in general in the ne-gation of the first proposition, in its re-placement by a second (in the transition of the first into the second, in the demon-stration of the connection of the firstwith the second, etc. 
). 
 The second can bemade the predicate of the first—# The first uni-versal con-cept (also = the first encountered, universal concept) This is very important for understand-ing dialectics — “for example, the finite is infinite, one is many, the individual is the universal.... 
” (341) ...“The first or immediate term is the No-tion in itself , and therefore is the nega-tive only in itself ; the dialectical moment with it therefore consists in this, thatthe distinction which it implicitly contains is posited in it. 
 The second term on theother hand is itself the determinate en-tity, the distinction or relation; hence with it the dialectical moment consists in thepositing of the unity which is contained in it.... 
”— (341-342) (In relation to the simple and origi-nal, “first,” positive assertions, proposi-tions, etc. 
, the “dialectical moment,” i. 
e. 
, scientific consideration, demands the dem-onstration of difference, connection, tran-sition. 
 Without that the simple positive assertion is incomplete, lifeless, dead. 
 Inrelation to the “second,” negative propo-sition, the “dialectical moment” demands the demonstration of “ u n i t y ,” i. 
e. 
, of the connection of negative and positive, the presence of this positive in the nega-tive. 
 From assertion to negation—fromnegation to “unity” with the asserted— without this dialectics becomes empty ne-gation, a game, or scepsis. 
) ... —“If then the negative, the deter-minate, the relation, judgment, and all determinations which fall under this sec-ond moment, do not of themselves appear as contradictory and dialectical, this is a mere fault of thought which does notconfront its thoughts one with another. 
 For the materials— opposite determinations in one relation —are posited already and are at hand for thought. 
 But formal thought makes identity its law, and allows the“in itself ” = potentially, not yet de-veloped, not yet åunfolded contradictory content which lies before it to drop into the sphere of sensuous repre-sentation, into space and time, where the contradictory terms are held apart in spa-tial and temporal juxtaposition and thuscome before consciousness without mu-tual contact . 
” (342) “Come before consciousness without mutual contact” (the object)—that isthe essence of anti-dialectics. 
 It is only here that Hegel has, as it were, allowed the ass’s ears of idealism to show them-selves—by referring time and space (inconnection with sensuous representation)to something lower compared with thought . 
 Incidentally, in a certain sense, sensuous representation is, of course, lower. 
 The crux lies in the fact thatthought must apprehend the whole “re-presentation” in its movement, but for that thought must be dialectical. 
 Is sensuous representation c l o s e r to reality than thought? Both yes and no. 
 Sensuous representation cannot appre-hend movement a s a w h o l e , it can-not, for example, apprehend movementwith a speed of 300,000 km. 
 per second,but thought does and must apprehend it. 
 Thought, taken from sensuous representa-tion, also reflects reality; time is a formof being of objective reality. 
 Here, in theconcept of time (and not in the relationof sensuous representation to thought)is the idealism of Hegel. 
 ...“In this connection this thought* makes it its fixed principle that contradic-tion is unthinkable; but in truth the think-ing of contradiction is the essential mo-ment of the Notion; in point of fact formal * formal thought— Ed. 
NB *“the most objective moment”— Ed. 
 **quadruplicity— Ed. 
the kernel of dialectics the criterion of truth the unity of the con-cept and realitythought does think contradiction, but im-mediately disregards it, and with the asser-tion of that principle” (the statement that contradiction is unthinkable) “passes overto abstract negation. 
” (342) “The negativity which has just been considered is the turning-point of the movement of the Notion. 
 It is the simple point of negative self-relation, the inter-nal source of all activity, vital and spirit-ual self-movement, the dialectic soul whichall truth has in it and through which italone is truth; for the transcendence ofthe opposition between the Notion and Reality, and that unity which is the truth, rest upon this subjectivity alone. 
—Thesecond negative, the negative of the neg-ative, which we have reached, is thistranscendence of the contradiction, but isno more the activity of an external reflec-tion than the contradiction is; it is the in-nermost and most objective moment of Life and Spirit, by virtue of which a subject,the person, the free, has being. 
” (342-343) Important here is: 1) the char-acterisation of dialectics: self-move-ment, the source of activity, themovement of life and spirit; thecoincidence of the concepts of thesubject (man) with reality; 2) ob-jectivism to the highest degree (“der objektiviste Moment”*). 
 This negation of the negation is the third term, says Hegel (343)—“if number is applicable”—but it can also be taken as the fourth (Quadruplicität**), (344) counting two negations: the “simple” (or( ( The difference is not clear to me, is not the absolu-te equivalent to the more concrete?“formal”) and the “absolute. 
” (343 i. 
f. 
) “That this unity, as well as the whole form of the method, is a triplicity is wholly, however, the merely superficial and ex-ternal side of the manner of cognition” (344) —but, he says, that is already “an infi-nite merit of Kant’s philosophy” that itat least (even if ohne Begriff*) demon-strated this. 
 “Formalists, it is true, have also seized upon triplicity, and have held fast to itsempty framework ; and this form has been rendered tedious and of ill-repute by theshallow misuse and the barrenness of mod-ern so-called philosophic construction , which consists simply in attaching the for-mal framework without concept and im-manent determination to all sorts of mat-ter and employing it for external arrange-ment. 
 But its inner value cannot be dimin-ished by this vapid misuse, and it must still be deemed of high value that the out-ward form of the rational has been dis-covered, albeit not understood. 
” (344-345) The result of the negation of the nega-tion, this third term is “not a qui-escent third term, but, as this unity” (of contradictions), “is self-mediatingmovement and activity.... 
” (345) The result of this dialectical transforma-tion into the “third” term, into the synthe-sis, is a new premise, assertion, etc. 
, which in turn becomes the source of a further analysis. 
 But into it, into this “third” * without any concept— Ed. 
NB: the “triplici-ty” of dialec-tics is its external su-perficial side Hegel sav-agely attacks formalism, tedious and idle play with dialectics *Going into itself —Ed. 
stage has already entered the “ c o n t e n t ” of cognition (“the content of cognition as such enters within the sphere of contempla-tion”*) — and the method is extended into a system . 
 (346) The beginning of all consideration, of the whole analysis—this first premise—now appears indeterminate, “imperfect”; the need arises to prove, “derive” (ablei-ten) (347) it and it turns out that “this may seem equivalent to the demand for an infinite backward progress in proof and derivation” (347)—but, on the other hand,the new premise drives f o r w a r d .... 
 ...“Thus, cognition rolls forward from con-tent to content. 
 This progress determinesitself, first, in this manner, that it be-gins from simple determinatenesses andthat each subsequent one is richer and more concrete . 
 For the result contains its own beginning, and the development of the beginning has made it the richer bya new determinateness. 
 The universal isthe foundation; the progress therefore mustnot be taken as a flow from Other to Other. 
In the absolute method the Notion pre-serves itself in its otherness, and the uni-versal in its particularisation, in the Judg-ment and in reality; it raises to each nextstage of determination the whole mass ofits antecedent content, and by its dialec-tical progress not only loses nothing and leaves nothing behind, but carries with it all that it has acquired, enriching andconcentrating itself upon itself.... 
” (349) This extract is not at all bad as a kind of summing up of dialectics. 
 But expansion requires also deepening (“In-sich-gehen ”*) “and greater extension is also higher intensity. 
” (349) ( ( “The richest consequently is also the most concrete and subjective , and that which carries itself back into the simplest depth is also the most powerful and com-prehensive. 
” (349) “In this manner it comes about that each step in the progress of further determi-nation in advancing from the indetermi-nate beginning is also a rearward approach to it, so that two processes which mayat first appear to be different (the regres-sive confirmation of the beginning and its progressive further determination) coincide and are the same. 
” (350) It is impermissible deprezieren* this indeterminate beginning: ...“It requires no apology that it” (the beginning) “may be admitted mere-ly as provisional and hypothetical. 
 Any objections which might be advanced—about the limits of human cognition, orthe need of a critical investigation of theinstrument of cognition before the prob-lem is attacked—are themselves supposi-tions which, as concrete determinations, imply the need for their mediation andproof. 
 Formally then they are no betterthan that beginning against which they protest, and rather require a derivationby reason of their more concrete content; so that it is sheer presumption to demand that they should have preferential consid-eration. 
 Their content is untrue, for theymake incontrovertible and absolute whatis known to be finite and untrue (namely,a restricted cognition which is determined as form and instrument as against its * to depreciate— Ed. 
This NB : The richest is the most concrete and most s u b j e c-t i v e NB: Hegel against Kant \ e *“fulfilled Being”— Ed. 
 **the idea of absolute cognition— Ed. 
content); and this untrue cognition is it-self form and regressive confirmation. 
— The method of truth too knows the begin-ning to be incomplete because it is be-ginning, but also knows this incompleteterm in general as necessary, because truthis only the coining to itself through thenegativity of immediacy.... 
” (350-351) By reason of the nature of the method which has been demonstrated, science isseen to be a circle which returns upon it-self, for mediation bends back its end intoits beginning, simple ground. 
 Further, thiscircle is a circle of circles .... 
 The various sciences ... are fragments of this chain.... 
” (351) “The method is the pure Notion which is related only to itself; it is thereforethe simple self-relation which is Being. 
But now it is also Being fulfilled , the self-comprehending Notion, Being as the con-crete and also thoroughly intensive to-tality.... 
” (352) ...“Secondly, this Idea” ((die Idee des absoluten Erkennens**)) “still is logical,it is enveloped in pure thought, and isthe science only of the divine Notion. 
The systematic development is itself a real-isation, but is maintained within the same sphere. 
 Since the pure Idea of Cogni-tion is to that extent enclosed in subjectiv-ity, it is an impulse to transcend the latter, and pure truth, as the last result,also becomes the beginning of another sphere and science . 
 This transition need here only be intimated. 
against Kant (correct) Science is a circle of circles NB: the con-nection of the dialectical method with “erfülltes Sein”* with Being that is full of con-tent and concrete It is noteworthy that the whole chapter on the “Absol-ute Idea” scarcely says a word about God (hardly ever has a “divine” “notion” slipped out accidentally) and apart from that— this NB —it contains almost nothing that is specifically i d e a l i s m , but has for its main subject the d i a l e c t i c a l method . 
 The sum-total, the last word and essence of Hegel’s logic is thedialectical method —this is extremely noteworthy. 
 And one thing more: in this m o s t i d e a l i s t i c o f Hegel’s works there is the least idealism and the m o s t m a t e r i a l i s m . 
 “Contradictory,” but a fact! Vol. 
 VI, p. 
 399**** The Encyclopaedia § 227—excellent on * addendum— Ed. 
 **Hegel, Werke , Bd. 
 VI, Berlin, 1840. 
— Ed. 
 *** “but this Idea which has firing is Nature”— Ed. 
 **** Hegel, Werke , Bd. 
 VI, Berlin, 1840. 
— Ed. 
“For the idea posits itself as the abso-lute unity of the pure Notion and its Reality, and thus gathers itself into the immediacy of Being ; and in doing so, as totality in this form, it is Nature . 
” (352-353) This sentence on the last (353) page of the Logic is highly noteworthy. 
 The tran-sition of the logical idea to nature . 
 It brings one within a hand’s grasp of mate-rialism. 
 Engels was right 63 when he said that Hegel’s system was materialism turnedupside down. 
 This is not the last sen-tence of the Logic , but what comes after it to the end of the page is unimportant. 
 End of the Logic . 
 17. 
XII. 
1914. 
Transition from the Idea to N a -t u r e ... NB: In the small Logic (Ency-clopaedia , Par. 
 244, Zu-satz* p. 
 414** the last sen-tence of the book reads: “diese seiende Idee aber ist die Natur”*** *is usually said— Ed. 
 **“tortures”— Ed. 
NB: “genus, or force and law” (genus = law!) Quite correct! Cf. 
 Marx’s remark in Capital , I, 5, 264the analytical method (to “analyse” the “Given concrete” phenomenon—“to give the form of abstraction” to its individual aspects and “herausheben”—“to bring into relief”—“the genus, or force and law” p. 
 398—and on its application: It is not at all “an arbitray matter” (398) whether we apply the analytical or the synthetical method (as man pflegt zu sprech-en*)—“it is the form of the very objects that have to be cognised upon which it depends” (399) Locke and the empiricists adopt the standpoint of analysis. 
 And they often say that “in general cognition cannot do more. 
” (398) “It is, however, at once apparent that this turns things upside down, and that cognition which wishes to take things as they are thereby falls into contradiction with itself. 
” The chemist, for example, “martert”** a piece of flesh and discovers in it nitrogen, carbon, etc. 
 “But then these abstract substances have ceased to be flesh. 
” There can be many definitions, for ob-jects have many aspects. 
 “The richer the object to be defined, i. 
e. 
, the more numerous the aspects which it offers to one’s notice, the more various also are the definitions framed from them” (400 § 229)—for example, the definition of life, of the state, etc. 
 In their definitions, Spinoza and Schel-ling present a mass of “speculation” (Hegel here obviously uses this word in the good sense) but “in the form of assurances. 
” *the Notion, the “idea,” “the unity of the Notion and objectiv-ity”— Ed. 
 **v o l i t i o n —Ed. 
 *** “The Idea of the Good”— Ed. 
Philosophy, however, must prove and de-rive everything, and not limit itself to definitions. 
 Division (Einteilung) must be “natural and not merely artificial, i. 
e. 
, arbitrary. 
” (401) Pp. 
 4 0 3 -4 0 4 —anger at “construction” and the “play” of construing, whereas it is a question of Begriff, of “Idee,” of “Ein-heit des Begriffs und der Objektivität.... 
”* (403) In the small Encyclopaedia § 233, section b is entitled D a s W o l l e n ** (which in the large Logic is “Die Idee des Guten”***). 
 Activity is a “contradiction”—the pur-pose is real and not real, possible and not ... etc. 
 “Formally, however, the disappearance of this contradiction consists in activity abolishing the subjectivity of the pur-pose and along with it the objectivity, the opposite, in virtue of which both are finite, and abolishing not merely the one-sidedness of this subjectivity, but the subjectivity as a whole. 
” (406) The standpoint of Kant and Fichte (es-pecially in moral philosophy) is the stand-point of purpose, of subjective ought (407) (without connection with the objective).... 
 Speaking of the Absolute Idea, Hegel ridicules (§ 237, Vol. 
 VI, p. 
 409) “decla-mation” over it, as if everything were revealed in it, and he remarks that “the absolute idea” ... is ... “the univer-sal,” “but the universal not merely as ab-stract form, to which (sic!) the particular content stands contrasted as an Other, but, as the absolute form into which all determinations, the whole fullness of thecontent posited by it, have retreated. 
 Inthis respect the absolute idea can be com-pared to an old man, who utters the samestatements of religion as a child, but for whom they have the significance of his whole lifetime. 
 Even if the child under-stands the religious content, it is for himstill only something outside of which thewhole of life and the whole of the worldlie. 
” (409) ...“The interest lies in the whole move-ment.... 
” (§ 237, 409) ...“The content is the living develop-ment of the idea.... 
” “Each of the stageshitherto reviewed is an image of the ab-solute, but at first in a limited way.... 
” (401) § 238, Addendum:“The philosophical method is both ana-lytical and synthetical, but not in thesense of a bare juxtaposition or a merealternation of these two methods of finite cognition, but rather in such a way that it holds them transcended in itself, and in every one of its movements, there-fore, it proves itself simultaneously ana-lytical and synthetical. 
 Philosophicalthought proceeds analytically, insofar as it only accepts its object, the Idea, allows the latter its own way and, as it were,only looks on at its movement and de-velopment. 
 To this extent philosophisingis wholly passive. 
 Philosophic thought,however, is equally synthetic and shows itself to be the activity of the Notion itself. 
 That, however, involves the effort to re-frain from our own fancies and privatetrès bien! A beautiful comparison! Instead of banal reli-gion, one must take all kinds of ab-stract truths excellent! très bien! very good! (and graphic) /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR opinions, which always seek to obtrude themselves.... 
” (411) (§ 243, p. 
 413)... “Thus the method is not an external form, but the soul andnotion of the content.... 
” (End of the Encyclopaedia ; see above on the side the extract from the end of Log-ic. 
*) * See p. 
 234 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 Preußische Jahrbücher66 (Bd. 
 151) 1913, March, an article by Dr. 
 Ferd. 
 J. 
 Schmidt:“Hegel and Marx. 
” The author hails the return to Hegel, reviles “theoretico-cognitive scholasticism,” quotes theneo-Hegelians Constantin Rössler and Adolf Lasson (of the Preußische Jahrbücher ) and, in connection with Plenge ’s book, states that Marx did not understand the significance of the “national idea” as a syn-thesis. 
 Marx’s merit—that of organisingthe workers—was a great one, but ...one-sided. 
 An example of the “liberal” (or rather bourgeois, worker-loving—for the author is probably a conservative) castration of Marx. 
 MacTaggart , Ellis M’Taggart : Studies in the Hegelian Dialectic , Cambridge, 1896 (259 pp. 
). 
 Review in Zeitschrift für Phi-losophie , 67 Bd. 
 119 (1902), S. 
 185———, says that the author is an expert on He-gel’s philosophy, which he defends againstSeth, Balfour, Lotze, Trendelenburg, etc. 
(the author MacTaggart is obviously anarch-i dealist). 
 Emil Hammacher : Die Bedeutung der Philosophic Hegels . 
 (92 SS. 
) 1911, Leipzig. 
NBNOTES ON REVIEWS OF HEGEL’S LOGIC 65 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR Review in Zeitschrift für Philosophie , Bd. 
 148 (1912), p. 
 95. 
 Says that the book contains rather good observations on “the reappearance of post-Kantian idealism atthe present time,” that Windelband is anagnostic (p. 
 96), etc. 
, but that the authorcompletely failed to understand Hegel’s“absolute idealism,” as incidentally also Riehl, Dilthey and other “stars. 
” The author is said to have undertaken a taskbeyond his powers. 
 Andrew Seth: The Development from Kant to Hegel with Chapters on the Philosophyof Religion , London, 1882. 
 Review in Zeitschrift für Philosophie , Bd. 
 83, S. 
 145 (1883). 
 The author is said to defend Hegel against Kant. 
 (Laudatory in general. 
) Stirling : The Secret of Hegel . 
 Review in the same journal, Bd. 
 53 (1868), p. 
 268. 
 The author is said to be an exceptionally fervent worshipper of Hegel, whom he in-terprets for English readers. 
 Bertrando Spaventa: Da Socrate a He-gel, Bari, 1905. 
 (432 pp. 
 4, 50 lire). 
 Review ibidem, Bd. 
 129 (1906)—the book is said to be a collection of articles , inter alia about Hegel, of whom Spaventa is a faith-ful adherent. 
 Stirling : The Secret of Hegel . 
 Italian: Spaventa : Da Socrate a Hegel . 
 Ralf. 
 Marian o. 
 German: Michelet and Haring. 
 Dialekitische Methode Hegels (1888). 
 Schmitt. 
 Das Geheimnis der Hegel-schen Dialektik (1888). 
 Regarding recent literatuire on H e g e l . 
 Neo-Hegelians: C a i r d , B r a d l e y . 
 J. 
 B. 
 B a i l l i e : The Origin and Signifi-cance of Hegel’s Logic , L o n d o n , 1901 (375 pp. 
). 
 A review in Revue Philoso-phique ,68 1902 , 2, S 3 1 2 . 
 Says that he does not merely repeat Hegelian terminol-ogy (like Véra ), but tries to examine and explain historically . 
 Incidentally, Chapter X: the relation of logic to nature (Hegelis said not to have achieved his aim). 
 He-gel’s significance is that he “demonstratedthe objective character of knowledge. 
” (p. 
 314) W i l l i a m W a l l a c e : Prolegomena to the Study of Hegel’s Philosophy andEspecially of His Logic , Oxford and London, 1 8 9 4 . 
 Review in R e v u e P h i l o -s o p h i q u e, 1 8 9 4 , 2, p. 
 538. 
 Second edition, the first was in 1874. 
 The author translated Hegel’s Logic . 
 “Mr. 
 Wallace accurately expounds the Hegelian conception of this science (logic)... a science which governs both the philo-sophy of nature and that of mind, since pure thought or the idea is the common basis both or material reality and psychical real-ity. 
” On Wallace , a laudatory but shallow review in Z e i t s c h r i f t f ü r P h i -l o s o p h i e , Bd. 
 111 (1898), p. 
 208. 
 P. 
 R o t t a : La renaissance de Hegel et “la philosophia perennis ” in the Italian Rivista di Filosofia , 1911, I—(review in Revue Philosophique , 1911, 2, p. 
 333). 
 Rotta is a supporter of Caird. 
 Seemingly, nil. 
By the same author: 1894 a translation of The Philo-sophy of Mind ,69 with an explanatory chapter. 
 Review ibid. 
 DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD Among other things ... “Bradley’s neo-Hegelian conception of an invisible energy transferred from one manifestation to another, present and operative in all changesand all particular activities. 
” 70 J . 
 G r i e r H i b b e n : Hegel’s Logic, an Essay in Interpretation, New York,1 9 0 2 (313 pp. 
). 
 Review in Revue Philosophique , 1904 , Vol. 
 I, p. 
 430: “In spite of its title, the work of M. 
 H. 
 is not an interpretative commentary but rather an almost literalsummary. 
” The author has compiled some-thing in the nature of a dictionary of the terms used in Hegel’s Logic . 
 But this, it is said, is not the essence of the matter: “Thecommentators are still in dispute overthe very position taken by Hegel overthe fundamental meaning and true aimof his dialectic. 
 The celebrated criticisms of S e t h are opposed by recent exegeses which attribute a quite different significanceto the Logic , taken as a whole, notably such as those of M a c T a g g a r t and G. 
 N o ë l . 
” (431) According to Hibben, Hegel’s Logic “n’est pas on simple système spéculatif, une plus ou moins savante combinaison de conceptsabstraits; elle est en même temps ‘une in-terprétation de la vie universelle danstoute la plénitude de sa signification con-crète. 
’ ”** (p. 
 430) *L. 
 Weber— Ed. 
 **“is not a simple peculstive system, a more or less scientific combination of abstract concepts; it is at the same time “an interpreta-tion of universal life in all the fullness of its concrete significance. 
”—Ed. 
an idealist interpreta-tion of energy?? The writer of the re-view* notes in general “the rebirth of Hegelian-ism in the Anglo-Saxon countries” ... “in recent years. 
” NB Published according to the manuscriptWritten in December 1914 First published in 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII NB Published according to the manuscriptWritten in 1915 First published in 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XIICONSPECTUS OF HEGEL’S BOOK LECTURES ON THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY 71 p. 
 37* ...“If the truth is abstract it must be untrue. 
 Healthy human rea-son goes out towards what is con-crete.... 
 Philosophy is what is most an-tagonistic to abstraction, it leads back to the concrete.... 
” p. 
 40: comparison of the history of phi-losophy with a circle —“a circle ... which, as periphery, has very manycircles.... 
” ...“I maintain that the sequence in the systems of philosophy in history is the same as the sequence in the logical deduc-tion of the Notion-determinations of theIdea. 
 I maintain that if the fundamental * Hegel, Werke , Bd. 
 XIII, Berlin, 1833— Ed. 
A very pro-found correct comparison!! Every shade of thought = a circle on the great circle (a spi-ral) of the development of human thought in general NBHEGEL. 
 LECTURES ON THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY, WORKS, VOL. 
 XIII INTRODUCTION TO THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY Extremely lengthy, empty and tedious on the relation of philosophy to religion. 
 In general, an introduction ofalmost 200 pages—impossible!! * “to all every twaddle (?) a philosophy”— Ed. 
 **beginning— Ed. 
conceptions of the systems appearing in the history of Philosophy be entirely di-vested of that which pertains to their outward form, their relation to the partic-ular and the like, the various stages inthe determination of the Idea itself arefound in its logical Notion. 
” (43) “Conversely in the logical progression taken for itself, there is, so far as its prin-cipal elements are concerned, the progres-sion of historical manifestations; but it isnecessary, of course, to be able to discernthese pure Notions in what the historicalform contains. 
” (43) P. 
 56—ridicule of the chasing after fash-ion,—after those who are ready “auchjedes Geschwöge (?) für eine Philo-sophie auszuschreien. 
”* Pp. 
 57-58—excellent for strict historicity in thehistory of philosophy, so that one should not ascribe to the ancients a “development” of their ideas, whichis comprehensible to us but whichin fact was not present in the ancients. 
 Thales, for example, did not possess the conception Ä ÇχÅ** (as a prin-ciple ), did not possess the concept of cause ... ...“Thus there are whole nations which have not this concept” (of cause)“at all; indeed it involves a greatstep forward in development.... 
” (58) ...“Hence the determinations are dry, destitute of process, undialectical, and sta-tionary.... 
” (244) This refers to the general ideas of the Pythagoreans;—“number” and its sig-nificance, etc. 
 Ergo: it is said in regard to the primitive ideas of the Pythago-reans, their primitive philosophy; their“determinations” of substance, things,the world, are “dry, destitute of process(movement), undialectical. 
” Tracing predominantly the dialectical i n the history of philosophy, Hegel cites theviews of the Pythagoreans: ...“one, addedto even, makes odd (2 +1 = 3);—added to odd, it makes even (3 +1 = 4);—it” (Eins*) “has the property of making ge-rade ( = even), and consequently it must *one— Ed. 
negative de-termination of dialecticsVOLUME XIII. 
 VOLUME I OF THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY. 
 HISTORY OF GREEK PHILOSOPHY IONIC PHILOSOPHY 72 “Anaximander (610-547 B. 
 C. 
) supposes man to develop from a fish. 
” (213) PYTHAGORAS AND PYTHAGOREANS 73 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR *Antichthon— Ed. 
(“harmony of the world”) relation of the subjec-tive to the objectiveitself be even. 
 Thus unity contains in it-self different determinations. 
” (246) Musical harmony and the philosophy of Pythagoras: “The subjective, and, in the case of hear-ing, simple feeling, which, however, existsinherently in relation, Pythagoras has at-tributed to the understanding, and he at-tained his object by means of fixed deter-minations. 
” (262)Pp. 
 265-266: the movement of the heav-enly bodies—their harmony—the har-mony of the singing heavenly spheres inaudible to us (in the P y t h a g o -r e a n s ): Aristotle, De coelo , II, 13 (and 9) 74: ...“Fire was placed by the Pythagoreans in the middle, but the Earth was madea star that moved around this central bodyin a circle.... 
” But for them this fire was not the sun.... 
 “They thus rely, not on sensuous appearance, but on grounds.... 
 These ten spheres” ten spheres or orbits or movements of the ten planets: Mer-cury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Sun,Moon, Earth, the Milky Way and theGegenerde* (—antipode?) invented “for an even number,” for 10 75 “like all that is in motion, make a sound; but each makes a different tone, according to the difference in its size and velocity. 
 This is determined by the different distances,which bear a harmonious relationship toone another, in accordance with musicalintervals; by this means a harmonioussound (music) arises in the moving spheres (world).... 
” Concerning the soul, the Pythagoreans thought “ die Seele sei : die Sonnenstäub-chen ”* (p. 
 268) ( = dust particle, atom) (Aristotle, De anima , I, 2). 
76 In the soul—seven circles (elements) as in the heavens. 
 Aristotle, De ani-ma, I, 3—p. 
 269. 
 And here immediately are recounted the fables that Pythagoras (who had taken from the Egyptians the doctrine of the im-mortality of the soul and the transmi-gration of souls) related about himself, thathis soul had dwelt 207 years in other people,etc. 
, etc. 
 (271) NB: the linking of the germs of scien-tific thought with fantasy à la religion,mythology. 
 And nowadays! Likewise,the same linking but the propor-tions of science and mythology are dif-ferent. 
 More on the theory of numbers of Pythag-oras. 
 “Numbers, where are they? Dispersed through space, dwelling in independencein the heaven of ideas? They are not things immediately in themselves, for a * “the soul is solar dust ”—Ed. 
An allusion to the struc-ture of matter! the role of dust (in the sunbeam) in ancient philosophy Pythagoreans: “guesses,” fantasies on the resem-blance of the macrocosm and the microcosm NB THE ELEATIC SCHOOL77 *In the Eleatic school— Ed. 
 **The next page of the manuscript contains the text given be-low. 
— Ed. 
what is dialectics? (α) (β)thing, a substance, is something quite other than a number—a body bears no resemblance to it. 
” 254 Q u o t a t i o n from Aristotle?— Met-aphysik , I, 9, is it not? From Sextus Empiricus? Unclear . 
 Pp. 
 279-280—the Pythagoreans accept the ether (...“A ray penetrates from the sun through the dense and cold ether,”etc. 
) Thus the conjecture about the ether has existed for thousands of years, re-maining until now a conjecture . 
 But at the present time there are alreadya thousand times more subsurface chan-nels leading to a solution of the prob-lem, to a scientific determination ofthe ether. 
 In speaking of the Eleatic school, Hegel says about d i a l e c t i c s : ...“We here” (in der eleatischen Schule*) “find the beginning of dialectics, i. 
e. 
, simply the pure movement of thoughtin Notions; likewise we see the oppositionof thought to outward appearance or sen-suous Being, or of that which is implicitto the being-for-another of this implicit-ness, and in the objective existence we see the contradiction which it has in itself,or dialectics proper.... 
” (280) See the nextpage. 
** Here are essentially two determinations (two characteristics, two typical features Bestimmungen, keine Definitionen*) ofdialectics 78: α) “the pure movement of thought in Notions”; β) “in the (very) essence of objects (to elucidate) (to reveal) the con-tradiction which it (this essence)has in itself ( d i a l e c t i c s p r o p e r ). 
” In other words, this “fragment” of He-gel’s should be reproduced as follows: Dialectics in general is “the pure move-ment of thought in Notions” (i. 
e. 
, puttingit without the mysticism of idealism:human concepts are not fixed but areeternally in movement, they pass intoone another, they flow into one another, otherwise they do not reflect living life. 
 The analysis of concepts, the study ofthem, the “art of operating with them”(Engels) 79 always demands study of the m o v e m e n t of concepts, of their inter-connection, of their mutual transitions). 
 In particular, dialectics is the study of the opposition of the Thing-in-itself(an sich), of the essence, substratum, sub-stance—from the appearance, from “Be-ing-for-Others. 
” (Here, too, we see a tran-sition, a flow from the one to the other: the essence appears. 
 The appearance is essen-tial. 
) Human thought goes endlessly deeperfrom appearance to essence, from essence ofthe first order, as it were, to essence ofthe second order, and so on without end. 
 Dialectics in the proper sense is the * determinations, not definitions— Ed. 
Hegel on dialectics (see the previous page) the compari-son is a tempting one... Gods in the image of man dialecticsstudy of contradiction in the very essence of objects : not only are appearances tran-sitory, mobile, fluid, demarcated only by conventional boundaries, but the es-sence of things is so as well. 
 Sextus Empiricus presents the point of view of the Sceptics as follows: ...“Let us imagine that in a house in which there are many valuables, therewere those who sought for gold by night;each would then think that he had foundthe gold, but would not know for certainwhether he had actually found it. 
 Thus philosophers come into this world as into a great house to seek the truth, but werethey to reach it, they could not tellwhether they had really attained it.... 
”(288-289) Xenophanes (the Eleatic) said: “Did beasts and lions only have hands, Works of art thereby to bring forth, as do men, They would, in creating divine forms, give to them What in image and size belongs to themselves.... 
” (289-290) “What especially characterises Zeno is dialectics, which ... begins with him.... 
”(302) ...“We find in Zeno likewise true objective dialectics . 
” (309) (310: on the refutation of philosophic systems: “Falsity must not be demonstrat-ed as untrue because the opposite is true,but in itself.... 
”) “Dialectics is in general α) external dia-lectics, in which this movement is differ-ent from the comprehension of this move-ment; β) not a movement of our intelli-gence only, but what proceeds from the nature of the thing itself, i. 
e. 
, from the pure Notion of the content. 
 The former is a manner of regarding objects in such a way that reasons are revealed and aspectsof them shown, by means of which allthat was supposed to be firmly fixed, ismade to totter. 
 There may be reasons whichare altogether external too, and we shall speak further of this dialectics when deal-ing with the Sophists. 
 The other dialectics,however, is the immanent contemplationof the object: it is taken for itself, withoutprevious hypothesis, idea or obligation,not under any external conditions, laws, grounds. 
 We have to put ourselves right into the thing, to consider the object initself and to take it in the determina-tions which it has. 
 In regarding it thus,it” (er) (sic!) “shows from itself that it con-tains opposed determinations, and thus transcends itself; this dialectics we more especially find in the ancients. 
 Subjec-tive dialectics, which reasons from exter-nal grounds, does justice when it is grantedthat: ‘in the correct there is what is notcorrect, and in the false the true as well. 
’ True dialectics leaves nothing whatever to its object, as if the latter were defi-cient on one side only; but it disintegratesin the entirety of its nature.... 
” (p. 
 311) With the “principle of development” in the twentieth century (indeed, at the end of the nineteenth century also) “all are agreed. 
” Yes, but this superficial, notthought out, accidental, philistine “agree-ment” is an agreement of such a kind a s stifles and vulgarises the truth—if every-thing develops, then everything passes from one into another, for development as is well known is not a simple, universal andeternal growth, enlargement (respective dim-objective dialectics Regarding the question of d i a l e c-t i c s and its objective significance... NB NB. 
 This can and must be t u r n e d r o u n d : the question is not whether there is movement, but how to express it in the logic of concepts Not bad! Where is this continuation of the anec-inution), etc. 
—If that is so, then, in the first place, evolution has to be under-stood more exactly , as the arising and passing away of everything, as mutualtransitions. 
—And, in the second place,if e v e r y t h i n g develops, does not that apply also to the most general concepts and categories of thought? If not, it means that thinking is not connected with being. 
 If it does, it means that there is a dialec-tics of concepts and a dialectics of cogni-tion which has objective significance. 
 + ...“Zenos treatment of motion was above all objectively dialectical.... 
” (p. 
 313) ...“Movement itself is the dialectic of all that is.... 
” It did not occur to Zeno to deny movement as “sensuous certainty,”it was merely a question “nach ihrer (move-ment’s) Wahrheit” (of the truth of move-ment). 
 (313) And on the next page, wherehe relates the anecdote how Diogenes the Cynic, of Sinope, refuted movement by walking, Hegel writes: ...“But the anecdote continues that, when a pupil was satisfied with this refutation, Diogenes beat him, on the ground that,since the teacher had disputed with reasons,+ In addition, the uni-versal principle of de-velopment must be com-bined, linked, made tocorrespond with the uni-versal principle of theu n i t y o f t h ew o r l d , nature, motion, matter, etc . 
I. 
 The principle of develop-ment... II. 
 The principle of unity... the only valid refutation is one derived from reasons. 
 Men have not merely to sat-isfy themselves by sensuous certainty but also to understand.... 
” (314) Zeno has four ways of refuting motion: 1. 
 That which is moving to an end must first cover half of the path. 
 And of this half, again first i t s half, and so on ad infinitum. 
 Aristotle replied: space and time are infinitely divisible ( δννáµει *) (p. 
 316), but not infinitely divided (êνεργεíα **), Bayle ( Dictionnaire ,82 Vol. 
 IV, article Zeno) calls this reply of Aristotle’s pitoyable *** and says: ...“i f one drew an infinite number of lines on a particle of matter, onewould not thereby introduce a division that would reduce to an actual infin-ity that which according to him wasonly a potential infinity.... 
” And Hegel writes (317): “Dies si istgut!”**** i. 
e. 
, i f one carried out the i n f i n i t e division to the end!! ...“The essence of space and time, is mo-tion, for it is universal; to understandit means to express its essence in the form * in potentiality— Ed. 
 **in actuality— Ed. 
 *** pitiful —Ed. 
 **** “This if is good!”— Ed. 
dote taken from? It is not to be found in Dio-genes Laerti-us, VI, § 39,80 or in Sextus Empiri-cus, III, 881 Hegel p. 
 314). 
 Did He-gel invent it? correct! of the Notion. 
 As unity of negativity and continuity, motion is expressed as the No-tion, as thought; but neither continuity nor discontinuity is to be posited as theessence.... 
” (pp. 
 318-319) “To understand means to express in the form of notions. 
” Motion is the essence of space and time. 
 Two fundamental con-cepts express this essence: (infinite) con-tinuity (Kontinuität) and “punctuality”( = denial of continuity, d i s c o n t i n u-i t y ). 
 Motion is the unity of continuity (of time and space) and discontinuity (of time and space). 
 Motion is a contra-diction, a unity of contradictions. 
 Überweg-Heinze, 10th edition, p. 
 63 (§ 20), is wrong when he says that Hegel “defends Aristotle against Bayle. 
” Hegelrefutes both the sceptic (Bayle) and theanti-dialectician (Aristotle). 
 Cf. 
 Gomperz, Les penseurs de la Grèce , 83 p. 
 ..., the forced recognition , under the lash, of the unity of contradictions, without recognising dialectics (owing tocowardice of thought).... 
 2. 
 Achilles will not overtake the tortoise. 
 “First the half” and so on endlessly. 
 Aristotle answers: he will overtakeit if he be permitted “to overstep thelimits. 
” (320)And Hegel: “This answer is cor-rect and contains all that can be said” (p. 
 321)—for actually the half here (at a certain stage) becomes the“limit”.... 
 ...“If we speak of motion in general, we say that the body is in one place and then it goes to another; because it moves it is no longer in the first, but yet not in thesecond; were it in either it would be atrest. 
 If we say that it is between both,this is to say nothing at all, for were itbetween both, it would be in a place, and this presents the same difficulty. 
 But move-ment means to be in this place and notto be in it; this is the continuity of spaceand time—and it is this which first makesmotion possible. 
” (Pp. 
 321-322) Movement is the presence of a body in a definite place at a given moment andin another place at another, subsequentmoment—such is the objection which Cher-nov repeats (see his Philosophical Studies ) in the wake of all the “metaphysical” opponents of Hegel. 
 This objection is incorrect : (1) it de-scribes the result of motion, but not mo-tion itself ; (2) it does not show, it does not contain in itself the possibility of mo-tion; (3) it depicts motion as a sum, as a concatenation of states of rest , that is to say, the (dialectical) contradiction isnot removed by it, but only concealed,shifted, screened, covered over. 
 “What makes the difficulty is always thought alone, since it keeps apart the mo-ments of an object which in their separa-tion are really united. 
” (322) We cannot imagine, express, measure, depict movement, without interrupting con-tinuity, without simplifying, coarsening, dismembering, strangling that which is liv-ing. 
 The representation of movement bymeans of thought always makes coarse,cf. 
 Chernov’s objections against Engels 84 NB correct! correct! Kant and his subjectiv-ism, scep-ticism, etc. 
kills,—and not only by means of thought, but also by sense-perception, and not only of movement, but every concept. 
 And in that lies the essence of dialectics. 
 And precisely t h i s e s s e n c e is ex-pressed by the formula: the unity, identityof opposites. 
 3. 
 “The flying arrow rests. 
” And Aristotle’s answer: the errorarises from the assumption that “timeconsists of the individual Nows” ( êκ τñν νÜν ) p. 
 324. 
 4. 
 Half is equal to the double: motion measured in comparison with all un-moving body and in comparison witha body moving in the o p p o s i t e direction. 
 At the end of the § on Zeno, Hegel com-pares him to K a n t (whose antinomies , he says, “do no more than Zeno did here”). 
 (p. 
 326) The general conclusion of the dialectic of the Eleatics: “the truth is the one, allelse is untrue”—“just as the Kantian phi-losophy resulted in ‘We know appearances only. 
’ On the whole the principle is the same. 
” (p. 
 326) But there is also a difference. 
“In Kant it is the spiritual that de-stroys the world; according to Zeno, theworld of appearance in itself and for itself has no truth. 
 According to Kant, it is our thought, our spiritual activity that is had;—it shows excessive humility of mind to be-lieve that knowledge has no value.... 
”(327) The continuation of the Eleatics in Leu-cippus and among the S o p h i s t s ... ( ( /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR After Zeno (? he lived after Heracli-tus?)85 Hegel passes on to Heraclitus and says: “It” (Zeno’s dialectics) “may, to that extent, also be called subjective dialec-tics, insofar as it rests in the contemplative subject, and the one, without this dialec-tics, without this movement, is one ab-stract identity.... 
” (328)but it was previously said, see thepassage quoted from p. 
 309, andothers, that Zeno’s dialectics is obj-ective dialectics. 
 Here is some kind of superfine “distinguo. 
” Cf. 
 thefollowing: “Dialectics: ( α) external dialectics, a reasoning which goes hither andthither, without reaching the soul of the thing itself; ( β) the immanent dialectics of the object, but (NB) following withinthe contemptation of the subject; ( γ) the objectivity of Heraclitus, i. 
e. 
, dialecticsitself taken as principle. 
” (328) α) subjective dialectics. 
 β) in the object there is dialectics, but I do not know, perhaps it is Schein,* merely appearance, etc. 
 γ) fully objective dialectics, as the principle of all that is (In Heraclitus): “Here we see land; there is no proposition of Heraclitus whichI would not have adopted in my Log-ic.... 
” (328) “Heraclitus says: Everything is be-coming; this becoming is the principle. 
 * semblance, show— Ed. 
NBTHE PHILOSOPHY OF HERACLITUS ((( NB NB This is contained in the expression: Being no more is than not-Being.... 
” (p. 
 333) “The recognition of the fact that Being and not-Being are only abstractions de-void of truth, that the first truth is to befound only in Becoming, forms a great ad-vance. 
 The understanding comprehends bothas having truth and validity in isolation; reason on the other hand recognises the one in the other, and sees that in the one itsother’, (NB “its other’) “is contained—that is why the All, the Absolute is to bedetermined as Becoming. 
” (334)“Aristotle says ( De mundo , 86 Chapter 5) that Heraclitus ‘joined together the complete whole and the incomplete’(part)” ... “what coincides and whatconflicts, what is harmonious and whatdiscordant; and from out of them all(the opposite) comes one, and from one, all. 
” (335) Plato, in his Symposium , 87 puts forward the views of Heraclitus (inter alia in theirapplication to music: harmony, consistsof opposites), and the statement: “The artof the musician unites the different. 
” Hegel writes: this is no objection against Heraclitus (336), for difference is the es-sence of harmony: “This harmony is precisely absolute Be-coming, change,—not becoming other, nowthis and then an other. 
 The essential thing is that each different thing, each particular, is different. 
 from another, notabstractly so from any other, but from its other. 
 Each particular only is, insofaras its other is implicitly contained in itsNotion.... 
” (336) “So also in the case of tones; they must be different, but so that they can alsobe united.... 
” (336) P. 
 337: incidentallyNB Quite right and impor-tant: the “other” as i t s other, development into i t s opposite Sextus Empiricus (and Aristotle) are reck-oned among the ... “best witness”.... 
 Heraclitus said: “die Zeit ist das erste körperliche Wesen”* (Sextus Empiricus)—p. 
 (338) körperliche**—an “unfortunate” expres-sion (perhaps, Hegel says (NB), it waschosen by a sceptic (NB)),—but time, he says, is “das erste sinnliche Wesen”***.... 
 ...“Time is pure Becoming, as per-ceived.... 
” (338) In regard to the fact that Heraclitus considered fire as a process, Hegel says:“Fire is physical time, it is this absolute unrest” (340)—and further, in regard to the natural philosophy of Heraclitus: ...“It” (Natur) “is process in itself.... 
” (344) “Nature is the never-resting, andthe All is the transition out of theone into the other, from division into unity, and from unity into division.... 
” (341) “To understand Nature means to rep-resent it as process.... 
” (339) Here is what is said to be the narrow-ness of natural scientists: ...“If we listen to their account” (Natur-forscher****), “they only observe and saywhat they see; but this is not true, for un-consciously they transform what is im-mediately seen by means of the Notion. 
And the strife is not due to the opposi-tion between observation and the absolute Notion, but between the limited rigidnotion and the Absolute Notion. 
 Theyshow that changes are non-existent.... 
”(344-345) * “Time is the first corporeal existence”— Ed. 
 **corporeal— Ed. 
 *** “the first sensuous existence”— Ed. 
 **** of natural scientists— Ed. 
NB NB “a b s o l u t e c o n n e c-t i o n ”...“Water in its decomposition re-veals hydrogen and oxygen: these have not arisen for they were already there as such, as the parts of which the waterconsists” (346) (thus Hegel mimics thenatural scientists).... 
 “As we find in all expression of per-ception and experience; as soon as men speak, there is a Notion present, it cannot be withheld, for in conscious-ness there is always a touch of univer-sality and truth. 
” (346) Quite right and important—it is pre-cisely this that Engels repeated in more popular form, when he wrote that natu-ral scientists ought to know that the re-sults of natural science are concepts, andthat the art of operating with conceptsis not, inborn, but is the result of 2,000 years of the development of natural science and philosophy. 
 88 The concept of transformation is taken narrowly by natural scientists and theylack understanding of dialectics. 
 ...“He” (Heraclitus) “is the one who first expressed the nature of the infinite, andwho first understood nature as infinite initself, i. 
e. 
, its essence as process.... 
” (346) On the “concept of necessity”—cf. 
 p. 
 347. 
 Heraclitus could not, see truth in “sensuous certainty” (348), but in “necessity” (εíµαÇµéνη *)—(( λóγος **)). 
 “A b s o l u t e m e d i a t i o n (348) NB ( ( *fate— Ed. 
 **logos— Ed. 
 LEUCIPPUS *“subterfuge”— Ed. 
 **“One”— Ed. 
 *** “the principle of the One” is “altogether ideal”— Ed. 
“The rational, the true, that which I know, is indeed a withdrawal from the objective as from what is sensuous, individ-ual, definite and existent; but what rea-son knows within itself is just as muchnecessity or the universal of being; it isthe essence of thought as it is the essenceof the world. 
” (352) 368: “The development of philosophy in history must correspond to the de-velopment of logical philosophy; but there will still be passages in the lat-ter which are absent in historical de-velopment. 
” Here there is a very profound and cor-rect, essentially materialist thought (ac-tual history is the basis, the foundation,the Being, which is followed by conscious-ness). 
 Leucippus says that atoms are invisible “because of the smallness of their body”(369)—Hegel, however, replies that thisis “Ausrede”* (ibid. 
), that “Eins”** cannot be seen, that “das Princip des Eins” “ganz ideell”*** (370), and that Leucippus is no“empiricist,” but an idealist. 
 ?? s t r e t c h i n g o f a p o i n t by the idealist Hegel, of course, stretching a point. 
NB: Necessi-ty = “the universal of Being” (the universal in Being) (connection, “absolute mediation”) The develop-ment of phi-losophy in history “must correspond” (??) to the development of logical philosophy ( ( ( ( *Being-for-itself— Ed. 
 **In Lenin’s manuscript these five lines have been crossed out— Ed. 
 *** mysticism of ideas —Ed. 
materialism (Hegel is afraid of the word: keep away from me) versus atomism([Straining to make Leucippus conform to his logic, Hegel expatiates on the impor-tance, the “greatness” of the principle (368)Fürsichsein,* descrying it in Leucippus. 
It savours in part of stretching a point. 
]** But there is also a grain of truth in it; the nuance (the “moment) of separateness;the interruption of gradualness; the mo-ment of the smoothing out of contradic-tions; the interruption of continuity—theatom, the one. 
 (Cf. 
 371 i. 
f. 
):—“The one and continuity are opposites.... 
” Hegel’s logic cannot be applied in its given form, it cannot be taken as given. 
 One must s e p a r a t e o u t from it the logical (epistemological) nuances, afterpurifying them from Ideenmystik ***: that is still a big job. 
) The Atomists are, therefore, generally speaking, opposed to the idea of the crea-tion and maintenance of the world bymeans of a foreign principle. 
 It is in thetheory of atoms that natural science firstfeels released from the need for demonstrat-ing a foundation for the world. 
 For if nature is represented as created and held together by another, then it is conceived of as notexistent in itself, and thus as having itsNotion outside itself, i. 
e. 
, its basis isforeign to it, it has no basis as such, it isonly conceivable from the will of another— as it is, it is contingent, devoid, of ne-cessity and Notion in itself. 
 In the ideaof the atomists, however, we have the con-ception of the inherency of nature, that isto say, thought finds itself in it.... 
” (372-373) DEMOCRITUS *Diogenes Laertius (p. 
 235)—“vertiginem”—Latin translation. 
 **treated— Ed. 
 *** step-motherly— Ed. 
 **** “my feeling, mine ”—Ed. 
In the presentation—according to Dio-genes Laertius, IX, § 31-33—of the atomism of Leucippus, the “vortex” (Wirbel— δíνην )* of atoms, Hegel finds nothing of interest(“no interest,” ...“empty representation,”“dim, confused ideas”—p. 
 377 i. 
f. 
). 
 Hegel’s blindness, the one-sidedness of the Idealist!! Democritus is behandelt** by Hegel in a very stiefmütterlich*** fashion, in allpp. 
 378-380! The spirit of materialism is intolerable to the idealist!! The words of Democritus are quoted (p. 
 379): “Warmth exists according to opin-ion ( νóµϕ ) and so do cold and colour, sweet and bitter; only the indivisibleand the void are in accordance with truth ( êτεÑ )” (Sextus Empiricus, Ad-versus Mathematicos , VII, § 135). 
 89 And the conclusion is drawn: ...“We see this much, that Demo-critus expressed the difference betweenthe moments of Being-in-itself and Being-for-other more distinctly.... 
” (380) By this “the way is at once opened up” to “the bad idealism,” that... “ meine Emp-findung, mein .... 
”**** ...“A sensuously notionless manifold of feeling is established, in which there isno reason, and with which this idealismhas no further concern. 
”NB “bad ideal-ism” (my feeling) Cf. 
 Mach90 Hegel versus E. 
 Mach... THE PHILOSOPHY OF ANAXAGORAS *reason— Ed. 
 **A word has remained undeciphered here. 
— Ed. 
 *** It is here that these extremes come into contact (and are transformed!). 
— Ed. 
Anaxagoras. 
 ΝοÜς *—“the cause of the world and of all order”, and Hegel elucidates this: ...“Objective thought ... reason in the world, also in nature—or as we speak ofgenera in nature, they are the universal. 
A dog is an animal, this is its genus, its substantial; the dog itself is this. 
 This law, this understanding, this reason isitself immanent in nature, it is the essenceof nature; the latter is not formed fromwithout as men make a chair. 
” (381-382) “ΝοÜς is the same as soul” (Aristotle on Anaxagoras)—p. 
 394 and ...** the elucidation of this l e a p from the general in nature to the soul ; from objective to subjec-tive, from materialism to idealism. 
 C’est ici que ces extrêmes se touchent (et se transforment!)*** On the homoeomeriae 91 of Anaxagoras (particles of the same kind as the wholebody) Hegel writes: “Transformation is to be taken in a double sense, according to existence andaccording to the Notion.... 
” (403-404)Thus, for instance, it is said that watercan be removed—the stones remain; bluecolour can be removed, red, etc. 
, will remain. 
 “This is only according to existence; according to the Notion, they only inter-penetrate, it is inner necessity. 
” Just asone cannot remove the heart by itself fromNB the concept of genus is “the essence of nature,” is l a w... tranforma-tion (its significance) the living body without the lungs perish-ing, etc. 
 “Nature likewise exists only in unity, just as the brain exists only in unity withthe other organs” (404) whereby some conceive transformationin the sense of the presence of smallqualitatively determined particles and their growth (respective diminution) combination and separation. 
 Theother conception (Heraclitus)—thetransformation of the one into an other . 
 (403) Existence and Notion—are to be dis-tinguished in Hegel approximately asfollows: fact (Being) taken separately,torn from its connection, and connection(the Notion), mutual relation, concat-enation, law, necessity. 
 415: ...“The Notion is that which things are in and for themselves.... 
” Hegel speaks of grass being the end for animals, and the latter for men, etc. 
, etc. 
,and concludes: “It is a circle which is complete in itself, but whose completion is likewise a passinginto another circle; a vortex whose mid-point, that into which it returns, is founddirectly in the periphery of a higher circlewhich swallows it up.... 
” (414) So far the ancients are said to have fur-nished little: “Universal is a meagre deter-mination: everyone knows of the univer-sal, but not of it as essence. 
” (416) ...“But here we have the beginning of a more distinct development of the relation-ship of consciousness to Being, the de-velopment of the nature of knowledge asa knowledge of the true. 
” (417) “The mindNB: the “univer-sal” as “es-sence” “development of the nature of knowl-edge” has gone forth to express essence as thought. 
” (418) “We see this development of the univer-sal, in which essence goes right over to theside of consciousness, in the so much de-cried wordly wisdom of the Sophists. 
” (418) ((End of the first volume)) The second volume begins with the Sophists. 
 VOLUME XIV. 
 VOLUME II OF THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE SOPHISTS 92 Speaking of the Sophists, Hegel in ex-treme detail chews over the thought that sophistry contains an element common toall culture (Bildung) in general, our ownincluded, namely, the adducing of proofs (Gründe) and Gegengründe*—“reflectingreasoning”;—the finding of the most di-verse points of view in everything ; ((sub-jectivity—lack of objectivity)). 
 In discuss-ing Protagoras and his famous thesis (manis the measure of all things) Hegel placesKant close to him: ...“Man is the measure of everything,— man, therefore, is the subject in general; the existent, consequently, is not in iso-lation, but is for my knowledge—conscious-ness is essentially the producer of the con-tent in what is objective, and subjectivethinking is thereby essentially active. 
 And this view extends even to the most modern Philosophy, as when, for instance, Kantsays that we only know phenomena, i. 
e. 
,that what seems to us to be objective, tobe reality, is only to be considered in itsrelation to consciousness, and does not exist without this relation.... 
” (31)** * counterproofs— Ed. 
 **Hegel, Werke , Bd. 
 XIV, Berlin, 1833. 
— Ed. 
Protagoras and Kant /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR *the universal— Ed. 
 **the “relativity”— Ed. 
the relativ-ism of the Sophist... Kant and the Sophists and Phenomenol-ogism93 à la Mach NB not, only relativism scepticism NB Hegel on “common sense”The second “moment” is objectivity (das Allgemeine*), “it is posited by me, but is likewise in itself objec-tively universal, not posited by me.... 
”(32) Diese “Relativität”** (32) “Every-thing has a relative truth only” (33),according to Protagoras. 
 ...“Kant’s phenomenon is no more than an external impulse, an x, an unknown,which first receives these determinationsthrough our feeling, through us. 
 Even ifthere were an objective ground for ourcalling one thing cold and another warm, we could indeed say that they must have diversity in themselves, but warmth andcold first become what they are in ourfeeling. 
 Similarly ... things are, etc. 
 ...thus experience was called a phenome-non.... 
” (34) “The world is consequently not only phenomenal in that it is for consciousness,and thus that its Being is only one rela-tive to consciousness, but, it is likewisephenomenal in itself. 
” (35) ...“This scepticism reached a much deep-er point in Gorgias.... 
” (35) ...“His d i a l e c t i c s ” ... that of Gor-gias, the Sophist many times: p. 
 36, idem p. 
 37. 
 Tiedemann said that Gorgias went fur-ther than the “common sense” of man. 
 AndHegel makes fun of this: every philosophy goes f u r t h e r than “common sense” for common sense is not philosophy. 
 Prior toCopernicus it was contrary to common sense to say that the earth goes round thesun. 
 (36) *common sense— Ed. 
 **This excerpt was made by Lenin somewhat later in outlining the philosophy of Socrates (pp. 
 43-44 of Hegel; see p. 
 273 of thisvolume). 
— Ed. 
“It” (der gesunde Menschenverstand*) “is the mode of thought of its time, con-taining all the prejudices of this time. 
” (36)Gorgias (p. 
 37): 1) Nothing exists. 
 Nothing is. 
 2) Assuming that Being is, it cannot be known. 
 3) Even if it is knowable, no communication ofwhat is known is pos-sible. 
 ...“Gorgias is conscious that they” (Be-ing and not-Being, their mutual sublation) “are vanishing moments; the unconscious conception has this truth also, but knowsnothing about it.... 
. 
” (40) “Vanishing moments” = Being and not-Being. 
 That is a magnifi-cent definition of dialectics!! ...“Gorgias α) justly argues against abso-lute realism, which, because it has a no-tion, thinks it possesses the very thingitself, when actually it possesses only some-thing relative; β) falls into the bad ideal-ism of modern times: ‘what is thought is always subjective, and thus not the existent, since through thought an existentis transformed into what is thought.... 
’” (41) (and further below (p. 
 41 i. 
f. 
) Kant is again mentioned). 
 To be added on Gorgias**: He puts “either— or” to the fundamental questions. 
 “Butthat is not true dialectics; it would benecessary to prove that the object mustcommon sense = the prejudices of its time Gorgias, “absolute realism” (and Kant) dialectics in the object itself THE PHILOSOPHY OF SOCRATES *the universal— Ed. 
 **the “relativity”— Ed. 
NB cf. 
 Feuerbach94be necessarily in one or another determi-nation, not in and for itself. 
 The object resolves itself only into those determi-nations; but from that nothing followsregarding the nature of the object it-self. 
” (39) To be added further on Gorgias*: In the exposition of his view that the existent cannot be imparted, communi-cated: “Speech, by which the existent has to be expressed, is not the existent, what isimparted is thus not the existent, but only words. 
” (Sextus Empiricus, Adversus Mathematicos . 
 VII. 
 § 83-84)—p. 
 41—He-gel writes: “The existent is also compre-hended as non-existent, but the comprehen-sion of it is to make it universal. 
” (42) ...“This individual cannot be ex-pressed.... 
” (42) Final words of the section on the Soph-ists: “The Sophists thus also made dia-lectic, universal Philosophy, their object,and they were profound thinkers.... 
” (42) Socrates is a “world-famed personage” (42), the “most interesting” (ibid. 
) in thephilosophy of antiquity—“subjectivity ofThe senses show reality; thoughtand word — the universal. 
Every word (speech) already universalises cf. 
 Feuerbach. 
 95 *“in it itself”— Ed. 
 **Following this paragraph in the MS. 
 is an excerpt on Gorgias’ philosophy, beginning with the words: “To be added onGorgias.... 
” (See p. 
 271 of this volume. 
)— Ed. 
 *** the art of midwifery —Ed. 
 **** Becoming = not-Being and Being. 
— Ed. 
 ***** “drugged”— Ed. 
thought” (42) “freedom of self-conscious-ness” (44) . 
 “Herein lies the ambiguity of dia-lectics and sophistry; the objectivedisappears” (43): is the subjective con-tingent or is there in it (“an ihm selhst”*) the objective and universal? (43)** “True thought thinks in such a way that its content is as truly objective as subjec-tive” (44)—and in Socrates and Plato wesee, Hegel says, not only subjectivity (“thereference of any judgment to conscious-ness is held by him—Socrates—“in common with the Sophists”)—but also objectivity. 
 “Objectivity has here” (in Socrates) “the sense of the universal, existent in and foritself, and not external objectivity” (45)—idem 46: “not external objectivity but the spiritual universal. 
” And two lines further down:“Kant’s ideal is the phenomenon, not objective in itself.... 
” (46) Socrates called his method Hebammen-kunst ***—(p. 
 64) (derived from his mother, he said) ((Socrates’ mother = midwife))— to help in bringing thoughts to birth. 
 Hegel’s example: everyone knows, he says, what Werden is, but it surprises usif we analyse (reflektierend) and find that itis “the identity of Being and not-Being”— “so great a distinction. 
” (67) Meno (Plato’s “Meno”) 96 compared Socra-tes to an electric eel (Zitteraal), which makesanyone who touches it “narkotisch”*****NB Kant shrewd! Werden = Nichtsein und Sein. 
**** Intelligent idealism is closer to intelligent ma-terialism than stupid materialism. 
 Dialectical idealism instead of intelligent;metaphysical, undeveloped, dead, crude,rigid instead of stupid. 
 * Following this paragraph in the MS. 
 is an excerpt on Gorgias’ philosophy, beginning with the words: “To be added further on Gor-gias.... 
” (See p. 
 272 of this volume. 
)— Ed. 
 **very well put— Ed. 
(69): and I, too, am “narkotisch” and I c a n n o t answer you. 
* ...“That which is held by me as truth and right is spirit of my spirit. 
 But whatthe spirit derives thus from itself, whatit so holds, must collie from it as the uni-versal, as from the spirit which acts ina universal manner, and not from its pas-sions, interests, likings, whims, aims, in-clinations, etc. 
 These, too, certainly comefrom something inward which is ‘implantedin us by nature,’ but they are only ina natural way our own.... 
” (74-75) To be elaborated: Plekhanov wrote on philosophy (dialec-tics) probably about 1,000 pages (Beltov + against Bogdanov + against the Kantians + fundamental questions, etc. 
, etc. 
). 
97 Among them, a b o u t the large Logic, i n c o n -n e c t i o n w i t h it , its thought (i. 
e. 
, dialectics p r o p e r , as philosophical sci-ence) nil!! Protagoras: “man is the measure of all things. 
” Socrates: “man, as thinking, is the measure of all things. 
” (75) Xenophon in his Memorabilien described Socrates better, more accurately and morefaithfully than Plato. 
 (Pp. 
 80-81)très bien dit!! ** NB Nuance! THE SOCRATICS In connection with the sophisms about the “heap” and “bald,” Hegel repeats the tran-sition of quantity into quality and viceversa: dialectics. 
 (Pp. 
 139-140)143-144: At length about the fact that “language in essence expresses only the universal; what is meant, however, is the special, the particular. 
 Hencewhat is meant cannot be said in speech. 
”(“It”? The most universal word of all. 
) Who is it? I. 
 Every person is an I. 
 D a s Sinnliche?* It is a u n i v e r -s a l , etc. 
, etc. 
 “This”?? Everyone is “this. 
” Why can the particular not be named? One of the objects of a givenkind (tables) is distinguished by some-thing from the rest. 
 “That the universal should in philosophy be given a place of such importance thatonly the universal can be expressed, andthe ‘it’ which is meant, cannot, indicatesa state of consciousness and thought which the philosophical culture of our time has not yet reached. 
” (143) Hegel includes here “the scepticism of our times” (143)— Kant’s? and those whoassert that ‘sensuous certainty is the truth. 
” (143) For das Sinnliche “is a universal. 
” (143) Thereby Hegel hits every materialism except dialectical materialism. 
 NB * the sensuous— Ed. 
NB in language there is only the universal NB *t h e v e r y e s s e n c e o f t h e t h i n g —Ed. 
 **Cf. 
 Überweg-Heinze, § 38, p. 
 122 (10th edition)—and also about them in Plato’s Theaetetus . 
99 Their (the Cyrenaics’) scepticism and subjectivism— Ed. 
Hegel and dialectical materialism sensation in the theory of knowledge of the Cyrenaics... NB** the Cyrenaics and Mach and Co. 
To call by name?—but the name is a contingent symbol and does not express S a c h e s e l b s t * (how can the partic-ular be expressed?) (144) Hegel seriously “believed,” thought, that materialism as a philosophy was impossible, for philosophy is the scienceof thinking, of the universal , but the universal is a thought. 
 Here he repeatedthe error of the same subjective ideal-ism that he always called “bad” ideal-ism. 
 Objective (and still more, abso-lute) idealism came very close to ma-terialism by a zig-zag (and a somersault),even partially became transformed into it . 
 The Cyrenaics 98 held sensation for the truth, “the truth is not what is in sensation,the content, but is itself sensation. 
” (151) “The main principle of the Cyrenaic school, therefore, is sensation, whichshould form the real criterion of the trueand the good.... 
” (153) “Sensation is the indeterminate unit” (154), but if thinking is added, then the universal appears and “simple subjectivity” disappears. 
 (Phenomenologists à la Mach & Co. 
 i n e v i t a b l y become idealists on the question of the universal , “law,” “ne-cessity,” etc. 
) Another Cyrenaic, Hegesias, “recognised” “this incongruity between sensation anduniversality.... 
” (155) THE PHILOSOPHY OF PLATOThey confuse sensation as a principle of the theory of knowledge and a prin-ciple of ethics. 
 This NB. 
 But Hegel separated the theory of knowledge. 
 In regard to Plato’s plan by which philosophers ought to rule the state: ...“The territory of history is different from that of philosophy.... 
” We must recognise that action repre-sents at the same time the endeavours of the subject as such for particular ends.... 
 Allthose particular ends are really only meansfor bringing forth the Idea, because it is the absolute power. 
” (193) Concerning Plato’s doctrine on ideas: ...“because sensuous perception shows nothing purely, or as it is in itself” ( Pha-edo)—p. 
 213—therefore the body is a hindrance to the soul. 
 The significance of the universal is contradictory: it is dead, impure, in-complete, etc. 
, etc. 
, but it alone isa s t a g e towards knowledge of the c o n c r e t e , for we can never know the concrete completely. 
 The infinite sum of general conceptions, laws, etc. 
,gives the concrete in its completeness. 
 The movement of cognition to the object can always only proceed dia-lectically: to retreat in order to hitParticular ends in history create the “Idea” (the law of history) “purity” (= lifeless-ness?) of universal conceptions NB the dialec-tics, of cognition NB b P l a t o in the “Sophistes”: *to fall back, the better to leap (to know?)— Ed. 
 **nodal point— Ed. 
NB “empty dialectics” in Hegel NB “empty dialectics”more surely—reculer pour mieux sauter (savoir?)* Converging and diverginglines: circles which touch one another. 
Knotenpunkt** = the practice of man-kind and of human history. 
 Practice = the criterion of the coin-cidence of one of the infinite aspectsof the real. 
 These Knotenpunkte represent a unity of contradictions, when Be-ing and not-Being, as vanishingmoments, coincide for a moment, in the given moments of the move-ment ( = of technique, of history, etc. 
) In analysing Plato’s dialectics, Hegel once again tries to show the differencebetween subjective, sophistic dialectics andobjective dialectics: “That everything is one, we say of each thing: ‘it is one and at the same time weshow also that it is many, its many partsand properties’—but it is thereby said:‘it is one in quite another respect fromthat in which it is many’—we do not bring these thoughts together. 
 Thus the conception and the words merely go back-wards and forwards from time one to theother. 
 If this passing to and fro is performedwith consciousness, it is empty dialectics,which does not unite the opposites and does not come to unity. 
” (232) “The point of difficulty, and what we ought to aim at, is to show that what( ( is other is the same, and what is the same is other, and indeed in the same regard and from the same point of view. 
” (233) “But we must be conscious of the fact that the Notion is neither merely the im-mediate in truth, although it is the sim-ple—but it is of spiritual simplicity,essentially the thought which has re-turned into itself (immediately is only this red, etc. 
); nor that it is only thatwhich reflects itself in itself, the thingof consciousness; but is also in itself, i. 
e. 
,it is objective essence.... 
” (245) The concept is not something imme-diate (although the concept is a “simple”thing, but this simplicity is “spiritual,” the simplicity of the Idea)-what is im-mediate is only the sensation of “red”(“this is red”), etc. 
 The concept is not“merely the thing of consciousness”; butis the e s s e n c e o f t h e o b j e c t (ge-genständliches Wesen), it is something an sich, “in itself. 
” ...“This conviction of the nature of the Notion, Plato did not express so defi-nitely.... 
” (245) Hegel dilates at length on Plato’s “Philosophy of Nature,” the ultra-non-sensical mysticism of ideas, such as that“triangles form the essence of sensuousthings” (265), and such mystical non-sense. 
 That is highly characteristic! Themystic-idealist-spiritualist Hegel (like all official, clerical-idealist philosophy of our day) extols and expatiates onmysticism, idealism in the history ofphilosophy, while ignoring and slight-NB NB objectivism idealism and mysticism in Hegel (and in Plato) THE PHILOSOPHY OF ARISTOTLEwhat is real is rational NB NB ((merely invert it)) precisely! Hegel has made a com-plete mess of the criticism of Plato’s “ideas” in Aristotleing materialism. 
 Cf. 
 Hegel on Democ-ritus—nil!! On Plato a huge mass of mystical slush. 
 Speaking of Plato’s republic and of the current opinion that it is a chimera, Hegelrepeats his favourite saying: ...“What is real is rational. 
 But one must know, distinguish, exactly what is real;in common life all is real, but there isa difference between the phenomenal worldand reality.... 
” (274) Incorrect, says Hegel, is the generally held opinion that the philosophy of Aristotle is “realism ” (299), id. 
 p. 
 311 “empiricism”) in contrast to the idealism of Plato ((Here again, Hegel clearly squeezes in a greatdeal under idealism. 
)) In presenting Aristotle’s polemic against Plato’s doctrine on ideas, Hegel s u p -p r e s s e s it s m aterialistic features. 
 (Cf. 
 3 2 2 -3 2 3 and others. 
) He has let the cat out of the bag: “The elevation of Alexander” (Alexander of Mac-edon, Aristotle’s pupil) “... into ... a godis ... not matter for surprise ... God and man are not at all so very wide asunder .... 
” (305) Hegel perceives the idealism of Aris-totle in his idea of god. 
 (326) ((Ofcourse, it is idealism, but more ob-jective and further removed, more gen-eral than the idealism of Plato, hence in the philosophy of nature more fre-quently = materialism. 
)) Aristotle’s criticism of Plato’s “ideas” is a criti-cism of idealism a s i d e a l -i s m i n g e n e r a l : for whence concepts, abstrac-tions, are derived, thencecome also “law” and “ne-cessity,” etc. 
 The idealist Hegel in cowardly fashionfought shy of the under-mining of the foundations of idealism by Aristotle(in his criticism of Plato’s ideas). 
 “Leucippus and Plato accordingly say that motion has always existed, but theygive no reason for the assertion. 
” (Aristo-teles, Metaphysik , XII, 6 and 7. 
) p. 
 328 Aristotle t h u s pitifully brings forward god against the material-ist Leucippus and the idealistPlato. 
 There is eclecticism in Aris-totle here. 
 But Hegel conceals the weakness for the sake of m y s -t i c i s m ! Hegel, the supporter of dialectics, could not understand the dialec-tical transition f r o m matter to motion, f r o m matter to con-sciousness—especially the second. 
Marx corrected the error (or weak-ness?) of the mystic. 
When one idealist criticises the founda-tions of idealism ofanother idealist, ma-terialism is always the gainer thereby. 
 Cf. 
Aristotle versus Plato,etc. 
, Hegel versusKant, etc. 
 Not only is the transition from matterto conscious-ness dialecti-cal, but also that from sensation to thought, etc. 
NBNB *substance— Ed. 
What distinguishes the dialectical tran-sition from the undialectical transition? The leap. 
 The contradiction. 
 The inter-ruption of gradualness. 
 The unity (iden-tity) of Being and not-Being. 
 The following passage shows especially clearly how Hegel conceals the weakness of Aristotle’s idealism: “Aristotle makes objects into thoughts; hence, in being thoughts, they exist intruth; that is their αûσíα . 
* “The meaning of this is not, however, that natural objects have themselves the power of thinking, but as they are subjec-tively thought by me, my thought is thusalso the Notion of the thing, which there-fore constitutes its substance. 
 But in na-ture the Notion does not exist as thoughtin this freedom, but has flesh and blood; yet it has a soul, and this is its Notion. 
 Aristotle recognises what things in andfor themselves are; and that is their αûσíα . 
 The Notion does not exist for itself, but itis stunted by externality. 
 The ordinary def-inition of truth is: ‘truth is the harmony of the conception with the object. 
’ But the conception itself is only a conception,I am still not at all in harmony with myconception (with its content); for whenI represent to myself a house, a beam, andso on, I am by no means this content— ‘I’ is something other than the conception of house. 
 It is only in thought that there ispresent a true harmony between objectiveand subjective; that constitutes me (Hegel’s italics). 
 Aristotle therefore finds himselfat the most advanced standpoint; nothing more profound can one desire to know. 
” (332-333)naive!! “In nature” concepts do not exist “in this freedom” (in the freedom of thought and the fantasy of man!! ). 
 “In nature” they (concepts) have “flesh and blood. 
”—That is excellent! But it is materialism. 
Human concepts are the soul of nature —thus is only a mystical way of sayingthat in human concepts nature is reflect-ed in a distinctive way (this NB: in a distinctive and d i a l e c t i c a l way!!). 
 Pp. 
 318-337 s o l e l y on the Meta-physics of Aristotle!! Everything essen-tial that lie has to say against Plato’s idealism is s u p p r e s s e d !! In particu-lar, there is suppressed the question ofexistence o u t s i d e man and humani-ty!!! = the question of materialism! Aristotle is an empiricist, but a think-ing one. 
 (340) “ The empirical, comprehend-ed in its synthesis, is the speculative No-tion .... 
” (341) (Hegel’s italics. 
) The coincidence of concepts with “syn-thesis,” with the sum, summing up of empiricism, sensations, the senses, is indubitable for the philosophers of all trends. 
 Whence this coincidence? From God (I, the idea, thought, etc. 
, etc. 
)or from (out of) nature? Engels was rightin his formulation of the question. 
 101 ...“The subjective form constitutes the essence of the Kantian philosophy.... 
” (341))))(cf. 
 Feuer-bach : To read the gospel of senses in interconnec-tion = to- think100 NB Kant *logos— Ed. 
 **sense-perception (sensation) and cognition— Ed. 
On the teleology of Aristotle. 
 ...“Nature has its means in itself and these means are also end. 
 This end in nature is its λóγος ,* the truly rational. 
” (349) ...“Understanding is not only thinking with consciousness. 
 There is contained in it also the whole, true, profound Notion of nature, of life.... 
” (348) Reason (understanding), thought, consciousness, without nature , not in correspondence with nature isfalsity = materialism! It is repulsive to read how Hegel extols Aristotle for his “true speculative notions”(373 of the “soul,” and much more besides), clearly spinning a tale of idealistic (= mys-tical) nonsense. 
 Suppressed are a l l the points on which Aristotle wavers between idealism and ma-terialism!!! Regarding Aristotle’s views on the “soul,” Hegel writes: “All that is universal is in fact real, as particular, individual, existing for anoth-er” (375)—in other words, the soul. 
 Aristotle. 
 De anima , II, 5: “The difference” (between Empfinden, and Erkennen**) “is: that which causes thesensation is external. 
 The cause of this isthat perceptive activity is directed on theparticular, while knowledge has as its object the universal; but the universal is“end” and cause, law, connection, reason lets the cat out of the bag in regard to “realism” sense-percep-tion and cognition to a certain extent, in the soul itself as substance. 
 Everyone can therefore think if he wishes but sense-perception does not depend on him, since the necessary con-dition is that the object perceived be pres-ent. 
” (377) The crux here—“außen ist”*— o u t -s i d e man, independent of him. 
 That is materialism. 
 And this foundation, basis, kernel of materialism, Hegelbegins wegschwatzen**: “This is an entirely correct view of sense-perception,” writes Hegel, and he goes on to explain that there is undoubtedly “pas-sivity in sense-perception: “it is a matterof indifference whether subjectively orobjectively; in both there is containedthe moment of passivity.... 
 With this mo-ment of passivity, Aristotle does not fall short of idealism, sense-perception is al-ways in one aspect passive. 
 That is, how-ever, a bad idealism which thinks thatthe passivity and spontaneity of the minddepend on whether the determination givenis from within or from without, as if there were freedom in sense-perception; the lat-ter is a sphere of limitation”!!... (377-378) ((The idealist stops up the gap leadingto materialism. 
 No, it is not gleich-gültig*** whether from without or from within . 
 This is precisely the point! “From without ”—that is materialism. 
 “From within” = idealism. 
 And with the word “ passivity ,” while keeping silent about the term (“ from without ”) in Aristotle, Hegel described in a differ-ent way the same f r o m w i t h o u t . 
 * “is external”— Ed. 
 **to talk out of existence— Ed. 
 *** a matter of indifference— Ed. 
Aristotle comes very close to materialism NB!! the idealist is caught! Passivity means precisely from with-out!! Hegel replaces the idealism of sense-perception by the idealism of thought , but equally by idealism . 
)) ...“Subjective idealism declares that there are no external things, they are a determi-nation of our Self. 
 This must be admitted in respect to sense-perception. 
 I am passivein sense-perception, sense-perception issubjective; it is existence, a state, a deter-mination in me, not freedom. 
 Whetherthe sense-perception is external or in me, is a matter of indifference, it exists .... 
” (378) Then follows the famous analogy of the soul with wax, causing Hegel to twist andturn like the devil confronted with holywater, and to cry out about it having “sooften occasioned misapprehension. 
” (378-379) Aristotle says ( De anima , II, 12): “Sense-perception is the receiving of sen-sible forms without matter” ... “as waxreceives only the impress of the goldensignet ring, not the gold itself, but merely its form. 
” H e g e l writes: ...“In sense-perception only the form reaches us, without matter. 
It is otherwise in practical life—in eatingand drinking. 
 In the practical sphere ingeneral we behave as single individuals, and as single individuals in a determinate Being, even a material determinate Being,we behave towards matter in a materialway. 
 Only insofar as we are of a materialnature, are we able to behave in such away; the point is that our material exist-ence comes into play. 
” (379) ((A close approach to materialism—and equivocation. 
)) Hegel gets angry and scolds on account of the “wax,” saying: “everyone can under-NB NB an evasion of m a t e -r i a l i s m NB Soul = W a x “otherwise” in practice a cowardly evasion of materialism /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR stand it” (380), “we do not get beyond the crude aspect of the analogy,” (379) etc. 
 “The soul should by no means be pas-sive wax or receive determinations fromwithout...” (380) ...“It” (die Seele*) “changes the form of the external body into its own.... 
” (381)A r i s t o t l e , D e a n i m a , III, 2: ...“The effect of being perceived and of sense-perception is exactly one and thesame; but their existence is not the same.... 
”(381) And Hegel comments:...“There is a body which sounds and a subject which hears: their existence is twofold.... 
” (382) But he leaves aside the question of Being o utside man!!! A sophistical dodge f r o m materialism! Speaking about thinking, and about rea-son ( νοÜς ), Aristotle ( De anima , III, 4) says: ...“There is no sense-perception independ-ent of the body, but νοÜς is separable from it...” (385) “ νοÜς is like a book upon whose pages nothing is actually written”(38)—and Hegel again becomes irate:“another much-decried illustration” (386),the very opposite of what he means is ascribed to Aristotle, etc. 
, etc. 
 ((and the question of Being i n d e p e n d e n t o f mind and of man is suppressed!!))—all thatfor the sake of proving “Aristotle is there-fore not a realist. 
” (389)A r i s t o t l e : “In this way he who perceives nothing by his senses learns nothing and under-stands nothing; when he discerns anything the soul— Ed. 
ha-ha! Aristotle Hegel con-ceals the weaknesses of idealism tabula rasa ha-ha! ha-ha! he’s afraid!! THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE STOICS102 *perceives— Ed. 
 **reason. 
— Ed. 
 *** what is apprehended by reason— Ed. 
Aristotle and m a t e r i a l -i s m distortion of Aristotle Hegel against the Stoics and their criterion there are “reasons” for everything(ϑεωÇÑ *) he must necessarily discern it as a pictorial conception, for such con-ceptions are like sense-perceptions, only without matter.... 
” (389) ...“Whether the understanding thinks actual objects when it is abstractedfrom all matter requires special inves-tigation.... 
” (389) And Hegel scrapes out of Aristotle that ostensibly “ νοÜς ** and νοητóν *** are one and the same” (390), etc. 
 A model example of theidealistic misrepresentations of an ideal-ist!! Distorting Aristotle into an idealist of the eighteenth-nineteenth century!! In regard to the “criterion of truth” of the S t o i c s —“the conception that is laid hold of” (444-446)—Hegel says that con-sciousness only compares conception withconception ( n o t with the object —(446): “truth ... is the harmony of object andconsciousness” = “the celebrated definition of the truth”) and, consequently, the whole question is one of the “objective logos, the rationality of the world. 
” (446) “Thought yields nothing but the form of universality and identity with itself;...hence everything may harmonise withmy thought. 
” (449) “Reasons, however, prove to be a hum-bug; for there are good reasons for every-thing.... 
” (449) “Which reasons should beesteemed as good thereby depends on theend and interest.... 
” (ibidem) THE PHILOSOPHY OF EPICURUS *In the manuscript the word “Canonic” is linked by an arrow with the word “It” at the beginning of the following paragraph. 
—Ed. 
Speaking of Epicurus (342-271 B. 
 C. 
), Hegel i m m e d i a t e l y (before describ-ing his views) adopts a hostile attitudeto materialism and declares: “It is already (!!) self-evident (!!) that if sense-perceived Being is regarded as the truth, the necessity for the Notion is altogether abrogated, in the absence ofspeculative interest everything falls apart,and, on the contrary, the vulgar viewof things prevails; in point of fact it doesnot go beyond the view of ordinary human understanding, or rather, everything is lowered to the level of ordinary humanunderstanding”!! (473-474) Slander against materialism!! “Ne-cessity for the Notion” is not in the slightest “abrogated” by the theory of the s o u r c e of cognition and the concept!! Disagreement with“common sense” is the foul quirkof an idealist. 
 Epicurus gave the name of Canonic * to the theory of knowledge and the crite-rion of truth. 
 After a brief exposition ofit, Hegel writes: “It is so simple that nothing can well be simpler—it is abstract, but also very trivial; more or less on the level of ordi-nary consciousness that begins to reflect. 
It consists of ordinary psychological con-ceptions; they are quite correct. 
 Out ofsense-perceptions we make conceptions asthe universal; thanks to which it becomes lasting. 
 The conceptions themselves (beiSlander against materialism Why? !!!!NB *in opinion— Ed. 
der δóξα , Meinung*) are tested by means of sensations, as to whether they are last-ing, whether they repeat themselves. 
 That is quite correct on the whole, but quitesuperficial; it is the first beginning, themechanics of conception with respect tothe first sense-perceptions.... 
” (483) The “first beginning” is forgotten and distorted by idealism. 
 D i a -l e c t i c a l materialism alone linked the “beginning” with thecontinuation and the end. 
 NB: p. 
 4 8 1 —on the significance of words according to Epicurus: Everything has its evidence, energy, distinctness, in the name first conferredon it” (Epicurus: Diogenes Laertius , X, § 33). 
 And Hegel: The name is something universal, belongs to thinking, makes the manifold simple. 
” (481) “On the objective manner in general in which the images of external thingsenter into us, and on our relation to exter-nal things, by which conceptions arise— Epicurus has evolved the following met-aphysical explanation: “From the surfaces of things there passes off a constant stream, which cannot bedetected by our senses ... and this be-cause, by reason of the counteracting re-plenishment, the thing itself in its solid-ity long preserves the same arrangementand disposition of the atoms; and the mo-tion through the air of these surfaces whichdetach themselves is of the utmost rapidity,because it is not necessary that what is detached should have any thickness. 
” “The!!! Epicurus: objects outside us N B theory of knowledge of Epicurus... *The words in brackets are missing in Lenin’s manuscript. 
— Ed. 
sensation does not contradict such an idea, when we consider” (zusehe) “how images produce their effects; they bring us a cor-respondence, a sympathetic link with ex-ternal things. 
 Therefore something passesout from them which within us is likesomething external. 
” “And since the ema-nation passes into us, we know of the def-initeness of a sensation; the definite lies in the object and thus flows into us”(pp. 
 484-485, Diogenes Laertius , X, § 48-49). 
 The genius of Epicurus’ conjecture (300 B. 
C. 
, i. 
e. 
, more than 2,000 years beforeHegel), e. 
g. 
, on light and its velocity. 
 Hegel completely c o n c e a l e d (NB) the m a i n t h i n g : (N B ) the existence of things o u t s i d e the consciousness of man and i n d e p e n d e n t o f it —all that Hegel suppresses and merely says: ...“This is a very trivial way of repre-senting sense-perception. 
 Epicurus electedto take the easiest criterion of the truth—acriterion still in use—inasmuch as it is not apprehended by sight, namely: that it does not contradict what we see or hear. 
 For intruth such matters of thought as atoms, thedetachment of surfaces, and so forth, arebeyond our powers of sight and hearing; [cer-tainty we manage to see and to hear some-thing different]* but there is abundance of room for what is seen and what is conceivedor imagined to exist alongside of one another. 
If the two are allowed to fall apart, theydo not contradict each other; for it is notuntil we relate them that the contradic-tion becomes apparent.... 
” (485-486)A model of distortion and slander against materialism by an ideal-ist *meagre —Ed. 
 **a l s o —Ed. 
 *** difference— Ed. 
 **** “c u r v i li n e a r ” m o t i o n —Ed. 
This, a u c h ,** is wonderful!!!! Epicurus (341-270 B. 
 C. 
). 
 Locke (1 6 3 2 -1 7 0 4 ). 
 Dif-ferenz*** = 2,000 years and electrons? nonsense! lies! slander!Hegel has avoided Epicurus’ theory of cognition and begun to speak of s o m e -t h i n g e l s e , which Epicurus does not touch on here and w h i c h i s c o m -p a t i b l e with materialism!! P. 
 (486): Error, according to Epicurus, proceeds from an interruption in movement (in the movement from the object to us, to sense-perception or to conception). 
 “It is impossible,” Hegel writes, “to have a more meagre (theory of knowledge). 
” (486) Everything becomes dürftig ,* if it is distorted and despoiled. 
 The soul, according to Epicurus, is a “certain” arrangement of atoms. 
 “This iswhat Locke also (!!!) said.... 
 These areempty words ...” (488) ((no, they are the guess-work of genius and signposts for sci-ence , but not for clericalism)). 
 NB. 
 NB. 
 (489), id. 
 (490): Epicurus ascribes to the atoms a “ k r u m m-l i n i g t e ” B e w e g u n g ,**** this ac-cording to Hegel is “most arbitrary andwearisome” (488) in Epicurus—((and the “God” of the idealists???)). 
 “Or else Epicurus altogether denies No-tion and the Universal as the essential.... 
”(490) although his atoms “themselves have this very nature of thought”... “the incon-sistency ... which all empiricists are guil-ty of.... 
” (491) This a v o i d s the essence of m a t e r i a l i s m and material-ist dialectics. 
 “In Epicurus there is no ... final end in the world, wisdom of a Creator; everythingconsists of events, which are determinedby the chance (??) external (??) comingtogether of configurations of atoms.... 
” (491) And Hegel simply h u r l s a b u s e a t Epicurus: “His thoughts on particular as-pects of Nature are, however, in them-selves feeble.... 
” (492) And immediately afterwards is a polemic against the “Naturwissenschaft” heute,*which, like Epicurus, allegedly judges “by analogy,” and “explains” (492)—e. 
g. 
, light as “vibrations of the ether.... 
” This is ananalogy quite in the manner of Epicu-rus.... 
” (493) ((Modern n a t u r a l s c i e n c e ver-sus Epicurus,—against ( NB) Hegel. 
)) In Epicurus, “the kernel of the matter, the principle, is nothing else than theprinciple of our usual natural science.... 
”(495) ... “it is still the manner which liesat the basis of our natural science.... 
” (496) Correct is only the reference to the ignorance of dialectics in gen-eral and of the dialectics of con-cepts. 
 But the criticism of m a -t e r i a l i s m is schwach. 
** * “natural science” today— Ed. 
 **feeble— Ed. 
NB he pities God!! the idealistic scoundrel!! !! and the “manner” of natural science! and its successes!! Epicurus and modern na-tural science *s u p e r s t i t i o n s —Ed. 
!NB! NB!! NB NB NB NB Hegel on the pros of materialism“Of this method (of Epicurean philosophy) we may say in general that it likewisehas a side on which it possesses value. 
Aristotle and the more ancient philosopherstook their start in natural philosophy fromuniversal thought a priori, and from thisdeveloped the Notion. 
 This is the one side. 
The other side is the necessary one thatexperience should be worked up into uni-versality, that laws should be determined;that is to say, that the result which fol-lows from the abstract Idea should coin-cide with the general conception to whichexperience and observation have led. 
 Thea priori is with Aristotle, for instance,most excellent, but not sufficient, becauseit lacks connection with and relation toexperience and observation. 
 This develop-ment of the particular to the general isthe discovery of laws, natural forces andso on. 
 It may be said that Epicurus is theinventor of empirical natural science, ofempirical psychology. 
 In contrast to theStoic ends, conceptions of the understand-ing, is experience, the sensuous present. 
There we have abstract, limited understand-ing, without truth in itself; and thereforewithout the presence and reality of nature;here we have this sense of nature, whichis more true than these other hypotheses. 
”(496-407) (THIS ALMOST COMPLETELY AP-PROACHES DIALECTICAL MATERIAL-ISM. 
) The importance of Epicurus—the strug-gle against A b e r g l a u b e n * o f t h e G r e e k s a n d R o m a n s (4 9 8 )—and modern priests?? all this nonsense about whether a hare ran across the path (493), etc. 
 (and the good Lord?). 
NB NB THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE SCEPTICS104 *“finite” things— Ed. 
 **“the universal”— Ed. 
 *** thinking scepticism— Ed. 
“And from it” (the philosophy of Epi-curus), “more than anything, those con-ceptions which have altogether denied thesupersensuous have proceeded. 
” (498) But this is good only for “end-lichen”*.... 
 “ With superstition there also passed away self-dependent Connec-tion and the world of the Ideal . 
” (499) This NOTA BENE . 
 P. 
 4 9 9 : Epicurus on the soul : the f i n e r (NB) atoms, their more rapid (NB) motion , their c o n n e c t i o n (NB) etc. 
, etc. 
, with the body ( D i o g e n e s L a e r t i u s , X, § 66; 63-64)—very naïve and good!—but Hegel becomes irate, hehurls abuse : “meaningless talk,” “empty words,” “no thoughts. 
” (500) The Gods, according to Epicurus, are “das Allgemeine”** (506) in general—“theyconsist partly in number” as number,i. 
e. 
, abstraction from the sensuous.... 
 “In part, they” (the gods) “are the perfect-ed type of man , which, owing to the simi-larity of the images, arises from the con-tinuous confluence of like images on oneand the same subject. 
” (507) Speaking of Scepticism , Hegel points to its apparent “invincibility” (Unbezwing-lichkeit) (538): “If anyone actually desires to be a Scep-tic, he cannot be convinced, or be broughtto a positive philosophy, any more than hewho is paralysed can be made to stand. 
” (539) “Positive philosophy in relation to it” (den denkenden Skeptizismus***) “mayNB for what did they (the classics) val-ue idealism?? for Hegel the “soul” is a l s o a prejudice N B Gods = the perfected type of man, cf. 
 F e u e r-b a c h103 NB Bien dit!! NB dialectics of Scepticism is “contingent” not a bad anecdote about the Sceptics NB Scepticism is not doubthave this consciousness: it contains in itself the negative of Scepticism; Scepticism is not opposed to it, nor outside it, but is a moment of it; but it contains the negativein its truth, as it is not present in Scepti-cism. 
” (539) (The relation of philosophy to Scepti-cism:) “Philosophy is dialectical, this dialectic is change; the Idea, as abstract Idea, isthe inert and existent, but it is only trueinsofar as it grasps itself as living; thisis that it is dialectical in itself, in orderto transcend that quiescence and inertness. 
 Hence the philosophic idea is dialectical in itself and not contingent; Scepticism,on the contrary, exercises its dialecticcontingently—for just as the material, thecontent comes before it, it shows that itis negative in itself.... 
” (540) The old ( ancient ) Scepticism has to be distinguished from the new (only Schulze of Göttingen is named). 
 (540) Ataraxie (imperturbability?) as the ideal of the Sceptics: “Pyrrho once pointed out to his fellow-passengers on hoard a ship, who were fright-ened during a storm, a pig, which remainedquite indifferent and peaceably ate on,saying to them: in such imperturbabilitythe wise man must also abide” (DiogenesLaertius, IX, 68)—pp. 
 551-552. 
 “Scepticism is not doubt. 
 Doubt is just the opposite of the tranquillity that isthe result of scepticism. 
” (552). 
 ...“Scepticism, on the contrary, is indif-ferent to the one as well as to the other.... 
”(553) Schulze-Aenesidemus passes off for Scep-ticism the statement that everything sen-suous is truth (557), but the Sceptics did not say so: one must sich danach richten, orientate oneself by the sensuous, but that is not the truth. 
 The new Scepticism does n o t doubt the reality of things. 
 The old Scepticism does doubt the reality of things. 
 Tropes (turns of speech, arguments, etc. 
) of the Sceptics: a. 
 The diversity of animal organisation. 
 (558)Differences in sensations: the jaun-diced (dem Gelbsüchtigen) sees as yellow what to others appears white,etc. 
 b. 
 The diversity of mankind. 
 “Idiosyn-crasies. 
” (559)Whom to believe? The majority? Fool-ish, for all men cannot be interro-gated. 
 (560)Diversity of philosophies: Stupid re-ference, Hegel waxes indignant: ...“such men see everything in a phi-losophy excepting Philosophy itself, and this is overlooked.... 
” “However different the philosophic systems maybe, they are not as different as whiteand sweet, green and rough, for theyagree in the fact that they are philos-ophies and this is what is overlooked. 
” (561) ...“All tropes proceed against the ‘is,’ but the truth is all the samenot this dry ‘is,’ but essentially proc-ess.... 
” (562) c. 
 The diversity in the constitution of the organs of sense: the various sense organs perceive differently (on a paint-ed panel something appears erha-NB everything in S e x t u s Empiricus (second cen-tury A. 
 D. 
) NB NB NB ben* to the eye but not to the touch). 
 d. 
 The diversity of circumstances in the subject (rest, passion, etc. 
). 
 e. 
 The diversity of distances, etc. 
 the earth going round the sun or vice versa, etc. 
, f. 
 Intermixture (scents in strong sun-shine and without it, etc. 
). 
 g. 
 The composition of things (pounded glass is not transparent, etc. 
). 
 h. 
 The “ relativity of things. 
” i. 
 The frequency, rarity of happenings, etc. 
; habit. 
 k. 
 Customs, laws, etc. 
, their diversity.... 
 These (10) are all o l d tropes and He-gel: this is all “empirical”—“do not have to do with the Notion.... 
” (566) This is “trivial” ..., but.... 
 “In fact, as against the dogmatism of the common human understanding theyare quite valid.... 
” (567) The five new tropes (are said by Hegel to be much more advanced, they contain dialectics , concern concepts )—also accord-ing to Sextus: a. 
 The diversity of the opinions ... of p h i l o s o p h e r s ... b. 
 The falling into an infinite pro-gression (one thing depends on an-other and so on without end). 
 c. 
 Relativity (of premises). 
 d. 
 Presupposition. 
 The dogmatists put forward unprovable presupposi-tions. 
 e. 
 Reciprocity. 
 Circle (vicious)... raised— Ed. 
  *Lenin’s remark in parentheses was evoked by a misprint in the German text, which had nicht (not) instead of nichts (nothing) beforethe word “absolute. 
”— Ed. 
“These sceptical tropes, in fact, concern that which is called a dogmatic philosophy (and in accordance with its nature such a philosophy must display itself in allthese forms) not in the sense of its havinga positive content, but as asserting some-thing determinate as the absolute. 
” (575) Hegel a g a i n s t t h e a b s o l u t e! Here we have the germ of dialectical materialism. 
 “To the criticism which knows nothing in itself, nothing (not nichts) (sic!!)* ab-solute, all knowledge of Being-in-itself,as such, is held to be dogmatism, whileit is the worst dogmatism of all, becauseit maintains that the ‘I,’ the unity of self-consciousness, opposed to Being, is in and for itself, and that what is ‘in itself’ inthe outside world is likewise so, and there-fore that the two absolutely cannot cometogether. 
” (570) “These tropes hit dogmatic philosophy, which has this manner of representing one principle in a determinate proposition asdeterminateness. 
 Such a principle is alwaysconditioned; and consequently contains dia-lectics, the destruction within it of itself. 
”(577) “These tropes are a powerful weapon against the philosophy of reason. 
” (ib. 
) Sextus, for example, reveals the dialec-tics of the concept of a point (der Punkt). 
 A point has no dimensions? That meansthat it is outside space! It is the limit of space in space, a negation of space, and at the same time “it touches space”—“but at time same time it is also in itself some-thing dialectical. 
” (570)NB N B “Criticism” is the “worst dogmatism” Bien dit!!! Dialectics = “destruction of itself” NB /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR www. 
marx2mao. 
com“These tropes ... are powerless against speculative ideas, because the latter contain within themselves a dialectical moment and the abrogation of the finite. 
” (580) End of Volume XIV (p. 
 586). 
NB VOLUME XV. 
 VOLUME II OF THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY (THE END OF GREEK PHILOSOPHY. 
 MEDIEVAL AND MODERN PHILOSOPHY UP TO SCHELLING, pp. 
 1-692) BERLIN, 1836 THE NEO-PLATONISTS105 ...“The return to God.... 
” (5),* “self-consciousness is absolute Essence”..., “theworld-spirit”... (7), “Christian religion”.... 
(8) And a m a s s o f t h i n p o r r i d g e ladled out about God.... 
 (8-18) But this philosophical idealism, open-ly, “seriously” leading to God, is morehonest than modern agnosticism withits hypocrisy and cowardice. 
 A. 
 Philo —(about the time of the birth of Christ), a Jewish savant, a mystic,“finds Plato present in Moses” (19),etc. 
 The main point is “the knowl-edge of God” (21), etc. 
 God is λóγος ,** “the epitome of all Ideas,” “pure Be-ing” (22) (“according to Plato”).... 
(22) Ideas are “angels” (messengersof God).... 
 (24) The sensuous world,however, “as with Plato” = οûκ öν *** == not-Being. 
 (25) *Hegel, Werke , Bd. 
 XV, Berlin, 1836. 
— Ed. 
 **logos— Ed. 
 *** non-existent— Ed. 
Ideas (of Plato) and the good Lord HEGEL ON PLATO’S DIALOGUES** p. 
 (230)*** Sophistes (238) Philebus (240) P a r m e n i d e s (Timaeus) (248) *clever people— Ed. 
 **This entry was made by Lenin in German on the back cover of the notebook containing the conspectus of Hegel’s book Lectures on the Philosophy of History . 
—Ed. 
 *** Hegel, Werke , Bd. 
 XIV, Berlin, 1833. 
— Ed. 
on the eclectics... Plato’s ideas and the, good LordB. 
 Cabbala ,106 the Gnostics107 —————— idem... C. 
 Alexandrian philosophy108—(= eclectic-ism) ( = Platonists, Pythagoreans, Ari-stotelians). 
 (33, 35) Eclectics are either uncultured men, or cunning (die klugen Leute*—they take thegood from every system, but... —they collect every good but do not have “consistency of thought. 
, and consequentlythought itself. 
” (33) They developed Plato.... 
“The Platonic universal, which is in thought, accordingly receives the significa-tion of being as such absolute essence” (33).... 
 Published according to the manuscriptWritten in 1915 First published in 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XIICONSPECTUS OF HEGEL’S BOOK LECTURES ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF HISTORY109 HEGEL. 
 WORKS, VOL. 
 IX (BERLIN, 1837) LECTURES ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF HISTORY (Edition of E. 
 Gans) Materials: Notes of the lectures 1822-1831. 
 Hegel’s manuscript u p t o p. 
 7 3, etc. 
 P. 
 5* ...“Speeches ... are transactions be-tween people”... (hence these speechesare not mere talk). 
 7—The French and English are more edu-cated (“they have more ... national culture”),—but we Germans rack ourbrains to discover how history ought to be written, rather than writing it. 
 9—History teaches “that peoples and gov-ernments of a people have never learned anything from history; each pe-riod is t o o i n d i v i d u a l for that. 
” “But what experience and history teach is this—that peoples and gov-ernments have never learned any-thing from history, or acted accord-ing to the lessons that could havebeen drawn from it. 
 Each period hassuch peculiar circumstances, it isa state of things so unique that onemust and can judge of it only on the basis of itself. 
” * Hegel, Werke , Bd. 
 IX, Berlin, 1837. 
— Ed. 
shrewd and clever! very clever! NB NB NB *feeble— Ed. 
 **“self-interest”— Ed. 
 *** in fine—at the end— Ed. 
 **** human beings— Ed. 
p. 
 12—“reason governs the world.... 
” 20: The substance of Matter is Gravity. 
 The substance of Spirit is Freedom. 
 22: “World history is the progress of the consciousness of freedom—a progresswhich we have to know in its ne-cessity.... 
” 24—(approach to historical materialism). 
 What guides the actions of men? Aboveall, “Selbstsucht”**—motives of love,etc. 
, are rarer and their sphere nar-rower. 
 What, then, is the outcomeof this interweaving of passions, etc. 
? of needs, etc. 
? 28 “Nothing great in the world has been accomplished without passion.... 
” Pas-sion is the subjective and “therefore;the formal side of energy.... 
” 28 i. 
f. 
***—History does not begin with a conscious aim.... 
 What is important is that which 29 ...appears unconsciously for mankind a s the result of its action.... 
 29 ... In this sense “Reason governs the world. 
” 30 ...In history through human actions “something else results in additionbeyond that which they aim at andobtain, beyond that which they direct-ly know and desire. 
” 30 ...“They” (die Menschen****) “gratify their own interest, but something fur-ther is thereby brought about, whichwas latent in their interest, but whichwas not in their consciousness or in-cluded in their intention. 
”schwach!* 30 NB (cf. 
 Engels110) 32 ...“Such are the great men in history, whose own particular aims contain that substantial element which is the will of the World Spirit.... 
 36—the religiousness and virtue of a shep-herd, a peasant, etc. 
, is highly honour-able (examples!! NB), but ...“the rightof the World Spirit stands above all special rights.... 
” Here in Hegel is often to be found—about God, religion, moral-ity in general—extremely trite ideal-istic nonsense. 
 97: “the gradual abolition of slav-ery is better than its sudden re-moval.... 
” 50. 
 The constitution of a state together with its religion, philosophy, thought, culture, “external forces” (climate,neighbours...) comprise “one substance,one Spirit.... 
” 51 In nature movement takes place only in a cycle (!!)—in history, something new arises.... 
 62. 
 Language is richer among peoples in an undeveloped, primitive state—lan-guage becomes poorer with the advanceof civilisation and the developmentof grammar. 
 67: “World history develops on a higher ground than that on which moralityhas its position (Stätte).... 
 73: An excellent picture of history: the sum of individual passions, actions,etc. 
 (“everywhere something akin to ourselves, and therefore everywhere something that excites our interest foror against”), sometimes the mass of“great men” ? very good *very important!— Ed. 
 **See p. 
 313 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 *** order— Ed. 
 **** duration— Ed. 
Sehr wich-tig!* see below this passage m o r e f u l l y ** NB cf. 
 Plekha-nov111 !!!some general interest, sometimes a multitude of “m i n u t e f o r c e s ” (“an infinite exertion of minute forces which produce a tremendous resultfrom what appears insignificant”). 
The result? The result is “ exhaustion . 
” P. 
 74. 
 End of the “Introduction . 
” P. 
 75—“ The Geographical Basis of World History ” (a characteristic heading): (75-101). 
 75—Under the mild Ionic sky,” a Homer could more easily arise—but this isnot the only cause. 
—“Not under Turk-ish rule,” etc. 
 82—Emigration to America removes “dis-content,” and the continued exist-ence of the contemporary civil order isguaranteed (but this Zustland***—“riches and poverty” 8 1).... 
 82. 
 In Europe there is no such outlet: had the forests of Germany still been in existence, the French Revolutionwould not have occurred. 
 102: Three forms of world history: 1) des-potism, 2) democracy and aristocracy,3) monarchy. 
 Subdivisions: The Oriental World—The Greek—The Roman—The GermanWorld. 
 Empty phrase-mongering aboutmorality, etc. 
, etc. 
 China. 
 Chapter 1 (113 to 139). 
 Description of the Chinese character , institutions, etc. 
, etc. 
 Nil, nil, nil! India— to 170 —To... Persia (and Egypt)—to 231. 
 Why did the Persian Empire fall, but not Chinaor India? Dauer**** is not as such vortreffliches* (229)—“The imperish-able mountains are not superior to the rose that quickly loses its petals in its fleeting existence. 
” (229) Persiafell because the “spiritual view ofthings” began here (230), but the Greeksproved superior, “higher principle” oforganisation, “self-conscious freedom. 
” (231) 232: “The Greek World” ... the principle (of “pure individuality”—the period ofits development, flowering and decline,“encounter with the succeeding organof world history ” (233)—Rome with its “substance” (ibidem). 
 234: The geographical conditions of Greece: the diversity of its nature (in con-trast to the monotony of the East). 
 2 4 2—The colonies in Greece. 
 Amassing of wealth. 
 Want and poverty “always” bound up with it.... 
 246. 
 “The natural, as explained by men, its internal, essential element, is thebeginning of the divine in general”(in connection with the mythology ofthe Greeks). 
 2 5 1 : “Man with his requirements behaves in a practical way in relation to ex-ternal nature; in making it serve forhis satisfaction, he wears it away, there-by setting to work as an intermediary. 
For natural objects are powerful and offer resistance in many different ways. 
 In order to subdue them, man intro-duces other natural objects, thus turn-ing nature against itself, and he in-vents tools for this purpose. 
 These hu-man inventions belong to the spirit, and such a tool must be regarded as * something excellent— Ed. 
world history as a whole and the separate peoples—its “organs” Wealth and poverty Hegel and Feuerbach112 Germs of historical materialism in Hegel *ardour —Ed. 
 **“industriousness”— Ed. 
Hegel and Marx ?? Hegel and “contradic-tions” in history c a t e g o -r i e s of the possible and contingent versus act-uality and confirmation in historyhigher than a natural object.... 
 The honour of human invention for sub-jugating nature is ascribed to the Gods” (among the Greeks). 
 264: Democracy in Greece was bound up with the small size of the states. 
Speech , living speech, united the cit-izens, created Erwärmung . 
* “Hence” in the French Revolution there was never a republican consti-tution. 
 322-323. 
 “He” (Caesar) “removed the in-ternal contradiction” (by abolishingthe republic, which had become a “shadow”) “and created a new one. 
 For world rule had hitherto reached onlyto the rim of the Alps, but Caesar open-ed a new arena: he founded the theatrewhich was now to become the centreof world history. 
” And then on the murder of Caesar: ...“In general, a political revolu-tion is, as it were, sanctioned in man’sopinion if it is repeated” (Napoleon,the Bourbons).... 
 “By repetition thatwhich at first appeared merely a mat-ter of chance and possibility becomes something real and confirmed. 
” (323) “Christianity. 
” (328-346) Banal, cleric-al, idealistic chatter about the greatnessof Christianity (with quotations from the Gospels!!). 
 Disgusting, stinking! 420-421: Why was the Reformation lim-ited to a few nations? Among otherreasons—“the Slav nations were agri-cultural ” (421) and this brings with it “the relation of lords and serfs,” less “Betriebsamkeit,**” etc. 
 But why /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR *fundamental character— Ed. 
 **“already changed everything for the better”— Ed. 
 *** “unspeakable injustice”— Ed. 
NB class relations !! cf. 
 Marx and Engels113 ?the Romanic nations? Their character (Grundcharakter* 421 i. 
f. 
) 4 2 9: ...“Polish freedom likewise was noth-ing but the freedom of the baronsagainst the monarchs.... 
 Hence thepeople had the same interest againstthe barons as the kings.... 
 When free-dom is mentioned, one must always be careful to see whether it is not really private interests that are being spokenof. 
” (430) 439: On the French Revolution... Why did the French pass “immediately from thetheoretical to the practical,” but not the Germans? Among the Germans, the Reformation had “schon Alles gebes-sert,”** abolished “das unsägliche Un-recht,”*** etc. 
 441: For the first time (in the French Revolution) humanity had arrived at the conclusion “that man bases himself on the head, i. 
e. 
, on thought, andbuilds reality accordingly.... 
” “Thiswas ... a glorious dawn.... 
”In considering further the “course ofthe Revolution in France” (441) Hegel stresses in freedom in general—freedom of property , and of industry (ibid. 
). 
 ...The promulgation of laws? The willof all.... 
 “The few should represent the many, but they often merely re-press them.... 
” “The power of the majority over the minority is to no less degree a great inconsistency”(ibid). 
 444: ...“In its content this event” (the French Revolution) “is world historical.... 
”        *introduction— Ed. 
 **On the next page of the manuscript the excerpt “Hegel on World History” begins— Ed. 
“Liberalism,” (444) “liberal institu-tions” (443) spread over Europe. 
 p. 
 446—end 4 4 6: “World history is nothing but the development of the notion of free-dom.... 
” In general the philosophy of history yields very, very little—this is compre-hensible, for it is precisely here, inthis field, in this science, that Marxand Engels made the greatest step for-ward. 
 Here most of all, Hegel is obso-lete and antiquated. 
 (see the next page**)N B: Most impor-tant is Ein-leitung,* where there is much that is magni-ficent in the formulation of the question “If then, finally, we regard world his-tory from the standpoint of the category through which it should be considered,we have before us an endless picture ofhuman life and activity under the mostvaried circumstances, with all kinds ofaims and the most diverse events and destinies. 
 In all these occurrences and events we see human action and effortin the forefront; everywhere something akinto ourselves, and therefore everywhere some-thing that excites our interest for oragainst. 
 Sometimes it attracts us by beauty, freedom and richness, sometimes by ener-gy, sometimes even vice succeeds in makingitself important. 
 Often there is the com-prehensive mass of some general interestthat cumbrously moves forward, but stillmore often the infinite exertion of minute forces, which produce a tremendous result from what appears insignificant; every-where the motleyest spectacle, and as soonas one vanishes another takes its place. 
 “But the immediate result of this con-sideration, however attractive it may be, is exhaustion , such as follows after a very varied spectacle, a magic lantern show;and even if we accord to each individualHEGEL ON WORLD HISTORY *Hegel, Werke , Bd. 
 IX, Berlin, 1837. 
— Ed. 
 **“elaboration”— Ed. 
representation its true worth, the question nevertheless arises in our minds, what is the final aim of all these particular events, is each one exhausted by its special aim,or ought one not rather think of a single ultimate aim of all these events; behindthe loud noises at the surface is there notgoing on the labour and production of a work, an internal quiet, secret work in which the essential force of all those tran-sitory phenomena is stored up? But if onedoes not bring thought, rational cognition,to world history from the beginning, onemust at least approach it with the firm unshakable faith that it has reason in it, or at least that the world of the intellectand self-conscious will is not a victimof chance but must reveal itself in the lightof the self-knowing idea. 
” (73-74)*((NB. 
 In the Preface, p. 
 XVIII, the pub-lisher, i. 
e. 
, the editor, Ed. 
 Gans, states that u p t o p. 
 7 3 the text was written by Hegel in 1830; the manuscript is an“Ausarbeitung. 
”**)) PLAN OF HEGEL’S DIALECTICS (LOGIC)114 CONTENTS OF THE SMALL LOGIC (ENCYCLOPAEDIA ) I. 
 The Doctrine of Being. 
 A) Quality a) Being; b) Determinate Being; c) Being-for-self. 
 B) Quantity a) Pure quantity; b) Magnitude (Quantum); c) Degree. 
 C) Measure II. 
 The Doctrine of Essence. 
 A) Essence a Ground of Existence. 
 a) Identity—Difference—Ground; b) Existence; c) The Thing. 
 B) Appearance. 
 a) The World of Appearance; b) Content and Form; c) Relation. 
 C) Actuality. 
 a) Relationship of Substantiality; b) Relationship of Causality; c) Reciprocal Action. 
 III. 
 The Doctrine of the Notion. 
 A) The Subjective Notion. 
 a) The Notion; b) The Judgment; c) The Syllogism. 
 B) The Object. 
 a) Mechanism; b) Chemism; c) Teleology. 
 C) The Idea. 
 a) Life; b) Cognition; c) The Absolute Idea. 
 *Being— Ed. 
 **D e t e r m i n a t e B e i n g —Ed. 
 *** Being-for-self— Ed. 
 **** mysticism of ideas— Ed. 
The concept (cognition) reveals the es-sence (the law of causality, identity, difference, etc. 
) in Being (in immediate phenomena)—such is actually the g e n -e r a l c o u r s e of all human cogni-tion (of all science) in general. 
 Suchis the course also of n a t u r a l s c i -e n c e and p o l t i c a l e c o n o m y and history. 
 Insofar Hegel’s dialectic is a generalisation of the history of thought. 
To trace this more concretely and ingreater detail in the history of the sep-arate sciences seems an extraordinarily rewarding task. 
 In logic, the history of thought must , by and large, coin-cide with the laws of thinking. 
 It is strikingly evident that Hegel some-times passes from the abstract to the con-crete (Sein* (abstract)— D a s e i n ** (con-crete)—Fürsichsein***) and sometimes theother way round (the subjective Notion—the Object—Truth (the Absolute Idea)). 
 Is not this the inconsistency of an ideal-ist (what Marx called the Ideenmystik****in Hegel)? Or are there deeper reasons?(e. 
g. 
, Being = Nothing —the idea of Be-coming, of development). 
 First of all im-pressions flash by , then Something emerges, —afterwards the concepts of quality T (the determination of the thing or the phe-nomenon) and quantity are developed. 
 After that study and reflection direct thought tocognition of identity—of difference—ofGround—of the Essence versus the Pheno-menon—of causality, etc. 
 All these mo-ments (steps, stages, processes) of cognitionmove in the direction from the subjectto the object, being tested in practice andarriving through this test at truth ( =the Absolute Idea). 
 T Quality and sensation (Empfindung) are one and the same, says Feuerbach. 
 Thevery first and most familiar to us is sen-sation, and i n i t there is inevitably also q u a l i t y .... 
 If Marx did not leave behind him a “Logic ” (with a capital letter), he did leave the logic of Capital , and this ought to be utilised to the full in this question. 
 InCapital , Marx applied to a single science logic, dialectics and the theory of knowl-dge of materialism [three words are notneeded: it is one and the same thing]which has taken everything valuable inHegel and developed it further. 
 Commodity—money—capital production of absolute Mehrwert** production of relative Mehrwert * everything flows— Ed. 
 **surplus-value— Ed. 
abstract “Sein” only as a m o-m e n t in πáντα çεì*b b Cf. 
 concerning the question of Essence versus Appearance *value ( =crystallized labour)— Ed. 
The history of capitalism and the anal-ysis of the c o n c e p t s summing it up. 
 The beginning—the most simple, ordi-nary, mass, immediate “Being’’: the single commodity (“Sein” in political economy). 
The analysis of it as a social relation. 
A double analysis, deductive and inductive —logical and historical (forms of value). 
 Testing by facts or by practice respec-tively, is to be found here in each step of the analysis. 
 — price and value — demand and supply versus Wert ( = krystallisjerte Arbeit*) — wages and the price of labour-power. 
. 
 Written in 1915 First published in 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XIIPublished according to the manuscriptDDDDDD DDDDDD GEORGES NOËL: HEGEL’S LOGIC PARIS, 1897115 Bibliothèque de Genève, Ca 1219 Printed in installments in Revue de Mé-taphysique et de Morale ; edited by Xavier Léon. 
 The author is an idealist and a shallow one. 
 A re-writing of Hegel, a defence ofHegel against “modern philosophers,” a com-parison with Kant, etc. 
 Nothing of interest. 
Nothing profound. 
 Not a word about ma-terialist dialectics: the author evidently has no notion of it. 
 Note the t r a n s l a t i o n s o f He -gel’s terms: Ê t r e [B e i n g ]—E s s e n c e —N o -t i o n (Mesure, etc. 
 [Measure]). 
 Devenir (das Gewordene) [Becoming]. 
L’être déterminé (Dasein) [Determinate Being, Existent Being]. 
 Être pour un autre (Sein-für-anderes) [Being-for-other]. 
 Quelque chose (Etwas) [Something]. 
Limite (Grenze) [Limit]. 
Borne (Schranke) [Boundary]. 
Devoir être (Sollen) [Ought]. 
Être pour soi (Für-sich-Sein) [Being-for-itself]. 
 Existence hors de soi (Außer-sich-Sein) [Being outside itself]. 
 La connaissance (dos Erkennen) [Cog-nition]. 
 *These three words are in English in the original. 
— Ed. 
Actualité (Wirklichkeit) [Actuality]. 
 Apparence (Schein) [Semblance]. 
 Être posé (Das Gesetzsein) [Posited Be-ing]. 
 Position (Setzende Reflexion) [Positing reflection]. 
 Fondement ou raison d’être (Grund) [Ground]. 
 L’universel (das Allgemeine) [The Uni-versal]. 
 Particulier (das Besondere) [The Par-ticular]. 
 Jugement (das Urteil) [Judgment]. 
Raisonnement ou Syllogismne (Schluß) (Reasoning or Syllogism (Conclu-sion)]. 
 Note also the amusing attempts of the author to justify Hegel as it were* againstaccusations of “realism” (read: material-ism). 
 According to Hegel “philosophy as a whole is a syllogism. 
 And in this syllo-gism, logic is the universal, nature the par-ticular, and spirit the individual” (p. 
 123). 
The author “analyses” ( = rehashes) the last sentences of the Logic on the transition from the Idea to Nature. 
 It transpires that through nature (in nature) the understand-ing cognises the Idea = uniformity, ab-stractions, etc.... 
 Help! Almost material-ism!!.... 
 “To treat nature by itself, abstracted from mind, is that not to return implicitly to the most naïve realism?” (p. 
 129) “True, by interposing a philosophy of nature between Logic and the philosophyof mind, Hegel adopts the standpoint ofrealism, but in doing so he is not guilty of any inconsistency.... 
 Hegel’s realismNB! NB is only provisional. 
 It is a point of view that has to be superseded. 
” (129) “That realism has its relative truth is indisputable. 
 A point of view so naturaland universal is not an aberration of thehuman mind.... 
 In order to supersede real-ism, it” (dialectics) “will have to give itfirst its full development and only thus will it demonstrate the necessity of ideal-ism. 
 Hence Hegel will put time and spaceas the most general determinations of na-ture and not as forms of the mind. 
 Onthis point he seems to disagree with Kant,but this is only in appearance and in words.... 
 ...“That is why he” (Hegel) “speaks of sensuous qualities as if they were reallyinherent in the body. 
 It is surprising thaton this account Herr Wundt accuses himof ignorance. 
 Does the learned philosopher believe that Hegel had never read Des-cartes, Locke or even Kant? If he is a real-ist, it is due neither to ignorance nor in-consistency, but only tentatively and as amethod of approach. 
” (130) Comparing Hegel with Spinoza, the author says: “In short, Hegel and Spinoza agree in submitting nature to logic” (p. 
 140),but in Hegel logic is not mathematicallogic but the logic of contradictions, ofthe transition “from pure abstraction toreality” (etc. 
). 
 Of Spinoza it is said “with him” (Spinoza) “we are at the antipodes of idealism” (138); for “the world of spirits” (inSpinoza) “exists side by side with the worldof bodies: it does not stand above it.... 
” ...“The idea of evolution so characteris-tic of Hegelianism has no meaning for Spinoza.... 
” (138) Hegel develops the dialectics of Plato (“he recognises with Plato the necessary NB ??!! NB Hegel = a “realist” NB Hegel not a “sceptic” NB Kant an agnostic NB material-ists = “dog-matists”coexistence of opposites” 140)—Leibnitz is close to Hegel. 
 (141) Noël defends Hegel against the charge of pantheism.... 
 (here, he says, is the basisof this charge): ...“Absolute spirit, the final point of his” (Hegel’s) “dialectics, is it basicallyother than the idealised and deified spirit of man himself? Does his God exist any-where but in nature and humanity?” (142) Noël’s “defence” consists in stress-ing (chewing over) the fact thatHegel is an idealist. 
 Is Hegel not a “dogmatist”? (Chapter VI: “The Dogmatism of Hegel”). 
 Yes, in thesense of non-scepticism , in the sense of the a n c i e n t s (p. 
 147). 
 But according to Kant that = cognisability of “Things-in-themselves. 
” Hegel (just like Fichte) denies Things-in-themselves. 
 “Agnostic realism ” according to K a n t (p. 
 148 i. 
f. 
). 
 ...“Kant defines dogmatism from the point of view of agnosticism. 
 A dogmatist is one who claims to determine the Thing-in-itself, to know the unknowable. 
 More-over, dogmatism can take two forms.... 
”(149) Either it is mysticism, or ...“it can also naïvely raise sensuous reality to absolute reality, identify the phenomenon with the noumenon. 
 It is then empirical dogmatism, thatof the common mass and of the savantwho is alien to philosophy. 
 The ma-terialists fall into this second error;the first was that of Plato, Descartes and their disciples.... 
” In Hegel, it is stated, there is not a trace of dogmatism, for “he will certainly not be accused of not recognising the rel-ativity of things with respect to thought, since his whole system rests on this prin-ciple. 
 Nor will he be accused of applyingthe categories undiscerningly and uncritical-ly. 
 Is not his logic precisely a critique of thecategories, a critique incontestably moreprofound than the Kantian critique?” (150) ...“There is no doubt that by the very rejection of noumena he” (Hegel) “putsreality in the phenomenon, 116 but this real-ity in the phenomenon as such is onlyan immediate reality, consequently rela-tive and intrinsically incomplete. 
 It is true reality only implicitly and on condi-tion of its further development.... 
” (151) ...“Moreover, between the intelligible and the sensuous there is no absolute opposi-tion, no hiatus, no unbridgeable gulf. 
 Thesensuous is the intelligible in anticipation; the intelligible is the sensuous under-stood.... 
” (152) (Even you, a shallow idealist, have de-rived some benefit from Hegel!) ...“Sensuous being contains the abso-lute implicitly and it is through a contin-uous gradation that we raise ourselves from the one to the other. 
” (153) ...“Thus, whatever may have been said about it, Kant’s philosophy retains the fun-damental vice of mystical dogmatism. 
 Wefind in it the two characteristic features of this doctrine: absolute opposition be-tween the sensuous and the supersensuous,and an immediate transition from the oneto the other. 
” (156) In Chapter VII: “Hegel and Modern Thought,” Noël takes the positivism of Auguste Comte and, analysing it, calls it “an agnostic system . 
” (166) (Idem 169: “positivist agnosticism”)NB not bad! positivism = agnosticism /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR French translations of Hegel: Véra: Logic , The Philos-ophy of Mind , The Philosophy of Religion , The Philosophy of Nature ; Ch. 
 Bénard: Aesthetics and Poetics Works on Hegelianism: E. 
 Beaussire: Antécédents de l’hégélianisme . 
 P. 
 Janet: La dialectique dans Hégel et dans Platon . 
 1860. 
 Mariano: La Philosophie contemporaine en Italie . 
 Véra: Introduction à la Philosophie de Hégel . 
 *“of permanent facts”— Ed. 
In criticising positivism as agnosticism, the author sometimes castigates it not atall badly for its half-heartedness,—saying,for example, that the question of thesource of laws or of the “permanence” offacts (“des faits permanents,”* 170) cannotbe evaded: ...“Depending on whether one regards them” (les faits permanents) “as uncognis-able or cognisable, one is brought backeither to agnosticism or to dogmatic philos-ophy.... 
” (170 i. 
f. 
). 
 The neo-criticism of M. 
 Renouvier is described as eclecticism, something midwaybetween “positivist phenomenalism andKantianism proper. 
” (175) Chattering about morality, freedom, etc. 
, Noël, the vulgariser of Hegel, hasnot the slightest word to say aboutfreedom as the understanding of neces-sity. 
 Written in 1915 First published in 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XIIPublished according to the manuscript J. 
 PERRIN. 
 TREATISE ON PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY. 
 PRINCIPLES PARIS, 1903117 Note J . 
 P e r r i n : Traité de chimie physique. 
 Les prin-cipes (300 pp. 
). 
 Paris, 1 9 0 3. 
 Review by Abel R e y i n R e v u e P h i l o s o p h i q u e , 1 9 0 4 , 1, entitled: “Phi-losophical Principles of Physical Chemistry. 
” (Perrin ana-lyses the notions of f o r c e , etc. 
, c a u s e , etc. 
, e n e r g y , etc. 
—against “ the view of e n e r g y as a mysterious entity” (p. 
 401).... 
 Abel Rey calls Perrin an opponent of “ n e o -s c e p t i c systems. 
”) Published according to the manuscriptWritten in December 1914 First published in 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII PETER GENOV. 
 FEUERBACH ERKENNTNISTHEORIE UND METAPHYSIK ZÜRICH, 1911 (BERNER DISSERTATION) (S. 
 89)118 Landesbibliothek This purely amateurish work consists a l m o s t e x -c l u s i v e l y of quotations from Feuerbach’s collected works Jodl edition . 
 It can be useful o n l y as a collection of quotations, and incomplete at that. 
 the author has far from worked out his subject The author quotes mainly: Vol. 
 II, especially “Thesen und Grundsätze,” and then “Wider den Dualismus. 
”119 X, especially “Über Spiritualismus und Materialismus. 
” NB V I I I, Vorlesungen über das Wesen der Religion (Feu-erbach himself wrote in 1 8 4 8 that this was a more mature work of his than The Essence of Christianity ; published in 1 8 4 1) VIII, SS. 
 26, 29; 102-109; 288; 329 and others . 
 VII. 
 Das Wesen der Religion (1 8 4 5: Fe u e r b a c h r e g a r d s i t a s i m p o r t a n t ). 
 IV. 
 “Leibnitz” with the notes of 1847 (NB) IV, SS. 
 261; 197; 190-191; 274 . 
 VII. 
 Addenda to Wesen des Christentums . 
 The author quotes (in the spirit of Feuerbach):Ebbinghaus : Experimentelle Psychologie , SS. 
 110 und 45. 
 Fr. 
 Jodl : Lehrbuch der Psychologie , S. 
 403. 
 A. 
 Forel : Gehirn und Seele , X Auflage, S. 
 14. 
 Lange 120 (II Buch, S. 
 104) against Feuerbach, he says, is obviously wrong (S. 
 83 and 88), distorting (and denying)Feuerbach’s materialism. 
{ { At the beginning the author gives a sketch of Feuer-bach’s philosophical evolution,— Todesgedanken (1830)— still a Hegelian; Der Schriftsteller und der Mensch * (1834)— beginning of the rupture; Kritik des Antihegel (1835)— against the enemies of Hegel, but not in favour of Hegel(cf. 
 de Grün, 121 Bd. 
 II, 409; I, 390 and 398). 
— The Critique of Hegelian Philosophy ** (1839). 
— The Essence of Christian-ity (1 8 4 1)—the rupture— Theses and Principles of the Philosophy of the Future (1842 and 1843). 
— The Essence of Religion (1845). 
— Lectures on the Essence of Religion (1 8 4 7 ). 
 *Here the author was “not a pantheist, but a polytheist” (S. 
 15); “more a Leibnitzian than a Hegelian” (S. 
 15). 
 **The German titles of Feuerbach’s works are: Kritik der Hegel-schen Philosophie ; Wesen des Christentums ; Vorläufige Thesen zur Reform der Philosophie ; Grundsätze der Philosophie der Zukunft ; Wesen der Religion ; Vorlesungen über das Wesen der Religion . 
—Ed. 
Published according to the manuscriptWritten December 29-30, 1914 First published in 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII PAUL VOLKMANN. 
 EPISTEMOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS OF THE NATURAL SCIENCES (“SCIENCES AND HYPOTHESIS,” IX) SECOND EDITION, LEIPZIG, 1910122 (Nat. 
 IV. 
 171 in Bern library) The author is an eclectic and vulgariser in philosophy, especially when speaking against Haeckel, about Buckle, etc. 
, etc. 
 Nevertheless, the tendency is materialist, e. 
g. 
, p. 
 35*—“The question whether we dictate concepts to na-ture, or nature to us” is, he says, a combination of bothpoints of view. 
 Mach , he says, is right (p. 
 38), but I coun-terpose to it (Mach’s point of view) the “objective” pointof view: “Thus I hold that logic in us has its origin in the uni-form course of things outside us, that the external necessi-ty of natural events is our first and most real schoolmis-tress” (p. 
 39). 
 He rebels against phenomenology and modern monism,— but completely fails to understand the essence of material-ist and idealist philosophy. 
 In fact, he reduces the mat-ter to “methods” of natural science in a general positivistsense. 
 He is not even capable of raising the question of theobjective reality of nature outside the consciousness (and sensations) of mankind. 
 * Volkmann, P. 
, Erkenntnistheorische Gründzüge der Natur-Published according to the manuscriptWritten in 1915 First published in 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII MAX VERWORN. 
 THE HYPOTHESIS OF BIOGENESIS JENA, 1903123 *Verworn, M. 
, Die Biogenhypothese , Jena, 1903. 
— Ed. 
The author expounds a special theme concerning “ living substance ” and its chem-ical metabolism. 
 A special theme. 
 A bibliography is provided on this question. 
 P. 
 112—a “working hypothesis,” this, he says, is the essence. 
 For example, hesays that materialism in the nineteenthcentury was of great benefit to the naturalsciences,—but now “no philosophical nat-ural scientist any longer considers the ma-terialist conception to be adequate” (112). 
There are no eternal truths. 
 The signifi-cance of ideas, their Fruchtbarkeit,** theirrole as a “ferment”—“which creates andacts. 
” (113) Characteristic here is the naïve ex-pression of the view that “materialism” hinders! Not the haziest conception ofdialectical materialism and completeinability to distinguish materialism asa p h i l o s o p h y from the individual hide-bound views of the philistines o f the day who call themselves mate-rialists . 
(Med. 
 5218) cf. 
 p. 
 9* definition of “Enzyme”124 The aim of the author is a “mechanical analysis of the phenomena of life” (p. 
 1, Preface)—a reference to the last chapter of the Allgemeine Physiologie . 
 Instead of “living protein” (p. 
 25)— said to be an unclear concept, and insteadof the “living protein molecule” (“sincea molecule cannot he alive”), the author proposes to speak of the “biogen-molecule. 
” (25) The conversion of the chemical into the living—that, evidently,is the crux. 
 In order to move more freely in this new, still obscure, hypothetical, down with “material-ism,” down with antiquated “shackl-ing” ideas (the “molecule”), letus invent a new term (biogen), inorder to seek new knowledge more freely! N B . 
 Concerning the ques-tion of the sources and vital im-pelling motives of modern “ideal-ism” in physics and natural sciencein general. 
 Published according to the manuscriptWritten in 1915 First published in 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII FR. 
 DANNEMANN. 
 HOW DID OUR PICTURE OF THE WORLD ARISE (KOSMOS). 
 STUTTGART, 1912125 (Nat. 
 XII. 
 456) In this pamphlet the author gives a kind of summary of his four-volume work : “N a t u r w i s s e n s c h a f -t e n i n i h r e r E n t w i c k l u n g u n d i n i h r e r m Z u s a m m e h a n g e ”... *Dannemann, Fr. 
, Wie unser Weltbild entstand? Stuttgart,About 5,000 years of the development of civilisation from ancient Egypt to ourtime. 
 According to Homer, the world was only the Mediterranean Sea and surround-ing countries. 
 (P. 
 8)* In Egypt the clear nights facilitated the pursuit of astronomy. 
 They observedthe stars and their movement, the moon,etc. 
 At first the month was reckoned as 30 days, and the year as 360 (p. 
 31). 
 The an-cient Egyptians already had 365 days. 
 (P. 
 32) Eratosthenes (276 B. 
 C. 
) determined the circumference of the earth as 250,000 “stadia” = 45,000 km. 
 (instead of 40,000). 
 Aristarchus guessed that the earth re-volved round the sun, p. 
 37 (1,800 yearsbefore Copernicus, 1473-1543). 
 (Third cen-tury B. 
C. 
) he considered the moon to be(((Much p o p-u l a r i s a-t i o n ...))) The author carelessly, pompously, vulgarly, in feuilleton style outlines philosophical questions, banal. 
 The booklet is neither here nor there: for a philosophical work it is careless, sen-tentious, pet-ty, banal;— for a popular DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD work it is pretentious30 (instead of 48) times smaller than the earth, and the sun to be 300 (instead of 1,300,000) times larger than the earth.... 
 Pythagoras (sixth centu-ry B. 
C. 
) the world is gov-erned by number and meas-ure.... 
 The four elements, sub-stances, of the ancient phil-osophers: earth, fire, water,air.... 
 Democritus (fifth centu-ry B. 
C. 
): atoms... seventeenth century: chemical elements. 
 Spectral analysis (1860) Electricity, etc. 
Law of conservation of force. 
 g the telescope and so forth ((discoveryof more than 20 millionstars, etc. 
))flattening of the earth at the poles — /numeratorone/emfractionbar/emdenomtwo/emdenomtwo/emdenomnine dia-meter instead of /numeratorone/emfractionbar/emdenomtwo/emdenomnine/emdenomnine Published according to the manuscriptgDDDDDDD DDDDDDD Ptolemy’s system (second century A. 
D. 
) fifteenth century: the revival of astronomy—con-nection with navigation. 
 Copernicus (1473-1543): heliocentric system. 
 Circles(not ellipses). 
 ((Only in the middle of the nineteenth century im-proved measuring instru-ments showed alteration in the appearance of the fixedstars)) Galileo— (1564 -1642). 
 Kepler— (1571 -1630). 
 Newton— (1643 -1727). 
 Written in 1915 First published in 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII LUDWIG DARMSTAEDTER. 
 HANDBOOK ON THE HISTORY OF THE NATURAL SCIENCES AND TECHNIQUE BERLIN, 1908, 2nd EDITION126 (Lesesaal in der Landesbibliothek) Determination of the velocity of light: 1 6 7 6 : Olaf Römer (from the eclipse of Jupiter): 40,000 geographical miles (less than.... 
300,000) km. 
 per sec. 
 (less than.... 
298,000 km. 
) 1 6 4 9 :Fizeau (toothed wheel and mirror): 42,219 geo-graphical miles . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 = 1 8 5 4 :Foucault (2 revolving mirrors, etc. 
): 40,160 geo-graphical miles . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 = 1 8 7 4 : Alfred Cornu (à la Fizeau) . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 1 9 0 2 : Perrotin (idem) . 
 . 
 . 
{313,000 km. 
 per sec. 
 298,000 ” ” ” 300,400 ” ” ”300,330 ” ” ”299,900 ( ± 80 m. 
) ” Written in 1915 First published in 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XIIPublished according to the manuscript NAPOLÉON. 
 PENSÉES PARIS, 1913 BIBLIOTHÈQUE MINIATURE No. 
 14127 ( Landesbibliothek) “Cannon killed feudalism. 
 Ink will kill modern society (p. 
 43).... 
 — — —“In every battle there comes a moment when the bravest soldiers, after the greatest tension, feel inclinedto take to flight. 
 This terror arises from a lack of confi-dence in their courage: it needs only an insignificant event,some pretext, to return this confidence to them: the great art consists in bringing this about” (pp. 
 79-80). 
 Written in 1915 First published in 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XIIPublished according to the manuscriptNB ARTUR ERICH HAAS. 
 THE SPIRIT OF HELLENISM IN MODERN PHYSICS LEIPZIG, 1914 (32 pp. 
) (VEIT & CO. 
)128 Reviewed in Kant-Studien , 1914, No. 
 3 (Vol. 
 XIX), pp. 
 391-392, the author is described as a professor of thehistory of physics (P. 
 Volkmann pays particular attention tothis history), is said to emphasise the special connectionbetween Heraclitus and Thomson, etc. 
, etc. 
 Written in 1915 First published in 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XIIPublished according to the manuscript THEODOR LIPPS. 
 NATURAL SCIENCES AND WORLD OUTLOOK129 (SPEECH AT THE 78TH CONGRESS OF GERMAN NATURAL SCIENTISTS IN STUTTGART), HEILELBERG, 1906 (Bern Library, Nat. 
 Varia. 
 160) An idealist of the Kant-Fichte persuasion, who empha-sises that both phenomenology (modern—“only phenomena. 
” P. 
 40) and energetics and vitalism (ibidem) work in thespirit of idealism. 
 Matter—x“Materiality”—“a conventional mode of expression”... (p. 
 3 5) “Nature is a product of the mind” (37), etc. 
 “In short, materialism is primarily nothing but a new name for the task of natural science. 
” (32) Written in 1915 First published in 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XIIPublished according to the manuscript Published according to the manuscriptWritten in 1915 First published in 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XIICONSPECTUS OF LASALLE’S BOOK THE PHILOSOPHY OF HERACLITUS THE OBSCURE OF EPHESUS130 Reading Hall of the Berlin LibraryV. 
 I. 
 Lenin worked here in 1914-16 Reading Hall of the Berlin LibraryV. 
 I. 
 Lenin worked here in 1914-16 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR F. 
 LASALLE. 
 THE PHILOSOPHY OF HERACLITUS THE OBSCURE OF EPHESUS, TWO VOLUMES BERLIN, 1858 (pp. 
 379 + 479) (Bern: Log. 
 119. 
 1) *Hegel, Werke , Bd. 
 XIII, Berlin, 1833. 
— Ed. 
 **Reference is being made to the conspectus of Hegel’s work Lectures on the History of Philosophy , in which Lenin makes this quota-tion. 
 (See p. 
 259 of this voluine. 
)— Ed. 
In the epigraph, inter alia, from Hegel—from his History of Philosophy —that there is not a single proposition of Heraclitusthat he would not have adoptedin his Logic. 
 Hegel. 
 Collected Works , Vol. 
 XIII, p. 
 328. 
*My quotation from Vorlesun-gen über die Geschichte derPhilosophie . 
** One can understand why Marx called this work of Lassalle’s “school boyish” (seethe letter to Engels of ... 131): Lassalle simply repeats Hegel, copies from him, re-echo-ing him a million times with regard to isolated passages from Heraclitus, furnish-ing his opus with an incredible heap oflearned ultra-pedantic ballast. 
 The difference with respect to Marx: In Marx there is a mass of new material , *industrious— Ed. 
and what interests him is only the move-ment forward f r o m Hegel and Feuer-bach f u r t h e r , from idealistic to mate-rialistic dialectics. 
 In Lassalle there isa rehash of Hegel on the particular themeselected: essentially transcribing from He-gel with respect to quotations from Hera-clitus and about Heraclitus. 
 Lassalle divided his work into two parts: “General Part. 
 Introduction” (Vol. 
 1,pp. 
 1-68), and “Historical Part. 
 Fragmentsand Evidence” (the remainder). 
 Chapter IIIin the general part: “Short LogicalDevelopment of the System of Heraclitus” (pp. 
 45-68)—gives the quintessence of the method, of Lassalle’s conclusions. 
 Thischapter is sheer plagiarism, slavish repe-tition of Hegel concerning Heraclitus! Here too (and still more in the historical part)there is a mass of erudition, but it is eru-dition of the lowest kind: the exercise set was to seek out the Hegelian element inHeraclitus. 
 The Strebsamer* pupil per-forms it “brilliantly,” reading throughe v e r y t h i n g about Heraclitus in all the ancient (and modern) authors, and putting a Hegelian construction on e v e r y t h i n g . 
 Marx in 1844-47 went from Hegel to Feuerbach, and further b e y o n d Feuer-bach to historical (and dialectical) mate-rialism. 
 Lassalle in 1846 began (Preface,p. 
 III), in 1855 resumed, and in August 1857 (Preface, p. 
 XV) finished a work of sheer, empty, useless, “learned” r e h a s h-i n g of Hegelianism!! Some chapters of the second part are interesting and not without use solely forthe translations of fragments from Her-aclitus and for the popularisation of He-gel, but that does not do away with all the above-mentioned defects. 
 The philosophy of the ancients and of Heraclitus is often quite delightful in itschildish naïveté, e. 
g. 
, p. 
 162—how is itto be explained that the urine of personswho have eaten garlic* smells of garlic?” and the answer: “is it not that, as some of the fol-lowers of Heraclitus say, one and thesame fiery process of transformationtakes place both in the universe andin (organic) bodies, and then aftercooling appears there (in the universe) as moisture, and here takes the form of urine, but the transformation(Äναϑνµíασις **) from the food causes the smell of that from which it hasarisen by mixing with it?...” (162-163) On p. 
 221 ff. 
*** Lassalle quotes Plu-tarch, who says with regard to Heraclitus: ...“in the same way as everything is createdby transformation out of fire, so also fireout of everything, just as we obtain thingsfor gold and gold for things.... 
” In this connection, Lassalle writes about v a l u e (Werth) (p. 
 2 2 3 NB) and about Function des Geldes**** , expounding it in the Hegelian manner (as “separated abstract unity”) and adding: ...“that thisunity, money, is not something actual , but something merely ideal (Lassalle’s italics) is evident from the fact...,” etc. 
 (But all the same NB that this was written in a book that appeared in 1858,the preface being dated August 1857 . 
)Heraclitus on gold and commodities incorrect Lassalle’s idealism *V. 
 I. 
 Lenin wrote the word “garlic” above the word “Knob-lauch. 
”— Ed. 
 **evaporation— Ed. 
 *** et seq. 
— Ed. 
 function of money— Ed. 
( ( *token of value— Ed. 
 **modern discoveries in this field— Ed. 
In note 3 on p. 
 224 (pp. 
 224-225) Las-salle speaks in still greater detail about money, saying that Heraclitus was no “po-litical economist,” that money is ((only(??)))a Wertzeichen,* etc. 
, etc. 
 (“all money ismerely the ideal unity or expression ofvalue of all real products in circulation”)(224), etc. 
 Since Lassalle here speaks vaguely of moderne Entdeckungen auf diesemGebiet**—the theory of value and money, it can be assumed that he has precisely in mind conversations withMarx and letters from him. 
 On pp. 
 225-228. 
 Lassalle reproduces a long p a s s a g e from Plutarch, proving further (convincingly) that it is indeedHeraclitus who is referred to, and that Plu-tarch here expounds “the basic featuresof the speculative theology of Heraclitus” (p. 
 228). 
 The passage is a good one: it conveys the spirit of Greek philosophy, the na-ïveté, profundity, the flowing transitions. 
 Lassalle reads into Heraclitus even a whole system of theology and “objec-tive logic” (sic!!), etc. 
—in short, Hegel“apropos of” Heraclitus!! An infinite number of times (truly wearisomely) Lassalle emphasises and rehashes the idea that Heraclitus not only recognises motion in everything, that hisprinciple is motion or becoming (Wer-den), but that the whole point lies inunderstanding “the processing identity of absolute (schlechthin) opposites” (p. 
 289 and many others). 
 Lassalle, so to speak, hammers into the reader’s head the Hegelian thought that in abstract con-cepts (and in the system of them) theprinciple of motion cannot be expressed otherwise than as the principle of theidentity of opposites. 
 Motion and Werden, generally speaking, can be with-out repetition, without return to thepoint of departure, a n d t h e n such motion would not be an “identity ofopposites. 
” But astronomical and me-chanical (terrestrial) motion, and the life of plants, animals and man—all this has hammered into the heads of man-kind not merely the idea of motion,but motion precisely with a return tothe point of departure, i. 
e. 
, dialec tical motion. 
 This is naïvely and delightfully expressed in the famous formula (or aphorism)of Heraclitus: “it is impossible to bathetwice in the same river”—actually, how-ever (as had already been said by Cratylus, a disciple of Heraclitus), it cannot be done even once (for before the whole bodyhas entered the water, the latter is al-ready not the same as before). 
 (NB: This Cratylus reduced Heraclitus’ dialectics to sophistry , pp. 
 294-295 and many others, by saying: nothing is true, nothing can be said about anything. 
 A neg-ative (and merely negative) conclusionfrom dialectics. 
 Heraclitus, on the otherhand, had the principle: “everything is true,”there is (a part of) truth in everything. 
 Cra-tylus merely “wagged his finger” in answer to everything, thereby showing that everythingmoves, that nothing can be said of anything. 
 *logos— Ed. 
 **necessity— Ed. 
Lassalle in this work has no sense of moderation, absolutely d r o w n i n g Heraclitus i n H e -g e l . 
 It is a pity. 
 Heraclitus i n m o d e r a t i o n , as one of the founders of dialectics, would beextremely useful: the 850 pages of Lassalle should be compressed into 85 pages of quintessence andtranslated into Russian: “Hera-clitus as one of the founders of dia-lectics (according to Lassalle). 
”Something useful could result! The basic law of the world, according to Heraclitus ( λóγος ,* sometimes εíµαρ− µéνη **), is “the law of transformation into the opposite” (p. 
 327) ( =êναντιοτροπÅ , êναντιοδροµíα ). 
 Lassalle expounded the meaning of εíµαρµéνη as the “law of development” (p. 
 333), quoting, inter alia, the words of Nemesius : “Democritus, Her-aclitus and Epicurus assume that neitherfor the universal nor for the particular does foresight exist” (ibidem). 
 And the words of Heraclitus: “The world was created by none of the Gods or men,but is eternally living fire and will al-ways be so” (ibidem). 
 It is strange that, in rehashing the religious philosophy of Heraclitus, Las-salle does not once quote or mentionFeuerbach! What was Lassalle’s atti-tude in general to Feuerbach? Thatof an idealist Hegelian? NBHence Philo said of Heraclitus’ doctrine, ...“that it” (die Lehre*), “like that of the Stoics, derives everything f r o m the world, and brings it i n t o the world, but does not believe that any-thing came from God. 
” (334) An exam-ple of “touching up” as Hegelian: Lassalle translates the famous passage of Heraclitus (according to Stobaeus ) on “(Das) Eine Weise”** ( ëν σοϕóν ) as follows: “However many discourses I haveheard, no one has succeeded in recog-nising that the wise is that whichis separated from all (i. 
e. 
, from all that exists)” (344) —considering that the words “beastor god” are an insertion, and rejectingthe translations of Ritter (“wisdomis remote from all”) (344) and Schleier-macher “the wise is separated from all,” in the sense of “cognition” dis-tinct from the knowledge of partic-ulars. 
 According to Lassalle the meaning of this passage is as follows:that “the absolute (the wise) is alien to all sensuous determinate being, that it is the negative” (349)—i. 
e. 
, Nega-tive = the principle of negation, the principle of motion. 
 A clear misrep-resentation as Hegelian! Reading He-gel into Heraclitus. 
 A mass of details on the (exter-nal) connection between Heracli-tus and Persian theology, Ormazd-Ahriman, 132 and the theory of mag-ic, etc. 
, etc. 
, etc. 
 *the doctrine— Ed. 
 **“the One Wise”— Ed. 
 *justice— Ed. 
 **necessity of all things— Ed. 
Heraclitus said: “time is a body” (p. 
 358)... this, Lassalle says, is in the sense of the unity of being and nothing. 
 Time is the pure unity of Being and not-Be-ing, etc. 
! Fire for Heraclitus, it is said = the principle of motion and not simply fire , something similar is fire in the teaching of Persian philosophy (and religion)! (362) If Heraclitus was the first to use the term λóγος (“word”) in the objective sense (law), this, too, is said to be taken from the Persian religion.... 
 (364) — A quotation from the Zend-Avesta. 
133 (367) In § 17 on the relation between ∆íκη * and εíµαρµéνη , Lassalle interprets these ideas of Heraclitus in the sense of “ n e -c e s s i t y ,” “ c o n n e c t i o n . 
” (376) NB: “ the bond of all things ” (δεσµòς /FL00E2hπáντων ) (p. 
 379) Plato (in the T h e a e t e t u s ) is al-leged to express the Heraclitean philosophy when he says: “Necessity binds together the essential-ity of Being.... 
” “Heraclitus is ... the source of the con-ception, common among the Stoics, thatεíµαρµéνη , rerum omnium necessitas,** ex-presses b o n d and ligation, illigatio.... 
” (376)Cicero: “I, however, call fate what the Greeks call εíµαρµéνη , i. 
e. 
, the order and sequence of causes, when one cause linked with another produces the phenomenon out of itself” (p. 
 377). 
 Thousands of years have passed since the time when the idea was born of “the connection of allthings,” “the chain of causes. 
” Acomparison of how these causeshave been understood in the his-tory of human thought would give an indisputably conclusive theory of knowledge. 
 Volume II. 
 Speaking of “fire,” Lassalle proves, by repeating himself a thousand times over, that this is a “principle” for Heraclitus. 
 He insists especially on the idealism o f Heraclitus (p. 
 2 5 —that the principle of development, des Werdens,* in Heracli-tus is logisch -präexistent,** that his phi-losophy = Idealphilosophie . 
*** Sic!!) (p. 
 25). 
 ((Squeezing into Hegelian!)) Heraclitus accepted “pure and absolute-ly immaterial fire” (p. 
 28 Timaeus , on Heraclitus). 
 On p. 
 56 (Vol. 
 II) Lassalle introduces a quotation from Clemens Al. 
,**** Stro-mata V; Chapter 14 about Heraclitus, which, translated literally, reads: “The world, an entity out of everything, was created by none of the gods or men,but was, is and will be eternally living fire, regularly becoming ignited and reg-ularly becoming extinguished.... 
” A very good exposition of the principles of dialectical materialism. 
 But on p. 
 58 * of becoming— Ed. 
 **logically pre-existent— Ed. 
 *** idealistic philosophy —Ed. 
 **** Clement of Alexandria— Ed. 
NB *free translation— Ed. 
 **corrects (ironic)— Ed. 
Lassalle provides the following “freie Über-setzung”* of this passage: “The world — — was, is and will be con-tinuous becoming, being constantly, but invarying measure, transformed from Beinginto (proceeding) not-Being, and from thelatter into (proceeding) Being. 
” An excellent example how Lassalle verballhornt* Heraclitus, representing him as Hegelian, spoiling the liveliness,freshness, naïveté and historical integ-rity of Heraclitus by misrepresentinghim as Hegelian (and in order to achievethis misrepresentation Lassalle presents a rehash of Hegel for dozens of pages). 
 The second section of the second part (“Physics,” pp. 
 1 - 2 6 2 !!!, Vol. 
 II) is ab-solutely intolerable. 
 A farthingsworth ofHeraclitus, and a shillingsworth ofrehash of Hegel and of misrepresentation. 
 One can only leaf through the pages—in order to say that it should not be read! From Section III (“The Doctrine of Cog-nition”) a quotation from P h i l o : “For the One is that which consists of two opposites, so that when cut into two the opposites are revealed. 
 Is not this the proposition which the Greeks say theirgreat and famous Heraclitus placed at thehead of his philosophy and gloried in asa new discovery.... 
” ((265)) And the following quotation also from Philo: ...“In the same way, too, the parts of the world are divided into two and mutual-ly counterposed: the earth—into moun-tains and plains, water—into fresh andsalt.... 
 In the same way, too, the atmos-NB NB phere into winter and summer, and like-wise spring and autumn. 
 And this served Heraclitus as the material for his books on nature: borrowing from our theologianthe aphorism about opposites, he addedto it innumerable and laboriously worked-out examples (Belege)” (p. 
 267). 
 According to Heraclitus the criterion of truth is not the consensus omnium, not the agreement of all (p. 
 285)—in that casehe would be a subjectiver Empiriker*(p. 
 284). 
 No, he is an objectiver Idealist ** (285). 
 For him, the criterion of truth,independent of the subjective opinion of all men, is agreement with the ideal law of the identity of Being and not-Being(285). 
 On p. 
 337, quoting, inter alia, Büch-ner (note 1), Lassalle says that Her-aclitus expressed a priori “the very same thought” as “modern physiology”(“thought is a movement of matter”). 
 An obvious exaggeration. 
 In the quotations about Heraclitus it is merely said that the soul is also a process of transformation—thatwhich moves is known by that whichmoves. 
 * subjective empiricist— Ed. 
 **objective idealist —Ed. 
Here it is clear-ly seen that Lassal-le is a Hegelian of the old type, anidealist. 
Cf. 
 Marx 1845 in his theses on Feuerbach! 134 Lassalle is here reactionary. 
NB A quotation from Chalcidius (in Ti-macus ): ...“Heraclitus, however, links our rea-son with the divine reason that guidesand rules the world, and says that, onaccount of inseparable accompaniment, it,too, possesses knowledge of the governingdecree of reason and, when the mind rests from the activity of the senses, it predicts the future” (p. 
 342). 
 From Clemens (Stromata V. 
):...“owing to its incredibility it—namely, the truth—escapes from becoming cog-nised.... 
” (347) Heraclitus, Lassalle says, is “the father of objective logic” (p. 
 351), for in him“natural philosophy” umschlägt* into thephilosophy of thought , “thought is recognised as the principle of existence” (350), etc. 
, etc. 
à la Hegel.... 
 The moment of subjectivity is said to be lacking in Heraclitus.... 
 § 36. 
 “Plato’s Cratylus”, 135 pp. 
 373-396 In the § on “Cratylus,” Lassalle proves that in this dialogue of Plato’s Cratylus is represented (not yet as a sophist and subjectivist as he subsequently became,but) as a true disciple of Heraclitus, whoreally expounded his, Heraclitus’, theoryof the essence and origin of words andlanguage as an i m i t a t i o n of nature (“imitation of the essence of things,” p. 
 388), the essence of things, “the imitation andcopy of God,” “imitation of God and theuniverse” (ibidem). 
 * is transformed— Ed. 
 Ergo : T h e h i s t o r y o f p h i l o s o p h y ” ” the separate sciences ” ” the mental development of the child ” ” the mental development of animals ” ” l a n g u a g e NB: # psychology # physiology of the senseo r g a n s ...“We have shown—says Lassalle—that the” (above-mentioned) “conceptual iden-tity (precisely identity, and not merely analogy) between word , name and law i s in every respect a principled view of theHeraclitean philosophy and of fundamentalimportance and significance in it.... 
” (393) ...“Names are for him” (Heraclitus) “laws of being, they are for him the common element of things, just as for him lawsare the ‘ common element of all ’”.... 
 (394) And it is precisely Heraclitean ideas that Hippocrates e x p r e s s e s when he says: “Names are the laws of nature. 
” “For both laws and names are for the Ephesian ... equally merely products andrealisations of the universal, both are for * briefly— Ed. 
these are the fields of knowledge from which the theory of knowl-edge and dialectics should be built kurz,* the history of cognition in general the whole field of knowledge NB very important! NBGreek Philoso-phy indicated all these moments *natural necessity— Ed. 
Naturnot-wendigkeit* in Lassallehim the achieved, purely universal, ideal being, freed from the stain of sensuous reality.... 
” (394) Plato analyses and refutes the philos-ophy of Heraclitus in his “ C r a t y l u s ” and “ T h e a e t e t u s ,” and in so doing (especially in the latter) he confuses Heracli-tus (the objective idealist and dialectician) with the subjective idealist and sophist Protagoras (man is the measure of allthings). 
 And Lassalle proves that in thedevelopment of ideas there has actuallystemmed from Heraclitus 1) sophistry (Pro-tagoras) and 2) Platonism, the “ideas” (objective idealism). 
 One gets the impression that Las-salle, the idealist, left in the shadethe materialism or materialistic tendencies of Heraclitus, misrepre-senting him as Hegelian. 
 (IV. 
 Ethik, pp. 
 427-462. 
) In the section on ethics—nil. 
 On pp. 
 458-459 Lassalle writes that Ne-mesios said that Heraclitus and Demo-critus denied prevision ( προνοíαν ), whereas Cicero ( De Fato ) said that Heraclitus, as also Democritus and others (including Aris-totle), recognised fatum—necessity. 
 ...“This fatum is intended to signify only the immanent natural necessity belonging to the object, its natural law.... 
” (459) (The Stoics, according to Lassalle, took e v e r y t h i n g from Heraclitus, making him banal and one-sided, p. 
 461. 
) *summa summarum— Ed. 
The index to Lassalle’s book is compiled in a learned, pedantic manner, but senselessly; a heap ofnames of the ancients, etc. 
, etc. 
 In general, ΣΣ,* Marx’s judgment is correct, Lassalle’s book is not worth read-ing. 
 ON THE QUESTION OF DIALECTICS136 Published according to the manuscriptWritten in 1915 First published in 1925 in the magazine Bolshevik , No. 
 5-6 A page from V. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s manuscript On the Question of Dialectics . 
—1915 Reduced A page from V. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s manuscript On the Question of Dialectics . 
—1915 Reduced ON THE QUESTION OF DIALECTICS The splitting of a single whole and the cognition of its contradictory parts (see the quotation from Philo on Her-aclitus at the beginning of Section III, “On Cognition,” in Lassalle’s book on Heraclitus*) is the e s s e n c e (one of the “essentials,” one of the principal, if not the principal,charactetistics or features) of dialectics. 
 That is preciselyhow Hegel, too, puts the matter (Aristotle in his Meta-physics continually g r a p p l e s with it and combats Her-aclitus and Heraclitean ideas). 
 The correctness of this aspect of the content of dialectics must be tested by the history of science. 
 This aspect ofdialectics (e. 
g. 
, in Plekhanov) usually receives inadequateattention: the identity of opposites is taken as the sum-total of e x a m p l e s “for example, a seed,” “for example, primitive communism. 
” The same is true of Engels. 
 But it is “in the interests of popularisation...” and not as al a w o f c o g n i t i o n (a n d as a law of the objective world). 
 In mathematics: + and –. 
 Differential and integral. 
 In mechanics: action and reaction. 
In physics: positive and negative electricity. 
 In chemistry: the combination and dissociation of atoms. 
 In social science: the class struggle. 
The identity of opposites (it would be more correct, per-haps, to say their “unity,”—although the difference betweenthe terms identity and unity is not particularly impor-tant here. 
 In a certain sense both are correct) is the recog-nition (discovery) of the contradictory, mutually exclusive , * See p. 
 348 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR opposite tendencies in a l l phenomena and processes of nature ( including mind and society). 
 The condition for the knowledge of all processes of the world in their “ self-movement ,” in their spontaneous development, in their real life, is the knowledge of them as a unity of opposites. 
Development is the “struggle” of opposites. 
 The two basic(or two possible? or two historically observable?) conceptionsof development (evolution) are: development as decrease and increase, as repetition, and development as a unity of opposites (the division of a unity into mutually exclusive opposites and their reciprocal relation). 
 In the first conception of motion, s e l f -movement, its d r i v i n g force, its source, its motive, remains in the shade (or this source is made external —God, subject, etc. 
). 
 In the second conception the chief attention is directed precisely to knowledge of the source of “ s e l f ”-movement. 
 The first conception is lifeless, pale and dry. 
 The second is living. 
 The second a l o n e furnishes the key to the “self-movement” of everything existing; it alone furnishesthe key to the “leaps,” to the “break in continuity,” to the “transformation into the opposite,” to the destruction of the old and the emergence of the new. 
 The unity (coincidence, identity, equal action) of opposites is conditional, temporary, transitory, relative. 
 Thestruggle of mutually exclusive opposites is absolute, justas development and motion are absolute. 
 NB: The distinction between subjectivism (sceptic-ism, sophistry, etc. 
) and dialectics, incidentally, isthat in (objective) dialectics the difference between therelative and the absolute is itself relative. 
 For objec-tive dialectics there is an absolute within the relative. 
 For subjectivism and sophistry the relative is only relative and excludes the absolute. 
 In his Capital , Marx first analyses the simplest, most ordinary and fundamental, most common and everydayrelation of bourgeois (commodity) society, a relation en-countered billions of times, viz. 
 the exchange of commodi-ties. 
 In this very simple phenomenon (in this “cell” of bour-geois society) analysis reveals a l l the contradictions (or the germs of all the contradictions) of modern society. 
 The subsequent exposition shows us the development ( both growth and movement) of these contradictions and of this society in the Σ* of its individual parts, from its beginning to its end. 
 Such must also be the method of exposition (or study) of dialectics in general (for with Marx the dialectics ofbourgeois society is only a particular case of dialectics). 
 To begin with what is the simplest, most ordinary, common, etc. 
, with any proposition : the leaves of a tree are green; John is a man; Fido is a dog, etc. 
 Here already we havedialectics (as Hegel’s genius recognised): the individual i s the u n i v e r s a l (cf. 
 Aristotele’s, Metaphysik , transla-tion by Schwegler, Bd. 
 II, S. 
 40, 3. 
 Buch, 4. 
 Kapitel, 8-9: “denn natürlich kann man nicht der Meinung sein, daß es ein Haus (a house in general) gebe außer den sichtbarenHäusern,” “ οû γàρ äν ϑεíηµεν εïναí τινα οîκíαν παρà τàς τινàς οîκíας ”. 
 Consequently, the opposites (the in-dividual is opposed to the universal) are identical: theindividual exists only in the connection that leads to the universal. 
 The universal exists only in the individual and through the individual. 
 Every individual is (in one way oranother) a universal. 
 Every universal is (a fragment, oran aspect, or the essence of) an individual. 
 Every universalonly approximately embraces all the individual objects. 
Every individual enters incompletely into the universal, etc. 
, etc. 
 Every individual is connected by thousands of transitions with other kinds of individuals (things, phenom-ena, processes), etc. 
 H e r e already we have the elements, the germs, the concepts of necessity , of objective connection in nature, etc. 
 Here already we have the contingent andthe necessary, the phenomenon and the essence; for when we say: John is a man, Fido is a dog, this is a leaf of a tree, etc. 
, we disregard a number of attributes as contingent ; we separate the essence from the appearance, and counter-pose the one to the other. 
 Thus in any proposition we can (and must) disclose as in a “nucleus” (“cell”) the germs of all the elements of dia-* summation— Ed. 
 **“for, of course, one cannot hold the opinion that there can be a house (in general) apart from a visible house. 
”— Ed. 
 lectics, and thereby show that dialectics is a property of all human knowledge in general. 
 And natural science shows us (and here again it must be demonstrated in any simple instance) objective nature with the same qualities, the trans-formation of the individual into the universal, of thecontingent into the necessary, transitions, modulations,and the reciprocal connection of opposites. 
 Dialectics i s the theory of knowledge of (Hegel and) Marxism. 
 This is the “aspect” of the matter (it is not “an aspect” but the essence of the matter) to which Plekhanov, not to speakof other Marxists, paid no attention. 
 *** Knowledge is represented in the form of a series of circles both by Hegel (see Logic ) and by the modern “epistemolog-ist” of natural science, the eclectic and foe of Hegelianism(which he did not understand!), Paul Volkmann (see his Erkenntnistheoretische Grundzüge ,* S. 
) “Circles” in philosophy: is a chronology of persons essential? No! Ancient: from Democritus to Plato and the dialec-tics of Heraclitus. 
 Renaissance: Descartes versus Gassendi (Spinoza?) Modern: Holbach—Hegel (via Berkeley, Hume, Kant). 
 Hegel—Feuerbach—Marx. 
 Dialectics as living , many-sided knowledge (with the number of sides eternally increasing), with an infinite number of shades of every approach and approximation to reality (with a philosophical system growing into a wholeout of each shade)—here we have an immeasurably richcontent as compared with “metaphysical” materialism, thefundamental misfortune of which is its inability to apply dialectics to the Bildertheorie,** to the process and devel-opment of knowledge. 
 * P. 
 Volkmann, Erhenntnistheoretische Grundzüge der Natur-wissenschaften , Leipzig-Berlin, 1910, p. 
 35. 
— Ed. 
 **theory of reflection— Ed. 
 Philosophical idealism is only nonsense from the stand-point of crude, simple, metaphysical materialism. 
 From the standpoint of dialectical materialism, on the other hand, philosophical idealism is a one-sided , exaggerated, überschwengliches (Dietzgen)137 development (inflation, dis-tention) of one of the features, aspects, facets of knowl-edge into an absolute, divorced from matter, from nature, apotheosised. 
 Idealism is clerical obscurantism. 
 True. 
 But philosophical idealism is (“ m o r e c o r r e c t l y ” and “i n a d d i t i o n ”) a road to clerical obscurantism through o n e o f t h e s h a d e s of the infinitely complex k n o w l e d g e (dialectical) of man. 
 Human knowledge is not (or does not follow) a straight line, but a curve, which endlessly approximates a series of circles, a spiral. 
 Any fragment, segment, section of this curve can be transformed (transformed one-sidedly) intoan independent, complete, straight line, which then (ifone does not see the wood for the trees) leads into the quag-mire, into clerical obscurantism (where it is a n c h o r e d by the class interests of the ruling classes). 
 Rectilinearity and one-sidedness, woodenness and petrification, subjectiv-ism and subjective blindness—voilà the epistemologicalroots of idealism. 
 And clerical obscurantism ( = philosoph-ical idealism), of course, has epistemological roots, it is not groundless; it is a sterile flower undoubtedly, but a sterile flower that grows on the living tree of living, fer-tile, genuine, powerful, omnipotent, objective, absolute human knowledge. 
NB this apho-rism CONSPECTUS OF ARISTOTLE’S BOOK METAPHYSICS138 Published according to the manuscriptWritten in 1915 First published in 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII Philosophy is often divert-ed by the definition of words , etc. 
 E v e r y -t h i n g , all categories are affectedARISTOTLE. 
 THE METAPHYSICS TRANSLATED BY A. 
 SCHWEGLER TWO VOLUMES TÜBINGEN, 1847 See above, quotation about “house. 
”* A mass of extremely interesting, lively, n a ï v e (fresh) matter which introduces philosophy and is replaced in the exposi-tions by scholasticism, by the result without movement, etc. 
 Clericalism killed what was living in Aristotle and perpetuated what was dead. 
 “But man and horse, etc. 
, exist as individ-uals, a universal for itself does not exist as an individual substance, but only as a whole composed of a definite concept anddefinite matter” (p. 
 125, Book 7, Chapter10, 27-28). 
 Ibidem, p. 
 126, § 32-33: ...“Matter is in itself unknowable. 
 Some matter is sensible and some intelligible;sensible, such as bronze and wood, in aword, all movable matter; intelligible, thatwhich is present in sensible things notqua sensible, e. 
g. 
, the objects of mathe-matics.... 
” Highly characteristic and profoundly in-teresting (in the beginning of the Meta-physics ) are the polemic with Plato and * See p. 
 359 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 *doubts— Ed. 
 **everywhere— Ed. 
the “puzzling’’ questions, delightful for their naïveté, and Bedenken* regarding the nonsense of idealism. 
 And all this along with the most helpless confusionabout the fundamental , the concept and the particular. 
 NB: At the beginning of The Metaphysics the s t u b b o r n struggle against Her-aclitus, against his idea of the identity of Being and not-Being (the Greek philos-ophers approached close to dialectics butcould not cope with it). 
 Highly character-istic in general, throughout the wholebook, passim,** are the living germs of dialectics and inquiries about it.... 
 In Aristotle, objective logic is every-where confused with subjective logic and, moreover, in such a way that everywhereobjective logic is v i s i b l e . 
 There is no doubt as to the objectivity of cognition. 
 There is a naïve faith in the power of reason, in the force, power, objective truthof cognition. 
 And a naïve confusion , a helplessly pitiful confusion in the d i a -l e c t i c s of the universal and the par-ticular—of the concept and the sensuously perceptible reality of individual objects, things, phenomena. 
 Scholasticism and clericalism took what was dead in Aristotle, but not what wasl i v i n g ; the i n q u i r i e s , the search-ings, the labyrinth, in which man lost his way. 
 Aristotle’s logic is an inquiry, a search-ing, an approach to the logic of Hegel—and it, the logic of Aristotle (who every-where , at every step, raises p r e c i s e l y the question o f d i a l e c t i c s ), has been made into a dead scholasticism by reject-ing all the searchings, waverings and modes of framing questions. 
 What the Greeks had was precisely modes of framing ques-tions, as it were tentative systems, a naïve discordance of views, excellently reflectedin Aristotle. 
 ...“Hence it is clear that no universal exists next to and in separation from its particulars. 
 The exponents of the Forms are partly right in their account when theymake the Forms separate; for the Formsare particular substances, but they arewrong in considering the one-over-manyas form. 
 The reason for this is that they cannot explain what are the imperishable substances of this kind which exist besideand outside particular sensible substances;so they make the forms the same in kind asperishable things (for these we know); i. 
e. 
,they make Ideal Man and Ideal Horse, add-ing the word ‘Ideal’ to the names of sensible things # (p. 
 136, Book 7, Ch. 
 16, § 8-12) #. 
 However, I presume that even if we hadnever seen the stars, nonetheless therewould be eternal substances besides thosewhich we knew; and so in the present case even if we cannot apprehend what they are, still they must be in existence. 
 It isclear, then, both that no universal termis particular substance and that no par-ticular substance is composed of particularsubstances ( οûσíα )” (— § 13 at the end of the chapter). 
 Delightful! There are no doubts of the reality of the external world. 
 The mangets into a muddle precisely over thedialectics of the universal and the par-ticular, of concept and sensation, etc. 
,of essence and phenomenon, etc. 
! ! (P. 
 146, Book 8—can it have been inserted afterwards?—Chapter 5, § 2-3). 
 ...“There is a difficulty in the question (Äπορíα ) how the matter of the individual is related to the contraries. 
 For example, if the body is potentially ( δυνáµει ) healthy, and the contrary of health is disease, is not the body potentially both healthy and diseased?... ...“Further, is not the living man poten-tially ( δυνáµει ) dead?” (P. 
 181), Book 11, Chapter 1, § 12-14: ...“They” (the philosophers) “posit the objects of mathematics as intermediate be-tween the Forms and sensible things, as a third class besides the Forms and the things of our world. 
 But there is no thirdman or horse besides the Ideal one and the particulars. 
 If on the other hand it is not as they make out, what sort of ob-jects are we to suppose to be the concern of the mathematician? Not surely the things of our world; for none of these is of thekind which the mathematical sciences in-vestigate.... 
” Ibidem, Chapter 2, § 21-23:...“Again, is there anything besides the concrete whole (I mean by this matter and the material) or not? If not, all thingsare perishable, at least everything mate-rial is perishable; but if there is something, it must be the form or shape. 
 It is hardto determine in what cases this is possible and in what it is not.... 
” Pp. 
 185-186, Book 11, Chapter 3, § 12— mathematics sets aside heat, weight and other “sensible contrarieties,” and has in mind “only quantity”... “it is the samewith regard to Being. 
”NB *“In as many ways as categories are stated, in so many ways do they denote being. 
”— Ed. 
Here we have the point of view of dialectical materialism, but accidental-ly, not consistently, not elaborated, inpassing. 
 Windelband in his sketch of the history of ancient philosophy (Müller’s Handbuch der klassischen Altertums-Wissenschaft , V, I, S. 
 265) (“Reading room of the Bern Li-brary”) stresses that in Aristotle’s Logic (die Logik) “has as its most general pre-mise the identity of the forms of thoughtwith those of Being,” and he quotes Metaph-ysik , V, 7: “ óσαχñς λéγεται, τοσαχñς τò εìναι σηµαíνει . 
” That is § 4. 
 Schwegler translates it: “Denn so vielfach die Ka-tegorien ausgesagt werden, so vielfach be-zeichnen sie ein Sein. 
* A bad translation. 
 An approach to God:Book 12 , Chapter 6, § 10-11: ...“For how can there be motion if there is no actual cause? Wood will not moveitself—carpentry must act upon it; norwill the menses or the earth move them-selves—the seeds must act upon the earth,and the semen on the menses.... 
” Leucippus (idem, § 14) accepts eternal motion, but he does not explain why(§ 11). 
 Chapter 7. 
 § 11-19—G o d (p. 
 213). 
 ...“eternal motion must be excited bysomething ... eternal” (Chapter 8, § 4)... B o o k 1 2 , C h a p t e r 1 0 —again a “re-examination” of the fundamental ques-tions of philosophy; “interrogation marks,”so to speak. 
 A very fresh, naïve, doubtingexposition (often hints) of various pointsof view. 
 *logos— Ed. 
 **in the final analysis— Ed. 
NB NBI n B o o k 1 3 Aristotle again returns to a criticism of Pythagoras’ theory of numbers (and Plato’s theory of ideas), inde-pendent of sensible things. 
 Primitive idealism: the universal (con-cept, idea) is a p a r t i c u l a r b e i n g . 
 This appears wild, monstrously (more accu-rately, childishly) stupid. 
 But is not modern idealism, Kant, Hegel, the idea of God, of the same nature ( absolutely of the same nature)? Tables, chairs andthe ideas of table and chair; the world and the idea of the world (God); thingand “noumen,” the unknowable “Thing-in-itself”; the connection of the earth and the sun, nature in general—and law, λóγος ,* God. 
 The dichotomy of human knowledgeand the possibility of idealism ( =religion) are g i v e n already in the first, elemen-tary abstraction “house” in general and particular houses The approach of the (human) mind to a particular thing, the taking of a copy(= a concept) of it i s n o t a simple, immediate act, a dead mirroring, but one which is complex, split into two, zig-zag-like, which includes in it the possibility of the flight of fantasy from life; morethan that: the possibility of the transfor-mation (moreover, an unnoticeable trans-formation, of which man is unaware) of the abstract concept, idea, into a fantasy (in letzter Instanz** = God). 
 For even in the simplest generalisation, in the mostelementary general idea (“table” in gen-eral), t h e r e i s a certain bit of fantasy . 
 (Vice versa: it would be stupid to deny the role of fantasy, even in the strictest science: cf. 
 Pisarev on useful dreaming, as an impulse to work, and on empty day-dreaming. 
)139 Naïve expression of the “difficulties” of the “philosophy of mathematics” (to usemodern language): Book 13, Chapter 2, § 23: ...“Further, body is a kind of substance, since it already in some sense possessescompleteness; but in what sense are linessubstances? They could not be that, neitheras form or shape as, for instance, the soul,nor as matter, like the body; for it does not appear that anything can be composed either of lines or of planes or of points.... 
”(p. 
 224) Book 13, Chapter 3 solves these dif-ficulties excellently, distinctly, clearly, materialistically (mathematics and other sciences abstract one of the aspects of a body, phenomenon, life). 
 But the au-thor does not consistently maintain t hi s point of view. 
 Schwegler in his commentary (Vol. 
 IV, p. 
 303) says: Aristotle gives here a positiveexposition of “his view of the mathemat-ical: the mathematical is the abstractionfrom the sensuous. 
” Book 13, Chapter 10 touches on the ques-tion, which is better expounded by Schweg-ler in the commentary (in connection withMetaphysik VII, 13, 5): science is con-cerned only with the universal (cf. 
 Book 13,Chapter 10, § 6), but only the particularis actual (substantial). 
 Does that mean that there is a gulf between science and real-ity? Does it mean that Being and thought are incommensurable? “Is true knowledgeNB *most valuable— Ed. 
# NB? # ha-ha!!!of reality impossible?” (Schwegler, Vol. 
 IV, p. 
 338. 
) Aristotle answers: potentially knowledge is directed to the universal, actually it is directed to the particular. 
 Schwegler (ibidem) describes as höchst beachtenswert* F. 
 Fischer’s work: Die Metaphysik, von empirischem Standpunkte aus dargestellt year of publication (1847) , who speaks of Aristotle’s “realism. 
” Book 14, Chapter 3, § 7: ...“why is it that while the mathematical is in no way presentin sensible things, its attributes are pres-ent in sensible things?”... (p. 
 254) (The last sentence of the book, Book 14, Chapter 6, § 21, has the same meaning. 
) End of The Metaphysics. 
 Friedrich Fischer (1801-1853), Professor of philosophy in Basle. 
 An article about him by Prantl ( Allgemeine Deutsche Bio-graphie , Vol. 
 7, p. 
 67) gives a disparag-ing account of him and says that “througha complete rejection of subjective idealismhe nearly fell into the opposite extremeof an un-ideal empiricism. 
” /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR www. 
marx 2mao. 
com Published according to the manuscriptNOTE ON THE COLLECTED WORKS OF FEUERBACH AND HEGEL* LOG. 
 563 Collected W orks of Feuerhach, Bolin’s edition Vol. 
 I. 
 Thoughts on Death and Immortality ” II. 
 Critical Philosophical Notes and Basic Proposi-tions ” III. 
 The H istory of Modern Philosophy ” IV. 
 The Philosophy of Leibnitz ” V. 
 Pierre Bayle ” VI. 
 The Essence of Christianity ” VII. 
 N otes and Supplements to this book ” VIII. 
 L ectures on the Essence of Religion ” IX. 
 Theogony ” X. 
 Letters on Ethics and Posthumous Aphorisms. 
 Log. 
 I. 
 175 Collected Works of Hegel III, IV and V. 
 Logic XIX, 1 and 2—Hegel’s Correspondence. 
 * Lenin wrote the list in German on a separate sheet. 
— Ed. 
Written in September 1914 First published in 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XII , p. 
 24 CONSPECTUS OF FEUERBACH’S BOOK EXPOSITION, ANALYSIS AND CRITIQUE OF THE PHILOSOPHY OF LEIBNITZ 140 Written between September and November 4 (17), 1895 First published in 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XIIPublished according to the manuscript ( (L. 
 FEUERBACH. 
 COLLECTED WORKS, VOL. 
 IV, 1910. 
 LEIBNITZ etc. 
 In the brilliant exposition of Leibnitz some especially outstanding passages shouldbe mentioned (this is not easy, for thewhole—i. 
e. 
, the first part (§ 1-13) is out-standing), and then the s u p p l e m e n t s o f 1 8 4 7. 
 P. 
 27—The feature that distinguishes Leib-nitz from Spinoza: in Leibnitz there is, in addition to the concept of sub-stance, the c o n c e p t o f f o r c e “and indeed of active force...” the prin-ciple of “self-activity” (29)— Ergo, Leibnitz through theology arrived at the principle of the in-separable (and universal, absolute)connection of matter and motion. 
So, it seems to me, Feuerhach isto be understood? p. 
 32: “Spinoza’s essence is unity, that of Leibnitz is difference, distinction. 
”The book on Leibnitz was written by Feuerbach in1836, when he was stillan idealist§2 0 § 21 1 8 4 7 and separate passages DDDDDDDDD DDDDDDDDD p. 
 34: The philosophy of Spinoza is a tele-scope , that of Leibnitz a micro-scope . 
141 “Spinoza’s world is an achromatic lens of divinity, a medium through which wesee nothing but the colourless celestiallight of the single substance; Leibnitz’sworld is a many-faceted crystal, a dia-mond, which by its specific nature mul-tiplies the simple light of the substance into an infinitely varied wealth of col ours and darkens it. 
” (Sic!)p. 
 40: “Consequently, for Leibnitz, corpo-real substance is no longer, as for Des-cartes, a merely extended dead mass, brought into motion from outside, but as substance it has within it an active force, a never-resting principle of activ-ity. 
” For this, to be sure, Marx valued Leibnitz, 142 despite his, Leibnitz’s, “Lassallean” features and his con-ciliatory tendencies in politics andreligion. 
 The monad is the principle of Leibnitz’s philosophy. 
 Individuality, movement, soul(of a special kind). 
 Not dead atoms, butthe living, mobile monads , reflecting the whole world in themselves, possessing(vaguely) the capacity of sensuous represen-tation (souls of a certain kind)—such are the “ultimate elements” (p. 
 45). 
 Each monad is different from the others.... 
“It would be quite contradictory to the beauty, order and reason of natureif the principle of life or of its own internal actions were to be linked only with a small or special part of matter” (Leibnitz—p. 
 45). 
NB “Hence the whole of nature is full of souls, as the ancient philosophers already correctly recognised, or at any rate of beings analogous to souls. 
 For, by meansof the microscope, one finds that there area multitude of living beings not visibleto the naked eye, and that there are moresouls than grains of sand and atoms” (Leib-nitz—p. 
 4 5). 
 cf. 
 electrons! Qualities of monads: Vorstellung,* Re-präsentation. 
 “Sensuous representation itself, however, is nothing more than the representation(reproduction in the mind and presenta-tion) of the complex or the external, i. 
e. 
,of multiplicity in the simple”... or ...“the transitory state, which contains and reproduces multiplicity in unity or simple substance” (p. 
 49, Leibnitz )—verworrene** (p. 
 50) (confuse,*** p. 
 52) Vorstellung inthe monads (man also has many uncon-scious, verworrene, feelings, etc. 
). 
 Every monad is “a world for itself, each is a self-sufficient unity” ( L e i b n i t z , p. 
 55). 
 “A mixture of vague conceptions, the senses are no more than that, matter is nomore than that” (Leibnitz, p. 
 58).... 
 “Hencematter is the bond of the monads” (ibi-dem). 
 My free interpretation: Monads = souls of a certain kind. 
 Leibnitz = idealist. 
 And matter is something in the nature of an other-*sensuous representation— Ed. 
 **confused— Ed. 
 *** vague— Ed. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR NB Leibnitz lived 1646-1716being of soul, or a jelly linking them by a worldly, fleshly connec-tion. 
 “Absolute reality lies only in the mo-nads and their conceptions” (Leibnitz,p. 
 60). 
 Matter is only a phenomenon . 
 “Clarity is only spirit” (p. 
 62)... matter, however, is “unclearness and unfreedom. 
” (64) Space “in itself is something ideal” (Leibnitz, pp. 
 70-71). 
 ...“The material principle of the diver-sity of matter is motion.... 
” (72) “Similarly—Newton and his adherents to the contrary—there is no empty spacein material nature. 
 The air pump by nomeans proves the presence of a vacuum,for the glass has pores through whichall kinds of fine matter can penetrate” (L e i b n i t z , 76-77).... 
 “Matter is a phenomenon” (Leibnitz, 78). 
“The Being-for-itself of the monads istheir soul, their Being-for-others ismatter” (Feuerbach, 78). 
 The humansoul—the central, higher monad, en-telechy, 143 etc. 
, etc. 
 “Hence every body is affected by every-thing that goes on in the universe” (Leib-nitz, 83). 
 “The monad represents the whole uni-verse” (Leibnitz, 83). 
 “The monad, despite its indivisibility, possesses a complex impulse, i. 
e. 
, a mul-tiplicity of sensuous representations, whichindividually strive for their special changesand which, by virtue of their essentialconnection with all other things, at the same time are found within it.... 
” “Individ-uality contains the infinite within it, asit were, in the germ” (Leibnitz, 84). 
 Here is dialectics of a kind, and very profound, d e s p i t e the idealism and clericalism. 
 “Everything in nature is analogical” (Leibnitz, 6). 
 “In general, there is nothing absolutely discrete in nature; all opposites, all bound-aries of space and time, and kind, vanish in the face of the absolute continuity, theinfinite interconnection of the universe”Feuerbach, 87). 
 “Owing to its peculiar nature, consisting solely of nerves and not of flesh and blood, the monad is influenced and affected by everything that takes place in the world.... 
”Nevertheless “it is only a spectator of theworld drama, not an actor. 
 Therein liesthe chief defect of the monads” (Feuer-bach, 90). 
 The conformity of soul and body is a harmonie préétablie* by God . 
 “The weak side of Leibnitz” (Feuer-bach, 95). 
 144 “The soul is a kind of spiritual automa-ton” (Leibnitz, 98). 
 (And Leibnitz himself said once that the transition from Occa-sionalism145 to his philosophy is an easy one, Feuerbach, 100. 
) But in Leibnitz thisis deduced from the “nature of the soul”.... 
(101) In his Theodicée 146 (§ 17) Leibnitz essentially repeats the ontological argu-ment”147 for the existence of God. 
 In his Nouceaux essais sur l’entendement ,148 Leibnitz criticised Locke’s empiricism,— *harmony pre-established— Ed. 
NBijjjjjjjjl lll l k *there is nothing in the intellect except the intellect itself . 
—Ed. 
transition to Kant ridiculing Kantsaying nihil est in intellectu, etc. 
, nisi intellectus ipse * (!) (152). 
 (Feuerbach in the first edition also ideal-istically criticises Locke. 
149) The principle of “ necessary truths ” lies “w i t h i n u s ” (Leibnitz, 148). 
 Cf. 
 Kant likewise The ideas of substance, change, etc. 
, lie within us (Leibnitz, 150). 
 “To be determined towards the best through reason is the highest degree of free-dom” (Leibnitz, 154). 
 “The philosophy of Leibnitz is idealism ” (Feuerbach, 160), etc. 
, etc. 
 ...“The cheerful, lively polytheism of Leibnitz’s monadology passed into the se-vere, but for that reason more spiritual and intense monotheism of ‘transcendental idealism’” (Feuerbach, 188). 
 Pp. 
 188-220: supplements of 1847 . 
 P. 
 188: “Idealistic, a priori philosophy.... 
” “But, of course, what for man is a pos-teriori is for a philosopher a priori ; for when man has gathered experiences and has embraced them in general concepts,then he is, of course, in a position to make‘synthetic judgments a priori. 
’ Hence whatfor an earlier time is a matter of experience is for a later time a matter of reason .... 
 Thus, earlier, electricity and magnetism were only empirical, i. 
e. 
, here accidental,properties perceived only in particularbodies, whereas now, as the result of compre-hensive observations, they are recognisedto be properties of all bodies, essential properties of a body.... 
 Hence the history of mankind is the sole standpoint that yields a positive answer to the problem of the origin of ideas.... 
” (191-192) The soul is not wax, it is no tabula rasa*.... 
 “The creation of a sensuous re-presentation requires the addition of some-thing distinct from the object, hence itwould be sheer folly for me to seek toderive this distinct element, which is the basis of the real essence of the sensuous representation, from the object. 
 But whatis this then? The form of universality; foreven the individual idea or sensuous re-presentation is, as Leibnitz remarked, atleast in comparison with the real individual object, originally universal, i. 
e. 
, in this case undetermined, wiping out differences,destructive. 
 Sensuousness is massive, uncrit-ical, luxurious; but the idea, the sensuousrepresentation, is restricted solely to theuniversal and necessary. 
” (192) “The basic thought, therefore, of the Nou-veaux essais sur l’entendement humain i s already, as in Der Kritik der reinen Ver-nunft , that universality , and the n e -c e s s i t y which is inseparable from it, express the essence belonging to the under-standing or apperceiving being, and there-fore cannot come from the senses, orfrom experience, i. 
e. 
, from outside.... 
”(193) This idea occurs already among the Car-tesians—Feuerbach quotes C l a u b e r g , 1 6 5 2. 
150 “Undoubtedly this axiom” (that the whole is greater than the part) “owes its certaintynot to induction, but to the understand-ing, for the latter has no other aim andvocation than to generalise the data of the senses, in order to save us the tedious * smoothed tablet— Ed. 
Leibnitz and Kant necessity i n s e p a r -a b l e from the universal NB Kantianism= old lumber NB bien dit! NBtrouble of repetition, to anticipate, replace, spare, sensuous experience and perception. 
 But does the understanding do this by itself, without a basis for it being pres-ent in sense-perception? Is then the individ-ual case shown me by the senses an individ-ual case in abstracto ? Is it not a qualita-tively determined case? But does not this quality, however, contain so much as an identity of the individual cases thatis perceptible by the senses?... Do thesenses show me only leaves and not alsotrees?... Is there no feeling of identity, likeness and difference? Is there no differ-ence for my senses between black and white, day and night, wood and iron?...Are not the senses the unconditional affir-mation of what is? Consequently, is notthe highest law of thought, the law ofidentity, also a law of sensuousness; indeed, does not this law of thought rest on the truth of sense-perception?”.... 
 (193-194) Leibnitz in Nouveaux essais : “Generality consists in the resemblance to each otherof individual things, and this resemblanceis a reality” (Book III, Chapter 3, § 12). 
 “But is this resemblance then not sensuous truth? Do not the beings which the un-derstanding refers to a single class, a single genus, affect also my senses in an identical,equal manner?... Is there for my sexualsense—a sense which theoretically also is of the greatest importance, although in the theory of the senses it is usuallyleft out of account—no difference betweenan animal and a human female? Whatthen is the difference between the facultyof understanding and that of sensuous per-ception or sensation? The senses present the thing , but the understanding adds the name to it. 
 There is nothing in the under-bien dit!standing that is not in sensuous perception, but what is found in the sensuous perception in fact is in the understanding only in name. 
 The understanding is the highestbeing, the ruler of the world, but only inname, not in fact. 
 What, however, is aname? It is a mark of difference, a strikingcharacteristic, which I make the character, the representative, of the object in order thereby to represent it to myself in its totality.... 
 (195) ...“The senses tell me just as well as the understanding that the whole is greaterthan the part; but it tells me so not by words, but by examples, for instance, that the finger is smaller than the hand.... 
(196-197) ...“Hence the certainty that the whole is greater than the part indubitably doesnot depend on the senses. 
 But on what then? On the word: the whole. 
 The state-ment that the whole is greater than thepart says absolutely nothing more thanthe word ‘whole’ itself says.... 
 (197) ...“Leibnitz, on the other hand, as an idealist or spiritualist, makes the means into an end, the denial of sensuousness into the essence of the mind.... 
 (198) ...“That which is conscious of itself exists and is, and is called soul. 
 We are, there-fore, certain of the existence of our soulbefore we are certain of the existence of our body. 
 Of course, consciousness is pri-mary, but it is only primary for me, it isnot primary in itself. 
 In the sense of myconsciousness, I am, because I am conscious ; but in the sense of my life I am conscious , because I am. 
 Which of these two is right? The body, i. 
e. 
, nature, or consciousness, i. 
e. 
, I? I, of course, for how could I admit myelf wrong? But can I then in fact sepa-rate consciousness from my body and think by myself?... (201) ...“The world is the object of the senses and the object of thought. 
 (204) “In a sensuous object, man distinguishes the essence as it really is, as an objectof sense-perception, from the essence ofit in thought, abstracted from sensuous-ness. 
 The former he calls the existence or also the individual , the latter the es-sence or the genus . 
 The latter is defined by him as necessary and eternal—because,although a sensuous object may have van-ished from the sensible world, it still remains as an object of thought or sensuous representation—but existence as accidentaland transitory.... 
 (205) ...“Leibnitz is half -Christian, he is a theist, or Christian and a naturalist. 
 He limits the goodness and power of God by wisdom, by the understanding; but this understanding is nothing but a cabinetof natural objects, it is only the idea ofthe interconnection of nature, of the uni-verse; hence he limits his theism by na-turalism ; he affirms and defends theism by that which abolishes it.... 
” (215) P. 
 274 (from the supplement of 1 8 4 7 ): “How much has been said of the decep-tion of the senses, how little of the decep-tion of speech, from which, however, thoughtis inseparable! Yet how clumsy is the betrayal of the senses, how subtle that of language! How long have I been led bythe nose by the universality of reason, theuniversality of Fichte’s and Hegel’s Ego,until finally, with the support of my five senses, I recognised for the salvation of my soul that all the difficulties andmysteries of the logos, in the sense of rea-son, find their solution in the meaning ofNB End of Volume IV. 
 *et seq. 
— Ed. 
 **Relation to Hegel (1840 and later), p. 
 417 et seq. 
— Ed. 
the word! For that reason Haym ’s statement ‘the critique of reason must become the criticism of language’ is for me in a theo-retical respect a soul-inspired statement. 
—As regards, however, the contradiction be-tween me as a perceiving, personal beingand me as a thinking being, it reducesitself in the sense of this note and the dis-sertation quoted” (of Feuerbach himself) 151 “to the sharp contradiction: in sensation I am individual, in thinking I am univer-sal. 
 However, in sensation I am not lessuniversal than I am individual in thinking. 
Concordance in thinking is based only on concordance in sensation. 
” (274) ...“All human communion rests on the assumption of the likeness of sensationin human beings. 
” (274) Spinoza and Herbart (1836). 
 152 P. 
 400 ff. 
* A d e f e n c e of Spinoza against the ba-nal attacks of the “moralist” Herbart. 
 The objectivism of Spinoza, etc. 
, is stressed. 
 NB. 
 Verhältnis zu Hegel (1840 and später). 
 S. 
 417 ff. 
** Not very clear, intermittently emphasised that he was a discipleof Hegel. 
 From the notes: “What is a dialectic that is in contradic-tion to natural origin and development? What is its necessity?...” (431) Herr von Shelling (1843). 
 Letter to Marx (434 ff. 
). 
 According to the roughdraft. 
 Castigation of Schelling. 
 153 DR. 
 JOHANN PLENGE. 
 AND HEGEL TÜBINGEN, 1911154 extremely vulgar! T h e o -r e t i c a l aspect of dialectics has been over-looked!! Marx = ideologist”... !Plenge fails to understand how “ma-terialism” can coincide with r e v o l u -t i o n i s m (calling the latter “ideal-ism,” etc. 
) and w a x e s a n g r y over his lack of understanding!!! A good example of how bourgeois professors vulgarise the fundamentals ofMarxism, its theoretical fundamentals!!Ad notam of the imperialist economists” 155 and Co. 
!! After a pretentious introduction (How I, I, I “read” Hegel and Marx) follows an essay of the Hegelian “doctrine” that isextremely shallow (idealism is not distin-guished from “speculation,” very, very fewthings have been grasped; still there issome good in this essay as compared with Kantianism, etc. 
). 
 Then, comes a criti-cism of Marx which is altogether nonsens-ical. 
 Marx is being accused of “pure ideology,” when by “actual” proletarian he meansa representative of a class. 
 (82) “Now the strong language of the apos-tate, who decisively renounced any sortof idealism ... now the ideal demand of the political enthusiast—such is the actual-ity of Karl Marx. 
” (81-82){ { DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD “It is passing strange that this Jewish radical healer should have known all his life just one universal remedy for all social conditions that are in need of cure; critic-ism and political struggle. 
” (56) Marx’s historical materialism is ac-tually “nothing but ... a pathetical gesture,”an extremely rationalistic doctrine,” “in its most profound basis an idealist examina-tion of society,” etc. 
, etc. 
 ... (83) ...“agitational motives”... (84) (id. 
 86, 92 et al . 
) (1 1 5 et al. 
) Marx borrowed “this natural-scientific empiricism” (88), “Marx naturalises, social science” (ibid. 
). 
 ...“His” (Marx’s) “path is not that of the thinker, but ... of the prophet of free-dom.... 
”!!! (94-95) Socialist revolution = subjectivist hope to present it as “an objectively scientific cognition” “is an illusion of an ecstatic dreamer, an illusion which degenerated intocharlatanry” (p. 
 110). 
 ...“Marx ... was dominated by the passion-ate will of a radical apostle of freedom.... 
”(111) Marx “agitationally whipping up all the instincts of hatred.... 
” (115) “Marxism ... becomes ethics of abstract negative, fanatical enthusiasm” (just likeMohammedanism according to Hegel!).... 
(120) ...“Temperament of a fanatic” of Marx (and his “hot head”)—that’s thepoint. 
 (120) And more of such vulgar gibberish!Whence this quotation? The author did not give chapter and verse. 
 * “just”!!— Ed. 
 **hence the ire!!— Ed. 
{“nur”!!* Marx!! “did not understand” Hegel 9 7 et al . 
 !! !! inde ira!!**DDDDDDDDDDD DDDDDDDDDDD \ *theory of surplus-value— Ed. 
NB NB “Clever-r-r” !!“Without revolution socialism cannot be realised. 
 It stands in need of a polit-ical act, inasmuch as it stands in needof destruction and dissolution. 
 But wher-ever its organic activity begins and itsend-in-itself bares its soul, socialism castsoff its political integument. 
” —After quoting this passage without giving its source Plenge continues: “‘Thepolitical integument’ that will be hurledaside is of course the whole of Marxism. 
”(129) How Plenge seeks out “contradictions”: Marx, he says, wrote in Rheinische Zei-tung 156: “‘The same spirit which con-structs railways with the help of industry, constructs philosophical systems in theminds of philosophers’ (p. 
 143). 
 Andthen these means of production are eman-cipated from the spirit which createdthem and begin, in turn, sovereignly, to determine the spirit. 
” Example of how Plenge criticises Mehrwertstheorie*: “By its gross exaggeration it brings to a white heat the hard fact of capitalism that the urge for profit lowers wages andworsens working conditions. 
 But then itsuffers from the elementary mistake of du-plication of concepts veiled by the termi-nology used.... 
” (157) ...“Agitational requirements dictate that the inflammatory theory of surplus-valuebe given the most prominent place in theentire system.... 
” (164), /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR ...“Marx is a revolutionary Jew of the nineteenth century who has re-tailored the garment borrowed from our great philos-ophy to suit his ends. 
” (171) This Plenge is an extreme vulgar-iser; the scientific value of his trashy book is zero. 
A pearl!! ( ( Published according to the manuscriptWritten not later than June 1916 First published in 1933 in Lenin Miscellany XXII NOTES ON BOOKS F. 
 Raab , Die Philosophie von R. 
 Avenarius. 
 Systematische Darstellung und immanente Kritik , Leipzig, 1912 (164 p. 
). 
 5 Mk. 
 Perrin , Les atomes , Paris (Alcan). 
157 Published according to the manuscriptWritten not earlier than 1912 First published in 1938 in Lenin Miscellany XX X I From books on p h i l o s o p h y in the Zürich C a n t o n a l Library158 Gideon Spicker , Über das Verhältnis der Naturwissenschaft zur Philosophie (especially versus Kant and Lange’s His-tory of Materialism ). 
 Octavo. 
 Berlin, 1874. 
 IV. 
 W. 
 57 K. 
 Hegel , Phänomenologie (hrs. 
 Bolland, 1907), IV. 
 W. 
 165 g. 
 Written in 1915 First published in 1933 in Lenin Miscellany XX I IPublished according to the manuscriptDDDDDDDDD (Cantonal Library in Zürich159) (Signatur: K. 
 bi . 
) Flugschriften des deutsehen Monistenbundes . 
 Heft 3: A l b r e c k t R a u . 
 “Fr. 
 Paulsen über E. 
 Haeckel . 
” 2-te Aufl . 
 Brackwede, 1907. 
 (48 SS. 
) A very sharp criticism of Paulsen from the stand-point of Feuerbach. 
 A “Mohican” of the bourgeois enlightenment!(( ((NB Written in 1915 First published in 1933 in Lenin Miscellany XX I IPublished according to the manuscript Section III. 
 (“Works of informative and scientific content” )160: Theories of Origin... 1914. 
 (Present-day Culture III, IV). 
 E. 
 Haeckel , Gott-Natur , Leipzig, 1914... Sch. 
 480 N 24. 
 Uhde , Feuerbach , Leipzig, 1914 ... XVI. 
 906. 
 A. 
 Zart , Bausteine des Weltalls : Atome , Moleküle ... Stuttgart, 1913. 
 Published according to the manuscriptWritten in 1916 First published in 1934 in Lenin Miscellany XX VI I Ruttmann , Die Hauptergebnisse der modernen Psycholo-gie, Pe. 
 VII. 
 3551. 
 Suter, Die Philosophie von Richard Avenarius , 1910 (Diss). 
 St. 
 Bro. 
 1 1. 
 3 4 1 Published according to the manuscriptWritten in 1916 First published in 1936 in Lenin Miscellany XX I X ON THE REVIEW OF JOH. 
 PLENGE’S BOOK AND HEGEL161 Joh. 
 Plenge , Marx und Hegel , Tübingen, 1911. 
 (184 SS. 
) (Mk. 
 4). 
 An unfavourable review by O. 
 Bauer in Vol. 
 III, 3rdnumber of Archiv für Geschichte des Sozialismus . 
 Written in 1913 First published in 1938 in Lenin Miscellany XXXIPublished according to the manuscript{ { ON THE REVIEW OF R. 
 B. 
 PERRY’S BOOK PRESENT PHILOSOPHICAL TENDENCIES162 Mind. 
 1913. 
 April. 
 Review by F. 
 C. 
 S. 
 Schiller of Ralph Barton Perry’s Present Philosophical Tendencies : a Critical Survey of Naturalism, Idealism, Pragmatism and Realism,together with a Synopsis of the Philosophy of WilliamJames, London and New York. 
 (Longmans & Co. 
). 
 1912. 
 383 pages. 
 Schiller is against Perry’s “realism” and makes the charge that “his mind is so preoccupied with the metaphysicalantithesis between realism and idealism that he is alwaystrying to reduce all other issues to this. 
” It is to be noted that Schilier quotes the following pas-sage from Perry: “The organism is correlated with an en-vironment, from which it evolved and on which it acts. 
Consciousness is a selective response to a pre-existing andindependently existing environment. 
 There must be some-thing to be responded to, if there is to be any response”(p. 
 323 in Perry’s book). 
 And Schiller raises the objection: “Unless the question is begged in the ‘ independently exist-ing environment’” (Schiller’s italics), “nothing is hereproved except the correlation of the mind and its ‘environ-ment’”... (p. 
 284). 
 Published according to the manuscriptChar-acter-istic!! Written in 1913 First published in 1938 in Lenin Miscellany XXXI ON THE REVIEW OF A. 
 ALIOTTA’S BOOK THE IDEALIST REACTION AGAINST SCIENCE163 Antonio Aliotta: La reazione idealistica contro la scienza . 
 1 vol. 
 8°. 
 XVI + 526 pages. 
 Palerme. 
 Casa editrice Optima, 1912. 
 Review in Revue Philosophique (Ribot). 
 Paris, 1912, No. 
 12, pp. 
 644-646, by J. 
 Segond, who states: “He” (Aliotta) “shows us in agnosticism all the latest sources of contemporary reaction; he shows how it de-velops through German (Riehl) and French (Renouvier)neo-criticism, the empirio-criticism of Mach and Avenarius,and English neo-Hegelianism; he describes and exposes theintuitionism of Bergson and Schmitt, the Anglo-American pragmatism of W. 
 James, Dewey and Schiller, the philos-ophy of values and the historicism of Rickert, Croce, Mün-sterberg and Royce,” etc. 
 (645), and so on up to Schuppe,Cohen and others. 
 In the second part the author examines the energetics of Ostwald and “the new physics des qualités”* of Duhem and the “theory of models” of Hertz, Maxwell and Pastore. 
 The author particularly dislikes, he says, mysticism (includ-ing that of Bergson), etc. 
 The point of view of the author is stated to be “the spir-it of the happy mean of truly rational intellectualism,that of M. 
 Aliotta and of M. 
 Chiapelli. 
” (645) * of qualities— Ed. 
Written in 1913 First published in 1938 in Lenin Miscellany XXXIPublished according to the manuscript muddle... incorrect not “in the same way” incorrectp. 
 13—”According to E. 
 Mach” “the ‘ego’ is only the focus in which the infinite threads of sensation meet most closely.... 
In exactly the same way money is the focalpoint in the network of social connec-tions.... 
”p. 
 71 note. 
 “Only our perception gives things the form of space” (a Kantian). 
 Published according to the manuscriptWritten not later than June 1916 First published in 1934 in Lenin Miscellany X XVIIREMARKS ON HILFERDING’S VIEWS ON MACH (IN FINANCE CAPITAL )164 H i l f e r d i n g : F i n a n c e C a p i t a l . 
 (“The Latest Phase in the Development of Capitalism”). 
 Moscow, 1912 Published in German in 1910 (III Band Marx-Studien) REMARKS IN BOOKS G. 
 V. 
 PLEKHANOV. 
 FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS OF ISM ST. 
 PTSBRG, 1908 [23]...The idealists first convert thought into an independent essence, independent of man(“subject for itself’’), and then declare that in it, in this essence, the contradiction between being and thought is resolved precisely because it,essence independent of matter, possesses a separate, independent being. 
 And the contradiction is in fact resolved in it, for what is this essence afterall? T h o u g h t. 
 And this thought exists—i s—in-dependently of anything else. 
 But this solution of the contradiction is a purely formal solution. 
It is attained only because—as we have already stated above—one of its elements is eliminated: that is, being independent of thought. 
 Being proves to be a simple property of thought, and when we say that a given object exists, it means only that it exists in thought.... 
 [24]...To be does not mean to exist in thought. 
 In this respect Feuerbach’s philosophy is far clearer than the philosophy of Dietzgen. 
 “The proof that something exists,” Feuerbach remarks, “has no other meaning than that something exists n o t i n t h o u g h t a l o n e. 
”* [28-29]...The materialist explanation of history was primarily of m e t h o d o l o g i c a l s i g n i f i c a n c e. 
 Engels understood this per-fectly when he wrote: “we need not so much bareresults as study (das Studium); results are nothing without the development leading up to them. 
. 
”** * Werks , X, 187. 
(( NB /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR [29-30]...Generally speaking, one of the greatest services rendered by Marx and Engels to material-ism is their elaboration of a c o r r e c t m e t h -o d. 
 Concentrating on the struggle against the s p e c u l a t i v e element in Hegelian philo-sophy, Feuerbach did not appreciate its d i a l e c -t i c a l method and made little use of it. 
 He says:“True dialectics is by no means a monologue ofa solitary thinker with himself; it is a dialoguebetween I and You. 
”* But, first, in Hegel, too, dialectics does not signify “a dialogue of a solitary thinker with himself”; secondly, Feuerbach’s re-mark correctly defines the s t a r t i n g-p o i n to f p h i l o s o p h y , b u t n o t i t s m e t h -o d. 
 This deficiency was made good by Marxand Engels, who understood that it would be wrong, in combating Hegel’s speculative philos-ophy, to ignore its dialectics.... 
 [31]...Many people confuse dialectics with the theory of development, and it is in fact such DDDDDDDDDDD DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD DDDDD a theory. 
 But dialectics differs substantially from the vulgar “theory” of evolution, which is wholly constructed on the principle that n e i t h e r n a t u r e n o r h i s t o r y m a k e s l e a p s , and that a l l c h a n g e s i n t h e w o r l d t a k e p l a c e o n l y g r a d u a l l y. 
 Hegel had already pointed out that the theory of develop-ment understood in this way is ridiculous anduntenable.... 
 [33]...In general, the right to d i a l e c t i c a l t h o u g h t is confirmed by him** from the d i a l e c t i c a l p r o p e r t i e s o f b e i n g . 
 Here too being determines thought.... 
 [39]...Thus the feature of the geographical environment determine the development of theproductive forces; the development of the produc-tive forces in turn determines the development of economic relations and, then, all other social relations.... 
 [42]...Each given stage of development of the productive forces has its corresponding definitetype of w e a p o n s, m i l i t a r y a r t, and,finally, of i n t e r n a t i o n a l—more exactly: I n t e r -s o c i a l, i. 
e. 
, also, incidentally, inter-* Werke , II, 345. 
NBee t r i b a l — l a w . 
 H u n t i n g t r i b e s cannot create large-scale political organisations preciselybecause the low level of their productive forcesc o m p e l s t h e m, in the ancient Russian expression, t o w a n d e r s e p a r a t e l y , i n small social groups, in search of the means ofsubsistence.... 
 [46-47]...According to Marx, the geographical environment influences man t h r o u g h t h ep r o d u c t i o n r e l a t i o n s a r i s i n g i n t h e g i v e n l o c a l i t y o n t h e b a s i s o f t h e g i v e n p r o d u c t i v e f o r c e s ,t h e p r i m a r y c o n d i t i o n f o r t h ed e v e l o p m e n t o f w h i c h i s t h i se n v i r o n m e n t’s f e a t u r e s.... 
 [65-66]...The character of the “economic struc-ture” and the direction in which it changes do not depend on man’s will, but on the state of the pro-ductive forces and on the changes that arise inproduction relations and become necessary tosociety due to the continued development of theseforces. 
 Engels explains this as follows: “Men make their history themselves, but not as yet with a collective will according to a collective plan oreven in a definite, delimited given society. 
 Theiraspirations clash, and for that very reason allsuch societies are governed by n e c e s s i t y,the complement and form of appearance of which is a c c i d e n t. 
” Here human activity itself is determined not as free, but as n e c e s s a r y,i. 
e. 
, as i n a c c o r d a n c e w i t h l a w, i. 
e. 
, a s b e i n g c a p a b l e o f b e c o m i n ga n o b j e c t o f s c i e n t i f i c i n v e s t i -g a t i o n. 
 Thus, historical materialism, while not ceasing to point out that circumstances are changed by people, also gives us an opportunityfor the first time of l o o k i n g u p o n t h ep r o c e s s o f t h i s c h a n g e f r o m t h es t a n d p o i n t o f s c i e n c e . 
 And that is why we are fully entitled to say that the material-ist explanation of history provides the necessary p r o l e g o m e n a f o r a n y t h e o r y o fh u m a n s o c i e t y t h a t d e s i r e s t oc o m e f o r w a r d a s s c i e n c e.... 
 [68]...In primitive society which knew no divi-sion into classes, man’s productive activity d i r e c t l y influences his outlook on the world and his aesthetic taste.... 
 [81-82]...If we were to state briefly the view of Marx and Engels on the relation between the “s u p e r s t r u c t u r e,” the result would be the following: 1 ) The s t a t e o f t h e p r o d u c t i v e f o r c e s; 2 ) T h e e c o n o m i c r e l a t i o n s deter-mined by it; 3) The socio -p o l i t i c a l s y s t e m whi c h has grown up on the economic “basis” in question; 4 ) T h e p s y c h o l o g y o f s o c i a l m a n as determined in part directly by the economy and in part by the socio-political system which has grown up on it; 5) D i f f e r e n t i d e o l o g i e s r ef l e cting the properties of this psychology.... 
 [98]...Let us take as an example our agrarian problem as it stands today. 
 To the intelligent Constitutional Democratic l a n d o w n e r, “the compulsory alienation of land” may seem to bemore or less, i. 
e. 
, in inverse proportion to theamount of “fair compensation,” a sad historicalnecessity. 
 But to the p e a s a n t, who is eagerto come by “a bit of land,” it is only this “fair compensation” that will seem to be a more or less sad necessity, while “compulsory alienation” isbound to appear to him to be an expression of hisfree will and the most valuable guarantee of hisfreedom. 
 In saying this, we touch perhaps on the most important point in the doctrine of freedom, a point not mentioned by Engels, of course, only becauseit is self-explanatory to one who has passed throughthe Hegelian school.... 
 Feuerbach and Dietzgen. 
 24* ( Written not earlier than May 1908 Published in part in 1933 in Lenin Miscellany XXV Published in full for the first timePublished according to the original *The reference is in page 24 of Plekhanov’s book (see p. 
 403 of this volume). 
— Ed. 
 PREFACE [6]*...Science, the creation of the intellect and reason, serves only to ensure our effective powerover nature. 
 It only teaches us how to utilisethings, but tells us nothing about their essence.... 
 [7]...Thus my essential task in this study has FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF been to contrast two points of view: the positive,FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF “scientific” and the “pragmatic”. 
 I have tried toFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF be as impartial as possible in outlining these two points of view, since I am well aware of a thirdand serious danger in this kind of work: that of not giving one’s adversaries their due. 
 I do not flatter myself that I have fully achieved my aim. 
Such perfect “neutrality” is impossible.... 
 C H A P T E R I THE MODERN CENTRE OF PHILOSOPHIC DISCUSSIONS § 5. 
 BASIC CONTRADICTION OF MODERN PHILOSOPHIC THOUGHT [28-29]...But contemporary systems of philos-ophy still oppose one another, battling over a fun-damental contradiction that arises from the mannerin which the philosophical problem is posed in ourepoch. 
 The form of the antithesis is therefore si-multaneously the form taken by the succession ofphilosophical views at different times and the form taken by the views existing at the same time. 
 * Rey A. 
, La Philosophie Moderne , Paris, 1908. 
— Ed. 
NBABEL REY. 
 MODERN PHILOSOPHY PARIS, 1908165 What, in the present position of the philoso-phical problem in general, are the possible alterna-tives? There can be only one, for it is a matter ofkeeping science and practice in the closest possible unity, without sacrificing one to the other, without opposing one to the other. 
 This means either thatpractice will be the consequence of science or, onthe other hand, science will be the consequenceof practice. 
 In the first case, science covers prac-tice; in the second, practice covers science. 
 It is a question of preserving a logical connection be-tween the two terms, and it can only be varied byreversing them, making the first dependent on thesecond, or the second on the first. 
 In the one casewe get rationalistic, intellectualist, and positivist systems: the dogmatism of science. 
 In the other, we get systems of pragmatism, fideism or activeintuition (like that of Bergson): the dogmatism of action. 
 According to the first systems, one has to know in order to act: cognition produces action. 
 According to the second, knowledge follows therequirements of action: action produces cognition. 
 It should not be thought that these latter systems resurrect contempt for science and the philosophyof ignorance. 
 It is after serious investigation, scientific erudition often of the most excellent kind, after profound critical thinking about sci-ence, and even through thoroughly “thinking outthis science,” as certain of these philosophers liketo put it, that they arrive at the derivation ofscience from practice. 
 If in so doing they belittle FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF science, it is only indirectly; for many of them, onFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF the contrary, believe that they are revealing itsfull value.... 
 § 6. 
 THE INTEREST OF CONTEMPORARY PHILOSOPHICAL DISCUSSIONS [33-35]...Let as, however, allow for a moment that the thesis of pragmatism is correct and that science is only a particular art, an appropriate technique for satisfying certain requirements. 
 What results from that? First of all, truth is reduced to an empty word. 
 A true affirmation appears as the recipe for an artifice that will prove successful. 
 And since there NB NBee in the same circumstances, since different individ-uals have extremely different requirements, weshall have to accept the pragmatist thesis: allpropositions and arguments which lead us to the same practical results are of equal value and are equally true, all ideas which yield practical resultsare equally legitimate. 
 From this new meaningof the word “truth,” it follows that our sciences arepurely contingent and fortuitous structures, thatthey could have been totally different and yet just as true, that is to say, just as suitable as means of action. 
 The bankruptcy of science, as a real form of knowledge, as a source of truth, there you havethe first conclusion. 
 The legitimacy of other methods differing considerably from the methods of intellect and reason, such as mystical feeling, there you have the second conclusion. 
 It is forthe sake of these conclusions that this entire philosophy, which to all appearance is crownedby them, was actually constructed.... 
 What a good argument it is, therefore, to pay back these powerful thinkers in their own coin!Scientific truths! But they are only truths in name. 
They, too, are beliefs, and beliefs of a lower order,beliefs that can be utilised only for material action;they have only the value of a technical instrument. 
 Belief for the sake of belief, religious dogma, FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF metaphysical or moral ideology, are far superior. 
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF In any case, they need not be embarrassed before science, because its privileged position has crumbled. 
 Indeed, the bulk of the pragmatist army, in the face of scientific experience, hastens to rehabilitate moral experience, metaphysical experience and, particularly, religious experience. 
 All these typesFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF of experience develop side by side with one anotherand can in no way hinder one another, because they are directed towards different needs, quite distinct aspects of practice (satisfaction of mate-rial needs, of moral consciousness or religioussentiments), and create different values .... 
 [37]...The metaphysicians would not be slow to take advantage of such a windfall. 
 Besides FFFFFFFF restoring religion, pragmatism helps to restoreFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF metaphysics. 
 Since Kant and Comte positivismFFFFFFFFFFFFFF during the nineteenth century has invaded almost(1) (2) NB NB NB [39-40]...Thus, the pragmatist attitude and those others which, while not being so philosophi-cal, original and interesting, lead to similar con-clusions, always have as their consequence therehabilitation of obsolete guiding forms of human thought which since the middle of the eighteenth century had been victoriously displaced by scien-tific positivism: religion, metaphysics, moral dog-matism, i. 
e, basically social authoritarianism. 
That is why it is one of the two poles, between which all contemporary thinking, all contemporary phi-losophy, vacillates. 
 It is the pole of dogmatic reaction, of the spirit of authority in all its forms. 
 This attitude is the more dangerous since it is atfirst presented, by its greatest adherents too, asthe boldest and latest revolt of the free spirit,a revolt against the only barrier still remainingand which hitherto served as a lever for overthrow-ing all the rest: science and scientific truth. 
 On the other hand, the opposite pole of modern philosophical thought, the purely scientific atti-tude—since in making practice the consequenceof knowledge it subordinates everything to sci-ence—is characterised above all by an endeavour towards emancipation and liberation. 
 It is here that one finds the innovators. 
 They are the inheri-tors of the Renaissance spirit; their fathers anddirect teachers are especially the philosophers andscientists of the eighteenth century, the greatcentury of liberation, of which Mach so truly said: “He who, if only through books, has had the opportunity of participating in this upsurge andliberation, will throughout his life preserve afeeling of melancholy regret for the eighteenth FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF century. 
” For thinkers of this type a truth existswhich, if not immutable, is one that can continual-ly be approached. 
 It cannot be reached except byscientific methods, and it cannot be found any-where outside science; truth, science are the neces-sary and sufficient conditions for all human activ-ity.... 
 § 8. 
 THE METHOD. 
—RÉSUMÉ AND CONCLUSIONS [48-49]...It is a matter of its [science’s] objective significance . 
 Some will think that it is insufficient to exhaust the reality which comprises its object, even though they admit, from a certain viewpoint, 2 ?!! C H A P T E R II THE PROBLEM OF NUMBER AND EXTENSION. 
 QUANTITATIVE PROPERTIES OF MATTER § 2. 
 THE OLD ARGUMENT BETWEEN EMPIRICISM AND APRIORISM [55]...But is not the elimination of all empirical element also an unattainable limit? The mathema-tician, the rationalists note, could continue to increase the wealth of his science even if the ma-terial world were suddenly annihilated. 
 Yes, undoubtedly, if it were annihilated now, butcould he create mathematics if the material world had never existed?... § 3. 
 THE CONTEMPORARY FORM OF THE PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEM OF NUMBER AND EXTENSION. 
 THE “NOMINALIST” AND “PRAGMATIST” ATTITUDE [61]...Bergson, who perhaps more than any other helped to propagate these ideas in philoso-phical literature, would not accept without reserva-tion the word “artifice. 
” He believes that scienceis greater and higher than merely an artifice, in relation to matter. 
 But for him matter is not true reality; it is reality that is diminished, regressive and dead. 
 And in relation to true reality, which is living, spiritual and creative, mathematics andscience as a whole can hardly have more than anartificial and symbolical character. 
 In any case, the fact remains that it was for action on matter, and not for cognition of its essence, that mathema-tics was created by the intellect, that first instru-ment forged under the pressure of practical require-ments in relation to matter.... 
 [62]...Is it not mathematics which, of all the sciences, has in our day most strongly inclined certain minds towards pragmatism, and towards that sophistry of pragmatism, namely scientific agnosticism? In point of fact, it is in mathematics that we feel furthest from the concrete and real, nearest to the arbitrary playing with formulas((ee [62-63]...All the truths, more relative and less exact, which other sciences try to express mathe-matically and with which they endeavour tosupplement mathematics, gravitate towards this absolute, as planets to the sun. 
 § 4. 
 RATIONALISM, LOGICISM AND INTELLECTUALISM [65]...The rigid and homogeneous space of geometry is not sufficient; the mobile and hetero-geneous space of physics is required. 
 The universalmechanism of nature does not signify that mattercontains nothing but geometry. 
 According to modern hypotheses it can signify that there also exists the release or transformation of energy or the movement of electrical masses.... 
. 
 § 5. 
 GENERAL IMPORTANCE OF THE PROBLEM OF QUANTITY : BASICALLY IT IS A PROBLEM OF REASON [74]...It is, in the first place, incontestable that reason, no matter how disinterested, has a utilitar-ian function. 
 Scientists are neither mandarins nordilettantes. 
 And pragmatism is not wrong in em-phasising the usefulness of reason, its pre-eminentusefulness. 
 Only, has it the right to assert that reason has only a utilitarian function? Cannot the rationalists reply very plausibly that the use-fulness of reason results only from the fact that,in deducing propositions from propositions, it simultaneously deduces from one another the relations between the facts of nature? It thus allows DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD us to act on these facts; not that this is its aim, but this follows from it. 
 Logic and the science ofquantity created by the mind, insofar as it simplyanalyses the relations it perceives, extend theirpower to things themselves because quantitativerelations are simultaneously the laws of things, and of the mind. 
 If to know is to be able, then it is not, as the pragmatists think, because sciencewas created by our practical requirements and fortheir sake, so that reason is of no value apart fromits usefulness, but because our reason, in learning to cognise things, provides us with the means for DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD acting on them.... 
NB NB NB § 6. 
 IDEAS OF POINCARÉ. 
 THE MATHEMATICIAN [75-76]...The great mathematician, Poincaré,* insists particularly on this arbitrary nature of mathematics. 
 Of course, our mathematics fully corresponds to reality, in the sense that it is adapted to thesymbolic expression of certain relations of thereal; strictly speaking, it was not prompted byexperience; experience merely gave the mind the occasion for creating it. 
 But, our mathematics, as it gradually became constituted for convenientlyexpressing what we needed to express, is only oneof the infinitely numerous possible mathematics or,rather, a particular case of some much more generalmathematics which the mathematicians of the nineteenth century have tried to attain. 
 Having got this clearly in mind, we at once realised thatmathematics, by its essence and nature, is abso-lutely independent of its application in experienceand, consequently, absolutely independent of DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD experience. 
 It is the free creation of the mind, theDDDDDDDDDDDD most striking manifestation of its own creativepower. 
 Axioms, postulates, definitions, conventions are, in essence, synonymous terms. 
 Therefore, every imaginable mathematics can lead to conclusions which, when properly expressed by a suitable system of conventions, would permit us to discoverabsolutely identical applications to the real.... 
 [77-79]...This theory is a good criticism of absolute rationalism and even of the attenuatedrationalism of Kant. 
 It shows us that it was not inevitably necessary for the mind to have elaborat-ed just that mathematics which is so well adaptedfor describing our experience; in other words,mathematics is not the expression of a universallaw of reality, whether our conception of reality(of the kind that is given us, of course) is the Carte-sian, Kantian or some other. 
 But Poincaré pre-sents this conclusion in quite a different way from that of pragmatism . 
 Some pragmatists, and even all the commenta-tors on Poincaré that I have had occasion to read, seem to me to have very largely failed to under-NB Poincaré Poincaré, La Science et l’Hypothèse , livre I (Paris, Flammarion). 
 Poincaré and Kant;stand his theory. 
 We have here an excellent exam-ple of distortion by interpretation. 
 They havemade of Poincaré—on this point as also on others, where their error is still greater—a pragmatist without the name. 
 But who can fail to see thattrue pragmatism makes mathematics indirectly dependent upon experience? It is a decree of themind, as with Poincaré, but a decree of the mind directed towards practical action, the free will of active thought, as the new philosophy conceivesit. 
 For the pragmatist there is no purely contem-plative and disinterested thought; there is nopure reason. 
 There is only thought which desiresto understand things and to this end alters the representation that it makes of them, for its great-est convenience. 
 Science and reason are the ser-vants of practice. 
 For Poincaré, on the other hand, thought has to be taken to a certain degree in the Aristotelian sense of the word. 
 Thought thinks, reason reasons, for its own satisfaction; and then,over and above this, it turns out that certainresults of its inexhaustible creative power can beuseful to us for other ends than purely spiritualsatisfaction. 
 But, in that case, practice is the servant of science and reason, which go far beyond the boundsof usefulness. 
 “Thought is only lightning, but thislightning is everything. 
”* One may not fully accept Poincaré’s theory; but it should not be distorted in order to invoke its authority. 
 Insufficient attention has been paid to its connection with Kantianism, from which itfully borrows the theory of synthetic judgments a priori, with the proviso (and it is here thatKant’s rationalism seems to Poincaré too rigid)that these synthetic judgments a priori, on which our mathematics (Euclidean) rests, are not to be considered the only possible and necessary postu-lates of rational mathematics.... 
 § 7. 
 THE RELATION BETWEEN THE MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES AND THE OTHER NATURAL SCIENCES [80]...Does Poincaré’s theory assign to expe-rience the role which seems to be its due? Strange! NB NBI would like to tell the pragmatists, who have constantly enlisted it for their own ends and usedit author’s name like an artillery piece, that I find very little of the pragmatic in it.... 
 § 8. 
 INDICATIONS RELATIVE TO THE GENERAL EVOLUTION OF SCIENTIFIC METHOD AND KNOWLEDGE [87]...And if science then develops thanks to its material usefulness, it should not be forgotten that only owing to its intellectual usefulness and thedisinterested satisfaction of the mind that desiresto cognise things did it free itself at the outsetfrom a crude empiricism in order to become truescience. 
 It first enables us to cognise reality, prior to allowing us to act on it. 
 And it is necessary that it should first enable us to cognise in order later to allow us to act.... 
 § 9. 
 MACH’S IDEAS, REASON AND THE ADAPTATION OF THOUGHT [90-91]...Does this not give us a valuable indica-tion of the nature and scope of logic and rationalthought, of which mathematics has always beenconsidered the pure emanation? And perhaps, also,of the nature and scope of reason? Here we arenot far from the thought of Mach, who was also frequently made out to be a pragmatist without the name. 
 He seems to us to be much closer to rationalism in the sense which, in our opinion, should henceforth be put into that term—a rationalism which by no means excludes a psychological history of reason with its opportunities and temporary contingenciesand, above all, does not in any way belittle the role of experience; reason being only codified ex-perience and, reciprocally, the necessary and uni-versal code of every kind of experience, taking intoaccount simultaneously both the moment of evolu-tion and the psychological organisation of man.... 
 [93-94]...Hence one sees that reason, subjected to abstract analysis in the consciousness of the rational being, is capable, with the help of theprinciples discovered in it and the ideal develop-ment of these principles, of agreeing with thelaws of the environment and expressing them. 
(( !! !! NB Compare 93-94what the environment is, reason cannot be different from what it is: it is then, as the rationalists claim,necessary and universal. 
 In a certain sense, it is even absolute, but not in the sense that this word is understood by traditional rationalism. 
 For this latter it means that things exist as reason conceives them. 
 From our point of view, on the contrary, we do not know how things exist in themselves, FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF and to this extent Kantian or positivist relativism has its raison d’être. 
 But we have the right to say that if, in a being of a totally different constitu-tion, the needs of evolution had established a con-formity with the environment different from ourown (since one of the two factors of which it is the product would be different), one would always be able to establish a system of translation thatwould make these two kinds of conformity coincidewith each other. 
 There is nothing absurd in thishypothesis, because to a certain degree this shouldoccur between domestic animals and ourselves.... 
 [95-96]...Number and extension, despite their abstractness, arise from the nature of the real, because reality is multiplicity and extension, and because relations in space are real relations arising from the nature of things. 
 In that case, does it not appear that extremely important conclusions could be deduced from these initial propositions? Scientific abstraction was often considered synonymous with non-reality. 
Increased abstractness would then signify con-tinual movement beyond the limits of the real,further and further removal from it. 
 Is that cor-rect? Mathematics, in progressively moving away from sensuous space in order to rise to geometricalspace, does not become removed from real space,i. 
e. 
, from the real relations between things. 
 Rather does it come closer to them. 
 According to the dataof modern psychology, each of our senses seems to give us extension and duration (i. 
e. 
, definiteconnections and relations of the real) in its own fashion . 
 Perception begins to eliminate this subjec-tivity which depends on the individual or on accidental peculiarities of the structure of the NB NB sensation = the ultimate Mach # objectivityspace, as well as a uniform duration—those syn-theses of all our various sensuous notions of space. 
Why should not scientific work pursue this progress towards objectivity? In any case, its strictness, its exactitude, its universality (or its necessity, they are one and the same) are so many arguments in favour of the objectivity of its results. 
 Consequently number, order and extension, in spite of our critical and subjective habits of thought, can be regardedas properties of things, i. 
e. 
, real relations;—themore real because science has gradually freed themfrom the individual and subjective distortions,with which they were originally presented to us in concrete and immediate sensations. 
 Should we not, therefore, rightly consider that what re-mains after all these abstractions is the real andpermanent content, which imposes itself on everyspecies with equal necessity, for it depends neither on the individual nor the moment of time, nor the point of view?... § 10. 
 WHAT DOES MATHEMATICS TEACH ITS? [97]...Psychology, for its part, teaches that all our sensations (which are the direct and ultimate data of experience) possess one property: extensivenessor extension. 
 This property is totally unlike geometrical extension, particularly if we consider the sensations that affect us most.... 
. 
 [98]...Geometrical, space is the result of an abstract interpretation of optical space, whichde-individualises, generalises, and makes moremanageable for the mind the relations implied bythis optical space. 
 We would willingly supplement Mach’s thought by saying that the aim of this operation has been to give these relations theirmost exact and precise expression, a universaland necessary expression, hence their objective’ expression. 
 Thus geometrical space is the outcome of an evolution, which has made our thought increasingly better adapted to certain propertiesof the environment. 
 This was a prolonged and con-tinuous experience, the success of which has cons-tantly strengthened certain habits of thought that(((( !!! NB NB[100]...Thus, what mathematics teaches us are the relations between things from the point of view of order, number and extension. 
 By analysing the real relations that exist be-tween things, our mind naturally acquires thecapacity to form similar relations from them,thanks to associations by resemblance. 
 It can, therefore, also imagine combinations which are not found in reality, basing itself on those whichare found in it. 
 After having formed conceptions that are copies of the real, we can form ideas that are models, as Taine says, in a slightly different sense. 
 § 11. 
 RÉSUMÉ AND CONCLUSIONS [103-105]...Absolute rationalism would seem to have sufficiently good grounds for asserting, bya kind of idealist realism, that, the laws of reason coincide with the laws of things. 
 But is it not at all wrong in separating reason from things, andin thinking that reason by itself alone, in splendid isolation, obtains cognition of the laws that governthings? It would have to be admitted, then, that by virtue of some sort of agreement or miraculousgrace, we possess intuitive knowledge of theselaws or at least a germ of it. 
 Revived in this way,the Platonic myth of reminiscence seems to be anextremely gratuitous and extremely uneconomical hypothesis. 
 Yes, the analysis of reason becomes co-extensive with the analysis of nature. 
 Yes, mathematics, in being concerned with the former, is at the same time concerned with the latter, or, if you prefer, provides some of the elements necessary for the latter. 
 But is it not simpler to suppose that thisis because our psychological activity is gradually formed through adaptation to the environment and to the practical conditions in which it has to beexercised?... Hence, despite very great differences between absolute rationalism and the theory outlined hereour the question of genesis and history, we reach, on the other hand, very similar conclusions on the question of the value and scope of mathematics:this value and this scope are absolute , in the human golden mean!! NBand a transcendental point of view, I confess I that I have not yet unearthed the secret of it, and am very little concerned to do so. 
 The possibilityof attaining human understanding of things andof translating them truthfully into human languageis enough for me.... 
 Is not this conclusion superficial and too petty? In my view, pragmatism goes to the other extreme, diametrically opposed to that of traditional ration-alism. 
 The latter took the end point for the point of departure and transferred the properties of the result to the beginning. 
 Pragmatism, on the con-trary, approximates the end point to the point of departure to the extent of confusing the two andascribes to the result the properties of the beginning. 
Is it not more rational to think that mathematics,after emerging from a utilitarian anthropomor-phism, gradually burst through the subjective limits of this initial horizon? By constantly improv-ing its analysis, it arrived at certain real, objec-tive, universal and necessary relations of things. 
 [107]...It has its foundation in the nature of things, just like our reason and our logic, of which it is a particular application and which are basically formed in a similar fashion. 
 It does not matter what path has been taken to arrive at reality if, by investigating it moreand more closely, we finally envelop it from allsides. 
 C H A P T E R III THE PROBLEM OF MATTER § 1. 
 THE HISTORY AND PRESENT STATUS OF THE PROBLEM OF MATTER [109-110]...First of all, after the failures of the “physicist” philosophers, the great philosophicaltradition of the Greeks, headed by the Eleatics and Plato throws doubt on the very existence of matter. 
 Matter is only appearance or, at any rate, the barest minimum of existence; the science of material things, in its turn, can only be a purely relative science, and there is no true science but that of spiritual things. 
 Thus the problem of matterbegins to be solved by suppressing the problem(( NB NB NB NB NB NBboundary of the mind and as a function of the mind, and everything relating to matter is ofa lower order.... 
 [111]...Thus disputes about the reality, of the external world, idealism, spiritualism, material-ism, mechanism, dynamism, increasingly appear to be an outdated and sterile game which mustbe left to classic philosophy, understanding this expression in the sense in which Taine did, philos-ophy for the classroom.... 
 [113]...Vulgar materialism borrows from it [physics] all that is basic as well as all that is exaggerated and monstrous in it. 
 What a luckychance for the religious spirit, if it can show that physics knows nothing about the things on which it allows us to act, and that its explanations arenot explanations at all! § 2. 
 THE CRISIS IN PHYSICS AT THE END OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY: ENERGETISTIC PHYSICS In point of fact, at the time when this philo-sophical hope was born and growing strong in theminds of educated and sincere believers, every-thing in physics seemed destined to justify andrealise it. 
 [114]...The new physics, energetistic physics, DDDD DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD come into opposition with this traditional mecha-nistic physics. 
 “Come into opposition”—is this phrase quite correct? As regards a large number of physicists, one would be tempted to say, rather:“is used interchangeably” (according to the casein hand) with the mechanistic method, [115-116] Indeed, energy is nothing but the ability to perform work, it is a mechanical conceptand can always be measured mechanically, i. 
e. 
,with the aid of motion and the science of motion. 
 Helmholtz, Gibbs and many others by no meansbroke with the mechanistic tradition when theyadded to mechanics the new chapter, generalising it in its application to physical realities. 
 They wished for nothing more, and in fact they did nothing more than correct and further develop(( (( eee e /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR !of physics, as had always been done since the time of Galileo and Descartes. 
 Side by side with theprinciples of mechanics and within the mechanicalinterpretation of reality, they put forward the principle of the conservation of force or of energy, the principle of Carnot and the principle of leastaction, one which had already played an importantrole since the time of Maupertuis. 
 Thus, the word “energetics” has primarily the meaning which makes it part of the science of physics, as recognised by all scientists. 
 Let us add that in France this part of physics is more usuallycalled thermodynamics , and although, etymological-ly, this word has too restricted a meaning for thecontent implied by it, it has the advantage of elim-inating all the misunderstandings caused by theother uses of the word “energetics. 
” The second use of this word relates not to a part of physics, but to a general theory of physics as a whole... [117]...This law was not incompatible with the mechanical conception. 
 The latter had goodreasons for claiming that the different manifesta-tions of energy were basically only differentappearances caused by one and the same basic reality—motion.... 
 [120-122]...But if everything can be reduced to the principles of classical mechanics, then, in theopinion of the energeticists there was no explana-tion for this increasing waste of force, this diminu-tion of usable energy. 
 Nature ought to be capableof going back, as it were, and endlessly recommenc-ing the same cycle of transformations; for classicalmechanics is essentially the science of reversibletransformations, for which time is of no account,and which, like happy peoples, have no history. 
In reality, however, the systems would be no hap-pier than peoples. 
 They would all the same havea history. 
 That is why certain physicists haverefused to regard physics simply as the continua-tion of classical mechanics. 
 They have wanted tothrow off the yoke of tradition, finding it, like allgood revolutionaries, too narrow and too tyranni-cal. 
 Hence the trivial criticism and later the revi-sion of the basic principles of mechanics. 
 From these efforts there arose a new conception of physics NB NB !! NBas was sometimes asserted, but in any case con-taining profound modifications. 
 In general it can be said that, finding classical mechanics to be an insufficient basis for physics, the latter has ceased to see in physical phenomena that which until then was always seen in them:the various kinds of motion, forming preciselythe science of classical mechanics. 
 Until then, toexplain a physical phenomenon, to study it, meant reducing it to forms of motion: the motion of material masses, of atoms, or vibrations of the universal transmitting medium—the ether. 
 Thus, every physical explanation could be represented diagrammatically with the aid of the geometry of motion. 
 The new conception, which, it was proposed, should replace the former, consisted in the firstplace in the absolute rejection of all the figurativerepresentations, of those “mechanical models,” as the English say, without which at one time there was no real physics. 
 Mach severely accuses them of being nothing but “mythology. 
” Like all mythol-ogy, it is childish; it could be useful when we did not know how to look at things directly; but hewho can walk without crutches is not likely tomake use of them. 
 Let us throw away the crutches of atomism and vortices in the ether. 
 Having reached the age of maturity, physics no longer has need of crude images for worshipping its gods. 
The abstract language of mathematics is alonecapable of suitably expressing the results of expe-rience. 
 It alone will be able to tell us what actually is, without adding and concealing anything, withthe strictest accuracy. 
 Magnitudes, defined algeb-raically and not geometrically, and even lessmechanically, numerical variations measured withthe aid of a conventional scale, and no longer perceptible changes measured by displacements in space in relation to a local origin—there youhave the materials of the new physics: conceptual physics in opposition to mechanistic or figurative physics.... 
 [123]...This new general theory of physics, which Rankin already had in mind in 1855, wasOO Duhem. 
 “The aim of every science is to replace experience by the shortest possible operations of the mind,” says Mach; this formula could be the motto of scientific energetics.... 
 § 3. 
 THE PHILOSOPHICAL INTERPRETATION OF ENERGETICS [127]...It is clear how philosophy, desiring to silence the arguments drawn from science against certain particular dogmas and against the religiousstandpoint in general, could use this ingeniousinterpretation. 
 Do you put forward certain physicaltruths in opposition to certain beliefs? Well, the new physics desires only one thing, to return to the ideas of the great epoch of faith. 
 After the stormy onslaught of three centuries, it returns, like a new prodigal son, to the paternal bosom of the most orthodox Thomism. 
 What is the most serious of all is that a scientist renowned for the mathematical precision and ele-gance of his works, particularly known for hisactive propagation of the new physics, for the limpid, admirably French form in which he has expounded it, and for his splendid generalisationsin the sphere of energetistic mechanics—this scien-tist himself considered it possible to align himself with this philosophical interpretation of the newscientific theories. 
 We refer to Duhem. 
 Of course, in doing so he has tried carefully to draw a strict line between his scientific and his metaphysicalconceptions.... 
 [130]...Developing this point of view, the new philosophy could almost immediately deduce fromthe contemporary attempts at reforming physics the purely descriptive character of this physics, which made no pretence of explaining anything. 
And this played into the hands of “fideism. 
” Science is powerless to go beyond the limit of qualities; therefore it has to restrict itself to describing them. 
It has to be a simple analysis of sensations, to useMach’s expression which, however, our new philos-ophy fears to borrow from him in its true sense, which is of a completely ”scientific-like” character. 
 [131-134]...In contemporary literature, one canNB ! NB tions varying considerably in quality: the sciences of matter tell us nothing about the real, for matter, as they understand it, matter itself, in the popular sense of the word, does not exist. 
 Simple, everyday perception already distorts external reality. 
 It builds it up wholly according to the requirements of our activity. 
 Science then further processesthese raw materials. 
 What it shows us under the name of matter is only a rough scheme in which all the living wealth of the real is lost through thesieve of scientific laws, or a heterogenous mixture of abstract elements, arbitrarily isolated or com-bined, and entirely fabricated by us. 
 Thus the road lies open for justifying the most mystical forms of idealism.... 
 Without dwelling on these extreme misconcep-tions one can nevertheless note that even among serious and well-informed thinkers there remainsa tendency to apply to the physical sciences a crit-icism analogous to that which Poincaré applied to the mathematical sciences, despite the energetic protestations of Poincaré himself. 
 From this pointof view physics, like mathematics, is a symbolic language intended simply to make things more intelligible, by making them simpler and clearer, more communicable and, above all, more flexiblein practice. 
 To make something intelligible evi-dently means systematically to distort and alter the ideas we obtain directly from reality, in orderto be able to make better use of the latter for satisfying our needs. 
 Intelligibility, rationality have nothing to do with the nature of things. 
 They’re merely instru-ments of action. 
 Moreover, every new discovery seems to directly contradict our reason, for it upsets our old habits. 
 The mind has to adapt itselfto it (just as the body first has to learn to ride a bicycle), for the new law in its turn to appear to us as rational, arising from our apparent needof intelligibility. 
 We grossly deceive ourselves when we think that this arbitrary symbolism teaches us anything that could satisfy our purecuriosity, our need for disinterested knowledge. 
 For knowledge, for cognition in the full sense of the word, it is necessary to turn elsewhere.... 
NB NB NB § 4. 
 CRITIQUE OF CONTEMPORARY CRITICISM OF PHYSICS Although the attitude of the vast majority of physicists to this interpretation of physical science has been one of silence or contempt, it cannot be disregarded by philosophical criticism. 
 Though scientists have the right to say: the dogs bark, the caravan goes on, philosophical criticism which is necessarily interested in the social and educa-tional significance of doctrines, is compelled to stop and take notice. 
 [136-138]...The majority of the adherents of the new philosophy have addressed themselves exclu-sively to the scientists, supporters of energetisticphysics and resolute opponents of mechanisticphysics. 
 But among physicists, the extreme sup-porters of energetistic physics are altogether a small FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF minority. 
 In the main, physicists continue to beFFFFFFFFFF mechanistic of course, they are changing their mechanical conceptions in order to bring them into accord with the new discoveries, for they are not scholastics. 
 But they always seek to depictand explain physical phenomena with the aid of movements open to sensuous perception. 
 On the other hand, it should not be forgotten that, while energetics has produced a number of elegant theories and expositions, almost all the great discoveries of recent times are due to mecha-nistic physicists and are connected with attempts to present a picture of the material structure of phenomena. 
 It is worth giving some thought to this circumstance. 
 In order to provide theoretical physics with geometrical rigour, energetics decided to make itsimply a more concise and economically-worded exposition of experimental data; but can the theory of physics be reduced to a mere instrument of economically-worded exposition? Can it totallyban hypotheses from a science that has always been made fertile by hypotheses? Should it not con-stantly orientate itself for the discovery of the real with the help of theories which, like the mechanis-NB NB) ) tic theories, are always anticipations of experience, attempts to obtain a clear idea of the real? Does it not follow then that to construct the philosophy of physics by relying exclusively onpurely energetistic physics amounts to a peculiar narrowing of the basis on which this philosophy should be built? The new philosophy in essence turns for confirmation of its ideas only to those who can be well-disposed towards it, and they are only a small minority. 
 This is a convenient ruse,but a ruse nevertheless. 
 Besides, are they favourably inclined towards it as it imagines? This is more than doubtful. 
 Almost all the scientists appealed to by pragmatism or so-called nominalism have made serious reservations, includ-ing Poincaré. 
 Let us now turn to them. 
 § 5. 
 WHAT CONTEMPORARY PHYSICISTS THINK [138]...Thus, physics is a science of the real, and even if it seeks to express this reality in a “con-venient” fashion, it is nevertheless always realitythat it expresses. 
 The “convenience” is only in the means of expression. 
 What is concealed behindthese means of expression which the mind can vary in searching always for the most convenient, is the “necessity” of the laws of nature. 
 This neces-sity is not arbitrarily decreed by the mind. 
 On the contrary, it constrains the mind, confines its means of expression within narrow limits. 
 Within the limits close to the approximations of experi-ence, and the small differences which physical phe-nomena, governed by one and the same law, retainbecause they are never identical, but only very similar—within these limits the law of nature is dictated to us from outside and by things them-selves: it expresses a real relation between things. 
 [139]...Duhem will say, too, that one should not take the experience of the physicist as a copyof reality. 
 Every physical experiment consists of measurements, and these measurements presuppose ha-ha!! NB NB NB[140]...Duhem will never deny this truth to the propositions of physics: they are the description of reality. 
 Moreover, physical theory is not only an exact description of the real, it is a well-arrangeddescription, for it always strives for a natural classification of physical phenomena—a natural classification, hence one which reproduces the order of nature. 
 No dogmatist, whether Descartes, Newton or Hegel, has ever demanded more.... 
 [141]...Moreover, even if the latter [Duhem] believes in the necessity for metaphysics side by side with science, then why does he adhere to Thomist metaphysics? Because it seems to himthat it is in better agreement with the results of physical science.... 
 [142-143]...Ostwald’s “scientism” is very close to that of the great Viennese mechanist, Mach, who on these grounds even refuses to be called, a philosopher. 
 Sensation is absolute. 
 Through our sensations we cognise reality. 
 But science is the analysis of our sensations. 
 To analyse sensations is to discover the exact relations between them, in short, todiscover the order of nature, giving this expression its most objective sense, for the order of nature isnothing but the order of our sensations. 
 [144]...In the criticisms of Mach by the rational-ists, he was sometimes reproached for a tendency towards pragmatism. 
 He was accused of sceptical DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD relativism. 
 Is it because this brilliant historianDDDDDDDDDDD of science often traces for us its humble beginnings in the primitive arts of our ancestors? After all,these were only a first attempt at adaptation. 
 To give it a precise evaluation, it is necessary to take a look at the result, at the final point reached. 
Or is it because his biological theory of science makes truth into human truth? But human truth remains truth; moreover, it is the only truth forman. 
 Sensation is evidently something human. 
 Nevertheless it is the absolute, and human truth is absolute truth, because for man it is the whole truth and the only truth, the necessary truth. 
 The properties of man and the universe being what theyare, it is based on the nature of things. 
 It is, in> human terms, the cognition of everything that exists.... 
 [147]...It is possible to imagine the existence of microbes even though they were invisible up tothe moment when some reagent reveals them. 
 Why then should we not have the right to imagine matter as having a certain structure, which expe-rience will some day reveal? § 6. 
 MATTER ACCORDING TO CONTEMPORARY PHYSICS: GENERAL REVIEW [148]...In that case what is the sense of the cam-paign begun by Brunetière and continued by reli-gious-minded people, who were certainly sincere,but who desired to destroy everything that could be a stumbling-block; a campaign which, if it did not lead to pragmatism, at any rate led to somedefinite form of pragmatism?... [149-150]...Just as in mathematics we use terms of order, number and extension to denote certaingroups of relations on which our sensations depend, and just as mathematics takes these relations for its subject, so, further, we denote by the extremely general name of “matter” a very large number of relations—far more complex—on which our sensa-tions also depend. 
 Physics makes a study of these relations. 
 This is all we wish to express when we say that physics is the science of matter.... 
 [152]...To many people it might seem natural that physics should have as its subject the elements capable of entering into these relations and giving them a real content, and filling them up as it were. 
 This was Spencer’s idea in his classification of the sciences. 
 However, this idea cannot be considered a happy one. 
 We register the elements of realitydirectly, immediately, just as they are, and as they cannot help being. 
 Their existence requires no justification. 
 One cannot ask whether it is possible for them to be other than they are. 
 To assert that would mean restoring the old metaphysical idol of the thing-in-itself, i. 
e. 
, in essence, idle verbalism in one form or another. 
 Experience should be simply accepted. 
 It is its own justification, because in the scientificsphere it is for the positive mind the justification of every proposition. 
NB NB T h e e s-s e n c e o f R e y’s a g n o s t i -c i sm [154-155]...Is then agnostic criticism of science correct? And is there a thing-in-itself which is out of the reach of science? etc. 
, etc. 
 Here, surely, we have metaphysics and its inevitable playing with words! Let us try to see clearly into this matter. 
 If the relative signifies something that deals with relations , then physics is relative . 
 But if the relative means something that has not penetrated to thebasis of things, then physics, as we understand it, is not relative, but absolute, because the basis of things, that at which analysis inevitably ar-rives in order to explain them, consists of relations or, rather, the system of relations on which our sensations depend. 
 Sensations, the given, are permeated with subjectivity: these fleeting, lightn-ing flashes are what they are made by a system of relations which will probably never be repeated in exactly the same form and which determinesmy state and the state of the environment at the moment under consideration. 
 But here the scientist steps in to separate out the universal which is part of the composition of the individual moment, those laws of which it is the complex expression, those relations which made it what it is. 
 All scientific laws in effect tell us why and how the given thing is what it is, by what it was condi-tioned and created, because they analyse the rela-tions on which it depends. 
 And they will reveal to us absolute human truth when this analysis has been completed, if ever it can be. 
 § 7. 
 THE CONCRETE DATA OF CONTEMPORARY PHYSICS [156-157]...All the relations on which the trans-formation and reduction, the diffusion or dispersion of energy, depend are grouped in the generalphysical theory called energetics. 
 This theory tells us nothing about the nature of the energies considered and, consequently, aboutthe nature of physico-chemical phenomena. 
 Itsimply describes how, at the expense of what, and in what direction, physical or chemical changes of the state of a given body take place. 
NB R R ha-ha!! NBee an amusing fellow, this “positivist” Mechanists versus ener-getics. 
 NB. 
 Plus loin* than mate-rialistically interpreted (p. 
 157) ener-getics!The energeticists claim that it is not possible to go further, that energetics gives us the complete, necessary and sufficient explanation of material phenomena, that is to say, the sum-total of therelations on which they depend. 
 In order to give more objectivity to their view, some even raise energy to a sort of substance which is alleged to be the true material substance, the real and acting DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD cause of all our sensations, the model accordingDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD to which we should build our idea of nature. 
DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD Here energy takes the place of the corpuscles of the atomic theories. 
 It plays the same role and has the same kind of existence: it is the basis of things their final nature the absolute. 
 Accord-ing to Ostwald, for example, the description of the transformations of energy gives us absolute knowl-edge of the material universe. 
 “When you arestruck with a stick, what do you feel: the stick or its energy?” Energy—that is the substantial reality which lurks beneath all material phenom-ena... [158]...The mechanists claim, on the other hand, that it is possible to proceed further. 
 Energetics, in their opinion, remains as it were on the surface of things, but its laws should either be reduceable to other, more profound laws or, at any rate, supplement them, by presuming their existence. 
 As already said, the vast majority of physicists, DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD and particularly the experimental physicists to whom physics owes its latest successes, belong toDDDDDDDDDDthe mechanistic school. 
DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD The supporters of this school criticise in the first place the conception of energy and show that one cannot raise it, as some people do, to a physicalor metaphysical entity. 
 The energy of a system signifies only the capa-city of the system to perform work: potentialwhen it does not result in detectable work, actual or kinetic in the opposite case. 
 Consequently, the concept of energy is co-relative with the concept further— Ed. 
 NB The electron theory = “mechanism”of work, which is a mechanical concept. 
 Hence, it does not seem possible to represent energy exper-imentally without turning to mechanics andmotion. 
 But, in that case, to provide an intelligible explanation of physico-chemical phenomena, should not energetics be joined with mechanics, be estab-lished as its continuation and, consequently, be reconciled with the consideration of mechanical ideas?... [159-161]...From this point of view, mechanics, physics and chemistry form a vast theoretical system, and mechanics represents the fundamentalbasis of this system, just as motion is the ultimate essence of physico-chemical phenomena. 
 Of course, modern mechanists no longer claim that the mechanics of today, any more than thelaws governing transformations of energy, have reached their final form, that science has found its unshakable foundation. 
 Having encounteredthe criticism of the energeticists—and that is one of the advances which modern physics certainly owes to it—they abandoned the rather narrow dogmatism of the old mechanistic and atomic views. 
 They think that the new discoveries should broaden the scientific horizon and introduce cons-tant changes in the idea of the external world. 
 Have we not been witnessing during the last fiftyyears the reconstruction, almost the overthrow, of classical mechanics? The old framework was smashed first of all by the principle of the conserva-tion of energy (Helmholtz) and Carnot’s principle. 
 The phenomena of radioactivity, which allowed us to penetrate more deeply into the nature of the atom, led to the idea of the possibility of an electri-cal structure of matter and of the necessity of sup-plementing the principles of classical mechanics by those of electro-magnetism. 
 Indeed, the mechanistic viewpoint now tends to adopt the form which is termed the electron theory. 
 Electrons are the ultimate elements of all physical reality. 
 Simple electrical charges, or else modifications of the ether, symmetrically distributed around one point, by virtue of the laws of the electro-magnetic field, perfectly represent(( NBlatter, therefore, is nothing but a system of elec-trons. 
 Depending on the nature of the modifica-tions of the ether (modifications as yet unknown)FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF electrons are positive or negative; a material atom consists of an equal quantity of each of them, or at least, possesses positive and negative charges of equal size, the positive charge apparentlyoccupying the centre of the system. 
 The negative electrons, or perhaps only part of them, revolve round the remainder like planets round the sun. 
Thus, molecular and atomic forces are only mani-festations of the movement, of electrons, just like the various forms of energy (light, electricity,heat) Hence, the remarkable conclusion: the concept of the conservation of mass (or of the quantityof matter), which, together with the concept of inertia, formed the basis of mechanics, cannot, apparently, be retained in electro-magnetic mechan-ics: gravitational mass remains constant only at moderate velocities, less than one-tenth of that of light; but, being a function of velocity, it FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF increases together with it, and the more rapidlyFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF the closer we approach the velocity of light. 
 This hypothesis presupposes either the existence of various electrical charges and the ether, or the ether alone, of which the electron is only a modifi-cation. 
 Finally, at the present time, the works of Dr. 
 Le Bon* and certain English physicists lead us, apparently, to the conclusion that neither the quantity of matter nor even the quantity of energy remains constant. 
 They are both onlyrelations depending on the state of the ether and on its motion. 
 ** * Gustave Le Bon: L’Evolution de la Matière. 
— L’Evolution des Forces . 
 (Flammarion, éditeur. 
) **Apparently, matter is converted into energy and energy into matter. 
 By matter, of course, one should understand only gravitational matter, and by energy—only the capacity to perform detectable work. 
 If by matter is meant the unknown basis of things,from which everything originates and into with every-thing returns, the ether, for example, or some otherprimordial entity, then Le Bon’s conclusions by nomeans refute its eternal nature and constancy; theylead neither to creation out of nothing nor to absoluteFFFFFFFFFFFF Agnosticism = shamefaced materialism166[163-171]...Today nothing remains, nor should anything remain, of this idea. 
 We have arrived at the diametrically opposite viewpoint. 
 All physicists are prepared to revise the fundamentalprinciples of their science or to restrict their application as soon as new experimental data provide the necessary motive for doing so. 
 The experimental method consists in rising from particular facts to general laws, and from the latter to still more general laws, constantlydeepening the nature of the given thing by this ascending movement. 
 It deduces particular laws from general laws in its systematising theories onlyto the extent that it encounters these general laws on its path; and it encounters them by means of particular experiments and by hypotheses whichthese experiments are called upon to ver-ify. 
 But should it be concluded from this that physicists thereby abandon the hope of arriving at basic principles and increasingly deep-seated elements that will explain and embrace an ever greater part of the given thing? Such a conclusion, even though it opposes the mistake of the ancient mechanists, would be a no less dangerous error. 
 The present-day spirit of the physico-chemical sciences, the scientific modern spirit, is not such as to retreat before the unknown. 
 It advancesmore and more boldly towards conquest of it, but by increasingly reliable methods. 
 The stability of the principles of physics will be assured onlyat the end of the task. 
 That is why we are witness-ing today, and will witness more than once again, so many revolutions produced in former,or in future, ideas by the unforeseen discoveries which have already thrown light on the path or are destined to do so in the future. 
 Progressive physicists, as we have seen, are no longer frightened by doubt being cast on the principles of the conservation of mass or of gravitational matter. 
 Truth is not given ready-made; every day something more is added to it. 
 That is the con-clusion which should be constantly repeated. 
 Thanks to scientific work, our mind daily becomes* more deeply into it. 
 The assertions which we believed we could put forward after studying the mathematical sciences present themselves here,too, in an almost necessary way, and at least in a very natural way. 
 Every moment scientific progress establishes between things and ourselves a conformity which is at once closer and deeper. 
 We are comprehending more and better. 
 And we invariably see that a result established by scien-tific experiment, i. 
e. 
, carried through methodically,may no longer, in the light of new results, have the same degree of importance but yet continues to exist by itself, intact and indelible, eternalas truth, for it is a truth. 
 He who would claim that this effort is fruitless, or that it will always be only strictly limited, is very daring and isrefuted in advance by everything that the history of science reveals to us. 
 The dispute between energeticists and mechan-ists, a dispute often extremely lively, particularly on the part of the energeticists, is properly only a moment of the progress of the physico-chemical sciences and, moreover, a necessary moment. 
 Far from breaking the unity of development whichall historians have noted in these sciences, it would rather seem to have its natural place there, like the old disputes between Cartesians andatomists, between Cartesians and Newtonians or Leibnitzians, between the kineticists and the dynamists. 
 And just as in the case of the oldtheoretical disputes, the encounter between the two great contemporary theories or, better still, their parallel development, has rather had fruitfulresults. 
 It has promoted the forward movement of science. 
 In the first place, energetics has put us on our guard against certain abuses of mechanist models, against the temptation of taking these models for objective reality. 
 Further, it has deepened thermo-dynamics and shown very well the universal significance of its basic laws which, instead of being restricted to researches relating to heat, havea legitimate and necessary application to the whole field of the physico-chemical sciences. 
 By extending the scope of these laws, energeticshas greatly contributed to making their formulas shown itself to be less fruitful than mechanism, from the viewpoint of discoveries, it nevertheless always represents a splendid instrument of exposi-tion—sober, elegant and logical. 
 Finally, andthis is particularly notable in such chemists as Van’t Hoff, Van der Waals and Nernst, but is more and more frequently encountered also among the physicists, both theories are readily accepted; in each case that theory which best lends itself to the investigation is selected. 
 They are usedconcurrently; scientists start out from the general equations of mechanics or from the general equa-tions of thermodynamics, depending on whetherthe path thus followed appears simpler or more successful. 
 The point is that physical theories are essentially hypotheses, instruments of investiga-tion and exposition, or organisation. 
 They are forms, frameworks, which have to be filled in by the results of experiment. 
 And it is these resultsalone that constitute the true, real content of the physical sciences. 
 It is on these that all physicists agree, and their constantly increasing quantity, ever more con-current and harmonious, characterises the prog-ress of physics, its unity and its lasting nature. 
They are the touchstone of the theories and hypo-theses which served to discover them and which endeavour to organise them, while respectingtheir real affinities, reproducing as closely as possible the order of nature. 
 And these theories, although they are always hypothetical and, it FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF follows, are always losing something—at times a great deal—to the extent that experience bringsus new discoveries, never, however, die completely. 
 They become integrated by becoming transformed into more comprehensive, more adequate newtheories. 
 It was so with the Cartesian theory and with the atomic theory and, from the latter, with Newton’s theory. 
 Evidently it will be sowith energetics and the old mechanism. 
 And are not the kinetic hypotheses of the present day preparing for this integration and this reconcilia-tion? “The chronicler should note the fact that the majority of modern results in the field of physicalchemistry were achieved by means of a successful combination of thermodynamic methods and the views of the molecular theory, in exactly the NB ? NBheat simultaneously devoted their best efforts to the development of atomistics, in particular the kinetic theory. 
 “...We should regard, as an outstanding result of the latter, the transference of atomistics to the science of electricity.... 
 Through this marvellous widening of its horizon, atomistics threw a totally new light on a number of physical and chemical processes.... 
* § 8. 
 RÉSUMÉ AND CONCLUSIONS If the unknown is boundless, it would neverthe-less be wrong in our day to call it incognisable, as was done a few years ago. 
 The repeated and irreparable setbacks of metaphysical attempts led physics to constitute itself as a science by resolutely eliminating the problem of matter. 
 Thereafter it sought only the laws of individual phenomena. 
 This was “physicsFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF without matter. 
” But the growing successes due toFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF this new method permit us, it seems, to assert today, contrary to the too narrow positivism of the Auguste Comte kind, that it changed only the method and not the subject or significance ofphysics. 
 Instead of approaching the problem of matter in all its generality and from its most difficult and basic sides, it approached it, on thecontrary, through superficial details and from the most accessible side. 
 This was putting common sense before audacious pride. 
 Common sense wasrewarded, for nowadays, as a result of so much work in approaching, we are beginning to compre-hend the problem in all its generality and in all itsdepth. 
 In conformity with history, invariably repeated by the human mind ever since it has been strivingto know things, science has taken a new subject of study from the world of metaphysical chimeras. 
 The nature of matter is no longer a metaphysical problem because it is becoming a problem of an experimental and positive order. 
 True, this problem has not been solved scientifically; there is still room for many surprises; but one thing now seems * W. 
 Nernst, Revue générale des Sciences , 15 mars, NB NBcertain: it is science and not metaphysics that will solve it. 
 Furthermore, I think, and I have tried in another place to demonstrate it, that kineticideas will always be closely linked with the progress of physics, because they constitute an eminently useful, if not indispensable instrument of discovery,and because they are best adapted to the conditions of our knowledge. 
 That is why I see the future of physics in the continuation of mechanistic theories. 
 That is why I have said that the energetics theory will probably be absorbed, as was the oldmechanism, into a kinetic theory which is more flexible and stricter from the viewpoint of the admission of hypotheses. 
 But mechanistic hypo-theses, despite the repugnance felt for them byabstract minds too preoccupied with mathematical rigour, will probably always remain necessary for the progress of physics, because they are hypotheses,while the deliberate aim of the energetics theory is to exclude hypotheses. 
 More than this: they are hypotheses that above all appear capable ofbecoming the object of experiments, because they are expressed in objective terms, in terms of per-ceptions, which if not real are at any rate possible. 
Indeed, science cannot do without guiding hypo-theses. 
 C H A P T E R IV THE PROBLEM OF LIFE § 1. 
 HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION [173-174]...With the problem of life we come to the basic differences which can separate philos-ophy from science. 
 Up to now the argument has been, one might say, above all theoretical. 
 The majority of the philosophers worthy of the nameadmit that, practically speaking, scientific results are valid for matter. 
 If from the speculative point of view they were able to raise some objections tothis validity, they nevertheless recognise that everything takes place as though the conclusions of science were, if not based on right, at leastapplicable in fact to material reality. 
 To some extent this reality can be expressed by mathematic-For matter, therefore, geometrism and mechanism remain a good formula of study.... 
 [177] Animism , which was in former times partly supported by Plato and Aristotle, considersthat all the phenomena of life are due to a rational force, hence to the soul. 
 In contradistinction to the Greek physicians who sought the causes ofhealth or sickness (the theory of humours) in the data of observation, in contradistinction to Descartes who absolutely separates the thinkingsoul from organic and material facts, Leibnitz and particularly Stahl support the view that the inner life processes, although they havenothing in common with conscious and rational actions, are nonetheless manifestations of the soul. 
 Barthez and the Montpellier school, persisting in the belief that the phenomena of life can be due only to a special cause, refer them to a vital force distinct both from material forces and the soul: hence the name vitalism given to this theory.... 
 § 3. 
 THE DEMARCATION LINE BETWEEN MECHANISM AND NEO-VITALISM [189-190] If we try in some way to synthesise neo-vitalism according to its chief representatives, scientists or philosophers, it seems we arrive at the following: the criticism which the neo-vitalists make of biological mechanism is closely linked with that which the pragmatist, anti-intellectual-ist or agnostic philosophies made of the mathe-matical and physico-chemical sciences. 
 It appears to us that we change the problem when we pass from matter to life. 
 Essentially, we are once morefaced, as we surmised at the outset, with the same basic problem, and that problem is again the problem of the value of science insofar as it is FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF FFFFFFFFFFFFF FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF knowledge. 
 Only the particular terms in which it is essentially raised are changed. 
 With what, in fact, did the new philosophy reproach the mathematical or physico-chemicalsciences? With being an arbitrary and utilitarian NB NBaction and not of cognition. 
 Thus, when we extend the physico-chemical method to biological facts we naturally also transfer in the results that it allows us to attain the consequences it implies, as regardsthe value of these results. 
 Hence the physico-chemical mechanism will be an excellent formula for giving us a practical grasp of living things;it will be totally powerless to enlighten us as to what life itself is. 
 As with the physico-chemical sciences in the sphere of matter, physico-chemicalmechanism in the sphere of life will allow us to act, but never to know.... 
 [192-194]...The neo-Thomists restore force, aspi-ration, desire in matter, re-animate it with the spirit, although heathen, of hylozoism, from which the Greeks, and in particular Aristotle, seem never to have fully departed. 
 Incidentally they distort the Hellenic doctrine. 
 For them matter has no other activity but the force which the creator put into it: the memory, so to speak, of its creation and the indelible impression of it which it bears. 
 Hence its activity is not essential but borrowed, it is creative only by authorisation. 
 But precisely thanks to that, it does not escapeat all from the complete grasp of mechanism. 
 Moreover, the nominalists, who have a close affinity to this neo-scholastic movement,* andthe pragmatists, pursuing a regular flirtation with * The neo-scholastics or neo-Thomists seek above all to rehabilitate the scholastic interpretations of Aris-totelianism and therefore the philosophical doctrines ofSaint Thomas. 
—The nominalists insist on the symbolic,artificial and abstract nature of science, on the huge abyssbetween reality an its formulas. 
—The pragmatists havea similar doctrine, but one which rests on a more generalmetaphysics. 
 All cognition is directed towards action;consequently we know only what interests our way ofacting. 
 All these philosophies are agnostic in the sense that they deny that we can reach, with the help of our intellectual faculties, an adequate and precise knowledge of reality. 
 Despite the fact that Bergson formulated a metaphysics close to pragmatism—and prior to it—he arrived at much less agnostic conclusions. 
 Science, reason,attains part of the real, that which lends itself to beingreduced to complete determinism and to being fully repre-sented in the form of spatial multiplicity, in a word,that which is the object of the mathematical and physico-chemical sciences. 
 It is only for the remainder that rea-son and science are inadequate and have to be supple-mented by intuition and philosophy. 
 Incidentally, all NB letting the cat out of the bag!these philosophies of belief (all too often one has rather to call them philosophies of believers), considered that they had the right to say that the content of their subject is not exhausted by thescience of matter. 
 In order truly to know, it is necessary “to proceed further. 
” A fortiori, will they support the view that when we approachlife the limits of science become still more re-stricted? Physico-chemical mechanism will be applicable only to the material conditions of life,but not to life itself. 
 To sum up, for the pure disciples of Bergson it will be all the material conditions of life, onlythese, but all of them, that mechanism will be able to attain. 
 For the others, it will not even be all the material conditions of life, but, insofar asmatter is already to a certain degree living and stamped with finality, only that which is mechani-cal and inert that we can abstract from it, onlythat which we can adapt from it for our practical needs. 
 And these formulas can already serve for answering the question that has been raised andfor fixing exactly the part of vitalism in mechan-ism. 
 Is it not possible to find a more expressive formula of demarcation? For the vitalist life plays the part of a creative force; but precisely because it depends besides on material conditions,it is not at all a creation ex nihilo. 
 As a result of its operation it will certainly give something new and unpredictable, but in order to arrive atthat, it will operate on pre-existing elements which it will have combined, and above all starting from pre-existing elements to which it will have added. 
The mutations observed by the botanist De Vries who, as a mechanist, interprets them differently would here be the manifestation itself and the proof of these creative additions. 
 § 4. 
 NEO-VITALISM AND MECHANISM DIFFER ONLY IN PHILOSOPHICAL HYPOTHESES WHICH SUPPLEMENT SCIENCE [204]...But in the vitalist method the entelechies and dominants have nothing in common with described elements: the ends cannot be described because they do not exist materially—at any /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR NBprocess of becoming, of a progressive realisa-tion. 
 Their influence is not perceptible to the senses. 
 That is why it is more dangerous to turn to themin science than to turn to mechanical models—and the history of all the sciences proves it. 
 The teleo-logical hypotheses by their very nature escapeexperimental control and can only be harmful if they are chimerical. 
 § 6. 
 MECHANISM, TOO, IS ONLY A HYPOTHESIS [216-218]...But it would be contrary to all the lessons of experience to assert that in the phenome-na of life everything can be reduced to physico-chemical laws and that mechanism in its whole scope has been verified experimentally. 
 On the contrary, we know very little about life. 
 Experi-mental biology has to its credit a number of im-portant results, if they are taken in themselves, but they are very insignificant when compared withall the results that we still have to obtain. 
 Why, then, concern ourselves with mechanist theories, one is led to think. 
 Should not thesevery general hypotheses, the verification of which presupposes the complete achievement of science, be banned from science? Here again we find an opinion that we have already seen expressed by a number of physicists regarding physics and, in particular, mechanistic theories in physics. 
 Let us recall that some energeticists were in favour of banning mechanist hypotheses from physics as being unverifiable, useless and even dangerousgeneralisations. 
 Among biologists, too, we find some scientists who adopt the same attitude andalign themselves directly with these energetics physicists. 
 In their opinion biology should be re-stricted to a description of the phenomena of life, without going beyond what experience allows usto affirm. 
 While using the energetistic scheme, it will restrict itself, when seeking general formulas for systematising its laws, to measuring exchangesof energy between the organism and its environ-ment in the performance of various organic func-tions, and to the enunciation of the laws governing But is not this already an admission that there is a basic analogy between the physico-chemical sciences and biology, at any rate from the stand-point of the description of facts and experimentalverification? The energetics school in biology is less clearly differentiated from the mechanistic school than in physics. 
 It is rather only a timidaspect of mechanism, for it opposes teleology and postulates a conformity between the phenomena of life and inorganic phenomena. 
 And this again brings us to our previous con-clusions: every time it is possible to make a scien-tific analysis of a biological phenomenon, weagain find ourselves up against the relations be-tween biological activity and physico-chemical activity. 
 Hence everything takes place as though,in connection with these facts, the mechanical hypothesis, or at least the physico-chemical theory of life, had been partially verified.... 
 § 7. 
 GENERAL CONCLUSIONS: BIOLOGICAL INDICATIONS [223-224]...Living matter is clearly conditioned by habit and heredity: everything takes place as though it remembered all its preceding states. 
It is said, however, that inanimate matter never manifests this property. 
 It would even be a con-tradiction to imagine anything of the kind. 
 Allmaterial phenomena are reversible. 
 All biological phenomena are irreversible. 
 In these conclusions one forgets that the second principle of thermodynamics could have been called the principle of evolution or heredity. 
** One forgets about all the phenomena of “residual” electricity and hysteresis. 
 One forgets that physics will not retreat even in the face of this conclusion: no phenomenon of reality is absolutely reversible,which, however, does not prevent this irreversibili-ty of partial systems, when transposed in the infinity of time and space, i. 
e. 
, in the total uni-verse, from being conditioned by reversible phenome-na—just as chance and coincidence are, probably, only a sign of our ignorance of necessary, very * timid aspect of mechanism— Ed. 
 **Clausius called it the principle of entropy which exactly corresponds to the word “evolution,” thoughun aspect timide du mécanisme* NB complex laws. 
 However that may be, and no matter which way one looks at irreversibility, heredity cannot be an insurmountable obstacle for mechanist biology. 
 [227]...Scientific discipline tries primarily to find, beneath the appearances which our direct sensations of objects and living beings give us,the relations which link them together, the bonds of dependence which explain their appearance or disappearance, or their variations. 
 The mechanistictheory of evolution is nothing but the effort to determine these relations of dependence as regards the aspects, forms and characters in which lifeand living beings appear to us. 
 Scientific discipline further tries to link every particular sphere it studies with the other spheresin which it is applied. 
 Science cannot resolve to consider as isolated for all time the various orders of facts for whose sake it is divided into particular sciences. 
 This division has entirely subjective and anthropomorphic causes. 
 It proceeds solely fromthe requirements of research which compel the serialisation of questions, the concentration of attention on each of them separately, starting withthe particular in order to arrive at the general. 
 Nature is of itself one whole. 
 FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF C H A P T E R V THE PROBLEM OF MIND § 2. 
 ANCIENT EMPIRICISM AND ANCIENT ANTI-METAPHYSICAL CONCEPTIONS: PSYCHO-PHYSIOLOGICAL PARALLELISM [242-243] Although metaphysical rationalism constituted the great philosophical tradition, itsancient affirmations a priori could not fail to evoke objections from critical minds. 
 Indeed, in all times we see philosophers trying to resist therationalist and metaphysical trends. 
 These were in the first place the sensualists and materialists, then the associationists and phenomenists. 
 In a general sense they may be called empiricists. 
 Instead of opposing mind to nature, they try anew to put mind in nature. 
 Only, they continueAn approach to dialectical materialism NB intellectualist manner as those whom they are combating.... 
 [244]...The empiricist theory regarded mind in approximately the same way as atomism regards matter. 
 This is the psychological atomism in which atoms are replaced by states of consciousness: sensations, ideas, feelings, emotions, sensations of pleasure and pain, movements, volitions, etc. 
 ... [245-246]...Thus our psychological states are only the sum-total of elementary consciousnesses, corresponding to the atoms of which our nerve centres are composed. 
 Mind is parallel to matter. 
It expresses in its own form, in its own language, what matter, in turn, expresses in its own form, and in a different language. 
 Mind, on the one hand, matter on the other, are two mutually-reversible translations of one and the same text. 
 For the idealists, the original text is mind; for the materialists, it is matter; for the dualist-spiritualists both texts are equally the original, since nature is written simultaneously in bothlanguages; for the pure monists, we are concerned with two translations of an original text that, eludes us.... 
 § 3. 
 THE MODERN CRITICISM OF PARALLELISM [248-249]...When it is said that consciousness is one and continuous, one must beware of thinkingthat the theory of the unity and identity of the “Ego,” the corner-stone of ancient rationalism, is being revived. 
 Consciousness is one, but it does not always remain identical with itself, as is the case, moreover, with all living beings. 
 It is con-stantly changing; not as something created onceand for all, which remains what it is, but as a being that is being constantly created: evolution is creative. 
 There would only be a need for thenotion of identity and permanence if it were neces-sary, in order to discover the real appearances, to impose the link of syntheses and unity on themultiple states which seem to be revealed behind these appearances. 
 But if one supposes that reality is essentially continuous, and that the gaps in it,are artificial, then there is no longer any need to appeal to the principle of unity and per-manence. 
 The theories of Anglo-American pragmatism are extremely close to these. 
 These theories are very diverse, particularly in the moral and logical applications that it has been sought to deduce from them. 
 But what gives them their unity andallows us to group them together are precisely the general features of the solution they have given to the problem of consciousness. 
 William James, the great psychologist of pragmatism, gave this solution its clearest and most complete form. 
 His conception opposes at one and the same time, and for almost the same reasons, both the concep-tion of metaphysical rationalism and that of empiricism. 
 [251-252]...William James claims also that to arrive at this theory he needed only to follow with the utmost rigour the teaching of experience: hence he calls it “the theory of radical empiricism” or of “pure experience. 
” For him the old empiricism remained impregnated with metaphysical and rationalist illusions. 
 He tried to free it from themcompletely. 
 Indubitably, these new theories of consciousness won very great favour in a very short space of time:the Englishmen—Schiller and Peirce, the Ameri-cans—Dewey and Royce, scientists like Poincaré, Hertz, Mach and Ostwald in France and Germany, and, on the other hand, almost everyone who want-ed to reform Catholicism, while remaining faith-ful to it, could be associated with the trend of ideas which have been most systematically pre-sented by Bergson and James. 
 It is also inconte-stable that this favour seems to be largely merited. 
 [254-255]...True, rationalism claimed that empiricism, i. 
e. 
, the explanation of the progress of the mind by experience alone, destroys all scienceor, if you prefer, all truth. 
 The theory of innate or a priori reason was, above all, a legitimisation of the rights of science. 
 We shall see, in connectionwith the problem of knowledge and truth, that pragmatism has in fact often led to sceptical conclusions, but these conclusions are by no means necessary. 
 James himself, who at times seems toJames’ “theory of experience” NB James, Mach and the priests stand extremely close to sceptical irrationalism,FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF has pointed out that in a strict interpretation of experience it should not be considered as giving us only an idea of isolated facts, but as giving usin addition, and in particular, an idea of the relations existing between the facts. 
 But does it not then become impossible to say with the rationalists that the empiricists have no guarantee that tomorrow’s experience will be identical with yesterday’s or, in other words, thatphenomena always follow one another in the same order since it is precisely the order of phenom-ena that is the subject of experience? When wecome into contact with nature, the mind actually perceives not isolated phenomena, the terms between which it will later establish some relationor other, but the relations themselves, a definite continuity in which we then arbitrarily mark out the terms themselves, rather as we mark pointson a line. 
 Thus, it seems that the new orientation which has appeared in philosophy and which has been given the name of pragmatism marks an indispu-table advance in the scientific and philosophical conceptions of the mind. 
 § 4. 
 GENERAL CONCEPTION OF PSYCHOLOGICAL ACTIVITY [256-258]...One would now have to establish accurately what constitutes the relations which form the psychological world and how they differfrom the relations which comprise the rest of nature and experience. 
 Perhaps the Viennese physicist, Mach, has made the clearest points on this sub-ject. 
* In every experience that which is given depends on a multitude of relations which in the first place are divisible into two groups: thosewhich have been verified in an identical way by all organisms externally analogous to our own, i. 
e. 
, by all witnesses, and those which differaccording to the witness. 
 It is all the latter that are the subject of psychology and together they form what we call psychological activity. 
 Moreexactly, the former are independent of our orga-Année psychologique 1906 , XIIe année. 
 (Paris, nism and biological activity. 
 The latter do depend on them, intimately and inevitably. 
 If we take a piece of sulphur, their the geometri-cal, mechanical, physical and chemical propertiesare relations which are independent of our orga-nism. 
 Psychology has nothing to do with them. 
 If a living being is concerned new relations areadded to the previous ones: biological properties which, too, are independent of our organism. 
 If it is a matter of our own organism itself, it alsopossesses properties which to a certain extent are independent of the conditions in which it is given to us in the experience; these are physico-chemical and biological properties. 
 Mathematics, mechanics, physics, chemistry and biology are so many sciences, each of which takes a group of re-lations from the sum-total of relations included in the given thing, and which are independent and should be examined independently of ourorganisation. 
 These are objective relations, the subject of the natural science, the ideal of which is to exclude from what is given all relations which make this given dependent on our organ-ism.... 
 [259-261] Experience shows us the reciprocal influence of the biological and the psychological, the system of relations between them. 
 Why shouldnot each of these two orders of facts be regarded as two orders of facts of nature, which act and react on each other, like all the other orders ofnatural facts: heat, electrical, optical, chemical and other phenomena? There is no more and no less difference between all these orders than betweenthe biological order and the psychological. 
 All phenomena should be regarded on one and the same plane and as able to condition oneanother. 
 Against this conception the objection will no doubt be raised that it fails to explain why there is experience and knowledge by the organism of this experience. 
 But does it not seem that one could and should reply that this question, like all metaphysical questions, is badly framed, non-existent? It arises from an anthropomorphicalillusion which always opposes mind to the universe. 
 One cannot say why there is experience, for expe-rience is a fact and as such imposes itself. 
 “experience is a fact” ties, let us try to develop in a more concrete form the definition of psychology that we have just given—and which appears to us the simplest and most scientific. 
 Let us try to imagine the generalconception of psychological activity to which it leads us. 
 Experience or, to use a less ambiguous term, the given, has up to now seemed to us to be de-pendent on mathematical, mechanical, physical and other relations. 
 When we analyse these condi-tions, it appears to us, in addition, to be dependent on certain relations concerning which one can say,in general, that they distort it according to the individual to whom it is given: these distortions constitute the subjective, the psychological. 
 Canwe establish—of course very roughly and prelimi-narily—the general meaning of these new relations, of these distortions, i. 
e. 
, the direction in whichscientific analysis, in its progress through the centuries, dares to reveal the most general relations (principles) which they imply? Why, in other words, is the given subjectively distorted, instead of being identical for all individ-uals, instead of being a direct datum, forminga single unity with the knowledge that we have of it? It is distorted to such a degree that a fairly large number of philosophers and common sensehave gone so far as to smash the unity of experi-ence, and to advance the irreducible dualism of things and the mind, which is nothing but thedualism of experience as had by all, to the extent that the sciences correct it, and experience as dis-torted in the individual consciousness.... 
 [271-272]...Images are not identical with sensa-tions as subjectivism has maintained, if this word, ambiguous in the scope of its meaning, is given the sense of immediate experiences. 
 On this point Bergson’s analysis has been by no means fruitless. 
 The image is the result of certain rela-tions already involved in immediate experience, i. 
e. 
, in sensations. 
 Only the latter involve quite a number of others. 
 Let there be given only the relations which form the system of the “image”(a partial system, if compared with the whole system of sensations and immediate experience)—experience of socially organised individuals NB NBtions of the whole system which involve the de-pendence of what is given on the organism, and then we have precisely the image, the recollec-tion. 
 In defining recollection in this way we have done no more than express the latest results of experimental psychology as well as the older ideasof common sense: recollection is an organic habit. 
 All that is common to recollection and primitive sensation are the organic conditions. 
 The formerlacks all the extra-organic relations with what we call the external environment involved in sensa-tion. 
 This complete dependence of the image and partial dependence of sensations on organic condi-tions also enables one to understand illusions, errors of the senses, dreams and hallucinations, when relations with the external environmentare to some degree abnormally cut off, and expe-rience becomes reduced for the individual to that which is taking place in his organism, i. 
e. 
, to the relations which depend on the latter, hence to the purely psychological, the purely subjec-tive.... 
 § 5. 
 THE PROBLEM OF THE UNCONSCIOUS [280]...Our life, fully conscious, is only an extremely limited part of the sum-total of ourpsychological activity. 
 It is as it were the centre of an illuminated area, around which extends a much larger semi-shaded region that graduallypasses into absolute darkness. 
 Ancient psychology made a very serious mistake in regarding fully conscious activity alone as psychological activity. 
 Although it is difficult to exaggerate the extent of the unconscious in our organisation, one should not, as is very frequently done by a certain kind of pragmatist psychology, exaggerate the qualita-tive importance of this unconscious. 
 According to some pragmatists, clear conscious-ness, intellectual and rational consciousness, is the most superficial and insignificant part of our(((((( NB NB§ 6. 
 PSYCHOLOGY AND THE CONCEPT OF FINAL CAUSE [285-286]...To immediate and superficial obser-vation, the higher psychological life, of course, seems heavily stamped with final cause. 
 In generalis-ing by a familiar procedure from the known to theunknown, one sees that from the earliest times attempts have equally been made at interpreting in a teleological way the entire lower psychologicallife. 
 The simplest reflex, like blinking an eye when the light is too strong, the simplest physical pleasures and sufferings, the primitive emotions—do not all these facts appear to be required to maintain and advance the species, or to maintain and advance the individual? Beginning with theamoeba, that embryonic blob of protoplasm which stretches out to some light irradiations and tries to avoid others, has not all activity which canbe called conscious always belonged to the category of tendency , and is not tendency purpose in action? Nor should one be surprised that James, Tarde and many others conclude from these that psychological laws have a totally different charac-ter from the other laws of nature. 
 They are teleologi-cal laws .... 
 The teleological conception of psychological law is in essence nothing but a scientific facing for metaphysical conceptions, which make ten-dency, the will to live, instinct, the will, and action, the basis of everything that exists. 
 Moreov-er, it has been accepted, elucidated and developed by the pragmatists, the adherents of the primacy of action. 
 For them functional psychology and teleological psychology are synonymous terms.... 
 § 7. 
 THE PROBLEM OF IMMORTALITY [294-296]...The antithesis of activity, reality, which cannot be analysed, on the one hand, and of relation on the other, disappears and, both asregards mind and matter, should be left on the dump-heap of obsolete metaphysics. 
 All the given is merely a synthesis, whose analysis is the concernof science, which traces it to its conditions and, further, resolves it into relations. 
 But in that case what becomes of the immortal-immortality and Rey’s agnosticismity, since for two thousand years now we have valued this above everything. 
 Not to follow the law of things, not to follow the law of everything living, not to disappear, not to be superseded bysomething else! To run this fine risk, belatedly invented by the bad gambler, that is man, the bad gambler who wants to win the prize and demandsthat the dice be loaded in his favour! To be sure a system of relations can hardly seem eternal or immortal. 
 However, there is no absolute impossibility about it. 
 Improbable—yes! Impos-sible—no! Only, on the ground on which we now stand, it would be necessary for experience to de-stroy the improbability or, at any rate, to convert it into probability. 
 It would be necessary for experience to force us to discover, beyond the subjective, the condi-tions which would exist after the disappearance of the organism, the relations which would makeit partially dependent on something other than that organism. 
 It is for experience to decide. 
 It alone is capable of dispelling doubts. 
 A priori there is nothing to stop certain conditions, certain rela-tions, from being discovered which would involve— at least partially—the indestructibility of one partof what is given, for example consciousness. 
 But need this be said? Experience has so far never shown us anything of the kind. 
 I am aware that spiritualists claim the opposite. 
 But that is mere assertion. 
 Their experiments, at least thosethat are not based on trickery or deception (and are not these a minority?), in the present state of things can at most induce us to think that thereexist some forces of nature, some kinds of mechani-cal motion, of whose manifestations we know very little, and the conditions and laws—still less. 
It even seems probable that they depend on the human organism and are simply related to the unconscious psychological and biological activity. 
 Moreover, in the face of the poverty of the sham experimental verifications of the life beyond the grave, the theory of the immortality of the soulcan only retain the form which Socrates and Plato already gave it: it is a risk one has to take— it is an appeal to the unknown and an appeal to which there hardly seems any chance of getting NB NBC H A P T E R VI THE PROBLEM OF MORALITY § 1. 
 IRRATIONAL MORALITY: MYSTICISM OR TRADITIONALISM [301-302]...The new philosophies are, therefore, primarily moral doctrines. 
 And it appears that these doctrines can be defined as: a mysticism of action . 
 This attitude is not new. 
 It was the attitude adopted by the sophists, for whom there was also neither truth nor error, but only success. 
 It was the attitude adopted by the post-Aristotelian probabilists and sceptics, the attitude of some nominalists at the time of scholasticism, the attitude of the subjectivists of the eighteenth century, notably Berkeley. 
 The doctrines of the intellectual anarchists like Stirner and Nietzsche rest on these same premises. 
 Thus, in the stock of modern nominalism and pragmatism the words are newer than the things.... 
 [303]...When some modernists, like Le Roy, derive from pragmatism a justification for Catholi-cism, they perhaps do not derive from it what some philosophers—the founders of pragmatism—want-ed to obtain. 
 But they draw from it conclusions which can legitimately be drawn and which, inci-dentally, were drawn or almost so, by outstandingpragmatists like William James and the philoso-phers of the Chicago school. 
 I think I can sayeven more than this. 
 I believe that Le Roy draws FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF the only conclusions that should legitimately beFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF drawn from this way of thinking.... 
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF [304]...It is characteristic of pragmatism that everything is true that succeeds and, in one way or another, is adapted to the moment: sciencereligion, morality, tradition, custom, routine. 
 Everything must be taken seriously, and that which realises an aim and permits one to act must be taken just as seriously.... 
 [305-306]...What has caused the downfall of traditions and dogmas up to now? Science, or ifFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF NBreason in the final analysis is nothing but free examination. 
 Moreover, science and reason are, above all, revolutionary, and the Greco-Western civilisation founded on them was, is and will re-main a civilisation of men in revolt. 
 Revolt has so far been our only means of liberation and the only form in which we have been able to get toknow liberty. 
 I have in mind the spiritual revolt of reason that is master of itself, and not the brutal revolt that has been only the covering—often useful, sometimes necessary—for the precious metal constituting the former. 
 Thus, the chief aid that can be given to tradi-tion, to the preservation of the ancient moral values, to use a fashionable term, is the depreciation of science. 
 That is why pragmatism, nominalism,should have had as logical consequence—as was very well seen by the majority of those who adhered to it, with a rational understanding of the cause—the justification of certain motives of action: reli-gious, sentimental, instinctive, traditional. 
 On the same plane as the motives of action borrowed fromscientific cognition or, still more logically, on a higher plane, for science aims only at industrial action, the new philosophy should have led tothe legitimisation of an irrational morality: passionate impulses or submission to authority, mysticism or traditionalism. 
 Traditionalism some-times even goes so far that some (William James, for example) do not hesitate in regard to morality to return to the absolute of rationalist doctrinesof morality.... 
 § 4. 
 THE SCIENCE OF MORALS [314]...For this conception of morality as a rational art to be possible, it is clearly necessary that a science of morals should be possible. 
 Heremetaphysics renews its high hopes. 
 In fact, so-ciology, of which this science of morals is only a section, has hardly come into being. 
 Like psychol-ogy, only much less advanced than this, it is still in the period where it is necessary to argue against the metaphysicians concerning the method, thesubject of science and its right to exist. 
 It seems, however, that here as elsewhere the question will finally be decided in favour of scientific NB NBspeech and action. 
 And so sociology, thanks to the work of Durkheim and his school, has been working and acting.... 
 C H A P T E R VII THE PROBLEM OF COGNITION AND TRUTH § 1. 
 TRADITIONAL SOLUTIONS [325-326]...Actually, scientists, pure scientists, concern themselves very little with this questionof truth. 
 For them it is enough to arrive at state-ments which receive universal assent and which, therefore, appear to be necessary. 
 For them everyexperiment methodically carried out and properly controlled is true. 
 Experimental verification— that they say, is the criterion of truth. 
 And the scientists are perfectly right, for practice hasalways justified this attitude. 
 To suppose thatit will not always justify it would be to imagine the absurd, to doubt for the pleasure of doubt-ing.... 
 [328-332]...The modern rationalists energeti-cally defended themselves against the attacks of pragmatism, when the latter claimed that the reason of rationalists amounted, in the final analysis, to guaranteeing to our mind a true copy of reality. 
 And, indeed, pragmatism reproached rationalism for dividing cognition into two syn-chronised parts: the objects or things-in-themselves and the ideas which the mind makes of them.... 
 § 2. 
 THE PRAGMATIST CRITICISM In the rationalism of the nineteenth century, as in evolutionary empiricism and also among themodern rationalists, we, of course, already find this idea that the mind is not a mirror, nor truth a faithful image of things. 
 Usually it is claimedthat truth is the result of the work of the mind on things. 
 But this again means putting things in opposition to mind. 
 Pragmatism goes further. 
 All experience, all knowledge, is at the same time action: to live means to act, and only to act. 
 From which it follows—and it is this that causedthe name of pragmatism to be given to this system, which essentially defines it in the general view—llll /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR a function of its practical results. 
 This is success. 
 Every experiment that is successful, i. 
e. 
, that allows the expected result to be achieved, determines a truth. 
 In order to get away from philosophicalabstractions, let us note that in the final analysis this conclusion is merely a generalised expression of the faith of scientists in experimentation. 
At what moment does the scientist say that the hypothesis advanced by him is true? The moment the result he expected to see in the operationundertaken by him is actually apparent. 
 Since this operation corresponds to the hypothesis or, more correctly, to the chain of hypotheses whichhe had in his mind, and the result obtained cor-responds to the conclusion from this chain of hypotheses, his idea was successful; it has beenverified by experiment. 
 T o b e sure, if one identifies success with experi-mental verification, then the pragmatist proposi-tion appears to be true; it merely conveys the essence of the experimental method. 
 But the trouble is that the word success is used sometimesin this limited sense and sometimes in its broad, popular sense, depending on the occasion and the philosopher. 
 This is particularly noticeable in thecase of William James. 
 He claims that truth ap-plies to everything that is verified experimentally, and, at other times, to everything that ensures anysort of success for our activity. 
 Hence, if one adopts this latter proposition, one is almost neces-sarily brought to the conclusion that truth no longerexists. 
 For what is successful today may not be successful tomorrow—a thing that often happens in practice, as proved by changes in laws andjurisprudence, moral rules and religious faiths, and scientific opinions. 
 The truth of today is the error of tomorrow, truth on this side of thePyrenees is error on the other side. 
 The theme is commonplace. 
 And these conclusions, which Peirce—the founder of pragmatism—firmly set aside and combated, and from which the great pragmatist philosophers, William James in partic-ular, tried to escape by means of the most subtle evasions, are in general accepted by the majority of the epigones. 
 Moreover, in regard to the problem of truth, pragmatism has become synonymous withscepticism, just as, in regard to morality or faith, it has become synonymous with irrational tradi-And yet, as in all criticism, there is, of course, an element of truth in the pragmatist criticism of rationalism. 
 One can say of it what frequently has to be said of critical theories: the destructivepart is excellent, but the constructive part leaves much to be desired. 
 Certainly the theory of mind as a mirror of things and of truth as a copy, is crudely superficial. 
 The evolution of scientific truths through all the mistakes which strew the path of science proves this. 
 On the other hand, when we regard ourselves as an organism operating in the environment of theuniverse, it is true that we cannot separate the realm of practice from that of truth for, in ac-cordance with all that we have said above, andin accordance with all the lessons of science, we cannot separate truth from experimental verifica-tion. 
 Only those concepts that succeed are true. 
But one has yet to discover whether they are true because they succeed or whether they succeed because they are true. 
 Pragmatism is always inclined to choose between these alternatives in favour of the first. 
 Common sense, apparently,can only choose the second.... 
 § 3. 
 AN INDIRECT INDICATION OF A SOLUTION TO THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH [332-334]...The given, the experience, is evi-dently that which is known. 
 Consequently, it is necessary to assume complete unity between the given and the means by which it is cognised, tomake a determined break with all dualism at the point of departure—but only at the point of departure. 
 This is an important limitation. 
 Doesit not in itself already contain the key to the solution of the problem of truth? At the point of departure the only possible method of cognition, i. 
e. 
, the only method of discovery, is the experimental method, the elimina-tion of all a priori methods, all dialectical reason-ing. 
 Modern science fully confirms this proposition and thereby postulates the first statement whichwe have just advanced. 
 The mathematical sciences themselves have experience for their point of departure; reasoning comes later, as we have seen,and always remains to a certain extent subordinatesic! ha! réalisme absolu*= histor-ical ma-terialismBut experience is not merely the immediate experience of the given; it includes also—and this in our view is James’ great philosophical innova-tion—the relations implied by the given, andwhich form a rigid fabric between all immediate experience and past or future experience. 
 If expe-rience consisted only of immediate experience, wewould have only sensations and not science; we would not even have perception in the full sense of the word. 
 The object of science, and even ofperception, is precisely to analyse immediate experience in order to arrive at the experience which has prepared it, or which prolongs it. 
 Toperceive and above all to note, to draw attention and to reflect—this is the beginning of this pro-tracted experience. 
 From this second remark we can draw the following conclusion: all knowledge that expe-rience gives us is interconnected and becomessystematised. 
 But it does not become systematised, as in rationalism, as the result of an activity that is superior to it and which would impose itsforms on it. 
 While seeking to guarantee the stabil-ity of science, this concept on the contrary leads to scepticism, for it makes cognition a creation ofthe mind, and this dualism inevitably raises the question as to whether or not this creation of the mind, cognition, distorts the given. 
 Here, on the other hand, our knowledge becomes systematised in exactly the same way as it is given to us, and the relations of the given have the same value as the given itself. 
 In reality, the immediately given and the relations it involves form a unity and are indivisible. 
 The acts of cognition are all of the same kind and of the same value.... 
 § 4. 
 THE PROBLEM OF ERROR [336-347]...In the absolute realism in which we have thus far been moving there is apparently no place for error. 
 But let us recall that we made experience and cognition identical only at the point of departure. 
 The time has cometo show what this limitation implies. 
 It is a fact established by experience that cogni-tion by different individuals is not exactly theOO( ( ! NBsame. 
 This can be explained in two ways: either there exist as many different realities as there are individuals (which is absurd: we should be falling into subjectivism), or—and we are consequentlyforced to adopt this alternative since the given is unique and the same for all—the difference be-tween the cognitions which individuals obtain about the given arises from the conditions in which they were and are situated, in other words,from certain individual relations which exist between them and the given, and which scientific analysis can reveal. 
 This is the conclusion to whichwe were led by other considerations in connection with the problem of consciousness. 
 We saw that the given involved relations independent of the cognising individual—objective relations—and re-lations in which the given depends on the cognising organism—subjective relations. 
 Once this is admitted, we see that in experience, and not now at the point of departure but in the measure that analyse it, bifurcation takes place between the cognising agent and the object of cognition. 
 This relation, in accordance with what we have said, has the same value as the given itself. 
 It imposes itself on us with the same justification as does the given; from which it follows that the difference between the mindand the object should not be regarded as something primary, but as the product of analysis, as two very common relations which analysis discoversin the given ... (W. 
 James); and this distinction derives its value from the value given at the outset to experience taken as a whole, single and indivisi-ble experience. 
 But in that ease mistakes and errors have a very natural explanation: they are the changes,the distortions, which depend on the individual and subjective conditions of cognition. 
 While science, thanks to experience, makes an increas-ingly complete analysis of the given, it should, no matter how prolonged and arduous the task, gradually exclude all these “personal equations,”which are far more complex than those which astronomers assign to the visual perceptions of the individual observer. 
 It should draw a dividingline between objective and subjective relations. 
8 Rey’s theo-ry of cogni-tion = shamefaced materialism NBDo these considerations not lead us to a con-venient and practical definition of truth? Truth is the objective. 
 The objective is the sum-totalof observations which are independent of theobserver. 
 In practice, it is that which everyoneadmits, which is the subject of universal experience universal agreement using these words in a scientific sense. 
 In analysing the conditionsof this universal agreement, in seeking behind this fact the law it conceals, its cause, we arrive at this conclusion: scientific work aims to “de-subjectivise,” de-personalise, experience, methodi-cally prolonging and continuing it. 
 Hence scientific experience is the continuation of crude experience,and there is no difference in character between a scientific fact and a crude fact. 
 It has sometimes been said that scientific truth is nothing but an abstraction. 
 Of course it is only an abstraction if one is considering crude expe-rience, i. 
e. 
, subjective and individual experience,for it excludes from this experience everything that depends solely on the individual who cognises through experience. 
 But, on the other hand, thisabstraction aims at discovering the given as it really is, independent of the individuals and circumstances which change it; it aims at discover-ing the objective, the concrete par excellence, the real. 
 It would be interesting to try to verify this general theory by analysing some famous errors. 
 Ptolemy’s system, for instance, shows its experienceencumbered with individual ideas which depend on the terrestrial conditions of astronomical obser-vation: it is the stellar system as seen from theearth. 
 The system of Copernicus and Galileo is much more objective, since it does away with the conditions which depend on the fact that the observer is situated on the earth. 
 In a more generalsense, Painlevé has pointed out that causality in mechanics, in the science of the Renaissance and in the science of our day, embraced the condi-tions of the appearance of phenomenon independent of space and time. 
 But the point is that the condi-tions of the situation in space and time embrace,OO truth and error (ap-proach to dia-lectical mate-rialism) ? phrase-mon-gering with “experience” “experience”the subjective conditions which are no longer sufficiently crude to be eliminated by summary consideration. 
 An important conclusion: error is not the abso-lute antithesis of truth. 
 As very many philosophershave already claimed, it is not positive; on the contrary, it is negative and partial, it is in a sense a lesser truth. 
 In ridding it—thanks to experi-ence—of the subjective that it involves, we pro-gressively approach the truth. 
 Once the truth has been reached, it is in the full sense of the word absolute and a limit, for it is objective, necessary and universal. 
 However, this limit is far removed from us in almost all cases. 
 It appears to us almost like a mathematical limit, which one approaches closer and closer without ever being able to reach. 
 The history of science, moreover, shows us the truth in the becoming of development; the truth is not yet formed, but is rather in the process of forma-tion . 
 Perhaps it never will be formed, but it will always be more and more formed. 
 A final question may perhaps be raised: Instead of being satisfied with what is, are we not still obsessed by the old metaphysical illusion of tryingto discover why things exist? Why does experience have subjective conditions? Why is its cognition not immediately one and the same for all? Itwould appear that we have the right to refuse to reply; but here thanks to psychology it seems one could indicate in the positive. 
 If full experiencehad to any degree knowledge of itself, like the god of the pantheists, this knowledge would indeed be immediately one and the same. 
 But in expe-rience, as it presents itself to us, the cognition of experience is given in a fragmentary way and it is only to those fragments of experience that we are ourselves. 
 Biology and psychology tell us that we are what we are, or rather have been shaped into what we are, by adaptation, a continuous equilib-rium with the environment. 
 From which, in general, it can be concluded that our cognition should above all correspond to the requirements of organic life. 
 Moreover, it is at first restricted, (l l ( l’expérience = le milieu?*But once consciousness appears in the play of universal energies, it is preserved and strengthened because of its practical utility. 
 Increasingly complex beings are evolved and develop. 
 Consciousnessbecomes more exact, more precise. 
 It becomes intelligence and reason. 
 And at the same time (adaptation, adequacy in relation to experience,) becomes more complete. 
 Science is merely the highest form of this process. 
 Even if it never attains it, science has the right to hope for a cogni-tion which will rather be at one with the given, which will be absolutely adequate to the object: objective, necessary and universal. 
 Theoreticallyits claim is justified, because it is in line with the evolution that has taken place up to now. 
 In practice this claim will most probably neverbe satisfied, for it marks the limit of evolution, and to attain it would require a state of the universe quite different from that at present, and a kindof identification between the universe and the experience of cognition. 
 In any case, one conclusion impresses itself: scepticism in relation to science conceals the most complete and clearest metaphysical illusion that ever deceived philosophical thought. 
 It consistsin raising non-existent problems, in seeking a non-existent reality beyond reality in order to explain the latter. 
 It is the result of the dualistic abstrac-tions in which philosophy has always been only too willing to engage. 
 In particular, is it not overthrowing all expe-rience to see in the embryonic, instinctive, vague, almost wholly subjective and instantaneous cogni-tion of awakening consciousness, original and realexperience, as Bergson, Le Roy and some pragma-tists are inclined to do. 
 Primitive experience, wholly stamped with subjectivity—yes, but alsowholly stamped with error and unreality. 
 This vague, nebulous experience is only the covering of experience. 
 True experience of the real, on thecontrary, is in the increasingly lucid limit towards which the human mind makes its way, and towards the increasingly rational form which it tends toadopt, towards reason. 
 The most artificial of all abstractions is that which excludes from experience the results of rational labour and the progress ofevolution. 
 shamefaced materialismThis evolution has been definitely guided by practice and towards practice, for it is transmitted and realised owing to the constant adaptation of the being to its environment. 
 Who would at-tempt to deny this today? That is one of the most decisive victories of pragmatism over a now fos-silised rationalism. 
 But it does not mean that truth is defined as a function of utility and success. 
 On the contrary, it means that the utility and success are a consequence of the acquisition of truth. 
 Why and how did cognition appear in nature? Because some beings were incapable of acting blindly. 
 They had to know the circumstances of their action. 
 And that is why, having takenfrom pragmatism everything that seemed to us to be excellent in its criticism of the old metaphysics, we resolutely turn our backs on it in the nameof absolute positivism. 
 To express sensibly and accurately the relations between practice and truth, it seems, therefore,that one should not say that what is successful is true, but rather that which is true is successful, i. 
e. 
, what is in conformity with reality, insofar as it concerns attempted action. 
 Direct action is theresult of exact knowledge of realities, in the en-vironment of which it takes place. 
 We act cor-rectly in the measure that we know truly. 
 § 5. 
 THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE Everyone will agree, I think, that we affirm as true and objective that which is independent of the individual coefficient which is to be found in every individual in the act of cognition. 
 But when diver-gencies appear it is a matter of saying at what moment the individual coefficient disappears. 
Confronted by any kind of experimental confirma-tion, can I draw a line between that which has been universally noted and that which has been notedonly by me? We said, in a general way, that the effort of science is in all cases directed precisely towarddrawing this line. 
 Basically, science has no other aim. 
 It could be defined by this characteristic. 
 In practice, then, we already have a primarymeans of distinguishing what is true and objective confuses the issuehas been acquired by means of rigorously applied scientific methods will be true. 
 Scientists have the duty of elaborating, perfecting and defining these methods. 
 This primary criterion is morestrict than the very vague rule given thus far: universal agreement. 
 For universal agreement may be only universal prejudice. 
 And a priori thereis nothing to bar the hypothesis that such preju-dices may exist in a truly universal manner during a particular period, although one could hardlycite any of them. 
 But if we replace the expres-sion “universal agreement” by the expression scientific control, then the objection collapses, for,insofar as it is a question of prejudice, it is impos-sible to indicate the reasons for it, whereas scien-tific control only exists when these reasons aremanifest. 
 Obviously, we see scientific control only where hypotheses are excluded, and we admit that it can just as well establish the limits of anapproximation as a strictly exact truth. 
 However, scientists will not engage in a search for any other criterion. 
 And from the practicalpoint of view they are perfectly right. 
 But from the speculative and theoretical point of view one may find—and this is the opinion of all meta-physicians who have been engaged in creating a theory of knowledge—that the indicated criterion is unsufficient. 
 Let us summarise in their crudestform all the objections that can be raised from this new point of view: is not all science, in its turn, with its methods and its control, a universalprejudice and, to use Bacon’s expression, an idola tribus?* Indeed, one can imagine that no matter what efforts we make to draw a line be-tween the subjective and the objective, we always remain enclosed, at least to a certain extent, in the subjective. 
 Our cognition would always dependon our individual structure and, consequently, would also always distort its object. 
 Taking the psychological hypothesis which we advanced inconnection with consciousness, can it not be said that since cognition is the result of the adaptation of our being to the actions which it has to carryout in its environment, all cognition will always be, without our being able to take this into account, a distortion of the environment in accordance withthe structure and the requirements of the human race? relative in the sceptical sense!!! ha!It seems one could certainly reply: yes. 
 But precisely because we cannot take this into account, the problem is insoluble and futile. 
 It must be granted: the truth that man can attain is human truth. 
 By this we do not mean to say that it is relative in the sceptical sense of the word. 
 But we do mean to say that it depends on the structure of the human species, and is valid only for that species. 
 Here, with some correction, one must repeat the famous words of Gorgias: we know nothing that is not human. 
 If by chance we were to know something that had nothing of the humanin it, we would be unable to take account of it; and if, which is impossible, we were able to take account of it, then we would be unable to informothers of it. 
 Consequently, in looking for a sign and definition of truth, it is not a question of finding a sign and definition that would be validfor anything other than the human race, but simply a sign and definition that would be abso-lutely and identically valid for all representatives of the human race. 
 It is in this sense that the criterion already referred to—scientific control—is sufficient. 
 Moreover, once and for all an end must be put to certain sophisms: truth, valid for the whole human race, human truth, is absolute truth for man, be-cause if it is supposed, as the adherents of an extra-human absolute suppose, that it is not a copy of the real, it is still, at any rate for man, the only possible exact translation the absolute equivalent.... 
 [351]...Perhaps, those who try to find reasons for doubting scientific results may still say: weare ready to allow that properly controlled ex-perience gives us effectively and fully the trans-formation of a cause into a given effect and, itfollows, an indubitable relation between the condi-tion and the conditioned. 
 But what can prove to us that this relation will manifest itself identically ina second experience? Leibnitz claimed that all facts differ, if only a little, from one another be-cause we can distinguish them from one another(the principle of the indiscernible: in all the forests of the earth no two identical leaves are to= ( finale = shamefaced materialismalso that physics never deals with identical facts, but simply with facts that closely resemble one another. 
 In that case, what use is science to us; for if it wants to be strictly exact, then every newfact requires a new law. 
 This objection is of the same character as the following: every fact embraces infinity. 
 Conse-quently, we would have to have complete science in order to have the very minimum exact knowl-edge of the smallest object. 
 It is overcome in the same way and almost of itself .... 
 [352]...To sum up, the given is the subject of science, because it is analysable, and because this analysis reveals to us the conditions of its existence. 
Science is certain because every analysis it makes gradually brings us to experimental intuitions which have the same value as the given; hence science has the same degree of certainty as the existence of the universe which it explains and my own existence which is likewise known to methrough experimental intuition. 
 C H A P T E R VIII GENERAL CONCLUSIONS: THE PHILOSOPHY OF EXPERIENCE [353-357]...Up to now philosophy has been above all a system of values , to use an expression now in vogue. 
 It sought to establish a hierarchy of things and to make laws about the good, the true and the beautiful in the name of this hierarchy. 
In general, one can say that it never conceived natural facts on one and the same plane, impar-tially and objectively; on the contrary it arrangedthem on different planes in the name of wholly subjective personal preferences or collective preju-dices, human of course but equally subjective forthat very reason. 
 All Greek philosophy and scholasticism, the heir of Aristotelianism, present us with typical scalesby which the value of things is measured. 
 Both the philosophy of the Renaissance and all modern philosophy, despite the isolated efforts of a Spino-za, were crystallised in one and the same mould. 
 Moreover, leaving aside Spinoza’s system, since it represents an excellent attempt to conceive(( NB judgment of idealism and materialism nonsense!subjective as possible, we always find, from the very beginnings of Greek philosophical thought, the same two or three general orientations along metaphysical lines. 
 These are the orientationsaccording to which all the textbooks still usually classify philosophical systems under the names of materialism, spiritualism and idealism. 
 In essence—considering things from the very general standpoint that we adopt here, i. 
e. 
, thestandpoint of the “particular scale of values” offered by each of these orientations—since spirit-ualism and idealism often present the closestanalogies, it can be said that metaphysics has always confronted us with two great scales of value: the materialist scale and the idealist-spiritualist scale. 
 These two scales oppose each oth-er and each is almost the reverse image of the other. 
 In the idealist-spiritualist scale, mind occupies the topmost position: it gives all the rest its senseand value either because, as in the case of idealism, it represents the sole reality, material appearances being created by it or existing only through it, orbecause, as in the case of spiritualism, it offers above material reality which is merely its support or its environment, the higher reality in whichnature culminates and through which nature is explained. 
—In the materialist scale, on the other hand, everything derives from matter and every-thing returns to it. 
 It is the eternal and immutable creator of all the spectacles of the universe, including the spectacle of life and of consciousness. 
 Life is only one particular variety—among an infinite number of others—of the combi-nations which blind chance has evoked from the original matter. 
 Consciousness, thought are only phenomena of life; the brain secretes them as the liver secretes bile. 
 Basically, all the phenomena that we can observe—amber which electrifies, iron which heats, steam which vaporises, liquid which solidifies, light or sound, life or thought— are all nothing but the appearances embellishedby the various combinations of vortices of a homo-geneous fluid which fills all space, or of the atoms which collide in the infinite void. 
 It seems to me that one could represent the 3,000 years of idealism and materialism ha!approximately in the same way: motion is incon-ceivable without a force to animate the movingbody. 
 Force is unintelligible except in relation to the effort we ourselves feel in muscular move-ment, in the tendency of life; it follows that effortpresupposes life. 
 But vital effort, in turn, is always directed to an end; bearing the stamp of purpose, it is conceivable only by the consciousness whichdirects it. 
 Consequently, thought or, at least, something of the order of immaterial and free spirit is necessary both as the supreme principleof explanation and as the essential principle of existence and creation. 
 Allow the spirit and everything in nature becomes clear. 
 Suppress it, and nature becomes incomprehensible. 
 It vanishes into nothingness. 
 Materialism on the other hand, claims—if I may use the same summary procedure—that every experiment that explains a psychological factfor us reduces it to organic facts. 
 Organic matter comes closer and closer to inorganic matter. 
 Force is nothing but a shock impulse; it is motion com-bined with something else. 
 Hence at the basis of things we find only sheer, blind motion. 
 And soon it will be three thousand years during which these systems of value have been taken up by generation after generation, elaborated, some-times made more precise, and very often obscured by the subtleties of thought which is never readyto admit itself conquered. 
 And we are hardly any further advanced than we were at the beginning. 
 Does this not mean, then, that the questions these conflicting systems are debating are idle ques-tions and badly formulated? Is not the desire to establish an explanatory hierarchy between things a purely anthropomorphic prejudice? And is notthis prejudice derived much more from the aspira-tions of individual sentiment than from rational discussion? Basically, it is for ends totally dif-ferent from objective cognition that these systems are put forward and opposed to one another, and concern for them has nothing in common with the impartial search for truth. 
 Thus, since they are incompatible with a positive discussion, wel l ll /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR W. 
 James on pragmatismEither I am greatly mistaken or modern philos-ophy in its vital and powerful trends—positivism and pragmatism—is tending towards this conclu-sion*.... 
 [358-362]...Thus, all the preceding seems to show not only that contemporary philosophy is coming closer and closer to science and becomingan increasingly elegant part of it, but also that it is possible to arrive at a scientific conception of philosophy: it would be no more than the neces-sary complement to science. 
 By setting aside the metaphysical poems of the individual imagina-tion, it would initiate the collective collaborationof scientists, historians and critics. 
 All facts are subject to scientific explanation; none of them can be cognised objectively, that isin truth , otherwise than through the sciences. 
 Evidently, science is still very limited and very superficial, but it can only be developed by thosewho seek to know; without it all speculation is barren. 
 Is philosophy therefore condemned? Is it noth-ing but a word devoid of sense and content? A few years ago many scientists would have said so. 
 And it is true to say that if we mean by philos-ophy those speculations which, beyond experience or on this side of it, seek the origin, end, and nature of things, the useless foundations of scienceor action, burdening everything immediately known by an unknowable, which ought to justify it, if, in a word, we mean by it the old dialectics, whether rational or sceptical, idealist material-ist, individualist or pantheist, then those scientists have apparently scored a victory. 
 All this meta-physics has only an aesthetic interest which, incidentally, can be a passionate one for those who have a predilection for it: it represents theindividual dreams of lofty but hardly practical minds. 
 But as this philosophy began to find fewer and fewer adherents, scientists created from it something else or other, and in the past few years * In defining pragmatism, William James insists on the idea that it is a system which turns away from a priori explanations, from dialectics and metaphysics, in order constantly to turn to the facts and experiment. 
(( ( blaguer! fool! bim, bam!the most outstanding fact in the field of philo-sophical knowledge has been the appearance of a large number of philosophies drafted by scientists in connection with their science, with it and for it. 
It is true that there have been learned philosophers before. 
 Almost all great systems of philosophy are their work. 
 But particularly in their methodsand conclusions these systems lagged considerably behind and stand apart from the scientific works of their authors. 
 Contemporary scientists, on thecontrary, instead of seeking a general conception of the world, simply seek to supplement and clarify scientific experience by partial hypothesesthat are much more exact and closely linked with this experience. 
 So, in a different way but to achieve almost identical results, Comte’s idea is being vindicated: a section of scientific work is being collectively organised with the object of scientific generalisa-tion and the synthesis of the sciences. 
 The manner in which scientific work is con-ducted makes this conception of philosophy clearerand more exact. 
 Science is composed at once of the totality of experimental results and of the theories of this totality which are always hypo-theses in one respect or another. 
 But these hypo-theses are indispensable to science, because it is precisely by their anticipation of future experienceand the unknown that science advances. 
 They systematise all that is known in such a way as to throw light on the unknown. 
 Why should notphilosophy, therefore, in the same way, be a general synthesis of all scientific knowledge , an effort to represent the unknown as a function of the known,in order to aid in discovering it and to keep the scientific spirit in its true orientation? It would differ from science only in the greater generalityof the hypothesis; instead of being the theory of a group of isolated and very circumscribed facts, philosophical theory would be the theory of the totality of the facts that nature presentsus with, the system of nature, as it used to becalled in the eighteenth century, or at any rate a direct contribution to a theory of this kind. 
 The philosophical standpoint is not opposed to the scientific standpoint; it stands side by side with it. 
 Even when a scientist is making every effort to attain positivity he is a philosopher, forpositivity is itself a philosophy.... 
 phew! defence against materialism 1Science should not differ from philosophy either in subject (it is the same: to give an account of experience), or in method (it should be the same, for the scientific discipline is by its very defini-tion the only discipline which can satisfy our intelligence). 
 No, the only difference between them is one of standpoint, and what distinguishes,and is the only thing that should distinguish, the scientific from the philosophical standpoint is that the latter is far more general and always appears somewhat of an adventure .... 
 [364-369]...History shows us that when science becomes too far removed from the most common human concerns, forming the basis of most philo-sophical questions, when it leaves the burden ofreplying to these concerns to various speculations or traditional beliefs, out of necessity or excessive prudence, it vegetates or begins to decline. 
 It isnecessary, absolutely necessary, therefore, for the gains of science and the scientific spirit to be defended, in case of need in spite of themselves, against excessive presumption or adventurism, when they overstep their rights. 
 For excessive temerity—seen, for instance, in some materialist generalisation—is no less dangerous for science in the case of sane and straightforward minds, than is timidity and lack of spirit in the case of ordinary people. 
 Hence, one of the essential tasks of philos-ophy is to maintain the general atmosphere re-quired for the development of science, for the normal maintenance and dissemination of thescientific spirit.... 
 But philosophy, of course, will only be able to fulfil the dual mission which we feel it is called uponto fulfil—to co-ordinate the efforts of scientists, to provide hypotheses which inspire discoveries, on the one hand, and, on the other, to create thenecessary atmosphere for scientific advance—if it seeks to be nothing but the organising synthesis of the sciences, regarded and understood in theway scientists regard and understand them, in short, a synthesis established in an exclusively scientific spirit. 
 It is gratifying to see—to a lesser extent, of course, in pragmatism, but all the same to a suf-ficiently great extent—that philosophical re-search today, having decisively broken away from ( !! positivism, experimental-ism, realism= “absolute or rationalist positivism”the metaphysical errors of the preceding period, is extremely well informed regarding scientific works, seeks to conform to them and derives its inspiration from them. 
 Without doubt, a very vital and pronounced scientific sentiment is taking shape today which, in some people, is developing parallel with religiousand moral sentiments and, as it were, on a different plane where conflict is impossible, while in others it has replaced the religious sentiment and fullysatisfies their needs. 
 For these, as Renan has beauti-fully expressed it, science has provided a symbol and a law. 
 They have adopted a truly positiveattitude which retains from ancient rationalism its unshakable faith in human reason, while at the same time acquiring from the incontestable triumph of the experimental method the incon-testable conclusion that reason is nothing but the constant effort of the mind to adapt itself to experience and to cognise it more and more deeply,the reciprocal penetration of objective reality and subjective thought. 
 I believe that the future of philosophy lies on this side, because it is on this side that truth is to be found. 
 As in all prophecies, this is nothing but an act of faith. 
 It is for the future to say whether it will be justified or not. 
 And as this is an act of faith, I consider legitimate all other acts of faith, on condition that the attitude of thosewho perform them is the same towards me. 
 I even consider that it is fortunate that one ideological trend is confronted by trends of opposing ideas;it is by the criticism of its opponents that it is refined, developed, corrected and made precise. 
 The philosophical attitude which has been outlined in these brief studies could be called ra-tionalist positivism, absolute positivism or scien-tism. 
 To avoid any ambiguity it would, perhaps, be better to call it experimentalism; this would indicate simultaneously that it rests wholly on experience—but, contrary to the old empiricism, on controlled experience, the fruit of scientificexperiment—and that it refuses in its absolute realism and its experimental monism to go beyond the bounds of experience. 
 ( = experience = Σ* sensations “chose en soi”?**Experience is primarily and immediately the totality of our sensations, what we call phenomena. 
 But it begins with analysis of itself as soon as attention, thought is applied to it, for this totalityof sensations is nothing but a crude and very superficial view of the given. 
 Almost immediately there is to be discerned in it and beneath it some ofthe relations that it involves and which form its true basis. 
 Science strives to carry this analysis progressively forward, penetrating ever moredeeply into the nature of the given. 
 If the immedi-ate given is represented by a point then, in order to obtain a picture of the real given, one has to imagine that this point is merely a projection of the straight line extending beyond it. 
 This straight line can be broken up into several segments, each of which will embrace, without there being anyimpenetrable partitions between them, families of relations on which the immediate given depends. 
 Each of these families will be formed by virtue ofa definition which will be based on the natural affinities by which these relations are joined together. 
 These will be relations of number and position, mechanical, physical relations, etc. 
, and, finally, psychological relations determined bytheir dependence on the organism to which the given is related. 
 There will be as many particular sciences as there are such groups of relations. 
 Philosophy, on the other hand, tries to conceive the straight line in its entire length and continuity. 
 But the line in its totality, just as much as the point which is the projection of it, the immediate given, as also the relations which supplement itto the extent of its analysis, are of one and the same character. 
 These are the data of experience. 
 And their totality comprises a single experience: human experience. 
 It is our psychological constitution, and not the nature of things, which distinguishes the world from perception, the universe from science; and this distinction is temporary andcontingent. 
 * summation— Ed. 
 **“Thing-in-itself”?— Ed. 
(\\ P Experience, therefore, needs only to be explained. 
 To explain it means simply to formulate the relations it involves, and which it itself brings to our attention if we know how to grasp its lessons. 
And science is beginning to concern itself with them. 
 But, being all reality, experience is not in need of justification: it exists. 
 End CONTENTS* .... 
. 
 — § 6. 
 Ideas of Poincaré, the mathematician, P o i n-c a r é . 
 .... 
. 
 Pp. 
 6-7; 28-9 =two lines 33=truth =? for pragmatism and 3 5 49=the objective value of science =centre Mathematics and pragmatism—6280 : the pragmatists laid claim to Poincaré,and Mach 90Rey =a pure agnostic 94 (93) 98: Mach # objectivity =Rey?! 100: Concepts =copies of reality Objectivity 105113 : vulgar materialism Published according to the originalWritten in 1909 First published in 1933 in Philosophical Notebooks inexact there is no point in using “foreign” words!A. 
 DEBORIN. 
 DIALECTICAL MATERIALISM167 [39]...As a world outlook, dialectical material-ism provides an answer—not an absolute one, of course—to the question of the structure of matter, of the world; it serves as the basis of a most brilliant historical theory; on the basis of dialectical ma-terialism, politics and morality become in a certain sense exact sciences. 
 Being foreign to all dogmatism , dialectical materialism—correctly understood, of course—introduces everywhere a fresh stream of theoretico-cognitive criticism . 
 [40]...In this article we intend to call the read-er’s attention only to the theoretico-cognitive aspect of dialectical materialism, which in this case does not, as a method, as a guiding principleof investigation, provide absolute solutions to problems, but primarily assists in their proper framing. 
 As a theory of knowledge, dialecticalmaterialism falls into a formal, or logical, part and a real, or material, one. 
 In the case of primeval, primitive cognition, experience is identical with the object of experience, and the phenomenon with being, with the thing-in-itself. 
 For primitive man , the world of inner experiences also constitutes the world of things. 
 He knows no distinction between the internaland the external world. 
 At a certain stage of cultural development, this primitive form of cognition comes into conflict with the social man’sdesire to subdue the forces of nature, with the new, higher stage of culture. 
 The contrast between perceptions and things, between the world of innerexperiences and the world of things, becomes more1) 2) listen to him!experimental evidence grows and accumulates, and clashes between perceptions and the external world become more frequent. 
 That is when the necessity arises for new forms of cognition. 
 ...What we are interested in directly is the logical process which in modern philosophy has led to dialectical materialism. 
— The psychologism of Hume, Berkeley and others operates chiefly psychically, in the sensuous world. 
 Sensuous images are the objects of cognition. 
 The result of the development of British empiricism is, Esse =per-cipi, i. 
e. 
, that exists which is given in perception, and all that is given in perception, has an objective being, exists. 
 [41]...Kant understood that genuinely scien-tific cognition is possible only through the medium of “mathematical contemplation. 
” Sense-perception does not contain the conditions necessary for universally obligatory cognition. 
 Sensuous images are not capable of embracing the totality of phenom-ena to be cognised. 
 And Kant, passes from psycholo-gism to transcendentalism .... 
 [43]...Hegelian philosophy represents the last and closing link of this chain. 
 We have seen thatHume, Kant, and Fichte placed the subject above the object, which they declared to be something inseparable from the subject.... 
 [48]...Categories, i. 
e. 
, pure universal concepts, such as time, space, or causality, are, from the point of view dialectical materialism, logical definitions, on the one hand, and real forms of things , on the other.... 
 [49]...The limitation of transcendentalism con-sists in the fact that it does not extend its rights to the real sphere of things and considers that categories are merely subjective , and furthermore a priori , forms of consciousness. 
 Transcendentalism embraces phenomena in categorical, i. 
e. 
, logically-universal forms, making it possible to formulatestrictly mathematical laws of nature, and to give them a universal character. 
 But transcendentalism, as also sensualistic phenomenalism, is concerned only with phenomena. 
 For them, being, things-in-themselves, are inaccessible.... 
 [50]...Dialectical materialism attains the “abso-? ? e e e eee ing the forms to be universal , objectively real “perceptions . 
” On this rests the possibility of mathematical , or “geometrical” if you will, i. 
e. 
, exact, cognition of reality. 
 “Geometrical” spaceand “pure time” are universally real perceptions, and constitute the premise for the “mathematical” cognition of the sensuous world.... 
 [51]...But at the same time dialectical conscious-ness shows an ability to rise to the “conception” of nature as a “whole,” to the conception of the neces-sity, of the inherency, of the universal order ofnature.... 
 [52]...Man cognises to the extent that he acts on , and he himself is subject to the action of, the external world . 
 Dialectical materialism teaches that man is impelled to reflect chiefly by the sensations he experiences as he acts on the external world.... 
Proceeding from the consideration that it is pos-sible to dominate nature only by submitting to her, dialectical materialism calls upon us to coordinate our activity with the universal laws of nature, with the necessary order of things, with the univer-sal laws of development of the world.... 
 [53]...Thus Parmenides saw the true essence of things (“the One”) in that which can be cognised by thought or reason and which lies behind fluctuat-ing and mutable phenomena. 
 Thereby, be divorced sense-perceptions from their basis, the phenomenal world from the meta-phenomenalistic.... 
 [54]...Whereas for the rationalistic metaphysi-cists true reality is given in the concept, for the sensualists the real is that which is given in sense-perception or perception. 
 That which lies beyond the senses is inaccessible to cognition. 
 The objects of cognition are phenomena, whichare raised to the level of absolute reality. 
 The content of empirical consciousness is changeable and fluctuating. 
 Phenomenalism denies thereal substratum of qualities. 
 Given is diversity, the multiplicity of phenomena, but no unity of substance.... 
 [55]...Kant contrived to combine the phenomen-alistic doctrine of incognisability of things in andooph! R R rot! Clumsy to nec plus ultra!* This is a muddle = 5icists’ doctrine of the existence of absolutely real being, of “things-in-themselves. 
” [56]...The French materialists, headed by Hol-bach, counterposed nature , as the metaphysical essence of a thing, to its properties . 
 This antithesis in a certain sense denotes the same dualism as that between Kant’s “thing-in-itself” and “phe-nomena...” [57]...However, we would be unjust to French materialism if we identified it with Kantianism. 
 After all, eighteenth-century materialism recognises the relative cognisability even of the essence of things.... 
 French materialism, taking as its point of departure the same consideration, that matter acts on our external senses, admits, however, that certain properties of things in and for themselves are cognisable . 
 But French materialism is insuffic-iently consistent, since it teaches that only certain properties of things are cognisable, while the“essence” itself or the “nature” of them is concealed from us and is not fully cognisable. 
 [58]...Kant borrowed this counterposing of the properties of the things to their “nature” from the agnostics, from the sensualistic phenomenalists (directly from Hume).... 
 In contrast to phenomenalism and sensualism, materialism regards the impressions which we receive from things in and for themselves as havingobjective significance. 
 Whereas phenomenalism (and Kantianism) sees no points of contact between the properties of things and their “nature,” i. 
e. 
, theexternal world, the French materialists emphasise specifically that things in and for themselves, at least in part, are cognisable precisely through the impressions they produce upon us, that the properties of things are, to a certain extent, objectively real.... 
 [60]...Dialectical materialism puts material substance, the real substratum, at the basis of being. 
 It has looked upon the world “as a process, as a substance, which is developing continuously”(Engels). 
 The metaphysicists’ immutable and absolute being becomes mutable being. 
 Substantial8( NB NB Correct truths are outlined in a diaboli-cally preten-tious, abstruse form. 
 Why did Engels not write such gibberish?reality is recognised to be mutable , and changes and movements are recognised to be real forms of being. 
 Dialectical materialism overcomes the dualism of “being” and “not-being,” the metaphysically absolute antithesis of the immanent to the “transcendental,” of the properties of things to the things themselves. 
 On the basis of dialectical materialism, it becomes possible scientifically to connect the thing-in-itself with phenomena and the immanent with the transcendental, and to surmount the incognisability of things-in-them-selves, on the one hand, and the “subjectivism” of qualities, on the other, for “the nature of thething,” as Plekhanov observes with very good reason, “manifests itself precisely in its prop-erties. 
” It is the impressions which we receivefrom things in and for themselves that enable us to judge of the properties of things in and for them-selves , of objectively real being.... 
 [60-61]...The “immanent” acquires an objective-ly real character; the “transcendental,” which lies beyond phenomena in the sphere of the “in-cognisable,” is transformed from a mysterious essence that is inaccessible to our senses into an “immanent” content of our consciousness, intoan object of sensuous perception. 
 The “immanent” becomes “transcendental insofar as it acquires objectively real significance, insofar as it makes it possible to judge of the properties of things by impressions; the “transcendental” becomes “immanent” insofar as it is declared to lie in thesphere of the cognisable , even though beyond the subject. 
 Beltov expresses himself in the same sense. 
 “According to this theory,” he says, “nature isprimarily a totality of phenomena. 
 But since things-in-themselves are a necessary condition for phenomena, or, in other words, since phenomenaare caused by the action of the object on the sub-ject, we are compelled to admit that the laws of nature have not only subjective , but also objective significance, i. 
e. 
, that the mutual relations of ideas in the subject correspond, when man is not in error, to the mutual relations of things outside it. 
”* This answers in the only correct and scientific form the question of the mutual relations of phe-nomena and things-in-themselves—that most im-portant question of cognition, over which KantNB NB NB ! NB ?)the metaphysicists and the phenomenalists racked their brains so much. 
 [62]...The unity of being and not-being is be-coming, dialectics teaches. 
 Put into concrete ma-terialist language, this thesis implies that at the basis of all that exists is substance, matter , which is developing continuously... [64]...Hence the body does not consist only in its perceptibility, as the sensualistic phenomenal-ists believe, but exists quite independently of ourperceptions, exists “for itself,” as a”subject. 
” But while the body exists independently of our perceptions, our perceptions, on the other hand, fully depend on the body acting on us. 
 Without thelatter, there are no perceptions, no notions, con-cepts or ideas. 
 Our thinking is determined by being, i. 
e. 
, by the impressions we receive fromthe external world. 
 That being so, our ideas and concepts, too, have objectively real significance. 
 [65]...The body, acting on our senses, is re-garded as the cause of the action it produces, i. 
e. 
, perception. 
 The phenomenalists dispute the very possibility of framing the question in this way. 
 The immanenists hold that the external worldis not only inaccessible to perception, but also inconceivable, even if such a world existed.... 
 [67]...It has to be assumed also that our per-ceptions, as a result of the action of two factors—the external world and our sensuousness”—are not identical in content as well with the objects of the external world, which is immediately in-tuitively * inaccessible to us.... 
 [69]...From the point of view of dialectical ma-terialism, the thing-in-itself is an object such asit exists in itself, and “for itself. 
” It is in this sense that Plekhanov defines matter “as the totality of things-in-themselves, since these things are thesource of our sensations. 
”** This thing-in-itself, *The sign indicates that the words “immediateiy intuitively” should be transposed. 
— Ed. 
 ** “Das Bild dieses Seins außer dem Denken ist die Materie, das Substrat der Realität!” L. 
 Feuerbach,R ?? a clumsy, absurd word!or matter, is not an abstract concept, which lies behind the concrete properties of things, but a “concrete ” concept . 
 The being of matter is not divorced from its essence or, vice versa, its essenceis not divorced from its being. 
 [70]...An object, devoid of all qualities or pro-perties, cannot even be conceived by us, cannotexist, cannot have any being. 
 The external world is constructed by us out of our perceptions, on the basis of those impressions evoked in us by the external world, by things in and for them-selves.... 
 Between the external and internal world there exists a certain distinction, and at the same time a definite similarity, so that we arrive at the cognition of the external world through impres-sions, but they are precisely impressions produced by objects of the external world. 
 On the strength of the impressions produced upon us by the actionof an object, we attribute definite properties to the latter. 
 An impression is the resultant of two factors, and as such it is inevitably conditioned by the nature of these two factors and includes something which constitutes the nature of one and the other factor, something which is commonto both.... 
 [71]...Only on the basis of dialectical material-ism, with its recognition of the external world,is the possibility presented of building a purely scientific theory of knowledge. 
 He who rejects the external world also rejects the cause of our sensations and arrives at idealism. 
 But the external world is also the principle of uniformity. 
 And if, in our perceptions, we are confronted with a definite, regular connection between them, this only occurs because the cause of our sensations, i. 
e. 
, the external world, constitutes the basis of this uniform connection.... 
 [72]...Without the possibility of provision it is impossible scientifically to cognise the phenomenaof nature and human life. 
 ...But the objects of the external world are in causal relation not only to Aha! Plekhanov is silent on this “new trend,” does not know it. 
 Deborin does not view it clearly . 
 Correct! s t u p i d term!objects of the external world themselves there exists a definite interaction, a knowledge of whose conditions, for its part, makes it possible to foresee and predict not only the action to be exercised upon us by objects, but also their objective rela-tions and actions, which are independent of us,i. 
e. 
, the objective properties of things.... 
 [73]...Dialectical materialism by no means predetermines the question of the structure of matter in the sense of an obligatory recognition of the atomistic or corpuscular theory, or of any third hypothesis. 
 And if the new theories of the structure of atoms are triumphant, dialecticalmaterialism will not only not be confuted but, on the contrary, will be most brilliantly confirmed. 
 What, indeed, is the essence of the new trend in DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD the sphere of natural science? It is, above all, theDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD fact that the atom, which physicists used to regard as immutable and most simple, i. 
e. 
, an elemen-tary and indivisible “body,” is found to consist of still more elementary units or particles. 
 It is assumed that the electrons constitute ultimate elements of being. 
 But does dialectical materialismassert that the atom is the absolute limit of being?... [74]...It would be erroneous to think, as our Machists do, that with the recognition of theelectron theory matter disappears as a reality , and hence, together with matter, also dialectical materialism, which considers matter as the sole reality and the only suitable tool for systema-tising experience.... 
 Whether all atoms consist of electrons is an undecided question; it is a hypo-thesis that may not be confirmed. 
 But apart from this, does the electron theory eliminatethe atom? It only proves that the atom is relatively stable, indivisible and immutable.... 
 But the atom, as the real substratum is not eliminated by the electron theory.... 
 [75]...To sum up. 
 From the formal aspect, dialectical materialism, as we have seen, makes universally obligatory and objective cognition possible thanks to the fact that, from its pointof view, the forms of being are also forms of Written not earlier than 1909 Published in part in 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XI I Published in full for the first timePublished according to the originalthinking, that to every change in the objective world there corresponds a change in the sphere of perceptions. 
 As for the material aspect, dialectical materialism proceeds from the recognition of things-in-themselves or the external world or matter . 
 “Things-in-themselves” are cognisable. 
 The unconditional and absolute is rejected by dialecti-cal materialism. 
 Everything in nature is in theprocess of change and motion, which are based on definite combinations of matter . 
 According to dialectics, one “form” of being changes into anotherthrough leaps. 
 Modern theories of physics, far from disproving, fully confirm the correctness of dialec-tical materialism. 
 sic! incorrect { incorrect!V. 
 SHULYATIKOV. 
 THE JUSTIFICATION OF CAPITALISM IN WEST-EUROPEAN PHILOSOPHY ( DESCARTES TO E. 
 MACH) MOSCOW, 1908 [5] *...In intellectual circles a traditional atti-tude has been established towards philosophy.... 
 Philosophical ideas are presented with too little and too feeble connection with any sort of classsubstratum .... 
 Very many Marxists adhere to the same view. 
 They are convinced that a variegated medley of philosophical views is permissible in the ranksof the proletarian vanguard, that it has no great significance whether ideologists of the proletariat profess materialism or energeticism, neo-Kantian-ism or Machism.... 
 [6]...To maintain such a viewpoint means falling into a naïve, most grievous error.... 
 Without exception, all philosophical terms and formulas used by it**... serve it to denote social classes, groups, sections and their mutual relations. 
 When dealing with the philosophical system of this or that bourgeois thinker, we are dealing with a pic-ture of the class structure of society, depicted by means of conventional symbols and reproducing the social profession de foi of a definite bourgeoisgroup.... 
 [7]...These pictures must not be accepted as being something that could be utilised and brought * The page references are to Shulyatikov’s book. 
— Ed. 
 **philosophy— Ed. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR sic! !! what nonsense! ;into line with the proletarian world outlook. 
 That would mean falling into opportunism, trying to combine what cannot be combined.... 
 ...the first brilliant attempt at this sort of re-appraisal took place as far back as several years ago. 
 Comrade A. 
 Bogdanov’s article “Authoritarian Thought”* undoubtedly opens up a new era in the history of philosophy: after the appearance of this article, speculative philosophy lost the rightto employ its two fundamental concepts of “mind” and “body”; it was established that these concepts were formed against the background of authoritar-ian relations and the antithesis between them reflected a social antithesis—the antithesis of the organising “top strata” and the executive “lower strata. 
” With amazing consistency bourgeois critics ignored the work of the Russian Marxist.... 
 [8]...In these circumstances, a social and genet-ic analysis of philosophical concepts and systemsis not only desirable, but definitely necessary. 
 It is a task which is extremely difficult and com-plicated.... 
 Contemporary fashionable systems, e. 
g. 
, neo-Kantianism or Machism.... 
 [9-10]...Our essay is not intended for a limited circle of experts.... 
 Demos is revealing an interest in philosophy ... our exposition is of a somewhat elementary character.... 
 The viewpoint we are defending ... can be more easily mastered if illustrat-ed not by unwieldy, but by economically selected material.... 
 I THE ORGANISING AND ORGANISED “PRINCIPLES” [11]...Economic inequality arose: the organis-ers were gradually transformed into the owners ofthe instruments of production,** which had once belonged to society.... 
 * Included in the symposium of his articles “From the Psychology of Society. 
” **In the present case, we disagree somewhat with the explanations proposed by comrade Bogdanov. 
 He ?? now the nonsense is clear!! Fiction and empty phrases. 
 Indeed, very “gen-eral”!! Words. 
 The savage and primitive communism are slurred over. 
 Mate-rialism and idealism in Greece as well. 
 nothing but idealism![11-12]...Production relations of “authoritar-ian” society... The primitive savage every-where begins to see the manifestation of organisa-tory will. 
 “...the executor is accessible to external senses—this is the physiological organism, the body; the organiser is not accessible to them, he is presumed inside the body; this is the spiritual personality.... 
 [13]...The concept of the mind acquires an in-creasingly abstract character. 
 [14]...When in the history of Greek philosophy the famous question was raised: flow is it possible for the multifarious transient phenomena of the material world to have been derived from pure, immutable, non-material substance? What is therelation of “being” to “becoming”?— it was not, contrary to the assertions of all kinds of historians of philosophy, the highest flight of noble human thought, a most altruistic effort aimed at solving does not attach to this last circumstance the impor-tance it undoubtedly had; he does not even advance it. 
 We had occasion to speak about the question elsewhere“From the History and Practice of the Class Struggle” (in the chapters devoted to the genesis of the ruling classes). 
 Edition of S. 
 Dorovatsky and A. 
 Charushnikov. 
eee So, indeed! And Greek materialism? and the sceptics?? not in the same sense as yoursthe greatest mystery of the universe and thereby giving joy to the human race for all time. 
 The matter was much simpler! To frame the question in that manner merely pointed to the fact thatin the Greek towns the process of social stratifica-tion had gone a long way, that the gulf between the “upper” and the “lower strata” of society had become deeper, and the old ideology of the organis-ers, corresponding to less differentiated social relations, had lost its right to existence. 
 Earlier,in spite of all the distinctions between substance and the world of phenomena, the direct connection between them had not been doubted. 
 Now, theexistence of this connection is denied. 
 Substance and the world of phenomena are declared to be incommensurable magnitudes. 
 Relations between them are only possible through a series of inter-mediary links. 
 Or, in more philosophical language,we cannot establish their reciprocal relations either by means of the senses or by means of ordinary thought: to do so requires the assistance of some special “idea,” some special intuition. 
 II ORGANISING AND ORGANISED “PRINCIPLES” IN THE PERIOD OF MANUFACTURING PRODUCTION [15]...This very question—the question of the incommensurability of the mental and material “principles,” of the absence of a direct connectionbetween them, was put forward and solved by the originators of the new philosophy.... 
 [16]...The spiritualistic sympathies of the Re-naissance and subsequent epochs are usually men-tioned in passing, but they are very character-istic. 
* [17]...The medieval artisan, while being an organiser, at the same time fulfilled executive functions—he worked together with his appren-tices. 
 The bourgeois manufacturer knows only one * It will be recalled that Marx in Vol. 
 I of Capi-tal and K. 
 Kautsky note the dependence between ab-stract religious views and the development of com-modity production. 
 what nonsense! e. 
g. 
, trained workers and trainees un-der them to page 19 = = Who? See page 17 nonsense!type of function: he is purely an organiser. 
 In the first case, it is true, a basis is provided for that dualistic “mode of presenting the facts explained by Comrade Bogdanov; nevertheless, the anti-thesis of organiser and executor is somewhat veiled. 
 Hence the corresponding antithesis of mental and corporeal, active and passive, prin-ciples, in the sphere of ideology, could not takea sharp form.... 
 [17]...In the workshop of the medieval artisan there was no place for representatives of so-calleduntrained, unskilled labour. 
 Work is found for them in the manufacturing workshop. 
 They consti-tute the “lower stratum. 
” Above them are otherstrata, other groups of workers, each differing according to the degree of skill. 
 Among them certain organising layers are already formed. 
 Going further up ascending scale, we see groups of administrators and technical managers of the enterprises. 
 The owner of the enterprise is thus “freed” not only from every kind of physical labour, but also from many purely organisational duties.... 
 [19]...In contrast to the medieval thinkers, the “fathers” of the new philosophy devote very much attention in their systems to the world of transient phenomena, make a detailed study of its structure and development, the laws governing the relations between its parts; they create a natural philosophy. 
 The very same “elevated” position of the leaders of the manufacturing enterprises which inspired in the fathers of the new philosophy the “pure” ideaof organising will, suggested to them, similarly, a mechanical explanation of the processes of mate-rial reality, i. 
e. 
, the processes taking place among the organised mass. 
 The point is that the leader of the manufactur-ing enterprise is merely the final link in a fairlylong chain of organising links. 
 In relation to him, the other organisers are subordinate and, in turn, stand in opposition to him as organised persons. 
 ...But insofar as their role differs from that of the chief leader, insofar as it consists in taking partin the technical work from which the chief leader is “freed,” to that extent their “mental” character is blurred and their activity is appraised as activity of “matter”.... 
word NB In this vulgar-isation of the history of philosophy, the struggle of the bourgeoi-sie against feudalism is completely forgotten. 
 n o t hence[21-22]...The bourgeois system in general is a two-faced Janus.... 
 True, we find a definite formulation of dualism only in Cartesianism,— in the system created just at the dawn of the new economic era; true, subsequent philosophical systems, beginning with that of Spinoza, declare that the Cartesian counterposing of God and the world, of mind and body, is contradictory. 
 ...The materialist and positivist systems of bourgeois philosophy, in turn, by no means testify to a triumph over the dualistic viewpoint. 
 The differ-ence between bourgeois metaphysics and the bourgeois “positive world outlook” is not as great as it may appear at first glance. 
 ...The attack made by materialism is not directed against the fundamental premise put forward by metaphysics; the concept of the organising will is not done away with by materialism. 
 It merely figures under another name: for example, “force” takes the place of “spirit”...... [22-23]...In the seventeenth century, at the time of its “storm and stress,” the English bourgeoisiepreached the doctrine that everything in the world should be explained as a motion of material particles taking place from mechanical necessity. 
 The English bourgeoisie were laying the founda-tions for large-scale capitalist economy.... 
 They imagined the whole world in the form of an organisa-tion of material particles united in accordance with immanent laws.... 
 [23-24]...In the second half of the eighteenth century, the French bourgeoisie flooded the book market with similar treatises.... 
 But we know what is meant by the internal structure of enter-prises: it is the realm of matter and mechanical processes. 
 Hence the generalisation: man is a ma-chine, nature is a machine.... 
 ...The motion of matter is conditioned by itself, or rather by its own force (Holbach). 
 The organisa-tory will, it is seen, has again become extremely transformed, but its presence is noted and is admitted to be absolutely essential. 
 and what about their struggle against clerica-lism? Shulya-tikov has dis-torted history! NB what non-sense! the p r o l e t a r -i a t = m a t-t e r nonsense = = and what about Plato’s ideas”?The manufacturers did not act as revolution-ary representatives of “Sturm and Drang”.... 
 III CARTESIANISM [25]...The organised require an organiser.... 
 [26]...The intermediary organisatory links— “individual minds” can only fulfil their organisingrole if there exists a superior organisatory centre. 
 Only, the latter brings them into contact with the proletariat—“matter”—within the framework of organised whole, a manufacturing workshop.... 
 [27]...The Cartesian concept of man is nothing but the further propagation of a definite form of thinking, “a definite mode of presenting the facts, a definite type of their union in the psyche. 
” We have seen that the world in Descartes’ system is organised on the lines of a manufacturing enter-prise.... 
 ...We are dealing with the cult of mental labour.... 
 [28]...I am an organiser and, as such, can exist only by fulfilling organisatory and not executive functions: this is the meaning of the Cartesian assertion, if it is translated into the language of class relations.... 
 ...The common, naïve viewpoint sees the external world as it appears through the prism of the senses.... 
 [29]...The concept of the worker as merely a saddler or merely a paper-hanger gives way to theconcept of the worker in general. 
 Trade no longer constitutes the “essence” of labour-power.... 
 [31]...Time, Descartes explains, must not beóò? infantile phrase-mon-geringthinking,” a generic concept created by the latter.... 
 [32-33]...Henceforth philosophy is the faithful servant of capital. 
 ...The revaluation of philo-sophical values was determined by changes in the organising upper strata and organised lower strata. 
 New organisers, new organised—new concepts of God and spirit, new concepts of matter.... 
 IV SPINOZA [37]...All relations between mind and body are only through God. 
 All relations between the intermediary organisatory links and the organised mass are only with the sanction of the supremeorganiser!... ...The motion of matter and the activity of the mind are only two aspects of one and the same process. 
 There can be no question of any interaction between mind and matter. 
 [41]...Experience, sensuous perception, is for him an imperative condition for cognising things.... 
 [42]...But ... when Spinoza died, as is well known, the fine fleur of the Dutch bourgeoisie with great pomp accompanied the hearse thatcarried his remains. 
 And if we become more closely acquainted with his circle of acquaintances and correspondents, we again meet with the fine fleur of the bourgeoisie—and not only of Holland but of the entire world. 
 ...The bourgeoisie revered Spinoza their bard. 
 Spinoza’s conception of the world is the song of triumphant capital of all-consuming, all-cen-tralising capital. 
 There is no being, there are no things, apart from the single substance; there can be no existence for producers apart from the large-scale manufacturing enterprise.... 
 V LEIBNITZ [45] Leibnitz’s God is the owner of an exemplar-ily organised enterprise and is himself the supreme a fine expla-nation! prim-itive mate-rialism à la L o r i a what about the relativ-ism of the Greeks? vague and inexact Go ahead, lump every-thing togeth-er! idealism as well as scepticism, everything “corresponds” to manufac-ture! Comrade Shulyatikov is simple, very simple. 
 ? What about Fichte?Fichte?VI BERKELEY [51]...Hobbes’ materialism corresponded to the Sturm-und-Drang period of the English capitalist bourgeoisie. 
 The way was paved for manufacture, quieter times began for the manufacturers: Hobbes’materialism gave place to the half-hearted system of Locke. 
 The further consolidation of the position of manufacture determined the possibility of anti-materialist utterances. 
 [56]...“The attraction and repulsion of workers should take place without any obstacles”: inperceptual complexes there are decidedly no absolute elements. 
 Everything is relative. 
 VII HUME [61]...His kinship to all the thinkers who appear in the foregoing chapters is beyond doubt.... 
 The position of philosophical scepticism adopted by Hume corresponds precisely to such a conception of the capitalist organism. 
 IX FICHTE, SCHELLING, HEGEL [81]...There arise systems of so-called objective idealism.... 
 [88]...objective idealists.... 
((1) 2) 3) Nonsense. 
 What about the contept of “motion”? what nonsense! Fichte — an objective idealist!!! what non-sense! what nonsense![94]...But we know that in all the systems of bourgeois philosophy “matter” is regarded as the subordinate principle (even by the materialists who, we repeat, note its subordinate position by introducing the concept of “force”).... 
 [98]...It is merely one step from Fichte’s anti-thetical method and Schelling’s potentialising theory to Hegel’s dialectics. 
 And in regard to the latter, after all that has been said in this chapter about the antithetical method, it only remains for us to make a few supplementary re-marks. 
 We have already made clear the “real background” of dialectics. 
 Hegel merely more fully substantiated the theory of development through “contradictions,”which had been outlined by two other objective idealists.... 
 [98-99]...The innovation made by Hegel em-phasises the following fact from the sphere of“real” relations. 
 The differentiation of functions and roles in manufacture reaches its maximum. 
 A stratification takes place of each separate executive group and each separate organising group. 
 The functions belonging to any one definite group are distributed among various, newly-formed groups. 
 Each group breaks up and new groups areformed from it. 
 And the ideologist of the manufac-turers considers this breaking-up process to be the process of the internal development of this or that “principle”.... 
 X THE REVIVAL OF THE “MANUFACTURING” PHILOSOPHY [100]...Speculative philosophy loses prestige in bourgeois society. 
 True, this does not occur all at once. 
 But neither did the machine conquer the territory of industry all at once.... 
 [101]...How can the positive nature of the new ideological systems be explained? By theOO ( # ] what nonsense! = what nonsense! NBsimple law of contrasts, the simple endeavour “to do the opposite” of what constituted the “symbol of faith of yesterday?... Individualised “complexes”—Ivan, Peter, Jacob vanish. 
 In their place there appears in the work-shops the worker in general. 
 “Matter” is given back the “qualities that were expropriated from it.... 
 [102]...Matter is rehabilitated. 
 Bourgeois so-ciety introduces the cult of the new idol—”environ-ment. 
” True, in doing so, the fact is not lost sight of that nevertheless matter remains matter, i. 
e. 
, the organised mass, and, as such, cannot exist without a “manager. 
” And “force,” as a specialist in organisatory duties, is assigned to matter. 
 Trea-tises about Stoff und Kraft (“matter and force”) are written.... 
 [104] A comparison between the most recent organisation of the factories and the internal structure of manufacture already a priori dictatesthe reply: the new variety of bourgeois philosophy should reproduce substantial features of the philos-ophy of the manufacturing epoch.... 
 [106] Neo-Kantianism gives way to a “turn” towards systems of “pre-Kantian” thought. 
 XI W. 
 WUNDT [108]...“ the object can never be separated from the idea, or the idea from the object .... 
” [113]...The considerations that have been given are already sufficient to define Wundt clearly as a philosopher who sets himself the task of combating materialism or, to use the fashionable term, “Überwindung” des Materialismus,” “over-coming materialism,” and who, in so doing, doesnot declare himself to be on the side of the school which is regarded as the traditional opponent of materialism.... 
OO = OO nonsense this is true , but not as stated ha-ha! eclectic not true S S[114]...Such an equalisation of the intermediary organising links and representatives of “physical” labour, the “lower executives,” is indicated in the sphere of philosophy precisely by the endeavourto characterise “subject” and “object,” “psychical” and “physical,” as comprising an “ indivisible ” whole, the endeavour to reduce the antithesisbetween the phenomena mentioned to a cognitive fiction. 
 Avenarius’ theory on principal coordina-tion, Ernst Mach’s theory on the relation of thepsychical and physical, Wundt’s theory on ideas-objects—these are all theories of the same order.... 
 [116]...Hitherto, Wundt’s monist views could not be denied a certain consistency. 
 Nor can he any more be suspected of idealist sym-pathies.... 
 [118]...Wundt takes just such a leap when, on the heel of his theory on “ideas-objects,” he puts forward his views on “psycho-physical parallel-ism”.... 
 [121]...“Attributes” are transformed into “se-ries,” but this reform, in essence, is more of a verbal character.... 
 [123]...Primacy is asserted for the spiritual principle.... 
 [123-124]...Everything corporeal has necessarily its psychical correlation. 
 No single worker, however simple the function he fulfils, can produce any products, can find any application for his labour-power, can exist, without his being under the direct, detailed “guidance” of a definite organiser.... 
 ...But the psychical series constitutes the “orga-nisers” and the “concomitance” of the latter signi-fies for the “physical series”—for the workers— nothing but dependence.... 
 [128]...Thus, according to Wundt, philosophy should transcend the bounds of experience, “supple-ment” the latter. 
 The philosophical analysis needsto be continued until we obtain the idea of a unity which embraces both series that are independent of each other. 
 Having expressed this ,view, Wundtimmediately hastens to make an important reserva-tion for himself: he declares that we can conceive of the unity of the world either as a material unity=OO ô ôe = = nonsense! What about Schopen-hauer? inexact { true! Then Willy, Petzoldt (twice),or as a mental unity: a third solution of the problem does not exist... [129]...Wundt refuses to give the name substance to his idea of universal unity. 
 He defines it as the idea of pure reason, i. 
e. 
, in the Kantian sense. 
 Just as Kant’s God is the idea of the supreme “forming,” non-substantial principle, so also Wundt’s universal unity is the idea of non-sub-stantial unity, thanks to which all phenomena acquire vital meaning, indisputable value. 
 In the light of this idea, there disappears the “empty and cheerless” philosophy which sees in the outwardorder of phenomena, in their mechanical connec-tion, the true essence of the latter. 
 In its place we obtain the view of the cosmic mechanism as the external covering of spiritual activity and creation.... 
 [130]...In this connection, Wundt strongly emphasises the element of actuality . 
 He reduces the idea of universal unity, of the “foundation of the world, to the idea of a universal will .... 
 [131]...We shall not enter on an analysis of his proposed formulation, nor shall we explainhis theory of “voluntarism”...... ...Consequently, the ideologists of the modern vanguard of the capitalist bourgeoisie cannotspeak of any “permanent” organised principles but, on the contrary, have to describe the latter as something extremely changeable, something thatis eternally in a state of motion.... 
 XII EMPIRIO-CRITICISM [133]...Wundt’s criticism had no crushing force; it struck at an imaginary target. 
 Wundt’s appearance on the scene and the subsequent reac-tion from the camp of Avenarius’* disciples did not signify a conflict between the philosophies of two different classes or two large groups of one and the same class. 
 The socio-economic background * Carstanjen was the first to reply. 
 of the philosophical contest in question was, in this case, the comparatively insignificant difference between the most advanced and the somewhat less advanced types of modern capitalist organisa-tions.... 
 [134]...We should say more: the empirio-critic-al philosophy should be understood primarily as an apologia for the idea in question. 
 The concept of functional dependence is a denial of causal dependence.... 
 [135-136]...Høffding’s conclusion must, in gen-eral, be considered correct. 
 Only his reference to “motives of expediency” is unfortunate: these motives are vague and indefinite. 
 Avenarius, in this case, was merely making a concession to materialist phraseology, a conces-sion determined by his social position. 
 To manypeople the views of the “parallelists” might appear to be materialist in comparison with vulgar spiri-tualism. 
 The same applies to the views of empirio-criticism. 
 The possibility of their coming close to materialism is particularly strong. 
 ...And wide sections of the reading public have formed the opinion that empirio-criticism is a materialist school of thought. 
 More than that, even expert philosophers judge it erroneously: Wilhelm Wundt himself, the patriarch of modern philosophy, called it “materialism”. 
 Finally, what is most interesting of all, the empirio-critics, too, while dissociating themselves from materialism, at the same time sometimes use its terminology, and sometimes even begin as it were to waver in their anti-material-ist views.... 
 [137]...Such is the real background that inspired empirio-criticism with the idea of classifyinghuman cognition on the basis of the principle of “biological” classification. 
 But this sort of “biol-ogy,” we repeat, has nothing in common withcorrect that is so really?? Of course, but it does not follow from this that func-tionality cannot be a variety of causality. 
 really? Hm? a lie! Why? You have not understood this! aha! [138-139]...dualism—according to Avenarius— is the fruit of a certain process of our abstracting thought—“introjection”.... 
 But the antithesis of the “external” and “inter-nal” world is the purest fiction. 
 An analysis of this antithesis is extremely important; it should lead to substantiating themonist world outlook. 
 Commentators of Avenarius’ system of philosophy strongly stress this point. 
 “By exposing the impermissibility of introjection,one of them says,* “two aims are achieved .... 
” [140]...the subordinate organiser, if his “abso-lute” viewpoint is adopted, i. 
e. 
, if he is regardedas an organiser independent of the “will” controll-ing him, is confronted also merely by a “thing,” or “body,” in the shape of the workers. 
 But let ustake another case: for the supreme “will,” the subordinate organiser is not only one who is orga-nised, but one who organises.... 
 The former “object,”now converted into “subject,” “organises” matter: man assimilates a tree, but a tree transformed, the “notion” of tree.... 
 [141-142]...“the fullness of human experience” is also proved in Avenarius’ theory of principal co-ordination.... 
 In Avenarius, like in Wundt, the “series” turn out, in essence, to be “incommensurable. 
” And instead of the materialist world outlook that one would expect after the categorical state-ments about “the fullness of experience,” views are expressed testifying to the idealist sympathies of empirio-criticism.... 
 B u t W undt and Avenarius part company on the road of idealist constructions. 
 The author ofThe System of Philosophy reveals a fancy for “Kantian” motives. 
 The author of The Human Concept of the World proclaims views which bring him close to the position once taken by Berkeley. 
 Let us hast en t o make a reservation. 
 We do not at all intend to assert that the works of the Bishopof Cloyne determined Avenarius’ viewpoint, that they had a direct influence on him. 
 But the simi-larity of the idealist positions of both philosophers is indubitable. 
 The afore-mentioned theory of * Rudolph Wlassak; quoted by Mach in The Analysis of Sensations , p. 
 52. 
oh, this is suspicious! A cheap explanation with no ana-lysis of the substance! true ? true! Here Shulya-tikov is un-der a misap-prehension. 
 bien! hm? hm? a misappre-hension NB a misappre-principal co-ordination, taken as a whole, is evi-dence of this similarity. 
 With the same straightforwardness as Berkeley, Avenarius presents the thesis that there are noobjects outside the subject. 
 Each “thing” must necessarily “he related” to the central nervous system, which plays the role of functional centre.... 
 [144]...The supreme “leader” does not figure, not even in the shape of the Kantian idea of reason, Kant’s “form,” or in the shape of Wundt’s “univer-sal unity. 
” Nevertheless, he is there, and is moreover the chief element of the philosophical system. 
 All phenomena are regarded precisely from his point of view . 
 His “invisible presence is postulated by the unusually high appraisal of the organisatory principle, presented parallel with the conceptionof organised organisers. 
 And in the general picture of the world resulting from Avenarius’ philosophic-al discourses, it is precisely the organisatorycharacter of the organising factors that comes into the forefront.... 
 For Avenarius the world represents an agglom-erate of central nervous systems. 
 “Matter” is absolutely deprived of all “qualities,” whether “primary” or “secondary,” which at one time wereconsidered its inalienable property. 
 Absolutely everything in matter is determined by the “spirit” or, to use the terminology of the author of the Critique of Pure Experience , by the central nervous system.... 
 [145] The viewpoint of idealism in the style of Berkeley is put forward with great consistency by the author of the Critique of Pure Experience .... 
 [146 ]...Mach’s theory of the “ ego” as a logical symbol.... 
 Mach, like Avenarius, knows two “series”—the psychical and the physical (two kinds of combina-tions of elements). 
 As with Avenarius, these series are incommensurable and at the same time represent nothing but a fiction of our thought. 
 Alternately, the monist and the dualist viewpoint is put forward: alternately the intermediary orga-nisatory links are described as the organised, and as the organising principle. 
 And, as with Avena-rius, in the final analysis the dictatorship of “the organisatory will” is proclaimed. 
 An idealistic /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR picture of the world is drawn: the world is a com-plex of “ sensations . 
” [147]...Mach’s objection cannot be called valid. 
 The central concept of his philosophical system,the famous “sensation,” is by no means a denial either of the organisatory principle or of the supreme organisatory principle.... 
 Mach was prompt-ed in his criticism of the conception of the “ ego” by the view of the subordinate organisers as the organised “mass”.... 
 [148-149]...Besides dealing with the specula-tive constructions of Wundt, Avenarius and Mach, we could, for example, subject to analysis the views of such prominent representatives ofmodern West-European philosophy as Renouvier Bradley and Bergson.... 
 The sphere of philosophy is a veritable “Bastil-le of bourgeois ideology.... 
 It is necessary to bear in mind that, for their part, the bourgeois ideolo-gists are not sleeping, but are strengthening their position. 
 At the present time, they are even im-bued with the conviction that their position isabsolutely impregnable. 
 The “idealist” sympathies of certain literary writers who take their standunder the banner of Marxism in turn, createparticularly favourable soil for such a convic-tion.... 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS XI. 
 Wundt Ostwald . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 107 not in the book The entire book is an example of extreme vul-garisation of materialism. 
 Instead of a concrete analysis of periods, formations, ideologies— empty phrases about “organisers” and ridiculously strained, absurdly falsecomparisons. 
 A caricature of materialism in history . 
 And it is a pity, for there is an attempt made in the direction of materialism. 
hension aha! a misappre-hension nonsense! NB Written not earlier than 1908 First published in 1937 in the magazine Proletarskaya Revolyutsia , No. 
 8Published according to the original= G. 
 V. 
 PLEKHANOV. 
 N. 
 G. 
 CHERNYSHEVSKY SHIPOVNIK PUBLISHING HOUSE, ST. 
 PETERSBURG, 1910168 INTRODUCTION [51]...The unfortunate outcome [52] of the Crimean War compelled the Government to make a few concessions to educated society and effect at least the more pressing reforms that had longsince become indispensable. 
 Soon the problem of freeing the peasants was placed on the order of the day, a problem plainly affecting the inter-ests of all social-estates. 
 Needless to say, Niko-lai Gavrilovich** eagerly set about elaborating the problem. 
 His excellent articles on the peasants’cause were written in 1857 and 1858. 
 The mutual relations of our social forces in the epoch of the abolition of serfdom are now fairly well known. 
 We shall therefore mention them only in passing, only insofar as it may be necessary to elucidate the role adopted in this matter by our advanced publi-cists, chief of whom then was N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky. 
 It is well known that these writers zealously defended the interests of the peasants. 
 Our authorwrote one article after another, advocating the emancipation of the peasants and giving them land, and maintaining that the Government wouldfind no difficulty whatever in redeeming the lands allotted to the peasants. 
 He supported this thesis both with general theoretical considerations andwith the most detailed estimates. 
 “Indeed, in * Here and elsewhere, a NB underscored with two slanting lines implies that Lenin’s NB is in the corner of the page and apparently refers to all of it. 
 The fulltext of the page in question is therefore given in suchNB* what way can the redemption of land prove dif-ficult? How can it be too much for the people to bear? That is improbable,” he wrote in the article “Is Land Redemption Difficult?” “It runs counterto the fundamental concepts of economics. 
 Political economy teaches clearly that all the material capital which a certain generation takes over fromprevious generations is not too considerable invalue compared with the mass of values producedby the labour of that generation. 
 For example,all of the land belonging to the French people, together with all the buildings and their contents, together with all the ships and cargoes, all thelivestock and money and other riches belongingto that country, is hardly worth a hundred thou-sand million francs, while the labour of the Frenchpeople produces fifteen or more thousand million francs’ worth of values annually, i. 
e. 
, in no more than seven years the French people produce a massof values equal to that of the whole of France fromthe Channel to the Pyrenees. 
 Consequently, if theFrench had to redeem all France, they could doso in the lifetime of one [53] generation, using only one-fifth of their revenue for the purpose. 
 And what is the point at issue in our country?Is it the whole of Russia that we must redeemwith all her riches? No, only the land. 
 And is itto be all the Russian land? No, the redemptionwould affect only those gubernias of European Russia alone where serfdom is deep-rooted,” etc. 
* After showing that the lands to be redeemed wouldconstitute no more than one-sixth of the area ofEuropean Russia, he puts forward as many as eightplans for carrying out redemption. 
 According tohim, if the Government were to accept any one of these plans, it could redeem the allotted lands not only without burdening the peasants, butalso to the great advantage of the state treasury. 
Chernyshevsky’s plans were all based on the con-cept t hat i t i s “n e c e s s a r y t o f i x t h em o s t m o d e r a t e p r i c e s p o s s i b l e i n d e t e r m i n i n g t h e a m o u n t o f r e d e m p t i o n p a y m e n t s . 
 ” We k no w no whow much consideration the Government gave tothe interests of the peasantry in the abolition ofserfdom and how much it heeded Chernyshevsky’s * Collected Works , Vol. 
 IV, p. 
 335-336. 
 (Here and elsewhere Plekhanov refers to the first Russian edition ofN. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky’s works published in St. 
 Petersburg advice regarding moderation in fixing redemption payments. 
 Whereas our government, in freeingthe peasants, never for a moment forgot the bene-fits to the state treasury, it thought very little about the interests of the peasants. 
 In the re-demption operations fiscal and landlord interests were exclusively borne in mind. 
 ...[57] It was not on economic problems alone that Chernyshevsky had to wage a fierce polemic. 
 Neither were his opponents only liberal econo-mists. 
 As the influence of the Sovremennik circle 169 in Russian literature grew, the greater were the number of attacks launched from the most varied [58] quarters both on that circle in general andon our author in particular. 
 The contributors to Sovremennik were regarded as dangerous people who were prepared to destroy all time notorious“foundations. 
” Some of “Belinsky’s friends,” who at first considered it possible to go along with Cherny-shevsky and those holding his views, repudiatedthe Sovremennik as an organ of the “Nihilists,” and began to exclaim that Belinsky would never have approved of its trend. 
 Such, was I. 
 S. 
 Turge-nev’s attitude. 
* Even Herzen grumbled at the “clowns, in his Kolokol . 
 170 He warned them that: “while exhausting all their ridicule over the litera-ture of exposures, our dear clowns forget that on this slippery path they may not merely ‘whistle’themselves into becoming like Bulgarin and Grech, but even into being decorated with the Stanislav Order. 
” Herzen affirmed that there were excellentthings in the “literature of exposures” that the “clowns” were ridiculing. 
 “Do you imagine that all the tales of Shchedrin and others can just behurled into the water together with Oblomov 171 o n their necks? You indulge yourselves too much, gentlemen!**.... 
 The reference to Shchedrin wasextremely unfortunate since Chernyshevsky him-self was well able to appreciate his work. 
 In gen-eral, everything shows that Herzen was misled by his liberal friends, such as Kavelin. 
 The * Chernyshevsky relates that Turgenev could still tolerate him to some extent but had no patience at all with Dobrolyubov. 
 You’re just a snake but Dobrolyubov is a cobra,” he said to Chernyshevsky (see the letter already quoted: “By Way of an Expression of Gratitude. 
” Collected Works , Vol. 
 IX, p. 
 103). 
Sotsial-Dem-okrat No. 
 1, p. 
 152 NB Up to here So-tsial-Demokrat No. 
 1, p. 
 152 NBee NB NB“clowns”—or “whistlers,” as they were called in Russia—were not ridiculing the exposures, but the naïve people who could not or would not go beyond innocent exposures, forgetting the moralof Krylov’s fable The Cat and the Cook *.... 
 Herzen himself was to see very soon how bad in a political sense were those liberal friends whokept questioning his relations with Chernyshevsky. 
 When he had to break with K. 
 D. 
 Kavelin he perhaps told himself that the “jaundiced ones were not entirely wrong. 
** [59] Incidentally, the majority of the articles in Svistok which evoked the especial dissatisfaction of the well-bred liberals did not belong to the pen of N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky. 
 Only rarely did he contribute to it, as he was overwhelmed with other work. 
 In the closing years of his literary activity he contributed regularly to every issueof Sovremennik ; what is more, every issue usually contained several articles by him. 
 As a general rule, his articles were distributed among thevarious sections of the journal as follows: first of all, he contributed an article on some general theoretical problem, then he wrote a politicalsurvey, reviewed several new books, and, lastly, by way of relaxation and diversion, as it were, he made polemical sorties against his opponents. 
The Sovremennik of 1861 was particularly rich in polemical articles written by him. 
 It was at that time that he wrote his well-known “PolemicalGems,” “National Tactlessness” (attacking Slovo of Lvov), “Popular Muddleheadedness” (attacking Aksakov’s Den ; we shall speak of this article later), and numerous other polemical notes in the section of Russian and foreign literature. 
 What is now especially interesting in “Polemi-cal Gems” is our author’s views on his own literary activity. 
 We shall cite them here. 
 Chernyshevsky was very well aware that he held a prominentplace in Russian literature. 
 His opponents dreaded him, and occasionally even paid him compliments. 
 But his growing renown did not make him happy * Regarding the article “Very Dangerous” and its more or less conjectural consequences, see, among others, Vetrinsky’s book Herzen , St. 
 Petersburg, 1908, p. 
 354. 
 **The history of this break may be followed in the letters of K. 
 D. 
 Kavelin and I. 
 S. 
 Turgenev to A. 
 I. 
 Herzen, published by M. 
 Dragomanov in Geneva in 1892. 
ee in the least. 
 He had too low an opinion of Russian literature to consider the prominent place he occupied in it to be honourable. 
 He was “com-pletely cold to his literary reputation. 
” The onlything he was interested in was whether he would be able to preserve the freshness of his thought and feeling till those better days when our litera-ture would become really useful to society. 
 “I know that better times will come for literary activity, when it will be of real benefit to society, andwhen he who possesses talent will really earn a good name. 
 And so I am wondering whether when the time comes I shall still be able to serve societyproperly. 
 Fresh strength and fresh convictions are needed for this. 
 But I see that I am beginning to join the company of ‘respected’ writers, that isto say, of those writers who have been wrung dry, who lag behind the movement of social require-ments. 
 This rouses a feeling of bitterness. 
But what is there to be done? Age takes its toll. 
 Youth does not come twice, [60] I can’t help envying those who are younger and fresherthan I.... 
”* [61] Meanwhile, feelings were rising at least in a section of Russian “society. 
” The student youth were filled with unrest and secret revolu-tionary organisations were springing up which printed their own manifestoes and programmesand awaited an imminent peasant uprising. 
 We already know that Chernyshevsky fully recognised the possibility of impending “troubled times”**in Russia and we shall yet see how strongly the rise of the social mood was reflected in his activity as a publicist. 
 But was he in any way connectedwith the secret societies? It is not yet possible to reply with certainty to this question, and who knows whether we shall ever have the facts toanswer it. 
 In the opinion of M. 
 Lemke, who made an excellent study of the N. 
 C. 
 Chernyshevsky case, “it can be p r e s u m e d (his italics) that hewas the author of the proclamation ‘To the Manorial Peasants,’ which the court found him guilty of having written. 
” Mr. 
 Lemke supports his conjectureby pointing to the style and content of the procla-mation. 
 We find these arguments not without foundation. 
 But we hasten to repeat with Mr. 
 Lem-* Collected Works , Vol. 
 VIII, p. 
 231. 
 **i. 
e. 
, the possibility of a revolution— Ed. 
NB NB Sotsial-Demo-krat No. 
 1, p. 
 157ke that “all these are more or less probable consider-ations, and no more. 
”* We also consider fairly well founded Mr. 
 Lemke’s opinion that the famous paper Velikoruss was, in part, the work of Cherny-shevsky. 
 Mr. 
 Lemke supports his hypothesis by quoting Mr. 
 Stakhevich, who for several years lived with Chernyshevsky in Siberia: “I noticedthat Chernyshevsky was obviously sympathetically inclined towards the paper which appeared at irregular intervals under the title of Velikoruss ; I recall three issues coming out. 
 As I listened to Nikolai Gavrilovich’s conversation, I sometimes noticed that both his thoughts and the way heexpressed them [62] strongly reminded me of the paper Velikoruss , and I decided in my own mind that he was either the author or, at least, co-author of the paper which advocated the need for constitutional reforms. 
”** We are in full agreement with Mr. 
 Stakhevich: the style and content of Velikoruss are indeed very reminiscent of Cherny-shevsky’s journalistic articles. 
 And if Cherny-shevsky was in fact the author, then that, of course, explains the circumstance that Velikoruss w a s far wiser and more tactful than other such papers of the time. 
 Simultaneously with the rise of the extreme party in Russia, there was a growth of the rev-olutionary movement in Poland. 
 Had Cherny-shevsky any formal relations with the Polishrevolutionaries of whom there were not a few in St. 
 Petersburg at that time? Again, there are no data on this point. 
 Not wishing to indulge inconjectures, we shall limit ourselves, in clarifying Chernyshevsky’s general sympathies towards the Polish cause, to data obtainable from his writings;however, even such data are not numerous. 
 We know that the Slavophils 172 very much approved of the struggle of the Galician Ruthen-ians against the Poles. 
 Chernyshevsky was always sympathetically inclined towards the Little Rus-sians. 
 He regarded Belinsky’s negative attitudeto the emerging Little Russian literature to be a great mistake. 
 In the January issue of Sovremen-nik for 1861 he published a very sympathetic article * M. 
 K. 
 Lemke, “The Case of N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky,” Byloye , 1906, No. 
 4, p. 
 179. 
 **M. 
 K. 
 Lemke, “The Trial of the Velikoruss Publishers,” Byloye , 1906, No. 
 7, p. 
 92. 
 Mr. 
 Stakhe-vich’s article was published in Zakaspiiskoye Obozrenie , on the occasion of the appearance of Osnova , the organ of the Little Russians. 
 But his attitudetowards the struggle of the Galician Rutheniansagainst the Poles could not be one of unconditional approval. 
 First of all, he did not like the fact that the Ruthenians sought the support of theViennese Government. 
 Neither did he like theinfluential role of the clergy in the movement ofthe Galician Ruthenians. 
 “Lay affairs,” he wrote,“should be the concern of laymen. 
” Finally, Cherny-shevsky did not like the exclusively n a t i o n a l formulation of this question, which he regarded asprimarily an e c o n o m i c one. 
 In an articleentitled “National Tactlessness” ( Sovremennik , July 1861) attacking the Lvov Slovo , Cherny-shevsky [63] sharply criticised the excessive nation-alism of that organ. 
 “It is very possible that a careful examination of existing relations,” hewrote, “would show the Lvov Slovo that at the basis of the matter there is a question that is farremoved from the racial question—the questionof social-estates. 
 It is very possible that it would see Ruthenians and Poles on each of the two sides— people differing in race, but of the same socialposition. 
 We do not believe that the Polish peasantshould be hostile to the alleviation of the obliga-tions and, in general, of the living conditions of theRuthenian settlers. 
 We do not believe that the sentiments of the Ruthenian landowners should differ very much in this matter from the sentimentsof the Polish landowners, If we are not mistaken,the root of the Galician question lies not in rela-tions of race, but of social-estate. 
” The mutual hostility of the peoples composing Austria ought to have appeared even more tactless to Chernyshevsky, in that the Viennese Govern-ment then, as previously, derived great advantagesfrom it. 
 “When one reflects carefully, one is notsurprised at the many years of existence of theAustrian Empire,” he wrote in a political review in the same issue of Sovremennik that published the article “National Tactlessness”; “and whyshould it not maintain itself when there is such‘excellent’ political tact on the part of the nationa-lities embraced within its borders. 
” To Cherny-shevsky the Austrian Germans, Czechs, Croats and, as we have seen, Ruthenians seemed equally “slow-witted. 
” He was afraid that the Slav “slow-wittedness” which was particularly evident in1848-49 would again go very far. 
 At the beginning Up to here Sot-sial-Demokrat No. 
 1, p. 
 158 NB NBstruggle against the Viennese reactionary central-ists. 
 The discontent of the Hungarians was running so high that at one time it could have been expected that there would be a revolutionary outburst intheir country. 
 In his political reviews, our author repeatedly expressed the fear that, in the event of a revolutionary movement in Hungary, theAustrian Slavs would again become obedient tools of reaction. 
 The tactics of many Slav races in Austria at that time could only strengthen suchfears, since the Austrian Slays even ventured to boast of the disgraceful role they had played in the 1848-49 events. 
 Chernyshevsky stronglycondemned these tactics and showed that it would have been more to their advantage if, on the contrary, they had supported the enemies of theViennese Government, enemies from whom they could have obtained substantial concessions. 
 He said this concerning the attitude of the Croatsto the Hungarians [64], and repeated this to the Ruthenians. 
 “The social-estate party, hostile to the Ruthenians,” we read in his article “NationalTactlessness,” “is now ready for concessions.... 
 It would do no harm for the Lvov Slovo to give this some thought; perhaps the concessions whichpeople who seem to it to be enemies are sincerely prepared to make, perhaps these concessions are so great that they would thoroughly satisfy theRuthenian settlers; in any event these concessions are without doubt far greater and far more impor-tant than the concessions the Ruthenian settlerscan get from the Austrians.... 
” [65]...Finally, the first part of the novel Prologue 173 depicts the friendly attitude of Volgin to Sokolovsky (Sierakowski). 
 Volgin likes Sokolovsky’s utter devotion to his [66] convictions, the absence ofconceited pettiness, his self-control, combined with the passionate zeal of the true agitator. 
 Volgin calls him a r e a l m a n and thinks that our liberals could learn a great deal from him. 
 All this is very interesting,* but it too in no way explains Chernyshevsky’s practical relations with the Polish affair. 
 174 *Volgin particularly prized in Sokolovsky his “ b a l a n c e d j u d g m e n t which he displayed in 1848 when of all his companions-in-arms in VolhyniaRegion he was the only one not to lose his head and to weigh coolly the chances of the armed insurrection. 
 These proved to be all but nil. 
ee idem Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 1, pp. 
 165-166 A t that time Chernyshevsky was about 34 years of age. 
 He was in the prime of his mental powers, and who knows to what heights he might not have risen in his development! But he had not long tolive in freedom. 
 He was the recognised leader of the extreme party, a highly influential exponent of materialism and socialism. 
 He was consideredthe “ringleader” of the revolutionary youth, and was blamed for all their outbursts and agitation. 
 As always happens in such cases, rumour exagger-ated the affair and ascribed to Chernyshevsky intentions and actions which were foreign to him. 
 In “Prologue to a Prologue,” 175 Chernyshevsky himself describes the liberal sympathetic gossip spread in St. 
 Petersburg concerning Volgin’s (i. 
e. 
, his own) alleged relations with the Londoncircle of Russian exiles. 
 176 The gossip was occa-sioned by the most insignificant incidents that had absolutely nothing to do with politics. 
 And,as usual, things did not stop at mere gossip. 
 The police-inspired press had long been engaged in literary denunciations of Chernyshevsky. 
 In 1862,Sovremennik was suspended for some time. 
 Then came non-literary denunciations as well. 
 “The Director of the Third Department of His ImperialMajesty’s Own Chancellery,” said the indictment of Chernyshevsky, “has received an anonymous letter warning the Government against Cherny-shevsky, ‘that youth ringleader and wily socialist’; ‘he himself has said that he will never be convict-ed’; he is said to be a pernicious agitator, andpeople ask to be spared from such a man; ‘all of Chernyshevsky’s former friends, seeing that his tendencies were finding expression in deeds andnot merely in words, liberal-minded people... have dissociated themselves from him. 
 Unless you remove Chernyshevsky, writes the author of theletter [67], there will be trouble and bloodshed; they are a band of rabid demagogues, of reckless people.... 
 Perhaps they will eventually be eliminat-ed, but just think how much innocent blood will be shed because of them.... 
 There are committees of such socialists in Voronezh, Saratov, Tambovand elsewhere, and everywhere they inflame the youth.... 
 Send Chernyshevsky away wherever you like, but be quick to deprive him of the opportunityto act.... 
 Deliver us from Chernyshevsky for the sake of public peace’”.... 
 [71]...What is the secret of the extraordinary success of What Is To Be Done? 177 It is the same as is generally responsible for the success of literary works, the fact that this novel gave a living and universally understood answer to questions in which a considerable section of the reading publicwas keenly interested. 
 In themselves, the thoughts expressed in it were not new; Chernyshevsky had taken them wholly from West-European literature. 
In France,* George Sand had much earlier advocat-ed free and, most important, sincere and honest relations in the love of a man for a woman. 
 As re-gards the moral demands she puts on love, Lucrezia Floriani differs in no way from Vera Pavlovna Lopukhova-Kirsanova. 
 And as for the novelJacques [72], it would be simple to copy out a fairly large number of passages from it to show that in the novel What Is To Be Done? the thoughts and reasonings of George Sand’s** freedom-loving, selfless hero are at times reproduced almost in their entirety. 
 And George Sand was not the only oneto advocate freedom in relations of this kind. 
 It is well known that they were also advocated by Robert Owen and Fourier, who had a decisive * Let us note in passing that Goethe’s Wahiver-wandschaften also represents a word in defence of suchrelations. 
 This is well understood by some Germanhistorians of German literature who, while not daring todecry such on authoritative writer, and at the same timenot daring to agree with him because of their own philistine virtuousness, usually mutter something totally unintelligible about the apparently strange paradoxes ofthe great German. 
 **On March 26, 1853, Chernyshevsky recorded in his diary the following conversation with his fiancée: “‘Canyou possibly think that I will deceive you?’ ‘I don’t think that, I don’t expect it, but I have considered such an event too. 
’ ‘What, then, would you do?’ I told her of GeorgeSand’s Jacques . 
 ‘Then you, too, would shoot yourself?’ ‘I don’t think so’; and I told her I would try to obtainGeorge Sand for her (she had not read it, or at any rate doesnot remember the ideas in it)” ( Collected Works , Vol. 
 X, Part 2, Section 3, p. 
 78). 
 We consider that it is not su-perfluous to note another passage from Chernyshevsky’sconversations with his fiancée: “But what these relationswould be like—the day before yesterday she said: ‘Wewould have separate halves of the house and you oughtnot to come to me without permission’; I would have liked to arrange things that way myself, perhaps I think more seriously about it than she does;—she probably onlymeans that she doesn’t want me to bore her, while I un-derstand it to mean that in general every husband shouldbe extremely considerate to his ‘wife in his matrimonialrelations” (ibid. 
, p. 
 82). 
 Almost literally the same con-versation takes place between Vera Pavlovna and Lo-pukhov in the novel What Is To Be Done?21* 2223 25 30 35 influence on Chernyshevsky’s outlook. 
*** And as early as the forties all these ideas met with warm sympathy in our country. 
 In his articlesBelinsky often called passionately for freedom and sincerity in relations of love. 
 The reader will recall, of course, how bitterly the “impetuousVissarion” reproached Pushkin’s Tatyana because, while loving Onegin, she did not follow the dictates of her heart; she belonged to “another,” her agedhusband, whom she did not love but continued to live with. 
 In their attitude to women, the best people of the “forties” adhered to the same principlesas those of Lopukhov and Kirsanov. 
 However, prior to the appearance of the novel What Is To Be Done? , these principles were shared only by a “select” handful; the mass of the reading public did not understand them at all. 
 Even Herzen hesitated to expound them fully and clearly inhis [73] novel Who Is To Blame? A. 
 Druzhinin handles the question more resolutely in his story Polenka Saks . 
* But this story is too colourless, and its characters, belonging to so-called high society—officials and titled personages—did not at all appeal to the non-gentry, who after the fall of Nicholas regime formed the left wing of the reading public. 
 With the appearance of What Is To Be Done? everything changed, every-thing became clear, precise and definite. 
 There was no more room left for doubt. 
 Thinking people were faced with the alternative of being guidedin love by the principles of Lopukhov and Kirsa-nov, or of bowing to the sanctity of marriage and resorting, should a new sentiment arise, to theold, tested method of secret amorous adventures, or else completely subduing all affection in their hearts in view of the fact that they belonged t o a marriage partner, whom they no longer loved. 
 And the choice had to be made quite consciously. 
 Chernyshevsky dealt with the issue in such a waythat what had been natural instinctiveness and sincerity in love relations became utterly impos-sible. 
 Mind control extended to love, and the gener-al public adopted a conscious view of the relations * It seems hardly necessary to recall what an ener-getic advocate Robert Owen was in this respect. 
 As for Fourier, we quote here his very profound words: “lescoutumes en amour ... ne sont que formes temporaires et variables, et non pas fond immuable” ( Oeuvres complètes NB NB 40 4142ee NB cf. 
 Sotsial-Demokratbetween man and woman. 
 And this was particu-larly important in our country in the sixties. 
 The reforms which Russia had undergone turned upside down both our social and family relations. 
A ray of light reached into recesses that had been in complete darkness. 
 Russian people were com-pelled to examine themselves, to take a soberview of their relation to their kin, to society and family. 
 A new element came to play a big role in family relations, in love and friendship: viz. 
,convictions , which formerly only the very smallest handful of “idealists” had possessed. 
 Differences of conviction led to unexpected ruptures. 
 A woman“given in marriage” to a certain man often discov-ered with horror that her lawful “lord” was an obscurantist, a bribe-taker, a flatterer grovellingbefore his superiors. 
 A man who had enjoyed the “possession” of his beautiful wife, and unexpectedly was affected by the current of new ideas, oftenrealised in dismay that what his charming play-thing was interested in was not at all “new people” or “new views,” but new dresses and dances, andalso [74] the title and salary of her husband.... 
 [75]...In Vera Pavlovna’s dreams we see that side of Chernyshevsky’s socialist views to which,unfortunately, Russian socialists up to now have not paid sufficient attention. 
 That which attracts us in these dreams is the fact that Chernyshevskyfully realised that the socialist system can only be based on the broad application to production of the technical forces developed by the bourgeoisperiod. 
 In Vera Pavlovna’s dreams huge armies of labour are jointly engaged in production pass-ing from Central Asia to Russia, from hot climatecountries to the cold countries. 
 All this, of course, could have been conceived with the aid of Fourier as well, but it is evident even from the subsequenthistory of so-called Russian socialism that the Russian reading public was not aware of this. 
 In their ideas of socialist society our revolution-aries frequently went so far as to conceive it in the form of a federation of peasant communities cultivating their fields with the same antiquatedplough as that used to scrape the soil in the time of Basil the Blind. 
 But obviously such “socialism” cannot be recognised as socialism. 
 The emancipa-tion of the proletariat can come about only through the emancipation of man from the “p o w e r o f /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR emancipation has made absolutely indispensable those [76] armies of labour and that extensive application of modern productive forces to produc-tion which Chernyshevsky spoke of in Vera Pav-lovna’s dreams and which we have completely forgotten in our desire to be “practical. 
” Chernyshevsky was present at the birth of the 1 new type of “new people” in our country. 
 He has drawn this type in the shape of Rakhmetov. 
 Our author joyfully welcomed the emergence of this new type could not deny himself the satisfac-tion of depicting at least a vague profile of him. 
 At the same time he foresaw with sorrow how many trials and sufferings there were in store for theRussian revolutionary whose life must be one of severe struggle and great self-sacrifice. 
 And so, in Rakhmetov, Chernyshevsky presents us withthe true ascetic. 
 Rakhmetov positively tortures himself. 
 He is completely “merciless towards him-self,” as his landlady says. 
 He even decides totest whether he can bear torture by spending a whole night lying on a length of felt with nails sticking through it. 
 Many people, including Pisa-rev, regarded this as mere eccentricity. 
 We agree that some aspects of Rakhmetov’s character could have been drawn differently. 
 But the character asa whole nevertheless remains completely true to life. 
 Almost every one of our prominent 2 socialists of the sixties and seventies p ossessed 3 no small share of the Rakhmetov spirit. 
 We should like to say in closing our introduc-tion that Chernyshevsky’s significance in Russianliterature has yet to be appraised properly. 
 How much he is misunderstood in our country even by many of those who think very well of himcan be seen from V. 
 G. 
 Korolenko’s reminiscences of him. 
 This gifted and intelligent author portrays him as a sort of “rationalistic economist” who,moreover, believes “in the power of Comte’s orga-nising reason. 
”* if the words about “organising1—“the revo-lutionary” in Sotsial-Demokrat (No. 
 1, p. 
 173)178 2—”Russian revolution-aries” 3—“enor-mous” ( Sot-sial-Demokrat No. 
 1, p. 
 174) NB NBreason” mean anything at all, then they mean that Chernyshevsky regarded social phenomena from an idealistic standpoint, from which they were considered by Comte himself. 
 But he wholooks on social phenomena from an i d e a l -i s t i c standpoint cannot be called an e c o n o -m i s t for the simple reason that this name is ap-plied, even if not very properly, to those who, while not believing [77] in the power of organising reason, do believe in the organising power of eco-nomics. 
 An “economist” who believed in the power of organising reason would be like a Darwinist who accepted the cosmogony of Moses. 
 But this isnot the most important thing here. 
 What is most important is the fact that Mr. 
 Korolenko counter-poses the sociological views of our “subjectivists” 179 to the “economism” of Chernyshevsky. 
 “We, too, did not stand still when we ceased to be ‘rationalis-tic economists. 
’ Instead of purely economic patterns,the literary trend, represented chiefly by N. 
 K. 
 Mi-khailovsky, has opened to us a veritable vista of laws and parallels of a biological character, whilethe play of economic interests was assigned a sub-ordinate role. 
”* “ D i d n o t s t a n d s t i l l,” indeed! The “vista of laws and parallels of a biological char-acter,” revealed by Mikhailovsky, w a s a n e n o r m o u s s t e p b a c k w a r d s i n com-parison with Chernyshevsky’s social views. 
** N. 
 K. 
 Mikhailovsky was a disciple of P. 
 L. 
 Lavrov, whose views on the course of social developmentcorresponded to those of Bruno Bauer, as we have shown in the book The Development of the Monist View of History . 
 Hence whoever would like to understand the relation between N. 
 G. 
 Cherny-shevsky’s world outlook and that of our “subjectiv-ists” should first of all try to understand the rela-tion between Feuerbach’s philosophy, to which Chernyshevsky adhered, and Bruno Bauer’s views. 
 And this is clear and simple: Feuerbach is farahead of Bruno Bauer. 
 As an epigraph to our first article on Cherny-shevsky, written while the news of his death wasstill fresh in mind, and completely revised in thepresent edition we have taken the following * Korolenko, op. 
 cit. 
, pp. 
 7 9-80. 
 **No wonder Chernyshevsky’s attitude to those “laws and parallels” was entirely negative, according toee words from Chernyshevsky’s letter to his wife: “My life and yours belong to history; hundreds of years will pass and our names will still be dear to people who will recall them with gratitudewhen those who lived with us are no more. 
” This letter was written on October 5, 1862, i. 
e. 
, when the author was already incarcerated. 
 PART ONE N. 
 G. 
 CHERNYSHEVSKY’S PHILOSOPHICAL, HISTORICAL AND LITERARY VIEWS SECTION ONE N. 
 G. 
 CHERNYSHEVSKY’S PHILOSOPHICAL VIEWS Chapter One CHERNYSHEVSKY AND FEUERBACH [81]...In the first edition of this work, the first article of which, dealing, inter alia, with Cherny-shevsky’s philosophical views, was written in late 18 9 9, we expressed the conviction that in his philosophical views our author was a follower of Feuerbach. 
 Naturally, this conviction of ours was based above all on a comparison of those ideasof Chernyshevsky which had a more or less direct bearing on philosophy, with Feuerbach’s views.... 
 Chapter Three POLEMIC WITH YURKEVICH AND OTHERS ...[101] Yurkevich ascribes to Chernyshevsky the idea that there is n o d i f f e r e n c e a t a l l between material and psychical phenomena, and inquires triumphantly how it is that sensa-tions arise from the movement of a nerve. 
 This is the old nonsense that has long been flung at material-ists and from which it merely follows that thepeople who want to “criticise’ materialism do not even know the ABC of materialism. 
 Nowhere in his article does Chernyshevsky say that there is nodifference at all between so-called [102] physical phenomena, on the one hand, and psychical pheno-mena, on the other. 
 On the contrary, he categori-cally admits the existence of this difference; but he believes that it in no way justifies attributing psychical phenomena to a particular non-materialfactor. 
 We are already acquainted with his re-mark to the effect that there are very many differ-ent qualities in every object. 
 Now we shall discuss8 it in more detail. 
 “For example,” Chernyshevsky says, “a tree grows and burns; we say it has two qualities: the power of growth and combustibility. 
 What similarity is there between these two quali-ties? They are totally different; there is no concept under which one could put both these qualities, except the general conception—quality; thereis no concept under which we could put both series of phenomena corresponding to these qualities, except the concept—phenomenon. 
 Or, for example,ice is hard and sparkles; what is there common to hardness and sparkle? The logical distance from one of these qualities to the other is immeasurablygreat or, it would be better to say, there is no logical distance between them, whether near or far, because there is no logical relation betweenthem. 
 From this we see that the combination of quite heterogeneous qualities in one object is the general “law of things. 
” The same also with thequality we call the capacity for sensation and thought. 
 Its distance from the so-called physical qualities of the living organism is immeasurably great. 
 But this does not prevent it being a quality of the same organism which, at the same time, possesses extension and capacity for movement .... 
 [103]...Even J. 
 Priestley remarked in his Disquisitions that the idea that brain vibrations are identical with perception would be a very great abuse of materialist doctrine. 
 “It is easy to form an idea of there being vibrations withoutany perceptions accompanying them. 
 But it is supposed that the brain, besides its v i b r a t i n g p o w e r, has superadded to it a p e r c i p i e n to r s e n t i e n t p o w e r , l i kewise; there being no reason that we know why this power may not be imparted to it. 
”* This is precisely the pointof view held by all the prominent materialists of modern times, including, of course, Feuerbach and Chernyshevsky. 
 The opponents of material-ism—the consistent or inconsistent, conscious or unconscious idealists—ought, in their criticism of this doctrine, to convince us above all thatthey know more about it than Priestley does, and show us what grounds specifically prevent them from recognising, together with Priestley, that * Disqusitions Relating to Matter and Spirit . 
 By Joseph Priestley, Vol. 
 I, The second edition, Birmingham,MDCCLXXX, II, p. 
 121. 
not immeasur-ably (al-though we still do not know this “meas-ure”) NB ee the brain, besides having the ability to vibrate, may also be capable of perceiving. 
 They undoubt-edly have such grounds. 
 But these amount to the spiritualistic prejudice that by itself, i. 
e. 
, unlessanimated by spirit, matter is dead and incapable not only of perception, but even of motion. 
 To re-fer, in arguing with the materialists, to suchgrounds means to commit an obvious petitio principii, i. 
e. 
, to argue from the very same proposi-tion which has to be proved. 
 The opponents ofmaterialism themselves more or less vaguely sense this. 
 Therefore, they are usually very careful not to show the grounds which hinder them from recognis-ing the capacity for perceiving one of the prop-erties of matter, and prefer to refute what no single prominent materialist has ever stated, atleast in modern times, i. 
e, that perception is the same as motion. 
* We leave it to the reader to judge of this sort of criticism, a criticism which is more widespread in our country than anywhere else,and is more so now than ever before.... 
 [105] ...It stands to reason,” Chernyshevsky admits, “that when we speak of the difference inthe state of the body during a chemical process and at a time when it is not in that process, we mean only the quantitative distinction betweena vigorous, rapid course of that process and a very feeble slow course of it. 
 Properly speaking, every body is constantly going through a chemical pro-cess. 
 For example, a log, even if it is not set on fire or burnt in a stove but lies quietly, seemingly undergoing no changes, in the wall of a house,will nevertheless come in time to the same end to which burning brings it: it will gradually decay, and nothing will be left of it, too, but ashes (thedust of decayed wood, of which in the end nothing remains but the mineral particles of ash). 
 But if this process—e. 
g. 
, in the case of the ordinary decayof a log in a house wall—takes place very slowly and feebly, then qualities which are proper to a body going through the process manifest them-selves with a microscopic feebleness that is com-pletely imperceptible under ordinary conditions. 
 * We allow that among the a n c i e n t materialists— Democritus and Epicurus for example—there could have been a certain lack of clarity on this account although this is far from having been proved it has to be remem-bered that the views of these thinkers have only reachedNB For example, the slow decay of a piece of wood in a house wall also generates heat; but that quan-tity of it which in burning would have been con-centrated into a few hours, in this case becomesdiluted, so to speak, into several decades, so that it does not achieve any result that is easily per-ceptible in practice; the existence of this heat isnegligible for practical purposes. 
 It is the same as the taste of wine in a whole pond of water into which one has let fall a drop of wine: from thescientific point of view, the pond contains a mixture of water and wine, but to all practical purposes it can be assumed that there is no wine at allin it. 
” [106] This brilliant passage allows one to sur-mise that for Chernyshevsky in this respect toothere was no cleavage between organised matter on the one hand and unorganised matter, on the other. 
 To be sure, the organism of the animal (andeven more so of the animal at the top of the zoologi-cal tree, that is, man) displays in the respect that is of interest to us such properties as are altogetheralien to unorganised matter. 
 But, after all, the burning of a piece of wood, too, is accompanied by a number of phenomena that are not to beobserved during the process of its slow decay. 
 However, there is no essential difference between these two processes. 
 On the contrary, this is oneand the same process, with this difference only that in the one case it is very rapid and in the other, extremely slow. 
 Therefore, in the one casethe properties which belong to a body undergoing this process manifest themselves with great force, while in the other case they do so “with microscopicfeebleness that is completely imperceptible under ordinary conditions. 
” In regard to the question of psychical phenomena this means that in an unor-ganised form also, matter is not devoid of the basic capacity for “sensation,” which provides such rich “spiritual” fruits among the higheranimals. 
 But in unorganised matter this capacity exists to an extremely small extent. 
 Therefore it is totally imperceptible to the investigator and,without risk of committing any appreciable error, we can equate it to nil. 
 Nevertheless, it must not be forgotten that this capacity in general is inher-ent in matter and that in consequence there are no grounds for regarding it as something miraculous NB can be seen, for example, among the higher animals in general, and pre-eminently in man. 
 In express-ing this idea—with the caution necessary under the conditions of our press at that time—Chernyshevsky came close to such materialists as Lamettrie and Diderot who, in turn, adopted the view of Spinoz-ism, freed of the unnecessary theological append-ages.... 
 [107]...Yurkevich also asserted that quantita-tive differences are transformed into qualitative differences not in the object itself but in its re-lation to the sentient subject. 
 But this is a very gross logical mistake. 
 In order to become changed in its relation to the sentient subject the object must undergo a preliminary change in itself. 
 DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD DDDDDDDDD If for us ice does not have the same properties as steam, it is because the mutual relations of the water particles in the former case are entirelydifferent from those in the latter. 
 But enough of this.... 
 We know how contemptuous Chernyshevsky was of Yurkevich’s arguments. 
 He did not analyse these arguments—and had no possibility of doing so under the conditions of the censorship—but sim-ply declared them to be obsolete and not in the least convincing. 
 “I am a seminarian myself,” he wrote in his Polemical Gems . 
 “I know from my own experience the position of people who get their education as Yurkevich did. 
 I have seen people in the sameposition as he is. 
 I therefore find it hard to laugh at him; it would mean laughing at the impossibility of having decent books available, laughing at thecomplete helplessness in the matter of developing oneself, at a situation that is unimaginably re-stricted in all possible respects. 
 “I don’t know Mr. 
 Yurkevich’s age; if he is no longer a young man, it is too late to worry about him. 
 But if he is still young, I gladly offer himthe small collection of books in my possession. 
” Mr. 
 Volynsky still finds this reply highly [108] unsatisfactory. 
 He thinks that Chernyshevskyreplied in this way solely because of his inability to decisively refute Yurkevich. 
 Evidently some journalists at the beginning of the sixties alsoreasoned in this manner. 
 For example, Dudyshkin, enumerating Yurkevich’s allegedly irrefutable arguments point by point, wrote the following innot logical, but episte-mological Otechestvenniye Zapiski , addressing himself to Chernyshevsky: “The matter would appear to be clear; it now concerns not someone else, but you; not philosophyor physiology in general, but your ignorance of these sciences. 
 Why drag in the red herring of seminary philosophy? Why confuse totally differ-ent things and say that you knew all that when you were in the seminary and even now remember it all by heart?” To this Chernyshevsky replied that Dudyshkin’s lack of acquaintance with seminary notebooks prevented him from understanding what was atissue. 
 “If you took the trouble to look through these notebooks,” he continues, “you would see that all the shortcomings which Mr. 
 Yurkevichdiscovers in me, these notebooks discover in Aristotle, Bacon, Gassendi, Locke, etc. 
, etc. 
, in all the philosophers who were not idealists. 
Consequently, these reproaches by no means apply to me as an individual writer: they apply properlyto the theory which I consider it useful to popular-ise. 
 If you are incredulous, take a look at the Philosophical Dictionary , published by Mr. 
 S. 
 G. 
, which takes the same line as Mr. 
 Yurkevich, and you will see that the same thing is said there of every non-idealist: he does not know psychology,he is not acquainted with the natural sciences, he rejects inner experience, he is overwhelmed by facts, he confuses metaphysics with the natural sciences, he degrades man, etc. 
, etc.... 
” Chapter Four THE DOCTRINE OF MORALITY [111]...In general, very noticeable in Cherny-shevsky’s view of rational egoism is the endeavour, characteristic of all “periods of enlightenment” (Aufklärungsperioden), to seek support for moralityin reason, and in the more or less well-founded calculations of the individual an explanation of his character and behaviour. 
 Sometimes Cherny-shevsky’s arguments in this connection are as similar as two peas in a pod to the arguments of Helvétius and those who shared his ideas. 
 Theyrecall almost as strongly the arguments of Socrates, the typical representative of the epoch of enlight-enment in ancient Greece, who, in coming forwardas a champion of friendship, showed that it is NB a d v a n t a g e o u s to have friends because they may [112] be of some use in times of mis-fortune. 
 The explanation for such extremes of rationality is that the enlighteners were usually incapable of adopting the v i e w p o i n t o f d e v e l o p m e n t. 
* We know that, according to Chernyshevsky’s theory, man is by nature neither good nor evil but becomes good or evil depending on circum-stances. 
** Were we to recognise that man is always prompted by calculation in his behaviour, then we should have to formulate Chernyshevsky’sview on human nature differently; we should have to say that man is by nature neither good nor evil but only calculating, this property of hisbecoming more or less marked depending on cir-cumstances. 
 But such a formulation would hardly be to our author’s liking. 
 What is good, and what is evil, according to his theory? This question is answered by the same article, “The Anthropological Principle in Philos-ophy”—a very informative one, as the reader can see. 
 “Individuals,” says Chernyshevsky in it, “regard as good the actions of other people thatare beneficial to them; society holds as good, what is good for the whole of society, or for the majority of its members. 
 Lastly people in general, irrespec-tive of a nation or a class, describe as good that which is beneficial for mankind in general. 
” It often happens that the interests of different nations orestates run counter to one another or to human interests generally; it is also a frequent occurrence that the interests of one estate are opposed to thoseof the whole nation. 
 How is one to decide in this case what is good and what is bad? * See for particulars in our book Beitäge zur Geschichte des Materialismus—Holbach, Helvetius und Karl Marx , Stuttgart, 1896. 
 **It is worth noting, however, that in the past our author expressed a different view of human nature. 
 According to that view, man is a being which by nature is inclined to respect and love truth and good, andto abhor all that is bad, a being capable of violating the laws of good and truth only through ignorance, error or under the influence of circumstances strongerthan his character and reason, but a being never capable of preferring evil to good of his own free will. 
” (See the article on Shchedrin’s Provincial Sketches in Sovremennik,No. 
 6, 1857, reprinted in The Complete Works , Vol. 
 III. 
 The lines quoted are on pp. 
 221-222 of the volume. 
) This is closer to Socrates than to the present-day doctrine NB ee SECTION TWO N. 
 G. 
 CHERNYSHEVSKY’S VIEWS ON HISTORY Chapter Two MATERIALISM IN CHERNYSHEVSKY’S VIEWS ON HISTORY [159]...Chernyshevsky applied Feuerbach’s views to aesthetics and in this, as we shall see below, he achieved results that in a certain sense aremost remarkable. 
 But here, too, his conclusions were not quite satisfactory because the perfectly correct idea of the aesthetic development of man-kind implies the preliminary elaboration of a general conception of history. 
 As regards this general con-ception of history, Chernyshevsky succeeded inmaking only a few, if very correct, steps towards its elaboration. 
 One may cite as examples of such steps the large quotations from his writings thatwe have just made [160].... 
 Chapter Three IDEALISM IN CHERNYSHEVSKY’S VIEWS ON HISTORY Here is what we read in his article dealing with V. 
 P. 
 Botkin’s well-known book Letters of Spain (Sovremennik , 1857, Book 2): “The division of a people into hostile castes is one of the greatest obstacles to the improvement of its future; in Spain, there is no such disastrousdivision, no irreconcilable enmity between social-estates every one of which would be prepared to sacrifice the most precious historical achievementsif only it could do harm to another estate; in Spain the entire nation feels itself a single whole. 
 This peculiarity is so extraordinary among the peoplesof Western Europe that it deserves the greatest attention and may in itself be considered an earnest of the country’s happy future. 
”* This is not a slip of the pen, because, several pages further below in the same article, Cherny-shevsky says: “The Spanish people have an indis-putable advantage over most civilised nations in one, exceedingly important respect: the Spanish [161] estates are not divided either by deep-rootedhatred or by substantial conflicting interests; they do not constitute castes inimical to one another, as is the case in many other West European coun-tries; on the contrary, in Spain, all the estates may strive jointly for a common goal.... 
* [163]...Utopian socialists took an idealist view of the entire future of contemporary society. 
 They were convinced that the fate of that society wouldbe decided by the “views” held by its members, i. 
e. 
, the standpoint which they took, with regard to social reorganisation plan put forwardby a particular reformer. 
 They did not ask themselves why it was that the dominant views in that particular society were suchand not others. 
 That is why they were not eager for a further elaboration of those elements of a materialist interpretation of history whichtheir doctrines undoubtedly were replete with. 
 In fact, they were prone to look on mankind’s past history as well from an idealist standpoint. 
 Forthis reason, in their statements about that history we very often encounter the most undoubted and, it would seem, most obvious contradictions: factswhich have apparently been interpreted in an entirely materialist sense are suddenly given an entirely idealist explanation; and, on the otherhand, idealist interpretations are every now and again upset by perfectly materialist eruptions. 
 This lack of stability, this recurrent shift frommaterialism to idealism and from idealism to materialism, a shift perceptible to the modern reader, but imperceptible to the author, makesitself felt also in the historical statements of Chernyshevsky, who in this respect is very reminis-cent of the great utopians of the West. 
 In thefinal analysis he inclines like them, we repeat, to idealism. 
 This can be clearly seen from his interesting article “On the Causes of the Fall of Rome (an Imitation of Montesquieu),” published in Sovre-mennik for 1861 (Book 5). 
 In it he vigorously opposes the very widespread opinion that the Roman Empire in the West [164] fell because of its inherent inability to develop further, whereasthe barbarians who put an end to its existence brought new seeds of progress with them.... 
 No mention is made here either of the internal social relations in Rome, which accounted for its weakness and which were pointed out even by Ibid. 
, p. 
 44. 
 Guizot in his first article “Essais sur l’histoire de France,” or of the forms of communal life to which the German barbarians owed their strength at the time of the fall of the Roman Empire in the West. 
Chernyshevsky forgot even the famous words of Pliny, which he himself quotes elsewhere: lati-fundia perdidere Italiam (“latifundia were theundoing of Italy”). 
 In his “formula of progress,” as the phrase went in our country afterwards, [165] there is no room for the internal relations inthe country concerned. 
 Everything is reduced to intellectual development. 
 Chernyshevsky states emphatically that progress is based on intellectualdevelopment and that “its fundamental aspect consists precisely in the successes and develop-ment of knowledge. 
” It does not occur to him that“the successes and development of knowledge” may depend on social relations, which in some cases are conducive to those successes and thatdevelopment and in others hinder them. 
 He de-picts social relations as a mere corollary of the spread of certain views. 
 We have just read this:“historical knowledge is broadened; this reduces the number of false notions that prevent people from organising their social life, which is, there-fore, organised more successfully than before. 
” This is very unlike what our author said in his article on Roscher’s book. 
 From what he saidthere it followed, moreover, that it is impossible, and indeed ridiculous, to judge scholars as if they were schoolboys, saying that a particularscholar was unfamiliar with a particular science and therefore came to hold erroneous views. 
 It also followed from what he said there that what mattersis not the amount of knowledge acquired by a partic-ular scholar, but the interests of the group which he represents. 
 In short, it followed from what hesaid there that social views are determined by social interests; and social thought, by social life. 
 Now, it is the other way round. 
 Now, it appearsthat social life is determined by social thought and that if a social system has certain shortcomings, it is because society, like a schoolboy, has studiedpoorly or little and therefore has conceived er-roneous notions. 
 It would he hard to think of a more striking contradiction. 
 [170]...Herzen formed his view of Russia’s attitude to the “old world” under the strong in-fluence of Slavophils and this view was wrong. 
But one can arrive at an erroneous view even just as a correct view may result from the employ-ment of a more or less erroneous method. 
 It is therefore fair to ask oneself how the method by which Herzen formed his erroneous view was relatedto the method which led Chernyshevsky to a com-pletely justified repudiation and ridicule of that view.... 
 Chapter Five CHERNYSHEVSKY AND [188]...We may be reminded that, as we have remarked, the reviews by Chernyshevsky which we have examined appeared after the historical views of Marx and Engels shaped themselves intoa harmonious whole. 
 We are not forgetful of this. 
 But we believe that this matter cannot be settled by mere reference to chronology. 
 The main writingsof Lassalle, too, did not appear until after the historical views of Marx and Engels assumed a harmonious form, and yet, in ideological content,those writings, too, belong to the period of transi-tion from historical idealism to historical material-ism. 
 The point is not when a particular work ap-peared but rather what was its content. 
 If in previous historical periods the advance of knowledge depended on the character of economicrelations, in passing to our own period Cherny-shevsky should have asked himself: what are the economic peculiarities of it that led to the discoveryof social truth and ensured the future realisation of the latter. 
 But in order to ask himself that question, he should have broken resolutely withidealism and firmly adopted a materialist interpre-tation of history. 
 We shall not reiterate that Chernyshevsky was still far from a break withidealism and that his conception of the further trend of social development was completely ideal-ist. 
 We merely ask the reader to note that Cherny-shevsky’s historical idealism compelled him in his considerations of the future to give first place to “advanced” people—to the i n t e l l e c t u a l s,as we [189] now call them—who should disseminate the ultimately discovered social truth among the masses. 
 The masses are allotted the role of back-ward soldiers in the advancing army. 
 Of course, no sensible materialist will assert that the average “man in the street,” just because he is an ordinary NB than the average “intellectual. 
” Of course he knows less. 
 But it is not a matter of the knowledge of the “man in the street,” but of his actions. 
 The actions of people are not always determined by their knowledge and are never determined o n l y by their knowledge but also—and chiefly—by their position, which is merely made clear andcomprehensible by the knowledge they possess. 
 Here again one has to remember the fundamental proposition of materialism in general, and of thematerialist explanation of history in particular: it is not being that is determined by consciousness, but consciousness by being. 
 The “consciousness”of a man from the “intelligentsia” is more highly developed than the consciousness of a man from the “masses. 
” But the “being” of a man from the masses prescribes to him a far more definite method of action than that which the social position of the intellectual prescribes to the latter. 
 That is whythe materialist view of history allows one only in a certain and, moreover, very limited sense to speak of the backwardness of the man from the“masses,” compared with the man from the intel-ligentsia; in a certain sense, the “man in the street” undoubtedly lags behind the “intellectual,” but in another sense he undoubtedly is in advance of him. 
 And precisely because this is so, an adherent of the materialist interpretation of history, while by no means repeating the absurd attacks on theintelligentsia that are coming from the Black-Hundred and syndicalist camp, would never agree to assign the intelligentsia the role of a demiurgeof history which is generally assigned to it by idealists. 
 There are various kinds of aristocratical-ness. 
 Historical idealism is guilty of an “aristocrat-icalness of knowledge. 
” What in Chernyshevsky’s historical views was a shortcoming resulting from the insufficient elaboration of Feuerbach’s materialism later became the basis of our subjectivism, which had nothing in common with materialism and vigor-ously opposed it not only in the field of history but also in the field of philosophy. 
 The subjectivistsboastfully called themselves continuers of the best traditions of the sixties. 
 In reality, they continued only the weak aspects [190] of theNB NB /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR This is also the shortcoming of Plekhanov ‘s book on ChernyshevskyChapter Six LAST HISTORICAL WORKS OF CHERNYSHEVSKY [199]...Had Chernyshevsky consistently elabo-rated the idea expressed here, he would have had to renounce completely the idealist views expressed by him in the article—now familiar to us—con-cerning the causes for the fall of Rome. 
 But the point is that he expresses such ideas only in pass-ing, he does not enlarge on them. 
 In expressingthem, he does not at all find it necessary to repu-diate historical idealism, and this is not due to a predilection for idealism as a philosophicaltheory. 
 Chernyshevsky’s attitude to this theory was in general extremely negative. 
 While expound-ing the idealist view of the trend of historicaldevelopment, he continues to regard himself as a consistent materialist. 
 He is wrong. 
 But the root of his error lies in one of the chief shortcom-ings of Feuerbach’s materialist system. 
 Marx expressed it rather aptly: “Feuerbach wants sen-suous objects, really differentiated from the thoughtobjects, but he does not conceive of human activity itself as being o b j e c t i v e activity. 
 Hence, in the Essence of Christianity , he regards the theoreti-cal attitude as the only genuinely human atti-tude.... 
”* ...Like his teacher, Chernyshevsky directs his attention almost exclusively to the “theoretical”activity of mankind and, as a result, mental development becomes for him the most basic cause of historical movement.... 
 [205]...It follows from Chernyshevsky that in history vice is always punished as it deserves. 
 In reality, however, the historical facts knownto us do not at all warrant this view, which may be comforting but is certainly naïve. 
 The only question of interest to us is how it came to beheld by our author. 
 This question can be answered by reference to the period when Chernyshevsky lived. 
 It was a period of social upsurge, a periodhaving a moral need, so to speak, for such views as would bolster faith in the inevitable defeat of evil.... 
 * See his Theses on Feuerbach , written as early as the spring of 1845. 
 SECTION THREE N. 
 G. 
 CHERNYSHEVSKY’S VIEWS ON LITERATURE Chapter One THE SIGNIFICANCE OF LITERATURE AND ART [221]...The view of art as p l a y, supplemented by the view of play as a “child of labour,” shedsa very bright light on the essence and history of art. 
 It makes it possible for the first time to view them from a materialist standpoint. 
 We knowthat, at the very beginning of his literary activity, Chernyshevsky made an attempt, which was most successful in its own way, at applying Feuerbach’smaterialist philosophy to aesthetics. 
 We have devoted a special work to describing that attempt. 
* So we shall merely say here that although it wasmost successful in its own way, that attempt is affected, in the same way as Chernyshevsky’s views on history, by the main shortcoming ofFeuerbach’s philosophy: insufficient elaboration of its historical, or to be more exact, dialectical aspect. 
 And it is just because this aspect was notelaborated in the philosophy assimilated by him that Chernyshevsky could overlook the great importance of the concept of play for a materialistinterpretation of art.... 
 Chapter Two BELINSKY, CHERNYSHEVSKY AND PISAREV [236]...“Lasting enjoyment is afforded to man by reality alone; only those desires are of serious importance which are based on reality; success[237] may be expected only from hopes evoked by reality, and only from those deeds which are accomplished with the help of forces and circum-stances offered by reality. 
”** Such was the new notion of “reality. 
” Cherny-shevsky had Feuerbach in mind when he said thatit had been formed by modern thinkers from the obscure allusions of transcendental philosophy. 
 And he expounded Feuerbach’s concept of realityquite correctly. 
 Feuerbach said that sensuousness * See the article “Chernyshevsky’s Aesthetic Theory” in the collection In Twenty Years . 
 **N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky, Collected Works , Vol. 
 II, p. 
 206. 
 NB ee Sor actuality is identical truth, i. 
e, that the object in its true sense is given only by sensation. 
 Speculative philosophy supposed that ideas of objects based only on sense experience do not correspond to the real nature of the objects and must be verified with the aid of pure thought,i. 
e. 
, thought not based on sense experience. 
 Feuer-bach decisively rejected this idealistic view. 
 He asserted that conceptions of objects based onour sense experience fully correspond to the nature of these objects. 
 The only trouble is that our imagination frequently distorts these conceptions,which, therefore, come into contradiction with our sense experience. 
 Philosophy should drive out from our conceptions the fantastic element that distorts them; it should bring them into accord with sense experience. 
 It must return mankindto a contemplation of real objects undistorted by fancy, such as prevailed in ancient Greece. 
 And insofar as mankind passes to such contemplation,it returns to itself, because people who submit to figments of the imagination can themselves be only imaginary and not real beings. 
 In the words of Feuerbach, the essence of man is sensuousness,i. 
e. 
, actuality, and not imagination and not ab-straction. 
 The task of philosophy and science in general is to restore reality to its rightful place. 
 But if that is so, it follows of itself that the tasks of aesthetics as a branch of science are also to restore reality to its rightful place and combat theimaginary element in man’s notions. 
 It was on this conclusion from Feuerbach’s philosophy that Chernyshevsky’s aesthetic views were based; itconstituted the main idea of his dissertation. 
 And there is no doubt that Belinsky had the same conclusion in mind when, in his [238] second butlast annual review of literature, he described the concept of “reality” as a new one.... 
 [242]...Everyone knows that the criticism of the sixties, the criticism of Dobrolyubov for example, often crossed over into journalism. 
 Hence, in speaking of Chernyshevsky, we shallnot so much present proofs of this thought as illustrations of it. 
 In 1858 Chernyshevsky’s article “The Russian at a Rendezvous. 
 Reflections onTurgenev’s story Asya ” appeared in the review section of Atheneum , No. 
 3. 
 This article is one of the most brilliant examples of journalisticcriticism. 
 Very little, almost nothing, is said in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 1, p. 
 143the article about Turgenev’s actual story, which Chernyshevsky calls “practically the only good new story. 
” The author merely draws attention to the scene in which the hero of the story makeshis declaration of love to Asya, and, in connection with this scene, he indulges in “reflections. 
” The reader will recall, of course, that at the criticalmoment Turgenev’s hero turned coward and withdrew. 
 It is this circumstance that caused Chernyshevsky to “reflect. 
” He notes that indeci-sion and cowardice are the distinctive features not only of this hero, but of most of the heroes of our best literary works. 
 He recalls Rudin, Beltov,and the tutor of Nekrasov’s Sasha, and sees the same features in all of them. 
 He does not blame the authors of the novels on this account sincethey were only recording what is met with at every step in real life. 
 There is no manliness in Russian people, therefore the characters in thenovels have none either. 
 And Russian people have no manliness because they are not in the habit of taking part in public affairs. 
 “Whenwe go into society, we see around us people in uniforms and civilian morning or evening dress; these people are five and a half or six feet tall,and sometimes even more; they grow or shave the hair on their cheeks, above their upper lip and [243] on their chin; and we imagine we are lookingat men. 
 This is a total error, an optical illusion, a hallucination, nothing more. 
 Without acquiring the habit of elementary participation in civilaffairs, without acquiring the feelings of a citizen, the male child grows up and becomes middle-aged, and then an elderly being of the masculine gender,but he does not become a man or, at any rate, not a man of a noble character. 
* Among humane, educated people, the absence of noble manlinessstrikes one still more than among ignorant people, because the humane, educated man likes to talk about important matters. 
 He talks with enthusiasmand eloquence, but only until it becomes a matter of passing from words to deeds. 
 “So long as there is no question of action, but merely the need tofill up empty hours, an empty mind, or an empty heart, with talk and dreams, the hero is very glib; but once it is a matter of expressing his feelingsplainly and exactly, the majority of the heroes * Collected Works , Vol. 
 1, pp. 
 97-98. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 1, p. 
 143— “malicious and apt char-acterisation of Russian liberalism”180 NB 9 NBimmediately begin to waver and feel tongue-tied. 
 A few, the most courageous, somehow contrive to muster their forces and stammer something that provides a vague idea of their thoughts. 
But just attempt to take their wishes at face value and say to them: ‘you want so-and-so; we’re very glad; begin to do something about itand you’ll have our support’—if such a remark is made one half of the very brave heroes faint, the other begin to gruffly reproach you for puttingthem in an awkward position; they begin to say that they did not expect such proposals from you, they are quite at a loss and cannot think properlybecause it is not possible to do so at a moment’s notice and, moreover, they are honest people, and not only honest but very mild, and they donot want to cause you any unpleasantness, and that, in general, it is not possible, really, to trouble oneself about all that is said merely from havingnothing to do, and that it is best not to undertake anything at all, because everything involves trouble and inconvenience, and at present nothinggood can come of it, because, as already said, they never for a moment expected, or anticipated, and so on and so forth. 
”* One can say that the portrait is painted with a master’s hand. 
 However, the master was not a literary critic, but a journalist. 
 [245]...As for the requirements of the period, they consisted, to his mind, [246] in concessions to the peasantry. 
 Chernyshevsky exhorted the“estimable” gentlemen with this quotation from the Gospel: “Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him; lest at anytime the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison. 
 Verily I say unto thee, thoushalt by no means come out thence, till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing. 
”(Mat. 
, Ch. 
 V, verses 25 and 26). 
** It is self-evident that every theoretical conclu-sion concerning the capacity of a given social class or stratum for definite practical action alwaysrequires a certain degree of verification by expe-rience, and that, consequently, it can be considered * Collected Works , Vol. 
 I, pp. 
 90-91. 
 **Ibid. 
, p. 
 102. 
 NB NBtrustworthy a priori only within certain, more or less broad limits. 
 Thus, for example, it was possible with complete assurance to foretell that even the most educated section of the nobility wouldrefuse to sacrifice their interests for the sake of the peasants. 
 Such a prediction in no way required practical verification. 
 But when it was necessary todetermine to what extent the educated nobility were capable of making concessions to the peas-a nt r y i n t h e i r o w n i n terests, then no one could say in advance with absolute certainty: they will not go in that direction beyond such-and-such a limit. 
 Here it was always possible to assume thatunder certain circumstances the educated nobility would go a little further, after arriving at a some-what more correct understanding of its own inter-ests. 
 Being practical, as Chernyshevsky was in this case, he not only could but had to endeavour to persuade the nobility that certain concessions tothe freed peasants were required in its own in-terests. 
 Thus, what might have seemed to consti-tute a contradiction in his article—the demand fora judicious and resolute step on the part of people whose incapacity for decision and wisdom is here admitted and explained as a necessary product ofcircumstances—was actually no contradiction at all. 
 Such imaginary contradictions can also be found in the political practice of people who take their stand on the firm ground of the materialist explanation of history. 
 However, here it is neces-sary to make a very essential reservation. 
 When a materialist applies his theoretical [247] con-clusions in practice with a certain amount of cau-tion, he can nevertheless guarantee that his con-clusions contain a certain element of the mostindisputable certainty. 
 And this is because, when he says: “everything depends on circumstances,” he knows from what side one must expect theappearance of the new circumstances that will change the will of people in the direction he desires; he knows quite well that, in the final analysis,they are to be expected from the side of “econom-ics,” and that the truer his analysis of the socio-economic life of society, the more trustworthyhis prediction concerning the future development of society. 
 Not so with the idealist, who is con-vinced that “opinions rule the world. 
” If “opin-ions” are the basic cause of social movement, then the circumstances on which the further devel-ee opment of society depends are linked chiefly to the conscious activity of people, while the possi-bility of any practical influence on this activity is dependent on the greater or lesser ability ofpeople to think logically and master the new truths discovered by philosophy or science. 
 But this ability depends itself on circumstances. 
 Thus, theidealist who recognises the materialist truth that the character and also, of course, the views of man, depend on circumstances, finds himself in a viciouscircle: views depend on circumstances, circum-stances on views. 
 The thought of the “enlightener” in theory has never broken out of this vicious circle. 
In practice the contradiction was usually solved by a strong appeal to all thinking people, indepen-dently of the circumstances under which suchpeople were living and acting. 
 What we are now saying may appear unnecessary and for that reason a boring digression. 
 But in point of fact this digres-sion was essential for us. 
 It will help us to under-stand the nature of the journalistic criticism of the sixties. 
 Since the hopes of the “enlightener” are pinned on the intellect and good will of thinking people,i. 
e. 
, in effect of the “enlighteners” themselves, it is obvious that critics desiring to support these people will demand from fiction above all ane x a c t depiction of social life with all its pros and cons, with its “positive” and “negative” phenom-ena. 
 Only an exact portrayal of all aspects of lifecan furnish an “enlightener” with the factual data needed by him for passing judgment on that life.... 
 [253]...However, N. 
 Uspensky used to express himself even more emphatically. 
 For example, he wrote: “Nothing is to be expected from thepresent-day peasants who not so long ago were the victims of serfdom:—they will not be resurrect-ed!... It is unlikely that medicine will ever cureatrophy, because the disease is based on o r g a n i c damage.... 
”* It was quite difficult for the “people of the seventies” to agree with this. 
 It waschiefly this that gave rise to the unfavourable attitude of the critics of that epoch towards N. 
 V. 
 Uspensky. 
 The reader will perhaps ask: but was it easy for Chernyshevsky himself to agree with N. 
 V. 
 Uspen-* N. 
 V. 
 Uspensky, Collected Works , Vol. 
 II, 1883, p. 
 202. 
NB sky’s completely hopeless view of “the present-day peasants,” since Chernyshevsky evidently considered possible at that time a broad movement of thepeople who were dissatisfied with the conditionsof the abolition of serfdom. 
 To this reply that,obviously, this would not have been easy for him if he considered himself bound to agree uncondi-tionally with N. 
 V. 
 Uspensky. 
 But that is precisely the point—he did not agree unconditionally with him. 
 He considered N. 
 V. 
 Uspensky’s essays quitetruthful; but he did not draw a hopeless conclu-sion from them. 
 He said: “Routine dominates the ordinary course of life of common people; andamong the plain folk, like in all other social-estates, the routine is just as dull and banal as in all other social-estates. 
 Mr. 
 Uspensky’s merit is tohave had the courage to depict for us, without con-cealment or adornment, the routine thoughts and actions, feelings and customs of plainpeople. 
 The picture is not at all attractive: at every step nonsense and dirt, pettiness and dullness. 
 “But do not be in a hurry to draw conclusions from this regarding the validity or non-validity of your hopes, if you wish to alleviate the lot ofthe people; or of your misgivings, if you were so far concerned about the dullness and inertia of the people. 
 Take the commonest, most colourless,weak-willed, shallow person; no matter how drab and petty the life he leads, it has in it moments of a totally different [254] shade, moments of energetic efforts, courageous decisions. 
 The same is also encountered in the history of every na-tion. 
”* The circumstances, on which everything depends in the last resort, may take such a turn that even an apathetic mass will become capable of vigorouseffort and courageous decision. 
 While waiting for the moment when the circumstances take a favourable turn, one must attentively study thebackward mass. 
 The initiative in taking courageous decisions will never come from the mass of the populace; but one has to know the character of thepeople making up this mass “in order to know in what way initiative may stimulate them. 
”** * N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky, Collected Works , Vol. 
 VIII, p. 
 357. 
 **Collected Works , Vol. 
 VIII, p. 
 346. 
NB NB NBee And the more accurately fiction represents the character of the mass of the people, the more it will facilitate the task of those who, under favour-able circumstances, will have to take the initiativein making great decisions. 
 Now we shall ask the reader to recall that in one of the theses of his dissertation Chernyshevsky,emphasising the portrayal of life as the chief characteristic of art, adds: “works of art often have another significance—they explain life; often theyalso provide a verdict on the phenomena of life. 
” What we have quoted, if only from one article “Is This Not the Beginning of a Change?”, clearlyshows to what extent literary criticism in the person of Chernyshevsky was inclined to value the portrayal of life chiefly as material for inter-preting it and judging it (for passing a verdict on the phenomena of life). 
 The same tendency of Chernyshevsky manifests itself definitely in allhis other literary articles. 
 Here is what he says, for example, in a review of a collection of poetry by A. 
 N. 
 Pleshcheyev ( Sovremennik , 1861, No. 
 3). 
 He recalls with displeasure the time when our critics treated Pleshcheyev with scorn and evenill-will. 
 “It seems monstrous now,” he says. 
 “Surely the noble sentiments and noble ideas which breath-ed from every page of Mr. 
 Pleshcheyev’s bookletwere not so commonplace in the Russian poetry of the time as to be dismissed with scorn. 
 When, indeed, is such a thing possible and permissible?”Pleshcheyev, according to him, had no great poetic talent and his aspirations [255] and hopes were quite vague. 
 But he did possess great sincerity andas for expressing his hopes with greater preci-sion, he could not do so for reasons beyond his control. 
 [262]...Pisarev possessed tremendous literary talent. 
 But for all the enjoyment that the unpre-judiced reader derived from the literary brilliancyof Pisarev’s articles, it must be admitted that “Pisarevism” was a sort of reductio ad absurdum of the idealism of our “enlighteners.... 
” [266]...Some of Mikhailovsky’s sociological articles have now been translated into French and, if we are not mistaken, also into German. 
 Pre-sumably, however, they will not make his name very well known in Europe. 
 But it is very possible that they will earn praise from one or two of thoseEuropean thinkers who are going “back to Kant!” out of hatred of Marxism. 
 In spite of the opinion of our latest historian of literature, there can be nothing flattering in these praises. 
 But extremely worth noting is time irony of history which makes a theoretical weapon of reaction out of what was an innocent theoretical mistake in a more or less progressive utopism. 
NB PART TWO N. 
 G. 
 CHERNYSHEVSKY’S VIEWS ON POLITICS AND POLITICAL ECONOMY SECTION ONE N. 
 G. 
 CHERNYSHEVSKY’S POLITICAL VIEWS Chapter One UTOPIAN SOCIALISM [280]... His article goes on to tell of the strange and often ridiculous acts to which the Saint-Simonists were driven in their extreme exaltation. 
 He calls them drawing-room heroes overcome by a fit of philanthropy. 
 But he qualifies this severejudgment of them. 
 The Saint-Simonist movement was the first expression of the concept of trans-forming society, and that first expression is of great[281] historic significance. 
 It indicates that it is high time society concerned itself with the ideas of reform that first appeared in the unsatisfactoryform of Saint-Simonism. 
 In conclusion, Chernyshevsky says of reformist ideas: “We shall soon see that they have begunto appear in more reasonable forms and to reach people for whom they are no longer a delightful amusement but a matter of necessity, and when DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD that class which the Saint-Simonists wished to humbug begins reasonably to concern itself about its own well-being, then probably, life on earth will be better for it than it is at present. 
* This is a highly important remark. 
 It shows that in his views on the future of West European socialism Chernyshevsky came very close to the theory of the class struggle. 
 But we know already of the rolewhich this theory has played in his views on history. 
 Sometimes it helped him to explain very successful-NB NBe l y c e r t a i n i s o l a t e d h i s t o r i c a l p h e n o m e n a; but he looked on it as a rather serious obstacle to progress instead of a necessary condition for it in a society divided into classes. 
The reader will recall that Chernyshevsky saw the weak development of the class struggle in Spain as an earnest of that country’s progressivedevelopment in the future. 
 In his comments on events in France in 1848, as well as in the passage we have just quoted, he seems to incline to theidea that the emancipation movement of the proletariat is now becoming the motive force of social progress in Western Europe. 
 But with himthis idea remains one of the germs of a materialist interpretation of history to which we have repeated-ly called the reader’s attention in dealing with ourauthor’s views on history.... 
 [282]...He explains the backwardness of the “ordinary people” of Europe as being due to thefact that well-known scientific conceptions have not yet reached the people. 
 When they do, when “ordinary people” become acquainted with philo-sophical views “corresponding to their needs,” then the triumph of the new principles in the social life of Western Europe will not be far off. 
* Cherny-shevsky does not ask himself the question whether any phenomena exist in this life that could provide an objective guarantee that the new philosophical ideas will, in fact, ultimately reach the “ordinary people. 
” He has no need for s u c h a guaranteebecause, as he sees it, the very nature of these principles, and also the nature of man, quite sufficiently guarantee the triumph of the newprinciples.... 
 Chapter Two UTOPIAN SOCIALISM (Continuation) [289]...Chernyshevsky regards the question of socialism, as he does all the other general questionsof historical development, from the point of view of i d e a l i s m. 
 And this idealist attitude to the most important historical phenomena was typicalof the socialism of all countries in the utopian period of its development. 
 This feature of utopianNB socialism is of such tremendous importance that it is necessary to dwell on it—without fear of a certain amount of repetition, which may very well occur in the process. 
 Chapter Three CHERNYSHEVSKY’S “OWN” PLAN AND THE QUESTION OF THE LAND COMMUNE [313]...“Let us suppose,” he says, turning to his favourite method of explanation by means of a “parable”—”let us suppose that I was interestedin taking steps to preserve the provisions from the store of which your dinner is prepared. 
 Obviously, if I did so out of affection for you, then my zealwould be based on the assumption that the provi-sions belong to you and that the dinner being pre-pared from them is nourishing and good for you. 
Just imagine my feelings when I learn that the provisions do not really belong to you and that for every dinner prepared from them you paymoney which is not only more than the dinner itself is worth but which, in general, you cannot pay without extremely embarrassing yourself. 
What ideas will enter my head in the face of such strange discoveries?... How stupid I was to bother about a matter when the conditions for its use-fulness were not guaranteed! Who but a dolt can bother about the preservation of property in certain hands, without first being assured thatthe property will remain in those hands and on advantageous terms?... Rather let all these provi-sions, which only cause harm to the person I love,be lost! Rather let the whole matter, which only causes your ruin, vanish! Sorrow for you, shame on account of my own stupidity—that is whatI feel. 
”* [315]...Credit is due to Chernyshevsky for the fact that, at the very beginning of his literaryactivity, he displayed, in his comments on the land commune, far more consideration than many a “Russian socialist” even in the mid-nineties,when to all appearances, only the blind could fail to see that our vaunted “age-long foundations” were crumbling. 
 As far back as April 1857 hewrote: but “there is no concealing the fact that Russia, which until now has had a small share in * Collected Works , Vol. 
 IV, p. 
 307. 
excessive! economic progress, is being rapidly swept along with it, and our way of life, until now scarcely affected by the economic laws which reveal their power only in times of increased economic andcommercial activity, is beginning rapidly to be subjected to them. 
 Perhaps it will not be long before we, too, are drawn into the sphere of fulloperation of the law of competition. 
”* This is precisely what the theoreticians of our Narodism ever since sought to conceal from them-selves and their readers for so long and with so much care. 
 What the Scriptures say is true: star differs from star in glory .... 
 Being convinced thatour country lacks the conditions for making com-munal land tenure a source of well-being for the people, Chernyshevsky was to see that his sym-pathetic attitude to the commune bore in fact very little similarity to the Slavophils’ sympathetic view of it. 
 In his article “On the Causes of the Fallof Rome,” he says that although the commune could contribute to the further development of Russia, it was nonetheless ridiculous to takepride in it, because 13161 it was after all a sign of our economic backwardness. 
 He offers an exam-ple: European engineers, he says, now use appliedmechanics to construct suspension bridges. 
 But it appears that in a backward Asiatic country-he does not quite remember which one-local engineershave long since been building suspension bridges on suitable sites. 
 Does that mean that applied mechanics in Asia may be placed on a footingwith that in Europe? There are bridges and bridges, and the Asian engineers’ suspension bridge is infinitely inferior to its European counterpart. 
To be sure, when European engineers arrive in the Asiatic country which has long been familiar with suspension bridges, they will find it all the easierto convince a mandarin that the suspension bridge of today is not a godless invention. 
 But nothing more than that. 
 Despite its suspension bridges,the Asiatic country will remain a backward country all the same while Europe will still be its preceptor. 
 The same holds true for the Russian commune. 
Perhaps the latter will promote the development of our country; but the chief stimulus will come nonetheless from the West, and it does not reallybefit us to renovate the world, even by means of the commune.... 
 * Collected Works , Vol. 
 III, p. 
 185. 
 Chapter Four SOCIALISM AND POLITICS [317]...He who tries to obtain in idea of Cherny-shevsky’s political views on the basis of his writ-ings, at first feels a little embarrassed, that is, if he himself is not indifferent [318] to politics. 
Indeed, the man who next to Belinsky was the most colourful exponent of progressive tendencies in our literature, at first glance appears to bepolitically indifferent. 
 And it is not because he has employed a few unfortunate expressions, nor be-cause of a slip of the pen, but on account of thegeneral principles by which he is sometimes guided in judging the more important phenomena of West-European life. 
 For evidence of this we referto the article “Party Struggles in France Under Louis XVIII and Charles X” ( Sovremennik , 1858, Nos. 
 8 and 9). 
 There we read: “The fundamental desires, the basic urges, of liberals and democrats are essentially different. 
 Democrats intend to abolish as far as possiblethe predominance of the upper classes over the lower in the state structure; on the one hand to reduce the power and wealth of the upper social-estates, on the other to give more weight and well-being to the lower social-estates. 
 How to change the laws in this sense and to support the newstructure of society is almost a matter of indiffer-ence to them. 
 On the other hand, the liberals can-not at all agree to give the predominance in societyto the lower social-estates because owing to their lack of education and material poverty, these social-estates are indifferent to the interests thatare of the utmost importance to the liberal party, namely, the right of free speech and a constitu-tional system. 
 For the democrat, our Siberia, wherethe ordinary people are well off, stands far higher than England, where the majority of the people suffer great privations. 
 Out of all political institu-tions, the democrat is irreconcilably hostile to only one—aristocracy; the liberal almost always finds that only with a certain degree of aristocracycan society attain the liberal system. 
 Therefore the liberals are usually the mortal enemies of the democrats, and say that democracy leads to despo-tism and is fatal to freedom. 
”* * Collected Works , Vol. 
 IV, pp. 
 56-57. 
Cf. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 1, p. 
 124 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR [319]...Chernyshevsky then explains his ideas by arguments which bear out even more forcefully our supposition that by democrats he means socialists. 
 He says: “From the theoretical aspect,liberalism may seem attractive to one whom good fortune has delivered from want: freedom is a very good thing. 
 But liberalism takes a very narrow,purely formal view of freedom. 
 To it freedom con-sists of abstract right, of formal permission of the absence of legal restraint. 
 It refuses to see thatlegal right is of value to a person only when he has the material means of exercising that right. 
* The people have no material opportunity for avail-ing themselves of political freedom. 
 The majority of them are illiterate almost in all countries. 
 So why should they treasure their right to free speech?Want and lack of education doom them to com-plete ignorance [320] of affairs of state. 
 So why should they take any interest in parliamentarydebates?” Chernyshevsky states emphatically that “there is no European country where the vast majority of the people is not completely indif-ferent to the decrees which are the object of the aspirations and concern of liberalism”** [329]...In the political survey published in No. 
 6 of Sovremennik for 1859, Chernyshevsky remarks, after stating that the movement which insists on intervention by the German [330] Unionin Austria’s favour is growing stronger in Germany: “we have not been speaking of ordinary people, but actually of classes in which public opinion isconcentrated, classes which engage in political affairs, read the newspapers and influence the course of affairs—that crowd which everywhere isa plaything of self-interest and intrigue. 
”*** The “ordinary people” do not read newspapers, do not occupy themselves with political affairsand have no influence on their course. 
 That is the situation now, while their consciousness is still fast asleep. 
 But when it awakens under the in-fluence of the vanguard of the active historical army, consisting of the “best people,” who have learned the lessons of modern science, then the“ordinary people” will understand that their task consists in the radical reconstruction of society, and then they will undertake the work of this re-* Collected Works , Vol. 
 IV, p. 
 157. 
 **Ibid. 
, p. 
 158. 
 *** Collected Works , Vol. 
 V, p. 
 249. 
NB NBee construction, which has no direct relation to questions of the forms of political structure. 
 Such were Chernyshevsky’s predominant views, which are to be found in the majority of hisnumerous political reviews. 
* If at times this essentially idealist view of politics makes way for a different view, the germ,as it were, of a materialist understanding, this is only an exception, quite like that which we encountered in studying Cher-nyshevsky’s historical views: the reader will remember that in these views which are also essentially idealist, there are also germs of the materialist view of history. 
 Let us now elucidate with the help of two exam-ples the character that Chernyshevskys political reviews had taken under the influence of his aforementioned predominant views regarding therelation of politics to the chief tasks of the working class. 
 First example. 
 In January 1862, in his political review, he enters into a controversy with the Prussian liberal National Zeitung regarding Austria’s internal policy. 
 The National Zeitung wrote: “Let the fate of Austria be a lesson to other states not to undertake expenditures that exceed their financial strength. 
 The cause of Austria’sruin is her excessive army expenditures. 
” Cherny-shevsky does not like these reflections of the National Zeitung . 
 [331]...Such arguments, which led to the con-clusion that the despotic Austrian Government is acting perfectly correctly, should have astonishedand in fact did astonish a large number of the readers of Sovremennik . 
 They produced [332] an impression not so much of indifference to ques-tions of political freedom as of direct sympathy with the obscurantists. 
 Chernyshevsky’s opponents frequently accused him of such sympathies. 
 It wasjust because of accusations of this kind that at the end of his political review in March 1862 he made the ironical confession: “for us there is no better amusement than liberalism—and we * These reviews take up at least two volumes of his Collected Works . 
Because of the theo-retical difference between the idea-list and materialist views of history, Plekhanov over-looked the practi-cal-political and class difference be-tween the liberal and the democrat ? NB NB NB Cf. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 1, p. 
 144181 changed!!M ee A page from G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov’s book N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky with V. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s notes A page from G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov’s book N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky with V. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s notes Cf. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 1, p. 
 144 tone! NBhave an irresistible desire to look about for liberals in order to poke fun at them. 
” But as a matter of fact, of course, he did not write his paradoxical reviews in order to “poke fun” at the liberals, norto defend despotic governments. 
 Basically the thought was that, while the given social relations existed, things could not proceed otherwise thanthey were doing and that anyone who wanted them to proceed differently should devote his DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD efforts to a radical change in social relations. 
 To actDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD differently would be a waste of time. 
 The liberalsevoked Chernyshevsky’s ridicule precisely because they proposed palliatives where a radical cure was necessary. 
 * Second example. 
 In April of the same year, Chernyshevsky again appeared to take the side of absolutism in its struggle with liberalism in the Prussian Government’s conflict with the Prussian Diet. 
 According to him, the liberals should nothave been surprised that the Prussian Government did not make voluntary concessions to them but preferred to agitate the country by dissolving theDiet “We find,” he says, “that the Prussian Govern-ment acted as it should have. 
** This again was bound to astonish the naïve reader and seem tohim a betrayal of the cause of freedom. 
 It is clearly understandable, however, that here, too, our author was not at all taking up the cudgels in defence ofdespotism, but only wanted [333] to utilise the Prussian events in order to communicate to the more astute of his readers the correct view of the chief condition on which, in the final analysis, theoutcome of all broad social conflicts depends. 
 Here is what he says on this point: “Just as quarrels between different states are * In his Essays on Political Economy Chernyshevsky, pointing to the lack of agreement between the existing economic system and “the demands of a sound theory,” sometimes interrupts his exposition with the question:“Should a system continue which allows such disagree-ment?” (See, for instance, Collected Works , Vol. 
 VII, p. 
 513. 
) The reader of Chernyshevsky must have asked himself the same question on reading his political surveys, especially those leading to the “incongruous” conclusion that the apologists of despotism, and not its opponents,were in the right. 
 In Chernyshevsky such a conclusion was just another argument a g a i n s t t h e c o n t e-m p o r a r y l i f e. 
 But the liberals often failed to under-stand this. 
eeDDDDDDDD NB NB NBat first carried on by diplomatic means, so the struggle for principles inside the state itself is at first carried on by means of civilian influence or so-called legal means. 
 But just as a quarrel be-tween different states, if it is sufficiently important, always leads to military threats, so too with the internal affairs of states, if the affair is not of minor importance. 
 If the quarrelling states are very unequal in power, then the affair is usually solved by military threats alone: the weaker state suc-cumbs to the will of the stronger, and this preventsopen warfare. 
 In just the same way, in important internal affairs, war is only prevented if one of the conflicting sides feels too weak compared withthe other: then it submits as soon as it sees that the opposing party has really decided to resort to military measures. 
 But if two quarrelling statesare not so unequal in power that the weaker of them cannot hope to repulse an attack, then the affair may pass from threats to war. 
 The defendingside has a very big advantage on its side and, therefore, if it is not too weak, it does not lose heart at the decision of the stronger opponent toattack it”* It was from this point of view that he examined what was then taking place in Prussia. 
 He defendedand praised the Prussian Government—this must be noted—solely because “it was acting in the best possible way in favour of national progress”by destroying the political illusions of those naïve Prussians who, for no obvious reason, imagined that a system of genuinely constitutional rule would be instituted in their country of itself, without a struggle against the old order. 
 And if he revealed not the slightest sympathy for the Prussian liberals and even poked fun at them, the explanation is that, in his just opinion, they too DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD wanted to achieve their aims [334] without a deter-mined struggle against their political enemies. 
 In speaking of the possible outcome of the conflict between the Diet and the Government he remarks,with great perspicacity, that “judging by the present mood of public opinion in Prussia, it is to be presumed that the opponents of the present * Collected Works , Vol. 
 IX, p. 
 241. 
ee ? NBsystem find themselves too weak for military struggle and are ready to yield at the first deter-mined threat from the government that it will resort to military measures. 
”* And so it turned out Chernyshevsky was right in his contempt for the Prussian liberals. 
 They indeed wanted constitu-tional order to be instituted in Prussia of itself. 
 Not only did they not take determined action—for that they could not be blamed since, with the prevailing relation of social forces, this was not possible—but they condemned in principle every idea of such action, i. 
e. 
, they hampered, insofar as it depended on them, a change in social forces that would have made it possible to resort to such action in the future. 
 Chernyshevsky could not forgive them that, just as Lassalle could not. 
 It isnoteworthy that just when Chernyshevsky was ridiculing the Prussian liberals in his political articles, Lassalle was tearing them to pieces in hisspeeches. 
 And it is even more noteworthy that in those speeches the German agitator sometimes used the same words as Chernyshevsky to describethe relation of social forces as the foundation of the political system in a particular country. 
 Lassalle had in many respects the same mentors as Cherny-shevsky. 
 It is natural, therefore, that the political thinking of both tended in the same direction, and achieved results that coincided in part. 
 We say“i n p a r t” because, in noting the great s i m -i l a r i t y of Lassalle’s views to Cherny-shevsky’s, one must not close one’s eyes to thed i f f e r e n c e s between them. 
 Lassalle does not confine himself to concluding that the constitu-tion of any country is the juridical expression of theprevailing correlation of social forces. 
 He seeks the causes which determine this correlation, and finds them in the social economy. 
 Those of Las-salle’s speeches which bear on this question are permeated with a materialist spirit, which is more than can be said, for instance, of his speech[335] on the philosophy of Fichte, or his “S y s t e m o f A c q u i r e d R i g h t s. 
” Neither does Chernyshevsky ignore the question of the causesdetermining the relation of social forces, but in his analysis he stops at social self-consciousness, i. 
e. 
, not crossing the boundary separating historical * Collected Works , Vol. 
 IX, p. 
 241. 
eee e e e i. 
e. 
, the dem-ocratic move-ment NB NBidealism from historical materialism. 
 In contrast to Lassalle, he is a far more consistent idealist in his comments on Prussian affairs than in many of his other articles dealing with politics or history. 
This difference, too, should be attributed com-pletely to the “relation of social forces. 
” In Prussia, no matter how weak Prussian capitalism was com-pared with what it is at present, a w o r k i n g-c l a s s m o v e m e n t in the modern sense of the word had nevertheless already begun; but inRussia t h e m o v e m e n t o f t h e “n o n-g e n t r y,” which is usually called the movement of the i n t e l l i g e n t s i a, had only just begun to flourish. 
 Influenced by the requirements of the working-class movement, even i d e a l i s t s are often compelled to reason m a t e r i a l i s -t i c a l l y. 
 (Joe can find many examples in present-day France of how the requirements ofthe working-class movement exert their influence. 
 The movement of the intelligentsia, on the con-trary, sometimes drives even m a t e r i a l i s t sto purely i d e a l i s t reasoning. 
 This is particu-larly marked in Russia today. 
 Chernyshevsky’s political reviews were intended for the “best people,” who had to know what they should teach the backward masses. 
 The work of the “best people” amounted, i n t h e m a i n , t o propaganda. 
 But not e x c l u s i v e l y. 
 The “ordinary people,” generally speaking, do not figure on the political stage. 
 And what takes placeon that stage—again speaking generally—little affects their interests. 
 But there are exceptional epochs during which the masses of the peopleawaken from their customary hibernation and make energetic, although often hardly conscious, efforts to improve their destiny. 
 In such exceptional epochs the activity of the “best people” more or less loses its predominantly p r o p a g a n d i s t charac-ter and becomes a g i t a t i o n a l. 
 This is what Chernyshevsky says of such epochs: “Historical progress takes place slowly and arduously... [336], so slowly that, if we limit ourselves to very short periods, the fluctuations produced in the advancing course of history byaccidental circumstances may blind us to the action of the general law. 
 In order to convince oneself of its immutability, it is necessary to con-sider the course of events over a fairly long time.... 
 Compare the state of the social institutions and laws of France in 1700 and today—the difference is extremely great, and it is all to the advantageof the present day; and yet almost all this century and a half was very arduous and gloomy. 
 The same also in England. 
 Whence comes the difference?It was being constantly prepared for by the fact that the best people of each generation found life in their time extremely difficult; little by little atleast a few of their desires became comprehensible to society, and then, at some time many years later, on propitious occasions, society for sixmonths, a year, or hardly more than three or four years, worked for the fulfilment of at least a few of this small number of desires which had penetrat-ed to it from the best people. 
 The work was never successful: when half the work was done society’s zeal would be exhausted, its strength would giveout, and once again the practical life of society would fall into a long period of stagnation; and, as before, the best people, if they survived the workinspired by them, saw that their desires were far from having been carried out and as before had to bemoan life’s burdens. 
 But in the brief period of noble enthusiasm much was reconstructed. 
 Of course, the reconstruction took place hurriedly, there was no time to think about the elegance of thenew structures, which remained unfinished, there was no time to bother about the subtle require-ments of architectural harmony between the newparts and the surviving remains, and the period of stagnation inherited the reconstructed edifice with a multitude of petty incongruities and hideosi-ties. 
 But that period of indolence afforded leisure to examine carefully every detail and since the improvement of the details that it disliked didnot require any particular effort, it was done little by little; and while an exhausted society busied itself with trivia, the best people weresaying that the reconstruction was incomplete, and argued that the old parts of the building were becoming more and more dilapidated, and that itwas necessary to resume work on a big scale. 
 At first a tired society refused to heed them, re-garding their jarring cry as interference with itsrest; then, having recovered its energy, society began to defer more and more to an opinion which had previously aroused its indignation. 
 [337] So- NB Cf. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 1, p. 
 161182ciety gradually became convinced that there was some truth in it, came to recognise that truth more and more from year to year, and finally was pre-pared to go along with those progressive peoplewho argued that reconstruction was necessary; and, then, at the earliest opportunity it set to work with renewed fervour, again left it unfinished,and once more fell into a slumber, only to resume the effort later on. 
”* Chernyshevsky’s political articles were aimed at showing the “best people” that the old structure of the contemporary social system was crumbling more and more and that there was a need to “re-sume work on a big scale. 
” And everything points to the fact that towards the end of the first, i. 
e. 
, pre-Siberian period of his literary activity, itbegan to appear to him that society was more and more heeding his opinion, and falling in with him. 
 In other words, he began to think that in Russian history too there was approaching one of those beneficial leaps which rarely occur in history, but which push far ahead the process of social develop-ment. 
 The spirits of the advanced sections of Russian society were indeed rapidly rising, and with them Chernyshevsky’s spirits also rose. 
 At one time he had found it possible and useful to make clear to the government its own interestsin the matter of freeing the peasants; now he does not even think of addressing himself to the govern-ment. 
 To count on it at all seems to him harmfulself-delusion. 
 In the article “The Russian Reformer” (Sovremennik, October 1861), which he wrote in connection with the publication of M. 
 Korf’s bookThe Life of Count Speransky , Chernyshevsky argues at length that no reformer should delude himself with such calculations in our country. 
Speransky’s enemies called him a revolutionary. 
 This opinion amused Chernyshevsky. 
 Speransky indeed had very broad plans for changes, but it isludicrous to call him a revolutionary, judging by the extent of the means he intended using to carry out his intentions. 
 He could maintain his position only because he had managed to earn the trust of the tsar Alexander I. 
 With this trust to support him, he intended to carry out his plans. 
 That is why Chernyshevsky called him a dreamer.... 
 * Collected Works , Vol. 
 V, pp. 
 400-491. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat , p. 
 161 changed Cf. 
 omission Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 1, p. 
 162183[338]...Only he who constantly remembers that the course of social life is determined by the re-lationship of social forces does not succumb to harmful delusions in politics, he who wishes to actin accordance with this basic principle has some-times to go through a difficult moral struggle. 
 Chernyshevsky tries to warn the “best people” ofhis time on this score, in view of what he thought was the imminent leap. 
 Thus, as far back as January 1861, in analysing a book by the well-known American economist, Carey, whose insig-nificance, incidentally, he brilliantly exposes, he unexpectedly passes to the well-known Jewishheroine, Judith, and strongly justifies her action. 
 He says: “The path of history is not paved like Nevsky Prospekt; it runs across fields, either dustyor muddy, and cuts across swamps or forest thick-ets. 
 He who fears being covered with dust or mud-dying his boots, should better not engage in socialactivity, for this is a noble occupation when one is really concerned with the good of the people, but it is not exactly a tidy one. 
 It is true, however,that moral purity may be understood differently; others, for example, may feel that Judith did not tarnish herself.... 
 Broaden your considerations andon many individual questions you will have obligations that are different from those resulting from an isolated examination of the same ques-tions* At the beginning of the sixties the government conceived the idea of lifting censorship restrictionsto some extent. 
 It was decided that new censorship rules should be drawn up, and the press was allowed to express itself on the question of its own repres-sion. 
 Chernyshevsky lost no time in stating his personal views, which as usual strongly differed from the usual liberal views. 
 [339] True, Cherny-shevsky himself maliciously ridicules the people who suppose that the printing press has some specific power like belladonna, sulphuric acid,fulminate of silver, etc. 
 “Our personal opinion is not inclined towards expecting unnaturally harm-ful results from objects and actions which do notpossess the power to produce such calamities. 
 We think the printing press is too weak to produce social misfortune. 
 After all, it does not containso much ink that the latter could come pouring out somehow and flood our country; nor has it springs * Collected Works , Vol. 
 VIII, pp. 
 37-38. 
( e e NBthat, after jumping out somehow and thumping the type, could fire it as case shot. 
” However, Chernyshevsky admits that there are epochs when the press can be no less dangerous than case shot tothe government of a country. 
 These are the epochs when a government’s interests d i f f e r f r o m t h e i n t e r e s t s o f s o c i e t y and a rev-olutionary upheaval is imminent. 
 A government in such a position has every ground for restricting the press, because the press, together with othersocial forces, is preparing its downfall. 
 Almost all the successive French governments of this century have been continuously in this situation. 
All this is very painstakingly and calmly expounded by Chernyshevsky. 
 Nothing is said in the article, until the very end, about the Russian Government. 
But in conclusion Chernyshevsky suddenly asks his reader—suppose it should turn out that the press laws are really necessary in our country?“Then we should again deserve to be called obscu-rantists, enemies of progress, haters of freedom, panegyrists of despotism, etc. 
, just as we havealready many times laid ourselves open to such censure. 
” He therefore does not want to investigate the question of whether there is a need for specialpress laws in our country. 
 “We fear,” he says, “that a conscientious investigation would lead us to reply: yes, they are necessary. 
”* The conclusion is clear they are necessary because the time for a “leap” is also approaching inRussia. 
 In the same March issue of Sovremennik that printed the article we have just quoted, there appeared a polemical article entitled “Have WeLearned the Lesson?”, concerning the well-known student demonstrations of 1861. 
 In it Chernyshev-sky defends the students, who were reproached byour “guardians” for allegedly not wanting to study [340]; and, incidentally, he also tells the govern-ment many home truths. 
 The immediate causefor this polemic was an anonymous article in the St. 
 Petersburg Academic Bulletin entitled “To Study or Not To Study?” Chernyshevsky repliesthat in regard to students this question has no sense, since they have always wanted to study, but the restricting university regulations hinderedthem. 
 The university regulations would have Collected Works , Vol. 
 IX, pp. 
 1 30, 155. 
 idem Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 1, p. 
 163dealt with students—people of an age when by our laws a man may marry, be taken into the civil ser-vice, or “command an army unit”—as children. 
 It is not surprising that they protested. 
 Theywere even barred from having such completely harmless organisations as mutual aid societies, which were undoubtedly essential in view of thematerial insecurity of the majority of the students. 
 Students could not but revolt against such regula-tions, because it was a question of “a crust of breadand the possibility of attending lectures. 
 This bread, this opportunity was being withdrawn. 
” Chernyshevsky declared outright that the peoplewho made the university regulations actually wanted to deprive the majority of those who entered the university of any possibility of studying. 
“If the author of the article and those who agree with him consider it necessary to prove that this was not the aim in view when the regulationswere drawn up, let them publish the documents relating to the meetings at which the regulations were decided on. 
” The anonymous writer of thearticle “To Study or Not To Study?” directed his charge of unwillingness to study not only against the students but against the whole ofRussian society. 
 Chernyshevsky took advantage of this to carry the controversy about the unrest at the university on to a more general field. 
 Hisopponent allowed that there were certain signs of the desire of Russian society to study. 
 Proof of this, in his opinion, was the “hundreds” of newperiodicals, the “dozens” of Sunday schools for adults that were appearing in our country. 
 “Hun-dreds of new periodicals, but where did he count thehundreds?” exclaims Chernyshevsky. 
 “And hundreds would really be necessary, but does the author want to know why hundreds of new periodicals are notbeing founded, as they should? It is because under the conditions of our censorship it is impossible for any lively periodical to exist anywhere, exceptin a few large towns. 
 Every rich commercial town should [341] have several, even if only small, news-papers; several local news-sheets should be publi-shed in every province. 
 They do not exist, because they are not allowed to.... 
 Dozens of Sunday schools for adults.... 
 Now that is no exaggeration, it is notthe same as with the hundreds of new periodicals: in an empire with a population of over 60 million, the Sunday schools for adults are indeed to becounted only in dozens. 
 Yet there should have /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR been possible to establish quickly tens of thousands of them, and for at least many thousands to be now in existence. 
 How is it that there are only dozens? Because they are so suspect, so hampered, so cir-cumscribed, that the people who are most loyal to the work of teaching in them have all desire to teach driven out of them. 
” After referring to the existence of ‘hundreds” of new periodicals and “dozens” of Sunday schools for adults as apparent signs of the desire of societyto study, the author of the article which Cherny-shevsky was analysing hastened to add that these signs were deceptive. 
 “You hear shouting in thestreets,” he proclaims mournfully, “something or other is said to have happened somewhere, and you involuntarily hang your head and are disillu-sioned.... 
” “Excuse me, Mr. 
 Author of the article,” objects Chernyshevsky, “what is the shouting you hear in the streets? The shouting of constables andpolice officers—we hear their shouting too. 
 Are you speaking of that shouting? You are told something or other has happened somewhere.... 
—what sortof thing, for example? There a theft has occurred, here authority has been exceeded, there the rights of the weak have been violated, here there hasbeen connivance with the strong—we are inces-santly being told this sort of thing. 
 Because of this shouting which everyone hears, and this con-stant talk, one does indeed involuntarily hang one’s head and become disillusioned. 
” The accuser of the students attacked them for their apparent intolerance of the opinions of others, for having recourse in their protests to whistling, pickled apples and similar “street weap-ons. 
” Chernyshevsky replies that “whistling and pickled apples are not used as street weapons: street weapons take the form of bayonets, rifle-butts and sabres. 
” He asks his opponent to recall “whether it was the students who used these street weapons against anyone, or whether they wereused against the students ... and whether there was any need to use them against the students. 
” It is easy to understand the impression such article of Chernyshevsky’s were bound to make on the Russian students. 
 When [342], subsequently, student demonstrations occurred again at the endof the sixties, the article “Have We Learned the Lesson?” was read at student gatherings as being the best defence of their demands. 
 It is also easyto understand what the attitude of the “guardians”idem Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 1, p. 
 164 NB Up to here Sotsial-ee Demokrat No. 
 1, p. 
 164 NBwriter’s “dangerous” influence on the student youth became more and more obvious to them. 
 We know already how that influence was removed. 
 Holding a utopian socialist point of view, Chernyshevsky believed that the plans which those of like mind in the West sought to realise couldbe carried out under the most varied political forms. 
 That’s how it was according to theory. 
 And as long as he did not step out of this sphere, heexpressed this view without mincing words. 
 When he started on his literary career, our social life seemed to furnish some confirmation, if onlyindirect, of the correctness of this view; hope arose among the advanced men of the day that the government would take the initiative in reachinga just solution of the peasant question. 
 It was a vain hope, which Chernyshevsky abandoned almost before anyone else. 
 And while in theory he didnot, even afterwards, clearly see the connection between economics and politics, in his practical activity—and by this we mean his j o u r n a l -i s t i c efforts—he was an uncompromising enemy of our old order, although his peculiar irony con-tinued to mislead many liberal-minded readerson that score. 
 In deeds, if not in theory, he became a man of irreconcilable political struggle and the thirst for struggle is felt In almost every line of each of his articles relating to the year 1861 and, in particular, to the year 1862, a fateful one for him. 
 Published according to the originalWritten not earlier than October 1909 and not later than April 1911 Published in part in 1933 in Lenin Miscellany XXV Published in full for the first time N O T E S 1 2Conspectus of the book “The Holy Family ” by Marx and Engels wa s written by Lenin in 1895 during his first stay abroad when he leftRussia to establish contact with the Emancipation of Labourgroup. 
 p. 
 19 The Holy Family , or Critique of Critical Criticism. 
 Against Bruno Bauer and Co. 
 —the first joint work of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. 
 It was written between September and November 1844and was published in February 1845 in Frankfort-on-Main. 
 “The Holy Family ” is a mocking reference to the Bauer brothers and their followers grouped around the Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung (General Literary Gazette ). 
 While attacking the Bauers and the other Young Hegelians (or Left Hegelians), Marx and Engels at thesame time criticised the idealist philosophy of Hegel. 
 Marx sharply disagreed with the Young Hegelians as early as the summer of 1842, when the club of “The Free” was formed inBerlin. 
 Upon becoming editor of the Rheinische Zeitung (Rhine Gazette ) in October 1842, Marx opposed the efforts of several Young Hegelian staff members from Berlin to publish inane and preten-tious articles emanating from the club of “The Free,” which hadlost touch with reality and was absorbed in abstract philosophicaldisputes. 
 During the two years following Marx’s break with “TheFree,” the theoretical and political differences between Marx and Engels on the one hand and the Young Hegelians on the other became deep-rooted and irreconcilable. 
 This was not only due to the factthat Marx and Engels had gone over from idealism to materialismand from revolutionary democratism to communism, but also dueto the evolution undergone by the Bauer brothers and persons oflike mind during this time. 
 In the Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung , Bauer and his group denounced “1842 radicalism” and its most out-standing proponent—the Rheinische Zeitung . 
 They slithered into vulgar subjective idealism of the vilest kind—propagation of a“theory” according to which only select individuals, bearers of the “spirit,” of “pure criticism,” are the makers of history, while the masses, the people, serve as inert material or ballast in the historicalprocess. 
 Marx and Engels decided to devote their first joint work to the exposure of these pernicious, reactionary ideas and to the defence of their new materialist and communist outlook. 
 During a ten-day stay of Engels in Paris the plan of the book (at first entitled Critique of Critical Criticism. 
 Against Bruno Bauer and Co . 
) was drafted, responsibility for the various chapters ap-portioned between the authors, and the “Preface” written. 
 Engels wrote his chapters while still in Paris. 
 Marx, who was responsible for a larger part of the book, continued to work on it until the endof November 1844. 
 Moreover, he considerably increased the initiallyconceived size of the book by incorporating in his chapters parts ofhis economic and philosophical manuscripts on which he had workedduring the spring and summer of 1844, his historical studies of the bourgeois French Revolution at the end of the 18th century, and a number of his excerpts and conspectuses. 
 While the book was inthe process of being printed, Marx added the words The Holy Family to the title. 
 By using a small format, the book exceeded 20 printer’ssheets and was thus exempted from preliminary censorship accord-ing to the prevailing regulations in a number of German states. 
 p. 
 23 Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung (General Literary Gazette )—a German monthly published in Charlottenburg from December 1843 toOctober 1844 by Bruno Bauer, the Young Hegelian. 
 p. 
 23 Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalökonomie (Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy ) was first published by Engels at the beginning of 1844 in Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher (Franco-German Annals )— see Marx, Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 . 
 Moscow, 1959, pp. 
 175-209. 
 p. 
 24 Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher (Franco-German Annals )—a mag-azine published in German in Paris and edited by Karl Marx andArnold Ruge. 
 The only issue to appear was a double number pub-lished in February 1844. 
 It included Marx’s articles “A Critique of the Hegelian Philosophy of Law (Introduction)” and “On the JewishQuestion,” and also Engels’ articles “Outlines of a Critique ofPolitical Economy” and “The Position of England. 
 Thomas Carlyle. 
‘Past and Present’. 
” These works mark the final transition of Marxand Engels to materialism and communism. 
 Publication of the magazine was discontinued chiefly as a result of the basic dif-ferences between Marx’s views and the bourgeois-radical viewsof Ruge. 
 p. 
 24 This refers to Proudhon’s work of 1840 Qu’est-ce que la propriété? ou Recherches sur le principe du droit et du gouvernement (What3 4 5 6 Is Property? or Studies on the Principle of Law and Government ). 
 Marx presents a critique of this work in a letter to Schweitzer datedJanuary 24, 1865 (see Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1955, pp. 
 185-192). 
 p. 
 26 This refers to Eugene Sue’s novel Les mystères de Paris (Mysteries of Paris ), which was written in the spirit of petty-bourgeois senti-mentality. 
 It was published in Paris in 1842-43 and was very popularin France and abroad. 
 p. 
 31 Marx is referring here to articles by Jules Faucher entitled Englische Tagesfragen (Topical Questions in England ), which were published in Nos. 
 VII and VIII (June and July 1844) of the Allgemeine Lite-ratur-Zeitung . 
p. 
 3 2 Loustallot’s journal of 1789 —a weekly publication entitled Révolu-tions de Paris (Parisian Revolutions ), which appeared in Paris from July 1789 to February 1794. 
 Until September 1790 it was editedby Elisée Loustallot, a revolutionary publicist. 
 p. 
 32 Phanomenologie des Geistes (Phenomenology of Mind ) by G. 
 W. 
 F. 
 Hegel was first published in 1807. 
 In working on The Holy Family , Marx made use of Vol. 
 II of the second edition of Hegel’s works (Berlin,1841). 
 He called this first large work of Hegel, in which the latter’s philosophical system was elaborated, “the source and secret of Hegel’s philosophy. 
” p. 
 33 Doctrinaires —members of a bourgeois political grouping in France during the period of the Restoration (1815-30). 
 As constitutional monarchists and rabid enemies of the democratic and revolutionary movement, they aimed to create in France a bloc of the bourgeoisieand landed aristocracy after the English fashion. 
 The most celebrat-ed of the Doctrinaires were Guizot, a historian, and Royer-Collard,a philosopher. 
 Their views constituted a reaction in the field ofphilosophy against the French materialism of the 18th century and the democratic ideas of the French bourgeois revolution. 
 p. 
 34 The refutation of the views expounded by Bruno Bauer in his book Die Judenfrage (The Jewish Question ), Braunschweig, 1843, was made by Marx in an article entitled “Zur Judenfrage” (“On the Jewish Question”), published in 1844 in Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher . 
p. 
 3 57 8 9 10 11 12 The Universal Rights of Man —the principles enunciated in the “Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen” and proclaimedduring the time of the French bourgeois revolution of 1789-93. 
 p. 
 38 The 18th Brumaire (9 November 1799)—the day of the coup d’etat of Napoleon Bonaparte, who overthrew the Directorate and estab-lished his own dictatorship. 
 p. 
 40 Cartesian materialism —the materialism of the followers of Descartes (from the Latin spelling of Descartes— Cartesius ). 
 The indicated book— Rapports du physique et du moral de l’hommne (Relation of the Physical to the Spiritual in Man ) by P. 
 J. 
 G. 
 Cabanis—was published in Paris in 1802. 
 p. 
 42 Nominalism —the trend in medieval philosophy that considered general concepts as merely the names of single objects in contrastto medieval “realism,” which recognised the existence of generalconcepts or ideas independent of things. 
 Nominalism recognised objects as primary and concepts as sec-ondary. 
 Thus, as Marx says in The Holy Family , nominalism represents the first expression of materialism in the Middle Ages(see Marx and Engels, The Holy Family , Moscow, 1956, p. 
 172). 
 p. 
 43 Sensualism —the philosophical doctrine that recognises sensation as the sole source of cognition. 
 p. 
 43 Babouvists —adherents of Gracchus Babeuf, who in 1796 led a utopian communist movement of “equals” in France. 
 p. 
 44 Lenin is referring to Feuerbach’s Grundsätze der Philosophie der Zukunft (Principles of the Philosophy of the Future ), 1843, which constitutes a continuation of the latter’s aphorisms Vorläufige Thesen zu einer Reform der Philosophie (Preliminary Theses on the Reform of Philosophy ), 1842, in which the author expounds the basis of his materialist philosophy and criticises Hegel’s idealistphilosophy. 
 p. 
 45 Fleur de Marie —heroine of Eugène Sue’s novel Mysteries of Paris . 
 p. 
 46 Anekdota zur neuesten deutschen Philosophie und Publizistik. 
 Von Bruno Bauer, Ludwig Feuerbach, Friedrich Köppen, Karl Nauwerk,13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Arnold Ruge und einigen Ungenannten (Unpublished Recent German Philosophical and Other Writings of Bruno Bauer, Ludwig Feuerbach,Friedrich Köppen, Karl Nauwerk, Arnold Ruge and Several Anon-ymous Writers )—a collection of articles that were banned for publication in German magazines. 
 Published in 1843 in Zurich by Ruge and included Marx as one of its contributors. 
 p. 
 48 Tory philanthropists —a literary-political group—“Young England. 
” This group was formed in the early 1840s and belonged to the Tory Party. 
 It voiced the dissatisfaction of the landed aristocracy with the increased economic and political might of the bourgeoisie,and resorted to demagogic methods to bring the working classunder its influence and use it in its fight against the bourgeoisie. 
 “In order to arouse sympathy,” Marx and Engels wrote in the Manifesto of the Communist Party , “the aristocracy were obliged to lose sight, apparently, of their own interests, and to formulate their indictment against the bourgeoisie in the interest of theexploited working class alone. 
” Ten Hours’ Bill —a law on the 10-hour working day for women and juveniles, adopted by the English Parliament in 1847. 
 p. 
 51 The note on Fr. 
 Überweg’s book “Grundriß der Geschichte der Philo-sophie . 
” (Bearbeitet von Max Heinze ). 
 3 Vls. 
 1876-1880, Leipzig (Fr. 
 Überweg, Outline of the History of Philosophy , revised by Max Heinze, 3 Vols. 
, 1876-1880, Leipzig) is recorded in the samenotebook containing the remarks on Paulsen’s book Introduction to Philosophy . 
 These entries were made in Geneva in 1903. 
 p. 
52 Remarks on Fr. 
 Paulsen’s book “Einleitung in die Philosophie ,” 1899 (Fr. 
 Paulsen, Introduction to Philosophy , 1899) are contained in the same notebook in which the note on the book by Überwug is recorded (entries made in Geneva in 1903). 
 After the remarks in the notebook on Paulsen’s book, there follows: “Note on the Positionof the New Iskra . 
” (See Lenin, pres. 
 ed. 
, Vol. 
 7. 
) p. 
 53 Note on a Feuilleton in the newspaper “Frankfurter Zeitung ” of November 15, 1904, which comments on two books by E. 
 Haeck-el—Lebenswunder (Gemeinverständliche Studien über biologische Philosophie ) [The Wonders of Life (Elementary Studies in Biologist Philosophy )], Stuttgart (Alfred Kröner) and Welträtsel (The Riddle of the Universe )—was written on a separate sheet, which also con-tained a list of a number of foreign books on the agrarian question. 
 The entry was made at the end of 1904. 
 Lenin gave an evaluation of The Riddle of the Universe by E. 
 Haeckel in Materialism and Empirio-Criticism (see V. 
 I. 
 Lenin, Materialism and Empirio-Criticism , Moscow, 1960, pp. 
 364-372). 
 p. 
 5622 23 24 25 Remarks on Books on the Natural Sciences and Philosophy in the Sorbonne Library were written on separate sheets during the first half of 1909. 
 p. 
 57 Ten Trends in Philosophy —a list of ten chapters in the first part of the book Modern Philosophical Trends by L. 
 Stein. 
 p. 
 58 Conspectus of Feuerbach’s book “Vorlesungen über das Wesen der Religion ” (Lectures on the Essence of Religion ) is contained in a sepa-rate notebook whose cover was not preserved. 
 On the first page inabbreviated form is written L. 
 Feuerbach, Sämtliche Werke , Band 8, 1851; also indicated is the press-mark—8 °. 
 R. 
 807. 
 There is no indica-tion exactly when the Conspectus was worked out by Lenin. 
 V. 
 Adoratsky has suggested that it was written in 1909 ( Lenin Miscellany XII ). 
 The following arguments speak in favour of this hypothesis. 
 It has been established that the press-mark on the firstpage of the Conspectus is that of the French National Library(Paris) in which Lenin worked from January 13 to June 30, 1909. 
The contents of Lectures on the Essence of Religion borders upon those works of Feuerbach that were used by Lenin in 1908 in writing his book Materialism and Empirio-Criticism , and some of Lenin’s re-marks in the Conspectus are related to propositions formulated inhis book. 
 In the Conspectus, for example, Lenin notes: [(Feuerbachand natural science!! NB. 
 Cf. 
 Mach and Co. 
 today)] (see p. 
 71 ofthis volume), and in Materialism and Empirio-Criticism he writes: “The philosophy of the scientist Mach is to science what the kiss of the Christian Judas was to Christ. 
 Mach likewise betrays science into the hands of fideism by virtually deserting to the camp ofphilosophical idealism. 
” (V. 
 I. 
 Lenin, Materialism and Empirio-Criticism , Moscow, 1960, p. 
 303. 
) Certain remarks in Lenin’s Con-spectus are also related to theses in his article “On the Attitude ofa Working-Class Party to Religion,” written in May 1909. 
 (See Lenin, pres. 
 ed. 
, Vol. 
 15. 
) p. 
 61 Das Wesen des Christentums (The Essence of Christianity )— L. 
 Feuerbach’s chief philosophical work. 
 Its first edition came out inLeipzig in 1841. 
 The book, which, as Engels said, proclaimed the triumph of materialism, exerted enormous influence on the ideological education of progressive intellectuals in Germany andother countries, including Russia. 
 The first Russian translation ofthe book came out in 1861. 
 p. 
 64 The reference is to The Holy Family by Frederick Engels and Karl Marx, in which the authors wrote that Feuerbach outlined“in a masterly manner the general basic features of Hegel’s speculation26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37and hence of every kind of metaphysics . 
” (Marx and Engels, The Holy Family , Moscow, 1956, pp. 
 186-187. 
) p. 
 65 Das Wesen der Religion (The Essence of Religion ) by L. 
 Feuerbach was published in 1846. 
 Grundsätze der Philosophie der Zukunft (Principles of the Philosophy of the Future ) was published in 1843. 
 p. 
 67 The reference is to the well-known passage on the basic question of philosophy in Engels’ book Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy (see Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 369-370). 
 p. 
 70 Lenin contrasts here the attitude toward natural science of Feuer-bach, the materialist, and of Mach, the subjective idealist. 
 A criticalevaluation of Mach’s attitude toward natural science is given byLenin in Materialism and Empirio-Criticism (see V. 
 I. 
 Lenin, Materialism and Empirio-Criticism , Moscow, 1960, pp. 
 363-364). 
 p. 
 71 Josef Dietzgen developed analogous ideas. 
 For example, in the book The Nature of the Workings of the Human Mind (Sämtliche Werke , Bd. 
 I, Stuttgart, 1922), in the paragraph “Spirit and Matter,” he wrote: “Long ago, mainly during early Christianity, it becamecustomary to look with disdain upon material, sensual and carnalthings, which become moth-eaten and rusty” (p. 
 53). 
 p. 
 72 Josef Dietzgen wrote as follows in The Nature of the Workings of the Human Mind (Sämtliche Werke , Bd. 
 I, Stuttgart, 1922), in the chapter “Pure Reason or the Capacity to Think in General”: “Think-ing is a function of the brain, just as writing is a function of the hand” (p. 
 11) and further “... the reader will not misunderstand me when I call the capacity to think a material power, a sensuous phenomenon ” (p. 
 13). 
 p. 
 72 See Lenin’s notations in Plekhanov’s book N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky (pp. 
 534-536, 538, 543, 544, 549-550 and 552 of this volume). 
 p. 
 77 Neue Rheinische Zeitung (New Rhine Gazette ) was published by Marx in Cologne from June 1, 1848 to May 19, 1849. 
 Engels’ book The Condition of the Working Class in England was published in 1845. 
 Regarding the significance of this book, see V. 
 I. 
 Lenin, pres. 
 ed. 
, Vol. 
 2, Moscow, 1960, pp. 
 22-23. 
 p. 
 77 38 39 40 41 42Lenin is referring to the following passage in Feuerbach’s book Vorlesungen über das Wesen der Religion . 
 Werke , Bd. 
 8, 1851, S. 
 411 (Lectures on the Essence of Religion , Works , Vol. 
 8, 1851, p. 
 411): “...godliness consists, so to speak, of two component parts, of whichone belongs to man’s fantasy, the other to nature. 
 Pray!—says onepart, i. 
e. 
, God, distinct from nature; work!—says the other part,i. 
e. 
, God, not distinct from nature, but merely expressing its es-sence; for nature is the working bee, Gods—the drones. 
” p. 
 78 The Anthropological Principle —the main thesis of Feuerabach’s philosophy that it is neccessary to consider man as part of nature,as a biological being. 
 The anthropological principle was directed against religion and idealism. 
 However, by considering man apart from the concrete historical and social relations, the anthropological principle leadsto idealism in the understanding of the laws of historical develop-ment. 
 Nikolai Chernyshevsky, in struggling against idealism, also took the anthropological principle as his starting-point and devoted a special work to this question under the title “The Anthropological Principle in Philosophy” (see N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky, Selected Philo-sophical Essays , Moscow, 1953, pp. 
 49-135). 
 p. 
 82 The reference is to L. 
 Feuerbach’s Theogonie nach den Quellen des klassischen, hebräischen und christlichen Altertums . 
 Sämtliche Werke , Bd. 
 9, 1857 ( Theogony Based on Sources of Classical, Hebrew and Christian Antiquity , Collected Works , Vol. 
 9, 1857). 
 Page 320— beginning of § 34, which is headed “’Christian’ Natural Science”;page 334 is in § 36, which is headed “The Theoretical Basis ofTheism. 
” p. 
 83 Conspectus of Hegel’s book “The Science of Logic ” consists of three notebooks, which have a common pagination from 1 to 115. 
 On thecover of the first notebook, in addition to the inscription “Hegel. 
Logic I,” there is the entry: “Notebooks on Philosophy. 
 Hegel, Feuerbach and others. 
” On the cover of the second notebook, to the pagination 49-88, there is the appendage: NB p. 
 76 (pp. 
 192-193of this volume). 
 At the bottom of page 111, there is written: “Endof Logic . 
 17. 
XII. 
1914. 
” The conspectus was probably begun during the first half of September 1914, when Lenin moved from Poroninto Bern, Switzerland. 
 p. 
 85 The first edition of Hegel’s works in German consists of 18 volumes (1832-45) and an additional volume in two parts (1887). 
 p. 
 87. 
 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53Wissenschaft der Logik (The Science of Logic ) consists of two parts (three books). 
 p. 
 87 Parmenides —the name of one of Plato’s dialogues, in which the philosophical views of Parmenides, the ancient Greek Eleatic philosopher, are discussed. 
 p. 
 97 Lenin is apparently referring to the following well-known statement by Kant in the preface to the second edition of Critique of Pure Reason : “I would have to restrict the field of knowledge to make place for faith. 
” p. 
 100 See F. 
 Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy . 
 (Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 372. 
) p. 
 104 See F. 
 Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy . 
 (Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 371. 
) p. 
 109 See F. 
 Engels, Anti-Dühring , Moscow, 1959, pp. 
 74-76, 186. 
 p. 
 117 An allusion to the couplet “The Question of Right,” from Schiller’s satirical poem “The Philosophers,” which may be translated asfollows: Long have I used my nose for sense of smell Indeed, what right have I to this, pray tell? p. 
 118 See F. 
 Engels, Anti-Dühring , Moscow, 1959, pp. 
 186, 189. 
 p. 
 118 The reference is to a remark made by Feuerbach in his work Vor-läufige Thesen zur Reform der Philosophie (Preliminary Theses on the Reform of Philosophy ), appearing in Vol. 
 II, p. 
 257, of Feuerbach’s Works published in German in 1846. 
 p. 
 123 The reference is to Die Kritik der Urteilskraft by Kant. 
 p. 
 1 3 4 Lenin is referring to the appearance of the following three works: Hegel’s Science of Logic (the first two books were published in 1812 and 1813, respectively); Marx and Engels’ Manifesto of the Commu- /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62nist Party (written at the end of 1847 and published in February 1848); and Darwin’s Origin of Species (published in 1859). 
 p. 
 141 The reference is to K. 
 Pearson’s work The Grammar of Science , London, 1892. 
 p. 
 154 The reference is to Enzyklopädie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse . 
 Hege!, Werke , Bd. 
 6, Berlin, 1840 ( Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences in Outline , Hegel, Works , Vol. 
 6, Berlin, 1840). 
 “Logic” constitutes Part I of the Encyclopaedia and is referred to by Lenin as “small” to distinguish it from the “large” Science of Logic , which consists of three volumes. 
 p. 
 157 Lenin is referring to remarks by Engels on Hegel’s Encyclopaedia . 
 See Engels’ letter to Marx dated September 21, 1874. 
 Also seeEngeis’ letter to Conrad Schmidt dated November 1, 1891 (Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1955, pp. 
 519-520). 
 Kuno Fischer —a German bourgeois historian of philosophy and the author of The History of Modern Philosophy , one of whose vol-umes (Vol. 
 8) is devoted to Hegel. 
 p. 
 157 See G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov, “For the Sixtieth Anniversary of Hegel’s Death” (Selected Philosophical Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1960). 
 p. 
 160 See F. 
 Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy (Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 371). 
 p. 
 169 A critique of the metaphysical views of the Machist V. 
 Chernov is presented by Lenin in his book Materialism and Empirio-Criticism (see V. 
 I. 
 Lenin, Materialism and Empirio-Criticism , Moscow, 1960). 
 p. 
 200 The solution of this equation was given by Gauss in his work Dis-quisitiones arithrneticae (Arithmetical Studies ), 1801. 
 p. 
 209 Lenin is referring to Marx’s “Theses on Feuerbach,” written in 1845 and published by Engels in 1888 as an appendix to Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy (see Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 403-405). 
 p. 
 211 The reference is to Diogenes of Sinope , a representative of the Cynic school who was nicknamed the “Dog,” probably because of hisbeggarly life and disregard for public morals. 
 p. 
 224 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71See F. 
 Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy (Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 372). 
 p. 
 233 See K. 
 Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 1, Moscow, 1959, Chapter VII, p. 
 179. 
 In footnote 1, Marx quotes from Hegel’s Encyclopaedia : “Reason is just as cunning as she is powerful. 
 Her cunning consists principally in her mediating activity, which, by causing objects to act and react on each other in accordance with their own nature, in this way,without any direct interference in the process, carries out reason’sintentions. 
” (Hegel, Enzyklopädie , Erster Theil, “Die Logik,” Berlin, 1840, S. 
 382. 
) p. 
 234 Notes on Reviews of Hegel’s “Logic ”—written after December 17, 1914 at the end of the third notebook of the conspectus of Hegel’sScience of Logic . 
 p. 
 238 Preußische Jahrbücher (Prussian Annals )—German conservative monthly on problems of politics, philosophy, history and literature, published in Berlin from 1858 to 1935. 
 p. 
 238 The reference is to Zeitschrift für Philosophie und philosophische Kritik (Journal of Philosophy and Philosophical Criticism ), which was founded in 1837 by Immanuel Hermann Fichte, German idealistphilosopher. 
 Originally it was called Zeitschrift für Philosophie und spekulative Theologie (Journal of Philosophy and Speculative The-ology ). 
 It was edited by German idealist philosophy professors. 
 Publication ceased in 1918. 
 p. 
 238 Revue Philosophique (Philosophical Review )—a journal founded in Paris in 1870. 
 p. 
 240 Philosophy of Mind —English translation of the third part of Hegel’s Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences , which consists of three parts—”Logic,” “Philosophy of Nature,” and “Philosophy of Mind. 
” p. 
 240 The quotation is from the review of the book by A. 
 Chiappelli, Le pluralisme moderne et le monisme (Modern Pluralism and Monism ), in the journal Revue Philosophique , 1911, Vol. 
 LXXII, p. 
 333. 
 p. 
 241 Conspectus of Hegel’s book “Lectures on the History of Philosophy ” consists of two notebooks on whose covers is written: Hegel. 
 Theconspectus was made in 1915 in Bern. 
 p. 
 243 The Ionic school , or Miletian school (from the town of Miletus, trading and cultural centre of the ancient world on the coast ofAsia Minor), was the earliest school of naturalistic materialism(6th century B. 
 C. 
) in the history of Greek philosophy. 
 (See F. 
 Engels, Dialectics of Nature , Moscow, 1954, p. 
 250. 
) p. 
 247 Pythagorean philosophy (6th-4th century B. 
 C. 
)—an idealist philos-ophy that considered the essence of all things to lie in numbers. 
Named after Pythagoras, the founder of a philosophical, religious and political league in Crotona (Southern Italy) that fought for the supremacy of the aristocracy. 
 p. 
 247 Aristotle’s work De coelo (On the Heavens ) belongs to his natural-philosophic writings and consists of four books that are subdivided into chapters. 
 In modern editions, these books are designated by Roman numerals and the chapters by Arabic ones. 
 p. 
 248 The number ten was viewed by the Pythagoreans as sacred, as the most perfect number, embracing the entire nature of numbers. 
 p. 
 248 Aristotle’s work De anima (On the Soul ) belongs to his natural-philosophic writings and consists of three books. 
 p. 
 249 The Eleatic school (end of 6th-5th century B. 
 C. 
) was named after the town of Elea in Southern Italy. 
 In contradistinction to the naturaldialectic teachings of the Miletian school, and of Heraclitus, re-garding the changeable nature of things, the Eleatic school believedin their indivisible, immovable, unchangeable, homogeneous, continuous, eternal essence. 
 At the same time, some of the proposi-tions of representatives of the Eleatic school, and particularlythe proofs advanced by Zeno concerning the contradictoriness ofmotion (the so-called paradoxes of Zeno), despite their metaphysicalconclusions, played a positive role in the development of ancientdialectics, having raised the problem of expressing in logical concept the contradictory character of the processes of motion. 
 p. 
 250 Determination is the comprehensive conception of the object which characterises its essential aspects and connections with the sur-rounding world, its internal development. 
 Definition, in this case, is the abstract formal-logical determination that takes into account only the external features of the object. 
 p. 
 251 See F. 
 Engels, Anti-Dühring , Moscow, 1959, p. 
 21. 
 Also see p. 
 264 of this volume. 
 p. 
 25172 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 The reference is to the work of Diogenes Laertius, Lives and Opinions of Famous Philosophers , consisting of ten books. 
 It was published in ancient Greek by G. 
 Gübner, Vols. 
 1-2, Leipzig, 1830-33. 
 p. 
 255 The reference is to the work of Sextus Empiricus, Basic Tenets of Pyrrhonism , in three books. 
 p. 
 255 The reference is to Pierre Bayle, Dictionnaire historique et critique (Historical and Critical Dictionary ), 4 Vols. 
, Amsterdam and Leyden, 1740. 
 p. 
 255 Lenin has in mind the French translation of the first volume of Théodore Gomperz’s work Griechische Denker (Greek Thinkers ). 
 p. 
 256 The reference is to § 1 of the book by V. 
 Chernov, Philosophical and Sociological Studies , Moscow, 1907. 
 p. 
 257 Heraclitus (c. 
 530-470 B. 
C. 
) lived prior to Zeno of Elea (c. 
 490-480 B. 
 C. 
). 
 Hegel discusses Heraclitus after the Eleatics becausehis philosopy, especially his dialectics, was superior to that of theEleatics, in particular, the dialectics of Zeno. 
 Whereas Eleaticphilosophy embodied, in Hegel’ view, the category of being, Heraclitus’ philosopy was an historical expression of the higher, more concrete and genuine category of becoming. 
 This is an exampleof how Hegel “adapted” the history of philosophy to fit the categoriesof his logic. 
 At the same time Hegel’s treatment of Heraclitus and theEleatics reflected the actual law-governed nature of the history ofphilosophy as a science. 
 Such deviations from the chronological order are quite legitimate in examining the history of individual aspects or categories of philosophy, since in this case their develop-ment emerges in a form free from historical accident. 
 Lenin wrotethe following in his fragment On the Question of Dialectics about the “circles” in philosophy: “Ancient: from Democritus to Platoand the dialetics of Heraclitus” and remarks: “Is a chronology of persons essential? No!” (See present volume, p. 
 360. 
) p. 
 259 The work De mundo (On the Universe ), included in Aristotle’s col-lected works, was written after Aristotle’s death by an unknownauthor at the end of the 1st or beginning of the 2nd century A. 
 D. 
 p. 
 262 Symposium (Feast )—a dialogue by Plato. 
 p. 
 26080 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94See F. 
 Engels, Anti-Dühring , Moscow, 1959, pp. 
 21-22. 
 p. 
 262 The reference is to the work of Sextus Empiricus, Against Mathemati-cians , consisting of 11 books, six of which are devoted to a critique of grammar, rhetoric, geometry, arithmetic, astronomy and music,and five ( Against Dogmatists ) to a critique of logic, physics and ethics. 
 p. 
 265 A critique of the subjective idealist teachings of Mach on sensations was presented by Lenin in his book Materialism and Empirio-Criticism , Chapter 1, §§ 1 and 2 (V. 
 I. 
 Lenin, Materialism and Empirio-Criticism , Moscow, 1960, pp. 
 32-61). 
 p. 
 265 Homoeomeriae —according to Aristotle, a term used by Anaxagoras to denote tiny material elements consisting in their turn of aninfinite number of smaller particles and containing all existingproperties (“all in everything”). 
 The elements themselves are inertand set in motion by νοÜς (mind, reason), believed by Anaxagora to be a kind of fine and light matter. 
 He explained any emergenceand destruction by the junction and separation of elements. 
 In theextent fragments of Anaxagoras’ work these elements are called“seeds” or “things”; the term homoeomeriae was introduced byAristotle. 
 p. 
 266 Sophists (from the Greek sophos —a wise man)—the designation (since the second half of the 5th century B. 
 C. 
) for professional philos-ophers, teachers of philosophy and rhetoric. 
 The Sophists did notconstitute a single school. 
 The most characteristic feature commonto Sophists was their belief in the relativity of all human ideas,ethical standards and values, expressed by Protagoras in the follow-ing famous statement: “Man is the measure of all things, of whatis, that it is, and of what is not, that it is not. 
” In the first halfof the 4th century B. 
C. 
, sophism disintegrated and degeneratedinto a barren play with logical conceptions. 
 p. 
 269 Phenomenologism —a branch of subjective idealism that considers phenomena to be only the totality of man’s sensations. 
 The Machistswere phenomenalists. 
 An important role in the Marxist criticism ofphenomenologism was played by Lenin's book Materialism and Empirio-Criticism (Collected Works , Vol. 
 14). 
 p. 
 270 See § 27 of Feuerbach’s Principles of the Philosophy of the Future for his views on being and essence. 
 p. 
 272 95 96 97 98 99 100 101The reference is to the following statement of Feuerbach: “At the beginning of phenomenology we immediately come across a con-tradiction between the word which represents the universal, and thething, which is always a particular. 
” (See § 28 of Feuerbach’sPrinciples of the Philosophy of the Future . 
) p. 
 272 Meno —Plato’s dialogue directed against the Sophists. 
 It is con-sidered to be one of Plato’s early works. 
 p. 
 273 Lenin is referring to the following philosophical works by Plekha-nov: N. 
 Beltov, The Development of the Monist View of History , published as a separate volume in 1895 in St. 
 Petersburg (see Selected Philosophical Works , Vol. 
 1, Moscow, 1900, pp. 
 542-782); articles against Bogdanov appearing in Social-Democratic periodicals andpublished in the collection entitled “From Defence to Attack”(1910); articles against the Kantians E. 
 Bernstein, C. 
 Schmidtand others appearing in the journal Die Neue Zeit and published in the collection: N. 
 Beltov, “Criticism of Our Critics,” St. 
 Peters-burg, 1906; and “Fundamental Questions of Marxism,” publishedas a separate volume in 1908 in St. 
 Petersburg. 
 p. 
 277 Cyrenaics —adherents of an ancient Greek school of philosophy, founded in the 5th century B. 
 C. 
 by Aristippus of Cyrene (NorthAfrica). 
 In the theory of knowledge, the Cyrenaics adhered to sen-sualism. 
 They asserted that objective truth does not exist and that,with certainty, one can only speak of subjective sensations. 
 InCyrenaicism, the sensualist theory of knowledge is supplemented bysensualist ethics—the doctrine of sensual satisfaction as the basis ofmorality. 
 The Cyrenaic school produced a number of representativesof ancient atheism. 
 p. 
 276 The reference is to § 38 “The Aristippian and Cyrenaic or Hedonistic School” in Überweg’s book: Grundriß der Geschichte der Philosophie des Altertums . 
 10. 
 Auflage, Berlin, 1909. 
 (F. 
 Überweg, Outline of the History of Ancient Philosophy , 10th edition, Berlin, 1909). 
 In the dialogue Theaetetus , Plato expounds his mystical theory of knowledge, calling cognition the rise of reason into the realm ofideas; this rise is like recollection since, according to Plato, reason,the soul, by their origin, belong to this supersensual world of ideas. 
 p. 
 276 See L. 
 Feuerbach, Against Dualism of Body and Soul, Flesh and Spirit. 
 p. 
 283 See F. 
 Engels, Anti-Dühring, Moscow , 1959, p. 
 54. 
 p. 
 283 102 103 104 105 106 107Stoics —adherents of an ancient Greek school of philosophy arising about the 3rd century B. 
 C. 
 and existing until the 6th century A. 
 D. 
The Stoics recognised two elements in the universe: an enduringelement—matter without quality; and an active one—reason, logos, god. 
 In logic, the Stoics proceeded from the assumption that the source of all cognition is sensuous perception and that a conceptioncan be true only if it is a faithful and full impression of the object. 
The Stoics taught, however, that perceptual judgment arises onlyas a result of agreement between the mind and a true conception. 
This the Stoics called “catalepsy” (or “seizure”) and viewed it as a criterion for truth. 
 p. 
 288 See L. 
 Feuerbach, Lectures on the Essence of Religion : “the God of man is nothing but the deified being of man. 
” (L. 
 Feuerbach, Werke , Bd. 
 6, Berlin, 1840, S. 
 21. 
) p. 
 295 Sceptics —in this case, adherents of the ancient Greek philosophical school founded by Pyrrho (c. 
 365-275 B. 
 C. 
). 
 The best-known of theancient Sceptics were Aenesidemus and Sextus Empiricus (2ndcentury A. 
 D. 
). 
 Tropes —the designation for the reasons for doubt advanced by the ancient Sceptics (ten tropes) and later supplemented (fivetropes) by Agrippa. 
 By means of these reasons the Sceptics triedto prove the impossibility of cognisinig things and the absoluterelativity of all perceptions. 
 p. 
 295 Neo-Platonists —followers of the mystical philosophical doctrine, the basis of which was Plato’s idealism. 
 Neo-Platonism (Plotinuswas the head of this school) developed during the period from the3rd to the 5th centuries and was a combination of the Stoic, Epicu-crean and Sceptical doctrines with the philosophy of Plato and Aristotle. 
 The influence of neo-Platonism was strong in the Middle Ages; it was expressed in the doctrines of the leading medievaltheologians and is also to be seen in certain trends of modern bour-geois philosophy. 
 p. 
 301 Cabbala —a medieval mystical religious “doctrine” prevalent among the most fanatical followers of Judaism, as well as among adher-ents of Christianity and Islam. 
 The basic thought of this doct-rine is the symbolic interpretation of the Holy Scripture, whoseevery word and number acquires special mystical importance inthe eyes of the Cabbalists. 
 p. 
 302 Gnostics —followers of mystical, religious-philosophical doctrines during the early centuries of our era. 
 They tried to unite Christian 108 109 110 111 112 113 114 115theology and various theses of Platonic, Pythagorean and Stoic philosophy. 
 p. 
 302 Alexandrian philosophy —several philosophical schools and trends that arose during the early centuries of our era in Alexandria,Egypt. 
 Their distinguishing feature was their attempt to unitePlato’s and Aristotle’s philosophy and the mystical Eastern cults. 
 p. 
 302 Conspectus of Hegel’s book “Lectures on the Philosophy of History ” consists of a separate notebook on whose cover is written “Hegel. 
”On the reverse side of the cover, in pencil, there is a list of Plato’sdialogues with references to pages in Vol. 
 XIV of Hegel, whichcontains the second book of Lectures on the History of Philosophy . 
 p. 
 303 See F. 
 Engels, Ludwig Ferierbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy , Chapter IV (see Marx and Engels, Sellected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 391). 
 p. 
 306 Regarding the influence of geographical conditions on the develop-ment of society see G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov, “Fundamental Questions ofMarxism,” Chapter VI, and “N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky,” Chapter II. 
 p. 
 308 Lenin is evidently comparing the formulations of Hegel and Feuer-bach, who approach the question of the origin of religion fromopposite standpoints. 
 See, for example, Feuerbach’s thesis: “ina deified being, he (i. 
e. 
, man— Ed. 
) objectifies solely his own being. 
” p. 
 309 Lenin is probably referring to the following passage in Marx’s work The Civil War in France : “Instead of deciding once in three or six years which member of the ruling class was to misrepresent the people in Parliament, universal suffrage was to serve the people, constituted in Communes...” (See Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1955, p. 
 520. 
) p. 
 311 Plan of Hegel’s Dialectics (Logic )—contained in a notebook directly following the conspectus of Georges Noël’s book Hegel’s Logic and a list of “writings on Hegelianism”; written in 1915. 
 p. 
 315 The remarks on Georges Noël’s book La logique de Hegel (Hegel’s Logic ), Paris, 1897, are contained in a notebook on whose cover Lenin wrote the word “Philosophy. 
” Probably written in Geneva in 1915. 
 p. 
 319 116 117 118 119 120 121 122Noumena and phenomena —terms used by Kant in his theory of knowledge. 
 Noumenon means a thing-in-itself, while phenomenonmeans a thing as it appears to us. 
 According to Kant, phenomena areformed as a result of the action on man of something unknown (a thing-in-itself). 
 Noumena are supposed to lie beyond phenomena, and their essence to be unknowable. 
 p. 
 323 Note on J. 
 Perrin’s book “Traitê de chimie physique: les principes ” (Treatise on Physical Chemistry : Principles ), Paris, 1903 is con-tained in a notebook following the conspectus of Hegel’s Science of Logic and was written at the end of 1914. 
 p. 
 325 Lenin’s remarks on Peter Genov’s book “ Feurbachs Erkenntnistheorie und Metaphysik . 
” Zürich, 1911 ( Berner Dissertation ) (S. 
 89) [Peter Genov, Feuerbach’s Theory of Knowledge and Metaphysics , Zurich, 1911 (Bern Dissertation) (p. 
 89)] were written December 29-30,1914, in Bern. 
 p. 
 326 “Thesen und Grundsätze” (“Theses and Principles”) refers to two works by Feuerbach: Vorläufige Thesen zur Reform der Philosophie (Preliminary Theses on the Reform of Philosophy ) and Grundsätze der Philosophie der Zukunft (Principles of the Philosophy of the Future ) contained in Vol. 
 II of Feuerbach’s works, published by Bolin and Jodl. 
 This volume also contains the work Wider den Dualismus von Leib und Seele, Fleisch und Geist (Against Dualism of Body and Soul, Flesh and Spirit ). 
 The phrase “particularly über Spiritualismus und Materialismus” refers to Über Spiritualismus und Materialismus in besonderer Beziehung auf die Willensfreiheit(On Spiritualism and Materialism with Particular Reference to Free Will ) contained in Vol. 
 X. 
 p. 
 326 The reference is to Fr. 
 A. 
 Lange’s book “Geschichte des Materialismus ” (F. 
 A. 
 Lange, History of Materialism ) in which the history of mate-rialism is given in distorted form. 
 p. 
 326 The reference is to K. 
 Grün’s book “Ludwig Feuerbachs Briefwechsel und Nachlass ” (K. 
 Grün, Ludwig Feuerbach’s Correspondence and Literary Heritage ). 
 p. 
 327 Note on Paul Volkmann’s book “Erkenntnistheoretische Grundzüge der Naturwissenschaften” (Wissenschaft und Hypothese . 
 IX) 2. 
 Auf-lags, Leipzig, 1910 [Paul Volkmann, Epistemological Foundations of the Natural Sciences (Science and Hypothesis. 
 IX), 2nd ed. 
, Leipzig, 1910] is contained in a notebook following the commentson Genov’s dissertation. 
 p. 
 328 123 124 125 126 127 128 129 130The remarks on Max Verworn’s book “Die Biogenhypothese . 
” Jena , 1903 (Max Verworn, The Hypothesis of Biogenesis , Jena , 1903 ) are contained in a notebook following the note on Volkmann’s book. 
 p. 
 329 On page 9 of his book, M. 
 Verworn defines “enzyme” as follows: “Enzymes are products of living substance distinguished by thefact that they can cause a large number of specific chemical com-pounds to decompose, without themselves being destroyed in the process. 
” p. 
 329 The remarks on Fr. 
 Dannemann’s book “Wie unser Weitbild entstand ” (Kosmos ). 
 Stuttgart , 1912 [F. 
 Dannemasin, How Did Our Picture of World Arise (Cosmos), Stuttgart, 1912] were written by Lenin in a notebook preceding the conspectus of G. 
 Noël’s Hegel’s Logic . 
 p. 
 331 The excerpts from L udwig Darmstaedter’s book “Handbuch zur Geschichte der Naturwissenschaften und der Technik ,” Berlin, 1908 (Ludwig Darmstaedter, Handbook on the History of the Natural Sciences and Technique , Berlin, 1908) were entered in a notebook directly preceding the conspectus of G. 
 Noël’s Hegel’s Logic . 
 p. 
 333 The excerpts from Napoléon’s book “Pensées,” Paris, 1913, Biblio-théque miniature No. 
 14 . 
 (Napoleon, Thoughts , Paris, 1913, Miniature Library No, 14) were made in Bern in 1915. 
 They were entered atthe bottom of the first page of the notebook containing the conspec-tus of Noël’s Hegel’s Logic . 
 p. 
 334 The note on Artur Erich Haas’ book “Der Geist des Hellenentums in der modernen Physik ,” Leipzig, 1914 (32 SS . 
) (Velt & Co. 
) [Artur Erich Haas, The Spirit of Hellenism in Modern Physics , Leipzig, 1914 (32 pp. 
) (Veit and Co. 
)] is contained in a notebook following“The Plan of Hegel’s Dialectics (Logic). 
” p. 
 335 The note on Th. 
 Lipp’ book “Naturwissenschaft und Weltanschauung” (T. 
 Lipps, Natural Science and World Outlook ) follows the note on Haas’ book, The Spirit of Hellenism in Modern Physics . 
 p. 
336 Conspectus of Lassalle’s book “Die Philosophie Herakleitos des Dunklen von Ephesos. 
” Berlin, 1858 (The Philosophy of Heraclitus the Obscure of Ephesus , Berlin, 1858) is contained in a notebook following the note on Lipps’ book Natural Science and World Outlook . 
 Following the conspectus of Lassalle’s book, there is a fragment in the note-book entitled “On the Question of Dialectics. 
” p. 
 337 131 132 133 134 135 136 137 138 139 140Lenin is referring to a letter from Marx to Engels dated February 1, 1858 (see Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1955, pp. 
 121-123). 
 p. 
 339 Ahriman —the Greek name for the ancient Persian God personifying the source of evil, an eternal and irreconcilable enemy of his brotherOrmazd, the Good Spirit. 
 p. 
 345 Zend-Avesta —the designation for the ancient Persian religious books expounding the Zoroastrian religion founded, according tolegend, by the prophet Zarathustra (Zoroaster). 
 p. 
 346 Lenin is referring to Theses on Feuerbach by Marx written in 1845 (see Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 403-405). 
 p. 
 349 Cratylus —Plato’s dialogue, directed against the Sophists. 
 p. 
 350 The fragment On the Question of Dialectics is contained in a note-book between the conspectus of Lassalle’s book on Heraclitus andthe conspectus of Aristotle’s Metaphysics . 
 Written in 1915 in Bern. 
 p. 
 355 The reference is to the use by Josef Dietzgen of the term “überschweng-lich,” which means: exaggerated, excessive, infinite; for example,in the book Kleinere philosophische Schriften (Minor Philosophical Writings ), Stuttgart, 1903, p. 
 204, Dietzgen uses this term as fol-lows: “absolute and relative are not infinitely separated. 
” p. 
 361 Conspectus of Aristotle’s book “Metaphysics ” is contained in a note-book directly following the fragment “On the Question of Dialec-tics. 
” The book was published by Schwegler in Greek wih a German translation. 
 p. 
 363 Lenin is referring to the article “Blunders of Immature Thought” by D. 
 I. 
 Pisarev, well-known democratic writer and literary crit-ic. 
 p. 
 371 Conspectus of L. 
 Feuerbach’s book “Darstellung, Entwicklung und Kritik der Leibnizschen Philosophie . 
” Sämtliche Werke . 
 Bd. 
 IV, Stuttgart. 
 1910 ( Exposition, Analysis and Critique of the Philosophy of Leibnitz , Collected Works , Vol. 
 IV, Stuttgart, 1910) is con- /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR 141 142 143 144 145 146 147tained in a separate notebook on whose cover is written: “Feuer-bach. 
” The conspectus was made in Bern at the end of 1914 or the beginning of 1915. 
 p. 
 375 In the passage referred to by Lenin, Feuerbach states; “Spinoza’s philosophy is like a telescope which makes objects visible to thehuman eye that are otherwise invisible owing to their remoteness;Leibnitz’ philosophy is like a microscope which makes objectsvisible that are unnoticeable owing to their minuteness and fine-ness. 
” (See L. 
 Feuerbach, Sämtliche Werke , Bd. 
 IV, 1910, S. 
 34. 
) p. 
 378 See Marx’s letter to Engels dated May 10, 1870. 
 p. 
 378 Entelechy —a term in idealist philosophy, used by Aristotle to denote the aim inherent in an object—an aim which through itsactivity is transformed from the possible to the actual. 
 According to Leibnitz, entelechy is the urge of the monad towards realisation of the perfection potentially contained in it. 
 p. 
 380 Lenin is referring to the following statement by Feuerbach: “Pre-es-tablished harmony is Leibnitz’ weak point, despite the fact thatit is his pet creation.... 
 Pre-established harmony, understood ina purely external sense in relation to the monad, basically con-tradicts the spirit of Leibnitz’ philosophy. 
” (See L. 
 Feuerbach, Sämtliche Werke , Bd. 
 IV, 1910, S. 
 95. 
) p. 
 381 Occasionalism —an idealist, religious trend in 17th-century philosophy which distorted the teachings of Descartes in the spirit of clericalismand mysticism. 
 The Occasionalists held the reactionary view thatall physical and mental activity, and the reciprocal action between them, is due to the intervention of God. 
 p. 
 381 Theodicée (a vindication of the justice of God)—an abbreviated title of G. 
 W. 
 Leibnitz’ book: Essais de Theodicée sur la bonté de Dieu , la liberté de l’homme et l’origine du mal (Theodician Essays on the Goodness of God, the Freedom of Man, and the Origin of Evil ). 
 p. 
 381 The ontological argument for the existence of God was first advanced by Anselm, Bishop of Canterbury and medieval scholastic. 
 It canbe summarised as follows: God is the totality of perfection. 
 Perfec-tion includes existence. 
 Therefore God exists. 
 On the essence of the ontological argument see F. 
 Engels, Anti-Dühring , Part I, Chapter IV. 
 p. 
 381 148 149 150 151 152 153 154 155Nouveaux essais sur l’entendement humain (New Essays on Human Understanding ) by Leibnitz (written 1700-05 and published in 1765)—directed against the materialist trend of Locke’s sensualist theory of knowledge. 
 p. 
 381 The first edition of L. 
 Feuerbach’s book Darstellung, Entwicklung und Kritik der Leibniz’schen Philosophie (Exposition, Analysts and Critique of the Philosophy of Leibnitz ) was published in 1837. 
 p. 
 382 The reference is to the work by Clauberg, German Cartesian philos-opher: Defensio Cartesiana , Amsterdam, 1652 ( Defence of Cartesian-ism ). 
 p. 
 383 Feuerbach’s dissertation in Latin, published in Erlangen in 1828 under the title “De Ratione una, universali, infinita,” appeared inGerman translation under the title “Über die Vernunft; ihre Ein-heit, Allgemeinheit, Unbegrenztheit” (On Reason; Its Unity,Universality and Infiniteness”) in Vol. 
 IV of Feuerbach’s worksin German; Bolin and Jodl edition, Stuttgart, 1910. 
 p. 
 387 Lenin is referring to Feuerbach’s work Spinoza and Herbart (1836), appearing in Vol. 
 IV (1910) of Feuerbach’s works in German; Bolinand Jodl edition. 
 p. 
 387 The reference is to Feuerbach’s letter to Marx in 1843 in which Feuerbach sharply criticises Schelling’s philosophy (see L. 
 Feuer-bach, Sämtliche Werke , Bd. 
 IV, 1910, S. 
 434-440). 
 Feuerbach’s letter was written in answer to Marx’s letter of October 20, 1843. 
 p. 
 387 The remarks on Johann Plenge’s book “Marx und Hegel . 
” Tübingen, 1911 (J. 
 Plenge, Marx and Hegel , Tübingen, 1911) are contained in the second notebook on imperialism (notebook “ β”). 
 p. 
 388 Imperialist economists —Lenin’s designation for the opportunists Bukharin, Pyatakov and Bosh in the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party (Bolsheviks) during the First World War. 
 The “imper-ialist economists” demanded that the Party delete the programmaticstatement on the right of nations to self-determination. 
 They alsocame out against the entire minimum programme of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
,which envisaged a struggle for democratic reforms that would facilitate the preparation and transition to the socialist revolution. 
 Lenin laid bare the opportunistic essence of the position of Bukharinand those sharing his views, its kinship with “economism”—theopportunistic trend in Russian Social-Democracy at the end of the 156 157 158 159 170 17119th century and the beginning of the 20th. 
 Like the old “econo-mists,” who could not understand the need for the political struggle of the working class under conditions of capitalism, the “imperialist economists” did not understand the significance of the strugglefor democratic reforms under, conditions of imperialism. 
 Certain views of the “imperialist economists” were shared by Left Social-Democrats of Holland, America, Poland, etc. 
 That is whyLenin called “imperialist economism” an “international disease” (Vol. 
 35, letter to Inessa Armand of November 30,1916). 
 A number of articles by Lenin are devoted to a criticism of “imperialist economisin”: “On the Incipient Trend of ‘ImperialistEconomism” (pres. 
 ed. 
, Vol. 
 23, pp. 
 1-9); “Reply to P. 
 Kievsky(Y. 
 Pyatakov)” (pres. 
 ed. 
, Vol. 
 23, pp. 
 10-15); “A Caricatureof Marxism and Imperialist Economism” (pres. 
 ed. 
, Vol. 
 23, pp. 
 16-64). 
 p. 
 388 The reference is to the Rheinische Zeitung für Politik, Handel und Gewerbe (Rhine Gazette on Problems of Politics, Trade and Industry )— a daily newspaper that appeared in Cologne from January 1, 1842 to March 31, 1843. 
 It was founded by representatives of the Rhine-land bourgeoisie who were opposed to Prussian absolutism. 
 Marxjoined its staff in April 1842 and became one of its editors in Octoberof the same year. 
 During Marx’s editorship, the revolutionary--democratic character of the newspaper became more and moremarked. 
 The newspaper was ultimately banned by the Prussian Government. 
 p. 
 390 The entry on the books by Raab and Perrin was made in a notebook entitled “Austrian Agricultural Statistics, etc. 
” not earlier than1912. 
 p. 
 392 The entry on the books under the heading From Books on Philosophy in the Zürich Cantonal Library was made in the first notebook (note-book “ α”) on imperialism in 1915. 
 p. 
 393 The entry under the heading Cantonal Library in Zürich was made in the first notebook on imperialism (notebook “α”) in 1915. 
 p. 
 394 The entry under the general heading Section III . 
 (Works of inform-ative and scientific content ), containing reference to the books by Haeckel, Uhde and Zart, was made in a notebook on imperialism(notebook “ ε”) in 1916. 
 p. 
 395 Note on the Review of Johann Pleage’s book “Marx and Hegel ” was written in 1913, amidst bibliographical excerpts on various ques-tions, in the notebook “Austrian Agricultural Statistics, etc. 
” p. 
 397 162 163 164 165 166 167 168Remarks on the Review of R. 
 B. 
 Perry’s book “Present Philosophical Tendencies ”—written after April 1913 in the notebook “Austrian Agricultural Statistics, etc. 
” p. 
 398 Remarks on the Review of A. 
 Aliotta’s book “The Idealist Reaction Against Science ”—written in 1913 at the end of the notebook “Austrian Agricultural Statistics, etc. 
” p. 
 399 Remarks on Hilferding’s Views on Mach (in “Finance Capital ”)— contained in notebook “ ϑ” on imperialism. 
 p. 
 400 Lenin’s Remarks and Notations in Abel Rey’s book “La Philosophie Moderne ,” Paris, 1908 (Abel Rey, Modern Philosophy , Paris, 1908) constitute a sequel to the sharp criticism in Materialism and Empirio-Criticism of Rey’s views as expounded in his book La théorie de la physique chez les physiciens contemporains (Modern Physicists’ Theory of Physics ), Paris, 1907. 
 p. 
 407 Lenin is referring to the well-known characterisation of agnosticism given by Engels in Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical Ger-man Philosophy (see Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, p. 
 371). 
 p. 
 433 A. 
 Deborin’s article “Dialectical Materialism” is contained in the collection Na Rubezhe , St. 
 Petersburg, 1909. 
 p. 
 475 Lenin’s Remarks in G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov’s book “N. 
 G . 
 Chernyshevsky ,” St. 
 Petersburg, 1910 —written not earlier than October 1909 (the actual date of the book’s appearance) and not later than April 1911. 
They were first published in 1933 in Lenin Miscellany XXV . 
 Many of Lenin’s comments are devoted to a comparion of state-ments by Piekhanov in his book published in 1910 with his articles on Chernyshevsky published in 1890 and 1892 in Sotsial-Demokrat, a literary and political review (see Sotsial-Demokrat , Book 1, London, 1890; Book 2, Geneva, 1890; Book 3, Geneva, 1890; Book 4,Geneva, 1892). 
 These four articles by Plekhanov were brought together in the book N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky appearing in Germany in 1894 in German. 
 Plekhanov’s book, which gave, in the main, a correct characterisation of Chernyshevsky’s views and which sharplyattacked the Narodniks, was favourably commented upon by Leninin the article “A Retrograde Trend in Russian Social-Democracy”(see pres. 
 ed. 
, Vol. 
 4, Moscow, 1961, p. 
 271). 
 Plekhanov’s book N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky published in 1910 was written at a time when he had already gone over to Menshevism. 
 169 170 171It was in effect directed against Bolshevism, against the Bolshevist evaluation of the world outlook and activity of Chernyshevsky and the revolutionary democrats of the 19th century. 
 In this book, Plekhanov abandons a number of basic propositions in his earlierevaluation of Chernyshevsky, obscuring his revolutionary democrat-ism, his resolute struggle against liberalism and his backing of thepeasant revolution. 
 Lenin carefully collates the text of the book published in 1910 with Plekhanov’s articles in Sotsial-Demokrat, noting which of Plekhanov’s basic formulations remained unchanged and whichunderwent radical change. 
 Lenin’s remarks and notations in Plekhanovs book are insepara-bly linked with his numerous statements on Chernyshevsky—in the writings published before he became acquainted with Plekha-nov’s book ( What the “Friends of the People” Are and How They Fight the Social-Democracy, The Heritage We Renounce, On “Vekhi ” and Materialism and Empirio-Criticism ) as well as in those written afterwards ( Peasant Reform and Proletarian Peasant Revolution, In Memory of Herzen, From the Past of the Workers ’ Press in Russia , etc. 
) p. 
 501 The Sovremennik circle included, among others, the revolutionary democrats N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky, N. 
 A. 
 Dobrolyubov, N. 
 A. 
 Nekra-sov, M. 
 I. 
 Mikhailov. 
 Sovremennik (Contemporary )—a monthly scientific-political and literary journal founded by A. 
 S. 
 Pushkin in 1836. 
 In 1847 the journal was taken over by N. 
 A. 
 Nekrasov. 
 From the mid-fifties on the journal became a militant organ of the revolutionary demo-crats, who advocated a peasant revolution and the overthrow oftsarism. 
 Chernyshevsky was a most prominent contributor untilhis arrest in 1862. 
 In 1866 Sovremennik was closed down by the tsarit government. 
 In 1859-62 the satirical magazine Svistok (Whistle ) appeared as a supplement to Sovremennik . 
 It wittily ridiculed the vain hopes of the liberals for bringing about a change in the political systemof Russia through literary denunciations of government officials, andwithout resorting to revolutionary struggle. 
 p. 
 503 Kolokol (The Bell )—journal founded by A. 
 I. 
 Herzen in London and illegally circulated in Russia. 
 It appeared from 1857 to 1868. 
The journal attacked the autocratic regime and serfdom. 
 It playedan important role in the development of the revolutionary movementin Russia. 
 “Clowns” and “whistlers” were nicknames given by liberals to the revolutionary democrats of Sovremennik and Svistok . 
 p. 
 503 Oblomov —the title of a well-known novel by the Russian author A. 
 I. 
 Goncharov which depicts the corruption of the serf-owningsystem in 19th century Russia. 
 p. 
 503 172 173 174 175 176 177Slavophils represented a trend of social thought arising in mid-19th-century Russia, which held that Russia’s development would take place along a distinct path of its own. 
 This, according to them, stemmed from the communal system in Russia and its orthodoxy. 
The Slavophils were confirmed opponents of the revolutionarymovement in Russia and the West. 
 p. 
 506 Chernyshevsky wrote the novel Prologue while serving at hard labour in 1865-70. 
 With great difficulty, his friends smuggled themanuscript to St. 
 Petersburg and then to London where it waspublished in 1877. 
 The novel describes Russia in the late fifties. 
 A revolutionary situation was maturing in the country and the tsarist government, preferring to free the peasants “from above” rather than wait tillthey took action “from below,” was preparing for the abolition ofserfdom (the so-called Peasant Reform). 
 The book describes thesharp struggle between various classes and groups over the reformand portrays real people of the day under fictitious names. 
 Thus, Chernyshevsky himself, who headed the revolutionary party, ap-pears under the name of Volgin; Kavelin, the liberal, appears underthe name of Ryazantsev; Sierakowski, a prominent figure in thePolish liberation movement—under the name of Sokolovsky,etc. 
 p. 
 508 The reference here is to the uprising in Poland in 1863-64, one of the organisers of which was Zygmunt Sierakowski. 
 The uprising againsttsarist autocracy aimed at Polish national liberation. 
 Broad supportfor the uprising came from the szlachta intelligentsia, students, clergy, artisans, workers and some sections of the peasantry. 
 The Russian revolutionary democrats also sympathised with the upris-ing. 
 Members of the secret organisation Zemlya i Volya, which hadconnections with Chernyshevsky, sought to render help to theinsurrection. 
 A. 
 I. 
 Herzen published a number of articles in Kolokol supporting the struggle of the Polish people. 
 However, the insurrection was ruthlessly suppressed by the tsarist government, and its leaders, including Sierakowski, wereexecuted. 
 p. 
 508 Prologue to a Prologue —the title of the first part of the novel Pro-logue . 
p. 
 5 0 9 The circle of Russian revolutionary emigrants in London who were grouped around A. 
 I. 
 Herzen and N. 
 A. 
 Ogaryov. 
 p. 
 509 The reference is to Chernyshevsky’s novel which exerted great in-fluence on several generations of Russian revolutionary youth. 
 178 179 180 181Chernyshevsky wrote the novel in 1862-63 in the Peter and Paul For-tress, where he was imprisoned in the summer of 1862. 
 The novel was published in Sovremennik in 1863. 
 Vera Pavlovna, Lopukhov, Kirsanov and Rakhmetov mentioned by Plekhanov are the chief characters in the novel. 
 p. 
 509 Lenin is referring to the following passage in Sotsial-Demokrat (Book I, London, 1890, pp. 
 173-174): “Chernyshevsky was present at the birth of the new type of ‘new people’ in our country—the revolutionary. 
 He joyfully welcomedthe emergence of this new type and could not deny himself thesatisfaction of depicting at least a vague profile of him. 
 At the same time, he foresaw with sorrow how many trials and sufferings there were in store for the Russian revolutionary, whose life mustbe one of severe struggle and great self-sacrifice. 
 And so, in Rakhme-tov, Chernyshevsky presents us with the true ascetic. 
 Rakhmetovpositively tortures himself. 
 He is completely ‘merciless towardshimself,’ as his landlady says. 
 He even decides to test whether he can bear torture by spending a whole night lying on a length of felt with nails sticking through it. 
 Many people, including Pisarev,regarded this as mere eccentricity. 
 We agree that some aspects ofRakhmetov’s character could have been drawn differently. 
 Butthe character as a whole nevertheless remains completely true tolife. 
 Every prominent Russian revolutionary possessed much of the Bakhmetov spirit. 
” p. 
 513 Our “Subjectivsts ”—supporters of the Narodnik doctrine which denied the existence of objective laws of social development and held that individual outstanding personalities, not the masses, make history. 
 The chief exponents of this trend were P. 
 L. 
 Lavrov andN. 
 K. 
 Mikhailovsky. 
 p. 
 514 Lenin is referring to the following passage in Plekhanov’s article in Sotsial-Demokrat : “We have never had occasion to read such malicious and at the same time such a highly accurate characterisa-tion of Russian liberalism. 
” ( Sotsial-Demokrat , Book I, London, 1890, p. 
 144. 
) p. 
 532 Lenin is referring to the following passage, subsequently radically changed by Plekhanov, in an article in Sotsial-Demokrat (Book I, London, 1890, p. 
 144): “For the sake of impartiality, however, it must be added that our author was not only contemptuous of Russian liberals. 
 In excellent political reviews that he wrote in Sovremennik until the very end of his free life, our author constantly displayed the most mercilesscontempt for all European liberals in general—particularly, theliberals of Austria (i. 
e. 
, the Liberal Party of Austrian Germans), /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR 182Prussia and Italy. 
 As is well known, in articles on the history of France, he also did not manifest much respect for the liberal party. 
 All this, naturally, could not be pleasing to the spokesmen of Rus-sian liberalism and, in their fight with him, they resorted to themethod so often used by liberals of all countries in their clashes with people further advanced than themselves politically; they accused him of disliking freedom and even of sympathies for despot-ism. 
 Of course, such accusations from liberals could only amuse Chernyshevsky. 
 He had so little fear of them that at times he aroused his opponents to new accusations by making believe thathe recognised their complete fairness. 
 ‘For us there is no better amusement than liberalism,’ he says in one of his last political reviews, ‘and we have an irresistible desire to look about for liberalsin order to poke fun at them. 
’ He then begins to poke fun at the Prussian liberals who, as he aptly puts it, were angered by the fact that political freedom in Prussia ‘does not become established byitself. 
’ “This mockery did not prevent the attentive reader from under-standing that it was not a lack of love for freedom that made Cherny-shevsky contemptuous of liberalism. 
 It was sufficient to read only a few of his political reviews to see how passionately he sympathised with every liberation movement, no matter where it began: inFrance or in Italy, in America or in Hungary. 
 He simply believed that the role of the liberals in such movements is usually very ugly. 
 They themselves do very little and often even impede theefforts of others by attacking people who are more daring and resolute than they. 
” p. 
 544 Lenin is referring to the following passage in Plekhanov’s article in Sotsial-Demokrat (Book I, London, 1890, p. 
 161): “In the article ‘The Russian Reformer,’ written on the occasion of the appearance of Baron M. 
 Korf’s book The Life of Count Spe-ransky , Chernyshevsky demonstrates conclusively that no reformer in our country could depend on the government as regards important social reforms. 
 Revolutionaries can depend on it even less. 
 Enemies called Speransky a revolutionary, but such an evaluation appearslaughable to Chernyshevsky. 
 Speransky indeed had very extensive reform plans, but ‘it is ludicrous to call him a revolutionary judging by the extent of the means he intended using to carry out his inten-tions. 
’ He could maintain his post only because he had managed to earn the trust of the tsar Alexander I. 
 With this trust to support him, he intended to carry out his plans. 
 Precisely for this reason,Chernyshevsky considered him to be a dangerous dreamer. 
 Dreamers are often simply ridiculous and their delusions trivial, but they can be dangerous to society when their delusions concern importantmatters. 
 In their rapturous bustle off the track, they appear to achieve a measure of success, thus confusing many who, as a result of this illusory success, get it into their heads to follow them. 
 Fromthis standpoint, Speransky’s activity may be called dangerous. 
” p. 
 552 183The statement in Plekhanov’s article on Chernyshevsky appearing in Sotsial-Demokrat (Book I, London, 1890, p. 
 162), but omitted by Plekhanov in the 1910 edition of his book on Chernyshevsky, is the following: “With respect to the Russian Government, Cherny-shevsky’s tone becomes more and more defiant. 
” p. 
 553. 
 INDEX OF SOURCES MENTIONED BY LENIN A Aliotta, A. 
 La reazione idealistica contro la scienza . 
 Palermo, “Optima”, 1912, XVI, 526 p. 
—399 Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie . 
 Bd, VII. 
 Leipzig, Duncker u. 
 Hum-blot, 1878, S. 
 66-67. 
—372 Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung . 
 Charlottenburg, 1843-1844, Hft. 
 I-VIII. 
—23, 24, 26, 37, 45, 46, 47 Anekdota zur neuesten deutschen Philosophie und Publizistik von Bruno Bauer, Ludwig Feuerbach, Friedrich Köppen, Karl Nauwerck, Arnold Ruge und einigen Ungenannten . 
 Hrsg. 
 von A. 
 Ruge. 
 Bd. 
 I-II. 
 Zürich u. 
 Winterthur, Literarisches Comptoir, 1843. 
—48 Archiv für die Geschichte des Sozialismus und der Arbeiterbewegung . 
 In Verbindung mit einer Reihe namhafter Fachmänner aller Länderhrsg. 
 von C. 
 Grünberg. 
 Bd. 
 3, Hft. 
 3 . 
 Leipzig, Hirschfeld, 1913, S. 
 528-30. 
—397 Archiv für systematische Philosophie in Gemeinschaft mit Wilhelm Dilthey, Benno Erdmann und Paul Natorp mitbegründet vonEduard Zeller. 
 Hrsg. 
 von L. 
 Stein. 
 Neue Folge der PhilosophischenMonatshefte. 
 Bd. 
 XIV. 
 Abt. 
 2. 
 Berlin, 1908. 
 570 S. 
—57, 59 Aristoteles . 
 De anima . 
—249, 284, 286, 287 —De coelo . 
— 248 —De mundo . 
—260 —Metaphysik . 
—250, 281 —Die Metaphysik des Aristoteles . 
 Grundtext, Übers. 
 und Komment. 
 nebst erläut. 
 Abhandlungen von A. 
 Schwegler... Bd. 
 1-4. 
 Tübingen,Fues, 1847-1848. 
—357, 359, 365-374 B Baillie, J. 
 B. 
 The origin and significance of Hegel’s Logic, a general introduction to Hegel’s system . 
 London, Macmillan, 1901. 
 XVIII, 375 p. 
—240 Bauch, B. 
 Review of the book: Haas, A. 
 E. 
 Der Geist des Hellenentums Komp. 
, Leipzig, 1914 (32 S. 
). 
—In: Kant-Studien . 
 Bd. 
 XIX, Hft. 
 3. 
 Berlin, 1914, S. 
 391-392. 
—335 Bauer, B. 
 Die Judenfrage . 
 Braunschweig, Otto, 1843. 
 115 S. 
—35, 37 — Neueste Schriften über die Judenfrage . 
—In: Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung . 
 Charlottenburg, 1844, Hft. 
 IV, März, S. 
 10-19. 
—37, 38 — Von den neuesten Schriften über die Judenfrage . 
—In: Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung . 
 Charlottenburg, 1843, Hft. 
 I, Dezember, S. 
 1-16. 
—35 Bauer, O. 
 Review of the book: Dr. 
 Johann Plenge, Marx und Hegel . 
 Tübingen, Laupp, 1911. 
 8 °. 
 184 S. 
 (4 M). 
—In: Archiv für die Geschi-chte des Sozialismus und der Arbeiterbewegung . 
 Bd. 
 3, Hft. 
 3. 
 Leip-zig, Hirschfeld, 1913, S. 
 528-530. 
—397 Bayle, P. 
 Dictionnaire historique et critique . 
 5-e ed. 
, rev. 
, corr. 
 et augm. 
 Avec la vie de l’auteur, par Mr. 
 Des Maizeaux. 
 T. 
1-4. 
 Amster-dam-Leiden, 1740. 
—255 Beaussiré, E. 
 Antécédents de l’hégélianisme dans la philosophie fran-çaise . 
 Dom Deschamps, son système et son école. 
 D’après un manu-scrit et des correspondances inédites du XVIII e siècle. 
 Paris, Lon-dres, ... Bäillière, 1865. 
 XVI, 233, 3 p. 
 (Bibliothèque de philosophiecontemporaine No. 
 3). 
—324 Boltzmann, L. 
 Wissenschaftliche Abhandlungen . 
 Im Auftrage und mit Unterstützung der Akademien der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, Göt-tingen, Leipzig, München, Wien. 
 Hrsg. 
 von Dr. 
 F. 
 Hasenöhrl. 
 Bd. 
 1-3. 
 Leipzig, Barth, 1909. 
—58 Busse, L. 
 Jahresbericht über die Erscheinungen der anglo-amerikani-schen Literatur der Jahre 1893/94 . 
 (Falckenberg-Armstrong, Fuller-ton, Wallace, Flint, Ladd, Ormond). 
—In: Zeitschrift für Philosophie und philosophische Kritik . 
 Bd. 
 111. 
 Leipzig, 1898, S. 
 205-213. 
—240 —Jahresbericht über die Erscheinungen der anglo-amerikanischen Literatur der Jahre 1896-1897 . 
 (Berenson—Caldwell—MacTaggart— Carus—Fraser—Lindsay—Wenley—Seth). 
—In: Zeitschrift für Phi-losophie und philosophische Kritik . 
 Bd. 
 119, Leipzig, 1902, S. 
 182-204. 
—238 C Cabanis, P. 
 I. 
 G. 
 Rapports du physique et du moral de l’homme . 
 T. 
 1-2. 
 Paris, Crapart, 1802. 
—42 Carnot, C. 
 Réflexions sur la Métaphysique du calcul infinitésimal. 
 Paris, Duprat, 1797. 
 380 p. 
—118 Clauberg, I. 
 Defensio Cartesiana . 
 Amsterdam, Elzevirium, 1652. 
 [12], 631 p. 
—383 Clemens, A. 
 Clementis Alexandrini . 
 Opera. 
 Ex rec. 
 Gulielmi Dindorfii. 
 Vol. 
 3. 
 Oxonii, Clarendoniano, 1869. 
 694 p. 
—347 D Dannemann, F. 
 Die Naturwissenschaften in ihrer Entwicklung und in ihrem Zusammenhange . 
 Dargest. 
 von F. 
 Dannemann. 
 Bd. 
 1-4. 
 Leipzig-Berlin, Engelmann, 1913. 
—333 nach der Rembrandtschen Radierung “Der Astrolog” und vielen Textbildern, Stuttgart, Francksche Verlagshandlung [1912]. 
 98 S. 
—331, 332 Darmstaedter, L. 
 Handbuch zur Geschichte der Naturwissenschaften und der Technik . 
 In chronologischer Darstellung. 
 2. 
 umgearb. 
 und verm. 
 Aufl. 
 Unter Mitwirk. 
 von Dr. 
 B. 
 du Bois-Reymond undC. 
 Schaefer. 
 Hrsg. 
 von Dr. 
 L. 
 Darmstaedter. 
 Berlin, Springer,1908. 
 X, 1262 S. 
—333 Darwin, Ch. 
 On the origin of species by means of natural selection, or the preservation of favoured races in the struggle for life . 
 London, Murray, 1859. 
 IX, 502 p. 
—141 Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher . 
 Hrsg. 
 von A. 
 Ruge u. 
 K. 
 Marx. 
 1. 
 u. 
 2. 
 Lfg. 
 Paris, 1844, S. 
 86-144, 182-214. 
—24, 35, 37, 38 Dietzgen, J. 
 Das Wesen der menschlichen Kopfarbeit . 
 Eine abermalige Kritik der reinen und praktischen Vernunft von J. 
 Dietzgen. 
 Miteiner Einl. 
 von A. 
 Pannekoek. 
 Stuttgart, Dietz, 1903. 
 XXVII, 151 S. 
—72 Diogenes Laertius. 
 De vitis dogmatibus et apophthegmatibus clarorum philosophorum . 
 Libri VIII, X. 
—255, 290, 291, 295 E Ebbinghaus, H. 
 Über das Gedächtnis . 
 Untersuchungen zur experimen-tellen Psychologie. 
 Leipzig, Duncker u. 
 Humblot, 1855, IX, 169 S. 
—326 Engel, B. 
 C. 
 Review of the book: Hammacher, E. 
 Die Bedeutung der Philosophie Hegels . 
 VIII u. 
 92 S. 
 Leipzig, 1911. 
 Duncker und Humblot. 
—In: Zeitschrift für Philosophie und philosophische Kritik . 
 Bd. 
 148. 
 Leipzig, 1912, S. 
 95-97. 
—238 EngeIs, F. 
 Die Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England . 
 Nach eigner Anschauung und authentischen Quellen. 
 Leipzig, Wigand, 1845. 
358 S. 
—77 — Ludwig Feuerbach und der Ausgang der klassischen deutschen Philo-sophie . 
 Revidierter sonder. 
 Abdr. 
 aus der Neuen Zeit. 
 Mit Anhang: Karl Marx über Feuerbach vom Jahre 1845. 
 Stuttgart, Dietz, 1888. 
VII, 72 S. 
—70, 104, 109, 169, 233, 306 — Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalökonomie . 
—In: Aus dem lite-rarischen Nachlass von Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels and FerdinandLassalle. 
 Hrsg. 
 von F. 
 Mehring. 
 Bd. 
 1. 
 Gesammelte Schriften von Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels. 
 Von März 1841 bis März 1844. 
 Stuttgart, Dietz, 1902, S. 
 432-490. 
—403 — Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalökonomie. 
—In: Deutsch-Fran-zösische Jahrbücher . 
 Hrsg. 
 von A. 
 Ruge u. 
 K. 
 Marx, 1. 
 u. 
 2. 
 Lfg. 
 Paris, 1844, S. 
 86-144. 
—24 Engels, F. 
 u. 
 Marx, K. 
—See Marx, K. 
 u. 
 Engels, F. 
 F Faucher, J. 
 Englische Tagesfragen . 
—In: Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung . 
 Charlottenburg, 1844, Hft. 
 VII, Juni, S. 
 1-8; Hft. 
 VIII, Juli, Feuerbach, L. 
 Sämtliche Werke . 
 Bd. 
 1-10. 
 Leipzig, Wigand, 1846-1883. 
 Bd. 
 4. 
 Geschichte der neuern Philosophie von Bacon von Verulam bis Benedict Spinoza . 
 1847, 392 S. 
—64 Bd. 
 5. 
 Darstellung, Entwicklung und Kritik der Leibnizschen Philoso-phie . 
 1848. 
 X, 290 S. 
—64 Bd. 
 6. 
 Pierre Bayle . 
 Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der Philosophie und Menschheit. 
 2. 
 umgearb. 
 und verm. 
 Aufl. 
 1848. 
 VIII, 308 S. 
—64 Bd. 
 8. 
 Vorlesungen über das Wesen der Religion . 
 Nebst Zusätzen und Anmerkungen. 
 1851. 
 VIII, 463 S. 
—63-83 Bd. 
 9. 
 Theogonie nach den Quellen des klassischen, hebräischen und christlichen Altertums . 
 1857. 
 446 S. 
—83 —Sämtliche Werke . 
 Neu hrsg. 
 von W. 
 Bolin u. 
 F. 
 JodI. 
 Bd. 
 I-X. 
 Stuttgart, Frommann, 1903-1911. 
 Bd. 
 I. 
 Gedanken über Tod und Unsterblichkeit . 
 Durchges. 
 und neu hrsg. 
 von F. 
 JodI. 
 1903. 
 XV, 374 S. 
—327, 373 Bd. 
 II. 
 Philosophische Kritiken und Grundsätze . 
 Durchges. 
 und neu hrsg. 
 von F. 
 Jodl. 
 1904. 
 XI, 411 S. 
—326, 373 Bd. 
 III. 
 Geschichte der Neuern Philosophie von Bacon von Verulam bis Benedict Spinoza . 
 Durchges. 
 und neu hrsg. 
 von F. 
 Jodi. 
 1906. 
 XI, 388 S. 
—373 Bd. 
 IV. 
 Darstellung, Entwicklung und Kritik der Leibnizschen Philo-sophie . 
 Zur neueren Philosophie and ihrer Geschichte. 
 Durchges. 
 und neu hrsg. 
 von F. 
 Jodl. 
 1910. 
 XII, 448 S. 
—326, 373, 375-387 Bd. 
 V. 
 Pierre Bayle. 
 Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der Philosophie und Menschheit . 
 Mit einer Biogr. 
 Bayles vorn Hrsg. 
 Neu hrsg. 
 und biogr. 
 eingeleitet von W. 
 Bolin. 
 1905. 
 X, 436 S. 
—373 Bd. 
 VI. 
 Das Wesen des Christentums . 
 Durchges. 
 und neu hrsg. 
 von W. 
 Bolin. 
 1903. 
 X, 411 S. 
—327, 373 Bd. 
 VII. 
 Erläuterungen und Ergänzungen zum Wesen des Christentums . 
 Durchges. 
 und neu hrsg. 
 von W. 
 Bolin. 
 1903. 
 XII, 520 S. 
—326 , 373 Bd. 
 VIII. 
 Vorlesungen über das Wesen der Religion. 
 Nebst Zusätzen and Anmerkugen . 
 Durchges. 
 und neu hrsg. 
 von W. 
 Bolin. 
 1908. 
 VIII, 459 S. 
—326, 327, 373 Bd. 
 IX. 
 Theogonie nach den Quellen den klassischen, hebräischen und christlichen Altertums . 
 Durchges. 
 und neu hrsg. 
 von W. 
 Bolin. 
 1907. 
 IX, 417 S. 
—373 Bd. 
 X. 
 Schriften zur Ethik and nachgelassene Aphorismen . 
 Durchges. 
 und neu hrsg, von F. 
 Jodl. 
 1911. 
 X, 385 S. 
—326, 373 —Darstellung, Entwicklung and Kritik der Leibni’schen Philosophie . 
 Ansbach, 1837. 
 295 S. 
—377-387 —Grundsätze der Philosophie der Zukunft . 
 Zürich. 
 u. 
 Winterthur, Literarisches Comptoir, 1843, IV, 84 S. 
—45, 67 —Grundsätze der Philosophie der Zukunft. 
 1843. 
—In: Feuerbach, L. 
 Sämtliche Werke . 
 Neu hrsg. 
 von W. 
 Bolin u. 
 F. 
 JodI. 
 Bd. 
 II. 
 Philosophische Kritiken und Grundsätze. 
 Durchges. 
 und neu hrsg. 
von F. 
 Jodl. 
 Stuttgart, Frommann, 1904, S. 
 245-320. 
—326, 327 —Herr von Schelling . 
 1843. 
 Brief, an K. 
 Marx. 
 (Nach dem Brouil-lon). 
—In: Feuerbach, L. 
 Sämtliche Werke . 
 Neu hrsg. 
 von W. 
 Bolin u. 
 F. 
 Jodi. 
 Bd. 
 IV. 
 Darstellung, Entwicklung and Kritik der Leib-Durchges. 
 und neu hrsg. 
 von F. 
 Jodi. 
 Stuttgart, Frommann, 1910, S. 
 434-440. 
—387 —Kritik des “Antihegel ”. 
 1835. 
—In: Feuerbach, L. 
 Sämtliche Werke . 
 Neu hrsg. 
 von W. 
 Bolin u. 
 F. 
 Jodl. 
 Bd. 
 II. 
 Philosophische Kritiken und Grundsätze. 
 Durchges. 
 und neu hrsg. 
 von F. 
 Jodl. 
 Stuttgart, Frommann, 1904, S. 
 17-80—327 —Der Schriftsteller und der Mensch . 
 Eine Reihe humoristisch-philo-sophischer Aphorismen. 
 1834. 
—In: Feuerbach, L. 
 Sämtliche Werke . 
 Neu hrsg. 
 von W. 
 Bolin u. 
 F. 
 Jodl. 
 Bd. 
 I. 
 Gedanken über Tod undUnsterbliclikeit. 
 Durcliges. 
 unit lieu hrsg. 
 von F. 
 Jodl. 
 Stuttgart, Frommann, 1903, S. 
 263-366—327 —Spinoza and Herbart . 
 1836. 
—In: Feuerbach, L. 
 Sämtliche Werke . 
 Neu hrsg. 
 von W. 
 Bolin u. 
 F. 
 Jodl. 
 Bd. 
 IV. 
 Darstellung, Enitwick-lung und Kritik der Leibnizschen Philosophie. 
 Zur neueren Philo-sophie and ihrer Geschichte. 
 Durchges. 
 u. 
 neu hrsg. 
 von F. 
 Jodl. 
Stuttgart, Frommann, 1910, S. 
 400-416. 
—387 —Todesgendanken . 
 1830. 
—In: Feuerbach, L. 
 Sämtliche Werke . 
 Neu hrsg. 
 von W. 
 Bolin u. 
 F. 
 Jodl. 
 Bd. 
 I. 
 Gedanken über Tod undUnsterblichkeit. 
 Durchges. 
 und neu hrsg. 
 von F. 
 Jodl. 
 Stuttgart,Frommann, 1903, S. 
 1-90—327 —Über die Vernunft ; ihre Einheit, Allgemeinheit, Unbegrenztheit . 
 Dissertation zur Erlangung des philosophischen Doktorates. 
—In: Feuerbach, L. 
 Sämtliche Werke . 
 Neu hrsg. 
 von W. 
 Bolin u. 
 F. 
 Jodl. 
 Bd. 
 IV. 
 Darstellung, Entwicklung und Kritik der LeibnizschenPhilosophie. 
 Zur neueren Philosophie und ihrer Geschichte. 
Durchges. 
 und neu hrsg. 
 von F. 
 Jodl. 
 Stuttgart, Frommann, 1910,S. 
 299-356. 
—387 —Über Spiritualismus and Matertalismus, besonders in Beziehung auf die Willensfreiheit . 
 1863-1866. 
—In: Feuerbach, L. 
 Sämtliehe Werke . 
 Neu hrsg. 
 von W. 
 Bolin a. 
 F. 
 Jodl. 
 Bd. 
 X. 
 Schriften zur Ethik und nachgelassene Aphorismen. 
 Durchges. 
 und nea hrsg. 
von F. 
 JodI. 
 Stuttgart, Frommann, 1911, S. 
 91-229—326 —Verhältnis zu Hegel . 
 1840, mit späteren Zusätzen. 
—In: Feuerbach, L. 
 Sämtliche Werke . 
 Neu hrsg. 
 von W. 
 Bolin u. 
 F. 
 Jodi. 
 Bd. 
 IV. 
 Darstellung, Entwicklung und Kritik der Leibnizschen Philosophie. 
 Zur neueren Philosophie und ihrer Geschichte. 
 Durchges. 
 und neuhrsg. 
 von F. 
 Jodl. 
 Stuttgart, Frommann, 1910, S. 
 417-424—387 —Vorläufige Thesen zur Reform der Philosophie . 
 1842. 
—In: Feuer-bach, L. 
 , Sämtliche Werke . 
 Neu hrsg. 
 von W. 
 Bolin u. 
 F. 
 JodI. 
 Bd. 
 II. 
 Philosophische Kritiken and Grundsätze. 
 Durchges. 
 und neu hrsg. 
 von F. 
 JodI. 
 Stuttgart, Frommann, 1904, S. 
 222-244—123, 326, 327 —Das Wesen der Religion . 
 Ergänzungen und Erläuterungen. 
 1845. 
— In: Feuerbach, L. 
 Sämtliche Werke . 
 Neu hrsg. 
 von W. 
 Bolin u. 
 F. 
 Jodl. 
 Bd. 
 VII. 
 Erläuterungen und Ergänzungen zum Wesendes Christentums. 
 Durchges. 
 und neu hrsg. 
 von W. 
 Bolin. 
 Stuttgart,Frommann, 1903, S. 
 390-520. 
—326, 327 —Das Wesen des Christentums ... Leipzig, Wigand, 1841. 
 XII, 450 S. 
— 64, 65, 328, 528 —Wider den Dualismus von Leib and Seele, Fleisch and Geist . 
—In: Feuerbach, L. 
 Sämtliche Werke . 
 Neu hrsg. 
 von W. 
 Bolin u. 
 F. 
 und neu hrsg. 
 von F. 
 Jodl. 
 Stuttgart, Frommann, 1904, S. 
 326-357. 
—283, 326 —Zur Beurteilung der Schrift : “Das Wesen des Christentums ”. 
 1842. 
— In: Feuerbach, L. 
 Sämtliche Werke . 
 Nea hrsg. 
 von W. 
 Bolin u. 
 F. 
 Jodl. 
 Bd. 
 VII. 
 Erläuterungers und Ergänzungen zum Wesen des Christentums. 
 Durchges. 
 und neu hrsg, von W. 
 Bolin, Stuttgart,Frommann, 1903, S. 
 265-275. 
—326 —Zur Kritik der Hegelschen Philosophie . 
 1839. 
—In: Feuerbach, L. 
 Sämtliche Werke . 
 Neu hrsg. 
 von W. 
 Bolin u. 
 F. 
 Jodl. 
 Bd. 
 II. 
 Philo-sophische Kritiken und Grundsätze. 
 Durchges. 
 und hrsg. 
 von F. 
 Jodl. 
 Stuttgart, Frommann, 1904, 5. 
 158-204. 
—327 Fischer, F. 
 Die Metaphysik, von empirischem Standpunkte aus darge-stellt . 
 Zur Verwirklichung der Aristotelischen Metaphysik. 
 Basel, Schweighausersche Buchh. 
, 1847. 
 VIII, 152 S. 
—372 Fischer, K. 
 Hegels Leben, Werke und Lehre . 
 T. 
 1. 
 Mit dern Bildnis des Verfassers in Heliogravüre. 
 Heidelberg, Winter, 1901. 
 XX, 576 S. 
 (Geschichte der neuern Philosophie von K. 
 Fischer. 
 Jubi-läumsausg. 
 Bd. 
 8). 
—157 Forel, A. 
 Gehirn und Seele . 
 Vortrag gehalten bei der 66. 
 Versammlung deutscher Naturforscher and Ärzte in Wien am 26. 
 September 1894. 
10. 
 Aufl. 
 Stuttgart, Kröner, 1907. 
 45 S. 
—326 Fourier, Ch. 
 Le nouveau monde industriel et sociétaire, ou invention du procédé d’industrie attrayante et naturelle distribuée en séries passionnées . 
—48, 49 —Théorie de l’unité universelle . 
—48, 49 —Théorie des quatre mouvements et des destinées générales . 
—49 Frankfurter Zeitung und Handelsblatt . 
 1904, No. 
 348. 
 Erstes Morgen-blatt, 13, Dezember, S. 
 1-3. 
—56 G Gauss, C. 
 F. 
 Disquisitiones arithmeticae . 
 Lipsiae, 1801. 
 478 S. 
—209 Genov, P. 
 Feuerbachs Erkenntnistheorie und Metaphysik . 
 Inaugu-ral-Dissertation zur Erlangung der Doktorwürde der hohen philo-sophischen Fakultät der Universität Bern vorgelegt von P. 
 Genov aus Zarsko-Selo (Bulgarien). 
 Zürich-Selnau, 1911. 
 89 S. 
—326, 327 Gomperz, Th. 
 Les penseurs de la Grèce . 
 Histoire de la Philosophie antique. 
—256 Grün, K. 
 Ludwig Feuerbach in seinem Briefwechsel und Nachlaß sowie in seiner Philosophischen Charakterentwicklung . 
 Bd. 
 1-2. 
 Leipzig u. 
 Heidelberg, Winter, 1874. 
—327 Guenther, K. 
 Vom Urtier zum Menschen . 
 Ein Bilderatlas zur Abstam-mungs-und Entwicklungsgeschichte des Menschen. 
 Zugest. 
 underläutert von Dr. 
 K. 
 Guenther. 
 Bd. 
 1-2. 
 Stuttgart, Deutsche Ver-lags-Anstalt, 1909. 
—58 H Haas, A. 
 E. 
 Der Geist des Hellenentums in der modernen Physik . 
 Antritts-vorlesung, gehalten am 17. 
 Januar 1914 in der Aula der Universität Haeckel, E. 
 Gott-Natur . 
 (Theophysis). 
 Studien über monistische Religion. 
 Leipzig, Kröner, 1914, 72 S. 
—395 —Die Lebenswunder . 
 Gemeinverständliche Studien über Biologische Philosophie. 
 Ergänzungsband zu dem Buche über die Welträtsel. 
 Volks-Ausg. 
 Stuttgart, Kröner, s. 
 a. 
 VIII. 
 200 S. 
—56 —Die Welträtsel . 
 Gemeinverständliche Studien über Monistische Philosophie. 
 Volks-Ausg. 
 ...Mit einem Nachworte: Das Glaubens-bekenntnis der Reinen Vernunft. 
 Stuttgart, Kröner, s. 
 a. 
 176 S. 
—56 Hammacher, E. 
 Die Bedeutung der Philosophic Hegels für die Gegen-wart . 
 Leipzig, Duncker u. 
 Humblot, 1911. 
 VIII, 92 S. 
—238, 239 Handbuch der Klassischen Altertumswissenschaft in systematischer Darstellung mit besonderer Rücksicht auf Geschichte und Methodikder einzelnen Disziplinen . 
 Hrgs. 
 von I. 
 Miller. 
 Geschichte der antiken Naturwissenschaft und Philosophie. 
 Bearb. 
 von S. 
 Güntherund W. 
 Windelband. 
 Bd. 
 V. 
 Abt. 
 1, Nördlingen, Beck’sche Buchh. 
 1888. 
 VII, 337 S. 
—369 Hegel, G. 
 W. 
 F. 
 Werke , Vollst. 
 Ausg. 
 durch einen Verein von Freun-den des Verewigten: Ph. 
 Marheineke u. 
 a. 
 Bd. 
 I-XIX. 
 Berlin,Leipzig, Duncker u. 
 Humblot, 1832-1845, 1887. 
 Bd. 
 I. 
 Philosophische Abhandlungen . 
 Hrsg. 
 von K. 
 L. 
 Michelet. 
 1832. 
 XXXIV, 423 S. 
—86 Bd. 
 II. 
 Phänomenologie des Geistes . 
 Hrsg. 
 von J. 
 Schulze. 
 1832. 
 XII, 612 S. 
—86, 96, 153 Bd. 
 III. 
 Wissenschaft der Logik . 
 Hrsg. 
 von L. 
 von Henning T. 
 1. 
 Die objektive Logik. 
 Abt. 
 1. 
 Die Lehre vom Sein. 
 1833. 
 VIII, 468 S. 
—86, 87-100, 103-125, 180, 360, 373 Bd. 
 IV. 
 Wissenschaft der Logik . 
 Hrsg. 
 von L. 
 von Henning. 
 T. 
 1. 
 Die objektive Logik. 
 Abt. 
 2. 
 Die Lehre vom Wesen. 
 1834. 
 VIII, 243 S. 
—86, 129-157, 158, 162, 164-180, 360, 373 Bd. 
 V. 
 Wissenschaft der Logik . 
 Hrsg. 
 von L. 
 von Henning. 
 T. 
 2. 
 Die subjektive Logik, oder; die Lehre vom Begriff. 
 1834. 
 VIII, 353 S. 
—86, 167-179, 185-195, 201-233, 237, 360, 373 Bd. 
 VI. 
 Enzyklopädie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse . 
 T. 
 1. 
 Die Logik. 
 Hrsg. 
 von L. 
 von Henning. 
 1840. 
 XL, 414, 2 S. 
— 86, 157-158, 162-163, 175, 176, 181-184, 195,196, 198-201, 208,234-237, 315-318 Bd. 
 VII. 
 Abt. 
 1. 
 Vorlesungen über die Naturphilosophie, als der Enzyklo-pädie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse . 
 T. 
 2. 
 Hrsg. 
 von K. 
 L. 
 Michelet. 
 1842. 
 XXX, 2, 696 S. 
—86 Bd. 
 VIII. 
 Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts oder Naturrecht und Staatswissenschaft im Grundrisse . 
 Hrsg. 
 von E. 
 Gans. 
 18:33. 
 XX, 440 S. 
—86 Bd. 
 IX. 
 Vorlesungen über die Philosophie der Geschichte . 
 Hrsg. 
 von E. 
 Gans. 
 1837. 
 XXIV, 446, 1 S. 
—86, 305-314 Bd. 
 X. 
 Vorlesungen über die Aesthetik . 
 Hrsg. 
 von H. 
 G. 
 Hotho. 
 Abt. 
 1. 
 Bd. 
 1. 
 1833. 
 XX, 547 S. 
; Abt. 
 2. 
 Bd. 
 2. 
 1837. 
 X, 465 S. 
; Abt. 
 3. 
 Bd. 
 3. 
 1838. 
 VIII, 581 S. 
—86 Bd. 
 XI. 
 Vorlesungen über die Philosophie der Religion . 
 Nebst einer Schrift über die Beweise vom Dasein Gottes. 
 Hrsg. 
 Ph. 
 Marheineke. 
 Bd. 
 XII. 
 Ibem. 
 Bd. 
 2. 
 1832. 
 VI, 483 S. 
—86 Bd. 
 XIII. 
 Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der Philosophie . 
 Hrsg. 
 von K. 
 L. 
 Michelet. 
 Bd. 
 1. 
 1833. 
 XX, 418 S. 
—86, 245-268, 339 Bd. 
 XIV. 
 Idem. 
 Bd. 
 2. 
 1833. 
 VI, 586 S. 
—86, 260-300 Bd. 
 XV. 
 Idem. 
 Bd. 
 3. 
 1836. 
 VIII, 692 S. 
—86, 301-302 Bd. 
 XVI. 
 Vermischte Schriften . 
 Hrsg. 
 von F. 
 Förster u. 
 L. 
 Boumann. 
 Bd. 
 1. 
 1834. 
 VI, 506 S. 
—86 Bd. 
 XVII. 
 Idem. 
 Bd. 
 2. 
 1835. 
 VI, 634 S. 
—80Bd. 
 XVIII. 
 Philosophische Propädeutik . 
 Hrsg. 
 von K. 
 Rosenkranz. 
 1840. 
 XXII, 2, 205 S. 
—86 Bd. 
 XIX. 
 Briefe von und an Hegel . 
 Hrsg. 
 von K. 
 Hegel, T. 
 1. 
 1887. 
 XII, 430 S. 
; T. 
 2. 
 1887. 
 399 S. 
—86, 373 —Werke . 
 Vollst. 
 Ausg. 
 durch einen Verein von Freunden des Vere-wigten: Ph. 
 Marheineke u. 
 a. 
 2. 
 unveränd. 
 Aufl. 
 Bd. 
 II. 
 Phäno-menologie des Geistes. 
 Hrsg. 
 von J. 
 Schulze. 
 Berlin, Dunker u. 
Humblot, 1841. 
 XII, 591 S. 
—33, 44-45, 47-49 —Cours d’esthetique . 
 Analysé et trad. 
 en partie, par Ch. 
 Bénard. 
 T. 
 1-3. 
 Paris, 1840-1848. 
—324 —The logic of Hegel . 
 Transl. 
 from the encyclopaedia of the philoso-phical sciences by W. 
 Wallace. 
 2d ed. 
, rev, and angm. 
 Oxford,Clarendon Press, 1892. 
 XXVI, 2, 439 p. 
—240 —Logique die Hegel . 
 Trad. 
 pour la première fois et accompagnée d’une introd. 
 et d’un comment. 
 perpétuel par A. 
 Véra. 
 T. 
 1. 
 Paris, Ladrange, 1859. 
 VII, 354 p. 
—324 —Phänomenologie des Geistes . 
 Mit einer Einleitung und einigen erläuternden Anmerkungen am Fuße der Seiten für den akademischenGebrauch. 
 Hrsg. 
 von G. 
 Bolland. 
 Leiden, Adriani, 1907. 
 XXXVIII,751 S. 
—393 —Philosophie de la nature . 
 Trad. 
 pour la première fois et accompagnée d’une introd. 
 et d’un comment. 
 perpétuel par A. 
 Véra. 
 T. 
 1. 
 Paris,Ladrange, 1863. 
 XI-1, 628 p. 
—324 —Philosophie de l’esprit . 
 Trad. 
 pour la première fois et accompagnée de deux introd. 
 et d’un comment. 
 perpétual par A. 
 Véra... Vols. 
 1-2. 
Paris, Ba illière, 1867-1869. 
—324 —Philosophie de la religion . 
 Trad. 
 pour la première fois et accompag-née de plusieurs introd. 
 et d’un comment. 
 perpétuel par A. 
 Véra. 
Vols. 
 1-2. 
 Paris, Baillière, 1876-1878. 
—324 —Wissenschaft der Logik . 
 240, 241 —Wissenschaft der Logik . 
 Bd. 
 1-2. 
 Nürnberg, Schrag, 1812-1816—141 Hibben, J. 
 G. 
 Hegel’s logic, an essay in interpretation . 
 New York, Scribner’s Sons, 1902. 
 313 p. 
—241 Hilferding, R. 
 Das Finanzkapital . 
 Eine Studie über die jüngste Ent-wicklung des Kapitalismus. 
 Wien, Brand, 1910. 
 XII, 477 S. 
 (Sepa-ratabdruck aus den Marx-Studien. 
 Bd. 
 3). 
—400 J Janet, P. 
 Études sur la dialectique dans Platon et dans Hégel . 
 Paris, Ladrange, 1861. 
 LVI, 396 p. 
—324 Jodl, F. 
 Lehrbuch der Psychologie . 
 2. 
 Aufl. 
 Bd. 
 1-2. 
 Stuttgart u. 
 Berlin, K Kant, I. 
 Kritik der reinen Vernunft . 
 2. 
 hin und wieder verbesserte Aufl. 
 Riga, 1787. 
 XLIV, 884 S. 
—100, 174, 383 —Kritik der Urteilskraft . 
 3. 
 Aufl. 
 Berlin, 1799. 
—134 Kant-Studien . 
 Philosophische Zeitschrift. 
 Unter Mitwirkung von E. 
 Adickes, E. 
 Boutroux u. 
 a. 
 und mit Unterstützung der “Kant-gesellschaft”. 
 Hrsg. 
 von H. 
 Vaihinger und B. 
 Bauch. 
 Bd. 
 XIX,Hit. 
 3. 
 Berlin, 1914, S. 
 391-392. 
—335 L Lange, F. 
 A. 
 Geschiehte des Materialismus und Kritik seiner Bedeutung in der Gegenwart . 
 Iserlohn, Baedeker, 1866. 
 XVI, 564 S. 
—326, 393 Lassalle, F. 
 Die Philosophie Herakleitos des Dunklen von Ephesos . 
 Nach einer neuen Sammlung seiner Bruchstücke und der Zeugnisse der Alten dargestellt. 
 Bd. 
 1-2, Berlin, Duncker, 1858. 
—339-352,357 Leibnitz, G. 
 W. 
 Essais de théodicée sur la bonté de Dieu, la liberté de l’homme et l’origine du mal . 
—381 — Nouveaux essais sur l’entendement humain . 
—381, 383, 384 Lipps, Th. 
 Naturwissenschaft und Weltanschauung . 
 Vortrag gehalten auf der 78. 
 Versammlung deutscher Naturforscher und Ärzte inStuttgart. 
 Heidelberg, Winter’s Universitätsbuchhandlung, 1906. 
40 S. 
—336 Lucas, R. 
 Bibliographie der radioaktiven Stoffe . 
 Hamburg u. 
 Leipzig, Voss, 1908. 
—57 M Mach, E. 
 Grundriß der Physik für die hohen Schulen des Deutschen Reiches , Bearb. 
 von Harbordt und Fischer. 
 T. 
 2. 
 Ausführlicher Lehrgang. 
 2. 
 Aufl. 
 Leipzig, Freytag, Wien, Tempsky, 1908. 
—57 MacTaggart, J. 
 E. 
 Studies in the Hegelian Dialectic . 
 Cambridge, 1896. 
 XVI, 259 p. 
—238 Mariano, R. 
 La Philosophie contemporaine en Italie . 
 Essai de philo-sophie hégélienne... Paris, Baillière, 1868. 
 VIII, 162, 12 p. 
—324 Marx K. 
 u. 
 Engels, F. 
 Die heilige Familie, oder Kritik der kritischen Kritik . 
 Gegen Bruno Bauer und Co. 
 Frankfurt a. 
 M. 
, Literarische Anstalt (J. 
 Rütten), 1845. 
 VIII, 336 S. 
—23-51, 65 —Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei . 
 Veröffentlicht im Februar 1848. 
 London, Druck von Hirschfeld, 1848. 
 24 S. 
—77, 141 Marx, K. 
 Marx über Feuerbach . 
 (Niedergeschrieben in Brüssel im Frühjahr 1845). 
—In: Engels, F. 
 Ludwig Feuerbach und der Aus-gang der klassischen deutschen Philosophie. 
 Revidierter sonder. 
 Abdr. 
 aus der Neuen Zeit . 
 Mit Anhang: Karl Marx über Feuerbach vom Jahre 1845. 
 Stuttgart, Dietz, 1888, S. 
 69-72. 
—211, 349, 528 — Zur Judenfrage . 
—In: Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher , hrsg. 
 von A. 
 Huge und K. 
 Marx. 
 1. 
 u. 
 2. 
 Lfg. 
 Paris, 1844. 
 S. 
 182-214—35, 37-38 Marx-Studien . 
 Blätter für Theorie und Politik des wissenschaftlichen Sozialismus. 
 Hrsg. 
 von M. 
 Adler u. 
 R. 
 Hilferding. 
 Bd. 
 3. 
 Wien, 1910, S. 
 VII-XII, 1-477. 
—400 Michelet, K. 
 L. 
 und Haring, G. 
 H. 
 Historisch-kritische Darstellung der dialektischen Methode Hegels . 
 Nebst dem gutachtlichen Berichte über die der Philosophischen Gesellschaft zu Berlin eingereichtenBewerbungsschriften und einer Geschichte der Preisbewerbung. 
Leipzig, Duncker u. 
 Humblot, 1888. 
 XVI, 174 S. 
—239 Mind . 
 A quarterly Review of psychology and philosophy. 
 Edited by G. 
 F. 
 Stout. 
 New series. 
 Vol. 
 XXII. 
 London, 1913, No. 
 86,April, pp. 
 280-284—398 N Napoléon. 
 Pensées . 
 Paris, 1913, 120 p. 
 (Bibliothèque miniature. 
 14). 
— 334 Neue Rheinische Zeitung . 
 Köln, 1848, Juni—1849, Mai. 
—77 Noël, G. 
 La Logique de Hegel . 
—In: Revue de Métaphysique et de Morale . 
 Paris, t. 
 II, 1894, p. 
 36-57, 270-298, 644-675; t. 
 III, 1895, p. 
 184-210, 503-526; t. 
 IV, 1896, p. 
 62-85, 583-614. 
—319 —La Logique de Hegel . 
 Paris, Alcan, 1897. 
 VII, 188 p. 
320-324 — Review of the book: William Wallace. 
 Hegel’s Philosophy of Mind . 
 Translated from the encyclopaedia of the philosophical scienceswith five introductory essays. 
 Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1894;Henry Frowde, London. 
—In: Revue Philosophique de la France et de l’Etranger . 
 Paris, 1894, No. 
 11, novembre, p. 
 540. 
—240 — Review at the book: William Wallace. 
 Prolegomena to the study of Hegel’s philosophy and especially of his logic . 
 Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1894; London, Henry Frowde. 
—In: Revue Philosophique de la France et de l’Etranger . 
 Paris. 
 1894, No 11, novembre, p. 
 538-540. 
—240 Norström, V. 
 Naives und wissenschaftliches Weitbild. 
 —In: Archiv für systematische Philosophie . 
 Bd. 
 XIV, Hft. 
 4. 
 Berlin, 1908, S. 
 447r 496. 
—59 P Paulsen, F. 
 Einleitung in die Philosophie . 
 6. 
 Aufl. 
 Berlin, Herz, 1899, XVI, 444 S. 
—53-55 Pearson, K. 
 The Grammar of Science . 
 London, Scott, 1892. 
 XVI, 493 S. 
—154 Pelazza, A. 
 B. 
 Avenarius e l’empiriocriticismo . 
 Torino, Bocca, 1909. 
 129 p. 
—58 Pérès, J. 
 Rivista di Filosafia . 
 1911, Janvier-Juin. 
—In: Revue Philo-sophique de la France et de l’Etranger . 
 Paris, 1911, No. 
 9, septem-bre, p. 
 332-335. 
—241 Perrin, J. 
 Les atomes . 
 Avec 13 figures. 
 Paris, Alcan, 1913. 
 XVI, 296 p. 
— 392 — Traité de chimie physique . 
 Los principes. 
 Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1903. 
 XXVI, 300 p. 
—325 Perry, R. 
 B. 
 Present philosophical tendencies: a critical survey of natu-ralism, idealism, pragmatism and realism, together with a synopsisof the philosophy of William James . 
 London a. 
 New York, Long-mans, Green, 1912. 
 XV, 383 p. 
—398 Phaum, Ch. 
 D. 
 Bericht über die italienische philosophische Literatur des Jahres 1905 . 
—In: Zeitschrift für Philosophie und philosophische Kritik . 
 Bd. 
 129. 
 Leipzig, 1906, S. 
 94-105. 
—239 Planck, M. 
 Das Prinzip der Erhaltung der Energie . 
 2. 
 Aufl. 
 Leipzig u. 
 Berlin, Teubner, 1908. 
 XVI, 280 S. 
 (Wissenschaft und Hypothe-se. 
 VI). 
—57 Plato—Cratylos . 
—350, 351 —Meno . 
—273 —Parmenides . 
—97, 107, 302 —Synposion . 
—260 —Sophista . 
—278, 302 —Theatetus . 
—276, 346, 351 —Timaeus . 
—302 —Phaedo . 
—277 —Philebus . 
—302 Plechanow, G. 
 Bernstein und der Materialismus . 
—In: Die Neue Zeit , Stuttgart. 
, XVI. 
 Jg. 
 1897-1898. 
 Bd. 
 II, No. 
 44, S. 
 545-555—274 —Konrad Schmidt gegen Karl Marx und Friedrich Engels . 
—In: Die Neue Zeit , Stuttgart, XVII. 
 Jg. 
 1898-1899. 
 Bd. 
 I, No. 
 5, S. 
 133, 145—274 —Materialismus oder Kantianismus? —In: Die Neue Zeit , Stuttgart, XVII. 
 Jg. 
 1898-1899. 
 Bd. 
 I, No. 
 19, S. 
 589-596. 
—274 Plenge, J. 
 Marx und Hegel . 
 Tübingen, Laupp, 1911. 
 184 S. 
—238, 388-391, 397 Prantl, K. 
 Fischer Friedrich . 
—In: Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie . 
 Bd. 
 VII. 
 Leipzig, Duncker u. 
 Humblot, 1878. 
 S. 
 66-67. 
—372 Preu ßische Jahrbücher . 
 Bd. 
 151. 
 Januar bis März 1913. 
 Berlin, 1913, S. 
 415-436. 
—238 Proudhon, J. 
 P. 
 Qu’est-ce que la propriété? on recherches sur le prin-cipe du droit et du gouvernement . 
 1-er mémoire. 
 Paris, Brocard, 1840. 
—25, 26, 29, 30 R Raab, F. 
 Die Philosophie von Richard Avenarius . 
 Systematische Dar-stellung und immanente Kritik. 
 Leipzig, Meinor, 1912. 
 IV, 164 S. 
— 392 Rheinisehe Zeitung für Politik, Handel und Gewerbe . 
 Köln, 1842-1843. 
—390 Ran, A. 
 Friedrich Paulsen über Ernst Haeckel . 
 Eine kritische Unter- /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR suchung über Naturforschung und moderne Kathederphilosophie. 
 2. 
 Aufl. 
 Berlin, Brackwede, 1907. 
 48 S. 
 (Flugschriften des DeutschenMonistenbundes. 
 Hft. 
 3). 
—394 Revolutions de Paris, dédiées à la Nation et au district des Petits-Augus-tins . 
 №№ 1-160. 
 Paris. 
 1789-1792. 
—32, 33 Revue de Métaphysique et de Morale . 
 Paris, t. 
 II, 1894, p. 
 36-57, 270-298, 644-675; t. 
 III, 1895, p. 
 184-210, 503-526; t. 
 IV, 1896, p. 
 62-85, 583-614. 
—319 Revue Philosophique de la France et de l’Étranger . 
 Paris, 1894, No. 
 11, novembre, p. 
 538-540. 
—240 — 1902, No. 
 9, septembre, p. 
 312-314. 
—240 — 1904, No. 
 4, avril, p. 
 393-409, 430-431. 
—241, 325— 1911, No. 
 9, septembre, p. 
 332-335. 
—241— 1912, No. 
 12, décembre, p. 
 644-646. 
—399Roy, A. 
 La philosophie moderne . 
 Paris, Flammarion, 1908. 
 372 S. 
 Bibliothèque de Philosophie scientifique. 
)—407-473, 474 —Les principes philosophiques de la chimie physique —In: Revue Philosophique de la France et de l’Étranger . 
 Paris, 1904, No. 
 4, avril, p. 
 393-409. 
—325 Richter, R. 
 Review of the book: Stein, Ludwig. 
 Philosophische Strö-mungen der Gegenwart . 
 Stuttgart, 1908, Verlag von Enke. 
 XVI und 452 S. 
—In: Vierteljahrsschrift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie und Soziologie . 
 Hft. 
 I. 
 Leipzig, 1909, S. 
 105-110. 
—58 Riecke, E. 
 Lehrbuch der Physik zu eigenem Studium und zum Gebrauche bei Vorlesungen . 
 Bd. 
 1-2. 
 4. 
 Aufl. 
 Leipzig, Veit, 1908. 
—57 Rivista di Filosofia . 
 Organo della Societa Filosofica Italiana. 
 Anno III. 
 Genova, 1911, p. 
 387-401. 
—240 Rotta, P. 
 La rinascita dell’Hegel e la filosofia perenne . 
—In: Rivista di Filosofia . 
 Anno III. 
 Geneva, 1911, p. 
 387-401. 
—240 Ruttmann, W. 
 I. 
 Die Hauptergebnisse der modernen Psychologie mit besonderer Berücksichtigung der Individualforschung . 
 Leipzig, Wun-derlich, 1914. 
 XIII, 392 S. 
—396 S Salignac, F. 
 Questions de physique générale et d’astronomie . 
 Toulouse, Privat, 1908. 
—57 Schiller, F. 
 C. 
 S. 
 Review of the book: Present Philosophical Tendencies: a Critical Survey of Naturalism, Idealism, Pragmatism and Realism, together with a Synopsis of the philosophy of William James. 
 By Ralph Barton Perry . 
 New York and London: Longmans, Green and Co. 
, 1912. 
 Pp. 
 XV, 383. 
—In: Mind . 
 New series. 
 Vol. 
 XXII. 
 London, 1913. 
 No. 
 86, April, p. 
 280-284. 
—398 Schinz, M. 
 Die Wahrheit der Religion nach den neuesten Vertretern der Religionsphilosophie . 
 Dargestellt und beurteilt von M. 
 Schinz. 
 Zürich, Leehmann, 1908. 
 XI, 307 S. 
—58 Schmidt, F. 
 J. 
 Hegel und Marx . 
—In: Preußische Jahrbücher . 
 Bd. 
 151. 
 Januar bis März 1913. 
 Berlin, Stilke, 1913, S. 
 415-436. 
—238 Schmitt, E. 
 H. 
 Das Geheimniss der Hegelschen Dialektik, beleuchtet vom konkretsinnlichen Standpunkte . 
 Halle a. 
 S. 
, Pfeffer, 1888. 
 XIV, 144 S. 
—239 Segond, J. 
 Review of the book: Antonio Aliotta. 
 La reazione idealistica contro la scienza . 
 1 vol. 
 grand in-8 °, XVI-526 pp. 
 Palermo, Casa editrice Optima, 1912. 
—In: Revue Philosophique de la France et de l’Étranger . 
 Paris, 1912, No. 
 12, décembra, p. 
 644-646. 
—399 — Review of the book: J. 
 B. 
 Baillie. 
 The origin and significance of Hegel’s Logic, a general introduction to Hegel’s system . 
 1 vol. 
 in-8 ° de XVIII-375 p. 
, London, Macmillan and Co, 1901. 
—In: Revue Philosophique de la France et de l’Étranger . 
 Paris, 1902, No. 
 9, septembre, p. 
 312-314. 
—240 Seth, A. 
 The Development from Kant to Hegel with Chapters on the Philosophy of Religion . 
 London, Williams a. 
 Norgate, 1882. 
 IV, 170 p. 
—239 Sextus Empiricus. 
 Adversus Mathematicos . 
—265, 272 — Pyrronische Hypotyposen. 
—255 Simon, T. 
 C. 
 Review of the book: Stirling, J. 
 H. 
 The secret of Hegel: being the hegelian system in origin, principle, form and matter . 
— Zeitschrift für Philosophe und philosophische Kritik . 
 Bd. 
 53. 
 Halle, 1868, S. 
 268-270, in: Simon, T. 
 G. 
 Über den gegenwärtigen Zustandder metaphysischen Forschung in Britannien. 
—239 Spaventa, B. 
 Da Socrate a Hegel . 
 Bari, Laterza, 1905. 
 XVI, 432 S. 
 (Biblioteca di culturamoderna. 
 No. 
 17). 
—239 —La filosofia italiana nelle sue relazioni con la filosofia europea . 
 Nuova edizione con note e appendice di documenti a cura di G. 
 Gentile. 
Bari, Laterza, 1908. 
 XXII, 317 p. 
—58 Spicker, G. 
 Über das Verhältnis der Naturwissenschaft zur Philosophie . 
 Mit besonderer Berücksichtigung der Kantischen Kritik der reinen Vernunft und der Geschichte des Materialismus Yon Albert Lange. 
 Berlin, Duncker, 1874. 
 94 S. 
—393 Stein, L. 
 Philosophische Strömungen der Gegenwart . 
 Stuttgart, Enke, 1908. 
 XVI, 452 S. 
—58 Stirling, J. 
 H. 
 The secret of Hegel: being the hegelian system in origin, principle, form and matter . 
—239 Strache, H. 
 Die Einheit der Materie, des Weltäthers und der Natur-kräfte . 
 Wien, Deuticke, 1909. 
—58 Sue, E. 
 Les Mystères de Paris . 
 11-e éd. 
, Paris, 1842. 
—31, 46, 47 Suter, J. 
 Die Philosophie von Richard Avenarius . 
 Darstellung und erkenntniskritische Würdigung. 
 Inaugural-Dissertation zur Erlan-gung der Doktorwürde der ersten Sektion der hohen philosophischen Fakultät der Universität Zürich vorgelegt von J. 
 Suter aus Mad-retsch. 
 Begutachtet von G. 
 W. 
 Störring, Zürich, 1910. 
 167 S. 
—396 T Teichinann, E. 
 Betrachtungen zu einigen neuen biologischen Werken . 
— In: Frankfurter Zeitung und Handelsblatt . 
 1904, No. 
 348. 
 Erstes Morgenblatt, 13. 
 Dezember, S. 
 1-3. 
—56 Thomson, J. 
 J. 
 Die Korpuskulartheorie der Materie . 
 Autoris. 
 Übers. 
 von G. 
 Siebert. 
 Braunschweig, Vieweg, 1908. 
 VII, 166 S. 
 (Die Wissenschaft. 
 Sammlung naturwissenschaftlicher und mathema-tischer Monographien. 
 Hft. 
 25). 
—57 U Überweg, F. 
 Grundriß der Geschichte der Philosophie . 
 T. 
 1-3. 
 5. 
, mit eneim Philosophen-und Literatoren-Register versehene Aufl. 
,bearb. 
 und hrsg. 
 von M. 
 Heinze. 
 Berlin, Muttler, 1876. 
—52 — Grundriß der Gesehichte der Philosophie fortgeführt von M. 
 Heinze . 
 T. 
 1. 
 Das Altertum. 
 10. 
, mit Namen-und Sachverzeichnis verse-hene Aufl. 
, bearb. 
 und hrsg. 
 von K. 
 Praechter. 
 Berlin, Mittler, 1909. 
 XV, 362, 178 S. 
—256, 276 Uhde-Bernays, H. 
 Feuerbach . 
 Leipzig, Insel-Verlag, 1914. 
 77 S. 
 mit III. 
—395 Ulrici, H. 
 Review of the book: The Development from Kant to Hegel with Chapters on the Philosophy of Religion . 
 By Andrew Seth . 
 Pub-lished by the Hibbert Trustees. 
 London, Williams a. 
 Norgate, 1882. 
— In: Zeitschrift für Philosophie und philosophische Kritik . 
 Bd. 
 83. 
 Hale, 1883, S. 
 145-150. 
—239 V Véra, A. 
 Introduction à la philosophie de Hegel . 
 Paris, Franck, 1855. 
 VII, 306 p. 
—324 Verworn, M. 
 Die Biogenhypothese . 
 Eine kritischexperimentelle Studie über die Vorgänge in der lebendigen Substanz. 
 Jena, Fischer, 1903. 
 IV, 114 S. 
—329, 330 Vierteljahrsschrift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie und Soziologie . 
 Gegründet von R. 
 Avenarius, in Verhindung mit F. 
 Jodl undA. 
 Riehl hrsg. 
 von P. 
 Barth. 
 33. 
 Jg. 
 Neue Folge VIII. 
 Leipzig,1909. 
 Hft. 
 I, S. 
 145-150. 
—57, 58 Volkmann, P. 
 Erkenntnistheoretische Grundzüge der Naturwissenschaf-ten und ihre Beziehungen zum Geistesichen der Gegenwart . 
 Allge-mein wissenschaftliche Vorträge. 
 2. 
 vollst. 
 umgearb. 
 und erw. 
Aufl. 
 Leipzig u. 
 Berlin, Teubner, 1910. 
 XXIII, 454 S. 
 (Wissen-schaft und Hypothese. 
 IX). 
—328 W Wallace. 
 W. 
 Hegel’s Philosophy of Mind . 
 Translated from the encyclo-paedia of the philosophical sciences with five introductory essays. 
Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1894, 320 p. 
—240 —Prolegomena to the study of Hegel’s philosophy and especially of his logic . 
 2d ed. 
, rev, and augm. 
 Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1894. 
 XVI, 365 p. 
—240 Weber, L. 
 Review of the book: J. 
 Grier Hibben. 
 Hegel’s logic, an essay in interpretation . 
 313 p. 
, Scribner’s Sons, New York, 1902. 
—In: Revue Philosophique de la France et de l’Étranger . 
 Paris, 1904, No. 
 4, avril, p. 
 430-431. 
—241 Windelband, W. 
 Geschichte der antiken Naturwissenschaft und Philo-sophie . 
 Bearb. 
 von S. 
 Günther und W. 
 Windelband. 
—In: Hand-buch der Klassischen Altertumswissenschaft in systematischerDarstellung mit besonderer Rücksicht auf Geschichte und Methodikder einzelnen Disziplinen, hrsg. 
 von I. 
 Müller. 
 Bd. 
 V. 
 Abt. 
 1. 
Nördlingen, Beck’sche Buchhandlung, 1888. 
 VII, 337 S. 
—369 X Xenophon. 
 Xenophontis memorabilia . 
—274 Z Zart, A. 
 Bausteine des Weltalls . 
 Atome und Moleküle. 
 Mit zahlreichen Abbildungen nach Originalaufnahmen und Zeichnungen von C. 
Schmauck, H. 
 Oeffinger u. 
 a. 
 und einem Titelbild von W. 
 Planck. 
 Stuttgart, Kosmos, Gesellschaft der Naturfreunde, 1913. 
 100 S. 
— 395 Zeitschrift für Philosophie und philosophische Kritik . 
Bd. 
 53. 
 Halle, 1868, S. 
 248-272. 
—239 — Bd. 
 83. 
 Halle, 1883, S. 
 145-150. 
—239— Bd. 
 111. 
 Leipzig, 1898, S. 
 205-213. 
—240 — Bd. 
 119. 
 Leipzig, 1902, S. 
 182-204. 
—238 — Bd. 
 129. 
 Leipzig, 1906, S. 
 94-105. 
—239— Bd. 
 148. 
 Leipzig, 1912, S. 
 95-97. 
—239 -----------А Авенаpиус Р. 
 Кpитиика чистого опыта . 
—499 — Человеческое понятие о тиpе . 
 Пеp. 
 И. 
 Федоpова, под pед. 
 М. 
 Фи-липпова, Спб. 
, Сойкин, 1901, 91 c. 
—498 Б Богданов А. 
 А. 
 Аетоpитаpное тышление . 
— В кн. 
: Богданов А. 
 А. 
 Из психологии общества. 
 Статьи 1901-1904 гг. 
 Спб. 
, Доpоватов-ский и Чаpушников, 1904, c. 
 95-156. 
—485 — Из пс ихо л о г ии об ще ства . 
 Статьи 1901-1904 гг. 
 Спб. 
, Доpова-товский и Чаpушников, 1904, c. 
 95-156. 
—485 Г Т еpцен, А. 
 Н. 
 «Very Dangerous!» — Колокол . 
 Лондон, 1859, № 44, стp. 
 363-364. 
—503, 504 Тильzеpдинг, Р. 
 Финансовый капитал . 
 Новейшая Фаза в pазвитии капитализма. 
 Авт. 
 пеp. 
 с нем. 
 и вступит. 
 статья И. 
 Степанова,М. 
 Знаменский, 1912. 
 XXIX, 576, 8 c. 
—400 Г олос Социал-Демокpата . 
 Женева — Паpиж, 1908, № 6 -7 , м а й -нюнь, с. 
 3-14; № 8-9, нюль-сентябpь, c. 
 3-14. 
—275 Д Дебоpин, А. 
 Диалектический матеpиализм . 
—В кн. 
: На pубеже. 
 (К хаpактеpистике совpеменных исканий. 
) Кpитический сбоpник. 
Спб. 
, «Hame Вpемя», 1909, c. 
 38—75. 
—475-483 Е Евангелие . 
—310 З Заpя . 
 Штутгаpт, 1901, № 2-3, декабpь, с. 
 204-225. 
—275 Зенд-Авеста . 
—346 К Колокол . 
 Лондон, 1895, № 44, стp. 
 363-364. 
—503 М Маpкс К. 
 Гpажданская война во Фpанции . 
 Воззвание Г енеpального Совета Междунаpодного Товаpищества Рабочих о гpажданскойвойне во Фpанции 1871 г. 
 Ко всем членам Товаpищества в Ев-pопе и Соединенных Штатах. 
 Апpель-май 1871 г. 
—311 — Капитал . 
 Кpитика политической экономии. 
 Т. 
 I-III. 
 1867-1894 гг. 
—99, 146, 178, 180, 235, 317, 358, 487 — Письмо Ф. 
 Энгельсу ом 1 Эевpаля 1858 г . 
—339, 352 — Письмо Ф. 
 Энгельсу ом 10 мая 1870 г . 
—378 Н На pубеже . 
 (К хаpактеpистике совpеменных исканий. 
) Кpитический сбоpник. 
 Спб. 
, «Hame Вpемя», 1909, c. 
 38-75. 
—475-483 П Писаpев Д. 
 И. 
 Пpомахи незpелой мысли . 
—371 ( Пл е ха но в Г . 
 В. 
 ) Бе л ь т о в, Н. 
 К вопpосу о pазвитии монистического взгляда на истоpию . 
 Ответ гг. 
 Михайловскому, Каpееву и комп. 
 Спб. 
, 1895, 288 c. 
—275 —К шестидесятой годовщине смеpти Г егеля . 
—160 —Cant пpотив Канта или духовное завещание г. 
 Беpнштейна . 
— Зapя , Штутгаpт, 1901, № 2-3, декабpь, c. 
 204-225. 
—275 —Кpитика наших кpитиков завещание . 
 Спб. 
, 1906, VII, 400 c. 
—275 —Materialismus militans . 
 О т в е т г . 
 Б о г д а н о в у . 
 Письмо пеpвое и втоpое. 
— Го л о с Социал-Демокpата . 
 Женева-Паpиж, 1908, № 6-7, май-июнь, с. 
 3-14; № 8-9, июль-сентябpь, c. 
 3-16. 
—275 —Н. 
 Г. 
 Чpeнышeвский . 
 Спб. 
, Шиповник , 1910, 537 c. 
—501-557 —Н. 
 Г. 
 Чpeнышeвский . 
—Социал-дeмокpат . 
 Лондон, 1890, кн. 
 I, zевpаль, с. 
 88-175. 
—503, 506-509, 512, 513, 514, 531, 532, 542, 544, 547, 552, 553, 555, 556, 557 — Основные вопpосы маpксизма . 
 Спб. 
, Наша жизнь , 1908, 107 c. 
— 270, 308, 403-406 — Ответ г. 
 Богданову . 
 Письмо тpетье. 
— В кн. 
: Плеханов, Г. 
 В. 
 От обоpоны к нападению. 
 От вет г . 
 А. 
 Б о г л а н о в у , кpитика италь-янского синдикализма и дpугие статьи. 
 М. 
, 1910, c. 
 70-111. 
—275 — От обоpоны к нападению . 
 Ответ г . 
 А. 
 Бог л ано в у , кpитика италь-янского синдикализма и дpугие статьи. 
 М. 
, 1910, c. 
 70-111. 
—275 С Совpеменник . 
 Спб. 
, 1861, № 5, c. 
 89-117. 
—524 Социал-Детокpата . 
 Лондон, 1890, кн. 
 I, zевpаль, с. 
 88-175. 
—503, 506-509, 512, 513, 514, 531, 532, 542, 544, 547, 552, 553, 555, 556, 557 Ч Чеpнов, В. 
 Философские и социологические этюды . 
 М. 
, Сотpудниче-ство , 1907, 379 c. 
—257 Чеpнышевский. 
 Н. 
 Г. 
 Июльская монаpхия . 
—В кн. 
: Полное собpа-ние сочинений в 10 томах. 
 Т. 
 VI. 
 Спб. 
, Чеpнышевский, 1906,c. 
 53-150. 
—538 Политика. 
 Июнь 1859 . 
—В кн. 
: Полное собpание сочинений в 10 то-мах. 
 Т. 
 V. 
 Спб. 
, Чеpнышевский, 1906, c. 
 209-250. 
—543 — Кpитика философских пpедубеждений пpотив общинного владе-ния. 
—В кн. 
: Полное собpание сочинений в 10 томах. 
 Т. 
 IV . 
 Спб. 
, Чеpнышевский, 1906, c. 
 304-333. 
—540 — О пpичинах падения Рима (подpажание Монтескьё ). 
— Совpемен-ник, Спб. 
, 1861, № 5, c. 
 89-117. 
—524 — Очеpки из политической экономии (по Миллю ). 
—В кн. 
: Полное собpание сочинений в 10 томах. 
 Т. 
 VII. 
 Спб. 
, Чеpнышевский,1906, c. 
 305-664. 
—547 — Письма об Испании. 
 В. 
 П. 
 Боткина . 
 Спб. 
, 1857 г. 
—В кн. 
: Полное собpание сочинений в 10 томах. 
 Т. 
 III. 
 Спб. 
, Чеpнышев-ский, 1906, c. 
 25-46. 
—523, 524 — Пpолог . 
—508, 509 — Что делать? —513 Ш Шекспиp, В. 
 Все хоpошо, что хоpошо кончается, а к т I , с ц е н а тpетья. 
—31 Шулятиков, В. 
 Опpавдание капитализма в западноевpопейской философии . 
 От Д е к а p т а д о Э. 
 М а ха , M. 
 , Московское кн-во , 1908, 151 c. 
—484-500 — Из теоpии и пpактики классовой боpьбы . 
 И з д а н ие C . 
 Д о p о ва -товcкого и А. 
 Чаpушникова. 
 Моcква, 1907. 
—486 Э Энгельс, Ф. 
 Анти-Дюpинг . 
 Пеpевоpот в науке, пpоизведенный господином Евгением Дюpингом. 
 1876-1878 гг. 
—117, 118, 251, 262, 283 — Письмо К. 
 Маpксу от 21 сентябpя 1874 г . 
—157 — Письмо К. 
 Шмидту от 1 ноябpя 1891 г . 
—157 materialism and idealism— 90, 175, 181, 202, 248, 249,250, 255, 256, 258, 260, 261,266, 280-288, 294, 352, 357,359, 363, 365-372, 438, 439,521 Avenarius, Richard (1843-1896)— German philosopher, subjec-tive idealist, a founder ofempirio-criticism—58, 392, 396,399, 495, 496-499 B Babeuf, Francois Noël (Gracchus) (1760-1797)—French revolu-tionary, prominent represen-tative of equalitarian utopian communism, organiser of con-spiracy of “Equals”—40, 44 Bacon, Francis Baron Verulam (1561-1626)—great English philo-sopher, founder of English materialism, naturalist, histori-an and statesman—43, 463, 521 Baillie, James Black (1872-1940)—vice-president of LeedsUniversity, author of a bookon Hegelian logic; translated Hegel’s Phenomenology of Mind into English—240 Balfour, Arthur James (1848-1930)—British statesman andA Aksakov, Ivan Sergeyevich (1823-1886)—Russian publicfigure, publicist, Slavophil—504 Alexander I (1777-1825)—Em-peror of Russia (1801-1825)—552 Alexander the Great (356-323 B. 
 C. 
)—famous soldierand statesman of antiquity, King of Macedon—280 Aliotta, Antonio (b. 
 1881)— Italian philosopher, authorof works on experimentalpsychology and aesthetics;opponent of empirio-criticism and pragmatism—399 Anaxagoras of Clasomenae (c. 
 500-428 B. 
 C. 
)—ancient Greekphilosopher, i nconsistent ma-terialist—266 Anaximander of Miletus (c. 
 610-546 B. 
 C. 
)—ancient Greek philosopher, naturalistic ma-terialist and dialectician—247 Aristarchus of Samos (c. 
 320-(c. 
 250 B. 
 C. 
)—ancient Greekastronomer and mathemati-cian—331 Aristotle (384-322 B. 
 C. 
)—out-standing ancient Greek phi-losopher, vacillated betweenNAME INDEX theoretician of utilitarianism— 44 Bergson, Henri (1859-1941)— French idealist philosopher, irrationalist, considered intui-tion as the highest form of philo-sophical and aesthetic cogni-tion—399, 411, 439, 445, 448,462, 500 Berkeley, George (1685-1753)— English philosopher, Anglican bishop, subjective idealist—360, 452, 476, 492, 498, 499 Berzelius, Jöns Jakob (1779-1848)—famous Swedish che-mist and mineralogist—123 Boehme, Jakob (1575-1624)— German pantheist philosopher,mystic, whose doctrine at thesame time contains profounddialectical and materialistideas—72 Bogdanov, A . 
 (Malinovsky, A. 
 A. 
 ) (1873-1928)—philosopher, so-ciologist and economist, Bol-shevik till 1907 when he leftthe Party; sought to reviseMarxism, distorting it from a Machist and vulgar mate-rialist viewpoint; foundedempiriomonism, a variety ofempirio-criticism—275, 485, 488 Bolin, Andreas Wilhelm (1835-1924)—Finnish historian and materialist philosopher, follow-er of Feuerbach; togetherwith Jodl published thesecond edition of Feuerbach’sworks—373 Bolland, Gerardus (1854-1922)— Dutch philosopher; neo-Hege-lian; translated several ofHegel’s works into Dutch—393 Boltzmann, Ludwig (1844-1906)— Austrian physicist, in philos-ophy adhered to mechanistic materialism; criticised the Machists subjective idealistand W. 
 Ostwald’s “energetic”theory—58diplomat, leader of the Conser-vatives; in his philosophicalworks was critical of Hegel’sviews—238 Barthez, Paul Joseph (1734-1806)—French physician andphysiologist, vitalist—438 Basil the Blind (1415-1462)— Grand Prince of Moscow—512 Bauer, Bruno (1809-1882)—Ger-man idealist philosopher, prom-inent Young Hegehan, bour-geois Radical, became a na-tional-liberal in 1866—23,28, 31-32, 34, 35-39, 41, 44,45, 49, 514 Bauer, Edgar (1820-1886)—Ger-man publicist, Young Hege-lian, brother of Bruno Bauer—26, 28, 29, 30 Bauer, Otto (1882-1938)—a lead-er of Austrian Social-Democ-racy and the Second Interna-tional, ideologist of revision-ism—397 Bayle, Pierre (1647-1706)— French sceptic philosopherand forerunner of the French Enlighteners, author of Dic-tionnaire historique et critique , critic of religious dogmatism—43, 64, 255, 256, 373 Beaussire, Emile-Jacques-Ar-mand (1824-1889)—French philosopher, author of a num-ber of works on morals—324 Belinsky, Vissarion Grigoryevich (1811-1848)—Russian literarycritic, publicist, and philosoph-er, played an outstanding role in the history of social and aesthetic thought—503,506, 511, 529, 530, 542 Beltov —see Plekhanov, G. 
 V. 
 Bénard, Charles (1807-1898)— French philosopher, translated and published several of He-gel’s works in French—324 Bentham, Jeremy (1748-1832)— English bourgeois sociologist, /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR Caird, Edward (1835-1908)— English philosopher, Hegelian,author of the book Hegel — 240, 241 Carnot, Lazare Nicolas (1753-1823)—French mathematician,political and military figure,bourgeois Republican—118 Carnot, Nicolas Leonhard Sadi (1796-1832)—French physicist and engineer, made several important discoveries con-cerning heat; was the first toformulate the thesis that workdue to a supply of heat can beobtained only through the transfer of heat from a warmer to a cooler body—421, 431 Carstanjen, Friedrich —disciple of Avenarius, professor at Zu-rich University; editor ofthe magazine Vierteljahrsschrift für wissenschaftliche Philoso-phie after Avenarius’ death— 496 Chalcidius (4th century A. 
 D. 
)— neo-Platonist; translated Pla-to’s dialogue “Timaeus” into Latin and wrote comments to it—349 Chamberlain, Houston Stewart (1855-1927)—philosopher, neo-Kantian, racialist sociologist,advocated world domnination by German imperialism, his philosophy was a forerunnerof fascist ideology—58 Chernov, V. 
 M. 
 (1876-1952)—a leader and theoretician ofthe Socialist-Revolutionaries, bitter foe of Marxism, eclectic and agnostic—200, 257 Chernyshevsky, Nikolai Gavrilovich (1828-1889)—outstanding Rus-sian revolutionary democrat,utopian socialist, materialist philosopher, writer and liter-ary critic, leader of the revolu-tionary democratic movement ofthe sixties in Russia; developedBonaparte —see Napoleon Bona-parte. 
 Bourbons —royal dynasty, reign-ing in France 1589-1792, 1814-15 and 1815-30—310 Bradley, Francis Herbert (1849-1924)—English philosopher,absolute idealist—239, 240,500 Brunetière, Ferdinand (1846-1906)—French critic and man of letters, tried to applythe methods of the naturalsciences, particularly the Dar-winian theory of evolution,to the history of literature— 428 Bruno —see Bauer, Bruno. 
 Büchner, Friedrich Karl Chris-tian Ludwig (1824-1899)—German physiologist, expo-nent of vulgar materialism, opponent of scientific social-ism—55, 349 Buckle, Henry Thomas (1821-1862)—English liberal-bourgeoishistorian and positivist sociol-ogist, author of the History of Civilisation in England —328 Bulgarin, F. 
 V. 
 (1789-1859)— Russian reactionary writerand journalist; bitter foeof progressive Russian writers,whom he denounced to the police—503 C Cabanis, Pierre Jean George (1757-1808)—French physician, philosopher and political figure, a forerunner of thevulgar materialists—42 Cabet, Etienne (1788-1856)— French publicist, representa-tive of utopian communism, author of Voyage en lcarie —44 Caesar, Gaius Julius (c. 
 100-44 B. 
 C. 
)—famous Roman sol-dier and statesman—310 Feuerbach’s materialist phi-losophy, sought to reviseHegel’s dialectics along mate-rialist lines; his philosophical views mark a high point in pre-Marxist materialist philoso-phy. 
 “But Chernyshevsky didnot succeed in rising, or, rather,owing to the backwardness ofRussian life, was unable to rise to the level of the dialectical materialism of Marx and En-gels” ( Lenin )—77, 82, 502-514, 516-526, 528-533, 535,536, 538-547, 549, 550, 552,553-557 Chiapelli, Alessandro (1857-1913)—Italian bourgeois phi-losopher, neo-Kantian, authorof works on history of philoso-phy, literature, arts andreligion; criticised scientific socialism—399 Cicero, Marcas Tullius (106-43 B. 
 C. 
)—Roman orator, states-man and philosopher, ec-lectic—346, 352 Clauberg, Johann (1622-1665)— German philosopher, professor of philosophy at Duisburg;Cartesian, was close to occa-sionalists—383 Clausius, Rudolf Julius Emma-nuel (1822-1888)—German physicist, together with Car-not. 
 Mayer and Joule laidthe basis for the science ofthermodynamics—442 Clement of Alexandria (c. 
 150-215 A. 
 D. 
)—Christian theologian, idealist philosopher—347, 350 Cohen, Hermann (1842-1918)— German philosopher, subjec-tive idealist, headed Marburgschool of neo-Kantians—399 Collins, John Anthony (1676-1729) English deist philoso-pher, follower of Locke—43 Comte, Auguste (1798-1857)— French reactionary bourgeoisphilosopher and sociologist, agnostic, founder of positiv-ism—323, 409, 436, 469, 513,514 Condillac, Étienne Bonnot (1715-1780)—French philosopher,deist, sensationalist, followerof Locke—42, 43 Copernicus (Kopernik ), Nikolaus (1473-1543)—Polish astronomer, founded the heliocentric system of the universe—270, 331, 333, 460 Cornu, Marie Alfred (1841-1902)—French physicist, knownfor his works on optics; refined Fizeau’s method of determining the velocity of light—333 Coward, William (c. 
 1656-1725)—English physician anddeist philosopher—43 Cratylus (5th century B. 
 C. 
)— ancient Greek idealist philos-opher, disciple of Heraclitusand teacher of Plato; arrivedat sophism by drawing extremerelativistic conclusions fromHeraclitus’ dialetics—343, 350, 351 Croce, Benedetto (1866-1952)— Italian philosopher, historian,literary critic and politicalfigure; in his works interpretedHegel’s dialectics in the spi-rit of subjective idealism; opponent of Marxism—399 D Dannemann, Friedrich ( b. 
 1859)—German historian ofnatural science—399 Darmstaedter, Ludwig (1846-1927)—German chemist, au-thor of works on the history of chemistry—333 Darwin, Charles Robert (1809-1882)—English materialist bi-ology, founder of a scientific theory of the development of the organic world—141 Deborin (Ioffe ), Abram Moiseye-vich (b. 
 1881)—Soviet philos-opher, Member of the U. 
S. 
S. 
R. 
 Academy of Sciences; Bolshe-vik from 1903; Menshevik in1907-17; member of the C. 
P. 
S. 
U. 
from 1928; in the thirtiessupported Menshevik idealist views; author of works on history of philosophy and dia-lectical materialism— 475, 482 Democritus of Abdera (c. 
 460-370 B. 
 C. 
)—great materialistphilosopher of ancient Greece, one of the founders of the atom-istic theory—265, 280, 332,344, 352, 360, 518 Descartes, René (in Latin— Cartesins) (1596-1650)—Frenchdualist philosopher, mathe-matician and naturalist—41, 42, 43, 321, 322, 360, 378, 421,427, 438, 484, 490 Destutt de Tracy, Antoine Louis Claude (1754-1836)—French vulgar economist, sensatio-nalist in his philosophic views, protagonist of constitutionalmonarchy—25 Dewey, John (1859-1952)— American philosopher, soci-ologist and pedagogue, the chief representative of prag-maticism—399,445 Dézamy, Théodore (1803-1850)—French publicist, out-standing representative ofthe revolutionary trend in uto-pian communism—44 Diderot, Denis (1713-1784)— French materialist philoso-pher, atheist, one of the ideo-logists of the French revolu-tionary bourgeoisie of the 18th century, a leading Encyclo-paedist—520 Dietzgen, Josef (1828-1888)— German worker and Social-Democrat; philosopher, indepen-dently arrived at some funda-mental principles of dialectical-materialism—72, 361, 403, 406 Dilthey, Wilhelm (1833-1911)— German idealist philosopher,professor at Berlin University,a founder of the “Lebens odorErlebnis Philosophie” (lifeor experience philosophy), a reactionary irrationalist trend in bourgeois philosophy dur-ing the epoch of imperialism;his works include a book onthe youth of Hegel ( Die Jugend-geschichte Hegels )—58, 239 Diogenes, Laertius (3rd century A. 
 D. 
)—ancient Greek histo-rian of philosophy, author ofa ten-volume work on ancientphilosophers—223, 255, 265,290, 291 Diogenes of Sinupu (c. 
 404-323 B. 
 C. 
)—ancient Greekphilosopher, one of the foundersof the Cynic school of phi-losophy—224, 254 Dobrolyubov, Nikolai Alexand-rovich (1836-1861)—Russian literary critic and publicist,materialist philosopher, revo-lutionary democrat—503, 530 Dodwell, Henry (1700-1784)— English materiallist philoso-pher—43 Druzhinin, A. 
 V. 
 (1824-1864)— Russian author and liberalcritic, advocated idealist theo-ry of “art for art’s sake”—511 Dudyshkin, S. 
 S. 
 (1820-1866)— Russian journalist and liberal literary critic—521 Duhem, Pierre Maurice Marie (1861-1916)—French theoreticalphysicist; philosopher and hist-orian of natural science—399, 422, 423, 426, 427 Duns Scotus, John (c. 
 1265-1308)—medieval Scottish scho-lastic philosopher, repre-sentative of nominalism, the earliest expression of material-ism in the Middle Ages; authorof “Opus Oxoniense”—43 Durkheim, Emile (1858-1917)— French positivist sociologist—454 E Ebbinghaus, Hermann (1850-1909)—German bourgeois psy-chologist, idealist, a leadingrepresentative of expirinentalpsychology; famous for hisresearch concerning the nature of man’s memory—326 Edgar —see Baiter, Edgar. 
 Engels, Frederick (1820-1895)— 23, 24, 35, 36, 65, 67, 70, 77,104, 108, 109, 117, 118, 141,157, 169, 234, 251, 257, 262, 283, 306, 311, 312, 339, 357, 403-406, 479, 526 Epicurus (c. 
 341-270 B. 
 C. 
)— famous thinker of ancientGreece, materialist philosopher,atheist—289, 295, 344, 518 Eratosthenes (c. 
 276-194 B. 
 C. 
)— ancient Greek mathematician,astronomer and geographer; firstto determine the approximatesize of the meridian—331 Euler, Leonhard (1707-1783)— mathematician, physicist and astronomer; member of theBerlin and Petersburg Acade-mies of Sciences; spent mostof his life in Russia—118 F Faucher, Julius (1820-1878)— German publicist, YoungHegelian—32 Feuerbach, Ludwig Andreas (1804-1872)—German mate-rialist philosopher and atheist;Feuerbach’s materialism, inspite of its limited contem-plative character, provideda theoretical source of Marx-ist philosophy—29, 30, 35, 36, 41, 44, 45, 61-67, 70-80, 82, 83, 123, 155, 169, 212,272, 283, 295, 309, 317, 326,327, 340, 344, 349, 360, 373,375, 377, 381-383, 387, 394,395, 403, 404, 406, 514, 516, 517, 523, 528-530 Fichte, Johann Gottlieb (1762-1814)—German philosopher,subjective idealist, represen-tative of classical Germanphilosophy—95, 113, 236, 322, 476, 492-493, 549 Fischer, Friedrich (1801-1853)— professor of philosophy atBasle—57, 372 Fischer, Kuno (1824-1907)— German historian of philoso-phy, Hegelian, author of the fundamental Geschichte derneueren Philosophie, profes-sor of philosophy at Jena andHeidelberg—157, 176 Fizeau, Armand Hippolyte Louis (1819-1896)—French phy-sicist, known for his works onoptics, determined the veloc-ity of light in air by meansof a rapidly revolving gearwheel specially designed for this purpose—333 Forel, Auguste (1848-1931)— Swiss neuropathologist, psy-chiatrist and entomologist—326 Forster, Friedrich Christoph (1791-1868)—German histori-an and writer, Hegelian, to-gether with L. 
 Boumann editedVolumes XVI and XVII ofthe posthumous edition of He-gel’s works, containing arti-cles on various themes—87 Foucault, Jean Bernard Léon (1819-1868)—French physicist,known for his pendulum exper-iment by which he demon-strated the diurnal motion of the earth; by means of a revolv-ing mirror, determined thevelocity of light in air and water—333 Fourier, Charles (1772-1837)— French utopian socialist—32,33, 44, 48, 49, 50, 510, 512 G Galilei, Galileo (1564-1642)— Italian physicist and astron-omer, a founder of classicalmechanics—122, 332, 421, 460 Gans, Eduard (c. 
 1798-1839)— professor of Roman law atBerlin University, Hegelian;edited Philosophy of Right and Lectures on the Philosophy of History for the posthumous edition of Hegel’s works— 46, 87, 305, 314 Gassendi, Pierre (1592-1655)— French materialist philoso-pher, elaborated the Epicureandoctrines of atomism and ethics; also known for his works on astronomy, mathe-matics, mechanics, and histo-ry of science—42, 81, 360,521 Gauss, Karl Friedrich (1777-1855)—German mathemati-cian, author of outstandingworks on theoretical astrono-my, geodesy, physics and eaarthmagneticism—207 Gay, Jules (1807-c. 
 1876)— French utopian communist— 44 Genov, Peter —Bulgarian histor-ian of philosophy—326, 327 Goethe, Johann Wolfgang (1749-1832)—German, poet and think-er—510 Gomperz, Theodor (1832-1912)— German historian of philoso-phy, philologist, positivist,author of the three-volume Griechische Denker —256 Gorgias of Leontini (a. 
 483-375 B. 
 C. 
)—sophist philoso-pher of ancient Greece, partisan of democratic, slave-owningsystem—270-272, 464 Grech, Nikolai Ivanovich (1787-1867)—Russian reactionaryjournalist and man of letters, bitter foe of progressive Rus-sian writers, whom he de-nounced to the police—503 Grün, Karl (t817-1887)—Ger-man petty-bourgeois publi-cist, exponent of “true social-ism”—327 Guenther, Konrad (1874-1955)— German zoologist, professorat Freiburg University, comp-iled the atlas Vom Urtier zum Menschen —58 Guizot, François-Pierre Gulllaume (1787-1874)—French bourgeoishistorian and statesman—525 H Haas, Arthur Erich (1884-1941)— Austrian physicist, specialisedin atomic physics—335 Haeckel, Ernest Heinrich (1834-1919)—German naturalist, professor of zoology at Jena University, evolutionist andnatural-historical materialist,supported and popularised Dar-win’s teaching—56, 328, 394,395 Hammacher, Emil (1885-1916)— German philosopher, objectiveidealist and mystic—238, 239 Harbordt —German scientist—57 Haring, Georg Wilhelm Heinr ich—German philosopher, to-gether with Michelet wrote Historisch-Kritische Darstel-lung der dialektischen MethodeHegels —239 Hartley, David (1705-1757)— English physician, bourgeoispsychologist and materialistphilosopher—43 Hartmann, Eduard (1842-1906)— German reactionary idealist,mystic, militant defendant ofthe junker-bourgeois Germa-ny—58 Haym, Rudolf (1821-1901)—Ger-man historian of literature and philosophy, positivist—387 Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (1770-1831)—German philos-opher, objective idealist anddialectician, leading repre-sentative of German classical philosophy; Hegel’s historicmerit was that he provided anexhaustive analysis of ideal-ist dialectics, which subse-quently served as one of the theoretical sources of dialectic-al materialism—27, 31, 33, 35,39, 41, 44, 45, 46-49, 70, 81,86, 87, 89, 91, 92, 95-97, 103,104, 106, 110, 112-114, 116-118, 120, 121, 123, 129, 134-135, 137, 138, 146, 147, 149, 151, 153-157, 160, 162,167, 169, 171-175, 177-181,182, 185-187, 189-193, 196,197, 203-207, 209, 210, 211,212, 217, 224, 228, 229, 232, 234-236, 238, 239, 240, 241, 243, 245, 247, 250, 251, 254-267, 269, 270, 273-257, 297-299, 303, 305, 307, 309-312,313, 314, 315-317, 319-324327, 339, 340, 341, 342-345, 347, 348, 350, 352, 357, 359, 360, 366, 370, 373, 387, 388,389, 393, 397, 404, 406, 427,492, 493 Hegesias (end of 4th-beginning of 3rd century B. 
 C. 
)—Greek philosopher of the Cyrenaic or Hedonistic school—276 Heinze, Max (1835-1909)— German historian of philoso-phy, specialised in ancient Greek philosophy; edited, be-ginning with the 6th edition,Üherweg’s course of history of philosophy—52, 256, 276 Helmholtz, Hermann von (1821-1894)—great German natural-ist; a founder of the law ofconservation of energy; hisphilosophical views were close to the Kantians—420, 431 Helvétius, Claude-Adrien (1715-1771)—French materialist phi-losopher, atheist, an ideologistof the French revolutionarybourgeoisie of the 18th centu-ry—42, 43, 44. 
 522 Henning, Leopold (1791-1866)— professor of philosophy atBerlin University, Hegelian;edited Science of Logic and the first part of Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences (“Logic”) for the posthumousedition of Hegel’s works—87 Heraclitus of Ephesus (c. 
 530-470 B. 
 C. 
)—ancient Greek ma-terialist philosopher, one of the founders of dialectics—105, 259, 262, 267, 335, 337, 339, 352, 357, 360, 366 Herbart, Johann Friedrich (1776-1841)—German idealist phi-losopher, psychologist and pedagogue—387 Hertz, Heinrich Rudolf (1857-1894)—German physicist, spe-cialised in electrodynamics, in-consistent materialist—399, 445 Herzen, Alexander Ivanovich (1812-1870)—Russian revolu-tionary democrat, materialistphilosopher, author and pub-licist—503, 504, 511, 526 Hibben, John Grier (1861-1933)— American logician, professor at Princeton University—241 Hilferding, Rudolf (1877-1941)— an opportunist leader of Ger-man Social-Democracy and the Second International; in his work Das Finanzkapital described imperialism froman anti-Marxist viewpoint, concealing its main contradic-tions—400 Hippocrates (c. 
 460-377 B. 
 C. 
)— great physician and naturalistof ancient Greece, a founder ofancient medicine—353 Hobbes, Thomas (1588-1679)— outstanding English philos-opher, representative of mech-anistic materialism—42, 43, 492 Hoffing, Harald (1843-1931)— Danish positivist philosopher and psychologist—497 Holbach, Paul Henri (1723-1789)—French materialist phi-losopher, atheist, an ideologistof the French revolutionarybourgeoisie of the 18th centu-ry—44, 360, 478, 489 Homer —great epic poet of Greece, legendary author of theIliad and the Odyssey, isbelieved to have lived between12th and 8th century B. 
 C. 
— 308, 331 Hotho, Heinrich Gustav (1802-1873)—historian of the arts,professor at Berlin Universityaesthete of Hegelian school;edited Lectures on Aesthetics for the posthumous edition of Hegel’s works—87 Hurne, David (1711-1776)—En-glish philosopher, subjectiveidealist, agnostic, historianand economist—53, 132, 203, 360, 476, 478, 492 J Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich (1743-1819)—German idealist philos-opher, metaphysician andtheist; opponent of rational-ism, advocated faith andintuition, considering these the most trustworthy paths toknowledge—210 James, William (1842-1910)— American philosopher and psychologist, subjective ide-alist, a founder of pragmatism—58, 399, 445, 446, 450, 452,453, 455, 457, 458, 468 Janet, Paul (1823-1899)—French eclectic philosopher—324 Jodl, Friedrich (1849-1914)— professor of philosophy atPrague and Vienna, follower ofFeuerbach; together with Bolinpublished the second edition of Feuerbach’s works—326 K Kant, Immanuel (1724-804)— German philosopher, founder of German classical philosophy,subjective idealist and agnos-tic; Kant’s theory of knowledgeis characterised by contradic-tions, a conglomoration of elements of materialism and idealism, resulting in thetheory of the objectively exist-ing “thing-in-itself”—47, 53,91, 92, 96, 98, 100, 113, 116,117, 120, 134, 168-174, 178, 179, 186, 192, 193, 204-207, 208, 209, 210, 223, 225, 232,233, 236, 239, 258, 269-271,273, 275, 281, 283, 319, 321-323, 360, 370, 382, 383, 393,409, 413, 414, 476, 477, 478 Kautsky, Karl (1854-1938)— opportunist leader of GermanSocial-Democracy and the Sec-ond International, ideologistof Centrisin and revisionism;in the eighties and nineties, when he supported Marxism, Kautsky wrote several workspopularising Marx’s teachings—487 idealist and eclectic in his philosophical views—337, 339,352, 357, 526, 549, 550 Lasson, Adolf (1832-1917)— German philosopher, professor at Berlin University, promi-nent representative of neo-Hegelianism—238 Lavrov, Pyotr Lavrovich (1823-1900)—Russian sociologist and pubicist, ideologist of the Narodniks, advocated an anti-scientific idealist, subjectivemethod of sociology—514 Law, John (1671-1729)—English bourgeois economist and finan-cier; contrôleur général des finances in France (1719-1720);known for issuing large amountsof paper currency which endedin financial collapse—42 Le Bon, Gustave (1841-1931)— French physician, psycholo-gist and sociologist, idealist—432 Leibnitz, Gottfried Wilhelm (1646-1716)—German mathe-matician, versatile scientist, outstanding rationalist philos-opher, objective idealist; hisphilosophy, containing dia-lectical ideas, greatly influencedthe development of Germanclassical phiiosophy—41-43, 64, 111, 114, 118, 131, 132, 144, 156, 209, 322, 326, 373,375, 379-386, 438, 465, 491 Lemke, M. 
 K. 
 (1872-1923)— historian of Russian litera-ture and the Russian revolu-tionary movement, collected historical and literary docu-ments—505, 506 Léon, Xavier (1868-1935)— President of Société Françaisede Philosophie, editor of Revue de Métaphysique et de Morale , idealist philosopher, author of works on Fichte’sphilosophy—319Kavelin, Konstantin Dmitriye-vich (1818-1885)—Russian pub-licist, historian and jurist,representative of feudal-bour-geois liberalism; supported the tsarist policy of reprisals andopposed the revolutionary-democratic movement duringthe preparation and carryingout of the Peasant Reform of 1861—503, 504 Kepler, Johannes (1571-1630)— German astronomer, basinghimself on Copernican teachings, discovered the laws ofplanetary motion—122, 332 Kleinpeter, Hans (1869-1916)— Austrian philosopher, subjec-tive idealist, popularised em-pirio-criticism—496 Korolenko. 
 Vladimir Galaktiono-vich (1833-1921)—Russian au-thor and public figure— 513, 514 Krylov, Ivan Adreyevich (1769-1844)—Russian fabullist; sa-tirised various vices of society:bribery, servility, falsehood,hypocrisy, boasting—504 L Lagrange, Joseph Louis (1736-1813)—French mathematician and mechanic—118 La Metirie, Julien Offrey de (1709-1751)—French physician,philosopher, prominent repre-sentative of mechanistic ma-terialism—42, 44, 520 Lange, Friedrich Albert (1828-1875)—German philosopher, anearlier representative of neo-Kantianism—327, 393 Lassalle, Ferdinand (1825-1864)— German petty-bourgeois so-cialist, headed General Asso-ciation of German Workers;originator of opportunism inGerman labour movement, Le Roy, Edouard (1870-1954)— French philosopher, mathema-tician, professor at Collègede France, pragmatist and neo-positivist, tried to achieve an “organic synthesis” ofphilosophy, science and reli-gion, a leader of Catholicmodernism—452, 462 Le Roy, Hendrik de (De Roy in Dutch, Regius in Latin) (1508-1679)—Dutch physician,philosopher, mechanistic ma-terialist and sensualist, found-er of a school of materialistfollowers of Descartes—42 Leucippus (5th century B. 
 C. 
)— materialist philosopher ofancient Greece, founder of theatomistic theory—258, 263-265,281, 369 Liebig, Justus von (1803-1873)— German scientist, a founder of agricultural chemistry, Pres-ident of Bavarian Academyof Sciences—71 Lipps, Theodor (1851-1914)— German psychologist and phi-losopher, subjective idealist, supported phenomenologism—336 Locke, John (1632-1704)— English philosopher, meta-physical materialist, workedout a sensualist theory of knowledge—42, 43, 233, 292, 321, 381, 382, 492, 521 Loria, Achille (1857-1943)— Italian vulgar sociologist andeconomist, distorted Marxism—492 Lotze, Rudolf Hermann (1817-1881)—German physioloist andidealist philosopher—237 Loustallot, Elisée (1762-1790)— French publicist, revolution-ary democrat, active in the French bourgeois revolution—32 Lucas, Richard —author of Bib-liographie des radioaktiven Stof-fes—57M Mach, Ernst (1838-1916)—Aus-trian philosopher, subjective idealist, physicist; like Ave-narius, leading representativeof empirio-criticism—57, 59,71, 265, 270, 276, 328, 399,400, 410, 415, 416, 417, 422,423, 427, 445, 446, 474, 484, 495, 498, 499, 500 MacTaggart, John M’Taggart Ellis (1866-1925)—English philosopher, neo-Hegelian; au-thor of the commentary toHegel’s Logic —238, 240, 241 Malebranche, Nicolas (1638-1715)—French idealist philos-opher, metaphysician, a re-presentative of occasionalism—41, 42, 43 Marheineke, Philip Konrad (1780-1846)—German Protes-tant theologist and historianof Christianity, professor atBerlin University, Hegelian;edited Lectures on Philosophy of Religion for the posthumous edition of Hegel’s works—87 Mariano, Raffaele (1840-1912)— Italian philosopher and pub-licist, Hegelian, professor ofchurch history at Naples—239, 324 Marx, Karl (1818-1883)—21-23, 24, 26, 30, 32-35, 36, 37,36, 40, 44-47, 49-51, 65, 77,141, 147, 178, 180, 212, 235,238, 281, 310, 311, 312, 316,317, 339, 340, 342, 349, 352, 358-360, 378, 387, 388-391, 397, 404, 405, 487, 526, 528 Maupertuis, Pierre Louis Mo-reau de (1698-1750)—French physicist, astronomer and geo-desist, originated the principle of Least Action—421 Maxwell, James Clerk (1831-1879)—English physicist, ad-vanced the theory of electro-magnetic field and the electro-magnetic theory of light—439 Michelet, Karl Ludwig (1801-1893)—professor of philosophy at Berlin University, Hegeli-an; edited Philosophische Ab-handlungen , Part II of Ency-clopaedia of the PhilosophicalSciences (“Philosophy of Na-ture”) and Lectures on the History of Philosophy for the posthum-ous edition of Hegel’s works—87, 239 Mikhailovsky, Nikolai Konstant-inovich (1842-1904)—Russian sociologist, publicist and lit-erary critic, ideologist of lib-eral Narodniks, editor of themagazines Otechestvenniye Za-piski and Russkoye Bogatstvo — 75 Montesquieu, Charles Louis (1689-1755)—French representative of 18th-century Enlightenment, ide-ologist of constitutional mon-archy, author of L’Esprit des Lois (The Spirit of the Law )—524 Müller, Iwan (1830-1917)—Ger-man philologist, professor of classical philology at Erlan-gen University—369 Münsterberg, Hugo (1863-1916)— German psychologist, profes-sor at Harvard University, advocated voluntarism in his works on psychology—399 N Napoleon I. 
 Bonaparte (1769-1821)—French Emperor (1804-1814 and 1815)—40, 310, 334 Nauwerck, Karl (1810-1891)— German publicist; member of“The Free,” a Young Hegel-ian circle in Berlin—24 Nemesius (c. 
 4th century A. 
 D. 
)— bishop of Emesa in Phoeni-cia, author of the treatise “OnHuman Nature” where he sought to combine neo-Platonismwith the Christian teachingof immortality of the soul, fre-edom of will and divine provi-dence—344, 352 Nernst, Walter Hermann (1864-1941)—German physicist andphysical chemist—435, 436 Newton, Isaak (1642-1727)—Eng-lish physicist, astronomer and mathematician, founder of classi-cal mechanics—118, 332, 380, 427 Nietzsche Friedrich (1844-1900)— German philosopher, volun-tarist and irrationalist, his ideology was a forerunner of fascism—58, 452 Nikolai Gavrilovich —see Cherny-shevsky Nikolai Gavrilovich Noël, Georges (1856-1916)—French idealist philosopher, professor of philosophy, author of La Logique de Hegel —240, 241, 319-324 Norström, Vitalis (1856-1916)— Swedish philosopher, subjectiveidealist, professor at Göteborg— 59 O Ostwald, Wilhelm Friedrich (1853-1932)—German natural scien-tist and idealist philosopher,founder of the “energetic” the-ory, a variety of “physical”idealism—58, 399, 422, 427,430, 445, 500 Owen, Robert (1771-1858)—great English utopian socialist—33,44, 510 P Parmenides of Elea (end of 6th-beginning of 5th century B. 
 C. 
)—ancient Greek philosopher of Phaedo —ancient Greek philoso-pher, disciple of Socrates—277 Philo of Alexandria (c. 
 25 B. 
 C. 
-50 A. 
 D. 
)—ancient philosopher chief representative of Judaic religious philosophy at thebeginning of 1st century A. 
 D. 
,sought to combine Judaic re-ligion with Platonism and stoi-cism; his mysticism greatly in-influenced Christian theology— 301, 345, 348, 357 Pisarev, Dimitry Ivanovich (1840-1868)—Russian literary critic,materialist philosopher andrevolutionary democrat—371, 513, 529, 536 Planck, Max Karl Ernst Ludwig (1858-1947)—German theoreti-cal physicist, founder of quan-tum theory, inconsistent ma-terialist—57 Plato (c. 
 427-347 B. 
 C. 
)—ancient Greek philosopher, objectiveidealist, ideologist of slave-owning aristocracy—47, 90,107, 146, 218, 221. 
 222, 260,273, 274, 276-281, 283, 301, 302, 321, 322, 346, 350, 351, 360, 365, 370, 419, 438, 452, 490 Plekhanov, Georgy Valentinovich (1856-1918)—materialist phi-losopher, outstanding propaga-tor of Marxism, prominent fig-ure in world socialist movement, after 1903 became Menshevikand opportunist, in his philo-sophical works sometimes de-viated from dialectical mater-ialism—16O, 179, 275, 308, 357, 360, 403, 479, 480, 482, 501, 528, 544 Plenge, Johann (d. 
 1874)—Ger-man sociologist, economist andidealist philosopher, professorat Leipzig and Münster (West-phalia)—238, 388, 390, 391, 397 Pleshcheyev, Alexei Nikolayevich (1825-1893)—Russian poet, inhis poems expressed ideas ofthe Eleatic school, disciple of Xenophanes—97, 105, 106, 107,302, 477 Pastore, Valentino Annibale (1868-1956)—Italian philosopher, mem-ber of Turin Academy of Scien-ces, specialised in mathematicallogic, contributed to the maga-zine Rivista di Filosofia —439 Paulsen, Friedrich (1846-1908)— German educationalist and phi-losopher, neo-Kantian, authorof works on ethics, pedagogyand history of public educationin Germany—53-55, 394 Pearson, Karl (1857-1936)—math-ematician and biologist, pro-fessor at London University,Machian approach to the theoryof knowledge—152 Peirce, Charles (Santiago ) Sanders (1839-1914)—American idealist philosopher, logician and psy-chologist; in 1878 enunciatedthe basic principles of pragma-tism—445, 455 Pelazza, Aurelio (d. 
 1915)—Ita-lian philosopher, author of the book Riccardo Avenarius e l’em-piriocriticismo —58 Perrin, Jean Baptiste (1870-1942)— French physicist and physicalchemist; his works were mainlyconcerned with experimental researches in Brownian move-ment—325, 392 Perrotin, Henri Joseph Anastase (1845-1904)—French astronom-er, known for his observationof “canals” on Mars and rings about Saturn—333 Perry, Ralph Barton (1876-1957)— American idealist philosopher,professor at Harvard Univer-sity, neo-realist—398 Petzoldt, Joseph (1862-1929)— German philosopher, subjective idealist, disciple of Mach andAvenarius, opponent of scien-tific socialism—496 R Raab, Friedrich (b. 
 1890)—Ger-man economist and philosopher, from 1926 professor of political economy at Frankfurt—392 Rankine, William John Mac-quorn (1820-1872)—Scottish en-gineer and physicist, a founderof thermodynamics—422 Rau, Albrecht (1843-1920)—Ger-man philosopher and natural-ist; follower of Feuerbach—394 Renan, Joseph Ernest (1823-1892)—French philologist, ide-alist philosopher, author of works on history of religion— 471 Renouvier, Charles Barnard (1815-1903)—French idealist philos-opher and eclectic, headed theso-called school of “neo-criti-cism,” conventionalist—324, 399, 500 Rey, François Abel (1873-1940)— French philosopher, positivist,in questions natural sciencean inconsistent and spontane-ous materialist—325, 407, 428, 430, 443, 452, 459, 465, 474 Ribot, Théodule Armand (1839-1916)—French philosopher andpsychologist, founder and edi-tor of the magazine Revue Philosophique —399 Ricardo, David (1772-1823)—En-glish economist, leading rep-resentative of classical bour-geois political economy—25 Richter, Raoul Hermann (1871-1912)—German philosopher, neo-Kantian—58 Rickert, Heinrich (1863-1936)— German philosopher and socio-logist, subjective idealist andagnostic, one of the main rep-resentatives of the Baden school of neo-Kantianism—399 Riecke, Eduard (1845-1915)—Ger-man physicist—57revolutionary democrats of the 1840s-1860s—536 Pliny the Elder (Gaius Plinius Secundus ) (23-79 A. 
 D. 
)—Roman writer and scientist—525 Plutarch (c. 
 46-126 A. 
 D)—an-cient Greek writer, historianand idealist philosopher—341,342 Poincaré, Jules Henri (1854-1912)—French mathematician and physicist, member ofFrench Académie des Sciences,in philosophy sided with Ma-chians, conventionalist—413,414, 424, 426, 445, 465, 474 Prantl, Karl (1820-1888)—profes-sor of philosophy at MunichUniversity, idealist, author ofworks on the history of phi-losophy and logic—372 Priestley, Joseph (1733-1804)— English chemist and material-ist philosopher—43, 517, 518 Protagoras of Abdera (c. 
 481-411 B. 
 C. 
)—ancient Greek soph-ist philosopher; protagonistof democracy in slave-owning society—269, 270, 274, 352 Proudhon, Pierre Joseph (1809-1865)—French publicist, vul-gar economist and sociologist,ideologist of the petty bour-geoisie, one of the founders of anarchism—24, 25, 28-30 Ptolemy, Claudius (2nd century A. 
 D. 
)—ancient Greek mathe-matician, astronomer and ge-ographer; founder of the doc-trine of the earth as the fixed centre of the universe—334, 459 Pyrrho of Elis (c. 
 365-275 B. 
 C. 
)— ancient Greek philosopher,founder of scepticism in ancientworld—296 Pythagoras (c. 
 580-500 B. 
 C. 
)—an-cient Greek mathematician and philosopher, objective ideal-ist, ideologist of slave-owningaristocracy—115, 247-249, 332, 370 Riehl, Alois (1844-1924)—Ger-man philosopher, neo-Kanti-an—239, 399 Ritter, Heinrich (1791-1869)—Ger-man theist philosopher, his-torian of philosophy—345 Robespierre, Maximilien François Marie Isidore (1758-1794)—lea-der of the French Revolution,Jacobin, head of the revolution-ary government (1793-1794)— 40 Robinet, Jean-Baptiste René (1735-1820)—French philosopher, ma-terialist, deist—44 Römer, Ole Christensen (1644-1710)—Danish astronomer; was the first to determine the velo-city of light, invented a num-ber of astronomical instru-ments—333 Roscher, Wilhelm (1817-1894)— German economist, representa-tive of the so-called historicalschool of political economy—525 Rössler, Constantin (1820-1896)— German publicist, professor ofgovernment at Jena, neo-He-gelian—238 Rotta, Paolo (b. 
 1873)—Italian philosopher, close to neo-scho-lasticism, Hegelian, professorat Milan Catholic University—241 Royce, Josiah (1855-1916)—Ameri-can philosopher, objectiveidealist, representative of Amer-ican neo-Hegelians—399, 445 Ruttmann, Wilhelm Julius ( b. 
 1884)—German psychologist, author of Die Hauptergebnisse der modernen Psychologie ...— 396 S Saint-Just, Louis Antoine Léon de (1767-1794)—leader in the FrenchRevolution, Jacobin—40Salignac, Fénelon —French scientist, author of Questions de physique générale et d’astronomie —57 Sand, George (1804-1876)—French authuress—510 Schaden, Emil August (1814-1852)—professor of philosophyat Erlangen University, mys-tic; critic of philosophy ofHegel and Feuerbach—82 Schaller, Julius (1807-1868)—pro-fessor of philosophy at HalleUniversity, Hegelian; critici-sed Feuerbach’s materialist phi-losophy—82 Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Jo-seph (1775-1854)—outstanding German idealist philosopher,representative of German clas-sical philosophy; developed ide-as of Kant and Fichte; elabo-rated objective idealistic “Iden-titätsphilosophie” (“philosophy of identity”); became an offi-cial ideologist of the Prussianmonarchy toward the end ofhis career, propagated the re-ligious and mystical “Philoso-phie der Offenbarung” (philo-sophy of revelation)—236, 301,387, 492-493 Schiller, Ferdinand Canning Scott (1864-1937)—English philoso-pher, prominent representative of pragmatism—398, 399, 445 Schinz, Max (b. 
 1864)—Privat-docent, professor of philosophyat Zurich University—58 Schleiermacher, Friedrich Daniel Ernst (1768-1834)—German the-ologlist and idealist philosopher, romanticist—345 Schmidt, Ferdinand Jakob (1860-1939)—German philosopherand pedagogue, professor atBerlin University, fideist, in regard to the theory of knowl-edge was close to the Marburgschool of neo-Kantianism andto the immanents—238 Schmitt Eugen Heinrich (1851-1916)—author of Das Geheimnis der Hegelschen Dialektik, bele-uchtet vom konkretsinnlichen Standpunkte , which he submit-ted in a contest arranged bythe Hegelian Berlin Society ofPhilosophers; the work wasrecognised as outstanding butwas not awarded a prize be-cause of its “materialism and sensualism”; subsequently heturned to mysticism and gnos-ticism—239, 399 Schopenhauer, Arthur (1788-1860)—German idealist philos-opher, ideologist of Prussian junkers; his voluntarist andmisanthropic philosophy provi-ded a source of German fascistideology—496 Schulze , (Änesidem ) Gottlieb Ernst (1701-1833)—German idealist philosopher, agnostic, Humean;sought to restore and modernisethe argumentation of ancientscepticism—296 Schulze, Johannes (1786-1869)— German educationalist, Hege-lian; edited The Phenomenology of Mind for the posthumous edition of Hegel’s works—296 Schuppe, Wilhelm (1836-1913)— German philosopher, subjective idealist, headed the so-called school of immanence—399 Schwegler, Albert (1819-1857)— German theologian, philoso-pher, philologist and histori-an—359, 365, 369, 371-372 Segond, Joseph-Louis-Paul (1872-1954)—French idealist philoso-pher and psychologist, author ofseveral works on aesthetics—399 Seneca, Lucius Annaeus (c. 
 4 B. 
 C. 
-65 A. 
 D. 
)—Roman philosopher, stoic, political figure, writer, Nero’s tutor—78 Seth, Andrew (1856-1931)—En-glish philosopher, professor atEdinburgh, author of works on philosophy—238, 239, 240 Sertus Empiricus (2nd century A. 
 D. 
)—ancient Greek physi-cian and sceptic philosopher, author of historical and philo-sophical works: Pyrronische Hypolyposen and Adversus Ma-themeticos —250, 252, 255, 261, 265, 272, 297, 298, 299 Shakespeare, William (1564-1616)— great English dramatist—31 Shehedrin (Saltykov-Shchedrin ), Mikhail Yevgrafovich (1826-1889)—Russian satirist, revo-lutionary democrat—503 Shulyatikov, V. 
 M . 
 (1872-1912)— Russian literary critic, Bol-shevik; criticised idealism fromthe viewpoint of vulgar sociolo-gy, thus distorting Marxism—484, 486, 492, 494, 499, 500 Sierakowski, Zygmunt (1827-1863)—Polish revolutionarydemocrat, one of the leaders inthe rising of 1863 in Poland;executed by the tsarist govern-ment on June 15, 1863—508 Sismondi, Jean Charles Lenard Simonde de (1773-1842)—Swiss economist, petty-bourgeois crit-ic of capitalism—25 Smith, Adam (1723-1790)—En-glish economist, leading repre-sentative of classical bourgeois political economy—25 Socrates (c. 
 469-399 B. 
 C. 
)—ide-alist philosopher of ancientGreece, ideologist of slave-hold-ing aristocracy—146, 223, 272, 273, 274, 451, 522 Spaventa, Bertrando (1817-1883) Italian idealist philosopher,leading representative of neo-Hegelianism in Italy, professorat Naples University—58, 239 Spencer, Herbert (1820-1903)— English bourgeois philosopherand sociologist, one of thefounders of positivism—45, 428 Speransky, Mikhail Mikhailovich (1772-1839)—Russian states-man; early in the rule of Ale-xander I drafted state reforms designed to introduce elements of constitutional government,while retaining feudalism andautocracy in Russia; the draftwas rejected and he was exiled—552, 553 Spicker, Gideon (1840-1912)—Ger-man idealist philosopher, au-thor of several works on thehistory of philosophy—393 Spinoza, Baruch (Benedict ) (1632-1677)—Dutch materialist phi-losopher, rationalist, atheist— 41, 43, 44, 64, 67, 06, 106, 108,156, 167, 168, 236, 321, 360,377, 378, 387, 491 Stahl, Georg Ernst (1660-1734)— German chemist and physician, formulated the theory of phlo-giston, vitalist in his works onphysiology and medicine—438 Stakhevich, S. 
 G. 
 (1843-1918)— participated in the revolution-ary movement in Russia in the sixties; in 1863 was arrested, sentenced to penal servitudeand exiled to Siberia for life;author of reminiscences aboutN. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky, withwhom he spent several years in Siberia—506 Stein, Ludwig (1859-1930)—Ger-man sociologist and philosopher,member of the Academies ofSciences in Berlin and Geneva,editor of the magazine Archiv für Geschichte der Philosophie , author of works on the historyof philosophy—58 Stirling, James Hutchison (1820-1909)—English philosopher, found-er of English neo-Hegelianism; physician by education—239 Stirner, Max (1806-1856)—Ger-man idealist philosopher,Young Hegelian, one of theideologists of anarchism; his basic work is Der Einzige und sein Eigentum —452 Stobaeus, Joannes (c. 
 5th century A. 
 D. 
)—Greek writer, compiler of writings by Greek authors—345 Strache, Hugo (1865-925)—Aus-trian chemist and engineer, au-thor of Die Einheit der Materie, des Weltäthers und der Natur-kräfte —58 Strauss, David Friedrich (1808-1874)—German theologian andidealist philosopher, Young He-gelian, author of the book Life of Jesus , a historical criticism of the gospels—44, 45 Sue, Eugène (1804-1857)—French writer, author of cheap senti-mental novels on socialthemes—31, 46, 47, 49 Suter, Heinrich (1848-1922)— Swiss professor of mathematics—396 Szeliga —pseudonym of Franz Zychlinsky (1816-1900)—Prus-sian officer, Young Hegelian, participated in the publication of B. 
 Bauer’s works—30, 31 T Taggart —see MacTaggart Taine, Hippolyte Adolphe (1828-1893)—French literary and artcritic, historian and positivistphilosopher—420 Tarde, Gabriel (1843-1904)—French sociologist, criminalist and psy-chologist; a founder of a psy-chological trend in sociology;voluntarist—452 Thales of Miletus (c. 
 624-547 B. 
 C. 
)—ancient Greek materi-alist philosopher; founder of Miletian (Ionic) school—223, 246 Thomson, Joseph John (1856-1940)—British physicist, mem- /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR ber of the London Royal So-ciety, of which he was Presi-dent from 1915 to 1920; heldmechanistic materialist philo-sophical views—57, 335 Tiedemann, Dietrich (1748-1803)—German historian ofphilosophy, professor at Mar-burg University, author of thesix-volume Geist der Spekulati-ven Philosophie , which served Hegel as a source in his courseof lectures on the history ofphilosophy—270 Timaeus (4th century-3rd century B. 
 C. 
)—ancient Greek histori-an, author of works on the history of Sicily and Italy,which have come down to us infragments—302, 347, 349 Trendelenburg, Friedrtch Adolf (1802-1872)—German idealist philosopher and logician, pro-fessor at Berlin University;critical of Hegel’s philosophy,particularly his dialectics—238 Turgenev, Ivan Sergeyevich (1818-1883)—Russian writer, liberal in his political views—503, 504, 531 U Uberweg, Friedrich (1826-1871)— German philosopher and psy-chologist, professor at Königs-berg University, author ofGrundriß der Geschichte der Phi-losophie —52, 256, 276 Uhde-Bernays, Hermann Hans ( b. 
 1873)—German philologist, au-thor of works on the history of literature and art—395 Uspensky, Nikolai Vasilyevich (1837-1889)—Russian democ ratic writer—534 V Van’t Hoff, Jacobus Hendricus (1852-1911)—Dutch chemist, afounder of modern physical chemistry and stereochemist-ry—435 Véra, Augusto (1813-1885)—Ita-lian philosopher, forerunner of Italian Hegelians, translatedHegel’s works into Italian andFrench—240, 324 Verworn, Max (1863-1921)—Ger-man physiologist, founder of the magazine Zeitschrift für all-gemeine Physiologie , eclectic in philosophy, close to Machism—329, 330 Vissarion —see Belinsky, Vissa-rion Grigoryevich Volkmann, Paul (1856-c. 
 1938)— professor of theoretical physicsat Königsberg, author of Er-kenntnistheoretische Grundzügeder Naturwissenschaften ..., ide-alist, eclectic—328, 335, 360 Voltaire , (François Marie Arouet ) (1694-1778)—French philosoph-er and writer of 18th centuryEnlightenment; deist andhistorian, opponent of abso-lutism and Catholicism—42 Volynsky, A. 
 L. 
 (1863-1926)—Rus-sian reactionary critic, deca-dent, advocated the theory of“art for art’s sake”—520 De Vries, Hugo (1848-1935)— Dutch botanist, anti-Darwini-an, founder of reactionary pangen-esis and mutation theories—440 W Waals, Johannes Diderik, van der (1837-1923)—Dutch physicist, professor at Amsterdam Uni-versity; known for his works onthe kinetic theory of gases—435 Wallace, William (1844-1897)— leading representative of Brit-ish Hegelians; translated He-gel’s Encyclopaedia of the Phi-losophical Sciences into En-glish—239 Willy, Rudolf (1855-1920)—Ger-man philosopher, follower ofAvenarius, subjective idealist—496 Windelband, Wilhelm (1848-1915)—German philosopher,neo-Kantian, prominent histor-ian of philosophy—239, 369 Wiassak, Rudolf (1865-1930)— Austrian physiologist—498 Wolff, Christian (1679-1754)— German idealist philosopher,metaphysician, popularised andvulgarised Leibnitz’ philoso-phy, teleologist—96, 208 Wundt, Wilhelm Max (1832-1920)—German psychologist, physiologist and idealist phi-losopher—321, 494-500 X Xenophanes of Colophon (c. 
 580-470 B. 
 C. 
)—ancient Greek phi-losopher and poet, founder ofthe Eleatic school—252Xenophon (c. 
 430-355/4 B. 
 C. 
)— ancient Greek historian, wasnot in sympathy with Atheniandemocracy, protagonist of aris-tocratic Sparta—274 Y Yurkevich, P. 
 D. 
 (1827-1874)— professor of philosophy, ideal-ist and mystic; entered intopolemics with Chernyshevskyon philosophical questions—516, 320, 521 Z Zart, A. 
 —German physcist, au-thor of the book Bausteine des Weltalls. 
 Atome und Molekü-le...—395 Zeno of Elea (5th century B. 
 C. 
)— ancient Greek philosopher ofthe Eleatic school, disciple ofParmenides—252, 254-259 —in philosophy of Leucippus, Democrits and Epicurus— 263, 265, 292 B Becoming —105-107, 273 Being —actual history as basis, foun-dation, being followed byconsciousness—263 —Being-for-other and Being-in-itself (for-itself)—108, 113 114, 211, 212-213, 315, 316 —“Being and nature”, “think-ing and man”—82 —Being outside ourselves=in-dependent of thought—69 —correctness and aptness of terms “in itself” and “for i tself”—202 —existent being as concrete, determinate being—quality105, 106, 107 Bourgsoisie —see Marx and Engels on classes and class struggle Bourgeois democracy (political trend)—75 C “Capital ” by Karl Marx —178, 180, 235—induction and deduction in—146A Absolute and relative —107 Abstraction —199, 370 —role of in cognition—91, 92 99-100, 171, 178, 195, 199 Activity of man —see Practice Actuality —157, 196, 218 Agnosticism —71, 301, 323, 428, 434, 452, 459 Anarchy —39 Anthropological principle in phi-losophy —82 Appearance —and contradiction—221, 223, 357-358 —and essence—173, 252, 318, 359—and law—150-151—as moment of man’s knowl-edge of nature—153 —world of apppearances and world in itself—153 Aristotle —criticism of Plato’s “ideas” by—281 —difference between idealism of Plato and of—280 —logic of—366—and materialism—280, 285, 288 Atheism —69, 76 Atomism —and Hegel’s thesis on the unity of finite and infinite—112SUBJECT INDEX /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR —logic, dialectics and theory of knowledge of materialismin—178-179, 317, 358-359 Capitalism —318 —contradictions of—179, 358-359 Categories —365 —of logic—see Logic —of possible and contingent— 310 —of thought—see Thought Causality —162, 178, 187-188, 222, 497—cause and effect as moments of universal connection—159-161 —movement of the relation of causality = movement of matter and history—161 —small particle of universal, objectively real interconnec-tion—160 —and theory of knowledge—347 Chernyshevsky, N. 
 G. 
 —“anthropological principle”, narrowness of term in—82 —philosophical views and dem-ocratism—544 —Plekhanov’s book on Cher-nyshevsky, shortcomings of —528, 544 Classes and class struggle —see Marx and Engels on classes andclass struggle Cognition —categories of logic, as mo-ments of—93, 198 —as series of circles—245, 277-278, 360 —as coincidence of notion and objectivity—194-195 —concept of law as stage of—150—dialectical, essence of—87, 158, 171, 178-179, 222, 357-361 —general course, steps, and stages in—93, 153, 158, 168, 171, 182, 194-196, 205, 206, 207, 277, 278, 316, 317 —intelligence and understand-ing in—82, 143—logic, dialectics and theory of knowledge of materialism317 —path of—171 —practice, as test of—191, 201, 202, 211-214, 217, 218, 278,316-317, 318as reflection of nature—182 —relativity of all knowledge and absolute content in—180 —and sensation—276-277, 284 —senses, and relation to—71 See also Abstraction, Thought, Sensuous representation, Con-sciousness, Theory of Knowl-edge Commodity —179, 317-318, 358 Communism (theory ) —18th-century materialism and 19th-century Englishand French—44 —and French Revolution—40 Concept —176-179, 316 —abstract and concrete—208 359, 370 —“art of operating with” (En-gels)—251, 262 —coincidence with sum of sen-sations, senses—283 —dialectic and materialist roots of—199 —and essence of dialectics— 257-258 —formation of—146, 178, 196, 254 —of genus and law—266 —highest product of brain, high-est product of matter—167 —and identity of opposites— 110, 146 —not immobile—225, 251 —and law-governed character of objective connection ofworld—146, 178, 196, 254 —mutual connection of—196—nature dialectically reflected in—283 —subjectivity and objectivity of—208 —universal flexibility of—110, 146 Concrete —138 —cognising of—277—in multifarious relations— 138 Connection —103, 106, 151, 161-163, 178, 202, 222, 226-227,346, 347, 359—all-sided character of, and its expression in causality—159 —concept of, and history of human thought—347 —and infinite progress—112—necessary, objective nature of—97 —reciprocal dependence of all notions—196 —universal, cause and effect as moments of—159-161 —universality of, and reflec-tion in concepts—146 —of world, objective—150, 151, 178 —and transitions—103, 180, 227, 359 See also Causality Consciousness —and being—263 —reflection of objective world in—171, 180, 183, 201, 202,212 —and relation to nature— 188 —subjective, and objectivity— 204 Content —96-97, 144 —and form—222 Continuity —116, 256 D Democrats and Liberals —544, 550 Development —221, 253 —two conceptions of—267, 358—of human thought—245 —principle of, and unity of world—254 —“self-movememit” and theory of knowledge—357-358—as struggle of opposites— 357-358 —of thing and phenomenon in-to its opposite—357-358 See also Motion Dialectics —357-361 —and ancient Greek philoso-phy—224 —application by Marx to poli-tical economy—178, 317, 358, 359 —two definitions and two fea-tures of—251 —elements of—221-223—essence of—99, 109, 110, 223, 226, 227, 250-252, 258, 357-361 —and “eternal life”—200—and history of human thought, science and technique—147 —of ideas, as reflection of dia-lectics of things—196, 253 —and individual sciences—351 —kernel of—223—and logic, and theory of knowledge of materialism—317 —of notions, materialist roots of—199, 251 —objective and subjective— 187-188, 223, 253, 259 —and sophistry—107, 110, 358—splitting of a single whole and cognition of its contra-dictory parts as essence of— 357 —as theory of knowledge—317 351, 357, 360 —of things themselves, of na-ture itself—111, 271 See also Hegel , Logic , Theory of Knowledge Dialectical Materialism —290, 361 See also Dialectics ; Marx, En-gels , Marxism Difference (distinction ) —between being and essence, between notion and objecti-vity—198 —immanent emergence of—97 E Eclecticism —flexibility of concepts ap-plied subjectively—110 Egoism —65, 76-77 Electrons —112, 292, 379, 431 Ends —of man engendered by objec-tive world—189 —of man, and relation to na-ture—187-189 Energy —66, 240 Engels —on “art of operating with con-cepts”—251, 262 —on Hegel—104, 108, 169, 234 —on natural sciences—262See also Marx, Engels, Marx-ism Ether —conjectures of the ancients about—250 Essence —134 —and appearance—173, 251, 318, 359 —and being, relativity of differ-ence between—198, 251 —essential and unessential— 130 —and form—144—and law—152, 316—and semblance (show)—130 132-133 —and universal, ancient Greek philosophers on—267 Evolution —253-254, 358 Experience —180 —James’ theory of experi-ence”—445 —A. 
 Rey’s definitions of— 447, 448, 472 F Fantasy —370, 371 Feuerbach —agnosticism, criticism of—71—“anthropological principle,” narrowness of term in—82 —arguments against God—68—on atheism and moral ideal— 69 —belief in God, causes of— 71, 75 —“Egoism” and its significance, views on—65 —germs of historical materi-alism—73, 76, 77 —versus Hegel and idealism— 81, 123 —idealism of, in 1836—377—lag behind Marx and Engels, 1848-1851—77 —Marx and Engels on—29, 30, 35-36, 41, 45 —materialism of—67, 70, 72 76, 77 —nature—a republican, God— a monarch—72 —objective, views on—75 —quality and sensation, views on—327 —religion, attitude towards— 63-83 —1848 revolution, attitude to-wards—63 —“sensuousness,” views on— 64, 66, 69, 75 —“socialism” of—77—on specuiation—78—theory of “the copy”—70 Finite and Infinite —definition of—110—infiniteness of matter—112—in mathematics—117, 118—as parts, stages of world— 107 —unity of, and connection between—112 Force —see Physics Form —and content—222—essential—144 Formal Logic —93, 97, 176, 177 Freedom and necessity —162, 164, 181, 186, 189, 324, 359,382 —on knowledge as knowledge of God—-171 —Logic —92, 97, 180, 192, 217, 234 —Logic , picture of world—147 —materialism, attitude to-wards—263, 264, 275, 279,280, 289, 290, 291-293 —materialism, on pros of—294—“mechanism,” views on—185, 186 —most obsolete and antiquated in philosophy of history—312 —mysticism in—175, 177, 204, 279, 316 —philosophical system, Marx’s and Engels’ attitude towards—104, 108, 141, 169, 178, 234,281, 316, 317, 339, 340 —on Plato—280—on practice and objectivity of knowledge—211 —and question of dialectical transition from matter tomotion, from matter to con-sciousness—281 —real is rational, formula of— 280 —on relations of thought to in-terests and impulses—90 —transition from logical idea to nature—234 —on transition of quantity into quality—116, 117 Heraclitus —elements of materialism, ex-position of—347, 352 —a founder of dialectics— 344 Historical materialism —see His-tory; Marx, Engels, Marxism History —as basis, foundation, being followed by consciousness—263 —categories of the possible and contingent—310 —criticism of Plekhanov’s views on—528, 544G God, gods —belief in God. 
 causes of— 71, 75 —Feuerbach’s argument against—68 —Hegel, views on—70, 170, 171, 184, 293, 301 —in the image of man—252 295 Gradualness and leaps —123-124, 282, 358 H Hegel —on Aristotle—280, 281, 282, 283, 284-286, 287-288 —on causality in history—160—concepts (notions) in—114, 122, 153, 267, 283 —on concept of force in phys-ics—89, 145 —criticism of Kant—91, 92, 116, 117, 120, 134, 168-170, 171-174, 179, 186, 192-194, 204-208, 208-209, 232-234 —on Democritus—280—dialectics in—155, 192, 196, 229, 234, 247, 316 —dialectics of nature, guess of—196 —on Epicurus—289-295 —formal logic, tribute to—177—on French Revolution—310, 311—germs of historical materi-alism—158, 189, 306, 309 —god, religion, morality, views on—148, 170. 
 171, 246, 293, 301, 307, 310 —grain of truth in mystical integument of—141, 153, 155,190, 264 —idea as truth, approach to— 191 —idealism—108, 168, 228, 276, 279, 285, 286, 301, 307, 310,370 Identity —134, 357 Identity and unity —see Unity and struggle of opposites Imagination —see Sensuous repre-sentation Infinite and finite —see Finite and Infinite K Kant and Kantianism —130, 170, 171, 258, 270, 370and Cartesianism—383—category of modality in—120—and faith—100, 170, 171 —Hegel’s criticism of— 91, 116 117, 120, 134, 168-170, 171-174, 179, 186, 192-194, 204-207, 208-209, 232-233 —and knowledge, restriction of—100, 170, 171 —Marxist criticism of (early 20th century)—179 —and metaphysics—109—Plekhanov’s criticism of— 179, 275 —subjectivism and objectiv-ism—134, 205-207, 225, 258 —Thing-in-itself in Kant—91 92, 205, 207 —and transition of categories—209—and universal law of dialec-tics—210 Knowledge —see Cognition L Language —as expression of universal— 272, 275 —history of—89, 351—and thought—89 Law —151, 175 —and appearance—150, 151 —concept of, as stage of cog-nition—150, 151 —and concept of genus—266—and essence—152, 316—criticism of Shulyatikov’s views on—490, 500 —Hegel on causality in—160—and Hegel’s thought of ideal passing into real—114 —Marx and Engels’ criticism of idealist views on—23-51 —world history as a whole—309 History of philosophy —bourgeois philosophy of mod-ern times—53 —criticism of Shulyatikov’s views on—486, 487, 489, 492,499, 500 —Greek philosophy—351, 360 366, 486, 487, 492 —materialism versus idealism in—53, 71, 279-280 —spiral development of—245 360, 361 —struggle of bourgeoisie against feudalism in—489 Humists —Marxist criticism of (early 20th century)—179 I Ideal —passing into real, Hegel’s thought of—114 —and real, difference be-tween—114 Idealism—361 —and clerical obscurantism—361—on concept and idea—370—epistemological roots of— 361, 370 —intelligent, and material-ism—274 —metaphysical materialism and dialectical materialismon—361 —objective, and materialism— 169, 276, 294 —versus materialism in history of philosophy—53, 71, 279,280 See also Hegel Marx and Engels on history of philosophy—Cartesian materialism—42 44 —English materialism—43, 44 —Feuerbach—29, 30, 35-36, 41 45 —French materialism—41-44—Hegel—31, 34, 39, 41, 44, 45, 46-49 —Lassalle’s The Philosophy of Heraclitus —339, 352 —metaphysics of 17th centu-ry—41, 42, 43 —materialism of 18th-century and 19th-century English and French communism—44 —nominalism—43—Young Hegelians—23-51 Marx and Engels on classes and class struggle—bourgeoisie—27 —proletariat, historic mission of—27-28 Marx and Engels —economic doc-trine—political economy—24, 26, 29, 30 —political economy, applica-tion of dialectics to—178, 317,358-359 —private property—24-28, 29, 30 —production, mode of—45, 46 —production, social relations of—30 —value—24, 25, 30—wages—24, 25 Marx and Engels on equality —29 Marx and Engels —philosophical doctrine —criterion of practice in theory of knowledge—211 —Hegel’s philosophical sys-tem, attitude towards—104,108, 141, 169, 178, 234, 281, 316, 317, 339, 340 —materialism and idealism, distinction between in En-gels and Feuerbach—67—essential, reflection of—152 —and modern physics—151—narrowness, incompleteness, approximation of—151 —objective world, reflection of—180 —as relation—153 Leaps —123, 124, 266, 282, 358 Liberals —532, 544 Life —201, 202 Limit —110-111 Logic —88, 94, 98, 318 —applied, science as—201—categories of, and human practice—90, 190, 217 —categories of, as moments of cognition of nature by man— 93, 94, 198 —definition of—92, 93, 103—and dialectics and theory of knowledge of materialism—103, 175, 182, 192, 317 —and dialectics and theory of knowledge of materialism inCapital—178, 317, 358, 359 —figures of—177—and history of thought—316—laws of, as reflections of objective in human con-sciousness—180, 183, 208 —main content of—196 M Machism —71, 132, 134, 153, 179, 265, 270, 276, 417, 445, 474 Macrocosm and microcosm —conjectures of Pythagoreans on—249 , ENGELS, ISM Marx and Engels on state —38-40 Marx and Engels on Declaration of Rights of Man and Citizen — 40 Marx and Engels on history —36, 45, 46, 312 —ideas, role of in history—39—idealist views, criticism of—23-51—masses, role of—32-36, 39 Measure —120-123 Mechanists —430, 431, 442 Mediation —103 Metaphysics of 17th century —42, 43, 44 Moment —147, 157, 200, 257, 271, 278, 317 Monads —378, 379, 380 Motion (movement )—133, 141, 257, 258, 493 —dialectical—343 —in logic of concepts—110, 255, 256, 257, 258, 343 —and moment—147, 200, 257, 258 —and principle of unity of world—150, 151, 254 —and representation of by thought and sensation—257,258 —and self-movement—141, 143 357, 358 —and time and space—255 —as unity of contradictions— 141, 256, 343 —universal, and change, idea of—141 See also Development N Natural sciences —71, 262, 316, 325, 328, 329, 330, 331, 332, 333, 335, 336, 360 Nature —182, 188 —concrete and abstract—208—dialectics of—111—material—72—and the “mental”—90 —moment and relation—208 —necessity of—72, 73, 74—phenomenon and essence— 208 —primary primordial being—67—and principle of unity of world—150-151, 254 Necessity —and contingent—359-360—definition of—263—progress, from Feuerbach to historical and dialectical ma-terialism—340 —socialism, Marx’s advance to in The Holy Family —24 Marx and Engels on religion —24, 37, 38, 39 Marx and Engels on socialism — 36, 37 Bourgeoisie on Marx and Marx-ism —238, 388 Masses —see Marx and Engels on history Mathematics —41, 42, 103, 328 —and anthropological prin-ciple—82 —Cartesian—42, 44—French materialism—41-44—French materialism, two trends in—42 —and idealism, distinction be-tween in Engels and Feuer-bach—67 —versus idealism in history of philosophy—53, 71, 279, 280 —and knowledge of matter—171 —Material and ideal—114 —18th-century materialism and 19th-century Englishand French communism—44 —mechanistic, metaphysical— 42, 43, 44, 360 —and naturalism—82 —Shulyatihov’s vulgarisation of—489, 492, 500 —and socialism—44—against theology and ideal-ism—71 See also Marx, Engels, Marx-ism ; Feuerbach Mathematics —371 —differential and integral cal-culus—118, 207, 208 —infinite in—117-118 Matter —159 —infiniteness of—112—and principle of unity of world—150-151, 254 Plato —303-304 Plekhanov —book on Chernyshevsky, short-comings of—528, 544 —Kantianism, criticism of— 179, 275 —philosophical works of—275—unity of opposites, views on—357 Political econony —316 —political economy of bour-geoisie—210 See also Marx and Engels — economic doctrine Positivism —323, 328, 472 Practice —187-188, 202, 217, 218, 318 —and categories of logic—90, 190, 217 —and cognition—216—as criterion of truth—191, 201, 202, 211-214, 217, 218,228, 278, 317 —and path of cognition—171 —practice and theory of knowl-edge in Marx—212 —and transformation of world— 187-189, 212, 213, 214, 218 Pragmatism —468, 474 Private property —see Marx and Engels —economic doctrine Progress —113 Proletariat —see Marx and Engels on classes and class struggle Pythagorean philosophy —247-250 Q Quality —and sensation—317—and transition into quanti-ty—113, 222 Quantity —113, 222 R Real —Hegel’s thought of ideal pas-sing into real—114 Reason —see Thought—and freedom—162 —of nature—72, 73, 74—as universal in being—263, 383 Negation —226, 227 —as moment of development— 226, 227 —of negation—97, 222, 226 227, 229 —and the positive—97, 226, 227 Neo-empiricism —162 Nominalism —43 Notion —see Concept Number —117 O Objective , objectivity —68 —and concept—170, 194—of concepts—176, 178—Feuerbach, views on—75 —and idea (cognition of man)— 170, 194 —objective reality and time—228—and practical activities— 187-191 —of semblance (show)—98 —subjective, relation to—204, 248 —and subjective, relativity of difference between—98, 198 —and thought—187-191 Opposites —see Unity and struggle of opposites P People —see Marx and Engels on history Phenomenon —see Appearance Phenomenologism —270, 276 Philistinism —136, 253 Philosophy —29, 119, 147, 275, 360, 361, 365See also Dialectics ; History of philosophy ; Marx and Engels on history of philosophy ; Ma-terialism Physic s—151 Reciprocal action —162 Reciprocal dependence —see Con-nection Reflection of nature in human thought —171, 180, 182, 183, 195, 201, 202, 212, 283See also Cognition Religion —and abstraction—370—Feuerbach on—63-83 —Hegel on—148, 170, 171, 246, 293, 301, 307, 310 —Marx and Engels on—24, 37, 38, 39 See also God , gods S Scepticism —and dialectics—296, 358—and doubt—296 —in history of philosophy—43 116, 224 —of Kant and Hume—205—philosophy of—295-300—and semblance—130, 132 Science —99, 201, 233, 357 Self-movement —141, 143, 357-358 See also Motion Semblance —98, 130-133, 134 Sensation —and cognition—276, 277, 283, 284—and quality—317 —and thought—517 Sensuousness, senses —66, 75, 272 Sensuous representation —143, 178, 228 Separate, particular, individual — see Universal Show —see Semblance Socialism —24, 36, 37, 44 Social relations of production —30 Something —109-110 Sophistry —107, 110, 146, 269-272, 343, 358 Speech (Word )—272 State —see Marx and Engels on state Struggle of opposites —see Unity and struggle of oppositesSubjectivism , subjectivity , subjec-tive —150, 194, 195, 210 —and concrete—232—and object—202, 203 —objective, relation to—248 269 —and objective, relativity of difference between—98, 198 —and objectivity—269 Substance —161 T Technique —188 Theory of Knowledge —88, 129, 182, 317, 347 —and causality—347—and dialectics—317, 351, 357, 360 —and individual sciences—351—and logic and dialectics— 175, 182, 192, 317 See also Logic ; Cognition Thing-in-itself —in Kant—91, 92, 205, 207—Hegel on cognisability of— 173 —and phenomenon—113, 150 —and thing for others—109 Thought —228 —categories of—91, 93, 254—and contradictions—144—interests and impulses, rela-tion to—90 —and language—89—and man—82—and movement—257—and nature—284—and physical qualities of organism—517 —progress of, from concrete to abstract and from abstract topractice—171, 316, 317 —and word—272See also Consciousness Time and space —70, 228, 255 Transcendent —192 Transition —103, 177, 180, 227, 281, 282, 359 Unity of the world, nature, move-ment, matter —150, 151, 254 Universal —359, 360 —essence—267 —and necessity—263, 383 —and the parlicular—90, 176 177, 178, 199, 274, 275, 277359, 360 V Value—30, 172, 178, 179, 317, 318, 342 W Wager —see Marx and Engels— economic doctrine Word (Speech )—272 World —103, 106, 107, 112, 150, 151, 153, 160, 178, 187-191, 256, 349 Y Young Hegelians —criticism of, by Marx and Engels—23-51Truth —190, 195 —absolute and relative in—180—criterion of—191, 201-202, 211-214, 217, 219, 228, 278, 316, 317 —path of cognising of—171 201 —as process—201—realisation of—196—stages of—201 U Unity and struggle of opposites — 97, 98, 177, 221-223, 256, 278, 342, 343, 357-360 —and develment—357, 358—development of thing, phe-nomenon into its opposite—260 —as essence of dialectics— 109, 223, 357 —and imagination—143—mobility of contradictions— 109, 110, 143 —and motion—141, 256, 342, 343 —and nodal points of cogni-tion—277, 278 —thing (phenomenon) as sum and unity of opposite—221-223, 357, 358 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR B. 
 n. 
 leHnH coЧnHeHnr TOM 38 На английскот языке