L E N I N COLLECTED WORKS /FL0071/FL0065 A IN ACCORDANCE WITH A DECISION OF THE NINTH CONGRESS OF THE R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) AND THE SECOND CONGRESS OF SOVIETS OF THE U. 
S. 
S. 
R. 
 B. 
 n. 
 l d H n H С О Ч И Н E Н И Я И з д a н u е ч е m в е p m o e ГОСУДАРСТВ ЕНН ОЕ ИЗ ДАТ ЕЛЬ СТВО ПОЛИТИЧЕ СКОЙ ЛИ ТЕРАТУ РЫ M О С К В А V. 
 I. 
 L E N I N cOLLEcTED WORKS VOLUME /FL0071/FL0065 !ugust 1916 –March 1917 PROGRESS PUBLISHERS MOSCOW TRANSLATED THE RUSSIAN BY M. 
 S. 
 L E V I N, THE LATE JOE FINEBERG AND OTHERS EDITED BY M. 
 S. 
 L E V I N First printing 1964 Second printing 1974 l 10102 –038 164–74 014(01) –74 From Marx to Mao M L © Digital Reprints 2011 www. 
marx 2mao. 
com 11 13 22 28 29 36 40 4855 63 75 77 77 80 83 88 9094 94 96 99 100 105 121CONTENTS Preface ...................... 
. 
 1916 THE NASCENT TREND OF IMPERIALIST ECONOMISM ...... REPLY TO P. 
 KIEVSKY (Y. 
 PYATAKOV) .......... 
. 
 A CARICATURE OF ISM AND IMPERIALIST ECONOMISM . 
. 
 1. 
 The Marxist Attitude Towards War and “Defence of the Fatherland” ................... 
 2. 
 “Our Understanding of the New Era” ....... 
. 
 3. 
 That Is Economic Analysis? ............ 4. 
 The Example of Norway ............. 
. 
 5. 
 “Monism and Dualism” ............. 
. 
 6. 
 The Other Political Issues Raised and Distorted by P. 
 Kievsky ................... 
 7. 
 Conclusion. 
 Alexinsky Methods .......... 
. 
 THE MILITARY PROGRAMME OF THE PROLETARIAN REVOLUTION I........................ II........................ III........................ LOST IN A WOOD OF THREE TREES ............. 
 GREETINGS TO THE ITALIAN SOCIALIST PARTY CONGRESS .... 
 THE “DISARMAMENT” SLOGAN ............... I........................ II........................ III........................ IV........................ IMPERIALISM AND THE SPLIT IN SOCIALISM .......... 
 SPEECH AT THE CONGRESS OF THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC PARTY OF SWITZERLAND, NOVEMBER 4, 1916 ............ /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR A SEPARATE PEACE ................... 
 TEN “SOCIALIST” MINISTERS! ............... TASKS OF THE LEFT ZIMMERWALDISTS IN THE SWISS SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC PARTY ................... 
 I. 
 Attitude Towards the War and Towards the Bourgeois Government in General ............. 
. 
 II. 
 The High Cost of Living and the Intolerable Economic Conditions of the Masses ............. 
 III. 
 Pressing Democratic Reforms and Utilisation of the Political Struggle and Parliamentarism ....... 
. 
 IV. 
 The Immediate Tasks of Party Propaganda, Agitation and Organisation ................ 
. 
 V. 
 International Tasks of the Swiss Social-Democrats ... THESES ON THE ATTITUDE OF THE SWISS SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC PARTY TOWARDS THE WAR ................ 
 PRINCIPLES INVOLVED IN THE WAR ISSUE ......... ON THE DEFENCE OF THE FATHERLAND ISSUE ....... 
. 
 THE YOUTH INTERNATIONAL. 
 A Review .......... 
. 
 EFFORTS TO WHITEWASH OPPORTUNISM .......... 
 THE CHKHEIDZE FACTION AND ITS ROLE .......... 
 1917 BOURGEOIS PACIFISM AND SOCIALIST PACIFISM ....... 
 Article (or Chapter ) I. 
The Turn in World Politics ... Article (or Chapter ) II. 
 The Pacifism of Kautsky and Turati ................... 
. 
 Article (or Chapter ) III. 
 The Pacifism of the French So-cialists and Syndicalists ............. 
. 
 Article (or Chapter ) IV. 
 Zimmerwald at the Crossroads . 
 AN OPEN LETTER TO BORIS SOUVARINE .......... 
. 
 THESES FOR AN APPEAL TO THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIALIST COMMITTEE AND ALL SOCIALIST PARTIES. 
 Rough Draft .... 
 A LETTER TO V. 
 A. 
 KARPINSKY ............... AN OPEN LETTER TO CHARLES NAINE, MEMBER OF THE INTER-NATIONAL SOCIALIST COMMITTEE IN BERNE ......... TO THE WORKERS WHO SUPPORT THE STRUGGLE AGAINST THEWAR AND AGAINST THE SOCIALISTS WHO HAVE SIDED WITHTHEIR GOVERNMENTS ..................125 134 137 137 139 141 143 146 149 152 161163 167 171 175 177 181 186 191 195 205 217 220 229 LECTURE ON THE 1905 REVOLUTION ............ TWELVE BRIEF THESES ON H. 
 GREULICH’S DEFENCE OF FA-THERLAND DEFENCE .................. DEFENCE OF NEUTRALITY ................ 
 A TURN IN WORLD POLITICS ............... STATISTICS AND SOCIOLOGY ............... Foreword ..................... Historical Background to National Movements .... 
. 
 Chapter I . 
 A Few Statistics ............ I...................... 
 II...................... 
 IMAGINARY OR REAL MARSH? ............. 
 PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE RESOLUTION ON THE WAR ISSUE ........................ THE STORY OF ONE SHORT PERIOD IN THE LIFE OF ONE SOCIAL-IST PARTY ...................... 
. 
 DRAFT THESES, MARCH 4 (17), 1817 ............. 
 TELEGRAM TO THE BOLSHEVIKS LEAVING FOR RUSSIA .... 
. 
 LETTER TO VOLKSRECHT ................ 
. 
 LETTERS AFAR .................. Letters from Afar . 
First Letter . 
 The First Stage of the First Revolution ................... 
. 
 Letters from Afar . 
Second Letter . 
 The New Government and the Proletariat .................. Letters from Afar . 
Third Letter . 
 Concerning a Proletarian Militia ...................... 
 Letters from Afar . 
Fourth Letter . 
 How To Achieve Peace . 
 Letters from Afar . 
Fifth Letter . 
 The Tasks Involved in the Building of the Revolutionary Proletarian State .... 
. 
 TO OUR COMRADES IN WAR-PRISONER CAMPS ....... 
. 
 THE REVOLUTION IN RUSSIA AND THE TASKS OF THE WORKERS OF ALL COUNTRIES ................... 
 THE TASKS OF THE RUSSIAN SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC LABOUR PARTY IN THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION. 
 Report of a lecture ... TRICKS OF THE REPUBLICAN CHAUVINISTS . 
 .........236 254 260 262271 271 271 273 273 276 278 282 283 287 292 293295 297 309 320 333 340 343 350 355 362 365 367 375 421 12-13 308-09 345ILLUSTRATIONS V. 
 I. 
 Lenin. 
—1917 .................. First page of Lenin’s manuscript, “Letters from Afar . 
 Second Letter . 
 The New Government and the Proletariat” . 
 March 22 (9), 1917 ...................... 
 First page of the leaflet, “To Our Comrades in War-PrisonerCamps” . 
 1917 ................... 
. 
DECISION OF THE COLLEGIUM ABROAD, CENTRAL COMMITTEE, RUSSIAN SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC LABOUR PARTY ....... 
. 
 FAREWELL LETTER TO THE SWISS WORKERS ....... 
. 
 Notes ......................... 
 The Life and Work of V. 
 I. 
 Lenin . 
 Outstanding Dates .... 
 PREFACE Volume 23 contains works written by V. 
 I. 
 Lenin in Swit-zerland between August 1916 and March 1917. 
 Most of the articles are expressive of the struggle Lenin and the Bolsheviks waged against the imperialist war and the treasonous policy of the avowed social-chauvinist andCentrist leaders of the Second International parties. 
 In thiscategory belong “Imperialism and the Split in Socialism”,“Ten ‘Socialist’ Ministers!”, “Bourgeois Pacifism and So-cialist Pacifism”, “To the Workers Who Support the Struggle Against the War and Against the Socialists Who Have Sided with Their Governments”. 
 The volume includes Lenin’s famous article “The Military Programme of the Proletarian Revolution”, in which, usingthe data on imperialist capitalism contained in his Imperial-ism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism , he elaborates the new theoretical proposition on the impossibility of the simultaneous triumph of socialism in all countries and thepossibility of its triumph in one single capitalist country. 
 In this article, Lenin also substantiates the theory of justand unjust wars. 
 Articles defining the tasks of the revolutionary Social-Democrats in the imperialist war of 1914-18 hold an import-ant place in Lenin’s writings of this period. 
 These include“Tasks of the Left Zimmerwaldists in the Swiss Social-Democratic Party”, “Principles Involved in the War Issue”,“On the Defence of the Fatherland Issue” and “Defence ofNeutrality”. 
 In “The Nascent Trend of Imperialist Economism”, “Reply to P. 
 Kievsky (Y. 
 Pyatakov)”, “A Caricature of Marxismand Imperialist Economism”, Lenin criticises the attitude of the anti-Party Bukharin-Pyatakov group as being hostile to Marxism, and elaborates the Bolshevik programme on the national question in adaptation to the new conditions of history. 
 The volume also includes the “Lecture on the 1905 Revo-lution”, delivered at a gathering of young workers in Zurich. 
In it Lenin gives a profound interpretative generalisation ofthe first Russian revolution. 
 “Draft Theses, March 4 (17), 1917”, “Letters from Afar”, “The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Partyin the Russian Revolution”, “The Revolution in Russiaand the Tasks of the Workers of All Countries”, and severalother articles, written in the early days of the FebruaryRevolution, analyse the alignment of class forces and out-line the prospect for transition from bourgeois-democratic to socialist revolution. 
 Six items are here published for the first time as part of the Collected Works . 
 “Proposed Amendments to the Resolution on the War Issue” and “The Story of OneShort Period in the Life of One Socialist Party” discuss the fight waged by the Left forces within the Swiss Social-Democratic Party. 
 Statistics and Sociology brings out the part played by national movements in the internationallabour movement. 
 “Telegram to the Bolsheviks Leavingfor Russia” and “Letter to Volksrecht ” explain the Bolshevik tactics in the revolution. 
 “Decision of the Collegium Abroad, the Central Committee of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party” is directed against Menshevik attempts toprevent Lenin and the other Bolsheviks returning to Russia. 
 V. 
 I. 
 LENIN 1917 NASCEN T TREN D OF IMPERIALIS T ECONOMI SM1 The old Economism2 of 1894-1902 reasoned thus: the Narodniks3 have been refuted; capitalism has triumphed in Russia. 
 Consequently, there can be no question of political revolution. 
 The practical conclusion: either “economic struggle be left to the workers and political struggle to theliberals”—that is a curvet to the right—or, instead of polit-ical revolution, a general strike for socialist revolution. 
That curvet to the left was advocated in a pamphlet, nowforgotten, of a Russian Economist of the late nineties. 
 4 Now a new Economism is being born. 
 Its reasoning is similarly base on the two curvets: Right—we are againstthe “right to self-determination” i. 
e. 
, against the liberationof oppressed peoples, the struggle against annexations—that has not yet been fully thought out or clearly stated). 
“Left”—we are opposed to a minimum programme (i. 
e. 
, opposed to struggle for reforms and democracy) as “contradic-tory” to socialist revolution. 
 It is more than a year now since this nascent trend was revealed to several comrades at the Berne Conference inthe spring of 1915. 
 At that time, happily, only one comrade,who met with universal disapproval, insisted on these ideas of imperialist Economism right up to the end of the Confer-ence and formulated them in writing in special “theses”. 
No one associated himself with these theses. 
 5 Subsequently two others associated themselves with this comrade’s theses against self-determination (unaware thatthe question was inextricably linked with the general line of the afore-mentioned “theses”). 
 6 But the appearance of the “Dutch programme” in February 1916, published in No. 
 3 of the Bulletin of the International Socialist Committee ,7 immediately brought out this “misunderstanding” and again compelled the author of the original theses to restate his imperialist Economism, this time, too, as a whole, and not merely in application to one allegedly “partial” issue. 
 It is absolutely necessary again and again to warn the comrades concerned that they have landed themselves in a quagmire , that their “ideas” have nothing in common either with Marxism or revolutionary Social-Democracy . 
 We can no longer leave the matter “in the dark”: that would only encourage ideological confusion and direct it into the worst possible channel of equivocation, “private” conflicts, inces-sant “friction”, etc. 
 Our duty, on the contrary, is to insist,in the most emphatic and categorical manner, on the obli-gation thoroughly to think out and analyse questions raised for discussion. 
 In its theses on self-determination * (which appeared in German as a reprint from No. 
 2 of Vorbote8), the Sotsial-Demokrat9 editorial board purposely brought the matter into the press in an impersonal , but most detailed, form, emphasising in particular the link between self-determination and the general question of the struggle for reforms, for democracy, the impermissibility of ignoring the political aspect, etc. 
 In his comments on the editorial board’s theses,the author of the original theses (imperialist Economism)comes out in solidarity with the Dutch programme , thereby clearly demonstrating that self-determination is by no means a “partial” question, as exponents of the nascent trend main-tain, but a general and basic one. 
 The Dutch programme was laid before representatives of the Zimmerwald Left 10 on February 5-8, 1916, at the Berne meeting of the International Socialist Committee. 
11 Not a single member of the Zimmerwald Left, not even Radek , spoke in favour of the programme, for it combines, indis-criminately, such points as “expropriation of the banks”and “repeal of customs tariffs”, “abolition of the first Senatechamber”, etc. 
 The Zimmerwald Left unanimously, withpractically no comment, in fact merely with a shrug of theshoulders, dismissed the Dutch programme as patently and wholly unsuitable. 
 *See present edition, Vol. 
 22, pp. 
 143-56. 
— Ed. 
 However, the author of the original theses, written in the spring of 1915, was so fond of the programme that he declared: “Substantially, that is all I said, too [in the spring of 1915], * the Dutch have thought things out ”: “with them the economic aspect is expropriation of the banks and large-scale production [enterprises], the political aspect is a republic and so on. 
 Absolutely correct! ” The fact, however, is that the Dutch did not “think things out”, but produced an unthought out programme. 
 It is the sad fate of Russia that some among us grasp at preciselywhat is not thought out in the newest novelty.... 
 The author of the 1915 theses believes that the Sotsial-Demokrat editors lapsed into a contradiction when they “themselves” urged “expropriation of the banks”, and even added the word “immediately” (plus “dictatorial measures”) in §8 (“Concrete Measures”). 
 “And how I was reproached forthis very thing in Berne!” the author of the 1915 thesesexclaims indignantly, recalling the Berne debates in thespring of 1915. 
 He forgets or fails to see this “minor” point: in §8 the Sotsial-Demokrat editors clearly distinguish two eventuali-ties: I. 
 The socialist revolution has begun . 
 In that event, they say: “immediate expropriation of the banks”, etc. 
II. 
 The socialist revolution has not begun, and in that event we shall have to postpone talking about these good things. 
 Since the socialist revolution, in the above-mentioned sense, has obviously not yet begun, the Dutch programme is incongruous. 
 And the author of the theses adds his bit of“profundity ” by reverting (he always seems to slip on the same spot!) to his old mistake of turning political demands(like “abolition of the first chamber”?) into a “ political formula for social revolution ”. 
 Having marked time for a whole year, the author returned to his old mistake. 
 That is the “crux” of his misadven-tures: he cannot solve the problem of how to link the advent of imperialism with the struggle for reforms and democracy — just as the Economism of blessed memory could not link theadvent of capitalism with the struggle for democracy. 
 *Interpolations in square brackets (within passages quoted by Lenin) have been introduced by Lenin, unless otherwise indicated. 
— Ed. 
 Hence—complete confusion concerning the “unachieva-bility” of democratic demands under imperialism. 
 Hence—ignoring of the political struggle now, at pres-ent, immediately, and at all times, which is impermissible for a Marxist (and permissible only for a Rabochaya Mysl12 Economist). 
 Hence—the knack of persistently “sliding” from recog-nition of imperialism to apology for imperialism (just as the Economists of blessed memory slid from recognition ofcapitalism to apology for capitalism). 
 And so on, and so forth. 
A detailed examination of the errors the author of the 1915 theses commits in his comments on the Sotsial-Demokrat self-determination theses is impossible, for every line is wrong ! After all, you cannot write pamphlets or books in reply to “comments” if the initiators of imperialist Econo-mism spend a whole year marking time and stubbornlyrefuse to concern themselves with what ought to be their directparty duty if they want to take a serious attitude to polit-ical issues, namely: a considered and articulate statement of what they designate as “our differences”. 
 I am therefore obliged to confine myself to a brief review of how the author applies his basic error and how he “sup-plements” it. 
 He believes that I contradict myself: in 1914 (in Prosve-shcheniye 13) I wrote that it was absurd to look for self deter-mination “in the programmes of West-European socialists ”,* but in 1916 I proclaim self-determination to be especiallyurgent. 
 It did not occur (!!) to the author that these “programmes” were drawn up in 1875, 1880, 1891! 14 Now let us take his objections (to the Sotsial-Demokrat self-determination theses) point by point. 
 §1. 
 The same Economist refusal to see and pose political questions. 
 Since socialism creates the economic basis for the abolition of national oppression in the political sphere,therefore our author refuses to formulate our political tasks in this sphere! That’s ridiculous! *See present edition, Vol. 
 20, p. 
 406. 
— Ed. 
 Since the victorious proletariat does not negate wars against the bourgeoisie of other countries, therefore the author refuses to formulate our political tasks in relation to national oppression!! These are all examples of downrightviolation of Marxism and logic, or, if you like, manifesta-tions of the logic of the fundamental errors of imperialist Economism. 
 §2. 
 The opponents of self-determination are hopelessly confused in their references to its being “unachievable”. 
 The Sotsial-Demokrat editors explain to them two possible interpretations of unachievability and their error in both cases. 
 Yet the author of the 1915 theses, without even trying to give his interpretation of “unachievability”, i. 
e. 
, accept-ing our explanation that two different things are confused here, persists in that confusion !! He ties crises to “imperialist” “policy”: our expert on polit-ical economy has forgotten that there were crises before imperialism! To maintain that self-determination is unachievable economically is to confuse the issue, the editors explain. 
 The author does not reply, does not state that he considers self-determination unachievable economically ; he abandons his dubious position and jumps over to politics (unachiev-able “all the same”) though he has been told with theutmost clarity that politically a republic is just as “unachiev-able” under imperialism as self-determination. 
 Cornered, the author “jumps” again: he accepts a republic and the whole minimum programme only as a “politicalformula for social revolution”!!! He refuses to defend the “economic” unachievability of self-determination and jumps to politics, maintaining thatpolitical unachievability applies to the minimum programme as a whole. 
 Here, again there is not a grain of Marxism, not a grain of logic, save the logic of imperialist Economism. 
 The author wants imperceptibly (without stopping to think, without producing anything articulate, without mak-ing any effort to work out his programme) to jettison theSocial-Democratic Party minimum programme! No wonder he has been marking time for a whole year!! The question of combating Kautskyism is again not a partial, but a general and basic question of modern times: the author does not understand this struggle. 
 Just as the Economists turned the struggle against the Narodniks into an apology for capitalism, so the author turns the struggle against Kautskyism into an apology for imperialism (thatapplies also to §3). 
 The mistake of the Kautskyites lies in the fact that they present in a reformist manner such demands, and at such atime, that can be presented only in a revolutionary manner (but the author lapses into the position that their mistake is to advance these demands altogether, just as the Econo-mists “understood” the struggle against Narodism to meanthat the slogan “Down with the autocracy” was Narodism). 
 The mistake of the Kautskyism lies in projecting correct democratic demands into the past, to peaceful capitalism, and not into the future, to the social revolution (the author, however, falls into the position of regarding these demandsas incorrect). 
 §3. 
 See above. 
 The author bypasses also the question of “federation”. 
 The same old fundamental mistake of the sameold Economism: inability to pose political questions. 
 * §4. 
 “From self-determination follows defence of the fa-therland,” the author obstinately repeats. 
 His mistake hereis to make negation of defence of the fatherland a shibboleth , deduce it not from the concrete historical features of a given war, but apply it “in general”. 
 That is not Marxism. 
 The author has been told long ago—try to think up a formula of struggle against national oppression or inequality which (formula) does not justify “defence of the fatherland”. 
 You cannot devise such a formula, and the author has notchallenged that. 
 Does that mean that we reject the fight against national oppression if it could be interpreted to imply defence of the fatherland? No, for we are opposed not to “defence of the fatherland” “in general” (see our Party resolutions **), but to using *“We are not afraid of disintegration,” the author writes, “we do not defend national boundaries. 
” Now, just try to give that a precisepolitical formulation!! You simply cannot do it and that’s where the trouble lies; you are hampered by Economist blindness on questions of political democracy . 
 **See present edition, Vol. 
 21, pp. 
 159-60. 
— Ed. 
 this fraudulent slogan to embellish the present imperialist war. 
 The author wants to pose the question of “defence of the fatherland” in a basically incorrect and unhistorical way (but he cannot; he has been trying in vain for a whole year...). 
His reference to “dualism” shows that he does not under-stand the difference between monism and dualism. 
 If I “unite” a shoe brush and a mammal, will that be “monism”? If I say that to reach goal a we must (c) êa• (b) travel to the left from point (b) and to the right from point (c), will that be “dualism”? Is the position of the proletariat with regard to national oppression the same in oppressing and oppressed nations?No, it is not the same, not the same economically , political-ly, ideologically , spiritually , etc. 
 Meaning? Meaning that some will approach in one way, others in another way the same goal (the merger of nations) from differ-ent starting-points. 
 Denial of that is the “monism” that unites a shoe brush and a mammal. 
 “It is not proper to say this [i. 
e. 
, to urge self-determination] to the proletarians of an oppressed nation”—that is how the author “interprets” the editors’ theses. 
 That’s amusing!! There is nothing of the kind in the theses. 
 The author has either not read them to the end or has notgiven them any thought at all. 
 §5. 
 See above on Kautskyism. 
 §6. 
 The author is told there are three types of countries in the world. 
 He “objects” and snatches out “cases”. 
 That iscasuistry, not politics. 
 You want a concrete “case”: “How about Belgium”?See the Lenin and Zinoviev pamphlet 15: it says that we would be for the defence of Belgium (even by war ) if this concrete war were different. 
 * *See present edition, Vol. 
 21, pp. 
 305-06. 
— Ed. 
 You do not agree with that? Then say so!! You have not properly thought out the question of why Social-Democrats are against “defence of the fatherland”. 
 We are not against it for the reasons you believe, because your presentation of the question (vain efforts, not reallya presentation) goes against history. 
 That is my reply tothe author. 
 To describe as “sophistry” the fact that while justifying wars for the elimination of national oppression , we do not justify the present imperialist war, which on both sides is being waged to increase national oppression—is to use “strong” words without giving the matter the least bit of thought. 
 The author wants to pose the question of “defence of the fatherland” from a more “Left” position, but the result (fora whole year now) is utter confusion! §7. 
 The author criticises : “The question of ‘peace terms’ is not touched upon at all. 
” Strange criticism: failure to deal with a question we did not even raise!! But what is “touched upon” and discussed is the ques-tion of annexations , on which the imperialist Economists are utterly confused, this time together with the Dutch and Radek. 
 Either you reject the immediate slogan against old and new annexations —(no less “unachievable” under imperialism than self-determination, in Europe as well as in the colo-nies)—and in that case you pass from concealed to openapology for imperialism. 
 Or you accept the slogan (as Radek has done in the press)— and in that case you accept self-determination of nations under a different name!! §8. 
 The author proclaims “Bolshevism on a West-European scale” (“not your position,” he adds). 
 I attach no importance to this desire to cling to the word “Bolshevism”, for I know such “old Bolsheviks” from whom God save us. 
 I can only say that the author’s proclamation of “Bolshevism on a West-European scale” is, I am deeply convinced, neither Bolshevism nor Marxism, but a minorvariant of the same old Economism. 
 In my view it is highly intolerable, flippant and non-Party to proclaim for a whole year the new Bolshevism and leave things at that. 
 Is it not time to think matters out and give the comrades an articulate and integrated exposé of “Bolshevism on a West-European scale”? The author has not proved and will not prove the differ-ence between colonies and oppressed nations in Europe (asapplied to the question under discussion). 
 The Dutch and the P. 
S. 
D. 
 * rejection of self-determina-tion is not only , and even not so much, the result of confu-sion, for Gorter factually accepts it, and so does the Zimmer-wald statement of the Poles, 16 but rather the result of the special position of their nations (small nations with centuries-old traditions and pretentions to Great-Power status ). 
 It is extremely thoughtless and naïve to take over and mechanically and uncritically repeat what in others hasdeveloped over decades of struggle against the nationalistbourgeoisie and its deception of the people. 
 Here we have a case of people taking over precisely what should not be taken over. 
 Written August-September 1916 First published in the magazine Published according to Bolshevik No. 
 15, 1929 the manuscript Signed: N. 
 Lenin *Polish Social-Democratic Party. 
— Ed. 
 REPL Y TO P. 
 KIEVSK Y (Y. 
 PYATAKOV )17 Like every crisis in the life of individuals or in the history of nations, war oppresses and breaks some, steels and en-lightens others. 
 The truth of that is making itself felt in Social-Democratic thinking on the war and in connection with the war. 
 It isone thing to give serious thought to the causes and significanceof an imperialist war that grows out of highly developedcapitalism, Social-Democratic tactics in connection withsuch a war, the causes of the crisis within the Social-Demo-cratic movement, and so on. 
 But it is quite another to allow the war to oppress your thinking, to stop thinking and ana-lysing under the weight of the terrible impressions and tormenting consequences or features of the war. 
 One such form of oppression or repression of human think-ing caused by the war is the contemptuous attitude of im-perialist Economism towards democracy . 
 P. 
 Kievsky does not notice that running like a red thread through all hisarguments is this war-inspired oppression, this fear, thisrefusal to analyse. 
 What point is there in discussing defenceof the fatherland when we are in the midst of such a terribleholocaust? What point is there in discussing nations’ rightswhen outright strangulation is everywhere the rule? Self-determination and “independence” of nations—but look what they have done to “independent” Greece! What is theuse of talking and thinking of “rights”, when rights are every-where being trampled upon in the interests of the mili-tarists! What sense is there in talking and thinking of arepublic, when there is absolutely no difference whatsoever between the most democratic republics and the most reaction-ary monarchies, when the war has obliterated every traceof difference! Kievsky is very angry when told that he has given way to fear, to the extent of rejecting democracy in general. 
 He is angry and objects: I am not against democracy, only against one democratic demand, which I consider “bad”. 
 But though Kievsky is offended, and though he “ assures ” us (and himself as well, perhaps) that he is not at all “against”democracy, his arguments —or, more correctly, the endless errors in his arguments— prove the very opposite. 
 Defence of the fatherland is a lie in an imperialist war, but not in a democratic and revolutionary war. 
 All talk of“rights” seems absurd during a war, because every war replaces rights by direct and outright violence. 
 But that shouldnot lead us to forget that history has known in the past (andvery likely will know, must know, in the future) wars (demo-cratic and revolutionary wars) which, while replacing every kind of “right”, every kind of democracy, by violence duringthe war, nevertheless, in their social content and implica-tions, served the cause of democracy, and consequently social-ism. 
 The example of Greece, it would seem, “refutes” allnational self-determination. 
 But if you stop to think, ana-lyse and weigh matters, and do not allow yourself to be deaf-ened by the sound of words or frightened and oppressed bythe nightmarish impressions of the war, then this exampleis no more serious or convincing than ridiculing the republi-can system because the “democratic” republics, the mostdemocratic—not only France, but also the United States, Portugal and Switzerland—have already introduced or are introducing, in the course of this war, exactly thesame kind of militarist arbitrariness that exists in Russia. 
 That imperialist war obliterates the difference between republic and monarchy is a fact. 
 But to therefore rejectthe republic, or even be contemptuous towards it, is to allow oneself to be frightened by the war, and one’s thinking to be oppressed by its horrors. 
 That is the mentality of many supporters of the “disarmament” slogan (Roland-Holst, theyounger element in Switzerland, the Scandinavian “Lefts” 18 and others). 
 What, they imply, is the use of discussingrevolutionary utilisation of the army or a militia when there is no difference in this war between a republican militia and a monarchist standing army, and when militarism is every-where doing its horrible work? That is all one trend of thought, one and the same theoret-ical and practical political error Kievsky unwitting, makes at every step. 
 He thinks he is arguing only against self-deter-mination, he wants to argue only against self determination, but the result —against his will and conscience, and that is the curious thing!—is that he has adduced not a single argument which could not be just as well applied to democ-racy in general! The real source of all his curious logical errors and confu-sion—and this applies not only to self-determination, butalso to defence of the fatherland, divorce, “rights” in gen-eral—lies in the oppression of his thinking by the war, which makes him completely distort the Marxist position ondemocracy. 
 Imperialism is highly developed capitalism; imperialism is progressive; imperialism is the negation of democracy— “hence”, democracy is “unattainable” under capitalism. 
Imperialist war is a flagrant violation of all democracy,whether in backward monarchies or progressive republics—“hence”, there is no point in talking of “rights” (i. 
e. 
, democ-racy!) . 
 The “only” thing that can be “opposed” to imperialist war is socialism; socialism alone is “the way out”; “hence”,to advance democratic slogans in our minimum programme,i. 
e. 
, under capitalism, is a deception or an illusion,befuddlement or postponement, etc. 
, of the slogan of socialistrevolution. 
 Though Kievsky does not realise it, that is the real source of all his mishaps. 
 That is his basic logical error which, pre-cisely because it is basic and is not realised by the author,“explodes ” at every step like a punctured bicycle tire. 
 It “bursts out” now on the question of defending the fatherland,now on the question of divorce, now in the phrase about “rights”, in this remarkable phrase (remarkable for its utter contempt for “rights” and its utter failure to understand theissue): we shall discuss not rights, but the destruction of age-old slavery! To say that is to show a lack of understanding of the rela-tionship between capitalism and democracy, between social-ism and democracy. 
 Capitalism in general, and imperialism in particular, turn democracy into an illusion—though at the same time capi-talism engenders democratic aspirations in the masses, creates democratic institutions, aggravates the antagonism between imperialism’s denial of democracy and the mass striv-ing for democracy. 
 Capitalism and imperialism can be over-thrown only by economic revolution. 
 They cannot be over-thrown by democratic transformations, even the most “ideal”. 
But a proletariat not schooled in the struggle for democracyis incapable of performing an economic revolution. 
 Capital-ism cannot be vanquished without taking over the banks , without repealing private ownership of the means of produc-tion. 
 These revolutionary measures, however, cannot beimplemented without organising the entire people for demo-cratic administration of the means of production capturedfrom the bourgeoisie, without enlisting the entire mass of the working people, the proletarians, semi-proletarians and small peasants, for the democratic organisation of theirranks, their forces, their participation in state affairs. 
Imperialist war may be said to be a triple negation of democ-racy ( a. 
 every war replaces “rights” by violence; b. 
 imperi-alism as such is the negation of democracy; c. 
 imperialist war fully equates the republic with the monarchy), but the awakening and growth of socialist revolt against imperial-ism are indissolubly linked with the growth of democratic resistance and unrest. 
 Socialism leads to the withering awayof every state, consequently also of every democracy, but socialism can be implemented only through the dictator-ship of the proletariat, which combines violence against the bourgeoisie, i. 
e. 
, the minority of the population, with full development of democracy, i. 
e. 
, the genuinely equal andgenuinely universal participation of the entire mass of the population in all state affairs and in all the complex prob-lems of abolishing capitalism. 
 It is in these “contradictions” that Kievsky, having for-gotten the Marxist teaching on democracy, got himself con-fused. 
 Figuratively speaking, the war has so oppressed histhinking that he uses the agitational slogan “break out ofimperialism” to replace all thinking, just as the cry “get outof the colonies” is used to replace analysis of what, properly speaking, is the meaning —economically and politically—of the civilised nations “getting out of thecolonies”. 
 The Marxist solution of the problem of democracy is for the proletariat to utilise all democratic institutions and aspirations in its class struggle against the bourgeoisie in order to prepare for its overthrow and assure its own victory. 
Such utilisation is no easy task. 
 To the Economists, Tolstoy-ans, etc. 
, it often seems an unpardonable concession to“bourgeois” and opportunist views, just as to Kievskydefence of national self-determination “in the epoch of finance capital” seems an unpardonable concession to bourgeois views. 
 Marxism teaches us that to “fight opportunism” byrenouncing utilisation of the democratic institutions createdand distorted by the bourgeoisie of the given , capitalist, society is to completely surrender to opportunism! The slogan of civil war for socialism indicates the quick[ ]est way out of the imperialist war and links our struggle against the war with our struggle against opportunism. 
 It is the onlyslogan that correctly takes into account both war-time pecu-liarities—the war is dragging out and threatening to growinto a whole “epoch” of war—and the general character ofour activities as distinct from opportunism with its paci-fism, legalism and adaptation to one’s “own” bourgeoisie. 
 In addition, civil war against the bourgeoisie is a democrat-ically organised and democratically conducted war of the propertyless mass against the propertied minority. 
 But civilwar, like every other, must inevitably replace rights by vio-lence. 
 However, violence in the name of the interests and rights of the majority is of a different nature: it tramples on the “rights” of the exploiters, the bourgeoisie, it is unachiev-able without democratic organisation of the army and the “rear”. 
 Civil war forcibly expropriates, immediately andfirst of all, the banks, factories, railways, the big estates,etc. 
 But in order to expropriate all this, we shall have to introduce election of all officials and officers by the people, completely merge the army conducting the war against the bourgeoisie with the mass of the population, completelydemocratise administration of the food supply, the produc-tion and distribution of food, etc. 
 The object of civil waris to seize the banks, factories, etc. 
, destroy all possibility of resistance by the bourgeoisie, destroy its armed forces. 
 But that aim cannot be achieved either in its purely mili-tary, or economic, or political aspects, unless we, during the war, simultaneously introduce and extend democracy among our armed forces and in our “rear”. 
 We tell the masses now (and they instinctively feel that we are right): “They are deceiving you in making you fight for imperialist capitalismin a war disguised by the great slogans of democracy. 
 Youmust, you shall wage a genuinely democratic war against the bourgeoisie for the achievement of genuine democracyand socialism. 
” The present war unites and “merges” nations into coalitions by means of violence and financial dependence. 
 In our civil war against the bourgeoisie, we shall unite and merge the nations not by the force of the ruble, not by the force of the truncheon, not by violence, but by voluntary agreement and solidarity of the working people against theexploiters. 
 For the bourgeoisie the proclamation of equal rights for all nations has become a deception. 
 For us it will be the truth that will facilitate and accelerate the winningover of all nations. 
 Without effectively organised democratic relations between nations—and, consequently, withoutfreedom of secession—civil war of the workers and workingpeople generally of all nations against the bourgeoisie is impossible. 
 Through utilisation of bourgeois democracy to socialist and consistently democratic organisation of the proletariatagainst the bourgeoisie and against opportunism. 
 There is noother path. 
 There is no other way out. 
 Marxism, just as life itself, knows no other way out. 
 In this path we must include free secession and free merging of nations, we must not fight shy of them, not fear that they will “defile” the “purity” ofour economic aims. 
 Written August-September 1916 First published in the magazine Published according to Proletarskaya Revolutsia the manuscript No. 
 7 (90), 1929 A CARICATUR E OF ISM AND IMPERIALIS T ECONOMIS M19 “No one can discredit revolutionary Social-Democracy as long as it does not discredit itself. 
” That maxim always comes to mind, and must always be borne in mind, when any major theoretical or tactical proposition of Marxismis victorious, or even placed on the order of the day, andwhen, besides outright and resolute opponents, it is assailed by friends who hopelessly discredit and disparage it andturn it into a caricature. 
 That has happened time and again in the history of the Russian Social-Democratic movement. 
 In the early nineties, the victory of Marxism in the revo-lutionary movement was attended by the emergence of acaricature of Marxism in the shape of Economism, or “strike-ism”. 
 The Iskrists 20 would not have been able to uphold the fundamentals of proletarian theory and policy, either against petty-bourgeois Narodism or bourgeois liberalism, without long years of struggle against Economism. 
 It was the samewith Bolshevism, which triumphed in the mass labourmovement in 1905 due, among other things, to correct applica-tion of the boycott of the tsarist Duma 21 slogan in the au-tumn of 1905, when the key battles of the Russian revolution were being fought. 
 Bolshevism had to face—and overcome by struggle—another caricature in 1908-10, when Alexin-sky and others noisily opposed participation in the ThirdDuma. 
 22 It is the same today too. 
 Recognition of the present war as imperialist and emphasis on its close connection with the imperialist era of capitalism encounters not only reso-lute opponents, but also irresolute friends, for whom theword “imperialism” has become all the rage. 
 Having memorised the word, they are offering the workers hopelessly confused theories and reviving many of the old mistakes of the old Economism. 
 Capitalism has triumphed— therefore there is no need to bother with political problems, the old Economistsreasoned in 1894-1901, falling into rejection of the politicalstruggle in Russia. 
 Imperialism has triumphed— therefore there is no need to bother with the problems of politicaldemocracy, reason the present-day imperialist Economists. 
 Kievsky’s article, printed above, merits attention as a sam-ple of these sentiments, as one such caricature of Marxism,as the first attempt to provide anything like an integralliterary exposition of the vacillation that has beenapparent in certain circles of our Party abroad since early1915. 
 If imperialist Economism were to spread among the Marx-ists, who in the present great crisis of socialism have reso-lutely come out against social-chauvinism and for revolu-tionary internationalism, that would be a very grave blowto our trend—and to our Party. 
 For it would discredit itfrom within, from its own ranks, would make it a vehicle of caricaturised Marxism. 
 It is therefore necessary to thoroughly discuss at least the most important of Kievsky’s numerouserrors, regardless of how “uninteresting” this may be, andregardless of the fact, also, that all too often we shall haveto tediously explain elementary truths which the thoughtfuland attentive reader has learned and understood long since from our literature of 1914 and 1915. 
 We shall begin with the “central” point of Kievsky’s disquisitions in order to immediately bring to the readerthe very “substance” of this new trend of imperialistEconomism. 
 1. 
 THE IST ATTITUDE TOWARDS WAR AND “DEFENSE OF THE FATHERLAND” Kievsky is convinced, and wants to convince his reader, that he “disagrees” only with §9 of our Party Programme dealing with national self-determination. 
 He is very angry and tries to refute the charge that on the question of democ-racy he is departing from the fundamentals of Marxism in general , that he has “betrayed” (the angry quotation marks are Kievsky’s) Marxism on basic issues. 
 But the point is that the moment our author begins to discuss his allegedly partial disagreement on an individual issue, the momenthe adduces his arguments, considerations, etc. 
, he immedi-ately reveals that he is deviating from Marxism all along theline. 
 Take §b (Section 2) of his article. 
 “This demand [i. 
e. 
,national self-determination] directly [!!] leads to social-patriotism,” our author proclaims, explaining that the “treasonous” slogan of fatherland defence follows “quite [!]logically [!] from the right of nations to self-determination” .... 
 In his opinion, self-determination implies “sanctioning thetreason of the French and Belgian social-patriots, who aredefending this independence [the national independence of France and Belgium] with arms in hand! They are doing what the supporters of ‘self-determination’ only advocate .... 
” “Defence of the fatherland belongs to the arsenal of our worstenemies .... 
” “We categorically refuse to understand how one can simultaneously be against defence of the fatherland and for self-determination, against the fatherland and for it. 
” That’s Kievsky. 
 He obviously has not understood our resolutions against the fatherland defence slogan in the pres-ent war. 
 It is therefore necessary again to explain themeaning of what is so clearly set out in our resolutions. 
 The resolution our Party adopted at its Berne Conference in March 1915, “On the Defence of the Fatherland Slogan”, * begins with the words: “ The present war is , in substance ”.... 
 That the resolution deals with the present war could not have been put more plainly. 
 The words “in substance”indicate that we must distinguish between the apparent andthe real, between appearance and substance, between theword and the deed. 
 The purpose of all talk about defence of the fatherland in this war is mendaciously to present as national the imperialist war of 1914-16, waged for thedivision of colonies, the plunder of foreign lands, etc. 
 And toobviate even the slightest possibility of distorting our views,we added to the resolution a special paragraph on “ genuinely national wars”, which “took place especially (especially does not mean exclusively!) between 1789 and 1871”. 
 *See present edition, Vol. 
 21, pp. 
 158-64— Ed. 
 The resolution explains that the “basis” of these “genuinely” national wars was a “long process of mass national move-ments, of a struggle against absolutism and feudalism, the overthrow of national oppression”.... 
 Clear, it would seem. 
 The present imperialist war stems from the general conditions of the imperialist era and isnot accidental, not an exception, not a deviation from thegeneral and typical. 
 Talk of defence of the fatherland is therefore a deception of the people, for this war is not a national war. 
 In a genuinely national war the words “defence of the fatherland” are not a deception and we are not opposed to it . 
 Such (genuinely national) wars took place “especially” in 1789-1871, and our resolution, while not denying by asingle word that they are possible now too, explains how we should distinguish a genuinely national from an imperialist war covered by deceptive national slogans. 
Specifically, in order to distinguish the two we must examinewhether the “basis” of the war is a “long process of mass na-tional movements”, the “overthrow of national oppression”. 
The resolution on “pacifism” expressly states: “Social-Demo-crats cannot overlook the positive significance of revolution-ary wars, i. 
e. 
, not imperialist wars, but such as were con-ducted, for instance [note: “for instance”], between 1789and 1871 with the aim of doing away with national oppres-sion .... 
” Could our 1915 P arty resolution speak of the nation-al wars waged from 1789 to 1871 and say that we do not deny the positive significance of such wars if they were not consi-dered possible today too? Certainly not. 
 A commentary, or popular explanation, of our Party re-solutions is given in the Lenin and Zinoviev pamphlet Socia-lism and War . 
 It plainly states, on page 5, that “socialists have regarded wars ‘for the defence of the fatherland’, or ‘defensive’ wars, as legitimate, progressive and just” only in the sense of “overthrowing alien oppression”. 
 It cites anexample: Persia against Russia, “ etc. 
”, and says: “These would be just, and defensive wars, irrespective of who wouldbe the first to attack; any socialist would wish the oppressed,dependent and unequal states victory over the oppressor, slave-holding and predatory ‘Great’ Powers. 
” * *See present edition, Vol. 
 21, pp. 
 300-01. 
— Ed. 
 The pamphlet appeared in August 1915 and there are German and French translations. 
 Kievsky is fully aware of its contents. 
 And never, on no occasion, has he or anyone else challenged the resolution on the defence of the father-land slogan, or the resolution on pacifism, or their interpre-tation in the pamphlet. 
 Never, not once! We are thereforeentitled to ask: are we slandering Kievsky when we say thathe has absolutely failed to understand Marxism if, beginning with March 1915, he has not challenged our Party’s views on the war, whereas now, in August 1916, in an article onself-determination, i. 
e. 
, on a supposedly partial issue, hereveals an amazing lack of understanding of a general issue? Kievsky says that the fatherland defence slogan is “trea-sonous”. 
 We can confidently assure him that every slogan is and always will be “treasonous” for those who mechanically repeat it without understanding its meaning, without givingit proper thought, for those who merely memorise the words without analysing their implications. 
 What, generally speaking, is “defence of the fatherland”? Is it a scientific concept relating to economics, politics, etc. 
? No. 
 It is a much bandied about current expression, sometimes simply a philistine phrase, intended to justify the war . 
 Noth-ing more. 
 Absolutely nothing! The term “treasonous” canapply only in the sense that the philistine is capable of justi-fying any war by pleading “we are defending our fatherland”, whereas Marxism, which does not degrade itself by stooping to the philistine’s level, requires an historical analysis of each war in order to determine whether or not that particu-lar war can be considered progressive, whether it serves the interests of democracy and the proletariat and, in that sense , is legitimate, just, etc. 
 The defence of the fatherland slogan is all too often uncon-scious philistine justification of war and reveals inability to analyse the meaning and implications of a particularwar and see it in historical perspective. 
 Marxism makes that analysis and says: if the “substance” of a war is, for example , the overthrow of alien oppression (which was especially typical of Europe in 1789-1871), then such a war is progressive as far as the oppressed state or nation is concerned. 
 If, however, the “substance” of a war is redivision of colonies, division of booty, plunder of foreign lands (and such is the war of 1914-16), then all talk of defend-ing the fatherland is “sheer deception of the people”. 
 How, then, can we disclose and define the “substance” of a war? War is the continuation of policy. 
 Consequently,we must examine the policy pursued prior to the war, thepolicy that led to and brought about the war. 
 If it was animperialist policy, i. 
e. 
, one designed to safeguard the inter-ests of finance capital and rob and oppress colonies and foreign countries, then the war stemming from that policy is imperialist. 
 If it was a national liberation policy, i. 
e. 
,one expressive of the mass movement against nationaloppression, then the war stemming from that policy is a warof national liberation. 
 The philistine does not realise that war is “the continua-tion of policy”, and consequently limits himself to the for-mula that “the enemy has attacked us”, “the enemy hasinvaded my country”, without stopping to think what issues are at stake in the war, which classes are waging it, and with what political objects. 
 Kievsky stoops right down to the level of such a philistine when he declares that Belgium has been occupied by the Germans, and hence, from the point of view of self-determination, the “Belgian social-patriotsare right”, or: the Germans have occupied part of France,hence, “Guesde can be satisfied”, for “what is involved isterritory populated by his nation” (and not by an aliennation). 
 For the philistine the important thing is where the armies stand, who is winning at the moment . 
 For the Marxist the important thing is what issues are at stake in this war, during which first one, then the other army may be on top. 
 What is the present war being fought over? The answer is given in our resolution (based on the policy the belliger-ent powers pursued for decades prior to the war). 
 England, France and Russia are fighting to keep the colonies they haveseized, to be able to rob Turkey, etc. 
 Germany is fightingto take over these colonies and to be able herself to robTurkey, etc. 
 Let us suppose even that the Germans takeParis or St. 
 Petersburg. 
 Would that change the nature of the present war? Not at all. 
 The Germans’ purpose—and more important, the policy that would bring it to realisa-tion if they were to win—is to seize the colonies, establish domination over Turkey, annex areas populated by other nations, for instance, Poland, etc. 
 It is definitely not to bring the French or the Russians under foreign domination. 
 The real nature of the present war is not national but imperial-ist. 
 In other words, it is not being fought to enable one sideto overthrow national oppression, which the other side istrying to maintain. 
 It is a war between two groups of oppres-sors, between two freebooters over the division of their booty, over who shall rob Turkey and the colonies. 
 In short: a war between imperialist Great Powers (i. 
e. 
, powers that oppress a whole number of nations and enmeshthem in dependence on finance capital, etc. 
), or in alliance with the Great Powers, is an imperialist war. 
 Such is the warof 1914-16. 
 And in this war “defence of the fatherland” is a deception, an attempt to justify the war. 
 A war against imperialist, i. 
e. 
, oppressing, powers by op-pressed (for example, colonial) nations is a genuine nationalwar. 
 It is possible today too. 
 “Defence of the fatherland” ina war waged by an oppressed nation against a foreignoppressor is not a deception. 
 Socialists are not opposed to “defence of the fatherland” in such a war. 
 National self-determination is the same as the struggle for complete national liberation, for complete independence,against annexation, and socialists cannot —without ceasing to be socialists—reject such a struggle in whatever form, right down to an uprising or war. 
 Kievsky thinks he is arguing against Plekhanov: it was Plekhanov who pointed to the link between self-determina-tion and defence of the fatherland! Kievsky believed Plekha-nov that the link was really of the kind Plekhanov made it out to be. 
 And having believed him, Kievsky tookfright and decided that he must reject self-determination so as not to fall into Plekhanov’s conclusions .... 
 There is great trust in Plekhanov, and great fright, but there isno trace of thought about the substance of Plekhanov’s mistake! The social-chauvinists plead self-determination in order to present this war as a national war. 
 There is only one cor-rect way of combating them: we must show that the war is being fought not to liberate nations, but to determine whichof the great robbers will oppress more nations. 
 To fall into negation of wars really waged for liberating nations is to present the worst possible caricature of Marxism. 
 Plekhanov and the French social-chauvinists harp on the republic in France in order to justify its “defence” against the Germanmonarchy. 
 If we were to follow Kievsky’s line of reasoning,we would have to oppose either the republic or a war really fought to preserve the republic!! The German social-chau-vinists point to universal suffrage and compulsory primary education in their country to justify its “defence” against tsarism. 
 If we were to follow Kievsky’s line of reasoning,we would have to oppose either universal suffrage and com-pulsory primary education or a war really fought to safe-guard political freedom against attempts to abolish it! Up to the 1914-16 war Karl Kautsky was a Marxist, and many of his major writings and statements will always remain models of Marxism. 
 On August 26, 1910, he wrote inDie Neue Zeit , 23 in reference to the imminent war: “In a war between Germany and England the issue is not democracy, but world domination, i. 
e. 
, exploitationof the world. 
 That is not an issue on which Social-Democrats can side with the exploiters of their nation” ( Neue Zeit , 28. 
 Jahrg. 
, Bd. 
 2, S. 
 776). 
 There you have an excellent Marxist formulation, one that fully coincides with our own and fully exposes the present-day Kautsky, who has turned from Marxism to defence of social-chauvinism. 
 It is a formulation (we shall have occasion to revert to it in other articles) that clearly brings out the principles underlying the Marxist attitude towards war. 
War is the continuation of policy. 
 Hence, once there is astruggle for democracy, a war for democracy is possible . 
 National self-determination is but one of the democraticdemands and does not, in principle, differ from other demo-cratic demands. 
 “World domination” is, to put it briefly, the substance of imperialist policy, of which imperialistwar is the continuation. 
 Rejection of “defence of the father-land” in a democratic war, i. 
e. 
, rejecting participation in such a war, is an absurdity that has nothing in common withMarxism. 
 To embellish imperialist war by applying to it the concept of “defence of the fatherland”, i. 
e. 
, by presenting it as a democratic war, is to deceive the workers and sidewith the reactionary bourgeoisie. 
 2. 
 “OUR UNDERSTANDING OF THE NEW ERA” The heading is Kievsky’s. 
 He constantly speaks of a “new era”, but here, too, unfortunately his arguments are erro-neous. 
 Our Party resolutions speak of the present war as stemming from the general conditions of the imperialist era. 
 We givea correct Marxist definition of the relation between the “era” and the “present war”: Marxism requires a concrete assess-ment of each separate war. 
 To understand why an imperial-ist war, i. 
e. 
, a war thoroughly reactionary and anti-democra-tic in its political implications, could, and inevitably did,break out between the Great Powers, many of whom stoodat the head of the struggle for democracy in 1789-1871—to understand this we must understand the general conditions of the imperialist era, i. 
e. 
, the transformation of capitalismin the advanced countries into imperialism. 
 Kievsky has flagrantly distorted the relation between the “era” and the “present war”. 
 In his reasoning, to consider thematter concretely means to examine the “era”. 
 That is pre-cisely where he is wrong. 
 The era 1789-1871 was of special significance for Europe. 
 That is irrefutable. 
 We cannot understand a single nationalliberation war, and such wars were especially typical ofthat period, unless we understand the general conditions ofthe period. 
 Does that mean that all wars of that period were national liberation wars? Certainly not. 
 To hold that view is to reduce the whole thing to an absurdity and apply a ri-diculous stereotype in place of a concrete analysis of eachseparate war. 
 There were also colonial wars in 1789-1871,and wars between reactionary empires that oppressed manynations. 
 Advanced European (and American) capitalism has entered a new era of imperialism. 
 Does it follow fromthat that only imperialist wars are now possible? Any suchcontention would be absurd. 
 It would reveal inability todistinguish a given concrete phenomenon from the sum totalof variegated phenomena possible in a given era. 
 An era is called an era precisely because it encompasses the sum total of variegated phenomena and wars, typical and untypical,big and small, some peculiar to advanced countries, others to backward countries. 
 To brush aside these concrete ques-tions by resorting to general phrases about the “era”, as Kievsky does, is to abuse the very concept “era”. 
 And to prove that, we shall cite one example out of many. 
 Butfirst it should be noted that one group of Lefts, namely, the German Internationale group, 24 has advanced this mani-festly erroneous proposition in §5 of its theses, publishedin No. 
 3 of the Bulletin of the Berne Executive Committee (February 29, 1916): “National wars are no longer possible in the era of this unbridled imperialism. 
” We analysedthat statement * in Sbornik Sotsial-Demokrata . 
25 Here we need merely note that though everyone who has followed theinternationalist movement is long acquainted with thistheoretical proposition (we opposed it way back in the spring of 1916 at the extended meeting of the Berne Executive Committee), not a single group has repeated or accepted it. 
 And there is not a single word in the spirit of this or anysimilar proposition in Kievsky’s article, written inAugust 1916. 
 That should be noted, and for the following reason: if this or a similar theoretical proposition were advanced, then we could speak of theoretical divergencies. 
 But since no such proposition has been advanced, we are constrained tosay: what we have is not a different interpretation of theconcept “era”, not a theoretical divergency, but merelya carelessly uttered phrase, merely abuse of the word “era”. 
 Here is an example. 
 Kievsky starts his article by asking: “Is not this (self-determination) the same as the right toreceive free of charge 10,000 acres of land on Mars? The ques-tion can be answered only in the most concrete manner, onlyin context with the nature of the present era. 
 The right ofnations to self-determination is one thing in the era of the formation of national states, as the best form of developing the productive forces at their then existing level, but it isquite another thing now that this form, the national state,fetters the development of the productive forces. 
 A vast dis-tance separates the era of the establishment of capitalismand the national state from the era of the collapse of the national state and the eve of the collapse of capitalism itself. 
 *See present edition, Vol. 
 22, pp. 
 308-13. 
— Ed. 
 To discuss things in ‘general’, out of context with time and space, does not befit a Marxist. 
” There you have a sample of caricaturing the concept “imperialist era”. 
 And its caricature must be fought preciselybecause it is a new and important concept! What do we meanwhen we say that national states have become fetters, etc. 
?We have in mind the advanced capitalist countries, aboveall Germany, France, England, whose participation in the present war has been the chief factor in making it an impe-rialist war. 
 In these countries, which hitherto have been in the van of mankind, particularly in 1789-1871, the processof forming national states has been consummated. 
 In these countries the national movement is a thing of an irrevocablepast, and it would be an absurd reactionary utopia to try to revive it. 
 The national movement of the French, English, Germans has long been completed. 
 In these countries histo-ry’s next step is a different one: liberated nations have becometransformed into oppressor nations, into nations of imperial-ist rapine, nations that are going through the “eve of thecollapse of capitalism”. 
 But what of other nations? Kievsky repeats, like a rule learned by rote, that Marxists should approach things “concretely”, but he does not apply that rule. 
 In our theses, on the other hand, we deliberatelygave an example of a concrete approach, and Kievsky didnot wish to point out our mistake, if he found one. 
 Our theses (§6) state that to be concrete not less than three different types of countries must be distinguished when deal-ing with self-determination. 
 (It was clearly impossible todiscuss each separate country in general theses. 
) First type:the advanced countries of Western Europe (and America),where the national movement is a thing of the past . 
 Second type: Eastern Europe, where it is a thing of the present . 
 Third type: semi-colonies and colonies, where it is largelya thing of the future . 
 * Is this correct or not? This is what Kievsky should have levelled his criticism at. 
 But he does not see the essence of the theoretical problems! He fails to see that unless he refutes the above-mentioned proposition (in §6) of our *See present edition, Vol. 
 22, pp. 
 150-52 . 
— Ed. 
 theses—and it cannot be refuted because it is correct his disquisitions about the “era” resemble a man brandishing his sword but striking no blows. 
 “In contrast to V. 
 Ilyin’s opinion,” he writes at the end of his article, “we assume that for the majority [!] of Western[!] countries the national problem has not been settled.... 
” And so, the national movements of the French, Spaniards, English, Dutch, Germans and Italians were not consummated in the seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, and earlier? At the beginning of the article the concept “eraof imperialism” is distorted to make it appear that the nation-al movement has been consummated in general, and notonly in the advanced Western countries. 
 At the end of thesame article the “national problem” is declared “not settled” in precisely the Western countries!! Is that not a muddle? In the Western countries the national movement is a thing of the distant past. 
 In England, France, Germany,etc. 
, the “fatherland” is a dead letter, it has played its his-torical role, i. 
e. 
, the national movement cannot yield here anything progressive, anything that will elevate new masses to a new economic and political life. 
 History’s next step here is not transition from feudalism or from patriarchal savageryto national progress, to a cultured and politically freefatherland, but transition from a “fatherland” that has out-lived its day, that is capitalistically overripe, to socialism. 
 The position is different in Eastern Europe. 
 As far as the Ukrainians and Byelorussians, for instance, are concerned, only a Martian dreamer could deny that the national move-ment has not yet been consummated there, that the awak-ening of the masses to the full use of their mother tongueand literature (and this is an absolute condition and conco-mitant of the full development of capitalism, of the full penetration of exchange to the very last peasant family) is still going on there. 
 The “fatherland” is historically not yet quite a dead letter there. 
 There the “defence of the fatherland” can still be defence of democracy, of one’s native language, of political liberty against oppressor nations,against medievalism, whereas the English, French, Germans and Italians lie when they speak of defending their father-land in the present war, because actually what they are de-fending is not their native language, not their right to nation-al development, but their rights as slave-holders, their colonies, the foreign “spheres of influence” of their finance capital, etc. 
 In the semi-colonies and colonies the national movement is, historically, still younger than in Eastern Europe. 
 What do the words “advanced countries” and imperialist era refer to? In what lies the “special” position of Russia (head-ing of §e in the second chapter of Kievsky’s article), and not only Russia? Where is the national liberation movement a false phrase and where is it a living and progressive reality? Kievsky reveals no understanding on any of these points. 
 3. 
 WHAT IS ECONOMIC ANALYSIS? Central to all the disquisitions of the self-determination opponents is the claim that it is generally “unachievable”under capitalism or imperialism. 
 The word “unachievable”is frequently used in widely different and inaccuratelydefined meanings. 
 That is why in our theses we insisted on what is essential in any theoretical discussion: an expla-nation of what is meant by “unachievable”. 
 Nor did we confineourselves to that. 
 We tried to give such an explanation. 
 All democratic demands are “unachievable” under imperialismin the sense that politically they are hard to achieve ortotally unachievable without a series of revolutions. 
 It is fundamentally wrong, however, to maintain that self-determination is unachievable in the economic sense. 
 That has been our contention. 
 It is the pivotal point of our theoretical differences, a question to which our opponentsin any serious discussion should have paid due attention. 
 But just see how Kievsky treats the question. 
 He definitely rejects unachievable as meaning “hard to achieve” politically. 
 He gives a direct answer in the senseof economic unachievability. 
 “Does this mean,” Kievsky writes, “that self-determination under imperialism is just as unachievable as labour moneyunder commodity production?” And he replies: “Yes, it means exactly that. 
 For what we are discussing is the logical contradiction between two social categories: ‘imperialism’and ‘self-determination of nations’, the same logical contra-diction as that between two other categories: labour money and commodity production. 
 Imperialism is the negation of self-determination, and no magician can reconcile the two. 
” Frightening as is the angry word “magician” Kievsky hurls at us, we must nevertheless point out that he simply failsto understand what economic analysis implies. 
 There shouldbe no “logical contradiction”—providing, of course, thatthere is proper logical thinking— either in an economic or political analysis. 
 Hence, to plead a “logical contradiction” in general when what we are discussing is economic and not political analysis, is completely irrelevant. 
 Both economic and political phenomena come within “social categories”. 
Consequently, having first replied directly and definitely:“Yes, it means exactly that” (i. 
e. 
, self-determination is just as unachievable as labour money under commodity pro-duction), Kievsky dismisses the whole matter by beatingabout the bush, without offering any economic analysis. 
 How do we prove that labour money is unachievable under commodity production? By economic analysis. 
 And economicanalysis, like every other, rules out “logical contradictions”, takes economic and only economic categories (and not “social categories” in general) and from them concludes thatlabour money is unachievable. 
 In the first chapter of Capital there is no mention whatever of politics, or political forms,or “social categories”: the analysis applies only to economic phenomena, commodity exchange, its development. 
 Economic analysis shows—needless to say, through “logical” argu-ments—that under commodity production labour money isunachievable. 
 Kievsky does not even attempt anything approximating an economic analysis! He confuses the economic substance of imperialism with its political tendencies, as is obvious from the very first phrase of the very first paragraph of his article. 
 Here is that phrase: “Industrial capital is the synthesis of pre-capitalist pro-duction and merchant-usurer capital. 
 Usurer capitalbecomes the servant of industrial capital. 
 Then capitalismsubjects the various forms of capital and there emerges its highest, unified type—finance capital. 
 The whole era can therefore be designated as the era of finance capital, of whichimperialism is the corresponding foreign-policy system. 
” Economically, that definition is absolutely worthless: instead of precise economic categories we get mere phrases. 
 However, it is impossible to dwell on that now. 
 The impor-tant thing is that Kievsky proclaims imperialism to be a“foreign-policy system”. 
 First, this is, essentially, a wrong repetition of Kautsky’s wrong idea. 
 Second, it is a purely political, and only political, defini-tion of imperialism. 
 By defining imperialism as a “system of policy” Kievsky wants to avoid the economic analysis he promised to give when he declared that self-determinationwas “ just as ” unachievable, i. 
e. 
, economically unachievable under imperialism as labour money under commodity pro-duction! * In his controversy with the Lefts, Kautsky declared that imperialism was “merely a system of foreign policy ” (namely, annexation), and that it would be wrong to describe as impe-rialism a definite economic stage, or level, in the develop-ment of capitalism. 
 Kautsky is wrong. 
 Of course, it is not proper to argue about words. 
 You cannot prohibit the use of the “word” imperialism in this sense or any other. 
 But if you wantto conduct a discussion you must define your termsprecisely. 
 Economically, imperialism (or the “era” of finance capi-tal—it is not a matter of words) is the highest stage in the development of capitalism, one in which production has assumed such big, immense proportions that free competition gives way to monopoly . 
 That is the economic essence of impe-rialism. 
 Monopoly manifests itself in trusts, syndicates, etc. 
,in the omnipotence of the giant banks, in the buying up ofraw material sources, etc. 
, in the concentration of banking capital, etc. 
 Everything hinges on economic monopoly. 
 *Is Kievsky aware of the impolite word Marx used in reference to such “logical methods”? Without applying this impolite term to Ki-evsky, we nevertheless are obliged to remark that Marx described suchmethods as “fraudulent”: arbitrarily inserting precisely what is atissue, precisely what has to be proved, in defining a concept. 
 We repeat, we do not apply Marx’s impolite expression to Kievsky. 
 We merely disclose the source of his mistake. 
 (In the manuscript this passage is crossed out. 
— Ed. 
) The political superstructure of this new economy, of monop-oly capitalism (imperialism is monopoly capitalism), is the change from democracy to political reaction. 
 Democracy corresponds to free competition. 
 Political reaction corres-ponds to monopoly. 
 “Finance capital strives for domination,not freedom,” Rudolf Hilferding rightly remarks in hisFinance Capital. 
 It is fundamentally wrong, un-Marxist and unscientific, to single out “foreign policy” from policy in general, let alone counterpose foreign policy to home policy. 
 Both inforeign and home policy imperialism strives towards viola-tions of democracy, towards reaction. 
 In this sense imperial-ism is indisputably the “negation” of democracy in general , of all democracy , and not just of one of its demands, national self-determination. 
 Being a “negation” of democracy in general, imperialism is also a “negation” of democracy in the national question (i. 
e. 
, national self-determination): it seeks to violate democ-racy. 
 The achievement of democracy is, in the same sense,and to the same degree, harder under imperialism (compared with pre-monopoly capitalism), as the achievement of a republic, a militia, popular election of officials, etc. 
 There canbe no talk of democracy being “economically” unachievable. 
 Kievsky was probably led astray here by the fact (besides his general lack of understanding of the requirements ofeconomic analysis) that the philistine regards annexation (i. 
e. 
, acquisition of foreign territories against the will of their people, i. 
e. 
, violation of self-determination) as equivalentto the “spread” (expansion) of finance capital to a largereconomic territory. 
 But theoretical problems should not be approached from philistine conceptions. 
 Economically, imperialism is monopoly capitalism. 
 To acquire full monopoly, all competition must be eliminated,and not only on the home market (of the given state), butalso on foreign markets, in the whole world. 
 Is it economical-ly possible, “in the era of finance capital”, to eliminate competition even in a foreign state? Certainly it is. 
 It is done through a rival’s financial dependence and acquisition of his sources of raw materials and eventually of all hisenterprises. 
 The American trusts are the supreme expression of the economics of imperialism or monopoly capitalism. 
 They do not confine themselves to economic means of eliminating rivals, but constantly resort to political, even criminal,methods. 
 It would be the greatest mistake, however, tobelieve that the trusts cannot establish their monopoly bypurely economic methods. 
 Reality provides ample proofthat this is “achievable”: the trusts undermine their rivals’ credit through the banks (the owners of the trusts become the owners of the banks: buying up shares); their supplyof materials (the owners of the trusts become the owners ofthe railways: buying up shares); for a certain time the trustssell below cost, spending millions on this in order to ruin acompetitor and then buy up his enterprises, his sources of raw materials (mines, land, etc. 
). 
 There you have a purely economic analysis of the power of the trusts and their expansion. 
 There you have the purelyeconomic path to expansion: buying up mills and factories, sources of raw materials. 
 Big finance capital of one country can always buy up com-petitors in another, politically independent country and constantly does so. 
 Economically, this is fully achievable. 
Economic “annexation” is fully “achievable” without polit-ical annexation and is widely practised. 
 In the literatureon imperialism you will constantly come across indica-tions that Argentina, for example, is in reality a “trade colony” of Britain, or that Portugal is in reality a “vassal” of Britain, etc. 
 And that is actually so: economic dependenceupon British banks, indebtedness to Britain, British acqui-sition of their railways, mines, land, etc. 
, enable Britain to“annex” these countries economically without violating theirpolitical independence. 
 National self-determination means political independence. 
 Imperialism seeks to violate such independence becausepolitical annexation often makes economic annexation easier,cheaper (easier to bribe officials, secure concessions, putthrough advantageous legislation, etc. 
), more convenient,less troublesome—just as imperialism seeks to replace demo-cracy generally by oligarchy. 
 But to speak of the economic “unachievability” of self-determination under imperialismis sheer nonsense. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR Kievsky gets round the theoretical difficulties by a very simple and superficial dodge, known in German as “ burschi-kose ” phraseology, i. 
e. 
, primitive, crude phrases heard (and quite naturally) at student binges. 
 Here is an example:“Universal suffrage,” he writes, “the eight-hour day andeven the republic are logically compatible with imperialism, though imperialism far from smiles [!!] on them and theirachievement is therefore extremely difficult. 
” We would have absolutely no objections to the burschikose statement that imperialism far from “smiles” on the repub-lic—a frivolous word can sometimes lend colour to a scien-tific polemic!—if in this polemic on a serious issue we weregiven, in addition , an economic and political analysis of the concepts involved. 
 With Kievsky, however, the burschikose phrase does duty for such an analysis or serves to I conceal lack of it. 
 What can this mean: “Imperialism far from smiles on the republic”? And why? The republic is one possible form of the political super-structure of capitalist society, and, moreover, under present-day conditions the most democratic form. 
 To say that impe-rialism does not “smile” on the republic is to say that thereis a contradiction between imperialism and democracy. 
 Itmay very well be that Kievsky does not “smile” or even “farfrom smiles” on this conclusion. 
 Nevertheless it is irrefutable. 
 To continue. 
 What is the nature of this contradiction be-tween imperialism and democracy? Is it a logical or illogical contradiction? Kievsky uses the word “logical” without stop-ping to think and therefore does not notice that in this par-ticular case it serves to conceal (both from the reader’s and author’s eyes and mind) the very question he sets out to dis-cuss! That question is the relation of economics to politics: the relation of economic conditions and the economic content of imperialism to a certain political form. 
 To say that every“contradiction” revealed in human discussion is a logicalcontradiction is meaningless tautology. 
 And with the aidof this tautology Kievsky evades the substance of the ques-tion: Is it a “logical” contradiction between two economic phenomena or propositions (1)? Or two political phenomena or propositions (2)? Or economic and political phenomena or propositions (3)? For that is the heart of the matter, once we are discussing economic unachievability or achievability under one or another political form! Had Kievsky not evaded the heart of the matter, he would probably have realised that the contradiction between impe-rialism and the republic is a contradiction between theeconomics of latter-day capitalism (namely, monopoly capi-talism) and political democracy in general. 
 For Kievsky will never prove that any major and fundamental democratic mea-sure (popular election of officials or officers, complete freedomof association and assembly, etc. 
) is less contradictory toimperialism (or, if you like, more “smiled” upon) than therepublic. 
 What we have, then, is the proposition we advanced in our theses: imperialism contradicts, “logically” contradicts, all political democracy in general . 
 Kievsky does not “smile” on this proposition for it demolishes all his illogicalconstructions. 
 But what can we do about it? Are weto accept a method that is supposed to refute certainpropositions, but instead secretly advances them by using such expressions as “imperialism far from smiles on the republic”? Further. 
 Why does imperialism far from smile on the republic? And how does imperialism “combine” its economicswith the republic? Kievsky has given no thought to that. 
 We would remind him of the following words of Engels in reference to the democratic republic. 
 Can wealth dominate under this formof government? The question concerns the “contradiction”between economics and politics. 
 Engels replies: “The democratic republic officially knows nothing any more of property distinctions [between citizens]. 
 In it, wealth exercises its power indirectly, but all the more surely. 
 On the one hand, in the form of the direct corruptionof officials, of which America provides the classical example;on the other hand, in the form of an alliance between govern-ment and stock exchange.... 
” 26 There you have an excellent example of economic analy-sis on the question of the “achievability” of democracy under capitalism. 
 And the “achievability” of self-determinationunder imperialism is part of that question. 
 The democratic republic “logically” contradicts capital-ism, because “officially” it puts the rich and the poor on an equal footing. 
 That is a contradiction between the eco-nomic system and the political superstructure. 
 There is thesame contradiction between imperialism and the republic,deepened or aggravated by the fact that the change-over fromfree competition to monopoly makes the realisation of polit-ical freedoms even more “difficult”. 
 How, then, is capitalism reconciled with democracy? By indirect implementation of the omnipotence of capital. 
There are two economic means for that: (1) direct bribery;(2) alliance of government and stock exchange. 
 (That isstated in our theses—under a bourgeois system financecapital “can freely bribe and buy any government and any official”. 
) Once we have the dominance of commodity production, of the bourgeoisie, of the power of money—bribery (director through the stock exchange) is “achievable” under any formof government and under any kind of democracy. 
 What, it can be asked, is altered in this respect when capitalism gives way to imperialism, i. 
e. 
, when pre-monopoly capitalism is replaced by monopoly capitalism? Only that the power of the stock exchange increases. 
 For finance capital is industrial capital at its highest,monopoly level which has merged with banking capital. 
 Thebig banks merge with and absorb the stock exchange. 
 (The literature on imperialism speaks of the declining role of the stock exchange, but only in the sense that every giantbank is itself virtually a stock exchange. 
) Further. 
 If “wealth” in general is fully capable of achiev-ing domination over any democratic republic by briberyand through the stock exchange, then how can Kievsky main-tain, without lapsing into a very curious “logical contradic-tion”, that the immense wealth of the trusts and the banks,which have thousands of millions at their command, cannot“achieve” the domination of finance capital over a foreign,i. 
e. 
, politically independent, republic?? Well? Bribery of officials is “unachievable” in a foreign state? Or the “alliance of government and stock exchange” applies only to one’s own government? * * * The reader will already have seen that it requires roughly ten pages of print to untangle and popularly explain ten linesof confusion. 
 We cannot examine every one of Kievsky’sarguments in the same detail. 
 And there is not a single onethat is not confused. 
 Nor is there really any need for thisonce the main arguments have been examined. 
 The rest will be dealt with briefly. 
 4. 
 THE EXAMPLE OF NORWAY Norway “achieved” the supposedly unachievable right to self-determination in 1905, in the era of the most rampant imperialism. 
 It is therefore not only absurd, but ludicrous,from the theoretical standpoint, to speak of “unachievability”. 
 Kievsky wants to refute that by angrily calling us “ration-alists”. 
 (What has that to do with it? The rationalist con-fines himself to purely abstract disquisitions, while we have pointed to a very concrete fact! But perhaps Kievsky is using the foreign word “rationalist” in the same ... how toput it more mildly? ... in the same “unhappy” manner heused the word “extractive” at the beginning of his article,when he presented his arguments “in extractive form”?) Kievsky reproaches us. 
 For us, he says, “the important thing is the appearance of phenomena rather than the real substance”. 
 Well, let us examine the real substance. 
 His refutation begins with this example: enactment of a law against trusts does not prove that their prohibitionis unachievable. 
 True enough. 
 But the example is an unhappyone, for it militates against Kievsky. 
 Laws are political mea-sures, politics. 
 No political measure can prohibit economic phenomena. 
 Whatever political form Poland adopts, whethershe be part of tsarist Russia or Germany, or an autonomousregion, or a politically independent state, there is no pro-hibiting or repealing her dependence on the finance capitalof the imperialist powers, or preventing that capital from buying up the shares of her industries. 
 The independence Norway “achieved” in 1905 was only political. 
 It could not affect its economic dependence, nor was this the intention. 
 That is exactly the point made in our theses. 
 We indicated that self-determination concerns only politics, and it would therefore be wrong even to raise the question of its economic unachievability. 
 But here isKievsky “refuting” this by citing an example of politicalbans being powerless against the economy! What a “refuta-tion”! To proceed. 
 “One or even many instances of small-scale industry prevailing over large-scale industry is not sufficient to refute Marx’s correct proposition that the general develop-ment of capitalism is attended by the concentration andcentralisation of production. 
” Again, the argument is based on an unfortunate example , chosen to divert the attention (of the reader and the author) from the substance of the issue. 
 We maintain that it would be wrong to speak of the eco-nomic unachievability of self-determination in the same senseas we speak of the unachievability of labour money undercapitalism. 
 Not a single “example” of such achievability can be cited. 
 Kievsky tacitly admits we are correct on this point when he shifts to another interpretation of “unachievability”. 
 Why does he not do so directly? Why does he not openly and precisely formulate his proposition: “self-determination, while achievable in the sense that it is economically possibleunder capitalism, contradicts development and is therefore either reactionary or merely an exception”? He does not do so because a clear formulation of this counter-proposition would immediately expose its author,and he therefore tries to conceal it. 
 The law of economic concentration, of the victory of large-scale production over small, is recognised in our own and the Erfurt programmes. 
 Kievsky conceals the fact that nowhere is the law of political or state concentration recognised. 
If it were the same kind of law—if there were such a law—thenwhy should not Kievsky formulate it and suggest that it beadded to our programme? Is it right for him to leave us witha bad, incomplete programme, considering that he has dis-covered this new law of state concentration, which is of practical significance since it would rid our programme oferroneous conclusions? Kievsky does not formulate that law, does not suggest that it be added to our programme, because he has the hazy feeling that if he did he would be making himself a laughing-stock. 
 Everyone would laugh at this amusing imperialistEconomism if it were expressed openly and if, parallel withthe law that small-scale production is ousted by large-scaleproduction, there were presented another “ law” (connected with the first or existing side by side with it) of small states being ousted by big ones! To explain this we shall put only one question to Kiev-sky: Why is it that economists (without quotation marks)do not speak of the “disintegration” of the modern trusts orbig banks? Or of the possibility and achievability of suchdisintegration? Why is it that even the “imperialist Econo-mist” (in quotation marks) is obliged to admit that the disintegration of big states is both possible and achievable,and not only in general, but, for example, the secession of“small nationalities” (please note!) from Russia (§e, ChapterII of Kievsky’s article)? Lastly, to show even more clearly the length to which our author goes, and to warn him, let us note the following: We all accept the law of large-scale production oustingsmall-scale production, but no one is afraid to describe aspecific “instance” of “small-scale industry prevailing overlarge-scale industry” as a reactionary phenomenon. 
 No opponent of self-determination has yet ventured to describe as reactionary Norway’s secession from Sweden, although we raised the question in our literature as early as 1914. 
 * Large-scale production is unachievable if, for instance, hand-worked machines remain. 
 The idea of a mechanicalfactory “disintegrating” into handicrafts production is utter-ly absurd. 
 The imperialist tendency towards big empires is fully achievable, and in practice is often achieved, in the form of an imperialist alliance of sovereign and independent—politically independent—states. 
 Such an alliance is pos-sible and is encountered not only in the form of an economicmerger of the finance capital of two countries, but also inthe form of military “co-operation” in an imperialist war. 
 National struggle, national insurrection, national secession *See present edition, Vol. 
 20, pp. 
 425-30. 
— Ed. 
 are fully “achievable” and are met with in practice under imperialism. 
 They are even more pronounced, for imperialism does not halt the development of capitalism and the growth of democratic tendencies among the mass of the population. 
On the contrary, it accentuates the antagonism between their democratic aspirations and the anti-democratic ten-dency of the trusts. 
 It is only from the point of view of imperialist Economism, i. 
e. 
, caricaturised Marxism, that one can ignore, for instance, this specific aspect of imperialist policy: on the one hand,the present imperialist war offers examples of how the forceof financial ties and economic interests draws a small, polit-ically independent state into the struggle of the Great Pow-ers (Britain and Portugal). 
 On the other hand, the viola-tion of democracy with regard to small nations, much weaker (both economically and politically) than their imperialist“patrons”, leads either to revolt (Ireland) or to defection ofwhole regiments to the enemy (the Czechs). 
 In this situationit is not only “achievable”, from the point of view of financecapital, but sometimes even profitable for the trusts, for their imperialist policy, for their imperialist war, to allow individual small nations as much democratic freedom as they can, right down to political independence, so as not torisk damaging their “own” military operations. 
 To overlookthe peculiarity of political and strategic relationships andto repeat indiscriminately a world learned by rote, “imperial-ism”, is anything but Marxism. 
 On Norway, Kievsky tells us, firstly, that she “had always been an independent state”. 
 That is not true and can onlybe explained by the author’s burschikose carelessness and his disregard of political issues. 
 Norway was not an independent state prior to 1905, though she enjoyed a very large measure of autonomy. 
 Sweden recognised Norway’s political independ-ence only after her secession. 
 If Norway “had always been an independent state”, then the Swedish Government wouldnot have informed the other powers, on October 26, 1905,that it recognised Norway’s independence. 
 Secondly, Kievsky cites a number of statements to prove that Norway looked to the West, and Sweden to the East, that in one country mainly British, and in the other German,finance capital was “at work”, etc. 
 From this he draws the triumphant conclusion: “This example [Norway] neatly fits into our pattern. 
” There you have a sample of the logic of imperialist Econ-omism! Our theses point out that finance capital can domi-nate in “any”, “even independent country”, and all thearguments about self-determination being “unachievable”from the point of view of finance capital are therefore sheerconfusion. 
 We are given data confirming our proposition about the part foreign finance capital played in Norway before and after her secession. 
 And these data are supposed to refute our proposition! Dilating on finance capital in order to disregard political issues—is that the way to discuss politics? No. 
 Political issues do not disappear because of Econom-ism’s faulty logic. 
 British finance capital was “at work” in Norway before and after secession. 
 German finance capitalwas “at work” in Poland prior to her secession from Russiaand will continue to “work” there no matter what political status Poland enjoys. 
 That is so elementary that it is embar-rassing to have to repeat it. 
 But what can one do if the ABC is forgotten? Does this dispense with the political question of Norway’s status? With her having been part of Sweden? With the atti-tude of the workers when the secession issue arose? Kievsky evades these questions because they hit hard at the Economists. 
 But these questions were posed, and are posed, by life itself. 
 Life itself posed the question: Could a Swedish worker who did not recognise Norway’sright to secession remain a member of the Social-DemocraticParty? He could not . 
 The Swedish aristocrats wanted a war against Norway, and so did the clericals. 
 That fact does not disappear because Kievsky has “forgotten” to read about it in the history of the Norwegian people. 
 The Swedish worker could, while remaining a Social-Democrat, urge the Norwegians to vote against secession (the Norwegian referendum on secession, held on August 13, 1905, resulted in 368,200 votes for seces-sion and 184 against, with about 80 per cent of the elector-ate taking part). 
 But the Swedish worker who, like the Swed-ish aristocracy and bourgeoisie, would deny the Norwegians the right to decide this question themselves, without the Swedes and irrespective of their will, would have been a social-chauvinist and a miscreant the Social-Democratic Party could not tolerate in its ranks. 
 That is how §9 of our Party Programme should be applied. 
 But our imperialist Economist tries to jump over this clause. 
 You cannot jump over it, gentlemen, without falling intothe embrace of chauvinism! And what of the Norwegian worker? Was it his duty, from the internationalist point of view, to vote for seces-sion? Certainly not. 
 He could have voted against secessionand remained a Social-Democrat. 
 He would have been be-traying his duty as a member of the Social-Democratic Partyonly if he had proffered a helping hand to a Black-HundredSwedish worker opposed to Norway’s freedom of secession. 
 Some people refuse to see this elementary difference in the position of the Norwegian and Swedish worker. 
 Butthey expose themselves when they evade this most concrete of political questions, which we squarely put to them. 
 Theyremain silent, try to wriggle out and in that way surrendertheir position. 
 To prove that the “Norwegian” issue can arise in Russia, we deliberately advanced this proposition: in circumstancesof a purely military and strategic nature a separate Polish state is fully achievable even now . 
 Kievsky wants to “dis-cuss” that—and remains silent! Let us add this Finland too, out of purely military and strategic considerations, and given a certain outcome of the present imperialist war (for instance, Sweden joining the Germans and the latter’s semi-victory), can become a sep-arate state without undermining the “achievability” ofeven a single operation of finance capital, without making“unachievable” the buying up of Finnish railway and in-dustrial shares. 
 * *Given one outcome of the present war the formation of new states in Europe (Polish, Finnish, etc. 
) is fully “achievable” without inany way disturbing the conditions for the development of imperialism and its power. 
 On the contrary, this would increase the influence, con-tacts and pressure of finance capital. 
 But given another outcome,the formation of new states of Hungary, Czechia, etc. 
, is likewise “achievable”. 
 The British imperialists are already planning this secondoutcome in anticipation of their victory. 
 The imperialist era does notdestroy either the striving for national political independence or its Kievsky seeks salvation from unpleasant political issues in an amazing phrase which is amazingly characteristic of all his “arguments”: “At any moment... [that is literally what he says at the end of §c, Chapter I] the Sword of Da-mocles can strike and put an end to the existence of an ‘in-dependent’ workshop” (a “hint” at little Sweden and Nor-way). 
 That, presumably, is genuine Marxism: a separate Nor-wegian state, whose secession from Sweden the Swedish Gov-ernment described as a “revolutionary measure”, has been inexistence only some ten years. 
 Is there any point in examin-ing the political issues that follow from this if we have read Hilferding’s Finance Capital and “understood” it in the sense that “at any moment”—if we are to exaggerate, then let’s go the whole hog!—a small state might vanish? Is there any point in drawing attention to the fact that we have pervertedMarxism into Economism, and that we have turned our pol-icy into a rehash of the speeches of case-hardened Russianchauvinists? What a mistake the Russian workers must have made in 1905 in seeking a republic: finance capital had already been mobilised against it in France, England, etc. 
, and “at anymoment” the “Sword of Damocles” could have struck itdown, if it had ever come into being! * * * “The demand for national self-determination is not ... ut-opian in the minimum programme: it does not contradictsocial development, inasmuch as its achievement wouldnot halt that development. 
” That passage from Martov is challenged by Kievsky in the section in which he cites the “statements” about Norway. 
 They prove , again and again, the generally known fact that Norway’s “self-determina-“achievability” within the bounds of world imperialist relationships. 
 Outside these bounds, however, a republican Russia, or in general any major democratic transformations anywhere else in the world are“unachievable” without a series of revolutions and are unstable without socialism. 
 Kievsky has wholly and completely failed to understand the relation of imperialism to democracy. 
 tion” and secession did not halt either the development of finance capital generally, or expansion of its operation in particular, or the buying up of Norway by the English! There have been Bolsheviks among us, Alexinsky in 1908-10, for instance, who argued with Martov precisely at a time when Martov was right! God save us from such “al-lies”! 5. 
 “MONISM AND DUALISM” Reproaching us for “interpreting the demand dualistical-ly”, P. 
 Kievsky writes: “Monistic action of the International is replaced by dual-istic propaganda . 
” That sounds quite Marxist and materialistic: monistic action is contrasted to “dualistic” propaganda. 
 Unfortu-nately, closer examination reveals that it is verbal “monism”, like the “monism” of Dühring. 
 “If I include a shoe brush inthe unity mammals,” Engels wrote exposing Dühring’s “monism”, “this does not help it to get mammary glands. 
” 27 This means that only such things, qualities, phenomena and actions that are a unity in objective reality can be declared “a unity”. 
 It is this “ detail ” that our author overlooks! He thinks we are “dualists”, first, because what we de-mand, primarily, of the workers of the oppressed nations— this refers to the national question only— differs from what we demand of the workers of the oppressor nations. 
 To determine whether P. 
 Kievsky’s “monism” is the same as Dühring’s, let us examine objective realities . 
 Is the actual condition of the workers in the oppressor and in the oppressed nations the same, from the standpoint of the national question? No, it is not the same. 
 (1)Economically , the difference is that sections of the work-ing class in the oppressor nations receive crumbs from thesuperprofits the bourgeoisie of these nations obtains by extra exploitation of the workers of the oppressed nations. 
 Besides, economic statistics show that here a larger percentage of the workers become “straw bosses” than is the case in theoppressed nations, a larger percentage rise to the labour aristocracy . 
* That is a fact. 
 To a certain degree the workers of the oppressor nations are partners of their own bourgeoisie in plundering the workers (and the mass of the population) of the oppressed nations. 
 (2)Politically , the difference is that, compared with the workers of the oppressed nations, they occupy a privileged position in many spheres of political life. 
 (3)Ideologically , or spiritually, the difference is that they are taught, at school and in life, disdain and contempt for the workers of the oppressed nations. 
 This has been experienced , for example, by every Great Russian who has been broughtup or who has lived among Great Russians. 
 Thus, all along the line there are differences in objective reality, i. 
e. 
, “dualism” in the objective world that is independent of the will and consciousness of individuals. 
 That being so, how are we to regard P. 
 Kievsky’s asser-tion about the “monistic action of the International”? It is a hollow, high-sounding phrase, no more. 
In real life the International is composed of workers divid-ed into oppressor and oppressed nations. 
 If its action is to be monistic , its propaganda must not be the same for both. 
 That is how we should regard the matter in the light of real(not Dühringian) “monism”, Marxist materialism. 
 An example? We cited the example of Norway (in the le-gal press over two years ago!), and no one has challenged it. 
In this concrete case taken from life, the action of the Nor-wegian and Swedish workers was “monistic”, unified, inter-nationalist only because and insofar as the Swedish workers unconditionally championed Norway’s freedom to secede, while the Norwegian workers raised the question of secession onlyconditionally . 
 Had the Swedish workers not supported Norway’s freedom of secession unconditionally , they would have been chauvinists , accomplices of the chauvinist Swedish landlords, who wanted to “keep” Norway by force, by war. 
 Had theNorwegian workers not raised the question of secession con-ditionally , i. 
e. 
, allowing even Social-Democratic Party members to conduct propaganda and vote against secession,they would have failed in their internationalist duty and *See, for instance, Hourwich’s book on immigration and the condi-tion of the working class in America, Immigration and Labour . 
—Ed. 
 would have sunk to narrow, bourgeois Norwegian nationalism. 
 Why? Because the secession was being effected by the bour-geoisie , not by the proletariat! Because the Norwegian bour-geoisie (as every other) always strives to drive a wedge be-tween the workers of its own and an “alien” country! Becausefor the class-conscious workers every democratic demand(including self-determination) is subordinated to the supreme interests of socialism. 
 For example, if Norway’s secession from Sweden had created the certainty or probability of war between Britain and Germany, the Norwegian workers, for that reason alone , would have had to oppose secession. 
 The Swedish workers would have had the right and the opportun-ity, without ceasing to be socialists, to agitate againstsecession, but only if they had waged a systematic, consistent and constant struggle against the Swedish Government for Norway’s freedom to secede. 
 Otherwise the Norwegian work-ers and people would not , and could not , accept the advice of the Swedish workers as sincere. 
 The trouble with the opponents of self-determination is that they confine themselves to lifeless abstractions, fearing to analyse to the end a single concrete real-life instance. 
 Our concrete statement in the theses that a newPolish state is quite “achievable” now , given a definite combi-nation of purely military, strategic conditions, * has not been challenged either by the Poles or by P. 
 Kievsky. 
 But noone wanted to ponder the conclusions that follow from this tacit admission that we were right. 
 And what follows, obviously, is that internationalist propaganda cannot be the same for the Russians and the Poles if it is to educate both for“monistic action”. 
 The Great-Russian (and German) workeris in duty bound unconditionally to insist on Poland’s free-dom to secede; otherwise he will, in fact , now be the lackey of Nicholas II or Hindenburg. 
 The Polish worker could insist on secession only conditionally, because to speculate (as do the Fracy 28) on the victory of one or the other imperial-ist bourgeoisie is tantamount to becoming its lackey. 
 Fail-ure to understand this difference, which is a prerequisitefor “monistic action” of the International, is about the same as failing to understand why “monistic action” against the *See present edition, Vol. 
 22, pp. 
 143-56. 
— Ed. 
 tsarist army near Moscow, say, requires that the revolution-ary forces march west from Nizhni-Novgorod and east from Smolensk. 
 * * * Second, our new exponent of Dühringian monism re-proaches us for not striving to achieve “the closestorganisational unity of the various national sections of the International” in the event of a social revolution. 
 Under socialism, P. 
 Kievsky writes, self-determination becomes superfluous, since the state itself ceases to exist. 
That is meant as an argument against us! But in our theseswe clearly and definitely say, in three lines, the last three lines of section one, that “democracy, too, is a form of state which must disappear when the state disappears”. 
 It is pre-cisely this truism that P. 
 Kievsky repeats—to “refute” us,of course!—on several pages of his §r (Chapter I), and repeats it in a distorted way . 
 “We picture to ourselves,” he writes, “and have always pictured the socialist system as a strictlydemocratic [!!?], centralised system of economy in which the state, as the apparatus for the domination of one part of the population over the other, disappears. 
” This is confusion,because democracy too is domination “of one part of the pop-ulation over the other”; it too is a form of state. 
 Our author obviously does not understand what is meant by the withering away of the state after the victory of socialism and what this process requires. 
 The main point, however, is his “objections” regarding the era of the social revolution. 
 He calls us “talmudistsof self-determination”—what a frightening epithet—andadds: “We picture this process [the social revolution] as theunited action of the proletarians of all [!] countries, who wipe out the frontiers of the bourgeois [!] state, who tear down the frontier posts [in addition to “wiping out the frontiers”?],who blow up [!] national unity and establish class unity. 
” The wrath of this stern judge of the “talmudists” notwith-standing, we must say: there are many words here, but no“ideas”. 
 The social revolution cannot be the united action of the proletarians of all countries for the simple reason that most of the countries and the majority of the world’s population have not even reached, or have only just reached, the capital-ist stage of development. 
 We stated this in section six of our theses, but P. 
 Kievsky, because of lack of attention, or inability to think, did “not notice” that we included thissection for a definite purpose, namely, to refute caricaturedistortions of Marxism. 
 Only the advanced countries of West-ern Europe and North America have matured for socialism,and in Engels’s letter to Kautsky ( Sbornik Sotsial-Demokra-ta)29 Kievsky will find a concrete illustration of the real and not merely promised “ idea ” that to dream of the “united action of the proletarians of all countries” means postponing socialism to the Greek calends, i. 
e. 
, for ever. 
 Socialism will be achieved by the united action of the pro-letarians, not of all, but of a minority of countries, those that have reached the advanced capitalist stage of develop-ment. 
 The cause of Kievsky’s error lies in failure to under-stand that. 
 In these advanced countries (England, France, Germany, etc. 
) the national problem was solved long ago;national unity outlived its purpose long ago; objectively , there are no “general national tasks” to be accomplished. 
 Hence, only in these countries is it possible now to “blow up” national unity and establish class unity. 
 The undeveloped countries are a different matter. 
 They embrace the whole of Eastern Europe and all the coloniesand semi-colonies and are dealt with in section six of thetheses (second-and third-type countries). 
 In those areas, as a rule, there still exist oppressed and capitalistically unde-veloped nations. 
 Objectively , these nations still have general national tasks to accomplish, namely, democratic tasks, the tasks of overthrowing foreign oppression . 
 Engels cited India as an example of such nations, stating that she might perform a revolution against victorious so-cialism, for Engels was remote from the preposterous im-perialist Economism which imagines that having achievedvictory in the advanced countries, the proletariat will “auto-matically”, without definite democratic measures, abolish national oppression everywhere. 
 The victorious proletariatwill reorganise the countries in which it has triumphed. 
 That cannot be done all at once; nor, indeed, can the bour-geoisie be “vanquished” all at once. 
 We deliberately empha-sised this in our theses, and Kievsky has again failed to stop and think why we stressed this point in connection with the national question. 
 While the proletariat of the advanced countries is over-throwing the bourgeoisie and repelling its attempts at coun-ter-revolution, the undeveloped and oppressed nations donot just wait, do not cease to exist, do not disappear. 
 Ifthey take advantage even of such a bourgeois imperialistcrisis as the war of 1915-16—a minor crisis compared with social revolution—to rise in revolt (the colonies, Ireland), there can be no doubt that they will all the more readilytake advantage of the great crisis of civil war in the advanced countries to rise in revolt. 
 The social revolution can come only in the form of an epoch in which are combined civil war by the proletariat against the bourgeoisie in the advanced countries and a whole series of democratic and revolutionary movements, including the national liberation movement, in the undevel-oped, backward and oppressed nations. 
 Why? Because capitalism develops unevenly, and objec-tive reality gives us highly developed capitalist nations side by side with a number of economically slightly developed, or totally undeveloped, nations. 
 P. 
 Kievsky has abso-lutely failed to analyse the objective conditions of social revolution from the standpoint of the economic maturityof various countries. 
 His reproach that we “invent” instances in which to apply self-determination is therefore an attempt to lay the blame at the wrong door. 
 With a zeal worthy of a better cause, Kievsky repeatedly quotes Marx and Engels to the effect that “one must notinvent things out of his own head, but use his head to dis-cover in the existing material conditions” the means thatwill free humanity of social evils. 
 When I read those oft-repeated quotations I cannot help recalling the late and unlamented Economists who just as tediously ... harpedon their “new discovery” that capitalism had triumphed inRussia. 
 Kievsky wants to “smite” us with these quotations: heclaims that we invent out of our own heads the conditions forapplying self-determination in the epoch of imperialism! But we find the following “incautious admission” in his own article: “The very fact that we are opposed [author’s italics] to defence of the fatherland shows most clearly that we will actively resist suppression of a national uprising, for we shall thereby be combating imperialism, our mortal enemy” (Chapter II, §r). 
 To criticise an author, to answer him, one has to quote in full at least the main propositions of his article. 
 Butin all of Kievsky’s propositions you will find that everysentence contains two or three errors or illogicalities thatdistort Marxism! 1) He is unaware that a national uprising is also “defence of the fatherland”! A little thought, however, will make itperfectly clear that this is so, since every “nation in revolt” “defends” itself, its language, its territory, its fatherland,against the oppressor nation. 
 All national oppression calls forth the resistance of the broad masses of the people; and the resistance of a nationally oppressed population always tends to national revolt. 
 Not infrequently (notably in Austria and Russia) we find thebourgeoisie of the oppressed nations talking of national revolt, while in practice it enters into reactionary compactswith the bourgeoisie of the oppressor nation behind the backs of, and against , its own people. 
 In such cases the criticism of revolutionary Marxists should be directed not against thenational movement, but against its degradation, vulgarisa-tion, against the tendency to reduce it to a petty squabble. 
Incidentally, very many Austrian and Russian Social-Democrats overlook this and in their legitimate hatred of the petty, vulgar and sordid national squabbles—disputes and scuffles over the question, for instance, of which languageshall have precedence in two-language street signs—refuse tosupport the national struggle. 
 We shall not “support” arepublican farce in, say, the principality of Monaco, orthe “republican” adventurism of “generals” in the small states of South America or some Pacific island. 
 But that does not mean it would be permissible to abandon the republicanslogan for serious democratic and socialist movements. 
 Weshould, and do, ridicule the sordid national squabbles andhaggling in Russia and Austria. 
 But that does not mean thatit would be permissible to deny support to a national upris-ing or a serious popular struggle against national oppression. 
 2) If national uprisings are impossible in the “imperialist era”, Kievsky has no right to speak of them. 
 If they are pos-sible, all his fine-spun talk about “monism” and our “invent-ing” examples of self-determination under imperialism, etc. 
, etc. 
, falls to pieces. 
 Kievsky defeats his own arguments. 
 If “we” “actively resist suppression” of a “national upris-ing”—a case which P. 
 Kievsky “ himself ” considers possible —what does this mean? It means that the action is twofold, or “dualistic”, to em-ploy the philosophical term as incorrectly as our author does: (a) first, it is the “action” of the nationally oppressed prole-tariat and peasantry jointly with the nationally oppressed bourgeoisie against the oppressor nation; (b) second, it is the “action” of the proletariat, or of its class-conscious sec-tion, in the oppressor nation against the bourgeoisie of that nation and all the elements that follow it. 
 The innumerable phrases against a “national bloc”, natio-nal “illusions”, the “poison” of nationalism, against “fanningnational hatred” and the like, to which P. 
 Kievsky resorts,prove to be meaningless. 
 For when he advises the proletariatof the oppressor countries (which, be it remembered, he re-gards as a serious force) “actively to resist suppression of a national uprising”, he thereby fans national hatred and supports the establishment of a “bloc with the bourgeoisie” by the workers of the oppressed nations. 
 3) If national uprisings are possible under imperialism, so are national wars. 
 There is no material political differ-ence between the two. 
 Military historians are perfectly right when they put rebellions in the same category as wars. 
 Kievsky has unwittingly refuted not only himself, but alsoJunius 30 and the Internationale group, who deny the possi-bility of national wars under imperialism. 
 And this denial is the only conceivable theoretical ground for denying self-determination of nations under imperialism. 
 4) For what is a “national” uprising? It is an uprising aimed at the achievement of political independence of the oppressed nation, i. 
e. 
, the establishment of a separate national state. 
 If the proletariat of the oppressor nation is a serious force (in the imperialist era, as our author rightly assumes), does not its determination “actively to resist suppression of a national uprising” imply assistance in creating a separate national state? Of course it does. 
 Though he denies the “achievability” of self-determi-nation, our brave author now argues that the class-conscious proletariat of the advanced countries must assist in achiev-ing this “unachievable” goal! 5)Why must “we” “actively resist” suppression of a nation-al uprising? P. 
 Kievsky advances only one reason: “...weshall thereby be combating imperialism, our mortal enemy. 
”All the strength of the argument lies in the strong word “mor-tal”. 
 And this is in keeping with his penchant for strong words instead of strong arguments—high-sounding phrases like“driving a stake into the quivering body of the bourgeoisie”and similar Alexinsky flourishes. 
 But this Kievsky argument is wrong . 
 Imperialism is as much our “mortal” enemy as is capitalism. 
 That is so. 
 No Marxist will forget, however, that capitalism is progressive compared with feudalism, and that imperialism is progres-sive compared with pre-monopoly capitalism. 
 Hence, itis not every struggle against imperialism that we should support. 
 We will not support a struggle of the reactionary classes against imperialism; we will not support an uprising of the reactionary classes against imperialism and capitalism. 
 Consequently, once the author admits the need to support an uprising of an oppressed nation (“actively resisting” sup-pression means supporting the uprising), he also admitsthat a national uprising is progressive , that the establishment of a separate and new state, of new frontiers, etc. 
, resulting from a successful uprising, is progressive . 
 In none of his political arguments is the author consistent! The Irish Rebellion of 1916, which took place after our theses had appeared in No. 
 2 of Vorbote , proved, incidental-ly, that it was not idle to speak of the possibility of nationaluprisings even in Europe. 
 6. 
 THE OTHER POLITICAL ISSUE RAISED AND DISTORTED BY P. 
 KIEVSKY Liberation of the colonies, we stated in our theses, means self-determination of nations. 
 Europeans often forget that colonial peoples too are nations, but to tolerate this “forget-fulness” is to tolerate chauvinism. 
 P. 
 Kievsky “objects”: In the pure type of colonies, “there is no proletariat in the proper sense of the term” (end of §r, Chapter II). 
 “For whom, then, is the ‘self-determination’ slogan meant? Forthe colonial bourgeoisie? For the fellahs? For the peasants?Certainly not. 
 It is absurd for socialists [Kievsky’s italics] to demand self-determination for the colonies, for it isabsurd in general to advance the slogans of a workers’ party for countries where there are no workers. 
” P. 
 Kievsky’s anger and his denunciation of our view as “absurd” notwithstanding, we make bold to submit that hisarguments are erroneous. 
 Only the late and unlamentedEconomists believed that the “slogans of a workers’ party”are issued only for workers. 
 * No, these slogans are issued for the whole of the labouring population, for the entire people. 
 The democratic part of our programme—Kievsky hasgiven no thought to its significance “in general”—is addressedspecifically to the whole people and that is why in it wespeak of the “people”. 
 ** The colonial and semi-colonial nations, we said, account for 1,000 million people, and P. 
 Kievsky has not taken the trouble to refute that concrete statement. 
 Of these 1,000million, more that 700 million (China, India, Persia, Egypt)live in countries where there are workers. 
 But even with re-gard to colonial countries where there are no workers, onlyslave-owners and slaves, etc. 
, the demand for “self-determi-nation”, far from being absurd , is obligatory for every Marx-ist. 
 And if he gave the matter a little thought, Kievskywould probably realise this, and also that “self-determina-tion” is always advanced “for” two nations: the oppressed and the oppressing . 
 Another of Kievsky’s “objections”: “For that reason we limit ourselves, in respect to the colonies, to a negative slogan, i. 
e. 
, to the demand socialists *P. 
 Kievsky would do well to reread what A. 
 Martynov and Co. 
 wrote in 1899-1901. 
 He would find many of his “own” arguments there. 
 **Some curious opponents of “self-determination of nations” try to refute our views with the argument that “nations” are divided intoclasses! Our customary reply to these caricature Marxists is that thedemocratic part of our programme speaks of “government by the people”. 
 present to their governments—‘get out of the colonies!’ Unachievable within the framework of capitalism, this demand serves to intensify the struggle against imperialism, but does not contradict the trend of development, for asocialist society will not possess colonies. 
” The author’s inability, or reluctance, to give the slightest thought to the theoretical contents of political slogans issimply amazing! Are we to believe that the use of a propa-ganda phrase instead of a theoretically precise political term alters matters? To say “get out of the colonies” is to evade atheoretical analysis and hide behind propaganda phrases!For every one of our Party propagandists, in referring to theUkraine, Poland, Finland, etc. 
, is fully entitled to demandof the tsarist government (his “own government”): “get out of Finland”, etc. 
 However, the intelligent propagandist will understand that we must not advance either positiveor negative slogans for the sole purpose of “intensifying” thestruggle. 
 Only men of the Alexinsky type could insist thatthe “negative” slogan “get out of the Black-Hundred Duma”was justified by the desire to “intensify” the struggle against a certain evil. 
 Intensification of the struggle is an empty phrase of the subjectivists, who forget the Marxist requirement that everyslogan be justified by a precise analysis of economic realities, the political situation and the political significance of the slogan. 
 It is embarrassing to have to drive this home, but what can one do? We know the Alexinsky habit of cutting short a theoretical discussion of a theoretical question by propaganda outcries. 
It is a bad habit. 
 The slogan “get out of the colonies” has oneand only one political and economic content: freedom ofsecession for the colonial nations, freedom to establish a separate state! If, as P. 
 Kievsky believes, the general laws of imperialism prevent the self-determination of nations andmake it a utopia, illusion, etc. 
, then how can one, with-out stopping to think, make an exception from these gen-eral laws for most of the nations of the world? Obviously, P. 
 Kievsky’s “theory” is a caricature of theory. 
 Commodity production and capitalism, and the connecting threads of finance capital, exist in the vast majority ofcolonial countries. 
 How, then, can we urge the imperialist countries, their governments, to “get out of the colonies” if, from the standpoint of commodity production, capitalism and imperialism, this is an “unscientific” and “utopian” demand, “refuted” even by Lensch, Cunow and the rest? There is not even a shadow of thought in the author’s argumentation! He has given no thought to the fact that liberation of the colonies is “unrealisable” only in the sense of being “un-realisable without a series of revolutions”. 
 He has given no thought to the fact that it is realisable in conjunction with a socialist revolution in Europe. 
 He has given no thoughtto the fact that a “socialist society will not possess” not only colonies, but subject nations in general . 
 He has given no thought to the fact that, on the question under discussion, there is no economic or political difference between Russia’s “possession” of Poland or Turkestan. 
 He has given nothought to the fact that a “socialist society” will wish to “getout of the colonies” only in the sense of granting them the free right to secede, but definitely not in the sense of recom-mending secession . 
 And for this differentiation between the right to secede and the recommendation to secede, P. 
 Kievsky condemns us as“jugglers”, and to “scientifically substantiate” that verdictin the eyes of the workers, he writes: “What is a worker to think when he asks a propagandist how the proletariat should regard samostiinost [political independence for the Ukraine], and gets this answer: social-ists are working for the right to secede, but their propagandais against secession?” I believe I can give a fairly accurate reply to that question, namely: every sensible worker will think that Kievsky is not capable of thinking . 
 Every sensible worker will “think”: here we have P. 
 Kiev-sky telling us workers to shout “get out of the colonies”. 
In other words, we Great-Russian workers must demandfrom our government that it get out of Mongolia, Turke-stan, Persia; English workers must demand that the EnglishGovernment get out of Egypt, India, Persia, etc. 
 But does this mean that we proletarians wish to separate ourselves from the Egyptian workers and fellahs, from the Mongo-lian, Turkestan or Indian workers and peasants? Does it mean that we advise the labouring masses of the colonies to “separate” from the class-conscious European proletariat? Nothing of the kind. 
 Now, as always, we stand and shall continue to stand for the closest association and mergingof the class-conscious workers of the advanced countrieswith the workers, peasants and slaves of all the oppressed countries. 
 We have always advised and shall continue toadvise all the oppressed classes in all the oppressed coun-tries, the colonies included, not to separate from us, but to form the closest possible ties and merge with us. 
 We demand from our governments that they quit the col-onies, or, to put it in precise political terms rather than inagitational outcries—that they grant the colonies full freedom of secession, the genuine right to self-determination , and we ourselves are sure to implement this right, and grant this freedom, as soon as we capture power. 
 We demand thisfrom existing governments, and will do this when we are the government, not in order to “recommend” secession, but, on the contrary, in order to facilitate and accelerate thedemocratic association and merging of nations. 
 We shall exert every effort to foster association and merger with the Mongolians, Persians, Indians, Egyptians. 
 We believe it isour duty and in our interest to do this, for otherwise social-ism in Europe will not be secure . 
 We shall endeavour to render these nations, more backward and oppressed thanwe are, “disinterested cultural assistance”, to borrow the happy expression of the Polish Social-Democrats. 
 In other words, we will help them pass to the use of machinery, tothe lightening of labour, to democracy, to socialism. 
 If we demand freedom of secession for the Mongolians, Persians, Egyptians and all other oppressed and unequal nations without exception, we do so not because we favour secession , but only because we stand for free, voluntary association and merging as distinct from forcible associa-tion. 
 That is the only reason! And in this respect the only difference between the Mongolian or Egyptian peasants and workers and theirPolish or Finnish counterparts is, in our view, that the lat-ter are more developed, more experienced politically than the Great Russians, more economically prepared, etc. 
, andfor that reason will in all likelihood very soon convince their peoples that it is unwise to extend their present legitimate hatred of the Great Russians, for their role of hangman, to the socialist workers and to a socialist Russia. 
 They will convince them that economic expediency and international-ist and democratic instinct and consciousness demand theearliest association of all nations and their merging in a so-cialist society. 
 And since the Poles and Finns are highly cul-tured people, they will, in all probability, very soon come to see the correctness ; of this attitude, and the possible seces-sion of Poland and Finland after the triumph of socialismwill therefore be only of short duration. 
 The incomparablyless cultured fellahs, Mongolians and Persians might secede-for a longer period, but we shall try to shorten it by disin-terested cultural assistance as indicated above. 
 There is no other difference in our attitude to the Poles and Mongolians, nor can there be. 
 There is no “contradiction”, nor can there be, between our propaganda of freedom ofsecession and our firm resolve to implement that freedomwhen we are the government, and our propaganda of associa-tion and merging of nations. 
 That is what, we feel sure, every sensible worker, every genuine socialist and internation-alist will “think” of our controversy with P. 
 Kievsky. 
 * Running through the article is Kievsky’s basic doubt: why advocate and, when we are in power, implement thefreedom of nations to secede , considering that the trend of *Evidently Kievsky simply repeated the slogan “get out of the colonies”, advanced by certain German and Dutch Marxists, withoutconsidering not only its theoretical content and implications, but also the specific features of Russia. 
 It is pardonable—to a certain extent— for a Dutch or German Marxist to confine himself to the slogan “getout of the colonies”. 
 For, first, the typical form of national oppression, in the case of most West-European countries, is oppression of the colonies, and, second, the very term “colony” has an especially clear,graphic and vital meaning for West-European countries. 
 But what of Russia ? Its peculiarity lies precisely in the fact that the difference between “ our” “colonies” and “our” oppressed nations is not clear, not concrete and not vitally felt! For a Marxist writing in, say, German it might be pardonable to overlook this peculiarity of Russia; for Kievsky it is unpardonable. 
 The sheer absurdity of trying to discover some serious difference between oppressed nations and colonies in the case of Russia should be especially clear to a Russian socialist who wants not simply to repeat , but to think . 
 development is towards the merging of nations? For the same reason—we reply—that we advocate and, when in power, will implement the dictatorship of the proletariat, though the entire trend of development is towards abolition ofcoercive domination of one part of society over another. 
Dictatorship is domination of one part of society over therest of society, and domination, moreover, that rests directlyon coercion. 
 Dictatorship of the proletariat, the only consist-ently revolutionary class, is necessary to overthrow the bourgeoisie and repel its attempts at counter-revolution. 
 Thequestion of proletarian dictatorship is of such overridingimportance that he who denies the need for such dictator-ship, or recognises it only in words, cannot be a member ofthe Social-Democratic Party. 
 However, it cannot be denied that in individual cases, by way of exception, for instance, in some small country after the social revolution has beenaccomplished in a neighbouring big country, peaceful sur-render of power by the bourgeoisie is possible , if it is convinced that resistance is hopeless and if it prefers to save itsskin. 
 It is much more likely, of course, that even in small states socialism will not be achieved without civil war, and for that reason the only programme of international Social-Democracy must be recognition of civil war, though violenceis, of course, alien to our ideals. 
 The same, mutatis mutandis (with the necessary alterations), is applicable to nations. 
 We favour their merger, but now there can be no transition from forcible merger and annexation to voluntary merger without freedom of secession. 
 We recognise—and quite rightly—the predominance of the economic factor, but to interpretit à la Kievsky is to make a caricature of Marxism. 
 Even the trusts and banks of modern imperialism, though inevi-table everywhere as part of developed capitalism, differ in their concrete aspects from country to country. 
 There is a still greater difference, despite homogeneity in essentials,between political forms in the advanced imperialist coun-tries—America, England, France, Germany. 
 The samevariety will manifest itself also in the path mankind willfollow from the imperialism of today to the socialist revolu-tion of tomorrow. 
 All nations will arrive at socialism—this is inevitable, but all will do so in not exactly the same way,each will contribute something of its own to some form of democracy, to some variety of the dictatorship of the pro-letariat, to the varying rate of socialist transformations in the different aspects of social life. 
 There is nothing more prim-itive from the viewpoint of theory, or more ridiculous fromthat of practice, than to paint, “in the name of historical materialism”, this aspect of the future in a monotonous grey. 
 The result will be nothing more than Suzdal daubing. 
 Andeven if reality were to show that prior to the first victory of the socialist proletariat only 1/500 of the nations now oppressed will win emancipation and secede, that prior to the final victory of the socialist proletariat the world over (i. 
e. 
, duringall the vicissitudes of the socialist revolution) also only 1/500of the oppressed nations will secede for a very short time—even in that event we would be correct, both from the theoret-ical and practical political standpoint, in advising the work-ers, already now, not to permit into their Social-Democraticparties those socialists of the oppressor nations who do notrecognise and do not advocate freedom of secession for all oppressed nations. 
 For the fact is that we do not know, andcannot know, how many of the oppressed nations will in practice require secession in order to contribute something of their own to the different forms of democracy, the different forms of transition to socialism. 
 And that the negation of freedom of secession now is theoretically false from beginningto end and in practice amounts to servility to the chauvin-ists of the oppressing nations—this we know, see and feel daily. 
 “We emphasise,” P. 
 Kievsky writes in a footnote to the passage quoted above, “that we fully support the demand‘against forcible annexation’.... 
” But he makes no reply, not even by a single word, to our perfectly clear statement that this “demand” is tantamount to recognising self-determination, that there can be no correct definition of the concept “annexation” unless it isseen in context with self-determination. 
 Presumably Kiev-sky believes that in a discussion it is enough to present one’sarguments and demands without any supporting evidence! He continues: “...We fully accept, in their negative for-mulation, a number of demands that tend to sharpen prole-tarian consciousness against imperialism, but there is abso-lutely no possibility of working out corresponding positive formulations on the basis of the existing system. 
 Against war, yes, but not for a democratic peace.... 
 ” Wrong— from the first word to the last. 
 Kievsky has read our resolution on “Pacifism and the Peace Slogan”(in the pamphlet Socialism and War , pp. 
 44-45 *) and even approved it, I believe. 
 But obviously he did not understandit. 
 We are for a democratic peace, only we warn the workers against the deception that such a peace is possible under the present, bourgeois governments “without a series of revo-lutions”, as the resolution points out. 
 We denounced as adeception of the workers the “abstract” advocacy of peace,i. 
e. 
, one that does not take into account the real class nature, or, specifically, the imperialist nature of the present governments in the belligerent countries. 
 We definitely stated in the Sotsial-Demokrat (No. 
 47 ) theses that if the revolution places our Party in power during the present war, it will immediately propose a democratic peace to all thewarring countries. 
 ** Yet, anxious to convince himself and others that he is opposed “only” to self-determination and not to democracy in general, Kievsky ends up by asserting that we are “not for a democratic peace”. 
 Curious logic! There is no need to dwell on all the other examples he cites, and no sense in wasting space on refuting them, forthey are on the same level of naïve and fallacious logic andcan only make the reader smile. 
 There is not, nor can there be, such a thing as a “negative” Social-Democratic slogan that serves only to “sharpen proletarian consciousnessagainst imperialism” without at the same time offering apositive answer to the question of how Social-Democracy will solve the problem when it assumes power. 
 A “negative” slo-gan unconnected with a definite positive solution will not “sharpen”, but dull consciousness, for such a slogan is a hollow phrase, mere shouting, meaningless declamation. 
 P. 
 Kievsky does not understand the difference between “negative” slogans that stigmatise political evils and econo-mic evils. 
 The difference lies in the fact that certain economic evils are part of capitalism as such, whatever the political *See present edition, Vol. 
 21, pp. 
 162-63. 
— Ed. 
 **Ibid. 
, pp. 
 403-04. 
— Ed. 
 superstructure, and that it is impossible to eliminate them economically without eliminating capitalism itself. 
 Not a single instance can be cited to disprove this. 
 On the other hand, political evils represent a departure from democracywhich, economically, is fully possible “on the basis of theexisting system”, i. 
e. 
, capitalism, and by way of exception isbeing implemented under capitalism—certain aspects in onecountry, other aspects in another. 
 Again, what the author fails to understand is precisely the fundamental conditions necessary for the implementation of democracy in general! The same applies to the question of divorce. 
 The reader will recall that it was first posed by Rosa Luxemburg in thediscussion on the national question. 
 She expressed the per-fectly justified opinion that if we uphold autonomy within a state (for a definite region, area, etc. 
), we must, as centra-list Social-Democrats, insist that all major national issues—and divorce legislation is one of them—should come within the jurisdiction of the central government and centralparliament. 
 This example clearly demonstrates that one can-not be a democrat and socialist without demanding full freedom of divorce now, because the lack of such freedom is additional oppression of the oppressed sex—though it shouldnot be difficult to realise that recognition of the freedom to leave one’s husband is not an invitation to all wives to do so! P. 
 Kievsky “objects”:“What would this right [of divorce] be like if in such cases [when the wife wants to leave the husband] she could not exercise her right? Or if its exercise depended on the will ofthird parties, or, worse still, on the will of claimants to her affections? Would we advocate the proclamation of such a right? Of course not!” That objection reveals complete failure to understand the relation between democracy in general and capitalism. 
 The conditions that make it impossible for the oppressedclasses to “exercise” their democratic rights are not theexception under capitalism; they are typical of the system. 
In most cases the right of divorce will remain unrealisableunder capitalism, for the oppressed sex is subjugated eco-nomically. 
 No matter how much democracy there is under capitalism, the woman remains a “domestic slave”, a slavelocked up in the bedroom, nursery, kitchen. 
 The right to elect their “own” people’s judges, officials, school-teachers, jurymen, etc. 
, is likewise in most cases unrealisable under capitalism precisely because of the economic subjection of the workers and peasants. 
 The same applies to the democraticrepublic: our programme defines it as “government by thepeople”, though all Social-Democrats know perfectly wellthat under capitalism, even in the most democratic republic,there is bound to be bribery of officials by the bourgeoisie and an alliance of stock exchange and the government. 
 Only those who cannot think straight or have no knowl-edge of Marxism will conclude: so there is no point inhaving a republic, no point in freedom of divorce, no pointin democracy, no point in self-determination of nations!But Marxists know that democracy does not abolish class oppression. 
 It only makes the class struggle more direct, wider, more open and pronounced, and that is what we need. 
The fuller the freedom of divorce, the clearer will womensee that the source of their “domestic slavery” is capitalism,not lack of rights. 
 The more democratic the system ofgovernment, the clearer will the workers see that the root evil is capitalism, not lack of rights. 
 The fuller national equality (and it is not complete without freedom of secession), the clearer will the workers of the oppressed nations see thatthe cause of their oppression is capitalism, not lack ofrights, etc. 
 It must be said again and again: It is embarrassing to have to drive home the ABC of Marxism, but what is one to do if Kievsky does not know it? He discusses divorce in much the same way as one of the secretaries of the Organising Committee abroad, Sem-kovsky, discussed it, if I remember rightly, in the ParisGolos . 
 31 His line of reasoning was that freedom of divorce is not, it is true, an invitation to all wives to leave their husbands, but if it is proved that all other husbands arebetter than yours, madame, then it amounts to one and thesame thing!! In taking that line of argument Semkovsky forgot that crank thinking is not a violation of socialist or democratic principles. 
 If Semkovsky were to tell a woman that all other husbands were better than hers, no one would regard this asviolation of democratic principles. 
 At most people would say: There are bound to be big cranks in a big party! But if Semkovsky were to take it into his head to defend as a dem-ocrat a person who opposed freedom of divorce and appealed to the courts, the police or the church to prevent hiswife leaving him, we feel sure that even most of Semkovsky’s colleagues on the Secretariat Abroad, though they are sorrysocialists, would refuse to support him! Both Semkovsky and Kievsky, in their “discussion” of divorce, fail to understand the issue and avoid its substance, namely, that under capitalism the right of divorce, asall other democratic rights without exception, is conditional, restricted, formal, narrow and extremely difficult of reali-sation. 
 Yet no self-respecting Social-Democrat will consideranyone opposing the right of divorce a democrat, let alone a socialist. 
 That is the crux of the matter. 
 All “democracy” consists in the proclamation and realisation of “rights” whichunder capitalism are realisable only to a very small degreeand only relatively. 
 But without the proclamation of theserights, without a struggle to introduce them now, immedi-ately, without training the masses in the spirit of this strug-gle, socialism is impossible . 
 Having failed to understand that, Kievsky bypasses the central question, that belongs to his special subject,namely, how will we Social-Democrats abolish national oppression? He shunts the question aside with phrasesabout the world being “drenched in blood”, etc. 
 (though this has no bearing on the matter under discussion). 
 This leaves only one single argument: the socialist revolutionwill solve everything. 
 Or, the argument sometimes advancedby people who share his views: self-determination is impos-sible under capitalism and superfluous under socialism. 
 From the theoretical standpoint that view is nonsensical; from the practical political standpoint it is chauvinistic. 
 It fails to appreciate the significance of democracy. 
 Forsocialism is impossible without democracy because: (1) theproletariat cannot perform the socialist revolution unlessit prepares for it by the struggle for democracy; (2) victori-ous socialism cannot consolidate its victory and bring humanity to the withering away of the state without imple-menting full democracy. 
 To claim that self-determination issuperfluous under socialism is therefore just as nonsensical and just as hopelessly confusing as to claim that democracy is superfluous under socialism. 
 Self-determination is no more impossible under capital-ism, and just as superfluous under socialism, as democracy generally. 
 The economic revolution will create the necessary prereq-uisites for eliminating all types of political oppression. 
 Precisely for that reason it is illogical and incorrect to reduce everything to the economic revolution, for the question is: how to eliminate national oppression? It cannot be elim-inated without an economic revolution. 
 That is incontest-able. 
 But to limit ourselves to this is to lapse into absurd and wretched imperialist Economism. 
 We must carry out national equality ; proclaim, formulate and implement equal “rights” for all nations. 
 Everyone agrees with that save, perhaps, P. 
 Kievsky. 
 But this poses a ques-tion which Kievsky avoids: is not negation of the right to form a national state negation of equality? Of course it is. 
 And consistent, i. 
e. 
, socialist, democrats, proclaim, formulate and will implement this right, without which there is no path to complete, voluntary rapproche-ment and merging of nations. 
 7. 
 CONCLUSION. 
 ALEXINSKY METHODS We have analysed only a fraction of P. 
 Kievsky’s argu-ments. 
 To analyse all of them would require an article five times the length of this one, for there is not a single correctview in the whole of what Kievsky has to say. 
 What is cor-rect—if there are no mistakes in the figures—is the footnote data on banks. 
 All the rest is an impossible tangle of confu-sion peppered with phrases like “driving a stake into the quiv-ering body”, “we shall not only judge the conquering heroes,but condemn them to death and elimination”, “the new world will be born in agonising convulsions”, “the question willnot be one of granting charters and rights, nor of proclaim-ing the freedom of the nations, but of establishing genuinely free relationships, destroying age-old slavery and social oppression in general, and national oppression in particu-lar”, and so on and so forth. 
 These phrases are, at one and the same time, the cover and expression of two things: first, their underlying “idea” is imperialist Economism , which is just as ugly a caricature of Marxism, and just as complete a misinterpretation of therelationship between socialism and democracy, as was thelate and unlamented Economism of 1894-1902. 
 Second, we have in these phrases a repetition of Alex-insky methods. 
 This should be especially emphasised, for a whole section of Kievsky’s article (Chapter II, §f, “The Special Position of the Jews”) is based exclusively on these methods. 
 At the 1907 London Congress the Bolsheviks would dissociate themselves from Alexinsky when, in reply totheoretical arguments, he would pose as an agitator and resort to high-falutin, but entirely irrelevant, phrases against one or another type of exploitation and oppression. 
“He’s begun his shouting again,” our delegates would say. 
And the “shouting” did not do Alexinsky any good. 
 There is the same kind of “shouting” in Kievsky’s article. 
 He has no reply to the theoretical questions and arguments expounded in the theses. 
 Instead, he poses as an agitator and begins shouting about the oppression of the Jews,though every thinking person will realise that his shouting,and the Jewish question in general, have no relationwhatever to the subject under discussion. 
 Alexinsky methods can lead to no good. 
 Written August-October 1916 First published in the magazine Published according to Zvezda Nos. 
 1 and 2, 1924 the manuscript, Signed: V. 
 Lenin verified with the typewritten copy containing Lenin’s corrections THE MILITAR Y PROGRAMME OF THE PROLETARIA N REVOLUTI ON32 Among the Dutch, Scandinavian and Swiss revolutionary Social-Democrats who are combating the social-chauvinist lies about “defence of the fatherland” in the present imperial-ist war, there have been voices in favour of replacing theold Social-Democratic minimum-programme demand for a“militia”, or “the armed nation”, by a new demand: “disarm-ament”. 
 The Jugend-Internationale 33 has inaugurated a discussion on this issue and published, in No. 
 3, an editor-ial supporting disarmament. 
 There is also, we regret to note, a concession to the “disarmament” idea in R. 
 Grimm’slatest theses. 
 34 Discussions have been started in the peri-odicals Neues Leben35 and Vorbote . 
 Let us take a closer look at the position of the disarma-ment advocates. 
 I Their principal argument is that the disarmament demand is the clearest, most decisive, most consistent expressionof the struggle against all militarism and against all war. 
 But in this principal argument lies the disarmament ad-vocates’ principal error. 
 Socialists cannot, without ceasingto be socialists, be opposed to all war. 
 Firstly, socialists have never been, nor can they ever be, opposed to revolutionary wars. 
 The bourgeoisie of theimperialist “Great” Powers has become thoroughly reaction-ary, and the war this bourgeoisie is now waging we regard as a reactionary, slave-owners’ and criminal war. 
 But what about a war against this bourgeoisie? A war, for instance, waged by peoples oppressed by and dependent upon this bourgeoisie, or by colonial peoples, for liberation. 
 In §5 of the Internationale group theses we read: “National wars are no longer possible in the era of this unbridled imperi-alism. 
” That is obviously wrong. 
 The history of the twentieth century, this century of “unbridled imperialism”, is replete with colonial wars. 
But what we Europeans, the imperialist oppressors of themajority of the world’s peoples, with our habitual, despic-able European chauvinism, call “colonial wars” are often national wars, or national rebellions of these oppressed peop-les. 
 One of the main features of imperialism is that it accel-erates capitalist development in the most backward coun-tries, and thereby extends and intensifies the struggle againstnational oppression. 
 That is a fact, and from it inevitably follows that imperialism must often give rise to national wars. 
 Junius , who defends the above-quoted “theses” in her pam-phlet, says that in the imperialist era every national waragainst an imperialist Great Power leads to the interventionof a rival imperialist Great Power. 
 Every national war is thusturned into an imperialist war. 
 But that argument is wrong too. 
 This can happen, but does not always happen. 
 Many colonial wars between 1900 and 1914 did not follow thatcourse. 
 And it would be simply ridiculous to declare, forinstance, that after the present war, if it ends in the utterexhaustion of all the belligerents, “there can be no” national,progressive, revolutionary wars “of any kind”, waged, say, by China in alliance with India, Persia, Siam, etc. 
, against the Great Powers. 
 To deny all possibility of national wars under imperial-ism is wrong in theory, obviously mistaken historically,and tantamount to European chauvinism in practice: wewho belong to nations that oppress hundreds of millions in Europe, Africa, Asia, etc. 
, are invited to tell the oppressed peoples that it is “impossible” for them to wage war against “our” nations! Secondly, civil war is just as much a war as any other. 
 He who accepts the class struggle cannot fail to acceptcivil wars, which in every class society are the natural, and under certain conditions inevitable, continuation, devel-opment and intensification of the class struggle. 
 That hasbeen confirmed by every great revolution. 
 To repudiate civil war, or to forget about it, is to fall into extreme opportunism and renounce the socialist revolution. 
 Thirdly, the victory of socialism in one country does not at one stroke eliminate all war in general. 
 On the contrary,it presupposes wars. 
 The development of capitalism proceedsextremely unevenly in different countries. 
 It cannot beotherwise under commodity production. 
 From this it followsirrefutably that socialism cannot achieve victory simulta-neously in all countries. 
 It will achieve victory first in one or several countries, while the others will for some timeremain bourgeois or pre-bourgeois. 
 This is bound to createnot only friction, but a direct attempt on the part of thebourgeoisie of other countries to crush the socialist state’svictorious proletariat. 
 In such cases a war on our part would be a legitimate and just war. 
 It would be a war for socialism, for the liberation of other nations from the bourgeoisie. 
Engels was perfectly right when, in his letter to Kautsky ofSeptember 12, 1882, he clearly stated that it was possiblefor already victorious socialism to wage “defensive wars”. 
 What he had in mind was defence of the victorious prole-tariat against the bourgeoisie of other countries. 
 Only after we have overthrown, finally vanquished and expropriated the bourgeoisie of the whole world, and notmerely of one country, will wars become impossible. 
 Andfrom a scientific point of view it would be utterly wrong—and utterly unrevolutionary—for us to evade or gloss over the most important thing: crushing the resistance of the bourgeoisie—the most difficult task, and one demandingthe greatest amount of fighting in the transition to socialism. 
 The “social” parsons and opportunists are always ready tobuild dreams of future peaceful socialism. 
 But the very thingthat distinguishes them from revolutionary Social-Demo-crats is that they refuse to think about and reflect on the fierce class struggle and class wars needed to achieve that beautiful future. 
 We must not allow ourselves to be led astray by words. 
 The term “defence of the fatherland”, for instance, is hate-ful to many because both avowed opportunists and Kauts-kyites use it to cover up and gloss over the bourgeois lie about the present predatory war. 
 This is a fact. 
 But it does not follow that we must no longer see through to the meaning of political slogans. 
 To accept “defence of the fatherland” in the present war is no more nor less than to accept it as a “just” war, a war in the interests of the proletariat—no more nor less, we repeat, because invasions may occur inany war. 
 It would be sheer folly to repudiate “defence of thefatherland” on the part of oppressed nations in their wars against the imperialist Great Powers, or on the part of a victorious proletariat in its war against some Galliffet of a bourgeois state. 
 Theoretically, it would be absolutely wrong to forget that every war is but the continuation of policy by othermeans. 
 The present imperialist war is the continuation ofthe imperialist policies of two groups of Great Powers, andthose policies were engendered and fostered by the sum total of the relationships of the imperialist era. 
 But this very era must also necessarily engender and foster policies ofstruggle against national oppression and of proletarianstruggle against the bourgeoisie and, consequently, also thepossibility and inevitability, first, of revolutionary nationalrebellions and wars; second, of proletarian wars and rebel-lions against the bourgeoisie; and, third, of a combination of both kinds of revolutionary war, etc. 
 II To this must be added the following general consideration. 
 An oppressed class which does not strive to learn to use arms, to acquire arms, only deserves to be treated likeslaves. 
 We cannot, unless we have become bourgeois pacifistsor opportunists, forget that we are living in a class societyfrom which there is no way out, nor can there be, savethrough the class struggle. 
 In every class society, whether based on slavery, serfdom, or, as at present, on wage-labour, the oppressor class is always armed. 
 Not only the modernstanding army, but even the modern militia—and even inthe most democratic bourgeois republics, Switzerland, forinstance—represent the bourgeoisie armed against the pro-letariat. 
 That is such an elementary truth that it is hardly necessary to dwell upon it. 
 Suffice it to point to the use of troops against strikers in all capitalist countries. 
 A bourgeoisie armed against the proletariat is one of the biggest, fundamental and cardinal facts of modern capital-ist society. 
 And in face of this fact, revolutionary Social-Democrats are urged to “demand” “disarmament”! That is tantamount to complete abandonment of the class-strugglepoint of view, to renunciation of all thought of revolution. 
Our slogan must be: arming of the proletariat to defeat,expropriate and disarm the bourgeoisie. 
 These are the onlytactics possible for a revolutionary class, tactics that follow logically from, and are dictated by, the whole objective development of capitalist militarism. 
 Only after the pro-letariat has disarmed the bourgeoisie will it be able, with-out betraying its world-historic mission, to consign allarmaments to the scrap-heap. 
 And the proletariat willundoubtedly do this, but only when this condition has been fulfilled, certainly not before . 
 If the present war rouses among the reactionary Christian socialists, among the whimpering petty bourgeoisie, only horror and fright, only aversion to all use of arms, to blood-shed, death, etc. 
, then we must say: Capitalist society isand has always been horror without end . 
 If this most reaction-ary of all wars is now preparing for that society an end in horror , we have no reason to fall into despair. 
 But the disar-mament “demand”, or more correctly, the dream of disarma-ment, is, objectively, nothing but an expression of despairat a time when, as everyone can see, the bourgeoisie itselfis paving the way for the only legitimate and revolutionary war—civil war against the imperialist bourgeoisie. 
 A lifeless theory, some might say, but we would remind them of two world-historical facts: the role of the trustsand the employment of women in industry, on the one hand,and the Paris Commune of 1871 and the December 1905uprising in Russia, on the other. 
 The bourgeoisie makes it its business to promote trusts, drive women and children into the factories, subject them tocorruption and suffering, condemn them to extreme poverty. 
We do not “demand” such development, we do not “support”it. 
 We fight it. 
 But how do we fight? We explain that trusts and the employment of women in industry are progressive. 
 We do not want a return to the handicraft system, pre-monop-oly capitalism, domestic drudgery for women. 
 Forwardthrough the trusts, etc. 
, and beyond them to socialism! With the necessary changes that argument is applicable also to the present militarisation of the population. 
 Today the imperialist bourgeoisie militarises the youth as well as the adults; tomorrow, it may begin militarising the women. 
Our attitude should be: All the better! Full speed ahead!For the faster we move, the nearer shall we be to the armeduprising against capitalism. 
 How can Social-Democratsgive way to fear of the militarisation of the youth, etc. 
, if they have not forgotten the example of the Paris Commune? This is not a “lifeless theory” or a dream. 
 It is a fact. 
 And itwould be a sorry state of affairs indeed if, all the economicand political facts notwithstanding, Social-Democratsbegan to doubt that the imperialist era and imperialist warsmust inevitably bring about a repetition of such facts. 
 A certain bourgeois observer of the Paris Commune, writ-ing to an English newspaper in May 1871, said: “If the Frenchnation consisted entirely of women, what a terrible nationit would be!” Women and teen-age children fought in theParis Commune side by side with the men. 
 It will be nodifferent in the coming battles for the overthrow of the bourgeoisie. 
 Proletarian women will not look on passively as poorly armed or unarmed workers are shot down by thewell-armed forces of the bourgeoisie. 
 They will take toarms, as they did in 1871, and from the cowed nations oftoday—or more correctly, from the present-day labour move-ment, disorganised more by the opportunists than by the governments—there will undoubtedly arise, sooner or later, but with absolute certainty, an international league of the“terrible nations” of the revolutionary proletariat. 
 The whole of social life is now being militarised. 
 Imperia-lism is a fierce struggle of the Great Powers for the divisionand redivision of the world. 
 It is therefore bound to lead to further militarisation in all countries, even in neutral and small ones. 
 How will proletarian women oppose this? Onlyby cursing all war and everything military, only by demand-ing disarmament? The women of an oppressed and reallyrevolutionary class will never accept that shameful role. 
They will say to their sons: “You will soon be grown up. 
 You will be given a gun. 
 Take it and learn the military art properly. 
 The proletarians need this knowledge not to shoot yourbrothers, the workers of other countries, as is being done in the present war, and as the traitors to socialism are telling you to do. 
 They need it to fight the bourgeoisie of their own country, to put an end to exploitation, poverty and war, and not by pious wishes, but by defeating and disarming the bourgeoi-sie. 
” If we are to shun such propaganda, precisely such propa-ganda, in connection with the present war, then we hadbetter stop using fine words about international revolution-ary Social-Democracy, the socialist revolution and war against war. 
 III The disarmament advocates object to the ‘’armed nation” clause in the programme also because it more easily leads, they allege, to concessions to opportunism. 
 The cardinal point, namely, the relation of disarmament to the class struggleand to the social revolution, we have examined above. 
 Weshall now examine the relation between the disarmamentdemand and opportunism. 
 One of the chief reasons why it isunacceptable is precisely that, together with the illusions it creates, it inevitably weakens and devitalises our struggle against opportunism. 
 Undoubtedly, this struggle is the main, immediate ques-tion now confronting the International. 
 Struggle againstimperialism that is not closely linked with the struggleagainst opportunism is either an empty phrase or a fraud. 
 One of the main defects of Zimmerwald and Kienthal 36—one of the main reasons why these embryos of the Third Internation-al may possibly end in a fiasco—is that the question offighting opportunism was not even raised openly, let alonesolved in the sense of proclaiming the need to break withthe opportunists. 
 Opportunism has triumphed—temporarily— in the European labour movement. 
 Its two main shades are apparent in all the big countries: first, the avowed, cynical,and therefore less dangerous social-imperialism of Messrs. 
Plekhanov, Scheidemann, Legien, Albert Thomas and Sem-bat, Vandervelde, Hyndman, Henderson, et al. 
; second,the concealed, Kautskyite opportunism: Kautsky-Haase and the Social-Democratic Labour Group in Germany 37; Lon-guet, Pressemane, Mayéras, et al. 
, in France; Ramsay Mac-Donald and the other leaders of the Independent Labour Party in England; Martov, Chkheidze, et al. 
, in Russia; Treves and the other so-called Left reformists in Italy. 
 Avowed opportunism is openly and directly opposed to revolution and to incipient revolutionary movements andoutbursts. 
 It is in direct alliance with the governments,varied as the forms of this alliance may be—from acceptingministerial posts to participation in the war industries com-mittees (in Russia). 
 38 The masked opportunists, the Kauts-kyites, are much more harmful and dangerous to the labour movement, because they hide their advocacy of alliance withthe former under a cloak of plausible, pseudo-“Marxist”catchwords and pacifist slogans. 
 The fight against both theseforms of prevailing opportunism must be conducted in all fields of proletarian politics: parliament, the trade unions, strikes, the armed forces, etc. 
 The main distinguishing fea-ture of both these forms of prevailing opportunism is that the concrete question of the connection between the present war and revolution , and the other concrete questions of revo-lution , are hushed up, concealed, or treated with an eye to police prohibitions. 
 And this despite the fact that before the war the connection between this impending war and the pro-letarian revolution was emphasised innumerable times, bothunofficially, and officially in the Basle Manifesto. 
 39 The main defect of the disarmament demand is its evasion of allthe concrete questions of revolution. 
 Or do the advocatesof disarmament stand for an altogether new kind of revolu-tion, unarmed revolution? To proceed. 
 We are by no means opposed to the fight for reforms. 
 And we do not wish to ignore the sad possibility—if the worst comes to the worst—of mankind going througha second imperialist war, if revolution does not come out ofthe present war, in spite of the numerous outbursts of mass unrest and mass discontent and in spite of our efforts. 
 We favour a programme of reforms directed also against the op-portunists. 
 They would be only too glad if we left thestruggle for reforms entirely to them and sought escape fromsad reality in a nebulous “disarmament” fantasy. 
 “Disarma-ment” means simply running away from unpleasant reality, not fighting it. 
 In such a programme we would say something like this: “To accept the defence of the fatherland slogan in the 1914-16 imperialist war is to corrupt the labour movement with the aid of a bourgeois lie. 
” Such a concrete reply to a concrete question would be more correct theoretically, much more useful to the proletariat and more unbearable to the opportun-ists, than the disarmament demand and repudiation of“all and any” defence of the fatherland. 
 And we could add:“The bourgeoisie of all the imperialist Great Powers—Eng-land, France, Germany, Austria, Russia, Italy, Japan, the United States—has become so reactionary and so intent on world domination, that any war waged by the bourgeoisie of those countries is bound to be reactionary. 
 The proletariat must not only oppose all such wars, but must also wish forthe defeat of its ‘own’ government in such wars and utiliseits defeat for revolutionary insurrection, if an insurrection to prevent the war proves unsuccessful. 
 ” On the question of a militia, we should say: We are not in favour of a bourgeois militia; we are in favour only of aproletarian militia. 
 Therefore, “not a penny, not a man”,not only for a standing army, but even for a bourgeois mili-tia, even in countries like the United States, or Switzerland, Norway, etc. 
 The more so that in the freest republican coun-tries (e. 
g. 
, Switzerland) we see that the militia is being in-creasingly Prussianised, particularly in 1907 and 1911, andprostituted by being used against strikers. 
 We can demandpopular election of officers, abolition of all military law,equal rights for foreign and native-born workers (a point particularly important for those imperialist states which, like Switzerland, are more and more blatantly exploitinglarger numbers of foreign workers, while denying them allrights). 
 Further, we can demand the right of every hundred,say, inhabitants of a given country to form voluntary milit-ary-training associations, with free election of instructors paid by the state, etc. 
 Only under these conditions could the proletariat acquire military training for itself and not for its slave-owners; and the need for such training is imper-atively dictated by the interests of the proletariat. 
 The Rus-sian revolution showed that every success of the revolution-ary movement, even a partial success like the seizure of a certain city, a certain factory town, or winning over a cer-tain section of the army, inevitably compels the victorious proletariat to carry out just such a programme. 
 Lastly, it stands to reason that opportunism can never be defeated by mere programmes; it can only be defeated by deeds. 
 The greatest, and fatal, error of the bankrupt Second International was that its words did not correspond to itsdeeds, that it cultivated the habit of hypocritical and un-scrupulous revolutionary phrase-mongering (note the presentattitude of Kautsky and Co. 
 towards the Basle Manifesto). 
Disarmament as a social idea, i. 
e. 
, an idea that springs from, and can affect, a certain social environment, and is not the invention of some crackpot, springs, evidently,from the peculiar “tranquil” conditions prevailing, by wayof exception, in certain small states, which have for a fairlylong time stood aside from the world’s path of war and blood-shed, and hope to remain that way. 
 To be convinced of this, we have only to consider the arguments advanced, for in-stance, by the Norwegian advocates of disarmament. 
 “Weare a small country,” they say. 
 “Our army is small; there isnothing we can do against the Great Powers [and, conse-quently, nothing we can do to resist forcible involvement inan imperialist alliance with one or the other Great-Power group] .... 
 We want to be left in peace in our backwoods and continue our backwoods politics, demand disarmament,compulsory arbitration, permanent neutrality, etc. 
” (“perma-nent ” after the Belgian fashion, no doubt?). 
 The petty striving of petty states to hold aloof, the petty-bourgeois desire to keep as far away as possible from the great battles of world history, to take advantage of one’s relatively monopolistic position in order to remainin hidebound passivity—this is the objective social environ-ment which may ensure the disarmament idea a certain de-gree of success and a certain degree of popularity in some ofthe small states. 
 That striving is, of course, reactionary and is based entirely on illusions, for, in one way or another, imperialism draws the small states into the vortex of worldeconomy and world politics. 
 In Switzerland, for instance, the imperialist environment objectively prescribes two courses to the labour movement: the opportunists, in alliance with the bourgeoisie, are seeking to turn the country into a republican-democratic mo-nopolistic federation that would thrive on profits from impe-rialist bourgeois tourists, and to make this “tranquil” monopolistic position as profitable and as tranquil as possible. 
 The genuine Swiss Social-Democrats are striving to use Switzerland’s relative freedom and her “international” posi-tion to help the victory of the close alliance of the revolu-tionary elements in the European workers’ parties. 
 Switzer-land, thank God, does not have “a separate language of herown”, but uses three world languages, the three languages spoken in the adjacent belligerent countries. 
 If twenty thousand Swiss party members were to pay a weekly levy of two centimes as a sort of “extra war tax”,we would have twenty thousand francs per annum, asum more than sufficient periodically to publish in threelanguages and distribute among the workers and soldiers of the belligerent countries—in spite of the bans imposed by the general staffs—all the truthful evidence about theincipient revolt of the workers, their fraternising in thetrenches, their hope that the weapons will be used for revolu-tionary struggle against the imperialist bourgeoisie of their“own” countries, etc. 
 That is not new. 
 It is being done by the best papers, like La Sentinelle , Volksrecht and the Berner Tagwacht ,40 although, unfortunately, on an inadequate scale. 
 Only throughsuch activity can the splendid decision of the Aarau PartyCongress 41 become something more than merely a splendid decision. 
 The question that interests us now is: Does the disarm-ament demand correspond to this revolutionary trend amongthe Swiss Social-Democrats? It obviously does not. 
 Objec-tively, disarmament is an extremely national, a specificallynational programme of small states. 
 It is certainly not theinternational programme of international revolutionary Social-Democracy. 
 Written in September 1916 First published in the magazine Published according to Jugend-Internationale Nos. 
 9, the magazine text and 10, September and October 1917 Translated from the German Signed: N. 
 Lenin First published in Russian in 1929 in the second and third editions of Lenin’s Collected Works , Vol. 
 XIX LOST IN A WOOD OF THREE TREES The first issue of the Bund Bulletin42 (September 1916) contains a letter from a St. 
 Petersburg Bundist dated Feb-ruary 26, 1916. 
 He writes: “Our difficulty in accepting the defence formula is greatly aggravated by the fact that we, of all people, cannot hushup the Polish question, as our Russian comrades have sofar been doing. 
” (Don’t forget that this gentleman’s “com-rades” are Potresov 43 and Co. 
) “And the fact that even the de-fencists among us do not want to apply the “no annexations” formula in relation to Russia is a strong argument against defence in the eyes of those who are not at present preparedto accept it psychologically. 
 For they ask, ironically: Whatare you defending? The idea of an independent Poland en-joys recognition in top circles” (which circles is not clear). 
 When we stated, in our 1915 resolution, that Germano-phile chauvinism predominates in the Bund, * the only reply Kosovsky and Co. 
 could give was abuse. 
 Now our statementis corroborated in their own journal, and by their own partycolleague! For, if the Bund “defencists” do not wish to applythe “no annexations” formula “in relation to Russia ” (note that there is not a word about Germany!), then how does this differ, in substance, from Germanophile chauvinism? If the Bundists wanted to think, and could do so, they would realise that on the question of annexations they arewandering in the dark. 
 There is only one way out of theirwanderings and confusion: accept the programme we expo-unded as early as 1913. 
 ** Namely, that a conscientious and *See present edition, Vol. 
 21, pp. 
 163 -64. 
— Ed. 
 **See present edition, Vol. 
 19, pp. 
 539 -45. 
— Ed. 
 forthright anti-annexation policy requires that socialists and democrats of the oppressed nations, in all their propa-ganda and agitation, denounce as scoundrels those socialists of the oppressor nations (whether Great Russians or Germans,Poles in relation to the Ukrainians, etc. 
) who do not con-sistently and unreservedly stand for free secession of nationsoppressed by their own nation (or forcibly held by it). 
 If the Bundists refuse to accept that conclusion, then it is only out of reluctance to quarrel with the Potresovs in Rus-sia, the Legiens, Südekums, even the Ledebours (Ledebourdoes not favour the secession of Alsace-Lorraine) in Ger-many, with the nationalists, or to be more correct, thesocial-chauvinists, in Poland, etc. 
 What a valid reason! Written September-October 1916 First published in 1931 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany XVII the manuscript GREETING S TO THE ITALIA N SOCIALIS T PARTY CONGRES S44 Dear Comrades, On behalf of the Central Committee of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, I convey greetings to the Congressof the Italian Socialist Party and wish it every success inits work. 
 Yours is the first socialist party to do what all socialist parties of the warring countries could and should have done,had they not betrayed socialism and sided with the bourgeoi-sie, namely: convene a congress or conference in a free coun-try, beyond the reach of their “native” military censorshipand military authorities, in a country where the socialistattitude towards the war can be freely expressed and discussed. 
Permit me to express the hope that your Congress—freeof patriotic muzzles—will accomplish as much or even more than your party has already accomplished in the struggle against the betrayal of socialism by nearly all the Europeansocialist parties. 
 Representatives of our two parties worked together at Zimmerwald and Kienthal. 
 The only serious differencedividing us was over the inevitability and necessity of break-ing with the social-chauvinists, i. 
e. 
, socialists in words and chauvinists in deeds, namely, with all those who advo-cate or seek to justify “defence of the fatherland” in the pres-ent imperialist war, who directly or indirectly support their “own” government and their “own” bourgeoisie in this reaction-ary, predatory war for division of colonies and worlddomination. 
 We believe that a break with the social-chau-vinists is historically inevitable and necessary if the prole-tariat’s revolutionary struggle for socialism is to be sincere, and not confined merely to verbal protests. 
 Your party’s representatives believed there was still hope that proletarian victory over the social-chauvinists (“ sciovinisti ”) could be achieved without a break. 
 We would like to hope that developments in world social-ism will increasingly remove the grounds for this differencebetween us. 
 On the one hand, the workers’ movement is increasingly developing towards a factual division into adherents and opponents of “defence of the fatherland” in this imperialistwar and in subsequent imperialist wars, which are being pre-pared and instigated by the entire policy of all the modernso-called “Great” Powers. 
 This applies to the whole world,not only to the belligerent countries, but also to the chief neutral powers—the United States of America, for instance, the foremost capitalist country. 
 On the other hand, we read with especial pleasure an editorial in a recent issue of Avanti! , the Central Organ of the Socialist Party, “La chiusura della conferenza socialistatedesca”. 
 * This Conference of the German Socialist Party was one of the most outstanding events in world socialism in recent months, for at it there clashed three principal trends not only in German, but in world socialism: first, avowed social-chauvinism represented by Legien, David and Co. 
in Germany, Plekhanov, Potresov, Chkhenkeli in Russia,Renaudel and Sembat in France, Bissolati and his party in Italy; second, the Haase-Kautsky trend which subscribes to the basic idea of social-chauvinism, namely, “defence ofthe fatherland” in the present war, and seeks to reconcilethis idea with genuine socialism and internationalism; and,third, the genuine socialist and internationalist trendrepresented by the Internationale group and international socialists in Germany. 
 45 Evaluating these three trends, Avanti! (No. 
 269, September 27, 1916) wrote in the above-mentioned editorial: “...il proletariato tedesco finirà indubbiamente per trionfare contro i Legien, gli Ebert ed i David, che hanno preteso di compromettere lasua azione di classe nei tristi pattegiameni coi Bethmann-Hollweg egli altri fautori della guerra. 
 Di questo noi abbiamo la più schiettacertezza. 
” *“Conclusion of the German Socialist Conference”. 
— Ed. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR Noi abbiamo la medesima certezza. 
 “Piuttosto”—continues Avanti! —“la conferenza dei socialisti tedeschi ci lascia incerti circa l’atteggiamento prossimo di una parte della opposizione, quella che ebbe per esponente principale l’Haase”. 
 “Il gruppo ‘Internazionale’ con Liebknecht, con Mehring, con Clara Zetkin, con Rosa Luxemburg—con tutti gli altri ‘sabotatori e traditori della patria’ è perfettamente a posto. 
” ...“Meno conseguente ci è parso Haase ”. 
* And Avanti! explains what it considers to be the “inconsist-ency” of Haase and his group, which we in our press call the Kautsky trend in world socialism, “essi non accettano le logiche e naturali conseguenze cui sono giunti Liebknecht e compagni ”. 
** So writes Avanti! We whole-heartedly welcome these statements of Avanti! We feel sure that the Vorwärts , Central Organ of the German Social-Democrats and chief organ of the Kautsky trend, is wrong when it writes, in its issue of October 7, 1916, in con-nection with this Avanti! statement, “dass der Avanti! über die Parteiverhältnisse und Partei-vorgänge in Deutschland nicht ganz zutreffend informiert ist”. 
 *** We feel sure that Avanti! is “ganz zutreffend” **** in-formed. 
 That it considers the Haase group wrong and the Lieb-knecht group right is no accident. 
 We therefore hope that,by its defence of Liebknecht’s principles and tactics, the *“Undoubtedly the German proletariat will, in the end, triumph over the Legiens, Eberts and Davids, who have sought to compromiseits class struggle by wretched deals with the Bethmann-Hollwegs andother supporters of the war. 
 We are fully convinced of that. 
” We, too, are convinced of that. 
“Nevertheless,” Avanti! continues, “the German Socialist Confer-ence provides no indication of the future conduct of that sectionof the opposition of which Haase is the chief representative. 
” “The Internationale group of Liebknecht, Mehring, Clara Zetkin and Rosa Luxemburg—together with all the other ‘saboteurs and trai-tors to the fatherland’—unfailingly remain at their posts. 
” “Haase appears to us to be less consistent. 
 ”—Ed. 
 **‘they do not accept the logical and natural conclusions drawn by Liebknecht and his comrades”. 
— Ed. 
 *** “that Avanti! is not quite correctly informed about the affairs of and relations within the party in Germany”. 
— Ed. 
 **** “quite correctly”. 
— Ed. 
 Italian Socialist Party will occupy an outstanding place in international socialism. 
 Our Party finds itself in incomparably more difficult conditions than the Italian party. 
 Our entire press has been clamped down. 
 But even in emigration we have been able to assist our comrades’ struggle in Russia. 
 Two factsprove that our Party’s anti-war struggle in Russia is the struggle of truly front-rank workers and the masses of work-ers. 
 Firstly, our Party’s deputies in the Duma—Petrovsky,Shagov, Badayev, Samoilov and Muranov—elected by theworkers of the leading industrial gubernias, have been exiled to Siberia by the tsarist government for revolutionary propaganda against the war. 
 46 Secondly, long after their exile, the front-rank workers in St. 
 Petersburg belongingto our Party categorically rejected participation in the warindustries committees. 
 A conference of Entente socialists 47 is being convened in January 1917. 
 We have already had one experience of participation in such a conference in London. 
 Our represen-tative was denied the floor the moment he dared tell thetruth about the European socialists’ betrayal. 
 48 We there-fore consider that only the Bissolatis, Plekhanovs, Sembatsand tutti quanti should share in these conferences. 
 For that reason we do not intend to attend the conference, and we shall address a letter to the European workers exposing thesocial-chauvinists’ deception of the people. 
 I once again convey greetings to the Congress of the Italian Socialist Party and best wishes for its success. 
 Written in the first half of October 1916 First published in 1931 Published according in Lenin Miscellany XVII to the manuscript THE “DISARMAMENT ” SLOGAN In a number of countries, mostly small and not involved in the present war—Sweden, Norway, Holland and Switzer-land, for example—there have been voices in favour of re-placing the old Social-Democratic minimum-programme demand for a “militia”, or the “armed nation” by a new de-mand: “disarmament”. 
 An editorial article in favour ofdisarmament appeared in No. 
 3 of Jugend-Internationale (The Youth International), organ of the internationalyouth organisation. 
 In R. 
 Grimm’s “theses” on the mili-tary question drawn up for the Swiss Social-Democratic Party Congress we find a concession to the “disarmament”idea. 
 In the Swiss magazine Neues Leben (New Life) for 1915, Roland-Holst, while ostensibly advocating “con-ciliation” between the two demands, actually makes thesame concession. 
 Issue No. 
 2 of Vorbote (The Herald), organ of the International Left, carried an article by the Dutch Marxist Wijnkoop in defence of the oldarmed-nation demand. 
 The Scandinavian Lefts, as isevident from the articles printed below, accept “disarma-ment”, though at times they admit that it contains anelement of pacifism. 
” 49 Let us take a closer look at the position of the dis-armament advocates. 
 I One of the principal premises advanced, although not always definitely expressed, in favour of disarmament is this: we are opposed to war, to all war in general, and the demand for disarmament is the most definite, clear andunambiguous expression of this point of view. 
 We showed the fallacy of that idea in our review of Junius’s pamphlet, to which we refer the reader. 
 * Social-ists cannot be opposed to all war in general without ceas-ing to be socialists. 
 We must not allow ourselves to beblinded by the present imperialist war. 
 Such wars between“Great” Powers are typical of the imperialist epoch; butdemocratic wars and rebellions, for instance, of oppressednations against their oppressors to free themselves from oppression, are by no means impossible. 
 Civil wars of the proletariat against the bourgeoisie for socialism are inevit-able. 
 Wars are possible between one country in whichsocialism has been victorious and other, bourgeois orreactionary, countries. 
 Disarmament is the ideal of socialism. 
 There will be no wars in socialist society; consequently, disarmament will be achieved But whoever expects that socialism willbe achieved without a social revolution and the dictatorship of the proletariat is not a socialist. 
 Dictatorship is statepower based directly on violence . 
 And in the twentieth century—as in the age of civilisation generally—violence means neither a fist nor a club, but troops . 
 To put “dis-armament” in the programme is tantamount to making thegeneral declaration: We are opposed to the use of arms. 
There is as little Marxism in this as there would be if wewere to say: We are opposed to violence! It should be observed that the international discussion of this question was conducted mainly, if not exclusively, in the German language. 
 The Germans, however, use twowords, the difference between which is not easily renderedin Russian. 
 One, strictly speaking, means “disarmament”, ** and is used by Kautsky and the Kautskyites, for instance,in the sense of reduction of armaments. 
 The other, strictly speaking, means “disarming”, *** and is used mainly by the Lefts in the sense of abolishing militarism, abolishing allmilitarist systems. 
 In this article we speak of the latter demand, which is current among certain revolutionary Social-Democrats. 
 *See present edition, Vol. 
 22, pp. 
 305-19. 
— Ed. 
 **Abrüstung. 
— Ed. 
 *** Entwaffnung. 
— Ed. 
 The Kautskyite advocacy of “disarmament”, which is addressed to the present governments of the imperialist Great Powers, is the most vulgar opportunism, it is bour-geois pacifism, which actually —in spite of the “good intentions” of the sentimental Kautskyites—serves todistract the workers from the revolutionary struggle. 
For this advocacy seeks to instil in the workers the ideathat the present bourgeois governments of the imperialist powers are not bound to each other by thousands of threads of finance capital and by scores or hundreds of cor-responding secret treaties (i. 
e. 
, predatory, plundering treaties, preparing the way for imperialist war). 
 II An oppressed class which does not strive to learn to use arms, to acquire arms, only deserves to be treated likeslaves. 
 We cannot, unless we have become bourgeoispacifists or opportunists, forget that we are living in aclass society from which there is no way out, nor can there be, save through the class struggle and the overthrow of the power of the ruling class. 
 In every class society, whether based on slavery, serf-dom, or, as at present, on wage-labour, the oppressor classis always armed. 
 Not only the modern standing army, buteven the modern militia—and even in the most democratic bourgeois republics, Switzerland, for instance—represent the bourgeoisie armed against the proletariat. 
 That is such an elementary truth that it is hardly necessary to dwellupon it. 
 Suffice it to recall that in all capitalist coun-tries without exception troops (including the republican-democratic militia) are used against strikers. 
 A bourgeoi-sie armed against the proletariat is one of the biggest, fundamental and cardinal facts of modern capitalistsociety. 
 And in face of this fact, revolutionary Social-Democrats are urged to “demand” “disarmament”! That is tantamountto complete abandonment of the class-struggle point of view, to renunciation of all thought of revolution. 
 Our slogan must be: arming of the proletariat to defeat, exprop-riate and disarm the bourgeoisie. 
 These are the only tactics possible for a revolutionary class, tactics that follow logically from, and are dictated by, the whole objective development of capitalist militarism. 
 Only after the proletariat has disarmed the bourgeoisie will it beable, without betraying its world-historic mission, toconsign all armaments to the scrap-heap. 
 And the prole-tariat will undoubtedly do this, but only when this condi-tion has been fulfilled, certainly not before. 
 If the present war arouses among the reactionary Chris-tian socialists, among the whimpering petty bourgeoisie,only horror and fright, only aversion to all use of arms, to bloodshed, death, etc. 
, then we must say: Capitalistsociety is and has always been horror without end . 
 And if this most reactionary of all wars is now preparing for that society an end in horror , we have no reason to fall into despair. 
 But the disarmament “demand”, or more cor-rectly, the dream of disarmament, is, objectively, nothingbut an expression of despair at a time when, as everyonecan see, the bourgeoisie itself is paving the way for theonly legitimate and revolutionary war—civil war against the imperialist bourgeoisie. 
 A lifeless theory, some might say, but we would remind them of two world-historical facts: the role of the trustsand the employment of women in industry, on the onehand, and the Paris Commune of 1871 and the December1905 uprising in Russia, on the other. 
 The bourgeoisie makes it its business to promote trusts, drive women and children into the factories, subject themto corruption and suffering, condemn them to extremepoverty. 
 We do not “demand” such development, we donot “support” it. 
 We fight it. 
 But how do we fight? We explain that trusts and the employment of women in industry are progressive. 
 We do not want a return to the handicraft system, pre-monopoly capitalism, domesticdrudgery for women. 
 Forward through the trusts, etc. 
,and beyond them to socialism! That argument takes account of objective development and, with the necessary changes, applies also to the present militarisation of the population. 
 Today the imperialist bourgeoisie militarises the youth as well as the adults;tomorrow it may begin militarising the women. 
 Our attitude should be: All the better! Full speed ahead! For the faster we move, the nearer shall we be to the armed uprising against capitalism. 
 How can Social-Democrats give way to fear of the militarisation of the youth, etc. 
,if they have not forgotten the example of the Paris Com-mune? This is not a “lifeless theory” or a dream. 
 It is a fact. 
And it would be a sorry state of affairs indeed if, all theeconomic and political facts notwithstanding, Social-Democrats began to doubt that the imperialist era and imperialist wars must inevitably bring about a repetitionof such facts. 
 A certain bourgeois observer of the Paris Commune, writing to an English newspaper in May 1871, said: “Ifthe French nation consisted entirely of women, what a terrible nation it would be!” Women and teen-age child-ren fought in the Paris Commune side by side with the men. 
It will be no different in the coming battles for the over-throw of the bourgeoisie. 
 Proletarian women will not lookon passively as poorly armed or unarmed workers areshot down by the well-armed forces of the bourgeoisie. 
 They will take to arms, as they did in 1871, and from the cowed nations of today—or more correctly, from the pres-ent-day labour movement, disorganised more by theopportunists than by the governments—there will undoubt-edly arise, sooner or later, but with absolute certainty,an international league of the “terrible nations” of the revolutionary proletariat. 
 The whole of social life is now being militarised. 
 Imperialism is a fierce struggle of the Great Powers forthe division and redivision of the world. 
 It is thereforebound to lead to further militarisation in all countries,even in neutral and small ones. 
 How will proletarian women oppose this? Only by cursing all war and everything military, only by demanding disarmament? The womenof an oppressed and really revolutionary class will neveraccept that shameful role. 
 They will say to their sons: “You will soon be grown up. 
 You will be given a gun. 
 Take it and learn the military art properly. 
 The proletarians need this knowledge not to shoot your brothers, the workers of other countries, as is being done in the present war, andas the traitors to socialism are telling you to do. 
 They need it to fight the bourgeoisie of their own country, to put an end to exploitation, poverty and war, and not by pious wishes, but by defeating and disarming the bour-geoisie. 
 ” If we are to shun such propaganda, precisely such prop-aganda, in connection with the present war, then we hadbetter stop using fine words about international revolution-ary Social-Democracy, the socialist revolution and war against war. 
 III The disarmament advocates object to the “armed nation” clause in the programme also because it more easily leads,they allege, to concessions to opportunism. 
 The cardinal point, namely, the relation of disarmament to the class strug-gle and to the social revolution, we have examined above. 
We shall now examine the relation between the disarmamentdemand and opportunism. 
 One of the chief reasons whyit is unacceptable is precisely that, together with theillusions it creates, it inevitably weakens and devitalises our struggle against opportunism. 
 Undoubtedly, this struggle is the main, immediate ques-tion now confronting the International. 
 Struggle againstimperialism that is not closely linked with the struggleagainst opportunism is either an empty phrase or a fraud. 
One of the main defects of Zimmerwald and Kienthal— one of the main reasons why these embryos of the Third International may possibly end in a fiasco—is that thequestion of fighting opportunism was not even raised open-ly, let alone solved in the sense of proclaiming the need tobreak with the opportunists. 
 Opportunism has triumphed—temporarily—in the European labour movement. 
 Its two main shades are apparent in all the big countries: first, the avowed, cynical, and therefore less dangeroussocial-imperialism of Messrs. 
 Plekhanov, Scheidemann,Legien, Albert Thomas and Sembat, Vandervelde, Hynd-man, Henderson, et al. 
; second, the concealed, Kautskyiteopportunism: Kautsky-Haase and the Social-Democratic Labour Group in Germany; Longuet, Pressemane, Mayéras et al. 
, in France; Ramsay MacDonald and the other lead-ers of the Independent Labour Party in England; Martov, Chkheidze, et al. 
, in Russia; Treves and the other so-called Left reformists in Italy. 
 Avowed opportunism is openly and directly opposed to revolution and to incipient revolutionary movements andoutbursts. 
 It is in direct alliance with the governments,varied as the forms of this alliance may be—from accept-ing ministerial posts to participation in the war indus-tries committees. 
 The masked opportunists, the Kautsky-ites, are much more harmful and dangerous to the labour movement, because they hide their advocacy of alliancewith the former under a cloak of plausible, pseudo-”Marxist”catchwords and pacifist slogans. 
 The fight against boththese forms of prevailing opportunism must be conductedin all fields of proletarian politics: parliament, the trade unions, strikes, the armed forces, etc. 
 What is the main distinguishing feature of both these forms of prevailing opportunism? It is that the concrete question of the connection be-tween the present war and revolution , and the other concrete questions of revolution , are hushed up, concealed, or treat-ed with an eye to police prohibitions. 
 And this despite the fact that before the war the connection between this impending war and the proletarian revolution was em-phasised innumerable times, both unofficially, and official-ly in the Basle Manifesto. 
 The main defect of the disarmament demand is its eva-sion of all the concrete questions of revolution. 
 Or do the advocates of disarmament stand for an altogether new kindof revolution, unarmed revolution? IV To proceed. 
 We are by no means opposed to the fight for reforms. 
 And we do not wish to ignore the sad possibil-ity—if the worst comes to the worst—of mankind goingthrough a second imperialist war, if revolution does notcome out of the present war, in spite of the numerous out-bursts of mass unrest and mass discontent and in spite of our efforts. 
 We favour a programme of reforms directed also against the opportunists. 
 They would be only too glad if we left the struggle for reforms entirely to them and sought escape from sad reality in a nebulous “disarmament” fantasy. 
 “Disarmament” means simply running away from unpleasant reality, not fighting it. 
 Incidentally, certain Lefts fail to give a sufficiently concrete answer on the defence of the fatherland issue, andthat is a major defect of their attitude. 
 Theoretically,it is much more correct, and in practice immeasurably moreimportant, to say that in the present imperialist war de-fence of the fatherland is a bourgeois-reactionary deception, than to take a “general” stand against defence of the father-land under “all” circumstances. 
 That is wrong and, besides,does not “strike” at the opportunists, those direct ene-mies of the workers in the labour parties. 
 In working out a concrete and practically necessary an-swer on the question of a militia we should say: We are not in favour of a bourgeois militia; we are in favour only ofa proletarian militia. 
 Therefore, “not a penny, not a man”,not only for a standing army, but even for a bourgeois mili-tia, even in countries like the United States, or Switzerland,Norway, etc. 
 The more so that in the freest republican countries (e. 
g. 
, Switzerland) we see that the militia is being increasingly Prussianised, and prostituted by beingused against strikers. 
 We can demand popular election ofofficers, abolition of all military law, equal rights for for-eign and native-born workers (a point particularly impor-tant for those imperialist states which, like Switzerland, are more and more blatantly exploiting larger numbers of foreign workers, while denying them all rights). 
 Fur-ther, we can demand the right of every hundred, say, in-habitants of a given country to form voluntary military-training associations, with free election of instructorspaid by the state, etc. 
 Only under these conditions could the proletariat acquire military training for itself and not for its slave-owners; and the need for such training isimperatively dictated by the interests of the proletariat. 
The Russian revolution showed that every success ofthe revolutionary movement, even a partial success likethe seizure of a certain city, a certain factory town, or winning over a certain section of the army, inevitably compels the victorious proletariat to carry out just such a programme. 
 Lastly, it stands to reason that opportunism can never be defeated by mere programmes; it can only be defeated by deeds. 
 The greatest, and fatal, error of the bankrupt Second International was that its words did not correspondto its deeds, that it cultivated the habit of unscrupulousrevolutionary phrase-mongering (note the present attitudeof Kautsky and Co. 
 towards the Basle Manifesto). 
 In ap-proaching the demand for disarmament from this aspect we must first of all raise the question of its objective signif-icance. 
 Disarmament as a social idea, i. 
e. 
, an idea thatsprings from, and can affect, a certain social environment,and is not the invention of some crackpot or group,springs, evidently, from the peculiar “tranquil” conditionsprevailing, by way of exception, in certain small states which have for a fairly long time stood aside from the world’s path of war and bloodshed, and hope to remain thatway. 
 To be convinced of this, we have only to considerthe arguments advanced, for instance, by the Norwegianadvocates of disarmament. 
 “We are a small country,” theysay. 
 “Our army is small; there is nothing we can do against the Great Powers (and, consequently, nothing we can do to resist forcible involvement in an imperialist alliance with one or the other Great-Power group!). 
 We want to be leftin peace in our backwoods and continue our backwoodspolitics, demand disarmament, compulsory arbitration,permanent neutrality, etc. 
” (“permanent” after the Bel-gian fashion, no doubt?). 
 The petty striving of petty states to hold aloof, the petty-bourgeois desire to keep as far away as possible fromthe great battles of world history, to take advantage ofone’s relatively monopolistic position in order to remainin hidebound passivity—this is the objective social environment which may ensure the disarmament idea a certain degree of success and a certain degree of popularityin some of the small states. 
 That striving is, of course, reac-tionary and is based entirely on illusions, for, in oneway or another, imperialism draws the small states intothe vortex of world economy and world politics. 
 Let us cite the case of Switzerland. 
 Her imperialist environment objectively prescribes two courses to the la-bour movement. 
 The opportunists, in alliance with the bourgeoisie, are seeking to turn the country into a repub-lican-democratic monopolistic federation that would thrive on profits from imperialist bourgeois tourists, and to make this “tranquil” monopolistic position as prof-itable and as tranquil as possible. 
 Actually, this is a pol-icy of alliance between a small privileged stratum ofthe workers of a small privileged country and the bour-geoisie of that country against the mass of the proletariat. 
 The genuine Swiss Social-Democrats are striving to use Switzerland’s relative freedom, her “international” posi-tion (proximity to the most cultured countries, the factthat Switzerland, thank God, does not have “a separatelanguage of her own”, but uses three world languages)to extend, consolidate and strengthen the revolution-ary alliance of the revolutionary elements of the pro-letariat of the whole of Europe. 
 Let’s help our own bour-geoisie retain as long as possible its monopoly of thesupertranquil trade in the charms of the Alps; perhaps apenny or two will fall to our share—such is the objective content of the Swiss opportunists’ policy. 
 Let us help weld the alliance of the revolutionary sections of the French, German and Italian proletariat for the overthrowof the bourgeoisie—such is the objective content of theSwiss revolutionary Social-Democrats’ policy. 
 Unfortun-ately, it is still being carried out far from adequatelyby the Swiss “Lefts”, and the splendid decision of the 1915 Aarau Party Congress (acceptance of the revolutionary mass struggle) is still largely a dead letter. 
 But that isnot the point we are discussing at the moment. 
 The question that interests us now is: Does the dis-armament demand correspond to this revolutionary trendamong the Swiss Social-Democrats? It obviously does not. 
 Objectively, the “demand” for disarmament corres-ponds to the opportunist, narrow national line of a la-bour movement, a line that is restricted by the outlookof a small state. 
 Objectively, “disarmament” is an ex-tremely national, specifically national programme of smallstates; it is certainly not the international programme of international revolutionary Social-Democracy. 
 P. 
 S. 
 In the last issue of the English Socialist Reviews50 (September 1916), organ of the opportunist Inde-pendent Labour Party, we find, on page 287, the resolution of the party’s Newcastle Conference—refusal to supportany war waged by any government even if “nominally” it is a war of “defence”. 
 And in an editorial on page 205of the same issue we read the following declaration: “Inno degree do we approve the Sinn Fein rebellion [the Irish Rebellion of 1916]. 
 We do not approve armed rebel-lion at all, any more than any other form of militarismand war. 
” Is there any need to prove that these “anti-militarists”, that such advocates of disarmament, not in a small, but in a big country, are the most pernicious opportun-ists? And yet, theoretically, they are quite right in regard-ing insurrection as one “form” of militarism and war. 
 Written in October 1916 Published in Sbornik Sotsial-Demokrata No. 
 2, Published according to December 1916 the Sbornik text Signed: N. 
 Lenin IMPERIALISM AND THE SPLIT IN SOCIALISM Is there any connection between imperialism and the monstrous and disgusting victory opportunism (in the formof social-chauvinism) has gained over the labour movement in Europe? This is the fundamental question of modern socialism. 
 And having in our Party literature fully established,first, the imperialist character of our era and of the pres-ent war, and, second, the inseparable historical connectionbetween social-chauvinism and opportunism, as well as the intrinsic similarity of their political ideology, we can and must proceed to analyse this fundamental question. 
 We have to begin with as precise and full a definition of imperialism as possible. 
 Imperialism is a specific his-torical stage of capitalism. 
 Its specific character is three-fold: imperialism is (1) monopoly capitalism; (2) paras-itic, or decaying capitalism; (3) moribund capitalism. 
 The supplanting of free competition by monopoly is thefundamental economic feature, the quintessence of imperial-ism. 
 Monopoly manifests itself in five principal forms:(1) cartels, syndicates and trusts—the concentration ofproduction has reached a degree which gives rise to these monopolistic associations of capitalists; (2) the monop-olistic position of the big banks—three, four or fivegiant banks manipulate the whole economic life of Amer-ica, France, Germany; (3) seizure of the sources of raw material by the trusts and the financial oligarchy (finance capital is monopoly industrial capital merged with bank capital); (4) the (economic) partition of the world by the international cartels has begun . 
 There are already over one hundred such international cartels, which command the entire world market and divide it “amicably” among themselves—until war redivides it. 
 The export of capital, as distinct from the export of commodities under non-monopoly capitalism, is a highly characteristic phenomenonand is closely linked with the economic and territorial-political partition of the world; (5) the territorial parti-tion of the world (colonies) is completed. 
 Imperialism, as the highest stage of capitalism in America and Europe, and later in Asia, took final shape in the period 1898-1914. 
 The Spanish-American War (1898),the Anglo-Boer War (1899-1902), the Russo-JapaneseWar (1904-05) and the economic crisis in Europe in 1900are the chief historical landmarks in the new era of worldhistory. 
 The fact that imperialism is parasitic or decaying capi-talism is manifested first of all in the tendency to decay,which is characteristic of every monopoly under the system of private ownership of the means of production. 
 The differ-ence between the democratic-republican and the reac-tionary-monarchist imperialist bourgeoisie is obliterated precisely because they are both rotting alive (which by no means precludes an extraordinarily rapid developmentof capitalism in individual branches of industry, in indi-vidual countries, and in individual periods). 
 Secondly,the decay of capitalism is manifested in the creation ofa huge stratum of rentiers , capitalists who live by “clip-ping coupons”. 
 In each of the four leading imperialist countries—England, U. 
S. 
A. 
, France and Germany—cap-ital in securities amounts to 100,000 or 150,000 million francs, from which each country derives an annual incomeof no less than five to eight thousand million. 
 Third-ly, export of capital is parasitism raised to a high pitch. 
 Fourthly, “finance capital strives for domination, not freedom”. 
 Political reaction all along the line is a charac-teristic feature of imperialism. 
 Corruption, bribery ona huge scale and all kinds of fraud. 
 Fifthly, the exploi-tation of oppressed nations—which is inseparably connectedwith annexations—and especially the exploitation of colonies by a handful of “Great” Powers, increasingly transforms the “civilised” world into a parasite on the bodyof hundreds of millions in the uncivilised nations. 
 The Roman proletarian lived at the expense of society. 
 Modern society lives at the expense of the modern proletarian. 
 Marx specially stressed this profound observation of Sis-mondi . 
51 Imperialism somewhat changes the situation. 
 A privileged upper stratum of the proletariat in the impe-rialist countries lives partly at the expense of hundreds of millions in the uncivilised nations. 
 It is clear why imperialism is moribund capitalism, capitalism in transition to socialism: monopoly, which grows out of capitalism, is already dying capitalism, the beginning of its transition to socialism. 
 The tremendous socialisation of labour by imperialism (what its apologists— the bourgeois economists—call “interlocking”) produces the same result. 
 Advancing this definition of imperialism brings us into complete contradiction to K. 
 Kautsky, who refuses to regard imperialism as a “phase of capitalism” and defines it as a policy “preferre d” by finance capital, a tendency of “industrial” countries to annex “agrarian” countries . 
* Kautsky’s definition is thoroughly false from the theoret-ical standpoint. 
 What distinguishes imperialism is the rule not of industrial capital, but of finance capital, the striving to annex not agrarian countries, particularly, but every kind of country. 
 Kautsky divorces imperialist politics from imperialist economics, he divorces monopoly in politics from monopoly in economics in order to pave the way for his vulgar bourgeois reformism, such as “disarmament”, “ultra-imperialism” and similar nonsense. 
The whole purpose and significance of this theoreticalfalsity is to obscure the most profound contradictions of imperialism and thus justify the theory of “unity”with the apologists of imperialism, the outright social-chauvinists and opportunists. 
 We have dealt at sufficient length with Kautsky’s break with Marxism on this point in Sotsial-Demokrat and Kommunist . 
52 Our Russian Kautskyites, the supporters *“Imperialism is a product of highly developed industrial capital-ism. 
 It consists in the striving of every industrial capitalist nation to subjugate and annex ever larger agrarian territories, irrespective of the nations that inhabit them” (Kautsky in Die Neue Zeit , September 11, 1914). 
 of the Organising Committee (O. 
C. 
), headed by Axelrod and Spectator, including even Martov, and to a large de-gree Trotsky, preferred to maintain a discreet silence on the question of Kautskyism as a trend. 
 They did not daredefend Kautsky’s war-time writings, confining themselvessimply to praising Kautsky (Axelrod in his Germanpamphlet, which the Organising Committee has promised to publish in Russian) or to quoting Kautsky’s private letters (Spectator), in which he says he belongs to the opposition and jesuitically tries to nullify his chauvinistdeclarations. 
 It should be noted that Kautsky’s “conception” of imperialism—which is tantamount to embellishing im-perialism—is a retrogression not only compared with Hil-ferding’s Finance Capital (no matter how assiduously Hil-ferding now defends Kautsky and “unity” with the social-chauvinists!) but also compared with the social-liberal J. 
 A. 
 Hobson. 
 This English economist, who in no wayclaims to be a Marxist, defines imperialism, and revealsits contradictions, much more profoundly in a book pub-lished in 1902 *. 
 This is what Hobson (in whose book may be found nearly all Kautsky’s pacifist and “conciliatory”banalities) wrote on the highly important question ofthe parasitic nature of imperialism: Two sets of circumstances in Hobson’s opinion, weakened the power of the old empires: (1) “economic parasitism”, and (2) formation of armies from dependent peoples. 
 “There is first the habit of economic parasitism, by whichthe ruling state has used its provinces, colonies, anddependencies in order to enrich its ruling class and to bribeits lower classes into acquiescence”. 
 Concerning thesecond circumstance, Hobson writes: “One of the strangest symptoms of the blindness of imperialism [this song about the “blindness” of imperial-ists comes more appropriately from the social-liberal Hob-son than from the “Marxist” Kautsky] is the recklessindifference with which (Great Britain, France, and otherimperial nations are embarking on this perilous dependence. 
 Great Britain has gone farthest. 
 Most of the fighting *J. 
 A. 
 Hobson, Imperialism , London, 1902. 
 by which we have won our Indian Empire has been done by natives; in India, as more recently in Egypt, great standing armies are placed under British commanders; almost all the fighting associated with our African domin-ions, except in the southern part, has been done for usby natives. 
” The prospect of partitioning China elicited from Hob-son the following economic appraisal: “The greater part of Western Europe might then assume the appearance and character already exhibited by tracts of country in theSouth of England, in the Riviera, and in the tourist-ridden or residential parts of Italy and Switzerland, littleclusters of wealthy aristocrats drawing dividends andpensions from the Far East, with a somewhat larger group of professional retainers and tradesmen and a larger body of personal servants and workers in the transporttrade and in the final stages of production of the moreperishable goods: all the main arterial industries wouldhave disappeared, the staple foods and semi-manufacturesflowing in as tribute from Asia and Africa .... 
 We have foreshadowed the possibility of even a larger alliance of Western states, a European federation of Great Powerswhich, so far from forwarding the cause of world civilisa-tion, might introduce the gigantic peril of a Westernparasitism, a group of advanced industrial nations, whoseupper classes drew vast tribute from Asia and Africa, with which they supported great tame masses of retainers, no longer engaged in the staple industries of agricultureand manufacture, but kept in the performance of personalor minor industrial services under the control of a newfinancial aristocracy. 
 Let those who would scout sucha theory [he should have said: prospect] as undeserving of consideration examine the economic and social condition of districts in Southern England today which are alreadyreduced to this condition, and reflect upon the vast exten-sion of such a system which might be rendered feasible bythe subjection of China to the economic control of similargroups of financiers, investors [rentiers] and political and business officials, draining the greatest potential reservoir of profit the world has ever known, in order toconsume it in Europe. 
 The situation is far too complex, the play of world forces far too incalculable, to render this or any other single interpretation of the future very probable; but the influences which govern the imperialism of Western Europe today are moving in this direction,and, unless counteracted or diverted, make towards sucha consummation. 
” Hobson, the social-liberal, fails to see that this “counter-action” can be offered only by the revolutionary prole-tariat and only in the form of a social revolution. 
 But then he is a social-liberal! Nevertheless, as early as 1902he had an excellent insight into the meaning and signif-icance of a “United States of Europe” (be it said for thebenefit of Trotsky the Kautskyite!) and of all that is nowbeing glossed over by the hypocritical Kautskyites of various countries, namely, that the opportunists (social-chauvinists) are working hand in glove with the imperial-ist bourgeoisie precisely towards creating an imperialist Europe on the backs of Asia and Africa, and that objective-ly the opportunists are a section of the petty bourgeoisie and of certain strata of the working class who have been bribed out of imperialist superprofits and converted into watchdogs of capitalism and corrupters of the labour move-ment. 
 Both in articles and in the resolutions of our Party, we have repeatedly pointed to this most profound connec-tion, the economic connection, between the imperialist bourgeoisie and the opportunism which has triumphed (for long?) in the labour movement. 
 And from this, inci-dentally, we concluded that a split with the social-chau-vinists was inevitable. 
 Our Kautskyites preferred to evadethe question! Martov, for instance, uttered in his lecturesa sophistry which in the Bulletin of the Organising Com-mittee , Secretariat Abroad53 (No. 
 4, April 10, 1916) is expressed as follows: “...The cause of revolutionary Social-Democracy would be in a sad, indeed hopeless, plight if those groups ofworkers who in mental development approach most closelyto the ‘intelligentsia’ and who are the most highly skilled fatally drifted away from it towards opportunism .... 
” By means of the silly word “fatally” and a certain sleight-of-hand, the fact is evaded that certain groups of workers have already drifted away to opportunism and to the imperialist bourgeoisie! And that is the very fact the sophists of the O. 
C. 
 want to evade ! They confine themselves to the “official optimism” the Kautskyite Hilferding andmany others now flaunt: objective conditions guarantee theunity of the proletariat and the victory of the revolution-ary trend! We, forsooth, are “optimists” with regard tothe proletariat! But in reality all these Kautskyites—Hilferding, the O. 
C. 
 supporters, Martov and Co. 
—are optimists ... with regard to opportunism . 
 That is the whole point! The proletariat is the child of capitalism—of world capitalism, and not only of European capitalism, or of im-perialist capitalism. 
 On a world scale, fifty years sooner or fifty years later—measured on a world scale this is a minor point—the “proletariat” of course “will be” united,and revolutionary Social-Democracy will “inevitably” bevictorious within it. 
 But that is not the point, Messrs. 
 Kaut-skyites. 
 The point is that at the present time, in the impe-rialist countries of Europe, you are fawning on the opportunists, who are alien to the proletariat as a class, who are the servants, the agents of the bourgeoisie andthe vehicles of its influence, and unless the labour move-ment rids itself of them, it will remain a bourgeois labour movement. 
 By advocating “unity” with the opportunists, with the Legiens and Davids, the Plekhanovs, the Chkhen-kelis and Potresovs, etc. 
, you are, objectively, defending the enslavement of the workers by the imperialist bour-geoisie with the aid of its best agents in the labour move-ment. 
 The victory of revolutionary Social-Democracy ona world scale is absolutely inevitable, only it is movingand will move, is proceeding and will proceed, against you, it will be a victory over you. 
 These two trends, one might even say two parties, in the present-day labour movement, which in 1914-16 soobviously parted ways all over the world, were traced by Engels and Marx in England throughout the course of decades , roughly from 1858 to 1892. 
 Neither Marx nor Engels lived to see the imperialist epoch of world capitalism, which began not earlier than1898-1900. 
 But it has been a peculiar feature of England that even in the middle of the nineteenth century she al-ready revealed at least two major distinguishing features of imperialism: (1) vast colonies, and (2) monopoly profit (due to her monopoly position in the world market). 
 Inboth respects England at that time was an exception amongcapitalist countries, and Engels and Marx, analysing thisexception, quite clearly and definitely indicated itsconnection with the (temporary) victory of opportunism in the English labour movement. 
 In a letter to Marx, dated October 7, 1858, Engels wrote: “...The English proletariat is actually becomingmore and more bourgeois, so that this most bourgeois of allnations is apparently aiming ultimately at the possessionof a bourgeois aristocracy and a bourgeois proletariat alongside the bourgeoisie. 
 For a nation which exploits the whole world this is of course to a certain extent justifi-able. 
” 54 In a letter to Sorge, dated September 21, 1872, Engels informs him that Hales kicked up a big row in theFederal Council of the International and secured a voteof censure on Marx for saying that “the English labour leaders had sold themselves”. 
 Marx wrote to Sorge on Au-gust 4, 1874: “As to the urban workers here [in England],it is a pity that the whole pack of leaders did not get intoParliament. 
 This would be the surest way of getting ridof the whole lot. 
” In a letter to Marx, dated August 11,1881, Engels speaks about “those very worst English trade unions which allow themselves to be led by men sold to, or at least paid by, the bourgeoisie”. 
 In a letter to Kautsky,dated September 12, 1882, Engels wrote: “You ask me whatthe English workers think about colonial policy. 
 Well,exactly the same as they think about politics in general. 
There is no workers’ party here, there are only Conserva-tives and Liberal-Radicals, and the workers gaily share the feast of England’s monopoly of the world market andthe colonies. 
” 55 On December 7, 1889, Engels wrote to Sorge: “The most repulsive thing here [in England] is the bourgeois‘respectability’, which has grown deep into the bones of the workers .... 
 Even Tom Mann, whom I regard as the best of the lot, is fond of mentioning that he will be lun-ching with the Lord Mayor. 
 If one compares this with the French, one realises what a revolution is good for after all. 
”56 In a letter, dated April 19, 1890: “But under the surface the movement [of the working class in Eng-land] is going on, is embracing ever wider sections andmostly just among the hitherto stagnant lowest [Engels’s italics] strata. 
 The day is no longer far off when this masswill suddenly find itself , when it will dawn upon it that it itself is this colossal mass in motion. 
” On March 4, 1891: “The failure of the collapsed Dockers’ Union; the ‘old’ conservative trade unions, rich and therefore cowardly, remain lone on the field .... 
” September 14, 1891: at the Newcastle Trade Union Congress the old unionists,opponents of the eight-hour day, were defeated “and thebourgeois papers recognise the defeat of the bourgeois labour party ” (Engels’s italics throughout).... 
 That these ideas, which were repeated by Engels over the course of decades, were also expressed by him publicly,in the press, is proved by his preface to the second editionof The Condition of the Working Class in England , 1892. 
 57 Here he speaks of an “aristocracy among the working class”, of a “privileged minority of the workers”, in contradistinc-tion to the “great mass of working people”. 
 “A small, priv-ileged, protected minority” of the working class alone was“permanently benefited” by the privileged position of Eng-land in 1848-68, whereas “the great bulk of them experiencedat best but a temporary improvement” .... 
 “With the break-down of that [England’s industrial] monopoly, the English working class will lose that privileged position .... 
” The members of the “new” unions, the unions of the unskilledworkers, “had this immense advantage, that their mindswere virgin soil, entirely free from the inherited ‘respect-able’ bourgeois prejudices which hampered the brains of the better situated ‘old unionists’” .... 
 “The so-called workers’ representatives” in England are people “who are forgiventheir being members of the working class because theythemselves would like to drown their quality of beingworkers in the ocean of their liberalism”.... 
 We have deliberately quoted the direct statements of Marx and Engels at rather great length in order that the reader may study them as a whole . 
 And they should be studied, they are worth carefully pondering over. 
 For they are the pivot of the tactics in the labour movement that are dictated by the objective conditions of the imperialist era. 
 Here, too, Kautsky has tried to “befog the issue” and substitute for Marxism sentimental conciliation with theopportunists. 
 Arguing against the avowed and naïve social-imperialists (men like Lensch) who justify Germany’sparticipation in the war as a means of destroying England’s monopoly, Kautsky “ corrects ” this obvious falsehood by another equally obvious falsehood. 
 Instead of a cynicalfalsehood he employs a suave falsehood! The industrial monopoly of England, he says, has long ago been broken,has long ago been destroyed, and there is nothing left todestroy. 
 Why is this argument false? Because, firstly, it overlooks England’s colonial monopoly. 
 Yet Engels, as we have seen, pointed to thisvery clearly as early as 1882, thirty-four years ago!Although England’s industrial monopoly may have beendestroyed, her colonial monopoly not only remains, but has become extremely accentuated, for the whole world is already divided up! By means of this suave lie Kautskysmuggles in the bourgeois pacifist and opportunist-philistine idea that “there is nothing to fight about”. 
 On thecontrary not only have the capitalists something to fight about now, but they cannot help fighting if they want to preserve capitalism, for without a forcible redivision of colonies the new imperialist countries cannot obtain the privileges enjoyed by the older ( and weaker ) imperialist powers. 
 Secondly, why does England’s monopoly explain the (temporary) victory of opportunism in England? Because monopoly yields superprofits , i. 
e. 
, a surplus of profits over and above the capitalist profits that are normal andcustomary all over the world. 
 The capitalists can devote a part (and not a small one, at that!) of these superprof-its to bribe their own workers, to create something like an alliance (recall the celebrated “alliances” described by the Webbs of English trade unions and employers) between the workers of the given nation and their capitalistsagainst the other countries. 
 England’s industrial monopoly was already destroyed by the end of the nineteenth cen-tury. 
 That is beyond dispute. 
 But how did this destruction take place? Did all monopoly disappear? If that were so, Kautsky’s “theory” of conciliation (with the opportunists) would to a certain extent bejustified. 
 But it is not so, and that is just the point. 
 Imperialism is monopoly capitalism. 
 Every cartel, trust, syndicate, every giant bank is a monopoly. 
 Superprofits have not disappeared; they still remain. 
 The exploitation of all other countries by one privileged, financially wealthy country remains and has become more intense. 
 A handfulof wealthy countries—there are only four of them, if wemean independent, really gigantic, “modern” wealth:England, France, the United States and Germany—have developed monopoly to vast proportions, they obtain super profits running into hundreds, if not thousands, of millions, they “ride on the backs” of hundreds and hun-dreds of millions of people in other countries and fightamong themselves for the division of the particularly rich,particularly fat and particularly easy spoils. 
 This, in fact, is the economic and political essence of imperialism, the profound contradictions of which Kauts-ky glosses over instead of exposing. 
 The bourgeoisie of an imperialist “Great” Power can economically bribe the upper strata of “its” workers by spending on this a hundred million or so francs a year, for its super profits most likely amount to about a thousand million. 
 And how this little sop is divided among thelabour ministers, “labour representatives” (rememberEngels’s splendid analysis of the term), labour members ofwar industries committees, labour officials, workers belong-ing to the narrow craft unions, office employees, etc. 
, etc. 
, is a secondary question. 
 Between 1848 and 1868, and to a certain extent even later, only England enjoyed a monopoly: that is why opportunism could prevail there for decades. 
 No other coun-tries possessed either very rich colonies or an industrialmonopoly. 
 The last third of the nineteenth century saw the tran-sition to the new, imperialist era. 
 Finance capital not of one, but of several, though very few, Great Powers enjoys a monopoly. 
 (In Japan and Russia the monopoly of military power, vast territories, or special facilities for robbing minority nationalities, China, etc. 
, partly sup-plements, partly takes the place of, the monopoly ofmodern, up-to-date finance capital. 
) This difference explainswhy England’s monopoly position could remain unchal-lenged for decades. 
 The monopoly of modern finance capital is being frantically challenged; the era of imperi-alist wars has begun. 
 It was possible in those days to bribe and corrupt the working class of one country for decades. 
 This is now improbable, if not impossible. 
 But on theother hand, every imperialist “Great” Power can and does bribe smaller strata (than in England in 1848-68) of the “labour aristocracy”. 
 Formerly a “ bourgeois labour party ”, to use Engels’s remarkably profound expression, could arise only in one country, because it alone enjoyed amonopoly, but, on the other hand, it could exist for along time. 
 Now a “ bourgeois labour party ” is inevitable and typical in all imperialist countries; but in view of the desperate struggle they are waging for the division of spoils, it is improbable that such a party can prevail for long in a number of countries. 
 For the trusts, thefinancial oligarchy, high prices, etc. 
, while enabling the bribery of a handful in the top layers, are increasinglyoppressing, crushing, ruining and torturing the mass of the proletariat and the semi-proletariat. 
 On the one hand, there is the tendency of the bour-geoisie and the opportunists to convert a handful of veryrich and privileged nations into “eternal” parasites on thebody of the rest of mankind, to “rest on the laurels” ofthe exploitation of Negroes, Indians, etc. 
, keeping themin subjection with the aid of the excellent weapons of extermination provided by modern militarism. 
 On the other hand, there is the tendency of the masses , who are more oppressed than before and who bear the whole bruntof imperialist wars, to cast off this yoke and to overthrowthe bourgeoisie. 
 It is in the struggle between these two ten-dencies that the history of the labour movement will now inevitably develop. 
 For the first tendency is not accident-al; it is “substantiated” economically. 
 In all countries the bourgeoisie has already begotten, fostered and secured for itself “bourgeois labour parties” of social-chauvinists. 
 The difference between a definitely formed party, like Bissolati’s in Italy, for example, which is fully social-imperialist, and, say, the semi-formed near-party of thePotresovs, Gvozdyovs, Bulkins, Chkheidzes, Skobelevs andCo. 
, is an immaterial difference. 
 The important thing isthat, economically, the desertion of a stratum of the labouraristocracy to the bourgeoisie has matured and become an accomplished fact; and this economic fact, this shift in class relations, will find political form, in one shape oranother, without any particular “difficulty”. 
 On the economic basis referred to above, the political institutions of modern capitalism—press, parliament, asso-ciations, congresses, etc. 
—have created political privileges and sops for the respectful, meek, reformist and patriotic office employees and workers, corresponding to the economicprivileges and sops. 
 Lucrative and soft jobs in the gov-ernment or on the war industries committees, in parliamentand on diverse committees, on the editorial staffs of “res-pectable”, legally published newspapers or on the manage-ment councils of no less respectable and “bourgeois law-abiding” trade unions—this is the bait by which theimperialist bourgeoisie attracts and rewards the representa-tives and supporters of the “bourgeois labour parties”. 
 The mechanics of political democracy works in the same direction. 
 Nothing in our times can be done without ele-ctions; nothing can be done without the masses. 
 And in this era of printing and parliamentarism it is impossible to gain the following of the masses without a widely rami-fied, systematically managed, well-equipped system offlattery, lies, fraud, juggling with fashionable and popu-lar catchwords, and promising all manner of reforms and blessings to the workers right and left—as long as they renounce the revolutionary struggle for the overthrow of thebourgeoisie. 
 I would call this system Lloyd-Georgism,after the English Minister Lloyd George, one of the fore-most and most dexterous representatives of this system inthe classic land of the “bourgeois labour party”. 
 A first-class bourgeois manipulator, an astute politician, a popular orator who will deliver any speeches you like,even r-r-revolutionary ones, to a labour audience, and a man who is capable of obtaining sizable sops for docile workers in the shape of social reforms (insurance, etc. 
), Lloyd George serves the bourgeoisie splendidly, * and serves it precisely among the workers, brings its influence precisely to the proletariat, to where the bourgeoisie needs it most and where it finds it most difficult to subject themasses morally. 
 And is there such a great difference between Lloyd George and the Scheidemanns, Legiens, Hendersons and Hyndmans, Plekhanovs, Renaudels and Co. 
? Of thelatter, it may be objected, some will return to the revolu-tionary socialism of Marx. 
 This is possible, but it is aninsignificant difference in degree, if the question is regardedfrom its political, i. 
e. 
, its mass aspect. 
 Certain individuals among the present social-chauvinist leaders may return to the proletariat. 
 But the social-chauvinist or (what is thesame thing) opportunist trend can neither disappear nor “return” to the revolutionary proletariat. 
 Wherever Marx-ism is popular among the workers, this political trend,this “bourgeois labour party”, will swear by the name of Marx. 
 It cannot be prohibited from doing this, just as a trading firm cannot be prohibited from using any partic-ular label, sign or advertisement. 
 It has always been thecase in history that after the death of revolutionary leaderswho were popular among the oppressed classes, their ene-mies have attempted to appropriate their names so as to deceive the oppressed classes. 
 The fact is that “bourgeois labour parties”, as a polit-ical phenomenon, have already been formed in all the foremost capitalist countries, and that unless a determinedand relentless struggle is waged all along the line againstthese parties—or groups, trends, etc. 
, it is all the same— there can be no question of a struggle against imperialism, or of Marxism, or of a socialist labour movement. 
 TheChkheidze faction, 58 Nashe Dyelo and Golos Truda59 i n Russia, and the O. 
C. 
 supporters abroad are nothing but *I recently read an article in an English magazine by a Tory, a political opponent of Lloyd George, entitled “Lloyd George from theStandpoint of a Tory”. 
 The war opened the eyes of this opponent andmade him realise what an excellent servant of the bourgeoisie this Lloyd George is! The Tories have made peace with him! varieties of one such party. 
 There is not the slightest reason for thinking that these parties will disappear before the social revolution. 
 On the contrary, the nearer the revolution approaches, the more strongly it flares up andthe more sudden and violent the transitions and leaps inits progress, the greater will be the part the struggle ofthe revolutionary mass stream against the opportunistpetty-bourgeois stream will play in the labour movement. 
 Kautskyism is not an independent trend, because it has no roots either in the masses or in the privileged stratumwhich has deserted to the bourgeoisie. 
 But the danger ofKautskyism lies in the fact that, utilising the ideology ofthe past, it endeavours to reconcile the proletariat withthe “bourgeois labour party”, to preserve the unity of the proletariat with that party and thereby enhance the lat-ter’s prestige. 
 The masses no longer follow the avowedsocial-chauvinists: Lloyd George has been hissed down atworkers’ meetings in England; Hyndman has left theparty; the Renaudels and Scheidemanns, the Potresovs andGvozdyovs are protected by the police. 
 The Kautskyites’ masked defence of the social-chauvinists is much more dangerous. 
 One of the most common sophistries of Kautskyism is its reference to the “masses”. 
 We do not want, they say, tobreak away from the masses and mass organisations! Butjust think how Engels put the question. 
 In the nineteenth century the “mass organisations” of the English trade unions were on the side of the bourgeois labour party. 
 Marxand Engels did not reconcile themselves to it on this ground;they exposed it. 
 They did not forget, firstly, that thetrade union organisations directly embraced a minority of the proletariat . 
 In England then, as in Germany now, not more than one-fifth of the proletariat was organised. 
 No one can seriously think it possible to organise the major-ity of the proletariat under capitalism. 
 Secondly—andthis is the main point—it is not so much a question of thesize of an organisation, as of the real, objective significanceof its policy: does its policy represent the masses, does it serve them, i. 
e. 
, does it aim at their liberation from capitalism, or does it represent the interests of the minor-ity, the minority’s reconciliation with capitalism? The latter was true of England in the nineteenth century, and it is true of Germany, etc. 
, now. 
 Engels draws a distinction between the “bourgeois labour party” of the old trade unions—the privileged minori-ty—and the “ lowest mass”, the real majority, and appeals to the latter, who are not infected by “bourgeois respecta-bility”. 
 This is the essence of Marxist tactics! Neither we nor anyone else can calculate precisely what portion of the proletariat is following and will follow the social-chauvinists and opportunists. 
 This will be revealedonly by the struggle, it will be definitely decided only bythe socialist revolution. 
 But we know for certain that the“defenders of the fatherland” in the imperialist war repre-sent only a minority. 
 And it is therefore our duty, if we wish to remain socialists, to go down lower and deeper , to the real masses; this is the whole meaning and thewhole purport of the struggle against opportunism. 
 By ex-posing the fact that the opportunists and social-chauvinistsare in reality betraying and selling the interests of themasses, that they are defending the temporary privileges of a minority of the workers, that they are the vehicles of bourgeois ideas and influences, that they are really alliesand agents of the bourgeoisie, we teach the masses toappreciate their true political interests, to fight forsocialism and for the revolution through all the long andpainful vicissitudes of imperialist wars and imperialist armistices. 
 The only Marxist line in the world labour movement is to explain to the masses the inevitability and necessity ofbreaking with opportunism, to educate them for revolutionby waging a relentless struggle against opportunism, to uti-lise the experiences of the war to expose, not conceal, the utter vileness of national-liberal labour politics. 
 In the next article, we shall try to sum up the prin-cipal features that distinguish this line from Kautskyism. 
 Written in October 1916 Printed in Sbornik Published according to Sotsial-Demokrata No. 
 2, the Sbornik text December 1916 Signed: N. 
 Lenin SPEEC H AT THE CONGRESS OF THE SOCIA L-DEMOCRATI C PARTY OF SWITZERLAN D, NOVEMBE R 4, 191660 The Social-Democratic Party of Switzerland recently had the honour of rousing the ire of the leader of the official Danish Social-Democratic Party, Herr MinisterStauning. 
 In a letter to another quasi-socialist Minister, Vandervelde, dated September 15 of this year, Stauning proudly declared that “we [the Danish party] have sharplyand definitely disassociated ourselves from the organisa-tionally pernicious splitting activities conducted on theinitiative of the Italian and Swiss parties under thename of the Zimmerwald movement”. 
 In greeting the Congress of the Social-Democratic Party of Switzerland on behalf of the Central Committee of theRussian Social-Democratic Labour Party, I do so in thehope that this party will continue to support the effort tounite the revolutionary Social-Democrats internationally,which began at Zimmerwald and which must end in a com-plete rupture between socialism and its ministerial and social-patriotic betrayers. 
 This split is maturing in all countries of developed capitalism. 
 In Germany, Karl Liebknecht’s colleague,Comrade Otto Rühle, was attacked by the opportunists andby the so-called Centre when he declared in the Central Organ of the German party that the split had become inevi-table ( Vorwärts , January 12, 1916). 
 The facts, however, make it increasingly clear that Comrade Rühle was right, that in reality there are two parties in Germany, one help-ing the bourgeoisie and the government wage the predatory war, the other, which for the most part is working illegally, spreading really socialist manifestos among thereal masses and organising mass demonstrations andpolitical strikes. 
 In France, the Committee for the Re-establishment of International Contacts 61 recently published a pam-phlet, The Zimmerwald Socialists and the War , in which we read that three main trends have developed within theFrench party. 
 The first, comprising the majority andbranded in the pamphlet as socialist-nationalists, social-patriots, has entered into a “holy alliance” with our classenemies. 
 The second, according to the pamphlet, represents a minority and consists of followers of Members of Parlia-ment Longuet and Pressemane, who on key issues go handin hand with the majority and unconsciously bring gristto the mill of the majority by attracting the discontentedelements, lulling their socialist conscience and inducingthem to follow the party’s official policy. 
 The third trend, the pamphlet says, are the Zimmerwaldists. 
 They maintain that France was involved in the war not because Germanydeclared war on her, but because she pursued an impe-rialist policy which, through treaties and loans, boundher to Russia. 
 This third trend unambiguously pro-claims that “ defence of the fatherland is not a socialist cause ”. 
 Practically the same three trends have arisen in Russia, as well as in England and in the neutral United States ofAmerica—in fact, all over the world. 
 The struggle ofthese trends will determine the course of the labour move-ment in the immediate future. 
 Permit me to say a few words on another point which is being very much discussed these days and on which weRussian Social-Democrats are particularly rich inexperience, namely, the question of terrorism. 
 We have no information yet about the Austrian revolu-tionary Social-Democrats. 
 We know that there are revolu-tionary Social-Democrats in Austria, but information about them is very meagre anyway. 
 Consequently, we do not knowwhether the assassination of Stürgkh by Comrade Fritz Adler62 was the application of terrorism as tactics, i. 
e. 
, systematic organisation of political assassinations unconnected with the mass revolutionary struggle; or whether it was a single act in the transition from the opportunist,non-socialist defence of the fatherland tactics of the offi-cial Austrian Social-Democrats to the tactics of revolution-ary mass struggle. 
 The latter assumption seems to fit inmore with the circumstances. 
 The message of greeting to Fritz Adler proposed by the Central Committee of the Italian party and published in Avanti! of October 29, therefore, deserves the fullest sympathy. 
 At all events, we are convinced that the experience of revolution and counter-revolution in Russia has provedthe correctness of our Party’s more than twenty-year struggle against terrorism as tactics. 
 We must not forget, however, that this struggle was closely connected with aruthless struggle against opportunism, which was inclinedto repudiate the use of all violence by the oppressed classesagainst their oppressors. 
 We have always stood for the useof violence in the mass struggle and in connection with it. 
 Secondly, we linked the struggle against terrorism with many years of propaganda, started long before December1905, for an armed uprising. 
 We have regarded the armeduprising not only as the best means by which the prole-tariat can retaliate to the government’s policy, but alsoas the inevitable result of the development of the class struggle for socialism and democracy. 
 Thirdly, we have not confined ourselves to accepting violence in principleand to propaganda for armed uprising. 
 For example,four years before the revolution we supported the use ofviolence by the masses against their oppressors, partic-ularly in street demonstrations. 
 We sought to bring to the whole country the lesson taught by every such demon-stration. 
 We began to devote more and more attention toorganising sustained and systematic mass resistance againstthe police and the army, to winning over, through thisresistance, as large as possible a part of the army to theside of the proletariat in its struggle against the govern-ment, to inducing the peasantry and the army to take a conscious part in this struggle. 
 These are the tactics wehave applied in the struggle against terrorism, and it is our firm conviction that they have proved suc-cessful. 
 I conclude, comrades, by once again greeting the Con-gress of the Social-Democratic Party of Switzerland and bywishing you success in your work ( applause ). 
 Published in 1916 in Protokoll über die Verhandlungen des Parteitages der Sozialdemokratischen Partei der Schweiz vom 4. 
 und 5. 
 November 1916 abgehalten im Gesellschaftshaus “z. 
 Kaufleuten ” in Zürich First published in Russian Published according to in 1924 in the magazine Proletarskaya the book text Revolutsia No. 
 4 (27) Translated from the German A SEPARATE PEACE Russia and Germany are already negotiating a separate peace. 
 The negotiations are official, and the two powershave already reached agreement on the main points. 
 A statement to that effect appeared recently in the Berne socialist paper and is based on information in itspossession. 
 63 The Russian Embassy in Berne hastened to issue an official denial, and the French chauvinists ascribedthese rumours to “German dirty work”, but the socialistpaper refused to attach any importance whatsoever to these denials. 
 In support of its statement it pointed to the presence in Switzerland of German (Bülow) and Russian“statesmen” (Stürmer, Giers and a diplomat who arrivedfrom Spain), and to the fact that Swiss commercial circleswere in possession of similar reliable information obtainedfrom Russian commercial circles. 
 Of course, deception on both sides is quite possible. 
 Russia cannot very well admit that she is negotiating aseparate peace, and Germany cannot miss an opportunity tocreate discord between Russia and England, irrespective ofwhether or not there are negotiations, and if so, how suc-cessfully they are proceeding. 
 To understand the question of a separate peace we must proceed not from rumours and reports about what is takingplace in Switzerland, which cannot be effectively verified,but from indisputably established political facts of the last few decades. 
 Let Messrs. 
 Plekhanov, Chkhenkeli,Potresov and Co. 
, now cast in the role of Marxist-liveried lackeys or jesters of Purishkevich and Milyukov, try as they will to prove “Germany’s war guilt” and that Russiais fighting a “war of defence”—the class-conscious workers have not listened and will not listen to these clowns. 
 The war was engendered by the Great Power imperialist rela-tions, i. 
e. 
, by their struggle for division of the loot, a struggle to decide which of them is to gobble up this or thatcolony or small state. 
 Two conflicts are in the foreground in this war. 
 First, between England and Germany. 
 Second,between Germany and Russia. 
 These three Great Powers,these three great freebooters, are the principal figures in the present war. 
 The rest are dependent allies. 
 Both conflicts were prepared by the whole policy these powers pursued for several decades before the war. 
 England is fighting to rob Germany of her colonies and to ruin herprincipal competitor, who has ruthlessly outrivalled herby his superior technique, organisation and commercial drive—and so thoroughly that England could not retain her world domination without war. 
 Germany is fightingbecause her capitalists consider themselves—and rightlyso—entitled to the “sacred” bourgeois right to world su-premacy in looting and plundering colonies and depend-ent countries. 
 In particular, Germany is fighting to sub-jugate the Balkan countries and Turkey. 
 Russia is fight-ing for possession of Galicia, which she needs, in partic-ular, to throttle the Ukrainian people (for Galicia isthe only place where the Ukrainians have, or can have,liberty—relatively speaking, of course), Armenia andConstantinople, and also to subjugate the Balkan coun-tries. 
 Parallel with the Russo-German conflict of predatory “interests” is another no less—if not more—profound con-flict between Russia and England. 
 The aim of Russia’simperialist policy, determined by the age-long rivalry andobjective international strength-ratio of the Great Powers, may be briefly defined as follows: smash Germany’s power in Europe with the aid of England and France in order torob Austria (by annexing Galicia) and Turkey (by annexingArmenia and, especially, Constantinople); and, after that,smash England’s power in Asia with the aid of Japan and Germany in order to seize the whole of Persia, complete the partition of China, etc. 
 For centuries tsarism has been striving to conquer Constantinople and a larger and larger part of Asia. 
 It has systematically shaped its policy accordingly and has exploited every antagonism and conflict between the Great Powers. 
 England has resisted these efforts longer, and with more persistence and vigour, than Germany. 
 From1878, when the Russian armies were approaching Constan-tinople and the English fleet appeared at the Dardanellesand threatened to bombard the Russians if they daredenter “Tsargrad”, * to 1885, when Russia was on the verge of war with England over division of the spoils in Central Asia (Afghanistan; the Russian army’s advance into theheart of Central Asia threatened British rule in India),and down to 1902, when England concluded a treaty withJapan, in preparation for the latter’s war against Russia—throughout all these years. 
 England was the most resolute opponent of Russia’s predatory policies, because Russia threatened to undermine British domination over a num-ber of other nations. 
 And now? Just see what is happening in the present war. 
 One loses patience with the “socialists”, who havedeserted the proletariat to go over to the bourgeoisie and talk about Russia waging a “war of defence”, or to “save the country” (Chkheidze). 
 One loses patience with senti-mental Kautsky and Co. 
 and their talk of a democraticpeace, as if the present governments, or any bourgeoisgovernment for that matter, could conclude such a peace. 
 As a matter of fact, they are enmeshed in a net of secret treaties with each other, with their allies, and against their allies. 
 And the content of these treaties is notaccidental, it was not determined merely by “malice”, butby the whole course and development of imperialistforeign policy. 
 Those “socialists” who hoodwink the workerswith banal phrases about nice things in general (defence of the fatherland, democratic peace) without exposing the secret treaties their own governments have concluded to rob foreign countries—such “socialists” are downrighttraitors to socialism. 
 The German, the English, and the Russian govern-ments only stand to gain from speeches in the socialist camp about a nice little peace, because, firstly, they *Tsargrad is the old Russian name for Constantinople. 
— Ed. 
 instil belief in the possibility of such a peace under the present governments, and, secondly, divert attention from these governments’ predatory policies. 
 War is the continuation of policy. 
 But policy also “continues” during war! Germany has secret treaties with Bulgaria and Austria on the division of spoils and contin-ues to conduct secret negotiations on the subject. 
 Russiahas secret treaties with England, France, etc. 
, and all of them concern plunder and robbery , robbing Germany of her colonies, robbing Austria, partitioning Turkey, etc. 
 The “socialist” who under such circumstances delivers speeches to the people and the governments about a nicelittle peace resembles the clergyman who, seeing beforehim in the front pews the mistress of a brothel and a police officer, who are working hand in glove, “preaches” to them, and to the people, love of one’s neighbour andobservance of the Christian commandments. 
 There is undoubtedly a secret treaty between Russia and England, and among other things it concerns Constan-tinople. 
 That Russia hopes to get Constantinople, and that England does not want to give it to her is well known. 
 If England does give Russia Constantinople, she willeither attempt to take it from her later, or else will makethis “concession” on terms directed against Russia. 
 Thetext of the secret treaty is unknown, but that the strugglebetween England and Russia centres around precisely this question, that this struggle is going on even now, is not only known, but beyond the slightest doubt. 
 It is alsoknown that, in addition to the old treaties betweenRussia and Japan (the 1910 treaty, for instance, whichallowed Japan to “gobble up” Korea and Russia to gobbleup Mongolia), a new secret treaty was concluded during the present war, directed not only against China, but, to a certain extent , also against England . 
 That is beyond doubt, although the text of the treaty is unknown. 
 In1904-05 Japan defeated Russia with England’s aid; nowshe is carefully preparing to defeat England with Russia’said. 
 There is a pro-German party in Russian “governing circles”—the Court gang of Nicholas the Bloody, the no-bility, army, etc. 
 In Germany, the bourgeoisie (followed by the socialist-chauvinists) has of late markedly turned towards a pro-Russian policy, towards a separate peace with Russia, towards placating Russia in order to strike with full force against England. 
 As far as Germany isconcerned, this plan is clear and leaves no room for doubt. 
As for Russia, the situation is that tsarism would, of course,prefer to smash Germany first in order to “take” asmuch as possible—the whole of Galicia, the whole of Poland, Armenia, Constantinople—“crush” Austria, etc. 
 It would then be much easier, with the aid of Japan, toturn against England. 
 But, apparently, Russia has notthe strength for that. 
 That’s at the bottom of it. 
 Mr. 
 Plekhanov, the ex-socialist, has tried to make out that the Russian reactionaries are generally in favour of peace with Germany, whereas the “progressive bourgeoisie” are in favour of crushing “Prussian militarism” and sup-port friendship with “democratic” England. 
 That is a fairy-tale suitable to the mental level of political infants. 
The fact is that tsarism and all the Russian reactionaries and the “progressive” bourgeoisie (Octobrists and Cadets) want the same thing : rob Germany, Austria and Turkey in Europe, and defeat England in Asia (so as to take thewhole of Persia, Mongolia, Tibet, etc. 
). 
 These “dear friends”disagree only as to when and how to turn from a struggle against Germany to a struggle against England. 
 Onlyabout when and how! This question, the only one on which the dear friends differ, will be determined by military and diplomatic con-siderations known in full only to the tsarist government: the Milyukovs and Guchkovs know only a quarter ofthem. 
 Take the whole of Poland from Germany and Austria! Tsarism is in favour of that, but has it the strength? And will England allow it? Take Constantinople and the Straits! Crush and dis-member Austria! Tsarism is entirely in favour of that. 
But has it the strength? And will England allow it? Tsarism knows just how many millions of soldiers have been slaughtered and how many more may be drawn from the people; it knows just how many shells are being expend-ed and how many more can be obtained (in the event of war with China, which is threatening, and which is quite possible, Japan will not supply any more ammunition!). 
 Tsarism knows how its secret negotiations with England concerning Constantinople have been and are progressing;it knows the strength of the British forces in Salonika,Mesopotamia, etc. 
 Tsarism knows all this. 
 It has all thecards in its hands and is making exact calculations—inso-far as exact calculations are possible in such matters where that very doubtful and elusive element, the “fortune of war”, plays so great a part. 
 As for the Milyukovs and Guchkovs, the less they know the more they talk. 
 And the Plekhanovs, the Chkhenkelis,the Potresovs know nothing at all of tsarism’s secret pacts;they are forgetting even what they knew before, do not study what can be learned from the foreign press, do not examine the course of tsarism’s foreign policy before thewar, do not trace its course during the war, and are consequently playing the part of socialist SimpleSimons. 
 If tsarism has become convinced that even with all the aid of liberal society, with all the zeal of the war industries committees, with all the help the Plekhanovs,Gvozdyovs, Potresovs, Bulkins, Chirkins, Chkheidzes(“Save the country”, don’t laugh!), Kropotkins, and thewhole of that menial crowd are giving to the noble causeof producing more shells—that even with all this help and with the present state of military strength (or military impotence) of all the allies it can possibly drag and hasdragged into the war, it cannot achieve more, it cannot hit Germany harder , or that it can do so only at excessive cost (for example, the loss of ten million more Russian soldiers, the recruiting, training and equipment of whom would cost so many more billions of rubles and so many more years of war), then tsarism cannot but seek a separate peace with Germany. 
 If “we” go after too much booty in Europe, “we” run the risk of utterly exhausting “our” military resources, ofgaining almost nothing in Europe and of losing the opportu-nity of getting “our share” in Asia. 
 This is how tsarism argues, and it argues correctly from the standpoint of imperialist interests. 
 It argues more correctly than the bourgeois and opportunist chatterboxes, the Milyukovs, Plekhanovs, Guchkovs and Potresovs. 
 If no more can be obtained in Europe even after Ruma-nia and Greece (from which “we” have taken all we could)have joined in, then let us take what can still be had!England cannot give “us” anything just now. 
 Germany will perhaps return to us Courland and a part of Poland, cer-tainly Eastern Galicia—which “we” particularly need for the purpose of throttling the Ukrainian movement, the movement of historically hitherto dormant people num-bering many millions, for freedom and the right to usetheir native-language—and, very likely, Turkish Armeniaalso. 
 If we take this now , we may emerge from the war with increased strength , and tomorrow we may, with the aid of Japan and Germany, with a wise policy and with the further aid of the Milyukovs, Plekhanovs and Pot-resovs in “saving” the beloved “fatherland”, get a goodslice of Asia in a war against England (the whole of Per-sia and the Persian Gulf with an outlet to the ocean muchbetter than Constantinople, which is an outlet only to the Mediterranean and is guarded by islands which Eng-land can easily take and fortify, thus depriving “us” ofevery outlet to the open sea), etc. 
 This is exactly how tsarism argues, and, we repeat, it argues correctly, not only from the narrow monarchistpoint of view, but also from the general imperialist point of view. 
 It knows more and sees farther than the liberals, the Plekhanovs and the Potresovs. 
 It is quite possible, therefore, that tomorrow, or the day after we shall wake up and hear the three monarchsproclaim: “Hearkening to the voices of our beloved peoples,we have resolved to endow them with the blessings of peace, to sign an armistice and to convene a general European Peace Congress. 
” The three monarchs may even displaytheir sense of humour by quoting fragments of the speechesof Vandervelde, Plekhanov and Kautsky, such as: we “pro-mises”—promises are the only thing that is cheap, even inthis period of soaring prices—“to discuss the question of reducing armaments and of a ‘lasting’ peace”, etc. 
 Van-dervelde, Plekhanov and Kautsky will run along andarrange their “socialist” congress in the same city as the Peace Congress; and there will be no end of pious wishes, sentimental phrases and talk of the need to “de-fend the fatherland” in all languages. 
 The stage will be well set for concealing the transition from an imperialistAnglo-Russian alliance against Germany to an imperialistRusso-German alliance against England! But whether the war ends in this way in the very near future, or whether Russia “holds out” a little longer in her effort to vanquish Germany and rob Austria more; whether the separate peace negotiations will prove ashrewd blackmailer’s trick (tsarism showing England adraft of a treaty with Germany and saying: “Either somany billion rubles and such-and-such concessions orguarantees, or I sign this treaty tomorrow”), in all cases the imperialist war cannot end otherwise than in an impe-rialist peace, unless it is transformed into a civil war of the proletariat against the bourgeoisie for socialism. 
 Inall cases, unless this happens, the imperialist war willresult in the strengthening of one or two of the threestrongest imperialist powers—England, Germany and Russia—at the expense of the weak (Serbia, Turkey, Belgium, etc. 
), and it is quite possible that all three rob-bers will become stronger after the war, having dividedthe booty among themselves (the colonies, Belgium,Serbia, Armenia). 
 The only argument will be over theshare each should get. 
 In all cases, both the full-fledged and avowed social-chauvinists, i. 
e. 
, the individuals who openly accept“defence of the fatherland” in the present war, and the dis-guised, half-way social-chauvinists, i. 
e. 
, the Kautskyiteswith their preachment of “peace” in general , “without vic-tors or vanquished”, etc. 
, will inevitably, unavoidably and undoubtedly be fooled and discredited. 
 For any peace concluded by the same, or similar, bourgeois governmentsthat started the war will glaringly show the peoples whata servile role both these types of socialists played in rela-tion to imperialism. 
 Whatever the outcome of the present war, those who maintained that the only possible socialist way out of it is through civil war by the proletariat for socialism, willhave been proved correct. 
 The Russian Social-Democrats who maintained that the defeat of tsarism, its complete military smash-up, is, “in all cases”, the lesser evil, will have been proved correct. 
 For history never stands still; it continues its forward movement during this war too. 
And if the European proletariat cannot advance to social-ism now, cannot cast off the social-chauvinist and Kauts-kyite yoke in the course of this first great imperialistwar, then East Europe and Asia can advance to democracy with seven-league strides only if tsarism is utterly smashed and deprived of all possibility to pursue its semi-feudal type imperialist policy. 
 The war will kill and destroy everything weak, social-chauvinism and Kautskyism included. 
 An imperialistpeace would further accentuate these weaknesses, show them up in a still more despicable and abhorrent light. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 56, Published according to November 6, 1916 the Sotsial-Demokrat text TEN “SOCIALIST ” MINISTERS! Huysmans, the Secretary of the International Social-Chauvinist Bureau,64 has sent a telegram of greetings to Danish Minister without portfolio Stauning, the leader ofthe Danish quasi-“Social-Democratic” Party. 
 The telegram reads: “I learn from the newspapers that you have been ap-pointed Minister. 
 My heartiest congratulations. 
 And so,we now have ten socialist Cabinet Ministers in the world. 
Things are moving. 
 Best wishes. 
” Things are indeed moving. 
 The Second International is rapidly moving—towards complete merger with nation-al-liberal politics. 
 Quoting this telegram, the Chemnitz Volksstimme , 65 militant organ of the extreme German opportunists and social-chauvinists, remarks, somewhatvenomously: “The Secretary of the International SocialistBureau unreservedly welcomes the acceptance by a So-cial-Democrat of a ministerial post. 
 And yet only shortly before the war all party congresses, and international congresses, expressed sharp opposition to this! Times andviews change—on this issue as on others. 
” The Heilmanns, Davids and Südekums are quite jus-tified in their condescending praise of the Huysmans,Plekhanovs and Vanderveldes.... 
 Stauning recently published a letter he wrote to Vander-velde. 
 It is full of the stinging remarks a pro-Germansocial-chauvinist would write about a French social-chau-vinist. 
 Among other things, Stauning boasts of the fact that“we [the Danish Party] have sharply and definitely disas-sociated ourselves from the organisationally pernicious splitting activities conducted on the initiative of the Italian and Swiss parties under the name of the Zimmer-wald movement”. 
 This is literally what he says! The formation of a national state in Denmark dates back to the sixteenth century. 
 The masses of the Danish people passed through the bourgeois liberation movement long ago. 
 More than 96 per cent of the population are Danes. 
The number of Danes in Germany is less than two hundredthousand. 
 (The population of Denmark is 2,900,000. 
)This alone proves what a crude bourgeois deception isthe talk of the Danish bourgeoisie about an “independent national state” being the task of the day! This is being said in the twentieth century by the bourgeoisie and themonarchists of Denmark, who possess colonies with a population nearly equal to the number of Danes in Germany,and over which the Danish Government is trying to strike a bargain. 
 Who says that in our day there is no trade in human beings? There is quite a brisk trade. 
 Denmark is sellingto America for so many millions (not yet agreed upon) threeislands, all populated, of course. 
 In addition, a specific feature of Danish imperialism is the superprofits it obtains from its monopolistically advantageous position in the meat and dairy produce market: using cheap maritime transport, she suppliesthe world’s biggest market, London. 
 As a result, theDanish bourgeoisie and the rich Danish peasants (bourgeoisof the purest type, in spite of the fables of the RussianNarodniks) have become “prosperous” satellites of the British imperialist bourgeoisie, sharing their particularly easy and particularly fat profits. 
 The Danish “Social-Democratic” Party completely suc-cumbed to this international situation, and staunchly sup-ported and supports the Right wing, the opportunists in theGerman Social-Democratic Party. 
 The Danish Social-Democ-rats voted credits for the bourgeois-monarchist government to “preserve neutrality”—that was the euphemistic formula. 
At the Congress of September 30, 1916, there was a nine-tenths’ majority in favour of joining the Cabinet, in favourof a deal with the government! The correspondent of the Bernesocialist paper reports that the opposition to ministerial-ism in Denmark was represented by Gerson Trier and the editor J. 
 P. 
 Sundbo. 
 Trier defended revolutionary Marxistviews in a splendid speech, and when the party decided to go into the government, he resigned from the Central Commit-tee and from the party, declaring that he would not be a member of a bourgeois party. 
 In the past few years the Da-nish “Social-Democratic” Party has in no way differed fromthe bourgeois radicals. 
 Greetings to Comrade G. 
 Trier! “Things are moving”, Huysmans is right—moving towards a precise, clear, polit-ically honest, socialistically necessary division between the revolutionary Marxists, the representatives of the masses of the revolutionary proletariat, and the Plekhanov-Potresov-Huysmans allies and agents of the imperialist bourgeoisie,who have the majority of the “ leaders ”, but who represent the interests, not of the oppressed masses, but of the minor-ity of privileged workers, who are deserting to the side of the bourgeoisie. 
 Will the Russian class-conscious workers, those who elected the deputies now exiled to Siberia, those who votedagainst participation in the war industries committees tosupport the imperialist war, wish to remain in the “Inter-national” of the ten Cabinet Ministers? In the International of the Staunings ? In the International which men like Trier are leaving? Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 56, Published according to November 6, 1916 the Sotsial-Demokrat text TASK S OF THE LEFT ZIMMERWALDISTS IN THE SWIS S SOCIA L-DEMOCRATI C PART Y66 The Congress of the Swiss Social-Democratic Party at Zurich (November 4-5, 1916) definitely proved that the deci-sion to join Zimmerwald and accept revolutionary mass struggle (resolution of the 1915 Aarau Congress) remains on paper, and that within the party there has been definite-ly formed a “Centre”, i. 
e. 
, a trend similar to that of Kauts-ky-Haase and the Arbeitsgemeinschaft 67 in Germany, and of Longuet-Pressemane and Co. 
 in France. 
 This “Centre”, ofwhich R. 
 Grimm has become the head, combines “Left” declarations with “Right”, i. 
e. 
, opportunist, tactics. 
 It is therefore the task of the Left Zimmerwaldists in the Swiss Social-Democratic Party immediately and effec-tively to consolidate their forces in order systematically toinfluence the party so that the Aarau Congress decisionshall not remain a dead letter. 
 Consolidation of their forces is all the more urgent since both the Aarau and Zurich con-gresses have left no doubt whatever as to the revolutionaryand internationalist sympathies of the Swiss proletariat. 
Resolutions of sympathy for Liebknecht are not enough;there must be serious acceptance of his slogan that theSocial-Democratic parties of today need regeneration . 
 68 The platform of the Left Zimmerwaldists in the Social-Democratic Party of Switzerland should be, approximately,as follows: I. 
 ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE WAR AND TOWARDS THE BOURGEOIS GOVERNMENT IN GENERAL 1. 
 “Defence of the fatherland” on the part of Switzerland in the present imperialist war as well as in the new impe-rialist wars now in preparation is nothing but a bourgeois deception of the people. 
 For, actually, Switzerland’s participa-tion in the present or similar wars would only be participa-tion in a predatory and reactionary war on the side of * one of the imperialist coalitions; it would definitely not be a warfor “freedom”, “democracy”, “independence”, etc. 
 2. 
 The attitude of the Swiss Social-Democratic Party towards the bourgeois Swiss Government and towards all theSwiss bourgeois parties must be one of utter distrust. 
 For that government (a) is closely bound up, economically and financially, with the bourgeoisie of the imperialist“Great” Powers and is completely dependent upon them;(b) has long ago turned towards political reaction all alongthe line in international and domestic affairs (politicalpolice, servility towards European reaction and European monarchies, etc. 
); (c) its whole policy over a period of many years (military reorganisation in 1907, etc. 
, the Egli “case”,the de Loys “case”, 69 etc. 
, etc. 
) has proved that it is increas-ingly becoming a pawn in the hands of the most reactionarySwiss military party and military clique. 
 3. 
 In view of the above, it is the urgent task of the Swiss Social-Democratic Party to expose the true character of the government, which is cringing before the imperialistbourgeoisie and the militarists, expose its deception ofthe people by means of phrases about democracy, etc. 
, showthe very real possibility of this government (with the ap-proval of the whole of the ruling bourgeoisie in Switzer-land) bartering away the interests of the Swiss people to one or the other imperialist coalition. 
 4. 
 Therefore, in the event of Switzerland’s involvement in the present war, it will be the duty of the Social-Democrats absolutely to repudiate “defence of the father-land” and to expose the use of that slogan to deceive the people. 
 In such a war the workers and peasants would lay down their lives not in their own interests, and not fordemocracy, but in the interests of the imperialist bourgeoi-sie. 
 The socialists of Switzerland, as of all other advancedcountries, can and must accept military defence of the fa-therland only when this fatherland has been reorganised *In the manuscript the words “in alliance with” are written over the words “on the side of”. 
— Ed. 
 along socialist lines, i. 
e. 
, defence of the proletarian social-ist revolution against the bourgeoisie. 
 5. 
 Neither in peace nor in war can the Social-Democrat-ic Party and its deputies vote war credits under any cir-cumstances, no matter what deceitful speeches about “defend-ing neutrality”, etc. 
, are made to justify such voting. 
 6. 
 The proletariat’s answer to war must be propaganda and the preparation and carrying out of revolutionary mass actions for the overthrow of bourgeois rule, the conquest of political power and the achievement of socialist society,which alone will save mankind from wars. 
 The determina-tion to achieve it is maturing in the minds of the workers ofall countries with unprecedented rapidity. 
 7. 
 Revolutionary action must include demonstrations and mass strikes, but under no circumstances refusal of military service. 
 On the contrary, not refusal to take uparms, but turning these arms against one’s own bourgeoisie is the only action that can correspond to the tasks of theproletariat and to the slogans of the best representativesof internationalism, for example, Karl Liebknecht. 
 8. 
 The Social-Democratic workers must counter the slight-est government action, either before entering or during thewar, towards abolishing or curtailing political libertiesby forming illegal organisations to conduct systematic, per-sistent propaganda, undaunted by any sacrifices, for waragainst war, and explain to the masses the real character of the war. 
 II. 
 THE HIGH COST OF LIVING AND THE INTOLERABLE ECONOMIC CONDITIONS OF THE MASSES 9. 
 Not only in the belligerent countries, but in Switzer-land too, the war has led to the unprecedented and scandal-ous enrichment of a handful of rich people and to incrediblewant among the masses, resulting from high prices andfood shortages. 
 The Social-Democratic Party’s main taskmust be a revolutionary, not reformist, struggle against this calamity: systematic and persistent propaganda and preparation for such a struggle, undeterred by inevitable tem-porary difficulties and set-backs. 
 10. 
 In reply to the numerous bourgeois projects of finan-cial reforms, the Social-Democratic Party must make it its main task to expose attempts by the bourgeoisie to shift the burden of mobilisation and war on to the workersand poor peasants. 
 Under no circumstances, and under no pretext, can So-cial-Democrats agree to indirect taxation. 
 The decision ofthe Aarau Congress (1915), and the Huber-Grimm resolu-tion adopted at the Zurich Congress (1916), which permit Social-Democrats to agree to indirect taxes, must be re-scinded. 
 All Social-Democratic organisations must forthwithbegin most energetically to prepare for the Party Congressin Berne in February 1917, and must elect only delegateswho favour rescinding these resolutions. 
 It is the job of liberal officials, and certainly not of revolutionary Social-Democrats, to help the bourgeois govern-ment extricate itself from the present difficulties and pre-serve the capitalist system, i. 
e. 
, perpetuate want amongthe masses. 
 11. 
 Social-Democrats must propagate as widely as possible among the masses the urgent necessity of introducing a uniform federal property and income tax, with high andprogressive scales not lower than the following: Property Income Rate of Taxation (per cent) 20,000 francs 5,000 francs exempt 50,000 ” 10,000 ” 10 100,000 ” 25,000 ” 40 200,000 ” 60,000 ” 60, etc. 
 Tax on persons living in pensions : Paying up to 4 francs per day—exempt ”” ” 5 ”” ” —1 % ”” ” 10 ”” ” —20% ”” ” 20 ”” ” —25%, etc. 
 12. 
 Social-Democrats must ruthlessly combat the bour-geois lie, spread also by many opportunists in the Social-Democratic Party, that it is “impractical” to advocaterevolutionary-high rates of property and income taxation. 
 On the contrary, this is the only practical and the only Social-Democratic policy. 
 First, because we must not adapt our-selves to what is “acceptable” to the rich; we must appeal to the broad masses of the poor and propertyless who are indifferent to, or suspicious of, the Social-Democratic Party, largely owing to its reformist and opportunist character. 
 Secondly, the only way of wresting concessions from the bour-geoisie is not by “bargaining” with it, not by “adapting”ourselves to its interests or prejudices, but by preparing therevolutionary forces of the masses against it. 
 The larger the section of people we convince of the justice of revolutionary-high taxation rates and of the need to fight to secure such rates, the sooner will the bourgeoisie make concessions. 
 Andwe will utilise every concession, however small, in the un-swerving struggle for the complete expropriation of the bour-geoisie. 
 13. 
 The fixing of a maximum salary for all salaried em-ployees and officials, Bundesräte, * etc. 
, of 5,000 to 6,000 francs per annum, according to size of family. 
 The prohi-bition of the accumulation of all other incomes under penal-ty of imprisonment and confiscation of such incomes. 
 14. 
 Compulsory alienation of the factories and works—in the first instance of those that are indispensable for supplying the necessities of life to the population—and also of all agricultural enterprises of over fifteen hectares (over 40“Jucharten ”) in area (in Switzerland there are only 22,000 enterprises of this size out of a total of 252,000, i. 
e. 
, lessthan one-tenth of all agricultural enterprises). 
 Systematicmeasures, on the basis of these reforms, to increase food output and ensure the people a supply of cheap food. 
 15. 
 Immediate and compulsory alienation by the state of all water power in Switzerland; this, as well as otheralienated property, to be subject to the above-mentionedscales of property and income tax. 
 III. 
 PRESSING DEMOCRATIC REFORMS AND UTILISATION OF THE POLITICAL STRUGGLE AND PARLIAMENTARISM 16. 
 Utilisation of the parliamentary tribune and the right of initiative and referendum, not in a reformist manner, *Members of the Federal Council. 
— Ed. 
 in order to advocate reforms “acceptable” to the bourgeoisie, and therefore powerless to remove the principal and funda-mental evils suffered by the masses. 
 The aim should be propaganda in favour of Switzerland’s socialist transforma-tion, which is quite feasible economically, and is becomingmore and more urgently necessary because of the intolerablyhigh cost of living and the oppression of finance capital,and also because the international relations created by the war are impelling the proletariat of the whole of Europe on to the path of revolution. 
 17. 
 Abolition of all restrictions without exception on the political rights of women compared with those of men. 
 Itmust be explained to the masses why this reform is particu-larly urgent at the present time, when the war and the high cost of living are agitating the minds of the broad masses and, in particular, are rousing the interest and the attentionof women towards politics. 
 18. 
 Compulsory naturalisation ( Zwangseinbürgerung ) of all foreigners, free of charge. 
 Every foreigner shall becomea Swiss citizen after three months’ residence in the country, unless he, on very good grounds, applies for a postponement, which may be granted for not more than three months. 
 Itmust be explained to the masses that such a reform is partic-ularly urgent for Switzerland, not only from the generaldemocratic standpoint, but also because, owing to its impe-rialist environment, Switzerland has a larger percentage of foreigners than any other European country. 
 Nine-tenths of these foreigners speak one of the three languages used inSwitzerland. 
 The disfranchisement and alienation of foreignworkers serve to increase political reaction, which is alreadymounting, and weaken international proletarian solidarity. 
 19. 
 Immediate propaganda for Social-Democratic candi-dates in the 1917 Nationalrat * elections to be nominated only on the basis of a political platform that has been previous-ly widely discussed by the electors. 
 This applies in partic-ular to the question of the attitude towards the war anddefence of the fatherland, and the question of reformist orrevolutionary struggle against the high cost of living. 
 *National Council. 
— Ed. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR IV. 
 THE IMMEDIATE TASKS OF PARTY PROPAGANDA, AGITATION AND ORGANISATION 20. 
 Effective operation of the Aarau decision on the revolutionary mass struggle is impossible without systematicand persistent efforts to extend Social-Democratic influenceover the masses, without drawing into the movement new stra-ta of the toiling and exploited masses. 
 Propaganda and agita-tion for the social revolution must be conducted more concrete-ly, more explicitly, and on pressing practical issues. 
 Thiswill make it understood not only by the organised workers,who under capitalism will always remain a minority of theproletariat and of the oppressed classes in general, but also by the majority of the exploited, who are incapable of sys-tematic organisation because of the terrible oppression ofcapitalism. 
 21. 
 To influence broader masses, the party must organ-ise more systematic publication of leaflets for free distri-bution. 
 These should explain to the masses that the revo-lutionary proletariat is fighting for the socialist transfor-mation of Switzerland, which is necessary for and in theinterests of nine-tenths of the population. 
 Open competi-tions should be organised between all party branches, partic-ularly the youth organisations, for the best distribution ofsuch leaflets, and street and house-to-house propaganda. 
 More attention and effort must be devoted to propaganda among the rural workers, agricultural labourers and day-la-bourers, and also among the poor section of peasants who donot exploit hired labour and do not profit, but suffer,from the high cost of living. 
 The party should demand ofits parliamentary representatives (National -, Kantons -, Gross -, and other Räte) that they utilise their particularly advantageous political position, not for idle reformistparliamentary talk, which naturally only bores the workersand rouses their suspicion, but for propaganda for thesocialist revolution among the most backward strata of the proletariat and semi-proletariat in urban, and particularly rural, areas. 
 22. 
 A decisive break with the theory of “neutrality” of the industrial organisations of the working class, office employees, etc. 
 A truth most strikingly confirmed by the war should be brought home to the masses, namely, that so-called “neutrality” is bourgeois deception or hypocrisy, that in fact it means passive submission to the bourgeoisie and to such of its particularly disgusting undertakings asimperialist war. 
 Social-Democratic activity in every orga-nisation of the working class and of the poor strata of thepetty bourgeoisie or office workers must be intensified. 
 Special Social-Democratic groups must be formed within all such organisations; systematic efforts must be made tocreate a situation in which revolutionary Social-Democracyshall have the majority in and leadership of these organisa-tions. 
 The special importance of this condition for thesuccess of the revolutionary struggle must be explained to the masses. 
 23. 
 Social-Democratic work among the troops must be extended and intensified, both before and after the call-up. 
Social-Democratic groups must be formed in all militaryunits. 
 The historical inevitability and legitimacy, fromthe standpoint of socialism, of using arms in the only legi-timate war, namely, the proletarian war against the bour-geoisie to liberate humanity from wage-slavery, must beexplained. 
 There must be propaganda against isolatedterrorist actions and for linking up the struggle of the revolutionary section of the army with the broad movementof the proletariat and of the exploited population generally. 
 There must be more intensive propaganda in support of the section of the Olten decision urging soldiers to refuse toobey when troops are used against strikers, and it shouldbe explained that passive disobedience alone is not enough. 
 70 24. 
 To explain to the masses the inseparable connection between the practical, consistent, revolutionary Social-Democratic work, as outlined above, and the systematic struggle over principles among the three main trends in the present-day labour movement that have arisen in all civi-lised countries, and have taken definite shape also in Swit-zerland (particularly at the 1916 Zurich Congress). 
 Thesethree trends are: (1) the social-patriots who frankly accept “defence of the fatherland” in the present imperialist war of 1914-16; this is an opportunist trend of the agents of the bourgeoisie in the labour movement; (2) the Left Zimmerwald-ists, who, in principle, reject “defence of the fatherland” in the imperialist war. 
 They favour a break with the social-patriots as agents of the bourgeoisie and mass revolutionary struggle, combined with complete reorganisation of Social-Democratic tactics to conform with the propaganda andpreparation for such struggle; (3) the so-called “Centre”(Kautsky-Haase, Arbeitsgemeinschaft in Germany;Longuet-Pressemane in France), * which stands for unity between the first and the second trends. 
 Such “unity” only ties the hands of revolutionary Social-Democracy, preventsthe development of its activity and corrupts the masses byfailure inseparably and completely to link up Partyprinciples and Party practice. 
 At the 1916 Zurich Congress of the Swiss Social-Democratic Party, in three speeches on the question of the National-ratsfraktion ** delivered by Platten, Naine and Greulich, there was the very clearly expressed admission that thestruggle between the different policy trends within theSocial-Democratic Party of Switzerland has long since become a fact. 
 The sympathies of the majority of the delegates were obviously with Platten when he spoke of the need consistent-ly to work in the spirit of revolutionary Social-Democracy. 
Naine openly, precisely and definitely declared that twotrends were continuously fighting each other within theNationalratsfraktion, and that the workers’ organisationsmust themselves see to it that adherents of the revolutionary trend who were in complete agreement with each other be elected to the Nationalrat. 
 When Greulich said that the Partyhad cast off its old “favourites” ( Lieblinge ) and had found new “favourites”, he too thereby admitted the existence andstruggle of different trends. 
 But no class-conscious andthinking worker will agree with this “favourites” theory. 
 It is precisely in order to prevent the inevitable and necessary struggle between trends from degenerating into a contest be-tween “favourites”, into personal conflicts, petty suspicionsand petty scandals that all members of the Social-DemocraticParty must see to it that the struggle between the differentpolicy trends is fought openly and on principles . 
 *In the German Social-Democratic press the “Centre” is sometimes identified, and rightly so, with the Right wing of the “Zimmerwaldists”. 
 **The Socialist Group in the National Council. 
— Ed. 
 25. 
 An intensified principled struggle must be waged against the Grütli-Verein71 as a glaring manifestation on Swiss soil of the tendencies of bourgeois labour politics, namely, opportunism, reformism, social-patriotism and cor-ruption of the masses by bourgeois-democratic illusions. 
The mistaken and pernicious character of social-patriotand “Centre” policies must be explained to the masses, usingthe concrete activities of the Grütli-Verein as an example. 
 26. 
 Preparations must be immediately started for the elections to the February (1917) Party Congress in Berne toensure that they are held only after every Party organisa-tion has discussed the principles and concrete policies setforth in the various platforms. 
 The platform outlined hereshou]d serve as the platform of the consistent, revolutionary, inter-nationalist Social-Democrats. 
 The election of all leading Party officials, to the Press Commission, to all representative bodies, to all manage-ment committees, etc. 
, must take place only on the basisof such a discussion of platforms. 
 Every local organisation must carefully control the local Party press organ to ensure that it pursues the views and the tactics, not merely of Social-Democracy in general,but of a precisely defined platform of Social-Democratic policy. 
 V. 
 INTERNATIONAL TASKS OF THE SWISS SOCIAL -DEMOCRATS 27. 
 In order that acceptance of internationalism by the Swiss Social-Democrats shall not remain an empty andnon-committal phrase—to which the adherents of the “Cen-tre”, and Social-Democrats of the epoch of the Second Inter-national generally, always confine themselves—it is neces-sary, first, consistently and unswervingly to fight for organi-sational rapprochement between foreign and Swiss workersbringing them together in the same unions, and for theircomplete equality (civic and political). 
 The specific fea-ture of imperialism in Switzerland is precisely the increas-ing exploitation of disfranchised foreign workers by the Swiss bourgeoisie, which bases its hopes on estrangementbetween these two categories of workers. 
 Second, every effort must be made to create a united internationalist trend among the German, French and Italian workers of Switzerland, a trend that will make for genuine unity in all practical activity in the labour movement and will combat, with equal determination and on principle,French (in Latin Switzerland), German and Italian social-patriotism. 
 The present platform should be made the basisof a common and united platform of the workers of all three main nationalities or languages in Switzerland. 
 Unless worker supporters of revolutionary Social-Democracy belong-ing to all the nationalities of Switzerland are united in thisway, internationalism will remain an idle word. 
 To facilitate this amalgamation, the publication should be started of supplements (even if weekly [monthly] and only two pages at first) to all Social-Democratic newspa-pers (and to all periodicals put out by workers’, office em-ployees’, etc. 
, trade unions). 
 The supplements should bepublished in three languages and should explain the present platform in the light of current political developments. 
 28. 
 The Swiss Social-Democrats must support in all other socialist parties only the revolutionary-international-ist forces, the forces that accept the Zimmerwald Left. 
This support must not remain platonic. 
 It is particularlyimportant to reprint in Switzerland the anti-governmentmanifestos secretly issued in Germany, France and Italy,translate them into all three languages and distribute them among the workers in Switzerland and all the neighbouring countries. 
 29. 
 At the Berne (February 1917) Congress the Swiss Social-Democratic Party must not only unreservedly acceptthe Kienthal Conference decisions, but must also de-mand an immediate and complete organisational break with the International Socialist Bureau at The Hague, that bul-wark of opportunism and social-patriotism, which are irre-concilably hostile to the interests of socialism. 
 30. 
 The Social-Democratic Party of Switzerland is in a particularly favourable position to keep in touch withdevelopments in the labour movement in the advanced European countries and unite its revolutionary elements. 
 The Party must not, therefore, wait passively for an internalstruggle to develop within that movement, but must keep in advance of that struggle. 
 In other words, it must follow the road of the Zimmerwald Left, the correctness of which is being proved more clearly every day by the course of events in the socialist movements of Germany, France, England,the United States and all civilised countries in general. 
 Written in late October and early November 1916 First published (in French) Published according to as a pamphlet in 1918 the manuscript First published in Russian in 1924 in the magazine Proletarskaya Revolutsia No. 
 4 (27) THESE S ON THE ATTITUDE OF THE SWIS S SOCIA L-DEMOCRATI C PARTY TOWARD S THE WAR72 1. 
 The present world war is an imperialist war waged for the political and economic exploitation of the world, for markets, raw material sources and new spheres of capi-tal investment, oppression of weak nations, etc. 
 The “defence of the fatherland” phraseology of the two warring coalitions is no more than a bourgeois deception ofthe peoples. 
 2. 
 The Swiss Government is the steward of the Swiss bourgeoisie, which is wholly dependent upon internationalfinance capital and intimately associated with the imperi-alist bourgeoisie of the Great Powers. 
 It is therefore no accident, but an inevitable result of these economic facts, that the Swiss Government is fromday to day—and this has been so for decades—con-ducting an increasingly reactionary policy and secret diplomacy, hampering and violating the people’s democraticrights and freedoms, kow-towing to the military clique andsystematically and shamelessly sacrificing the interests ofthe broad masses to the interests of a handful of financialmagnates. 
 Switzerland may at any moment be drawn into the pres-ent war as a result of this dependence of her bourgeoisgovernment on the interests of the financial oligarchy, and ofpowerful pressure by one or another of the imperialist coa-litions. 
 3. 
 Consequently, in relation to Switzerland, too, “defence of the fatherland” is now no more than a hypocritical phrase. 
For in reality it is not a question of defending democracy,independence or the interests of the broad popular masses, etc. 
, but, on the contrary, of preparing to hurl the workers and small peasants into the holocaust in order to maintain the monopoly and privileges of the bourgeoisie, of strength-ening capitalist domination and political reaction. 
 4. 
 Proceeding from these facts, the Swiss Social-Demo-cratic Party rejects “defence of the fatherland” on principle,demands immediate demobilisation and calls on the workingclass to reply to the bourgeoisie’s war preparations and to war itself, should it break out, with the sharpest methods of proletarian class struggle. 
 Among these methods the following should be especially urged: (a) Rejection of civil peace, sharper principled struggle against all bourgeois parties, and also against the Grütli-Verein as an organisation of agents of the bourgeoisie within the workers’ movement, and against Grütli trendswithin the Socialist Party. 
 (b) Rejection of all war credits, no matter under what pretext requested, both in peace-time and war-time. 
 (c) Support of all revolutionary movements and every struggle of the working class of the belligerent countries against the war and against their own governments. 
 (d) Assistance to the revolutionary mass struggle within Switzerland—strikes, demonstrations, armed rising againstthe bourgeoisie. 
 (e) Systematic propaganda among the armed forces, estab-lishment for this purpose of special Social-Democratic groups in the army and among conscription-age youth. 
 (f) Establishment by the working class of illegal organ-isations in retaliation to every government curtailmentor repeal of political freedoms. 
 (g) Systematic preparation, through regular and consist-ent explanatory work among the workers, of a situation in which the leadership of all workers’ and office employees’organisations without exception would pass into thehands of persons who accept and are capable of conductingthis struggle against the war. 
 5. 
 The Party’s aim in the revolutionary mass struggle, adopted at the 1915 Party Congress in Aarau, is a socialist revolution in Switzerland. 
 Economically, this can be carriedout immediately. 
 Socialist revolution offers the only effective means of liberating the masses from the horror of high prices and hunger. 
 It is being brought nearer as a result of the crisis that has gripped the whole of Europe. 
 It is absolutely necessary for the complete elimination ofmilitarism and war. 
 The Party declares that all bourgeois pacifist and social-ist pacifist phrases against militarism and war that failto accept this goal and the revolutionary means of achieving it, are illusions or lies and can only have the effect of diverting the working class from any serious struggle againstthe foundations of capitalism. 
 Without ceasing its fight to improve the position of the wage-slaves, the Party calls upon the working class andits representatives to put on the order of the day propaganda for an immediate socialist revolution in Switzerland. 
 This should be done through mass agitation, speeches in Parlia-ment, legislative proposals, etc. 
, proving the need toreplace the bourgeois government by a proletarian governmentrelying on the support of the mass of the propertylesspopulation, and explaining the imperative need for such measures as expropriation of the banks and big industries, repeal of all indirect taxes, introduction of a single directtax with revolutionary-high tax-rates for big incomes, etc. 
 Written in German in early December 1916 First published in 1931 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany XVII the manuscript Translated from the German PRINCIPLES INVOLVED IN THE WAR ISSUE Swiss Left Social-Democrats are unanimous in rejecting the defence of the fatherland principle in the present war. 
The proletariat, at any rate its best elements, is likewise opposed to defence of the fatherland. 
 Hence, on this most burning issue confronting contem-porary socialism in general and the Swiss Socialist Party inparticular, it would appear that necessary unity has beenachieved. 
 Closer examination, however, is bound to leadus to the conclusion that it is only seeming unity. 
 For there is absolutely no clarity, let alone unanimity, that a declaration against defence of the fatherland placesexceptionally high demands on the revolutionary conscious-ness and revolutionary viability of the party that makessuch a declaration, providing, of course, that it is not reducedto a hollow phrase. 
 And such a declaration does become a hollow phrase if we merely reject defence of the fatherland without being fully aware of, i. 
e. 
, without appreciating,the demands implied, without realising that all propaganda , agitation , organisation , in short, the sum total of party activity, must be radically changed, “regenerated” (to useKarl Liebknecht’s expression) and adapted to the supreme revolutionary tasks. 
 Let us carefully consider what rejection of fatherland defence implies, if we approach it as a serious political slogan that must really be carried out . 
 First. 
 We call on the proletarians and the exploited of all the belligerent countries, and of all countries faced with the danger of war, to reject defence of the fatherland. 
 We definitely know now, from the experience of several of thewarring countries, what this actually implies in the present war. 
 It implies rejection of all the foundations of modern bourgeois society, the undermining of the very roots of the modern social system, and not only in theory, not only “in general”, but in practice, directly and immediately. 
Is it not clear that this can be accomplished only if we go beyond the firm theoretical conviction that capitalism hasfully matured for its transformation into socialism andaccept the practical, direct and immediate carrying out of such transformation, i. 
e. 
, the socialist revolution? Yet that is nearly always lost sight of in discussing refusal to defend the fatherland. 
 At best there is “theoretical”acceptance of the fact that capitalism is ripe for transfor-mation into socialism. 
 But immediate , radical change of all aspects of party activity in the spirit of the directly imminent socialist revolution—that is shunned ! The people, it is alleged, are not prepared for that!But that is ridiculously inconsistent. 
 Either, or. 
 Either we do not proclaim immediate rejection of defence ofthe fatherland—or we immediately develop, or begin to develop, systematic propaganda for immediate socialist revolution. 
 In a certain sense the “people”, of course, are “not prepared” either to reject fatherland defence or accept socialist revolution. 
 But that does not justify two years—two years!—of procrastination and delay in starting tosystematically prepare them! Second. 
 What is being opposed to the policy of defence of the fatherland and civil peace? Revolutionary struggle against the war, “revolutionary mass actions”, as recognisedby the 1915 Aarau Party Congress resolution. 
 No doubt avery good decision, but ... but the party’s record since thatcongress, the party’s actual policy, show that it has remained a paper decision. 
 What is the aim of revolutionary mass struggle? The party has made no official statement, nor is the questionbeing discussed in general. 
 It is either taken for granted,or frankly admitted, that the aim is “ socialism ”. 
 Socialism is being opposed to capitalism (or imperialism). 
 That, however, is absolutely illogical (theoretically) and void of all practical meaning. 
 Illogical because it is too general, too nebulous. 
 “Socialism” in general, as an aim, as the opposite of capitalism (or imperialism), is accepted now not only by the Kautsky crowd and social-chauvinists, but by many bourgeois social politicians. 
 However, it is no longer a matter of contrasting two social systems, but of formulating the concrete aim of the concrete “revolutionary mass struggle” against a concrete evil, namely, the present high cost of living, the present war danger or the present war. 
 The whole Second International of 1889-1914 opposed socialism to capitalism in general, and it was precisely this too general “generalisation” that brought on its bankruptcy. 
It ignored the specific evil of its age, which Frederick Engelsnearly thirty years ago, on January 10, 1887, characterisedin the following words: “...a certain petty-bourgeois socialism finds representation in the Social-Democratic Party itself, and even in the ranks of the Reichstag group. 
 This is done in the following way:while the fundamental views of modern socialism and thedemand for the transformation of all the means of productioninto social property are recognised as justified, the reali-sation of this is declared possible only in the distant future , a future which for all practical purposes is quite out of sight. 
 Thus , for the present one has to have recourse to mere social patchwork... ” (The Housing Question , Preface). 
 73 The concrete aim of “revolutionary mass struggle” can only be concrete measures of socialist revolution , and not “socialism” in general. 
 The Dutch comrades have given a precise definition of these concrete measures in their pro-gramme (published in the Bulletin of the International Social-ist Committee No. 
 3, Berne, February 29, 1916): annulment of the national debt, expropriation of the banks and bigindustry. 
 When we suggest that these absolutely concretemeasures be included in an official party resolution, and be systematically explained in the most popular form, in day-to-day party propaganda at public meetings, in parliamentaryspeeches, in legislative proposals—we get the same procras-tinating, evasive and thoroughly sophistical reply that thepeople are not yet prepared for this, and so on and so forth! The point is, however, that we should begin preparing them right now, and firmly stick to this work! Third, the party has “accepted” revolutionary mass strug-gle. 
 Very well. 
 But is the party capable of waging it? Is it preparing for it? Is it studying these problems, gathering together the necessary material, setting up the proper bodies and organisations? Is it discussing the issues among the people and with the people? Nothing of the kind! The party clings to its old line—a thoroughly parliamentarian, thoroughly trade union, thor-oughly reformist and thoroughly legalistic line. 
 The partyremains manifestly incapable of facilitating the revolutionary mass struggle and leading it. 
 It is obviously making no prep-arations whatever for this. 
 The old routine rules supremeand the “new” words (rejection of fatherland defence, revolu-tionary mass struggle) remain mere words ! And the Lefts, failing to realise this, are not mustering their forces, sys-tematically, perseveringly and in all fields of party activity, to combat the evil. 
 One can only shrug one’s shoulders on reading, for in-stance, the following phrase (the last) in Grimm’s theseson the war issue: “In conjunction with trade union organisations, party bodies must in this event [i. 
e. 
, the calling of a mass railway strike if there is a danger of war, etc. 
] take all the necessary measures. 
” The theses were published in the summer, and on September 16, the Schweizerische Metallarbeiter-Zeitung ,74 issued over the names of its editors, O. 
 Schneeberger and K. 
 Dürr,contained the following phrase (I was on the verge of saying,the following official reply to Grimm’s theses or pious wishes): “...The phrase ‘the worker has no fatherland’ is in very poor taste at a time when the workers of all Europe, in their overwhelming majori-ty, have for two years been standing shoulder to shoulder with the bourgeoisie on the battlefields against the ‘enemies’ of their fatherland,while those who remain at home want to ‘live through it’ despite allthe poverty and hardship. 
 Should we be attacked by a foreign power we shall doubtlessly see the same picture in Switzerland too!!! ” What is this if not “Kautsky” policy, the policy of the impotent phrase, Left declaration and opportunist practicewhen, on the one hand, resolutions are proposed urging the party, “in conjunction with trade union organisations”, to call for revolutionary mass strikes, and, on the other, nostruggle is waged against the Grütli , i. 
e. 
, social-patriot, reformist and thoroughly legalistic, trend and its supporters within the party and the trade unions? Are we “educating” the masses or corrupting and demor-alising them if we fail daily to say and prove that “leading” comrades like O. 
 Schneeberger, K. 
 Dürr, P. 
 Pflüger, H. 
 Greu-lich, Huber and many others hold exactly the same social-patriot views and pursue exactly the same social-patriot policy as the one Grimm so “courageously” exposes and cas-tigates ... when it concerns the Germans ( in Germany ) and not the Swiss? Rail against the foreigners, but protect one’s“own” “fellow-citizens” .... 
 Is that “internationalist”? Is that “democratic”? This is how Hermann Greulich describes the position of the Swiss workers, the crisis of Swiss socialism and also the substance of Grütli policy within the Socialist Party: “... The standard of living has risen insignificantly and only for the top strata [hear! hear!] of the proletariat. 
 The mass of workers continueto live in poverty, beset by worry and hardship. 
 That is why, from timeto time, doubts arise as to the correctness of the path we have been fol-lowing. 
 The critics are looking for new paths and place special hope on more resolute action. 
 Efforts are being made in that direction, but as a rule [?] they fail [??l and this increases the urge to revert to the oldtactics [a case of the wish being father to the thought?] .... 
 And now the world war ... drastic decline in the standard of living, amounting tooutright poverty for those sections which in the past still enjoyedtolerable conditions. 
 Revolutionary sentiments are spreading. 
 [Hear! hear!] In truth, the party leadership has not been equal to the tasks confronting it and all too often succumbs [??] to the influence of hot-heads [??] .... 
 The Grütli-Verein Central Committee is committed to a ‘practical national policy’ which it wants to operate outside the party .... 
 Why has it not pursued it within the party? [Hear! hear!] Why has itnearly always left it to me to fight the ultra-radicals?” (Open Letter to the Hottingen Grütli-Verein, September 26, 1916. 
) So speaks Greulich. 
 It is not at all, therefore, a matter (as the Grütlians in the party think, and hint in the press,while the Grütlians outside the party say so openly) of a few “evil-minded foreigners’ wanting, in a fit of personal impatience, to inject a revolutionary spirit into the labourmovement, which they regard through “foreign spectacles”. 
No, it is none other than Hermann Greulich—whose politicalrole is tantamount to that of a bourgeois Labour Ministerin a small democratic republic—who tells us that only the upper strata of the workers are somewhat better off now, while the mass is steeped in poverty, and that “revolution-ary sentiments are spreading” not because of the accursed foreign “instigators”, but because of “the drastic decline in the standard of living”. 
 And so?And so, we shall be absolutely right if we say: Either the Swiss people will suffer hardships that will increase with every passing week and they will be faced daily with the threat of involvement in the imperialistwar, i. 
e. 
, of being killed in the capitalists’ interests, or they will follow the advice of the finest part of theirproletariat, muster all their forces and carry out a social-ist revolution. 
 Socialist revolution? Utopia! “A remote and practically indefinable” possibility!... It is no more a utopia than rejection of fatherland defence in the present war or revolutionary mass struggle againstit. 
 One should not be deafened by one’s own words or fright-ened by the words of others. 
 Nearly everyone is prepared to accept revolutionary struggle against the war. 
 But onemust visualise the magnitude of the task of ending the warby revolution! No, it is not a utopia. 
 The revolution ismaturing in all countries and the question now is not whether to continue to live in tranquillity and tolerable conditions, or plunge into some reckless adventure. 
 On the contrary, the question is whether to continue to suffer hardship and bethrown into the holocaust to fight for alien interests , or to make great sacrifices for socialism, for the interests ofnine-tenths of mankind. 
 Socialist revolution, we are told, is a utopia! The Swiss people, thank God, have no “separate” or “independent” language, but speak the three world languages of the neigh-bouring warring countries. 
 It is not surprising, therefore,that they are in such close touch with developments in thesecountries. 
 In Germany, things have reached a point wherethe economic life of 66 million people is directed from one centre . 
 The national economy of a country of 66 million is run from this one centre. 
 Tremendous sacrifices are imposedon the vast majority of the people in order that the “upper 30,000” can pocket thousands of millions in war profits, and that millions die in the shambles for the enrichment of these “finest and noblest” representatives of the nation. 
 And in the face of these facts , of this experience , is it “utopian” to believe that a small nation, with no monarchy or Junkers,with a very high level of capitalism and perhaps betterorganised in various unions than in any other capitalistcountry, will try to save itself from hunger and the danger of war by doing the very same thing that has already been practically tested in Germany? With the difference, of course,that in Germany millions are being killed and maimedto enrich a few, open the road to Baghdad, conquer theBalkans, whereas in Switzerland it is merely a matter ofexpropriating a maximum of 30,000 bourgeois, i. 
e. 
, not con-demning them to perish, but to the “horrible fate” of receiving “only ” 6,000-10,000 francs income and giving the rest to the socialist workers’ government in order to ward off hungerand the war danger. 
 The Great Powers, however, will never tolerate a socialist Switzerland and will use their immensely superior strength to crush the socialist revolution at the very beginning! That, undoubtedly, would be so if, first, the beginnings of a revolution in Switzerland did not generate a class move-ment of solidarity in neighbouring countries, and, second, ifthese Great Powers were not tied up in a “war of attrition”which has practically exhausted the patience of the most patient peoples. 
 Military intervention by the mutually hos-tile Great Powers would, in present circumstances, only bethe prelude to revolution flaring up throughout the whole ofEurope. 
 Perhaps you think I am so naïve as to believe that such issues as socialist revolution can be resolved by “persua-sion”? No. 
 I only wish to illustrate , and, what is more, merely one partial issue , the change that must take place in all party propaganda if we want to approach the question ofrejection of fatherland defence with all the seriousness it deserves. 
 That is only an illustration, and it concerns only one partial issue. 
 I lay claim to no more. 
 It would be absolutely wrong to believe that immediate struggle for socialist revolution implies that we can, or should, abandon the fight for reforms. 
 Not at all. 
 We cannot know beforehand how soon we shall achieve success, how soon the objective conditions will make the rise of this revolution possible. 
 We should support every improvement,every real economic and political improvement in the posi-tion of the masses. 
 The difference between us and thereformists (i. 
e. 
, the Grütlians in Switzerland) is not that weoppose reforms while they favour them. 
 Nothing of the kind. 
 They confine themselves to reforms and as a result stoop—in the apt expression of one (rare!) revolutionary writer in the Schweizerische Metallarbeiter-Zeitung (No. 
 40)—to the role of “hospital orderly for capitalism”. 
 We tell the workers:vote for proportional representation, etc. 
, but don’tstop at that. 
 Make it your prime duty systematically to spread the idea of immediate socialist revolution, prepare for this revolution and radically reconstruct every aspectof party activity. 
 The conditions of bourgeois democracyvery often compel us to take a certain stand on a multitudeof small and petty reforms, but we must be able, or learn,to take such a position on these reforms (in such a manner) that—to oversimplify the matter for the sake of clarity— five minutes of every half-hour speech are devoted to reformsand twenty-five minutes to the coming revolution. 
 Socialist revolution is impossible without a hard revolu-tionary mass struggle in which many sacrifices have to bemade. 
 But we would be inconsistent if we accepted the revolutionary mass struggle and the desire for an immediate end to the war while, at the same time, rejecting immediatesocialist revolution! The former without the latter is nil,a hollow sound. 
 Nor can we avoid hard struggle within the party . 
 It would be sheer make-believe, hypocrisy, philistine “head-in-the-sand” policy to imagine that “internal peace” can rule within the Swiss Social-Democratic Party. 
 The choice is not be-tween “internal peace” and “inner-party struggle”. 
 Suffice itto read Hermann Greulich’s letter mentioned above andexamine developments in the party over the past severalyears to appreciate the utter fallacy of any such supposition. 
 The real choice is this: either the present concealed forms of inner-party struggle, with their demoralising effecton the masses, or open principled struggle between the internationalist revolutionary trend and the Grütli trend inside and outside the party. 
 An “inner struggle” in which Hermann Greulich attacks the “ultra-radicals” or the “hotheads”, without naming thesemonsters and without precisely defining their policy, andGrimm publishes articles in the Berner Tagwacht larded with hints and only comprehensible to one out of a hundred read-ers, articles in which he castigates those who see things through “foreign spectacles”, or those “actually responsible” for the draft resolutions he finds so annoying—that kindof inner struggle demoralises the masses, who see, or guess, that it is a “quarrel among leaders” and do not understand what it is really all about . 
 But a struggle in which the Grütli trend within the party— and it is much more important and dangerous than outside the party—will be forced openly to combat the Left, while both trends will everywhere come out with their own inde-pendent views and policies, will fight each other on mattersof principle , allowing the mass of party comrades, and not merely the “leaders”, to settle fundamental issues—such a struggle is both necessary and useful, for it trains in the masses independence and ability to carry out their epoch-making revolutionary mission. 
 Written in German in early December 1916 First published in 1931 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany XVII the manuscript Translated from the German ON THE DEFENCE OF THE FATHERLAND ISSUE The bourgeoisie and its supporters in the labour movement, the Grütlians, usually pose the question thus: Either we recognise in principle our duty to defend the fatherland, or we leave our country defenceless. 
 That presentation is fundamentally wrong. 
This is how the question stands in reality:Either we allow ourselves to be killed in the interests of the imperialist bourgeoisie, or we systematically preparethe majority of the exploited, and ourselves, for seizure—at the price of less sacrifice—of the banks and expropriation of the bourgeoisie in order to put an end to the high cost ofliving and war. 
 * * * The first presentation of the question is thoroughly bourgeois, not socialist. 
 It disregards the fact that we areliving in the imperialist era, that the present war isan imperialist war, that in this war Switzerland will underno circumstances be ranged against imperialism, but on the side of one or the other imperialist coalition, i. 
e. 
, will in fact become an accomplice of one or another group of the big robber powers, that the Swiss bourgeoisie has long beentied to imperialist interests by thousands of threads. 
 Itis of no concern whether this is implemented by a system ofinter-relationships and “mutual participation” of the bigbanks through export of capital, or through the tourist trade, which thrives on the patronage of foreign million-aires, or through unscrupulous exploitation of disfranchisedforeign workers, etc. 
 In short, all the fundamental tenets of socialism, all the socialist ideas, have been forgotten. 
 The predatory nature of the imperialist war is being embellished. 
 One’s “own” bourgeoisie is being depicted as an innocent lamb and thecase-hardened bank directors of present-day Switzerlandas heroic William Tells, and, furthermore, the secret agree-ments between Swiss and foreign banks and between Swissand foreign diplomats are overlooked. 
 And this incredible hotchpotch of bourgeois lies is covered up by a fine-sounding and “popular” phrase meant to deceive the people: “defenceof the fatherland!” Written in German in December 1916 First published in Pravda No. 
 174 Published according to August 1, 1929 the manuscript Translated from the German THE YOUTH INTERNATIONAL A REVIEW A German-language publication bearing the above title has been appearing in Switzerland since September 1, 1915. 
 It carries the subtitle: “Militant and Propaganda Organ of the International League of Socialist Youth Organisations”. 
Altogether six issues have appeared so far. 
 The magazinemerits our attention and should be strongly recommended toall Party members in a position to contact foreign Social-Democratic parties and youth organisations. 
 Most of the official European Social-Democratic parties are advocating the foulest and vilest social-chauvinism andopportunism. 
 This applies to the German and French parties,the Fabian Society and the Labour Party in England, theSwedish, Dutch (Troelstra’s party), Danish, Austrian par-ties, etc. 
 In the Swiss party, notwithstanding the withdraw-al (to the great benefit of the labour movement) of the ex-treme opportunists, now organised in the non-party “Grütli-Verein”, there still remain within the Social-DemocraticParty numerous opportunist, social-chauvinist and Kauts-kyite leaders who exercise tremendous influence on its af-fairs. 
 With this state of affairs in Europe, there falls on the League of Socialist Youth Organisations the tremendous,grateful but difficult task of fighting for revolutionary in-ternationalism, for true socialism and against the prevail-ing opportunism which has deserted to the side of the im-perialist bourgeoisie. 
 The Youth International has published a number of good articles in defence of revolutionary inter-nationalism, and the magazine as a whole is permeatedwith a fine spirit of intense hatred for the betrayers of socialism, the “defenders of the fatherland” in the present war, and with an earnest desire to wipe out the corroding influence of chauvinism and opportunism in the international labour movement. 
 Of course, the youth organ still lacks theoretical clarity and consistency. 
 Perhaps it may never acquire them, pre-cisely because it is the organ of seething, turbulent, inquiringyouth. 
 However, our attitude towards the lack of theoret-ical clarity on the part of such people must be entirely different from what our attitude is and should be towards thetheoretical muddle in the heads, and the lack of revolution-ary consistency in the hearts, of our “O. 
C. 
 -ists”, “Socialist-Revolutionaries”,75 Tolstoyans, anarchists, the European Kautskyites (“Centre”), etc. 
 Adults who lay claim to lead and teach the proletariat, but actually mislead it, are one thing: against such people a ruthless struggle must be waged. 
 Organisations of youth , however, which openly declare that they are still learning, that their main task is to train partyworkers for the socialist parties, are quite another thing. 
Such people must be given every assistance. 
 We must be patient with their faults and strive to correct them gradually, mainly by persuasion , and not by fighting them. 
 The middle-aged and the aged often do not know how to approach the youth, for the youth must of necessity advance to socialismin a different way , by other paths , in other forms , in other circumstances than their fathers. 
 Incidentally, that is why we must decidedly favour organisational independence of the Youth League, not only because the opportunists fear such independence, but because of the very nature of thecase. 
 For unless they have complete independence, the youthwill be unable either to train good socialists from their midst or prepare themselves to lead socialism forward . 
 We stand for the complete independence of the Youth Leagues, but also for complete freedom of comradely criticismof their errors! We must not flatter the youth. 
 Of the errors to be noted in this excellent magazine, reference must first of all be made to the following three: 1) The incorrect position on the question of disarmament (or “disarming”), which we criticised in a preceding article. 
 * *See pp. 
 94 -104 in this volume. 
— Ed. 
 There is reason to believe that this error arises entirely out of the laudable desire to emphasise the need to strive for the “complete destruction of militarism” (which is perfectly correct); but the role of civil wars in the socialist revolutionis forgotten. 
 2) On the question of the differences between socialists and anarchists in their attitude towards the state, ComradeNota-Bene 76 in his article (issue No. 
 6) falls into a very serious error (as he also does on several other questions, for instance, our reasons for combating the “defence of the fa-therland” slogan). 
 The author wishes to present “a clearpicture of the state in general” (together with that of theimperialist predatory state). 
 He quotes several statementsby Marx and Engels, and arrives at the following two con-clusions, among others: a) “...It is absolutely wrong to seek the difference between socialists and anarchists in the fact that the former are infavour of the state while the latter are against it. 
 The realdifference is that revolutionary Social-Democracy desiresto organise social production on new lines, as centralised, i. 
e. 
, technically the most progressive, method of production, whereas decentralised, anarchist production would meanretrogression to obsolete techniques, to the old form ofenterprise. 
” This is wrong. 
 The author raises the questionof the difference in the socialists’ and anarchists’ attitudetowards the state . 
 However, he answers not this question, but another , namely, the difference in their attitude towards the economic foundation of future society. 
 That, of course, is animportant and necessary question. 
 But that is no reason toignore the main point of difference between socialists and anarchists in their attitude towards the state. 
 Socialistsare in favour of utilising the present state and its institu-tions in the struggle for the emancipation of the working class, maintaining also that the state should be used for a specificform of transition from capitalism to socialism. 
 This tran-sitional form is the dictatorship of the proletariat, whichis also a state. 
 The anarchists want to “abolish” the state, “blow it up” (sprengen ) as Comrade Nota-Bene expresses it in one place, erroneously ascribing this view to the socialists. 
 The social-ists—unfortunately the author quotes Engels’s relevant words rather incompletely—hold that the state will “wither away”, will gradually “fall asleep” after the bourgeoisie has been expropriated. 
 b) “Social-Democracy, which is, or at least should be, the educator of the masses, must now more than ever empha-sise its hostility to the state in principle .... 
 The present war has shown how deeply the state idea has penetrated thesouls of workers,” writes Comrade Nota-Bene. 
 In order to “emphasise” our “hostility” to the state “in principle” we must indeed understand it “clearly”, and it is this clarity thatour author lacks. 
 His remark about the “state idea” isentirely muddled. 
 It is un-Marxist and un-socialist. 
 Thepoint is not that the “state idea” has clashed with the repu-diation of the state, but that opportunist policy (i. 
e. 
, the opportunist, reformist, bourgeois attitude towards the state) has clashed with revolutionary Social-Democratic policy(i. 
e. 
, the revolutionary Social-Democratic attitude towardsthe bourgeois state and towards utilising it against the bour-geoisie to overthrow the bourgeoisie). 
 These are entirelydifferent things. 
 We hope to return to this very important subject in a separate article. 
 77 3) The “declaration of principles of the International League of Socialist Youth Organisations”, published inissue No. 
 6 as the “Secretariat’s draft”, contains not a fewinaccuracies, and does not contain the main thing: a clear comparison of the three fundamental trends (social-chauvin-ism, “Centre” and Left) now contending against each other in the socialist movement of all countries. 
 We repeat, these errors must be refuted and explained. 
 At the same time we must make every effort to find points ofcontact and closer relations with youth organisations andhelp them in every way, but we must find the proper manner of approach to them. 
 Published in Sbornik Published according to Sotsial-Demokrata , No. 
 2 the Sbornik text December 1916 Signed: N. 
 Lenin EFFORTS TO WHITEWASH OPPORTUNISM The Paris Nashe Slovo ,78 recently suppressed by the French Government to oblige tsarism (the excuse being that copies of Nashe Slovo were found on the Russian soldiers who had mutinied in Marseilles!), was indignant over the“lamentable” role of Deputy Chkheidze. 
 With the permissionof the authorities, Chkheidze addressed public meetings inthe Caucasus, appealing to the population not to create“disorder” (accompanied by looting of shops, etc. 
), but toorganise co-operative societies, etc. 
 A nice trip for an alleged Social-Democrat to make “under the protection of a govern-or, a colonel, a priest and a police captain” ( Nashe Slovo No. 
 203). 
 L. 
 Martov forthwith hastened to enter a noble protest in the Bund’s Bulletin against “representing Chkheidze as a sort of [?? not “a sort of”, but “the same sort as all the liquidators”79] extinguisher of the awakening revolution-ary spirit”. 
 Martov’s defence of Chkheidze proceeds along two lines: fact and principle. 
 He challenges the fact by declaring that Nashe Slovo quotes from a Caucasian Black-Hundred paper, and that thosewho spoke at the meeting with Chkheidze were Mikoladze, a retired officer “known in his uyezd as a radical public personality”, and the priest Khundadze, who “in 1905 wasprosecuted for participating in the Social-Democratic move-ment”. 
 (“It is well known,” adds Martov, “that participationof village priests in the Georgian Social-Democratic move-ment is quite common. 
”) Such is Martov’s “defence” of Chkheidze. 
 And it is a very feeble defence. 
 Even if Chkheidze’s appearance on the sameplatform with a priest was reported by a Black-Hundred paper it does not refute the fact, and Martov himself admits that the fact did occur. 
 That Khundadze “was prosecuted in 1905” proves absolute-ly nothing, for Gapon and Alexinsky were also “prosecuted”at that time. 
 What party do Khundadze and Mikoladze be-long to, or sympathise with, now ? Are they defencists ? That is what Martov ought to have ascertained if he were seekingthe truth and not doing a cheap lawyer’s job. 
 In our press, a man “known in his uyezd as a radical public personality” ordinarily means simply a liberal landowner. 
 By shouting that Nashe Slovo has presented an “entirely false picture”, Martov wishes to conceal the truth , which he has not refuted one iota. 
 But that is not the main thing. 
 We have only the blos-soms, the fruit is to come. 
 Having failed to disprove Chkhei-dze’s “lamentable” conduct by denying the fact, Martovconfirms it by his defence of the principle . 
 “It remains beyond doubt,” says Martov, “that Comrade [?? of Potresov and Co. 
?] Chkheidze found it necessary tospeak out not only against the reactionary direction taken by the Caucasian disorders insofar as it fell [? they fell?] under the influence of the Black Hundreds, but also againstthose of its destructive forms (looting of shops, violenceagainst merchants) which, generally speaking, populardiscontent may assume even regardless of reactionaryinfluences. 
” Note the words: “It remains beyond doubt ”! Martov sings like a nightingale; V. 
 Maklakov could do no better: the helplessness, disunity, “consternation and evenignorance” of the masses ... “‘revolts’ of this kind is not thepath that leads to the goal, and in the final analysis areharmful from the standpoint of proletarian interests .... 
” On the one hand, “it would be a bad revolutionary party that turned its back upon an incipient movement because it was accompanied by spontaneous and inexpedient exces-ses. 
” On the other hand, “it would be a bad party that con-sidered it its revolutionary duty to refrain from combatingsuch excesses as inexpedient actions” .... 
 “Inas much as in Russia ... an organised campaign of struggle against the war has not yet begun [?], inasmuch as the scattered state of the class-conscious elements of the proletariat makes itimpossible to compare our present position, not only with 1904-05, but even with 1914-15 [?], the popular unrest which flares up as a consequence of the high cost of living, etc. 
, although a very important symptom , cannot [?] directly [?] become the source of that movement for which we are striv-ing. 
 The only way in which it may be ‘utilised’ expedientlyis by guiding the discontent that breaks out into the channelsof some kind of organised struggle, without which therecan be no question of the masses setting themselves revo-lutionary aims. 
 For this reason, even [!!] appeals to organise co-operative societies, to compel municipal councils to fixprices, and for similar palliatives based on the developmentof the initiative of the masses, are more revolutionary [ha!ha!] and more fruitful than flirting .... 
 Frivolous speculation is ‘positively criminal’,” etc. 
 It is difficult to keep calm when reading outrageous speeches like these. 
 Even the Bundist editors appear tohave realised that Martov was behaving dishonestly, andadded an ambiguous promise to “return to the subject in afuture issue”.... 
 The question is as clear as clear can be. 
 Let us assume that Chkheidze had to deal with a form of unrest which he considered inexpedient. 
 Obviously it was his right and dutyas a revolutionary to combat the inexpedient form—for the sake of what? For the sake of expedient revolutionary actions? Or for the sake of an expedient liberal struggle? That is the whole point! And this is what Martov muddles up! Mr. 
 Chkheidze was “guiding” the rising revolutionary “mass discontent” “ into the channel ” of a liberal struggle (only peaceful co-operative societies, only legal pressureon the municipal councils, with the approval of the Govern-or, etc. 
), and not into the channel of an expedient revolu-tionary struggle. 
 This is the crux of the question; but Martov goes on spouting in defence of a liberal policy. 
 A revolutionary Social-Democrat would say: “It is inexpedient to loot small shops. 
 Let us organise a moreimpressive demonstration, simultaneously, say, with the Ba-ku, Tiflis and Petrograd workers. 
 Let us direct our hatred against the government; let us win over the part of the army that wants peace. 
 Is this what Mr. 
 Chkheidze said? No. 
 He called for a “struggle” acceptable to the liberals ! Martov signed a “platform” recommending “revolutionary mass actions”80—one has to show oneself a revolutionary before the workers!—but when the first symptoms of such actions appear in Russia, he begins, by fair means or foul,to defend the “Left” -liberal Chkheidze. 
 “In Russia an organised campaign of struggle against the war has not yet begun .... 
” In the first place, this is not true. 
 It has begun, at any rate, in Petrograd, with manifestos, meetings, strikes, demonstrations. 
 Secondly, if it has not begun in some other parts of the country, it must be begun . 
 But Martov claims that the liberal campaign “begun” byMr. 
 Chkheidze is “more revolutionary”. 
 What is this, if not whitewashing abominable opportun-ism? Published in Sbornik Published according to Sotsial-Demokrata , No. 
 2 the Sbornik text December 1916 Signed: N. 
 Lenin THE CHKHEIDZE FACTION AND ITS ROLE We have maintained all along that Messrs. 
 Chkheidze and Co. 
 do not represent the Social-Democratic proletariat and that a genuine Social-Democratic Labour Party willnever be reconciled or united with this faction. 
 Our conten-tion was based on the following incontrovertible facts: (1) Chkheidze’s “save the country” formula does not in sub-stance differ from defencism; (2) the Chkheidze faction hasnever opposed Mr. 
 Potresov and Co. 
, not even when Martovdid; (3) the decisive fact: the faction has never opposed par-ticipation in the war industries committees. 
 Nobody has attempted to deny these facts. 
 Chkheidze’s adherents simply evade them. 
 The pressure of facts has increasingly compelled Nashe Slovo and Trotsky, who reproach us for our “factionalism”, to take up the struggle against the O. 
C. 
 and Chkheidze. 
 Thetrouble, however, is that it was only “under pressure” (of our criticism and the criticism of the facts) that the Nashe Slovo supporters retreated from position to position; but they have not yet said the decisive word. 
 Unity or a split with the Chkheidze faction? They are still afraid to decide! No. 
 1 of the Bulletin of the Bund Committee Abroad (September 1916) contains a letter from Petrograd dated February 26, 1916. 
 It is a valuable document and fully con-firms our view. 
 Its author declares unequivocally that thereis “a definite crisis in the Menshevik camp itself”, and whatis particularly characteristic, he says nothing about the Mensheviks opposed to participation in the war industries committees! He has not seen or heard of them in Russia! Three out of the five members of the Chkheidze faction, he writes, are opposed to the “defencist position” (like theO. 
C. 
) and two are in favour of it . 
 “Those who serve the faction,” he writes, “are unable to shift the majority from the position it has taken. 
 The local ‘initiating group’81, which rejects the defencist position, comes to the aid of the faction majority. 
” Those who serve the faction are liberal intellectuals of the type of Potresov, Maslov, Orthodox82 and Co. 
, who call themselves Social-Democrats. 
 Our repeated assertions thatthis group of intellectuals is a “hotbed” of opportunism and of liberal-labour politics have now been confirmed by a Bundist. 
 He writes further: “Life [and not Purishkevich and Gu-chkov?] has brought to the fore ... a new organ, the workersgroup, which is more and more becoming the centre of thelabour movement. 
 [The writer means the Guchkov, or, to use an older term, the Stolypin labour movement; he rec-ognises no other!] A compromise was reached in the elections to the workers ’ group: not defence and self-defence , but sal-vation of the country , by which something broader was implied . 
” This is how a Bundist exposes Chkheidze and Martov’s lies about him! At the election of the Guchkov gang (Gvoz-dyov, Breido, etc. 
) to the war industries committees, Chkheidze and the O. 
C. 
 entered into a compromise . 
 The Chkheidze formula is: a compromise with the Potresovs and the Gvoz-dyovs! Martov concealed and is now concealing this. 
The compromise did not end there. 
 The policy statement was also drawn up on the basis of a compromise, which the Bundist characterises in this way: “Definiteness disappeared . 
” “The representatives of the faction majority and of the ‘initiating group’ were dis-satisfied because, after all, the statement is a big step towardsformulation of a defencist position .... 
 In essence , the compromise is the position of German Social-Democracy , in application to Russia. 
 ” So writes a Bundist. 
Clear enough, it would seem? There is a party, that of the O. 
C. 
, Chkheidze and Potresov. 
 Within it there are twocontending wings; they come to an agreement , they compro-mise and remain in one party. 
 The compromise is concluded on the basis of participation in the war industries committees. 
 The only point of disagreement is how to formulate the “mo-tives” (i. 
e. 
, how to dupe the workers). 
 As a result of the com-promise we have, “in essence, the position of German Social-Democracy”. 
 Well, were we not right when we said that the O. 
C. 
 party was social-chauvinist, that, as a party, the O. 
C. 
 andChkheidze were the same as the Südekums in Germany? Even a Bundist is compelled to admit their identity with the Südekums! Neither Chkheidze and Co. 
, nor the O. 
C. 
 have ever ex-pressed opposition to the compromise, although they are “dissatisfied” with it. 
 That was the position in February 1916. 
 In April 1916, Martov appeared in Kienthal with a mandate from the “ini-tiating group” to represent the whole O. 
C. 
, the O. 
C. 
 in general . 
 Is this not deceiving the International? And see what we have now! Potresov, Maslov and Orthodox establish their own organ, Dyelo , 83 which is openly defencist; they invite Plekhanov to contribute ; they enlist Messrs. 
 Dmitriev, Cherevanin, Mayevsky, G. 
 Petrovich, etc. 
, thewhole crowd of intellectuals who were formerly the mainstay of liquidationism. 
 What I said on behalf of the Bolsheviks in May 1910 (Diskussionny Listok84) about the final consol-idation of the independent-legalists ’ group * has been fully confirmed. 
 Dyelo takes up a brazenly chauvinist and reformist position. 
 See how Mme. 
 Orthodox falsifies Marx and by mis-quoting him makes him appear to be an ally of Hindenburg (all on “philosophical” grounds, mind you!), how Mr. 
 Mas-lov (especially in Dyelo No. 
 2) champions reformism all along the line, how Mr. 
 Potresov accuses Axelrod and Martovof “maximalism” and anarcho-syndicalism, how the magazinegenerally tries to palm off advocacy of defence as the cause of “democracy” while modestly evading the unpleasant question as to whether or not this reactionary war is beingwaged by tsarism for a predatory purpose, for throttlingGalicia, Armenia, etc. 
 The Chkheidze faction and the O. 
C. 
 are silent. 
 Skobelev sends greetings to the “Liebknechts of all countries”. 
 The real Liebknecht has ruthlessly exposed and condemned *See present edition, Vol. 
 16, pp. 
 238-51. 
— Ed. 
 his own Scheidemanns and Kautskyites, whereas Skobelev remains in permanent harmony and friendship with the Russian Scheidemanns (Potresov and Co. 
, Chkhenkeli, et al . 
) and with the Russian Kautskyites (Axelrod et al . 
) On behalf of himself and of his friends abroad, Martov announces in Golos85 No. 
 2 (Samara, September 20, 1916) a refusal to contribute to Dyelo , but at the same time he whitewashes Chkheidze; at the same time (Izvestia No. 
 6, September 12, 1916) he asserts that he has parted with Trot-sky and Nashe Slovo because of the “Trotsky” idea of repu-diating the bourgeois revolution in Russia. 
 But everybodyknows that this is a lie, that Martov left Nashe Slovo be-cause the latter could not tolerate Martov’s whitewashing of the O. 
C. 
! In the same Izvestia Martov defends his decep-tion of the German public, which even roused the indignation of Roland-Holst. 
 He published a pamphlet in German fromwhich he omitted the very part of the Petrograd and Moscow Mensheviks’ policy statement in which they announcedtheir willingness to participate in the war industries com-mittees! 86 Recall the controversy between Trotsky and Martov in Nashe Slovo prior to the latter’s resignation from the Edi-torial Board. 
 Martov reproached Trotsky for not havingmade up his mind whether or not he would follow Kautskyat the decisive moment. 
 Trotsky retorted that Martov wasplaying the part of a “bait”, a “decoy”, trying to entice the revolutionary workers into the opportunist and chauvinist party of the Potresovs, then the O. 
C. 
, etc. 
 Both sides repeated our arguments. 
 And both were right. 
 However much the truth about Chkheidze and Co. 
 may be concealed, it will come to light. 
 Chkheidze’s role is to com-promise with the Potresovs, to camouflage opportunist and chauvinist politics by vague or near -“Left ” phrases. 
 And Martov’s role is to whitewash Chkheidze. 
 Published in Sbornik Published according to Sotsial-Demokrata , No. 
 2 the Sbornik text December 1916 Signed: N. 
 Lenin BOURGEOI S PACIFISM AND SOCIALIS T PACIFI SM87 First published in 1924 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany II the manuscript Signed: N. 
 L. 
 BOURGEOIS PACIFISM AND SOCIALIST PACIFISM87 First published in 1924 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany II the manuscript Signed: N. 
 L. 
 A R T I C L E (O R C H A P T E R) I THE TURN IN WORLD POLITICS There are symptoms that such a turn has taken place, or is about to take place, namely, a turn from imperialist warto imperialist peace. 
 The following are the outstanding symptoms: both im-perialist coalitions are undoubtedly severely exhausted; continuing the war has become difficult; the capitalists generally, and finance capital in particular, find it dif-ficult to skin the people substantially more than they havedone already in the form of outrageous “war” profits; fi-nance capital in the neutral countries, the United States,Holland, Switzerland, etc. 
, which has made enormous prof-its out of the war, is satiated; the shortage of raw materials and food supplies makes it difficult for it to continue this“profitable” business; Germany is making strenuous effortsto induce one or another ally of England, her principalimperialist rival, to desert her; the German Governmenthas made pacifist pronouncements, followed by similar pronouncements by a number of neutral governments. 
 Are there any chances for a speedy end to the war?It is very hard to give a positive reply to this question. 
 In our opinion, two possibilities present themselves ratherdefinitely. 
 First, conclusion of a separate peace between Germany and Russia, though perhaps not in the usual form of a formal written treaty. 
 Second, no such peace will be concluded;England and her allies are still in a position to hold outfor another year or two, etc. 
 If the first assumption is cor-rect the war will come to an end, if not immediately, thenin the very near future, and no important changes in its course can be expected. 
 If the second assumption is correct, then the war may continue indefinitely. 
 Let us examine the first possibility. 
 That negotiations for a separate peace between Germany and Russia were conducted quite recently, that Nicholas II himself, or the top Court clique, favour such a peace, that aturn has taken place in world politics from a Russo-Britishimperialist alliance against Germany to a no less imperial-ist Russo-German alliance against England—all that isbeyond doubt. 
 The replacement of Stürmer by Trepov, the tsarist government’s public declaration that Russia’s “right” toConstantinople has been recognised by all the Allies, andthe setting up by Germany of a separate Polish state—theseseem to indicate that the separate peace negotiations haveended in failure. 
 Perhaps tsarism entered into them solely to blackmail England, obtain formal and unambiguous recognition of Nicholas the Bloody’s “right” to Constanti-nople and certain “weighty” guarantees of that right? There is nothing improbable in that assumption, con-sidering that the main, fundamental purpose of the presentimperialist war is the division of the spoils among the three principal imperialist rivals, the three robbers, Russia, Germany and England. 
 On the other hand, the clearer it becomes to tsarism that there is no practical, military possibility of regainingPoland, winning Constantinople, breaking Germany’s ironfront, which she is magnificently straightening out, shorten-ing and strengthening by her recent victories in Rumania, the more tsarism is finding itself compelled to conclude a separate peace with Germany, that is , to abandon its impe-rialist alliance with England against Germany for an impe-rialist alliance with Germany against England. 
 And whynot? Was not Russia on the verge of war with England as a result of their imperialist rivalry over the division of the spoils in Central Asia? And did not England and Germanynegotiate in 1898 for an alliance against Russia? They secretly agreed then to divide up the Portuguese colonies“in the event” of Portugal failing to meet her financialobligations! The growing trend among leading imperialist circles in Germany towards an alliance with Russia against Englandwas already clearly defined several months ago. 
 The basis of this alliance, apparently, is to be the partition of Galicia (it is very important for tsarism to strangle the centre of Ukrainian agitation and Ukrainian liberty), Armenia and perhaps Rumania ! In fact there was a “hint” in a German newspaper that Rumania might be divided among Austria,Bulgaria and Russia! Germany could agree to other minorconcessions to tsarism if only she could achieve an alliancewith Russia, and perhaps also with Japan, against England. 
 A separate peace between Nicholas II and Wilhelm II could have been concluded secretly. 
 There have been in-stances in diplomatic history of treaties known only to twoor three persons and kept secret from everyone else, evenCabinet Ministers. 
 Diplomatic history knows instances ofthe “Great Powers” gathering at “European” congresses after the principal rivals had secretly decided the main questions among themselves (for example, the secret agree-ment between Russia and England to plunder Turkey, priorto the Berlin Congress of 1878). 
 It would not be at all sur-prising if tsarism rejected a formal separate peace betweenthe governments for the reason, among others, that the pres-ent situation in Russia might result in Milyukov and Gu-chkov, or Milyukov and Kerensky, taking over the govern-ment, while at the same time, it may have concluded a sec-ret, informal, but none the less “durable” treaty withGermany to the effect that the two “high contracting parties”undertake jointly to pursue such-and-such a policy at the forthcoming peace congress! It is impossible to say whether or not this assumption is correct. 
 At any rate, it is a thousand times nearer thetruth , is a far better description of things as they actually are than are the pious phrases about peace between the presentgovernments, or between any bourgeois governments for that matter, on the basis of no annexations, etc. 
 These phrases either express innocent desires or are hypocrisy and liesmeant to conceal the truth. 
 And the truth of the present time,of the present war, of the present attempts to conclude peace,is the division of the imperialist spoils . 
 That is at the bottom of it all; and to understand this truth, to express it, “to show things as they actually are”, is the fundamental task of socialist policy as distinct from bourgeois policy, theprincipal aim of which is to conceal, to gloss over this truth. 
 Both imperialist coalitions have grabbed a certain amount of loot, and the two principal and most powerful of the rob-bers, Germany and England, have grabbed most. 
 England has not lost an inch of her territory or of her colonies; butshe has “acquired” the German colonies and part of Turkey(Mesopotamia). 
 Germany has lost nearly all her colonies,but has acquired immeasurably more valuable territory inEurope, having seized Belgium, Serbia, Rumania, part of France, part of Russia, etc. 
 The fight now is over the divi-sion of the loot, and the “chieftain” of each of the robbergangs, i. 
e. 
, England and Germany, must to some degreereward his allies, who, with the exception of Bulgaria andto a lesser extent Italy, have lost a great deal. 
 The weakestof the allies have lost most: in the English coalition, Bel-gium, Serbia, Montenegro and Rumania have been crushed; in the German coalition, Turkey has lost Armenia and partof Mesopotamia. 
 So far Germany has secured undoubtedly far more loot than England. 
 So far Germany has won; she has proved tobe far stronger than anyone anticipated before the war. 
 Naturally, therefore, it would be to Germany’s advantage to conclude peace as speedily as possible, for her rival mightstill be able, given the most favourable opportunity con-ceivable (although not very probably), to mobilise a largerreserve of recruits, etc. 
 Such is the objective situation. 
 Such is the present posi-tion in the struggle for the division of the imperialist loot. 
 It is quite natural that this situation should give rise to pacifist strivings, declarations and pronouncements, mainlyon the part of the bourgeoisie and governments of the Ger-man coalition and of the neutral countries. 
 It is equallynatural that the bourgeoisie and its governments are compelled to exert every effort to hoodwink the people, to cover up the hideous nakedness of an imperialist peace—the divisionof the loot—by phrases, utterly false phrases about a demo-cratic peace, the liberty of small nations, armaments reduc-tion, etc. 
 But while it is natural for the bourgeoisie to try to hoodwink the people, how are the socialists fulfilling their duty? This we shall deal with in the next article (orchapter). 
 A R T I C L E (O R C H A P T E R) II THE PACIFISM OF KAUTSKY AND TURATI Kautsky is the most authoritative theoretician of the Second International, the most prominent leader of the so-called “Marxist centre” in Germany, the representative ofthe opposition which organised a separate group in the Reichs-tag, the Social-Democratic Labour Group (Haase, Ledebour and others). 
 A number of Social-Democratic newspapers inGermany are now publishing articles by Kautsky on theterms of peace, which paraphrase the official Social-Demo-cratic Labour Group declaration on the German Govern-ment’s well-known note proposing peace negotiations. 
 The declaration, which calls on the German Government to propose definite terms of peace, contains the following char-acteristic statement: “...In order that this [German Government] note may lead to peace, all countries must unequivocally renounceall thought of annexing foreign territory, of the political, economic or military subjection of any people whatsoever .... 
” In paraphrasing and concretising this, Kautsky set out to “prove” in his lengthy articles that Constantinople mustnot go to Russia and that Turkey must not be made a vassalstate to anyone. 
 Let us take a closer look at these political slogans and arguments of Kautsky and his associates. 
 In a matter that affects Russia, i. 
e. 
, Germany’s impe-rialist rival, Kautsky advances, not abstract or “general”demands, but a very concrete, precise and definite demand:Constantinople must not go to Russia. 
 He thereby exposes the real imperialist designs ... of Russia. 
 In a matter that affects Germany, however, i. 
e. 
, the country where the majority of the party, which regards Kautsky as its member(and appointed him editor of its principal, leading theoret-ical organ, Die Neue Zeit ), is helping the bourgeoisie and the government to conduct an imperialist war, Kautskydoes not expose the concrete imperialist designs of his own government, but confines himself to a “general” desideratum or proposition: Turkey must not be made a vassal state toanyone!! How, in substance, does Kautsky’s policy differ from that of the militant, so to speak, social-chauvinists (i. 
e. 
, so-cialists in words but chauvinists in deeds) of France and England? While frankly exposing the concrete imperialistactions of Germany, they make shift with “general” desi-derata or propositions when it is a matter of countries ornations conquered by England and Russia. 
 They shout aboutthe seizure of Belgium and Serbia, but are silent about the seizure of Galicia, Armenia, the African colonies. 
 Actually, both the policy of Kautsky and that of Sembat and Henderson help their respective imperialist governments by focusing attention on the wickedness of their rival andenemy, while throwing a veil of vague, general phrasesand sentimental wishes around the equally imperialist con-duct of “ their own ” bourgeoisie. 
 We would cease to be Marx-ists, we would cease to be socialists in general, if we confinedourselves to the Christian, so to speak, contemplation of thebenignity of benign general phrases and refrained from ex-posing their real political significance. 
 Do we not constantly see the diplomacy of all the imperialist powers flaunting magnanimous “general” phrases and “democratic” declarations in order to conceal their robbery, violation and strangula-tion of small nations? “Turkey must not be made a vassal state to anyone .... 
” If I say no more than that, the impression is that I favourTurkey’s complete freedom. 
 As a matter of fact, I am merely repeating a phrase usually uttered by German, diplomats who are deliberately lying and deceiving, and employ that phrase to conceal the fact that Germany has already converted Tur-key into her financial and military vassal! And if I am a German socialist, my “general” phrases can only be to theadvantage of German diplomacy, for their real significance is that they put German imperialism in a good light . 
 “All countries must renounce all thought of annexations... of the economic subjection of any people whatsoever .... 
” What magnanimity! A thousand times the imperialistshave “renounced all thought” of annexations and of thefinancial strangulation of weak nations. 
 But should we not compare these renunciations with the facts , which show that any one of the big banks of Germany, England, France andthe United States does hold small nations “ in subjection ”? Can the present bourgeois government of a wealthy country really renounce annexations and the economic subjugation of alien peoples when millions and millions have been invested in the railways and other enterprises of weaknations? Who is really fighting annexations, etc. 
? Those who bandy magnanimous phrases, which, objectively, have the samesignificance as the Christian holy water sprinkled on the crowned and capitalist robbers? Or those who explain to the workers the impossibility of eliminating annexations andfinancial strangulation without overthrowing the imperial-ist bourgeoisie and its governments? Here is an Italian illustration of the kind of pacifism Kautsky preaches. 
 Avanti! , the Central Organ of the Socialist Party of Italy, of December 25, 1916, contains an article by the well-known reformist, Filippo Turati, entitled “Abracadabra”. 
On November 22, 1916, he writes, the socialist group tableda peace resolution in the Italian Parliament. 
 It declaredthat “the principles proclaimed by the representatives of England and Germany were identical, and these principles should be made the basis of a possible peace”; and it invited“the government to start peace negotiations through themediation of the United States and other neutral countries”. 
This is Turati’s own account of the socialist proposal. 
 On December 6, 1916, the Chamber “buries” the socialist resolution by “adjourning” the debate on it. 
 On December 12, the German Chancellor proposes in the Reichstag the verything the Italian socialists proposed. 
 On December 22,Wilson issues his Note which, in the words of Turati, “pa-raphrases and repeats the ideas and arguments of the social-ist proposal”. 
 On December 23, other neutral countries come on the scene and paraphrase Wilson’s Note. 
 We are accused of having sold ourselves to the Germans, exclaims Turati. 
 Have Wilson and the neutral countries alsosold themselves to Germany? On December 17, Turati delivered a speech in Parliament, one passage of which caused an unusual and deserved sensa-tion. 
 This is the passage, quoted from the report in Avanti! : “Let us assume that a discussion similar to the one proposed by Germany is able, in the main, to settle such questions as the evacuation of Belgium and France, the restoration of Rumania, Serbia and, if you will, Montenegro; I will add the rectification of the Italian frontiers in regard to what is indisputably Italian and corresponds to guaranteesof a strategical character” .... 
 At this point the bourgeois and chauvinist Chamber interrupts Turati, and from all sidesthe shout goes up: “Excellent! So you too want all this!Long live Turati! Long live Turati!”... Apparently, Turati realised that there was something wrong about this bourgeois enthusiasm and tried to “correct”himself and “explain”. 
 “Gentlemen,” he said, “there is no occasion for irrelevant jesting. 
 It is one thing to admit the relevance and right ofnational unity, which we have always recognised, but it is quite another thing to provoke, or justify, war for this aim. 
” But neither Turati’s “explanation”, nor the articles in Avanti! in his defence, nor Turati’s letter of December 21, nor the article by a certain “B. 
B. 
” in the Zurich Volksrecht can “correct” or explain away the fact that Turati gave him-self away !... Or, more correct, not Turati, but the whole of socialist pacifism represented by Kautsky, and, as weshall see below, the French “Kautskyites”, gave itselfaway. 
 The Italian bourgeois press was right in seizing uponand exulting over this passage in Turati’s speech. 
 The above-mentioned “B. 
B. 
” tried to defend Turati by arguing that the latter referred only to “the right of nations to self-determination”. 
 Poor defence! What has this to do with “the right of na-tions to self-determination”, which, as everyone knows, theMarxist programme regards—and the programme of inter-national democracy has always regarded—as referring to the defence of oppressed nations? What has it to do with the imperialist war, i. 
e. 
, a war for the division of colonies, awar for the oppression of foreign countries, a war among predatory and oppressing powers to decide which of them shall oppress more foreign nations? How does this argument about self-determination of na-tions, used to justify an imperialist, not national, war, differ from the speeches of Alexinsky, Hervé and Hyndman?They argue that republican France is opposed to monarchist Germany, though everyone knows that this war is not due to the conflict between republican and monarchist principles, but is a war between two imperialist coalitions for the division of colonies, etc. 
 Turati explained and pleaded that he does not “justify” the war. 
 We will take the reformist, Kautskyite Turati’s word for it that he did not intend to justify the war. 
 But who does not know that in politics it is not intentions that count, but deeds, not good intentions, but facts, not the imaginary, butthe real? Let us assume that Turati did not want to justify the war and that Kautsky did not want to justify Germany’splacing Turkey in the position of a vassal to German impe-rialism. 
 But the fact remains that these two benign paci-fists did justify the war ! That is the point. 
 Had Kautsky declared that “Constantinople must not go to Russia, Turkeymust not be made a vassal state to anyone” not in a magazinewhich is so dull that nobody reads it, but in parliament,before a lively, impressionable bourgeois audience, full of southern temperament, it would not have been surprising if the witty bourgeois had exclaimed: “Excellent! Hear,hear! Long live Kautsky!” Whether he intended to or not, deliberately or not, the fact is that Turati expressed the point of view of a bourgeoisbroker proposing a friendly deal between imperialist rob-bers. 
 The “liberation” of Italian areas belonging to Austria would, in fact , be a concealed reward to the Italian bour-geoisie for participating in the imperialist war of a giganticimperialist coalition. 
 It would be a small sop thrown in, inaddition to the share of the African colonies and spheres ofinfluence in Dalmatia and Albania. 
 It is natural, perhaps, for the reformist Turati to adopt the bourgeois standpoint; but Kautsky really differs in no way from Turati. 
 In order not to embellish the imperialist war and help the bourgeoisie falsely represent it as a national war, as awar for the liberation of nations, in order to avoid slidinginto the position of bourgeois reformism, one must speak not in the language of Kautsky and Turati, but in the language of Karl Liebknecht: tell one’s own bourgeoisie that they are hypocrites when they talk about national liberation, that this war cannot result in a democratic peace unless the pro-letariat “turns its guns” against its own governments. 
 That is the only possible position of a genuine Marxist, of a genuine socialist and not a bourgeois reformist. 
 Thosewho repeat the general, meaningless, non-committal, goody-goody desires of pacifism are not really working for a demo-cratic peace. 
 Only he is working for such a peace who exposesthe imperialist nature of the present war and of the impe-rialist peace that is being prepared and calls upon the peoples to rise in revolt against the criminal governments. 
 At times some try to defend Kautsky and Turati by argu-ing that, legally, they could no more than “hint” at theiropposition to the government, and that the pacifists of thisstripe do make such “hints”. 
 The answer to that is, first, that the impossibility of legally speaking the truth is an argument not in favour of concealing the truth, but in fa-vour of setting up an illegal organisation and press that wouldbe free of police surveillance and censorship. 
 Second, thatmoments occur in history when a socialist is called upon to break with all legality. 
 Third, that even in the days of serfdom in Russia, Dobrolyubov and Chernyshevsky man-aged to speak the truth, for example, by their silence on theManifesto of February 19, 1861, 88 and their ridicule and castigation of the liberals, who made exactly the same kindof speeches as Turati and Kautsky. 
 In the next article we shall deal with French pacifism, which found expression in the resolutions passed by the two recently held congresses of French labour and socialist orga-nisations. 
 A R T I C L E (O R C H A P T E R) III THE PACIFISM OF THE FRENCH SOCIALISTS AND SYNDICALISTS The congresses of the French General Confederation of Labour (Confédération générale du Travail)89 and of the French Socialist Party90 have just been held. 
 The true sig-nificance and true role of socialist pacifism at the present moment were quite definitely revealed at these congresses. 
 This is the resolution passed unanimously at the trade union congress. 
 The majority of the ardent chauvinists headed by the notorious Jouhaux, the anarchist Broutchoux and ... the “Zimmerwaldist” Merrheim all voted for it: “This Conference of National Corporative Federations, trade unions and labour exchanges, having taken cognisanceof the Note of the President of the United States which‘invites all nations now at war with each other to publiclyexpound their views as to the terms upon which the war mightbe brought to an end’— “requests the French Government to agree to this proposal; “invites the government to take the initiative in making a similar proposal to its allies in order to speed the hourof peace; “declares that the federation of nations, which is one of the guarantees of a final peace, can be secured only given the independence, territorial inviolability and political and economic liberty of all nations, big and small. 
 “The organisations represented at this conference pledge themselves to support and spread this idea among the massesof the workers in order to put an end to the present indefiniteand ambiguous situation, which can only benefit secret diplomacy, against which the working class has always protested. 
” There you have a sample of “pure” pacifism, entirely in the spirit of Kautsky, a pacifism approved by an officiallabour organisation which has nothing in common with Marx-ism and is composed chiefly of chauvinists. 
 We have before us an outstanding document, deserving the most serious attention, of the political unity of the chauvinists and the “Kautskyites” on a platform of hollow pacifist phrases. 
 In thepreceding article we tried to explain the theoretical basis of the unity of ideas of the chauvinists and the pacifists,of the bourgeois and the socialist reformists. 
 Now we see this unity achieved in practice in another imperialist country. 
 At the Zimmerwald Conference, September 5-8, 1915, Merrheim declared: “Le parti, les Jouhaux, le gouvernement,ce ne sont que trois têtes sous un bonnet” (“The party, theJouhaux and the government are three heads under onebonnet”, i. 
e. 
, they are all one). 
 At the C. 
G. 
T. 
 Conference, on December 26, 1916, Merrheim voted together with Jou-haux for a pacifist resolution. 
 On December 23, 1916, one of the frankest and most extreme organs of the German social-imperialists, the Chemnitz Volksstimme , published a leading article entitled “The Disintegration of the Bourgeois Parties and the Restoration of Social-Democratic Unity”. 
 Needless to say, it praises peace-loving Südekum, Legien, Scheidemannand Co. 
, the whole German Social-Democratic Party major-ity and, also, the peace-loving German Government. 
 Itproclaims: “The first party congress convened after the warmust restore party unity, with the exception of the few fa-natics who refuse to pay party dues [i. 
e. 
, the adherents of Karl Liebknecht!]; ... Party unity based on the policy of theParty Executive, the Social-Democratic Reichstag group andthe trade unions. 
” This is a supremely clear expression of the idea, and a su-premely clear proclamation of the policy of “unity” between the avowed German social-chauvinists on the one hand and Kautsky and Co. 
 and the Social-Democratic Labour Groupon the other—unity on the basis of pacifist phrases—”unity”as achieved in France on December 26, 1916, betweenJouhaux and Merrheim! The Central Organ of the Socialist Party of Italy, Avanti! , writes in a leading article in its issue of December 28, 1916: “Although Bissolati and Südekum, Bonomi and Schei-demann, Sembat and David, Jouhaux and Legien have de-serted to the camp of bourgeois nationalism and have be-trayed [ hanno tradito ] internationalist ideological unity, which they promised to serve faithfully and loyally, we shall stay together with our German comrades, men like Lieb-knecht, Ledebour, Hoffmann, Meyer, and with our Frenchcomrades, men like Merrheim, Blanc, Brizon, Raffin-Dugens, who have not changed and have not vacillated. 
” Note the confusion expressed in that statement:Bissolati and Bonomi were expelled from the Socialist Party of Italy as reformists and chauvinists before the war. 
 Avanti! puts them on the same level as Südekum, and Legien, and quite rightly, of course. 
 But Südekum, David andLegien are at the head of the alleged Social-DemocraticParty of Germany, which, in fact, is a social-chauvinistparty, and yet this very Avanti! is opposed to their expul-sion, opposed to a rupture with them, and opposed to the formation of a Third International. 
 Avanti! quite correctly describes Legien and Jouhaux as deserters to the camp or bourgeois nationalism and contrasts their conduct with that of Liebknecht, Ledebour, Merrheim and Brizon. 
 But we have seen that Merrheim votes on the same side as Jouhaux , while Legien, in the Chemnitz Volksstimme , declares his confidence that party unity will be restored, with the single exception, however, of Liebknecht supporters, i. 
e. 
, “unity” with the Social-Democratic Labour Group (including Kautsky) towhich Ledebour belongs!! This confusion arises from the fact that Avanti! confuses bourgeois pacifism with revolutionary Social-Democraticinternationalism, while experienced politicians like Legienand Jouhaux understand perfectly well that socialist andbourgeois pacifism are identical . 
 Why, indeed, should not M. 
 Jouhaux and his organ, the chauvinist La Bataille , 91 rejoice at the “unanimity” between Jouhaux and Merrheim when, in fact , the unanimously adopted resolution, which we have quoted in full above,contains nothing but bourgeois pacifist phrases; not a shadow of revolutionary consciousness, not a single socialist idea! Is it not ridiculous to talk of the “economic liberty of all nations, big and small”, and yet not say a word about the fact that, until the bourgeois governments are overthrown and thebourgeoisie expropriated, this talk of “economic liberty”is just as much a deception of the people as talk of the “eco-nomic liberty” of the individual in general , of the small peasants and rich, workers and capitalists, in modern society? The resolution Jouhaux and Merrheim unanimously voted for is thoroughly imbued with the very ideas of “bourgeoisnationalism” that Jouhaux expresses, as Avanti! quite rightly points out, while, strangely enough, failing to observe that Merrheim expresses the same ideas. 
 Bourgeois nationalists always and everywhere flaunt “general” phrases about a “federation of nations” in general and about “economic liberty of all nations, big and small”. 
But socialists, unlike bourgeois nationalists, always saidand now say: rhetoric about “economic liberty of all nations,big and small”, is disgusting hypocrisy as long as certain nations (for example, England and France) invest abroad, that is to say, lend at usurious interest to small and backward nations, billions of francs , and as long as the small and weak nations are in bondage to them. 
 Socialists could not have allowed a single sentence of the resolution, for which Jouhaux and Merrheim unanimously voted, to pass without strong protest. 
 In direct contrast to that resolution, socialists would have declared that Wil-son’s pronouncement is a downright lie and sheer hypocrisy,because Wilson represents a bourgeoisie which has made bil-lions out of the war, because he is the head of a governmentthat has frantically armed the United States obviously in preparation for a second great imperialist war. 
 Socialists would have declared that the French bourgeois governmentis tied hand and foot by finance capital, whose slave it is, andby the secret, imperialist, thoroughly predatory and reac-tionary treaties with England, Russia, etc. 
, and thereforecannot do or say anything except utter the same lies about a democratic and a “just” peace. 
 Socialists would have de-clared that the struggle for such a peace cannot be wagedby repeating general, vapid, benign, sentimental, meaning-less and non-committal pacifist phrases, which merely serveto embellish the foulness of imperialism. 
 It can be wagedonly by telling the people the truth , by telling the people that in order to obtain a democratic and just peace the bour-geois governments of all the belligerent countries must beoverthrown, and that for this purpose advantage must betaken of the fact that millions of workers are armed andthat the high cost of living and the horrors of the imperial-ist war have roused the anger of the masses. 
 This is what socialists should have said instead of what is said in the Jouhaux-Merrheim resolution. 
 The Congress of the French Socialist Party, which took place in Paris simultaneously with that of the C. 
G. 
T. 
, notonly refrained from saying this, but passed a resolution thatis even worse than the one mentioned above. 
 It was adopted by 2,838 votes against 109, with 20 abstentions, that is to say, by a bloc of the social-chauvinists (Renaudel and Co. 
,the so-called “ majoritaires ”) and the Longuet-ists (suppor-ters of Longuet, the French Kautskyites)!! Moreover, theZimmerwaldist Bourderon and the Kienthalian Raffin-Dugens voted for this resolution!! We shall not quote the resolution—it is inordinately long and totally uninteresting: it contains benign, senti-mental phrases about peace, immediately followed by declara-tions of readiness to continue to support the so-called “na-tional defence” of France, i. 
e. 
, the imperialist war France is waging in alliance with bigger and more powerful robbers like England and Russia. 
 In France, unity of the social-chauvinists with pacifists (or Kautskyites) and a section of the Zimmerwaldists hasbecome a fact, not only in the C. 
G. 
T. 
, but also in the Soc-ialist Party. 
 A R T I C L E (O R C H A P T E R) IV ZIMMERWALD AT THE CROSSROADS The French newspapers containing the report of the C. 
G. 
T. 
 Congress were received in Berne on December 28, andon December 30, Berne and Zurich socialist newspapers pub-lished another manifesto by the Berne I. 
S. 
K. 
 (Internationale Sozialistische Kommission), the International Socialist Com-mittee, the executive body of Zimmerwald. 
 Dated the end ofDecember 1916, the manifesto refers to the peace proposalsadvanced by Germany and by Wilson and the other neutralcountries, and all these governmental pronouncements are described, and quite rightly described, of course, as a “far-cical game of peace”, “a game to deceive their own peoples”,“hypocritical pacifist diplomatic gesticulations”. 
 As against this farce and falsehood the manifesto declares that the “only force” capable of bringing about peace, etc. 
,is the “firm determination” of the international proletariat to “turn their weapons, not against their brothers, but against the enemy in their own country”. 
 The passages we have quoted clearly reveal the two funda-mentally distinct policies which have lived side by side,as it were, up to now in the Zimmerwald group, but whichhave now finally parted company. 
 On the one hand, Turati quite definitely and correctly states that the proposals made by Germany, Wilson, etc. 
,were merely a “ paraphrase ” of Italian “socialist” pacifism; the declaration of the German social-chauvinists and thevoting of the French have shown that both fully appreciatethe value for their policy of the pacifist screen. 
 On the other hand, the International Socialist Committee manifesto describes the pacifism of all belligerent andneutral governments as a farce and hypocrisy. 
 On the one hand, Jouhaux joins with Merrheim; Bourde-ron, Longuet and Raffin-Dugens join with Renaudel, Sembat and Thomas, while the German social-chauvinists, Südekum, David and Scheidemann, announce the forthcoming “res-toration of Social-Democratic Unity” with Kautsky and theSocial-Democratic Labour Group. 
 On the other hand, the International Socialist Committee calls upon the “socialist minorities” vigorously to fight “their own governments” and “their social-patriot hirelings” ( Söldlinge ). 
 Either one thing, or the other. 
Either expose the vapidity, stupidity and hypocrisy of bourgeois pacifism, or “paraphrase” it into “socialist” paci-lism. 
 Fight the Jouhaux, Renaudels, Legiens and Davids as the “hirelings” of the governments, or join with them in empty pacifist declamations on the French or German models. 
 That is now the dividing line between the Zimmerwald Right, which has always strenuously opposed a break withthe social-chauvinists, and the Left, which at the Zimmer-wald Conference had the foresight publicly to dissociate itself from the Right and to put forward, at the Conference and after it in the press, its own platform. 
 It is no accidentthat the approach of peace, or even the intense discussionby certain bourgeois elements of the peace issue, has led toa very marked divergence between the two policies. 
 To bour-geois pacifists and their “socialist” imitators, or echoers, peace has always been a fundamentally distinct concept, for neither has ever understood that “war is the continuationof the policies of peace and peace the continuation of thepolicies of war”. 
 Neither the bourgeois nor the social-chau-vinist wants to see that the imperialist war of 1914-17 isthe continuation of the imperialist policies of 1898-1914, if not of an even earlier period. 
 Neither the bourgeois pac-ifists nor the socialist pacifists realise that without therevolutionary overthrow of the bourgeois governments,peace now can only be an imperialist peace, a continuation of the imperialist war. 
 In appraising the present war, they use meaningless, vulgar, philistine phrases about aggression or defence in gene-ral, and use the same philistine commonplaces in apprais-ing the peace, disregarding the concrete historical situa-tion, the actual concrete struggle between the imperialist powers. 
 And it was quite natural for the social-chauvinists, these agents of the governments and the bourgeoisie in the workers’ parties, to seize upon the approach of peace inparticular, or even upon mere peace talk, in order to gloss over the depth of their reformism and opportunism, exposed by the war, and restore their undermined influence over themasses. 
 Hence, the social-chauvinists in Germany and in France, as we have seen, are making strenuous efforts to “unite” with the flabby, unprincipled pacifist section of the“opposition”. 
 Efforts to gloss over the divergence between the two irre-concilable lines of policy will certainly be made also inthe Zimmerwald group. 
 One can foresee that they will follow two lines. 
 A “practical business” conciliation by mechani-cally combining loud revolutionary phrases (like those inthe International Socialist Committee manifesto) with op-portunist and pacifist practice. 
 That is what happened inthe Second International. 
 The arch-revolutionary phrasesin the manifestos of Huysmans and Vandervelde and in certain congress resolutions merely served as a screen for the arch-opportunist practice of the majority of the Europeanparties, but they did not change, disrupt or combat thispractice. 
 It is doubtful whether these tactics will again besuccessful in the Zimmerwald group. 
 The “conciliators in principle” will try to falsify Marxism by arguing, for example, that reform does not exclude re-volution, that an imperialist peace with certain “improve-ments” in nationality frontiers, or in international law, orin armaments expenditure, etc. 
, is possible side by side withthe revolutionary movement, as “one of the aspects of thedevelopment” of that movement, and so on and so forth. 
 This would be a falsification of Marxism. 
 Reforms do not, of course, exclude revolution. 
 But that is not the pointat issue. 
 The point is that revolutionaries must not excludethemselves , not give way to reformism, i. 
e. 
, that socialists should not substitute reformist work for their revolutionarywork. 
 Europe is experiencing a revolutionary situation. 
 The war and the high cost of living are aggravating the situation. 
 The transition from war to peace will not necessarily elimi-nate the revolutionary situation, for there are no grounds whatever for believing that the millions of workers who now have excellent weapons in their hands will necessarily permit themselves to be “peacefully disarmed” by the bour-geoisie instead of following the advice of Karl Liebknecht,i. 
e. 
, turning their weapons against their own bourgeoisie. 
 The question is not, as the pacifist Kautskyites main-tain: either a reformist political campaign, or else the renun-ciation of reforms. 
 That is a bourgeois presentation of the question. 
 The question is: either revolutionary struggle, the by-product of which, in the event of its not being fullysuccessful, is reforms (the whole history of revolutionsthroughout the world has proved this), or nothing but talkabout reforms and the promise of reforms. 
 The reformism of Kautsky, Turati and Bourderon, which now comes out in the form of pacifism, not only leaves aside the question of revolution (this in itself is a betrayal of socialism), not only abandons in practice all systematicand persistent revolutionary work, but even goes to thelength of declaring that street demonstrations are adventur-ism (Kautsky in Die Neue Zeit , November 26, 1915). 
 It goes to the length of advocating and implementing unity with the outspoken and determined opponents of revolutionary strug-gle, the Südekums, Legiens, Renaudels, Thomases, etc. 
, etc. 
 This reformism is absolutely irreconcilable with revo-lutionary Marxism, the duty of which is to take the utmostpossible advantage of the present revolutionary situation in Europe in order openly to urge revolution, the overthrow of the bourgeois governments, the conquest of power by thearmed proletariat, while at the same time not renouncing,and not refusing to utilise, reforms in developing the revo-lutionary struggle and in the course of that struggle. 
 The immediate future will show what course events in Europe will follow, particularly the struggle between reformist pacifism and revolutionary Marxism, includingthe struggle between the two Zimmerwald sections. 
 Zurich, January 1, 1917 AN OPEN LETTE R TO BORIS SOUVARIN E92 Citizen Souvarine says his letter is addressed also to me. 
 I take all the greater pleasure in replying, since his article touches on vital problems of international socialism. 
 Souvarine believes that those who consider “defence of the fatherland” to be incompatible with socialism are takingan “unpatriotic” view. 
 As for himself, he “defends” the viewof Turati, Ledebour, Brizon who, while voting against warcredits, declare that they accept “defence of the fatherland”;in other words, he defends the trend known as the “Centre” (the “marsh”, I would say), or as Kautskyism—after its chief theoretical and literary exponent, Karl Kautsky. 
 I mightremark, in passing, that Souvarine is wrong in maintainingthat “they [i. 
e. 
, the Russian comrades who speak of the collapseof the Second International] equate men like Kautsky, Lon-guet, etc... with nationalists of the Scheidemann and Renaudel type”. 
 Neither I nor the Party to which I belong (the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee) have ever equated the social-chauvinist viewpoint with that of the “Centre”. 
 In ourofficial Party statements, in the Central Committee manifestopublished November 1, 1914 *, and in the resolutions adopted in March 1915 ** (both documents are reproduced in extenso in our pamphlet Socialism and War ,*** which is known to Souvarine), we have always drawn a dividing line betweenthe social-chauvinists and the “Centre”. 
 The former, in ouropinion, have defected to the bourgeoisie. 
 With regard tothem we demand not merely struggle, but a split. 
 The latterhesitate, vacillate, and their efforts to unite the socialist *See present edition, Vol. 
 21, pp. 
 25-34. 
— Ed. 
 **See present edition, Vol. 
 21, pp. 
 158-64. 
— Ed. 
 *** See present edition, Vol. 
 21, pp. 
 295-338. 
— Ed. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR masses with the chauvinist leaders cause the greatest damage to the proletariat. 
 Souvarine says he wants to “examine the facts from a Marxist viewpoint”. 
 But from a Marxist viewpoint, such general and abstract definitions as “unpatriotic” are of absolutely no value. 
 Thefatherland, the nation are historical categories. 
 I am notat all opposed to wars waged in defence of democracy or against national oppression, nor do I fear such words as “defence of the fatherland” in reference to these wars or toinsurrections. 
 Socialists always side with the oppressed and,consequently, cannot be opposed to wars whose purpose isdemocratic or socialist struggle against oppression. 
 Itwould therefore be absurd to deny the legitimacy of the wars of 1793, of France’s wars against the reactionary European monarchies, or of the Garibaldi wars, etc .... 
 And it would be just as absurd not to recognise the legitimacy of wars ofoppressed nations against their oppressors, wars that mightbreak out today—rebellion of the Irish against England, forinstance, rebellion of Morocco against France, or the Ukraine against Russia, etc.... 
 The Marxist viewpoint requires that in each individual case we define the political content of the war. 
 But what determines the political content of a war?Every war is only the continuation of policy. 
 What kind of policy is being continued in the present war? The policy of the proletariat, which from 1871 to 1914 was the sole exponent of socialism and democracy in France, Englandand Germany? Or imperialist policy, the policy of colonialrapine and oppression of weak nations by the reactionary,decadent and moribund bourgeoisie? The question has only to be squarely put and we get a perfectly clear answer: the present war is an imperialist war. 
 It is a war of slave-owners quarrelling over theirchattels and eager to consolidate and perpetuate slavery. 
 Itis the “capitalist brigandage” of which Jules Guesde spokein 1899, thereby condemning in advance his own betrayal. 
Guesde said at the time: “There are other wars ... they arise every day, wars for the acquisi-tion of markets. 
 This kind of war does not disappear, but, on the con-trary, bids fair to become continuous. 
 It is chiefly a war between the capitalists of all countries for profits and possession of the world market, and it is fought at the price of our blood. 
 Now, just imagine thatin each of the capitalist countries of Europe, this mutual slaughter forthe sake of plunder is directed by a socialist! Just imagine an English Millerand, an Italian Millerand a German Millerand, in addition to a French Millerand, working to embroil the proletarians in this capital-ist brigandage and make them fight each other! What would remain,I ask you, comrades, of international solidarity? On the day the Mille-rands became a common phenomenon, we would have to say ‘farewell’ toall internationalism and become nationalists, and this neither you nor I will ever agree to (Jules Guesde, En Garde! , Paris, 1911, pp. 
 175-76). 
 It is not true that France is waging this 1914-17 war for freedom, national independence, democracy, and so on .... 
 She is fighting to retain her colonies, and for England toretain hers, colonies to which Germany would have had a much greater right—from the standpoint of bourgeois law, of course. 
 She is fighting to give Russia Constantinople,etc.... 
 Consequently, this war is being waged not by demo-cratic and revolutionary France, not by the France of 1792,nor the France of 1848, nor the France of the Commune. 
 Itis being waged by bourgeois France, reactionary France, that ally and friend of tsarism, the “world usurer” (the expression is not mine, it belongs to Lysis, a contributor tol’Humanité 93), who is defending his booty, his “sacred right” to possess colonies, his “freedom” to exploit theentire world with the help of the millions loaned to weakeror poorer nations. 
 Do not tell me it is hard to distinguish between revolu-tionary and reactionary wars. 
 You want me to indicate apurely practical criterion that would be understood by all,in addition to the scientific criterion indicated above? Here it is: Every fair-sized war is prepared beforehand. 
 When a revolutionary war is being prepared, democrats and socialists are not afraid to state in advance that they favour “defence of the fatherland” in this war. 
 Whenhowever, in contrast, a reactionary war is being prepared,no socialist will venture to state in advance , that is, before war is declared, meaning that he will favour “defenceof the fatherland”. 
 Marx and Engels were not afraid to urge the German people to fight Russia in 1848 and 1859. 
 In contrast , at their Basle Congress in 1912 the socialists did not venture to speak of “defence of the fatherland ” in the war they could see was maturing and which broke out in 1914 . 
 Our Party is not afraid to declare publicly that it will sympathise with wars or uprisings which Ireland might startagainst England; Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia againstFrance; Tripoli against Italy; the Ukraine, Persia, Chinaagainst Russia, etc. 
 But what of the social-chauvinists? And the “Centrists”? Will they have the courage openly and officially to state that they favour, or will favour, “defence of the fatherland”in the event of war breaking out between, say, Japan and theUnited States, a clearly imperialist war prepared over thecourse of many years, and one which would imperil manyhundreds of millions of people? I dare them! I am prepared to wager that they will not, for they know only too well that if they make such a statement, they will become a laughing-stock in the eyes of the workers, they will be jeered at anddriven out of the socialist parties. 
 That is why the social-chauvinists and those in the “Centre” will avoid any openstatement and will continue to wriggle, lie and confuse the issue, seeking refuge in all manner of sophisms, like this one in the resolution of the last, 1915 French party congress:“An attacked country has the right to defence. 
” As if the question were: Who was the first to attack , and not: What are the causes of the war? What are its aims? Which classes are waging it? Could one imagine, for example, a sane-minded socialist recognising England’s right to “defence of the fatherland” in 1796, when the French revolu-tionary troops began to fraternise with the Irish? And yetit was the French who had attacked England and were actual-ly preparing to land in Ireland. 
 And could we, tomorrow,recognise the right to “defence of the fatherland” for Russia and England, if, after they had been taught a lesson by Germany, they were attacked by Persia in alliance withIndia, China and other revolutionary nations of Asia per-forming their 1789 and 1793? That is my reply to the really ludicrous charge that we share Tolstoy’s views. 
 Our Party has rejected both the Tol-stoy doctrine and pacifism, declaring that socialists must seek to transform the present war into a civil war of theproletariat against the bourgeoisie, for socialism. 
 Should you object that this is utopian, I will answer that the bourgeoisie of France, England, etc. 
, do not, appar-ently, subscribe to that opinion. 
 They would not play so vile and ridiculous a role, going to the length of jailing orconscripting “pacifists”, had they not felt and foreseen theinevitable and steady rise of revolution and its early approach. 
 This leads me to the question of a split, raised also by Souvarine. 
 A split! That is the bogy with which the social-ist leaders are trying to frighten others, and which they themselves fear so much! “What useful purpose could now be served by the foundation of a new International?”—Souvarine asks. 
 “Its activity would be blighted by sterility,for numerically it would be very weak. 
” But the day-to-day facts show that, precisely because they are afraid of a split , the “activity” of Pressemane and Lon-guet in France, Kautsky and Ledebour in Germany, isblighted by sterility! And precisely because Karl Liebknechtand Otto Rühle in Germany were not afraid of a split, openlydeclaring that a split was necessary (cf. 
 Rühle’s letter in Vorwärts , January 12, 1916), and did not hesitate to carry it out—their activity is of vast importance for the prole-tariat, despite their numerical weakness . 
 Liebknecht and Rühle are only two against 108. 
 But these two representmillions, the exploited mass, the overwhelming majority ofthe population, the future of mankind, the revolution thatis mounting and maturing with every passing day. 
 The 108, on the other hand, represent only the servile spirit of a hand-ful of bourgeois flunkies within the proletariat. 
 Brizon’sactivities, when he shares the weaknesses of the Centre orthe marsh, are blighted by sterility. 
 And, conversely, theycease to be sterile, help to awaken, organise and stimulatethe proletariat, when Brizon really demolishes “unity”, when he courageously proclaims in parliament “Down with the war!”, or when he publicly speaks the truth, declaring thatthe Allies are fighting to give Russia Constantinople. 
 The genuine revolutionary internationalists are numeric-ally weak? Nonsense! Take France in 1780, or Russia in1900. 
 The politically-conscious and determined revolution-aries, who in France represented the bourgeoisie—the revolutionary class of that era—and in Russia today’srevolutionary class—the proletariat, were extremely weak numerically. 
 They were only a few, comprising at the most only 1/10,000, or even 1/100,000, of their class. 
 Several years later, however, these few, this allegedly negligible minority, led the masses, millions and tens of millions of people. 
Why? Because this minority really represented the interests ofthese masses, because it believed in the coming revolution,because it was prepared to serve it with supreme devotion. 
 Numerical weakness? But since when have revolutionaries made their policies dependent on whether they are in a majority or minority? In November 1914, when our Partycalled for a split with the opportunists, * declaring that the split was the only correct and fitting reply to their betrayalin August 1914, to many that seemed to be a piece of insen-sate sectarianism coming from men who had completely lost all contact with real life. 
 Two years have passed, and what is happening? In England, the split is an accomplishedfact. 
 The social-chauvinist Hyndman has been forced toleave the party. 
 In Germany, a split is developing beforeeveryone’s eyes. 
 The Berlin, Bremen and Stuttgart organ-isations have even been accorded the honour of being expelled from the party ... from the party of the Kaiser’s lackeys, the party of the German Renaudels, Sembats, Thom-ases, Guesdes and Co. 
 And in France? On the one hand, theparty of these gentlemen states that it remains true to“fatherland defence”. 
 On the other, the Zimmerwaldistsstate, in their pamphlet The Zimmerwald Socialists and the War , that “defence of the fatherland” is unsocialist. 
 Isn’t this a split? And how can men who, after two years of this greatest world crisis, give diametrically opposite answers to thesupreme question of modern proletarian tactics, work faith-fully side by side, within one and the same party? Look at America—apart from everything else a neutral country. 
 Haven’t we the beginnings of a split there, too:Eugene. 
 Debs, the “American Bebel”, declares in the socialistpress that he recognises only one type of war, civil war forthe victory of socialism, and that he would sooner be shotthan vote a single cent for American war expenditure (see Appeal to Reason 94 No. 
 1032, September 11, 1915). 
 On the *See present edition, Vol. 
 21, pp. 
 25-34. 
— Ed. 
 other hand, the American Renaudels and Sembats advocate “national defence” and “preparedness”. 
 The American Lon-guets and Pressemanes—the poor souls!— are trying to bring about a reconciliation between social-chauvinists and revo-lutionary internationalists. 
 Two Internationals already exist. 
 One is the International of Sembat-Südekum -Hyndman -Plekhanov and Co. 
 The other is the International of Karl Liebknecht, MacLean (the Scottish school-master whom the English bourgeoisie sen-tenced to hard labour for supporting the workers’ classstruggle), Höglund (the Swedish M. 
 P. 
 and one of the found-ers of the Zimmerwald Left sentenced to hard labour forhis revolutionary propaganda against the war), the fiveDuma members exiled to Siberia for life for their propaganda against the war, etc. 
 On the one hand, there is the Interna-tional of those who are helping their own governments wage the imperialist war , and on the other, the International of those who are waging a revolutionary fight against the imperialistwar . 
 Neither parliamentary eloquence nor the “diplomacy” of socialist “statesmen” can unite these two Internationals. 
 The Second International has outlived itself. 
 The Third International has already been born. 
 And if it has not yetbeen baptised by the high priests and Popes of the SecondInternational but, on the contrary, has been anathemised(see Vandervelde’s and Stauning’s speeches), this is notpreventing it from gaining strength with every passing day. 
 The Third International will enable the proletariat to rid itself of opportunists and will lead the masses to victory inthe maturing and approaching social revolution. 
 Before concluding, I would like to say a few words in reply to Souvarine’s personal polemics. 
 He asks (the social-ists now residing in Switzerland) to moderate their personal criticism of Bernstein, Kautsky, Longuet, etc .... 
 For my part, I must say that I cannot accept that. 
 And I wouldpoint out to Souvarine, first of all, that my criticism of the“Centre” is political, not personal. 
 Nothing can restore themass influence of the Südekums, Plekhanovs, etc. 
: theirauthority has been so undermined that everywhere the police have to protect them. 
 But by their propaganda of “unity” and “fatherland defence”, by their striving to bring abouta compromise, by their efforts to draw a verbal veil over the deep-seated differences, the “Centrists” are causing the greatest damage to the labour movement, because they are impeding the final break-down of the social-chauvinists’ moral authority, and in that way are bolstering theirinfluence on the masses and galvanising the corpse of theopportunist Second International. 
 For all these reasons Iconsider it my socialist duty to fight Kautsky and other“Centre” spokesmen. 
 Souvarine “appeals”, among others, to “Guilbeaux, to Lenin, to all those who enjoy the advantage of being ‘out-side the battle’, an advantage that often enables one totake a reasonable view of men and affairs in socialism,but one that, perhaps, is fraught also with certain incon-veniences. 
” A transparent hint. 
 In Zimmerwald, Ledebour expressed the same thought without any ambiguity. 
 He accused us“Left Zimmerwaldists” of addressing revolutionary appeals tothe masses from abroad. 
 I repeat to Citizen Souvarine what Itold Ledebour in Zimmerwald. 
 It is 29 years since I wasarrested in Russia. 
 And throughout these 29 years I have never ceased to address revolutionary appeals to the masses. 
 I did so from prison, from Siberia, and later from abroad. 
 And Ifrequently met in the revolutionary press “hints” similar tothose made in the speeches of tsarist prosecutors—”hints”that I was lacking in honesty, because, while living abroad,I addressed revolutionary appeals to the Russian people. 
 Coming from tsarist prosecutors these “hints” surprise no one. 
 But I must admit that I expected arguments of anotherkind from Ledebour. 
 Apparently he has forgotten that whenthey wrote their famous Communist Manifesto in 1847, Marx and Engels likewise addressed revolutionary appeals to theGerman workers from abroad! The revolutionary struggle is often impossible without revolutionaries emigrating abroad. 
 That has repeatedly been the experience in France. 
 AndI Citizen Souvarine would have done better not to follow thebad example of Ledebour and ... the tsarist prosecutors. 
 Souvarine also says that Trotsky, “whom we [the French minority] consider one of the most extreme elements of the extreme Left in the International, is simply branded as a chauvinist by Lenin. 
 It has to be admitted that there isa certain exaggeration here”. 
 Yes, of course, “there is a certain exaggeration”, but on Souvarine’s part, not mine. 
 For I have never branded Trots-ky’s position as chauvinistic. 
 What I have reproached him with is that all too often he has represented the “Centre”policy in Russia. 
 Here are the facts. 
 The split in theR. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 has existed officially since January 1912. 
 95 Our Party (grouped around the Central Committee) accusedof opportunism the other group, the Organising Committee, of which Martov and Axelrod are the most prominent leaders. 
 Trotsky belonged to Martov’s party and left it only in 1914. 
By that time the war had started. 
 Our five Duma deputies(Muranov, Petrovsky, Shagov, Badayev and Samoilov)were exiled to Siberia. 
 In Petrograd, our workers votedagainst participation in the war industries committees (the most important practical issue for us, just as important in Russia as the question of participation in the government inFrance). 
 On the other hand, the most prominent and mostinfluential Organising Committee writers—Potresov, Zasu-lich, Levitsky and others—have come out for “defence ofthe fatherland” and participation in the war industries com-mittees. 
 Martov and Axelrod have protested and advocated non-participation in the committees. 
 But they have notbroken with their party, one faction of which has turnedchauvinist and accepts participation. 
 That is why at Kien-thal we reproached Martov with having wanted to representthe Organising Committee as a whole, whereas in fact he can represent only one of its two factions. 
 This party’s Duma group (Chkheidze, Skobelev and others) is divided, withsome of its members for and others against “fatherlanddefence”. 
 But all of them favour participation in the warindustries committees, resorting to the ambiguous formulaof “saving the country”, which, essentially, is but another wording of the Südekum and Renaudel “fatherland defence” slogan. 
 More, they have in no way protested against Pot-resov’s position (which is actually identical to Plekhanov’s;Martov publicly protested against Potresov and declined tocontribute to his journal because Plekhanov had been in-vited to contribute). 
 And Trotsky? Having broken with Martov’s party, he continues to accuse us of being splitters. 
 Little by littlehe is moving to the Left, and even calls for a break with the Russian social-chauvinist leaders. 
 But he has not definitely said whether he wants unity or a break with the Chkheidze faction. 
 And that is one of the key issues. 
 For, indeed, if peace comes tomorrow, we shall be having Dumaelections the day after tomorrow, and the question willimmediately arise of siding with or opposing Chkheidze. 
 Weoppose such an alliance. 
 Martov favours it. 
 And Trotsky?His attitude is unknown. 
 There has been no definite indica-tion of it in the 500 issues of the Paris Russian-language newspaper Nashe Slovo , of which Trotsky is one of the edit-ors. 
 These are the reasons why we do not agree with Trotsky. 
 We are not the only ones. 
 In Zimmerwald, Trotsky re-fused to join the Zimmerwald Left. 
 Together with ComradeHenriette Roland-Holst he represented the “Centre”. 
 And this is what Comrade Roland-Holst now writes in the Dutch socialist paper Tribune 96 (No. 
 159, August 23, 1916): “Those who, like Trotsky and his group, want to wage arevolutionary struggle against imperialism must overcomethe consequences of émigré differences—largely of a personalnature—which disunite the extreme Left, and join the Leninists. 
 A ‘revolutionary centre’ is impossible. 
” I must apologise for having dwelt at such length on our relations with Trotsky and Martov, but the French socialistpress refers to this quite frequently and the information itgives its readers is often very inaccurate. 
 The French com-rades must be better informed of the facts concerning the Social-Democratic movement in Russia. 
 Lenin Written in the second half of December (old style) 1916 First published (in abridged form) Published according to in La Vérité No. 
 48, La Vérité page proofs January 27, 1918 Translated from the French First published in full in Russian in the magazine Proletarskaya Revolutsia No. 
 7 (90), 1929 THESES FOR AN APPEAL TO THE INTERNATIONA L SOCIALIS T COMMITTEE AND ALL SOCIALIS T PARTIE S97 ROUGH DRAFT 1. 
 The turn in world politics, from imperialist war to open appeals by a number of bourgeois governments for an imperialist peace, coincides with a turn in the developmentof world socialism. 
 2. 
 The first turn has produced a spate of pious and sen-timental pacifist phrases, promises and pledges, with which the imperialist bourgeoisie and the imperialist govern-ments seek to deceive the peoples and “peacefully” condi-tion them to obediently bear the whole cost of the preda-tory war, peacefully disarm the millions of proletariansand cover up, by paltry concessions, the preparation fora deal to divide up the colonies and financially (also polit-ically if possible) strangle weak nations. 
 This deal comprises the sum and substance of the projected imperialist peaceand is a direct continuation of the existing secret predatoryagreements, particularly those concluded during the war,between all the powers of both warring imperialist coali-tions. 
 3. 
 *The second turn consists in a “reconciliation” between the social-chauvinists, who have betrayed socialism anddefected to bourgeois nationalism or imperialism, andthe Zimmerwald Right wing , as represented by Kautsky and Co. 
 in Germany, Turati and Co. 
 in Italy, Longuet-Pressemane-Merrheim in France, etc. 
 By uniting on a basis of empty, meaningless and non-committal pacifist phrases, *Combine with §4. 
 which in practice serve to disguise imperialist policy and imperialist peace, embellish them instead of exposing them, these two trends are taking a decisive step towards the greatest deception of the workers, towards consolidatingthe domination in the labour movement of a bourgeoislabour policy veiled by socialist phraseology, the domina-tion of leaders and privileged sections of the working classthat have helped the governments and the bourgeoisie wage this predatory imperialist war on the plea of “defending the fatherland”. 
 4. 
 Social-pacifist policy, or the policy of social-pacifist phraseology, now predominates in the socialist parties ofthe chief European countries (see Kautsky’s five pacifistarticles in the German Social-Democratic press and, appear-ing at the same time, the statement of the social-imperial-ist leaders in the Chemnitz Volksstimme that they are fully prepared for peace and unity with the Kautskyites on abasis of pacifist phrases; the January 7, 1917 pacifist mani-festo of the German Kautskyite opposition; the Longuetistsand Renaudel and Co. 
 voting together at the French Social-ist Party Congress, and Jouhaux and Merrheim, also Brout-choux, at the General Confederation of Labour Congress,for resolutions composed of misleading pacifist phrases; a similar pacifist statement by Turati on December 17,1916, and the defence of his position by the entire Social-ist Party of Italy). 
 Whatever the terms of the peace now being prepared between the present, i. 
e. 
, bourgeois , govern-ments of both imperialist coalitions, this policy signifies the conversion of socialist and syndicalist (Jouhaux andMerrheim) organisations into a tool of government intrigue and secret imperialist diplomacy. 
 5. 
 The possible terms of the peace now being prepared by the bourgeois governments of both imperialist coali-tions are in reality determined by the altered balance of forces which the war has already produced and might still produce. 
 In their basic and principal features the changesare as follows: (a) the German imperialist coalition has upto now proved much stronger than its adversary. 
 The ter-ritories occupied by German and German-allied forces are its guarantee in a new imperialist division of the world colonies, weak countries, finance capital’s spheres of influence, etc. 
), which will merely be formalised by the peace treaty; (b) the British imperialist coalition hopes to improve its military position in the spring; but (c) the exhaustion caused by the war and, chiefly , the fact that it is hard for the financial oligarchy to rob the peoples still more than it has already done through unparalleled “war profits”, is giving rise, in connection with the fear ofproletarian revolution, to attempts by some bourgeois circles to end the war as soon as possible through a deal between the two groups of imperialist freebooters; (d) thereis a noticeable shift in world politics from the Anglo-Russiancoalition against Germany towards a coalition (just as impe-rialist in nature) of Germany and Russia against England. 
The basis for this is that tsarism has not the strength to seize Constantinople, promised it in the secret treaties with France, England, Italy, etc. 
, and is therefore seekingcompensation in a division of Galicia, Armenia and, possibly,Rumania, etc. 
, and also in an alliance with Germany againstEngland for the plunder of Asia; (e) another major changein world politics is the tremendous enrichment, at Europe’s expense, of United States finance capital, which has latterly increased its armaments (just like Japanese imperialism,which is much weaker) to unprecedented proportions, andwhich would be only too glad to divert the attention of“its” workers from these armaments by cheap pacifistphraseology ... relating to Europe ! 6. 
 Out of fear of proletarian revolution, the bourgeoisie finds itself compelled in every possible way to concealand embellish this objective political situation, thisimperialist reality. 
 It is trying to dupe the workers, diverttheir attention, and the best means to that end is the custom-ary diplomatic duplicity of non-committal, hypocritical phrases about a “democratic” peace, freedom for small nations “in general”, “armaments restriction”, etc. 
 Thisduping of the people comes all the easier to the imperialistbourgeoisie because, when it speaks of, say, “peace withoutannexations” every bourgeoisie has in view annexations by its adversary , and is “modestly reticent” about annexations it itself has already made. 
 The Germans “forget” that they have factually annexed not only Constantinople, Belgrade, Bucharest, Brussels, but also Alsace-Lorraine, part of Schleswig, Prussian Poland, etc. 
 Tsarism and its flunkeys, the Russian imperialist bourgeois (Plekhanov, Potresov and their ilk included, i. 
e. 
, the majority of the Organising Committee party in Russia), “forget” that Russia has annexednot only Erserum and part of Galicia, but also Finland,the Ukraine, etc. 
 The French bourgeoisie “forgets” that,together with the English, it has robbed Germany of hercolonies. 
 The Italian bourgeoisie “forgets” that it is robbing Tripoli, Dalmatia, Albania, and so on without end. 
 7. 
 That being the objective state of affairs, it is the obvious and imperative task of every sincere socialist policy,every honest proletarian policy (not to speak of consciousMarxist policy) first of all and above all consistently, sys-tematically, boldly and unreservedly to expose the pacifist and democratic hypocrisy of one ’s own government and one ’s own bourgeoisie . 
 Lacking that, all talk of socialism, syndi-calism, internationalism is a sheer deception of the people. 
For exposure of annexations by one’s imperialist rivals(regardless of whether they are named or merely implied,by denouncing annexations “generally” or by similar “dip-lomatic” methods of concealing one’s thoughts) is the direct concern, the direct business, of all venal journalists, all imperialists, including those that parade as socialists, suchas Scheidemann and Co. 
, Sembat and Co. 
, Plekhanov andCo. 
, etc. 
 8. 
 Turati and Co. 
, Kautsky and Co. 
, Longuet and Merr-heim and Co. 
 utterly fail to understand that this is their direct duty. 
 They represent a definite trend in internationalsocialism and, objectively , in practice —regardless of how supremely virtuous their intentions may be—are simplyhelping their “own” imperialist bourgeoisie to dupe the people, embellish its imperialist aims. 
 These social-pacifists, i. 
e. 
, socialists in words and vehicles of bourgeois-pacifist hypocrisy in deeds, now play exactly the same part as theChristian priests, who for centuries sought to embellishthe policy of the oppressing classes—the slave-owners, feu-dals and capitalists—and make their rule acceptable to the oppressed classes by preaching Christian love of one’s neighbour and Christ’s commandments. 
 9. 
 A policy designed not to mislead the workers, but to open their eyes to reality, should consist in the following: (a) Socialists in every country must now, when the ques-tion of peace is so directly posed, unfailingly and more vigorously than usual expose their own government and their own bourgeoisie. 
 They must expose the secret agreements they have concluded, and are concluding, with their impe-rialist allies for the division of colonies, spheres of influence,joint financial undertakings in other countries, buying upof shares, monopoly arrangements, concessions, etc. 
 For in this, and in this alone , lies the real, not deceptive, basis and substance of the imperialist peace now being prepared. 
 Everything else is meant to deceive the people. 
Those who vow and swear by these catchwords are not reallysupporting a democratic peace without annexations, etc. 
,for real support means exposing, in practice , one’s own bourgeoisie, which by its actions is destroying these great principles of true socialism and true democracy. 
 For every member of parliament, every editor, every secretary of a labour union, every journalist and publicleader can always gather the information kept secret by the government and the financiers that reveals the truth about the real basis of imperialist deals. 
 A socialist’s fail-ure to fulfil this duty is a betrayal of socialism. 
 There need be no doubt that no government will allow, especially now, free publication of exposures of its real policy, its trea-ties, financial deals, etc. 
 That is no reason to renounce suchexposures. 
 Rather it is a reason to renounce servile submis-sion to the censorship and publish the facts freely, i. 
e. 
, uncensored, illegally. 
 For the Socialist of another country cannot expose the government and bourgeoisie of a country at war with “hisown” nation, and not only because he does not know thatcountry’s language, history, specific features, etc. 
, but also because such exposure is part of imperialist intrigue, and not an internationalist duty. 
 He is not an internationalist who vows and swears by internationalism. 
 Only he is an internationalist who in areally internationalist way combats his own bourgeoisie, his own social-chauvinists, his own Kautskyites. 
 (b) In every country the Socialist must above all empha-sise in all his propaganda the need to distrust not onlyevery political phrase of his own government, but also every political phrase of his own social-chauvinists, who in reality serve that government. 
 (c) In every country the Socialists must above all ex-plain to the masses the indisputable truth that a genuinelyenduring and genuinely democratic peace (without annexa-tions, etc. 
) can now be achieved only if it is concluded not by the present bourgeois governments, or by bourgeois governments in general, but by proletarian governments that have overthrown the rule of the bourgeoisie and are proceed-ing to expropriate it. 
 The war has reaffirmed clearly enough and in a very practical way a truth which prior to the war was repeatedby all the socialist leaders who have now gone over to thebourgeoisie, namely, that modern capitalist society, par-ticularly * in the advanced countries, has fully matured for the transition to socialism. 
 If, for instance, Germany candirect the economic life of 66 million people from a single centre , and strain the people’s energies to wage a predatory war in the interests of 100 or 200 financial magnates oraristocrats, the monarchy, etc. 
, then the same can be done, in the interests of nine-tenths of the population, by the non-propertied masses if their struggle is directed by class-conscious workers, liberated from social-imperialist andsocial-pacifist influence. 
 All propaganda for socialism must be refashioned from abstract and general to concrete and directly practical: expropriate the banks and, relying on the masses, carry out in their interests the very same thing the W. 
U. 
M. 
B. 
A. 
 ** is carrying out in Germany! (d) In every country the socialist must explain to the masses the indisputable truth that, if the phrase “democraticpeace” is to be taken seriously, sincerely and honestly, and not merely used as a false Christian phrase meant to conceal an imperialist peace, then the workers have only one means of really achieving such a peace right now . 
 That means is to turn their weapons against their own government (i. 
e. 
, follow the advice of Karl Liebknecht, for which he has been *In the manuscript, the words “at any rate” are written over the word “particularly”. 
— Ed. 
 **Waffen -und Munitionsbeschaffungsamt—Weapons and Ammu-nition Supply Department. 
— Ed. 
 sentenced to hard labour. 
 He urged, in other words, what our Party manifesto of November 1, 1914 * defined as turn-ing the imperialist war into a civil war of the proletariat against the bourgeoisie and for socialism). 
 The Basle Manifesto of November 24, 1912, signed by all the socialist parties, had in view the very war that is now raging . 
 And when it threatened the governments with “proletarian revolution ” in connection with the imminent war, when it referred to the Paris Commune, it spoke the truth, a truth from which the betrayers of socialism arenow cowardly retreating. 
 For if in 1871 the Paris workerscould utilise the excellent weapons given them by NapoleonIII in pursuance of his ambitious plans, to make theirheroic attempt, admired by socialists the world over, to over-throw bourgeois rule and capture power for the introduction of socialism—then a similar attempt is a thousand timesmore achievable, possible and likely to succeed now, whena much larger number of better organised and more class-conscious workers of several countries are in possession ofmuch better weapons, and when with every passing day the course of the war is enlightening and revolutionising the masses. 
 In all countries the chief obstacle to initiating sys-tematic propaganda and agitation in this spirit is defi-nitely not the “fatigue of the masses”, as the Scheidemannsplus Kautsky, etc. 
, falsely plead. 
 The “masses” are not yettired of shooting and will continue to shoot even more in the spring, unless their class enemies come to some arrange-ment about dividing up Turkey, Rumania, Armenia,Africa, etc. 
 The chief obstacle is the faith part of the class-conscious workers have in the social-imperialists andsocial-pacifists. 
 Today’s major task must be to destroy thefaith in these trends, ideas , methods of policy . 
 To what extent such an attempt is feasible, from the standpoint of the sentiment of the broad masses, can only be proved by launching this type of agitation and propaganda everywhere and in the most resolute and energetic way; bygiving the most sincere and devoted support to all revolu-tionary manifestations of the mounting mass resentment, to the strikes and demonstrations that are forcing the Russian *See present edition, Vol. 
 21, pp. 
 25-34. 
— Ed. 
 bourgeoisie frankly to admit that the revolution is on the march, and have forced Helfferich to declare in the Reichstag: “Better to keep the Left Social-Democrats in prison than to have Potsdam Square littered with corpses,”i. 
e. 
, to admit that the masses are responding to agitation by the Left. 
 In any case , the alternative which socialists must clearly place before the masses is this: either continue to kill each other for capitalist profits, put up with the high cost of living, hunger, the burden of a debt running into billions,and accept the farce of an imperialist truce veiled by demo-cratic and reformist promises, or rise in revolt against thebourgeoisie. 
 A revolutionary party which openly, before the whole world, threatened the governments with “proletarian revolu-tion” in the event of such a war as is now being waged, would be committing moral suicide if it did not urge the workers,and the masses generally, to direct all thought and efforttowards revolt, now that the masses are so excellently armed,so excellently trained in the art of warfare, and fed up with the absurdity of this criminal imperialist shambles, which up to now they have been helping. 
 (e) Socialists must centre their activity on the struggle against reformism, which has always corrupted the revolu-tionary labour movement by injecting bourgeois ideas, andhas now assumed a somewhat special form, namely: “reliance” on the reforms the bourgeoisie is supposed to carry out after the war! Reformists argue that in urging, popularisingand preparing the socialist revolution of the proletariat,we are “losing sight” of the “practical” aspect, “forfeiting”our chances to win reforms. 
 That argument, customary both to social-chauvinists and supporters of Kautsky, who has even denounced street demon-strations as “adventuristic”, is thoroughly unscientific,fundamentally false, a bourgeois lie. 
 In the course of the war world capitalism has taken a forward step not only towards concentration in general, butalso towards transition from monopoly in general to state capitalism on a much broader scale than before. 
 Economic reforms in this direction are inevitable. 
 In the political sphere, the imperialist war has demon-strated that from the imperialists’ standpoint it is sometimes much more advantageous to have as war ally a politi-cally independent but financially dependent small nation rather than risk Irish or Czech “incidents” (i. 
e. 
, uprisingsor the defection of whole regiments) during a war. 
 It is quitepossible, therefore, that parallel with its policy of stranglingsmall nations—a policy it can never wholly abandon—imperialism will in individual cases follow a policy of “vol-untary” alliance (i. 
e. 
, resulting exclusively from financial strangulation) with new small national states, or with mon-grel states, such as Poland. 
 However, it does not follow from this that Social-Demo-crats can, without betraying their cause, “vote” for or sup-port such imperialist “reforms”. 
 Only bourgeois reformism, which in substance is the posi-tion of Kautsky, Turati and Merrheim, poses the questionthus: either renunciation of revolution and that means reforms, or no reforms at all. 
 Yet all the experience of world history, like the exper-ience of the 1905 Russian Revolution, teaches us the very opposite: either revolutionary class struggle, of which reforms are always a by-product (when the revolution is not completely successful), or no reforms at all. 
 For the only effective force that compels change is popu-lar revolutionary energy, providing it does not remain onpaper, as has been the case in the Second International, but finds expression in comprehensive mass revolutionary propaganda, agitation and organisation conducted by par-ties marching at the head of the revolution, not limpingalong in its tail. 
 Only by openly proclaiming revolution, by purging the workers’ parties of all who oppose revolution or “sceptically” accept it—only by giving every aspect of party activity a revolutionary content, can Social-Democracy, in such“critical ” eras of world history as the present one, guarantee the masses either complete success of their cause if therevolution is supported by very broad masses, or reforms, i. 
e. 
,concessions by the bourgeoisie, if the revolution is only partially successful. 
 Otherwise, if the Scheidemann and Kautsky policy pre-vails, there is no guarantee that the reforms will not be reduced to naught, or carried out with police and reactionary restrictions that will rule out the very possibility of the proletariat using them in a repeated fight for the revolution. 
 (f) Socialists must make a serious effort to bring to reality Karl Liebknecht’s slogan. 
 The popularity that name enjoysamong the masses is a guarantee that revolutionary activ-ity is both possible and likely to succeed. 
 The attitude ofScheidemann and Co. 
, Kautsky and Co. 
 towards that name is an example of hypocrisy: in words they swear by the “Liebknechts of all countries”; in deeds they combat Liebknecht’s tactics. 
 Liebknecht broke not only with the Scheidemanns (Renaudels, Plekhanovs, Bissolatis), but also with theKautsky trend (Longuet, Axelrod, Turati). 
 Liebknecht declared, as early as October 2, 1914 , in his letter to the Party Executive: “Ich habe erklärt, dass die deutsche Partei, nach meiner innersten Überzeugung, von der Haut bis zum Mark rege-neriert werden muss, wenn sie das Recht nicht verwirken will, sich sozialdemokratisch zu nennen, wenn sie sich die jetzt gründlich verscherzte Achtung der Welt wiedererwer-ben will. 
” ( Klassenkampf gegen den Krieg! Material zum “Fall Liebknecht”. 
 Seite 22. 
) (Geheim gedruckt in Deutsch-land: “Als Manuskript gedruckt”. 
) * All parties should take up Liebknecht’s slogan and it would certainly be ridiculous to even think of being able to turn it into effect without ridding the party of the Scheidemanns, Legiens, Renaudels, Sembats, Plekhanovs,Vanderveldes and Co. 
, or without denouncing the policy ofconcessions to the trend represented by Kautsky, Turati,Longuet and Merrheim. 
 * * * 10. 
 We therefore suggest a conference of Zimmerwald supporters to discuss the following proposals: *I have declared my deep conviction that, if it does not want to forfeit the right to call itself a Social-Democratic party, if it wants torestore its prestige in the eyes of the world, now so thoroughly under-mined, the German party must be regenerated from top to bottom. 
 (Class Struggle After the War! Materials in the “Liebknecht Case”, p. 
 22. 
) (Printed secretly in Germany: Published as a manuscript. 
)— Ed. 
 (1) Socialist pacifism of a definite trend—Longuet-Merrheim, Kautsky, Turati, etc. 
,—already rejected in prin-ciple at Kienthal, and its concrete defence by these repre-sentatives of the afore-mentioned trends should be decisively and unconditionally rejected as bourgeois reformism (onthe basis of the theses formulated above). 
 (2) A similarly decisive organisational break with social-chauvinism. 
 (3) Explain to the working class its immediate and urgent revolutionary tasks, precisely in connection with thefact that the masses have lost patience with the war and thelying milk-and-water pacifist phrases of the bourgeoisie. 
 (4) Openly brand as a complete break with the spirit and decisions of Zimmerwald and Kienthal, and condemn as such, the policy of the Italian Socialist Party, which is following a patently pacifist path, and the policy of theSwiss Social-Democratic Party, which on November 4,1916 in Zurich voted to permit indirect taxes, and onJanuary 7, 1917, through an alliance between the “Centrist”R. 
 Grimm and the social-patriots Greulich, G. 
 Müller and Co. 
, secured indefinite postponement of the special party congress called for February 11, 1917 to discuss the war issue,and which now meekly accepts the outright ultimatum of thesesame social-patriot leaders, who openly threaten to resignfrom parliament if the party rejects fatherland defence. 
 The sad experience of the Second International has clear-ly demonstrated the immense damage caused by combining, in actual practice , “general” revolutionary decisions, for-mulated in general phrases, with reformist actions—whenprofessions of internationalism are attended by refusaljointly to discuss, in a truly internationalist manner, fun-damental problems of the tactics of each individual party as a component part of the international union. 
 Prior to the Zimmerwald Conference and at the Conference itself, our Party considered it its duty to acquaint the com-rades with our irrevocable condemnation of pacifism andabstract preachment of peace as a bourgeois deception (a Ger-man translation of our Party’s resolution, in the pamphlet Socialism and War ,* and a French translation, in a separate *See present edition, Vol. 
 21, pp. 
 295-338. 
— Ed. 
 leaflet, were circulated at the Conference). 
 The Zimmer-wald Left , in whose organisation we shared, was formed as a separate group at the Conference for the express purpose of showing that we support the Zimmerwald group insofar as it combats social-chauvinism. 
 It has now been definitely established—of this we are profoundly convinced—that the Zimmerwald majority, orthe Zimmerwald Right, has made a roundabout turn not towards struggle against social-chauvinism, but towards complete surrender to it, towards merger with it on a plat-form of empty pacifist phrases. 
 And we consider it our dutyopenly to state that to support, in these circumstances, theillusion of Zimmerwald unity and Zimmerwald struggle forthe Third International would cause the greatest damage to the labour movement. 
 We declare, not as a “threat” or “ultimatum”, but as an open notification of our decision,that unless the situation changes we shall not remain amember of the Zimmerwald group. 
 Written before December 26, 1916 (January 7, 1917 ) First published in 1931 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany XVII the manuscript A LETTE R TO V. 
 A. 
 KARPINS KY98 Dear Comrades! I am sending you a most important communication. 
 Discuss it and pass it on to Brilliant99 and Guilbeaux: then we shall know whom they support and who they are: cowards or men capable of fighting. 
 The whole struggle will now be shifted here. 
 Let me know how they reacted and if there are any chances of publishing a protest or an open letter. 
 We should take advantage of the fact that Naine enjoys undisputed authority in French Switzerland. 
 Best wishes, Yours The Executive (Parteivorstand) of the Swiss Socialist Party met in Zurich on Sunday, January 7, 1917. 
 It adopted a disgraceful decision—to postpone indefinite-ly the party congress, which was to have met in Berne onFebruary 11, 1917 for the express purpose of discussing thewar issue. 
 The excuse: the need to fight the high cost ofliving; the workers are not yet ready; there was no unanimity in the commission, and similar excuses that are an outright insult to the party. 
 (Two drafts have already been drawn upin the commission and published confidentially : one, against fatherland defence, prepared by Affolter, Nobs, Schmid,Naine and Graber; the other, for fatherland defence, pre-pared by G. 
 Müller, Pflüger, Huber and Klöti. 
) The January 7 meeting was very stormy. 
 Grimm led the Rights, i. 
e. 
, the opportunists, i. 
e. 
, the nationalists, shout-ing the most vile things against the “foreigners”, against the youth , accusing them of a “split” (!!!), and so on. 
 Naine, Platten, Nobs and Münzenberg firmly opposed postponing the congress. 
 Naine told Grimm outright that he was de-stroying himself as an “international secretary”! Adoption of this decision signifies complete betrayal by Grimm and is an insult to the party on the part of the oppor-tunist leaders, the social-nationalists. 
 The entire Zimmer-wald-Kienthal group and action have been factually reduced to an empty phrase by a handful of leaders (Grimm included) who threaten to resign ( sic!! ) if defence of the fatherland is rejected. 
 They are determined not to allow this issue to be discussed by the party “mob” until the endof the war. 
 The Grütlianer 100 (January 4 and 8) is speaking the truth and is giving this party a slap in the face. 
 The whole struggle of the Left, the whole struggle for Zimmerwald and Kienthal, has now been shifted to otherground: struggle against this gang of leaders defiling theparty. 
 We must everywhere rally the Left and discussmethods of struggle. 
 Hurry! Would not the best method be (not a minute must be lost) to secure immediate adoption in La Chaux-de-Fondsand Geneva of protest resolutions, plus open letters toNaine, and publish them without delay? There can be nodoubt that the “leaders” will bring every lever into motionto prevent protests appearing in the press. 
 The open letter should frankly state everything recounted here and squarely put the question: (I) Does Naine refutethese facts? (2) Does he consider it permissible , in a demo-cratic party of socialists, for the Executive to repeal congressdecisions?—(3) Permissible to hide from the party the way the betrayers of socialism voted at the meeting of January 7, 1917, and the speeches they made there?—(4) Permissible to accept a chairman of the International Socialist Commit-tee (Grimm) who combines Left phrases with assistance to the Swiss nationalists, opponents of Zimmerwald, “fa-therland defenders” Pflüger, Huber and Co. 
, in virtually disrupting the Zimmerwald decisions?—(5) Permissible to abuse, in the Berner Tagwacht , the German social-patriots, while secretly helping the Swiss Social-patriots? etc. 
 I repeat: this will not be allowed to appear in the news-papers. 
 That is clear. 
 Publication of an open letter to Naine on behalf of one or another group is the best method. 
 If that is possible, lose no time and reply without delay. 
 Written on December 26, 1916 (January 8, 1917 ) First published in 1929 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany XI the manuscript AN OPEN LETTER TO CHARLES NAINE, MEMBER OF THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIALIST COMMITTEE IN BERNE Dear Comrade, The stand taken by Mr. 
 National Councillor Robert Grimm at the meeting of the Party Executive on January 7, jointlywith all the social-nationalists and to a considerable degreeas their leader, in favour of the resolution to postpone the party congress fills the cup of patience to overflowing andutterly exposes Mr. 
 National Councillor Grimm in his true colours. 
 The chairman of the International Socialist Committee elected at Zimmerwald, the chairman of the Zimmerwaldand Kienthal conferences, the most “authoritative” repre-sentative, in the eyes of the whole world, of the entireZimmerwald group, comes out together with, and at the head of, the social-patriots as a downright traitor to Zimmerwald. 
 He puts forth a proposal designed to disruptthe party congress, appointed long ago for the express pur-pose of deciding, in the freest and—considering the placeand time—most internationally influential European coun-try, the question of defending the fatherland in an imperi-alist war!! Can one remain silent? Can one remain calm in the face of such a fact, which would have for ever disgraced the entireZimmerwald movement, and converted it into a farce, hadnot the mark been torn from the face of Mr. 
 National Coun-cillor Grimm? The Socialist Party of Switzerland is the only European socialist party which openly and officially, in open congressunhindered by military censorship and the military authori-ties, joined Zimmerwald, supported it, appointed two mem-bers of the International Socialist Committee and appeared before the whole world as the principal representative of the Zimmerwald movement, if we do not count the Italianparty, which is in an immeasurably more difficult positionowing to the oppressive war conditions. 
 At its Zurich Con-gress of November 4-5, 1916, after delays caused, amongother things, by the struggle against the avowed social-patriots who only in the autumn of 1916 broke away from the party to form a separate Grütli-Verein, the SocialistParty finally decided to convene a special party congressin Berne, in February 1917, to decide the questions of warand of fatherland defence. 
 But now some individuals inthe party are determined to prevent the congress, to disrupt it, to prevent the workers themselves from discussing and deciding, during the war, their attitude towards militarismand defence of the fatherland. 
 At the head of those individuals, whose policy is an out-rage to the whole Zimmerwald movement, we find thechairman of the International Socialist Committee! Is this not the utter betrayal of Zimmerwald? Is it not the spurning of all the Zimmerwald decisions? We have only to glance at some of the official arguments to justify postponing the congress to understand the pointand purpose of this move. 
 “The workers,” we are told, “are not yet ready” to decide this question! All the Zimmerwald and Kienthal manifestos and resolu-tions declare over and over again that fatherland defence inan imperialist war, a war between two imperialist coalitions,a war for robbing colonies and throttling weak nations, isa betrayal of socialism, irrespective of whether this relates to the “Great Powers” or to small nations, which for the time being have retained their neutrality. 
 In dozens of waysthis idea is repeated in all the official Zimmerwald and Kien-thal documents. 
 It has been presented and argued over andover again in hundreds of articles and reports in all Swisssocialist papers, notably in the Berner Tagwacht , of which Mr. 
 National Councillor Grimm is editor. 
 The declarations of sympathy for Karl Liebknecht, Höglund, MacLean, etc. 
,emphasised hundreds of times the conviction common to all the Zimmerwaldists, namely, that these men have right-ly understood the position and interests of the masses , that the sympathy of the masses , i. 
e. 
, of the majority of the oppressed and exploited, is on their side, that by its class instinct the proletariat everywhere, in “Great” belli-gerent Germany, as well as in small neutral Sweden, iscoming to see that defence of the fatherland in an imperi-alist war is the betrayal of socialism . 
 And now the chairman of the International Socialist Com-mittee, with the enthusiastic approval and warm supportof all the pronounced representatives of social-patriotism in the Socialist Party of Switzerland—H. 
 Greulich,P. 
 Pflüger, Huber, Manz-Schäppi, etc. 
, etc. 
—comes forthwith the hypocritical and false argument that the party congress is being postponed because “the workers are not yet ready”. 
 This is a lie; it is disgusting, intolerable hypocrisy. 
 Everyone knows—and the Grütlianer openly publishes this bitter truth—that the congress is being postponedbecause these social-patriots are afraid of the workers, afraid that the workers will decide against defence of the father-land; that they threaten to resign their seats in the Natio-nalrat, if a decision against defence of the fatherland is car-ried. 
 The social-patriot “leaders” of the Socialist Party ofSwitzerland, who even now, two and a half years after thebeginning of the war, favour “defence of the fatherland”, i. 
e. 
, defence of the imperialist bourgeoisie of one or the other coalition, have decided to disrupt the congress , to sabotage the will of the Swiss socialist workers, to prevent them fromdiscussing and determining, during the war, their attitudetowards the war, towards the “defenders of the fatherland”,i. 
e. 
, towards the lackeys of the imperialist bourgeoisie. 
 This is the real reason, which everyone knows perfectly well, why the congress has been postponed; this is a betray-al of Zimmerwald by the chairman of the InternationalSocialist Committee, who has deserted to the side of thesocial-patriots in the Socialist Party of Switzerland, against the class-conscious workers of Switzerland! Such is the bitter truth. 
 It has already been told by the avowedly social-patriot Grütlianer , which, incidentally, is always best informed about what the Grütlian leaders, Greulich, Pflüger, Hubar, Manz-Schäppi and Co. 
, inside the Socialist Party are thinking and doing. 
 Incidentally, three days before the meeting of January 7, 1917, this paper wrote: * Another “official” reason for postponing the congress is that the commission specially elected in December, or evenNovember, 1916, to frame the resolution on the war question,“failed to arrive at a unanimous decision”!! As if Grimm and Co. 
 did not know beforehand that una-nimity on such a question was impossible in the Socialist Party of Switzerland as long as there remained such “leaders”as Greulich, Pflüger, G. 
 Müller, Huber, Manz-Schäppi, OttoLang and others, who while not joining the social-patriotGrütli party fully share the social-patriot views of the Grütli-Verein, and who only deceive the socialist workers by belonging to the Socialist Party! As if Grimm and Co. 
 did not clearly see in the summer of 1916 that there was no unity, nor could there be, on thedefence of the fatherland issue: for the social-patriot theses of Pflüger, G. 
 Müller and others were published in thesummer of 1916, and Grimm, being a member of the National-rat, naturally could not help noting thousands of times the social-patriot views at least of Greulich and Co. 
, if not of the majority of the Nationalrat Social-Democratic group. 
 Grimm and Co. 
 want to deceive the socialist workers of Switzerland. 
 That is why, in appointing a commission, theydid not publish the names of its members. 
 But the Grütlia-ner told the truth when it published those names and added, as something taken for granted, as a generally acceptedtruth, that such a commission could not arrive at a unanimous decision! To deceive the workers, Grimm and Co. 
 decided not to publish the commission resolutions immediately ; they con-cealed the truth from the workers. 
 Yet the resolutions have been available for a long time, and have even been printed confidentially !! As was only to be expected, the resolution accepting “defence of the fatherland”, i. 
e. 
, justifying the betrayal of socialism during a war whose imperialist character has been exposed a thousand times, is signed by Huber. 
 Pflüger, *In Lenin’s manuscript space is left for a quotation. 
— Ed. 
 Klöti and G. 
 Müller; the resolution rejecting “defence of the fatherland” is signed by Nobs, Affolter, Schmid, Naine and Graber. 
 Grimm and the social-patriots are playing a disgraceful, unscrupulous game with the socialist workers. 
 The workers are not yet ready, they shout, and yet at the very same time, these leaders conceal from the workers avail-able resolutions which definitely place before the workers two sets of ideas, two irreconcilable policies, the social-patriot and the Zimmerwald policies!! Grimm and the social-patriots are brazen deceivers of the workers, for it is they who have decided to disrupt thecongress, withhold publication of the resolutions, deny theworkers the opportunity openly to weigh and discuss the two policies—and yet they shout that the workers “are not yet ready”! Other “official” arguments for postponing the congress: the need to combat the high cost of living, conduct theelection campaign, etc. 
 These arguments are a sheer insult to the workers. 
 Who does not know that we Social-Democrats are not against the struggle for reforms, that, unlike the social-patriots, unlikethe opportunists and reformists, we do not confine ourselves to the struggle for reforms, but subordinate it to the struggle for revolution? Who does not know that this is exact-ly the policy repeatedly formulated in the Zimmerwald and Kienthal manifestos? We are not opposed to elections and reforms aimed at reducing the high cost of living, but ourfirst concern is openly to tell the masses the truth , namely, that it is impossible to eliminate high living costs without expropriating the banks and big industry, i. 
e. 
, withoutsocial revolution. 
 What does every Zimmerwald manifesto call upon the proletariat to do in retaliation to the war, in connection with the war? It calls for revolutionary mass struggle, for the workers to turn their weapons against the enemy in their own country(see the last International Socialist Committee manifesto: An die Arbeiterklasse , * end of December 1916), i. 
e. 
, to turn *To the Working Class. 
 —Ed. 
 their weapons against their own bourgeoisie, their own government. 
 Should this not make it clear to every thinking person that the policy of repudiating defence of the fatherland is linked with the really revolutionary and really socialist struggle against the high cost of living, with a really social-ist, and not bourgeois-reformist, utilisation of the electioncampaign? Is it not clear that the social-patriot policy, the “father-land defence” policy in the imperialist war, is the policyof reformism , i. 
e. 
, a bourgeois-reformist and not a socialist struggle against high prices, merely an election campaignstruggle? How is it possible to “ postpone ” a congress which is to decide the “defence of the fatherland” issue (i. 
e. 
, to choose between social-patriot and socialist policy) “on the plea” that it is necessary to combat high prices, etc. 
?? Grimm andthe social-patriots advance this false and fraudulent argu-ment to obscure from the workers the truth that they want to combat high living costs, conduct the election campaign, etc. 
, in a bourgeois-reformist spirit and not in the Zimmer-wald spirit. 
 On August 6, 1916, Grimm addressed a meeting in Zurich of 115 Arbeitervertrauensleute aus der ganzen Schweiz. 
 * His speech was a plea for a bourgeois-reformist, purelyreformist, struggle against the high cost of living! Grimm is marching “with sure stop” to his goal, i. 
e. 
, to rapprochement with the social-patriots against the socialist workers, against Zimmerwald. 
 Particularly disgusting in all this is the fact that Grimm covers up his desertion to the social-patriots by roundly abusing the non-Swiss social-patriots. 
 And in this lies one of the deepest roots of Grimm’s treachery, one of the deepest sources of the whole policy of deception which was revealedon January 7, 1917. 
 Look at the Berner Tagwacht . 
 It has heaped every manner of abuse on the Russian, French, English, German and Aus-trian social-patriots—in short, on everyone ... except the Swiss! Grimm has even called the German social-patriot *Workers delegates from all parts of Switzerland. 
101—Ed. 
 Ebert, a member of the German Social-Democratic Party Executive, “einen Rausschmeisser in einem Bordell” * (Berner Tagwacht No. 
 ...). 
 Brave fellow, this Grimm, a knightly warrior! Sitting in Berne, he bravely attacks the social-patriots ... in Ber-lin! But this knight maintains a noble reticence about the social-patriots ... in Berne and Zurich ! But is there any difference between Ebert in Berlin and Greulich, Manz-Schäppi and Pflüger in Zurich, and Gustav Müller, Schneeberger and Dürr in Berne? None whatever. 
 They are all social-patriots . 
 They all share exactly the same views. 
 The ideas they bring the masses are “ Grütlian ”, i. 
e. 
, reformist, nationalist, bourgeois, ideas, not socialist ideas. 
 When Grimm drew up his theses on the war issue in the summer of 1916, he deliberately made them long and vague in the hope that this would deceive both the Left and theRight and enable him to “cash in” on their differences. 
 Heconcluded the theses with the following sentence: “The party and trade union organs should reach agree-ment” (in the event of a war danger and the need for revolu-tionary mass action). 
 But who is at the head of the trade unions in Switzer-land? Among others, the very Schneeberger and Dürr who inthe summer of 1916 were the editors of the Schweizerische Metallarbeiterzeitung . 
** They conducted this payer in a reactionary, reformist, social-patriot spirit, openly declaring that they stood for “defence of the fatherland”, and openly protesting against the whole policy of Zimmerwald. 
 And at the head of the Socialist Party of Switzerland, as the events of January 7, 1917 reaffirmed, are the social-patriots Greulich, Pflüger, Manz-Schäppi, Huber, etc. 
, etc. 
 And so, what is the net result? It amounts to this: in his theses Grimm proposed that the party place the leadership of revolutionary mass actionsagainst the war in the hands of none other than the social-patriots Schneeberger, Dürr, Greulich, Pflüger and Co. 
!In the hands of the very people who are opposed to such actions, in the hands of reformists !! *A “bouncer” in a brothel— Ed. 
 **Swiss Metalworkers Gazette. 
— Ed. 
 Now, after January 7, 1917, Grimm’s “tactics” have been fully exposed. 
 He wants to be regarded as leader of the Left, as chair-man of the International Socialist Committee, representa-tive and leader of the Zimmerwaldists. 
 He is trying todeceive the workers with the most “r-r-revolutionary” phrases,using them, in reality , to conceal the party’s old, social-patriot, bourgeois-reformist practice. 
 He vows and swears that he sympathises with Karl Lieb-knecht, Höglund, etc. 
, that he is their supporter, that he is pursuing their policy. 
 But Karl Liebknecht in Germany, Höglund in small neu-tral Sweden, fought not against foreign , but against their own social-patriots. 
 They attacked the reformists and national-ists at home, in Berlin, in Stockholm, not in other coun-tries. 
 Their ruthless exposure of the social-patriots won themthe honour of being hated by the Berlin and Stockholm Greu-lichs, Pflügers, Schneebergers and Dürrs. 
 Is it so difficult to realise that when the French chau-vinists laud the German Liebknecht, and when the German chauvinists laud the Englishman MacLean, they are behav-ing like swindlers—using “internationalist” phrases in praiseof other people ’s internationalism to cover up their own nationalism? Is it so difficult to realise that Grimm is behav-ing in the very same manner when he pours abuse on thesocial-patriots of all countries except Switzerland, that he does this for the express purpose of covering up his desertion to the Swiss social-patriots? Grimm denounced the German social-patriot Ebert as a “Rausschmeisser in einem Bordell” for having stolen theVorwärts from the German workers, for ejecting Left wingers from the party while shouting about a split. 
 But what is Grimm doing at home, in Switzerland, in com-pany with the dismal heroes of dismal January 7, 1917? Did he not steal from the Swiss workers the solemnly promised special congress to discuss the fatherland defenceissue? And is he not preparing to expel Zimmerwaldistsfrom the party while shouting about a split? Let us not be childishly naïve, let us squarely face the truth! At the January 7 meeting, Grimm’s new friends and pat-rons, the social-patriots, joined him in protesting against a split. 
 They especially accused the youth organisation of splitting activities. 
 One of them shouted to the party sec-retary, Platten, “Er sei kein Parteisekretär, er sei Partei-verräter. 
” * Can one remain silent when such things are being said and when the “leaders” want to hide them from the party?Can it be that the Swiss socialist workers will not protestagainst such methods? What crime have the Youth League and Platten commit-ted? Their only crime is that they are sincere adherents ofZimmerwald, sincere Zimmerwaldists, and not careerists. 
Their only crime is that they are opposed to postponing the congress. 
 And if scandal-mongers say that only the Zimmer-wald Left, acting as a separate faction, is opposed to the postponement of the congress, “opposed to His Majesty Grimm” in general, has not January 7, 1917 proved thatthis is nothing but idle gossip? Have not you, ComradeNaine, spoken in opposition to Grimm, although you havenever, either directly or indirectly, formally or informally,adhered to the Zimmerwald Left? Causing a split! That is the truly threadbare accusa-tion the social-patriots in all countries are making in orderto cover up the fact that they are ejecting the Liebknechts and the Höglunds from the party. 
 Written December 26-27, 1916 (January 8-9, 1917 ) First published in the magazine Published according to Proletarskaya Revolutsia the manuscript No. 
 4 (27), 1924 *“He is not a party secretary, he is a party traitor. 
”— Ed. 
 TO THE WORKERS WHO SUPPORT THE STRUGGLE AGAINST THE WAR AND AGAINST THE SOCIALISTS WHO HAVE SIDED WITH THEIR GOVERNMENTS The international situation is becoming increasingly clear and increasingly menacing. 
 Both belligerent coalitions have latterly revealed the imperialist nature of the war in a very striking way. 
 The more assiduously the capitalist gov-ernments and the bourgeois and socialist pacifists spreadtheir empty, lying pacifist phrases—the talk of a democraticpeace, a peace without annexations, etc. 
—the sooner arethey exposed. 
 Germany is crushing several small nations under her iron heel with the very evident determination not to give up her booty except by exchanging part of it forenormous colonial possessions, and she is using hypocriticalpacifist phrases as a cover for her readiness to concludean immediate imperialist peace. 
 England and her allies are clinging just as tightly to the colonies seized from Germany, part of Turkey, etc. 
, claim-ing that in endlessly continuing the slaughter for possessionof Constantinople, strangulation of Galicia, partition ofAustria, the ruin of Germany, they are fighting for a “just”peace. 
 The truth, of which only a few were theoretically con-vinced at the beginning of the war, is now becoming palpably evident to an increasing number of class-conscious workers,namely, that a serious struggle against the war, a struggleto abolish war and establish lasting peace, is out of thequestion unless there is a mass revolutionary struggle led bythe proletariat against the government in every country, unless bourgeois rule is overthrown, unless a socialist revolu-tion is brought about. 
 And the war itself, which is imposingan unprecedented strain upon the peoples, is bringing man-kind to this, the only way out of the impasse, is compelling it to take giant strides towards state capitalism, and is demon-strating in a practical manner how planned social economy can and should be conducted, not in the interests of thecapitalists, but by expropriating them, under the leadershipof the revolutionary proletariat, in the interests of themasses who are now perishing from starvation and the othercalamities caused by the war. 
 The more obvious this truth becomes, the wider becomes the gulf separating the two irreconcilable tendencies, poli-cies, trends of socialist activity, which we indicated atZimmerwald, where we acted as a separate Left wing, and ina manifesto to all socialist parties and to all class-consciousworkers issued on behalf of the Left wing immediately after the conference. 
 This is the gulf that lies between the attempts to conceal the obvious bankruptcy of officialsocialism and its representatives’ desertion to the bourgeoi-sie and their governments, as well as the attempts to recon-cile the masses with this complete betrayal of socialism, onthe one hand, and, on the other, the efforts to expose this bankruptcy in all its magnitude, to expose the bourgeois policy of the “social-patriots”, who have deserted the prole-tariat for the bourgeoisie, to destroy their influence overthe masses and to create the possibility and the organisa-tional basis for a genuine struggle against the war. 
 The Zimmerwald Right wing, which was in the majority at the conference, fought the idea of breaking with the social-patriots and founding the Third International tooth andnail. 
 Since then the split has become a definite fact in Eng-land; and in Germany the last conference of the “opposition”,on January 7, 1917, revealed to all who do not wilfullyshut their eyes to the facts, that in that country too there are two irreconcilably hostile labour parties, working in opposite directions. 
 One is a socialist party, working forthe most part underground, and with Karl Liebknecht oneof its leaders. 
 The other is a thoroughly bourgeois, social-patriot party, which is trying to reconcile the workers tothe war and to the government. 
 The same division is to be observed in every country of the world. 
 At the Kienthal Conference the Zimmerwald Right wing did not have so large a majority as to be able to continue its own policy. 
 It voted for the resolution against the social-patriot International Socialist Bureau, a resolution which condemned the latter in the sharpest terms, and for the resolution against social-pacifism, which warned the workersagainst lying pacifist phrases, regardless of socialist trim-mings. 
 Socialist pacifism, which refrains from explaining tothe workers the illusory nature of hopes for peace without overthrowing the bourgeoisie and organising socialism, is merely an echo of bourgeois pacifism, which instils in the workers faith in the bourgeoisie, presents the imperialistgovernments and the deals they make with each other in agood light and distracts the masses from the maturingsocialist revolution, which events have put on the orderof the day. 
 But what transpired? After the Kienthal Conference, the Zimmerwald Right, in a number of important countries, inFrance, Germany and Italy, slid wholly and entirely intothe very social-pacifism Kienthal had condemned and reject-ed! In Italy, the Socialist Party has tacitly accepted thepacifist phrases of its parliamentary group and its prin-cipal speaker, Turati, though, precisely now, when abso-lutely the same phrases are being used by Germany and theEntente and by representatives of the bourgeois governmentsof a number of neutral countries, where the bourgeoisie hasaccumulated and continues to accumulate enormous warprofits—precisely now their utter falsehood has been exposed. 
 In fact, pacifist phrases have proved to be a cover for the new turn in the fight for division of imperialist spoils! In Germany, Kautsky, the leader of the Zimmerwald Right, issued a similar meaningless and non-committal paci-fist manifesto, which merely instils in the workers hope inthe bourgeoisie and faith in illusions. 
 Genuine socialists, the genuine internationalists in Germany, the Internationale group and the International Socialists of Germany, who areapplying Karl Liebknecht’s tactics in practice, were obligedformally to dissociate themselves from this manifesto. 
 In France, Merrheim and Bourderon, who took part in the Zimmerwald Conference, and Raffin-Dugens, who took part in the Kienthal Conference, have voted for meaningless and, objectively, thoroughly false pacifist resolutions, which, inthe present state of affairs, are so much to the advantage of the imperialist bourgeoisie that even Jouhaux and Renaudel, denounced as betrayers of socialism in all the Zimmerwald and Kienthal declarations, voted for them! That Merrheim voted with Jouhaux and Bourderon and Raffin-Dugens with Renaudel is no accident, no isolatedepisode. 
 It is a striking symbol of the imminent merger everywhere of the social-patriots and social-pacifists against the international socialists. 
 The pacifist phrases in the notes of a long list of impe-rialist governments, the same pacifist phrases uttered byKautsky, Turati, Bourderon and Merrheim—Renaudelextending a friendly hand to the one and the other—all thisexposes pacifism in actual politics as a means of placating the people, as a means of helping the governments to condi-tion the masses to continuation of the imperialist slaughter! This complete bankruptcy of the Zimmerwald Right has been still more strikingly revealed in Switzerland, the onlyEuropean country where the Zimmerwaldists could meetfreely, and which served as their base. 
 The Socialist Party ofSwitzerland, which has held its congresses during the war without interference from the government and is in a better position than any other party to promote internationalsolidarity between the German, French and Italian workersagainst the war, has officially affiliated to Zimmerwald. 
 And yet, on a decisive question affecting a proletarian party, one of this party’s leaders, the chairman of the Zim-merwald and Kienthal conferences, a prominent member and representative of the Berne International Socialist Commit-tee, National Councillor R. 
 Grimm, deserted to the social-patriots of his country . 
 At the meeting of the Parteivor-stand * of the Socialist Party of Switzerland on January 7, 1917, he secured the adoption of a decision to postpone indefinitely the party congress, which was to be convened for the express purpose of deciding the fatherland defenceissue and the party’s attitude towards the Kienthal Con-ference decisions condemning social-pacifism. 
 In a manifesto signed by the International Socialist Com-mittee and dated December 1916, Grimm describes as hypo-*Executive. 
— Ed. 
 critical the pacifist phrases of the governments, but says not a word about the socialist pacifism that unites Merr-heim and Jouhaux, Raffin-Dugens and Renaudel. 
 In this manifesto Grimm urges the socialist minorities to fightthe governments and their social-patriot hirelings, but atthe same time, jointly with the “social-patriot hirelings”in the Swiss party, he endeavours to bury the party congress, thus rousing the just indignation of all the class-conscious and sincerely internationalist Swiss workers. 
 No excuses can conceal the fact that the Parteivorstand decision of January 7, 1917 signifies the complete victoryof the Swiss social-patriots over the Swiss socialist workers, the victory of the Swiss opponents of Zimmerwald over Zimmerwald. 
 The Grütlianer , that organ of the consistent and avowed servants of the bourgeoisie in the labour movement, saidwhat everyone knows is true when it declared that social-patriots of the Greulich and Pflüger type, to whom shouldbe added Seidel, Huber, Lang, Schneeberger, Dürr, etc. 
,want to prevent the congress from being held, want to pre-vent the workers from deciding the fatherland defence issue, and threaten to resign if the congress is held and a decision in the spirit of Zimmerwald is adopted. 
 Grimm resorted to an outrageous and intolerable false-hood at the Parteivorstand and in his newspaper, theBerner Tagwacht , of January 8, 1917, when he claimed that the congress had to he postponed because the workers were not ready, that it was necessary to campaign against thehigh cost of living, that the “Left” were themselves in favourof postponement, etc. 
 102 In reality, it was the Left, i. 
e. 
, the sincere Zimmerwald-ists, who, anxious to choose the lesser of two evils and also to expose the real intentions of the social-patriots and their new friend, Grimm, proposed postponing the congress untilMarch , voted to postpone it until May , and suggested that the meetings of the cantonal committees he held beforeJuly ; but all these proposals were voted down by the “fa-therland defenders”, led by the chairman of the Zimmerwald and Kienthal conferences, Robert Grimm!! In reality, the question was: shall the Berne Interna-tional Socialist Committee and Grimm’s paper be allowed to hurl abuse at foreign social-patriots and, at first by their silence and then by Grimm’s desertion, shield the Swiss social-patriots; or shall an honest internationalist policy be pursued, a policy of fighting primarily the social-patriots at home ? In reality, the question was: shall the domination of the social-patriots and reformists in the Swiss party be con-cealed by revolutionary phrases; or shall we oppose to thema revolutionary programme and tactics on the question of combating the high cost of living, as well as of combating the war, of putting on the order of the day the fight forthe socialist revolution? In reality, the question was: shall the worst traditions of the ignominiously bankrupt Second International becontinued in Zimmerwald; shall the workers be kept igno-rant of the things the party leaders do and say at the Partei-vorstand; shall-revolutionary phrases be allowed to cover upthe vileness of social-patriotism and reformism, or shallwe be internationalists in deeds ? In reality, the question was: shall we in Switzerland too, where the party is of primary importance for the whole of the Zimmerwald group, insist upon a clear, principled and politically honest division between the social-patriots andthe internationalists, between the bourgeois reformists andthe revolutionaries; between the counsellors of the proletar-iat, who are helping it carry out the socialist revolution,and the bourgeois agents or “hirelings”, who want to divert the workers from revolution by means of reforms or promises of reforms: between the Grütlians and the Socialist Party—or shall we confuse and corrupt the minds of the workers by conducting in the Socialist Party the “Grütlian” policy ofthe Grütlians, i. 
e. 
, the social-patriots in the ranks of theSocialist Party? Let the Swiss social-patriots, those “Grütlians” who want to operate their Grütlian policy, i. 
e. 
, the policy oftheir national bourgeoisie, abuse the foreigners, let themdefend the “inviolability” of the Swiss party from criticismby other parties, let them champion the old bourgeois-reform-ist policy, i. 
e. 
, the very policy that brought on the collapse of the German and other parties on August 4, 1914—we, who adhere to Zimmerwald in deeds and not merely in words,interpret internationalism differently. 
 We are not prepared passively to regard the efforts, now definitely revealed, and sanctified by the chairman of the Zimmerwald and Kienthal conferences, to leave everything unchanged in decaying European socialism and, by means ofhypocritical professions of solidarity with Karl Liebknecht,to bypass the real slogan of this leader of the international workers, his appeal to work for the “regeneration” of the oldparties from “top to bottom”. 
 We are convinced that on our side are all the class-conscious workers in all countries, who enthusiastically greeted Karl Liebknecht and histactics. 
 We openly expose the Zimmerwald Right, which has deserted to bourgeois-reformist pacifism. 
 We openly expose Grimm’s betrayal of Zimmerwald and demand convocation of a conference to remove him from his post on the International Socialist Committee. 
 The word Zimmerwald is the slogan of international socialism and revolutionary struggle. 
 This word must notserve to shield social-patriotism and bourgeois reformism. 
 Stand for true internationalism, which calls for the struggle, first of all , against the social-patriots in your own country! Stand for true revolutionary tactics, which areimpossible if there is a compromise with the social-patriotsagainst the revolutionary socialist workers! Written at the close of December (old style) 1916 First published in the magazine Published according to Proletarskaya Revolutsia the manuscript No. 
 5 (28), 1924 LECTUR E ON THE 1905 REVOLUTIO N103 My young friends and comrades, Today is the twelfth anniversary of “Bloody Sunday”, which is rightly regarded as the beginning of the Russian revolution. 
 Thousands of workers—not Social-Democrats, but loyal God-fearing subjects—led by the priest Gapon, streamed from all parts of the capital to its centre, to the square in frontof the Winter Palace, to submit a petition to the tsar. 
 Theworkers carried icons. 
 In a letter to the tsar, their then leader, Gapon, had guaranteed his personal safety and asked him to appear before the people. 
 Troops were called out. 
 Uhlans and Cossacks attacked the crowd with drawn swords. 
 They fired on the unarmedworkers, who on their bended knees implored the Cossacksto allow them to go to the tsar. 
 Over one thousand were killed and over two thousand wounded on that day, according to police reports. 
 The indignation of the workers was inde-scribable. 
 Such is the general picture of January 22, 1905—”Bloody Sunday”. 
 That you may understand more clearly the historic sig-nificance of this event, I shall quote a few passages from theworkers’ petition. 
 It begins with the following words: “We workers, inhabitants of St. 
 Petersburg, have come to Thee. 
 We are unfortunate, reviled slaves, weighed down bydespotism and tyranny. 
 Our patience exhausted, we ceasedwork and begged our masters to give us only that without which life is a torment. 
 But this was refused; to the employ-ers everything seemed unlawful. 
 We are here, many thou-sands of us. 
 Like the whole of the Russian people, we have no human rights whatever. 
 Owing to the deeds of Thy officials we have become slaves. 
” The petition contains the following demands: amnesty, civil liberties, fair wages, gradual transfer of the land tothe people, convocation of a constituent assembly on thebasis of universal and equal suffrage. 
 It ends with the follow-ing words: “Sire, do not refuse aid to Thy people! Demolish the wall that separates Thee from Thy people. 
 Order and promise that our requests will be granted, and Thou wilt make Rus-sia happy; if not, we are ready to die on this very spot. 
We have only two roads: freedom and happiness, or thegrave. 
” Reading it now , this petition of uneducated, illiterate workers, led by a patriarchal priest, creates a strange impression. 
 Involuntarily one compares this naïve petitionwith the present peace resolutions of the social-pacifists,the would-be socialists who in reality are bourgeois phrase-mongers. 
 The unenlightened workers of pre-revolutionaryRussia did not know that the tsar was the head of the rul-ing class , the class, namely, of big landowners, already bound by a thousand ties with the big bourgeoisie and prepared todefend their monopoly, privileges and profits by every meansof violence. 
 The social-pacifists of today, who pretend to be“highly educated” people—no joking—do not realise that it isjust as foolish to expect a “democratic” peace from bour-geois governments that are waging an imperialist predatory war, as it was to believe that peaceful petitions wouldinduce the bloody tsar to grant democratic reforms. 
 Nevertheless, there is a great difference between the two—the present-day social-pacifists are, to a large extent,hypocrites, who strive by gentle admonitions to divert the people from the revolutionary struggle, whereas the uned-ucated workers in pre-revolutionary Russia proved bytheir deeds that they were straightforward people awakenedto political consciousness for the first time. 
 It is in this awakening of tremendous masses of the peo-ple to political consciousness and revolutionary struggle that the historic significance of January 22, 1905 lies. 
 “There is not yet a revolutionary people in Russia,” wrote Mr. 
 Pyotr Struve, then leader of the Russian liberals and publisher abroad of an illegal, uncensored organ, two days before “Bloody Sunday”. 
 The idea that an illiterate peasant country could produce a revolutionary people seemed utterly absurd to this “highly educated”, superciliousand extremely stupid leader of the bourgeois reformists. 
So deep was the conviction of the reformists of those days—as of the reformists of today—that a real revolution wasimpossible! Prior to January 22 (or January 9, old style), 1905, the revolutionary party of Russia consisted of a small group ofpeople, and the reformists of those days (exactly like thereformists of today) derisively called us a “sect”. 
 Severalhundred revolutionary organisers, several thousand membersof local organisations, half a dozen revolutionary papers appearing not more frequently than once a month, pub-lished mainly abroad and smuggled into Russia with incred-ible difficulty and at the cost of many sacrifices—such werethe revolutionary parties in Russia, and the revolutionarySocial-Democracy in particular, prior to January 22, 1905. 
This circumstance gave the narrow-minded and overbearing reformists formal justification for their claim that there was not yet a revolutionary people in Russia. 
 Within a few months, however, the picture changed com-pletely. 
 The hundreds of revolutionary Social-Democrats“suddenly” grew into thousands; the thousands became theleaders of between two and three million proletarians. 
 The proletarian struggle produced widespread ferment, often revolutionary movements among the peasant masses, fiftyto a hundred million strong; the peasant movement had itsreverberations in the army and led to soldiers’ revolts, toarmed clashes between one section of the army and another. 
In this manner a colossal country, with a population of 130,000,000, went into the revolution; in this way, dormant Russia was transformed into a Russia of a revolutionaryproletariat and a revolutionary people. 
 It is necessary to study this transformation, understand why it was possible, its methods and ways, so to speak. 
 The principal factor in this transformation was the mass strike . 
 The peculiarity of the Russian revolution is that it was a bourgeois-democratic revolution in its social content, but a proletarian revolution in its methods of struggle. 
 It was a bourgeois-democratic revolution since its immediate aim, which it could achieve directly and with its own forces, was a democratic republic, the eight-hour day and con-fiscation of the immense estates of the nobility—all themeasures the French bourgeois revolution in 1792-93 hadalmost completely achieved. 
 At the same time, the Russian revolution was also a pro-letarian revolution, not only in the sense that the proletar-iat was the leading force, the vanguard of the movement, but also in the sense that a specifically proletarian weaponof struggle—the strike—was the principal means of bringingthe masses into motion and the most characteristic phe-nomenon in the wave-like rise of decisive events. 
 The Russian revolution was the first , though certainly not the last, great revolution in history in which the mass political strike played an extraordinarily important part. 
It may even be said that the events of the Russian revolutionand the sequence of its political forms cannot be understoodwithout a study of the strike statistics to disclose the basis of these events and this sequence of forms. 
 I know perfectly well that dry statistics are hardly suit-able in a lecture and are likely to bore the hearer. 
 Neverthe-less, I cannot refrain from quoting a few figures, in orderthat you may be able to appreciate the real objective basisof the whole movement. 
 The average annual number ofstrikers in Russia during the ten years preceding the revolu-tion was 43,000, which means 430,000 for the decade. 
 In January 1905, the first month of the revolution, the num-ber of strikers was 440,000. 
 In other words, there were more strikers in one month than in the whole of the preceding decade! In no capitalist country in the world, not even in the most advanced countries like England, the United States of America, or Germany, has there been anything to match thetremendous Russian strike movement of 1905. 
 The totalnumber of strikers was 2,800,000, more than two times thenumber of factory workers in the country! This, of course,does not prove that the urban factory workers of Russia were more educated, or stronger, or more adapted to the struggle than their brothers in Western Europe. 
 The veryopposite is true. 
 But it does show how great the dormant energy of the proletariat can be. 
 It shows that in a revolutionary epoch— I say this without the slightest exaggeration, on the basis of the most accurate data of Russian history—the proletariatcan generate fighting energy a hundred times greater than in ordinary, peaceful times. 
 It shows that up to 1905 mankinddid not yet know what a great, what a tremendous exertion ofeffort the proletariat is, and will be, capable of in a fight for really great aims, and one waged in a really revolu-tionary manner! The history of the Russian revolution shows that it was the vanguard, the finest elements of the wage-workers, thatfought with the greatest tenacity and the greatest devotion. 
The larger the mills and factories involved, the more stub-born were the strikes, and the more often did they recur dur-ing the year. 
 The bigger the city, the more important wasthe part the proletariat played in the struggle. 
 Three bigcities, St. 
 Petersburg, Riga and Warsaw, which have thelargest and most class-conscious working-class element,show an immeasurably greater number of strikers, in rela-tion to all workers, than any other city, and, of course, much greater than the rural districts. 
 * In Russia—as probably in other capitalist countries— the metalworkers represent the vanguard of the proletariat. 
In this connection we note the following instructive fact:taking all industries, the number of persons involved in strikes in 1905 was 160 per hundred workers employed, but in the metal industry the number was 320 per hundred! It is estimated that in consequence of the 1905 strikes everyRussian factory worker lost an average of ten rubles in wages—approximately 26 francs at the pre-war rate of exchange—sacrificing this money, as it were, for the sake of the struggle. 
 But if we take the metalworkers, we find that the loss in wages was three times as great ! The finest elements of the working class marched in the forefront, giving leadershipto the hesitant, rousing the dormant and encouraging theweak. 
 A distinctive feature was the manner in which economic strikes were interwoven with political strikes during the *In the manuscript this paragraph is crossed out. 
— Ed. 
 revolution. 
 There can be no doubt that only this very close link-up of the two forms of strike gave the movement its great power. 
 The broad masses of the exploited could not have been drawn into the revolutionary movement had theynot been given daily examples of how the wage-workers inthe various industries were forcing the capitalists to grantimmediate, direct improvements in their conditions. 
 Thisstruggle imbued the masses of the Russian people with a new spirit. 
 Only then did the old serf-ridden, sluggish, pat-riarchal, pious and obedient Russia cast out the old Adam;only then did the Russian people obtain a really democraticand really revolutionary education. 
 When the bourgeois gentry and their uncritical echoers, the social-reformists, talk priggishly about the “education” of the masses, they usually mean something schoolmasterly, pedantic, something that demoralises the masses and instilsin them bourgeois prejudices. 
 The real education of the masses can never be separated from their independent political, and especially revolution-ary, struggle. 
 Only struggle educates the exploited class. 
 Only struggle discloses to it the magnitude of its own power, widens its horizon, enhances its abilities, clarifies its mind,forges its will. 
 That is why even reactionaries had to admitthat the year 1905, the year of struggle, the “mad year”,definitely buried patriarchal Russia. 
 Let us examine more closely the relation, in the 1905 strike struggles, between the metalworkers and the textile workers. 
 The metalworkers are the best paid, the mostclass-conscious and best educated proletarians. 
 The textileworkers, who in 1905 were two and a half times morenumerous than the metalworkers, are the most backward andthe worst paid body of workers in Russia, and in very many cases have not yet definitely severed connections with their peasant kinsmen in the village. 
 This brings us to a veryimportant circumstance. 
 Throughout the whole of 1905, the metalworkers’ strikes show a preponderance of political over economic strikes,though this preponderance was far greater toward the end of the year than at the beginning. 
 Among the textile workers, on the other hand, we observe an overwhelming preponder-ance of economic strikes at the beginning of 1905, and it is only at the end of the year that we get a preponderance of political strikes. 
 From this it follows quite obviously that the economic struggle, the struggle for immediate and direct improvement of conditions, is alone capable of rousing themost backward strata of the exploited masses, gives them areal education and transforms them—during a revolution-ary period—into an army of political fighters within thespace of a few months. 
 Of course, for this to happen, it was necessary for the vanguard of the workers not to regard the class struggle as astruggle in the interests of a thin upper stratum—aconception the reformists all too often try to instil—but forthe proletariat to come forward as the real vanguard of themajority of the exploited and draw that majority into the struggle, as was the case in Russia in 1905, and as must be, and certainly will be, the case in the impending proletarianrevolution in Europe. 
 * The beginning of 1905 brought the first great wave of strikes that swept the entire country. 
 As early as the springof that year we see the rise of the first big, not only eco-nomic, but also political peasant movement in Russia. 
 The importance of this historical turning-point will be appreciat-ed if it is borne in mind that the Russian peasantry was liber-ated from the severest form of serfdom only in 1861, thatthe majority of the peasants are illiterate, that they live inindescribable poverty, oppressed by the landlords, delu-ded by the priests and isolated from each other by vast distances and an almost complete absence of roads. 
 Russia witnessed the first revolutionary movement against tsarism in 1825, a movement represented almost exclusive-ly by noblemen. 
 Thereafter and up to 1881, when Alexan-der II was assassinated by the terrorists, the movement was led by middle-class intellectuals. 
 They displayed supreme self-sacrifice and astonished the whole world by the heroismof their terrorist methods of struggle. 
 Their sacrifices werecertainly not in vain. 
 They doubtlessly contributed—directly or indirectly—to the subsequent revolutionaryeducation of the Russian people. 
 But they did not, and could *In the manuscript the four preceding paragraphs are crossed out. 
— Ed. 
 not, achieve their immediate aim of generating a people’s revolution. 
 That was achieved only by the revolutionary struggle of the proletariat. 
 Only the waves of mass strikes that sweptover the whole country, strikes connected with the severelessons of the imperialist Russo-Japanese War, roused thebroad masses of peasants from their lethargy. 
 The word“striker” acquired an entirely new meaning among the peas-ants: it signified a rebel, a revolutionary, a term previously expressed by the word “student”. 
 But the “student” belongedto the middle class, to the “learned”, to the “gentry”,and was therefore alien to the people. 
 The “striker”, on theother hand, was of the people; he belonged to the exploitedclass. 
 Deported from St. 
 Petersburg, he often returned to the village where he told his fellow villagers of the conflagra-tion which was spreading to all the cities and would destroyboth the capitalists and the nobility. 
 A new type appearedin the Russian village—the class-conscious young peas-ant. 
 He associated with “strikers”, he read newspapers, hetold the peasants about events in the cities, explained to his fellow-villagers the meaning of political demands, and urged them to fight the landowning nobility, the priestsand the government officials. 
 The peasants would gather in groups to discuss their con-ditions, and gradually they were drawn into the struggle. 
Large crowds attacked the big estates, set fire to the manor-houses and appropriated supplies, seized grain and other foodstuffs, killed policemen and demanded trans-fer to the people of the huge estates. 
 In the spring of 1905, the peasant movement was only just beginning, involving only a minority, approximately one-seventh, of the uyezds. 
 But the combination of the proletarian mass strikes in the cities with the peasant movement in the rural areas wassufficient to shake the “firmest” and last prop of tsarism. 
I refer to the army . 
 There began a series of mutinies in the navy and the army. 
 During the revolution, every fresh wave of strikes and of the peasant movement was accompanied by mutinies in all parts of Russia. 
 The most well-known of these is themutiny on the Black Sea cruiser Prince Potemkin , which was seized by the mutineers and took part in the revolution in Odessa. 
 After the defeat of the revolution and unsuccessful attempts to seize other ports (Feodosia in the Crimea, for instance), it surrendered to the Rumanian authorities inConstantsa. 
 Permit me to relate in detail one small episode of the Black Sea mutiny in order to give you a concrete picture ofevents at the peak of the movement. 
 “Gatherings of revolutionary workers and sailors were being organ-ised more and more frequently. 
 Since servicemen were not allowed toattend workers’ meetings, large crowds of workers came to militarymeetings. 
 They came in thousands. 
 The idea of joint action found alively response. 
 Delegates were elected from the companies wherepolitical understanding among the men was higher. 
 “The military authorities thereupon decided to take action. 
 Some of the officers tried to deliver ‘patriotic’ speeches at the meetings butfailed dismally: the sailors, who were accustomed to debating, put theirofficers to shameful flight. 
 In view of this, it was decided to prohibitmeetings altogether. 
 On the morning of November 24, 1905, a companyof sailors, In full combat kit, was posted at the gates of the naval bar-racks. 
 Rear-Admiral Pisarevsky gave the order in a loud voice: ‘No one is to leave the barracks! Shoot anyone who disobeys!’ A sailor namedPetrov, of the company that had been given that order, stepped forthfrom the ranks, loaded his rifle in the view of all, and with one shot kil-led Captain Stein of the Belostok Regiment, and with another woundedRear-Admiral Pisarevsky. 
 ‘Arrest him!’ one of the officers shouted. 
 No one budged. 
 Petrov threw down his rifle, exclaiming: ‘Why don’t you move? Take me!’ He was arrested. 
 The sailors, who rushed from everyside, angrily demanded his release, declaring that they vouched forhim. 
 Excitement ran high. 
 “‘Petrov, the shot was an accident, wasn’t it?’ asked one of the officers, trying to find a way out of the situation. 
 “‘What do you mean, an accident? I stepped forward, loaded and took aim. 
 Is that an accident?’ “‘They demand your release.... 
’“And Petrov was released. 
 The sailors, however, were not content with that; all officers on duty were arrested, disarmed, and locked up atheadquarters .... 
 Sailor d elegates, about forty in number, conferred the whole night. 
 The decision was to release the officers, but not to permit them to enter the barracks again. 
” This small incident clearly shows you how events devel-oped in most of the mutinies. 
 The revolutionary ferment among the people could not but spread to the armed forces. 
 It is indicative that the leaders of the movement camefrom those elements in the army and the navy who had been recruited mainly from among the industrial workers and of whom more technical training was required, for instance, the sappers. 
 The broad masses, however, were still too naïve, their mood was too passive, too good-natured, too Christian. 
 They flared up rather quickly; any instanceof injustice, excessively harsh treatment by the officers,bad food, etc. 
, could lead to revolt. 
 But what they lackedwas persistence, a clear perception of aim, a clearunderstanding that only the most vigorous continuation of the armed struggle, only a victory over all the military andcivil authorities, only the overthrow of the government and the seizure of power throughout the country could guarantee the success of the revolution. 
 The broad masses of sailors and soldiers were easily roused to revolt. 
 But with equal light-heartedness they foolish-ly released arrested officers. 
 They allowed the officers to pacify them by promises and persuasion: in this way the officers gained precious time, brought in reinforcements, broke the strength of the rebels, and then followed the most brutal suppression of the movement and the execution of its leaders. 
 A comparison of these 1905 mutinies with the Decembrist uprising of 1825 is particularly interesting. 
 In 1825 the lead-ers of the political movement were almost exclusively offi-cers, and officers drawn from the nobility. 
 They had become infected, through contact, with the democratic ideas of Europe during the Napoleonic wars. 
 The mass of the soldiers, who at that time were still serfs, remained passive. 
 The history of 1905 presents a totally different picture. 
 With few exceptions, the mood of the officers was either bourgeois-liberal, reformist, or frankly counter-revolution-ary. 
 The workers and peasants in military uniform were the soul of the mutinies. 
 The movement spread to all sections of the people, and for the first time in Russia’s history involved the majority of the exploited. 
 But what it lacked was, on the one hand, persistence and determination among the masses—they were too much afflicted with the malady oftrustfulness—and, on the other, organisation of revolution-ary Social-Democratic workers in military uniform—they lacked the ability to take the leadership into their own hands, march at the head of the revolutionary army and launch anoffensive against the government. 
 I might remark, incidentally, that these two shortcomings will—more slowly, perhaps, than we would like, but surely— be eliminated not only by the general development of capitalism, but also by the present war... * At any rate, the history of the Russian revolution, like the history of the Paris Commune of 1871, teaches us the incontrovertible lesson that militarism can never and under no circumstances be defeated and destroyed, except by a victo-rious struggle of one section of the national army against the other section. 
 It is not sufficient simply to denounce, revile and “repudiate” militarism, to criticise and prove that it is harmful; it is foolish peacefully to refuse to perform military service. 
 The task is to keep the revolutionary con-sciousness of the proletariat tense and train its best elements, not only in a general way, but concretely, so that when popular ferment reaches the highest pitch, they will put themselves at the head of the revolutionary army. 
 The day-to-day experience of any capitalist country teaches us the same lesson. 
 Every “minor” crisis that such a country experiences discloses to us in miniature the elements, the rudiments, of the battles that will inevitablytake place on a large scale during a big crisis. 
 What else, for instance, is a strike if not a minor crisis of capitalist society? Was not the Prussian Minister for Internal Affairs, Herr von Puttkammer, right when he coined the famous phrase: “In every strike there lurks the hydra of revolution”? Does not the calling out of troops during strikes in all, even the most peaceful, the most “democratic”—save the mark— capitalist countries show how things will shape out in a really big crisis? But to return to the history of the Russian revolution. 
 I have tried to show you how the workers’ strikes stirred up the whole country and the broadest, most backward strata of the exploited, how the peasant movement began, and how it was accompanied by mutiny in the armed forces. 
 The movement reached its zenith in the autumn of 1905. 
 On August 19 (6), the tsar issued a manifesto on the intro-duction of popular representation. 
 The so-called Bulygin *In the manuscript the three preceding paragraphs are crossed out. 
— Ed. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR Duma was to be created on the basis of a suffrage embracing a ridiculously small number of voters, and this peculiar “parliament” was to have no legislative powers whatever, only advisory , consultative powers! The bourgeoisie, the liberals, the opportunists were ready to grasp with both hands this “gift” of the frightened tsar. 
 Like all reformists, our reformists of 1905 could not understand that historic situations arise when reforms, and particularly promises of reforms, pursue only one aim: to allay the unrest of the people, force the revolutionary class to cease, or at least slacken, its struggle. 
 The Russian revolutionary Social-Democracy was well aware of the real nature of this grant of an illusory con-stitution in August 1905. 
 That is why, without a moment’s hesitation, it issued the slogans: “Down with the advisory Duma! Boycott the Duma! Down with the tsarist govern-ment! Continue the revolutionary struggle to overthrow it! Not the tsar, but a provisional revolutionary government must convene Russia’s first real, popular representative assembly!” History proved that the revolutionary Social-Democrats were right, for the Bulygin Duma was never convened. 
 It was swept away by the revolutionary storm before it could be convened. 
 And this storm forced the tsar to promulgate a new electoral law, which provided for a considerable increase in the number of voters, and to recognise the legislative character of the Duma. 
 * October and December 1905 marked the highest point in the rising tide of the Russian revolution. 
 All the well-springs of the people’s revolutionary strength flowed in a wider stream than ever before. 
 The number of strikers— which in January 1905, as I have already told you, was 440,000—reached over half a million in October 1905 (in a single month!). 
 To this number, which applies only to factory workers, must be added several hundred thousand railway workers, postal and telegraph employees, etc. 
 The general railway strike stopped all rail traffic and paralysed the power of the government in the most effective *In the manuscript the four preceding paragraphs are crossed out. 
— Ed. 
 manner. 
 The doors of the universities were flung wide open, and the lecture halls, which in peace time were used solely to befuddle youthful minds with pedantic professorial wisdom and to turn the students into docile servants of thebourgeoisie and tsarism, now became the scene of publicmeetings at which thousands of workers, artisans and officeworkers openly and freely discussed political issues. 
 Freedom of the press was won. 
 The censorship was simply ignored. 
 No publisher dared send the obligatory censor copy to the authorities, and the authorities did not dare takeany measure against this. 
 For the first time in Russianhistory, revolutionary newspapers appeared freely in St. 
Petersburg and other towns. 
 In St. 
 Petersburg alone, threeSocial-Democratic daily papers were published, with cir-culations ranging from 50,000 to 100,000. 
 The proletariat marched at the head of the movement. 
 It set out to win the eight-hour day by revolutionary action. 
“An Eight-Hour Day and Arms !” was the fighting slogan of the St. 
 Petersburg proletariat. 
 That the fate of therevolution could, and would, be decided only by armed strug-gle was becoming obvious to an ever-increasing mass of workers. 
 In the fire of battle, a peculiar mass organisation was formed, the famous Soviets of Workers ’ Deputies , compris-ing delegates from all factories. 
 In several cities these Soviets of Workers ’ Deputies began more and more to play the part of a provisional revolutionary government, the part of organs and leaders of the uprising. 
 Attempts weremade to organise Soviets of Soldiers’ and Sailors’ Deputiesand to combine them with the Soviets of Workers’Deputies. 
 For a time several cities in Russia became something in the nature of small local “republics”. 
 The government author-ities were deposed and the Soviet of Workers’ Deputiesactually functioned as the new government. 
 Unfortunately,these periods were all too brief, the “victories” were tooweak, too isolated. 
 The peasant movement in the autumn of 1905 reached still greater dimensions. 
 Over one-third of all the uyezds were affected by the so-called “peasant disorders” and regu-lar peasant uprisings. 
 The peasants burned down no less than two thousand estates and distributed among themselves the food stocks of which the predatory nobility had robbed the people. 
 Unfortunately, this work was not thorough enough! Unfortunately, the peasants destroyed only one-fifteenth ofthe total number of landed estates, only one-fifteenth part ofwhat they should have destroyed in order to wipe the shame of large feudal landownership from the face of the Russian earth. 
 Unfortunately, the peasants were too scattered, too isolated from each other in their actions; they were notorganised enough, not aggressive enough, and therein liesone of the fundamental reasons for the defeat of the revolu-tion. 
 A movement for national liberation flared up among the oppressed peoples of Russia. 
 Over one-half , almost three-fifths (to be exact , 57 per cent ) of the population of Russia is subject to national oppression; they are not even freeto use their native language, they are forcibly Russified. 
The Moslems, for instance, who number tens of millions,were quick to organise a Moslem League—this was a time of rapid growth of all manner of organisations. 
 The following instance will give the audience, particu-larly the youth, an example of how at that time the move-ment for national liberation in Russia rose in conjunctionwith the labour movement. 
 In December 1905, Polish children in hundreds of schools burned all Russian books, pictures and portraits of the tsar, and attacked and drove out the Russian teachers andtheir Russian schoolfellows, shouting: “Get out! Go back toRussia!” The Polish secondary school pupils put forward,among others, the following demands: (1) all secondaryschools must be under the control of a Soviet of Workers’ Deputies; (2) joint pupils’ and workers’ meetings to be held in school premises; (3) secondary school pupils to be allowedto wear red blouses as a token of adherence to the futureproletarian republic. 
 The higher the tide of the movement rose, the more vigor-ously and decisively did the reaction arm itself to fight the revolution. 
 The Russian Revolution of 1905 confirmed the truth of what Karl Kautsky wrote in 1902 in his book Social Revolution (he was still, incidentally, a revolutionary Marxist and not, as at present, a champion of social-patriotism and opportunism). 
 This is what he wrote: “...The impending revolution ... will be less like a spon-taneous uprising against the government and more likea protracted civil war . 
” That is how it was, and undoubtedly that is how it will be in the coming European revolution! Tsarism vented its hatred particularly upon the Jews. 
 On the one hand, the Jews furnished a particularly high percentage (compared with the total Jewish population)of leaders of the revolutionary movement. 
 And now, too,it should be noted to the credit of the Jews, they furnish arelatively high percentage of internationalists, comparedwith other nations. 
 On the other hand, tsarism adroitly exploited the basest anti-Jewish prejudices of the most ignorant strata of the population in order to organise, if notto lead directly, pogroms —over 4,000 were killed and more than 10,000 mutilated in 100 towns. 
 These atrocious mas-sacres of peaceful Jews, their wives and children rouseddisgust throughout the civilised world. 
 I have in mind, of course, the disgust of the truly democratic elements of the civilised world, and these are exclusively the socialist workers, the proletarians. 
 Even in the freest, even in the republican countries of Western Europe, the bourgeoisie manages very well tocombine its hypocritical phrases about “Russian atrocities” with the most shameless financial transactions, particularly with financial support of tsarism and imperialist exploitationof Russia through export of capital, etc. 
 The climax of the 1905 Revolution came in the December uprising in Moscow. 
 For nine days a small number of rebels,of organised and armed workers—there were not more than eight thousand —fought against the tsar’s government, which dared not trust the Moscow garrison. 
 In fact, it had to keepit locked up, and was able to quell the rebellion only bybringing in the Semenovsky Regiment from St. 
 Petersburg. 
 The bourgeoisie likes to describe the Moscow uprising as something artificial, and to treat it with ridicule. 
 For instance, in German so-called “scientific” literature, Herr Professor Max Weber, in his lengthy survey of Russia’spolitical development, refers to the Moscow uprising as a “putsch”. 
 “The Lenin group,” says this “highly learned” Herr Professor, “and a section of the Socialist-Revolution-aries had long prepared for this senseless uprising. 
” To properly assess this piece of professorial wisdom of the cowardly bourgeoisie, one need only recall the strikestatistics. 
 In January 1905, only 123,000 were involved inpurely political strikes, in October the figure was 330,000,and in December the maximum was reached —370,000 taking part in purely political strikes in a single month! Let us recall, too, the progress of the revolution, the peasant andsoldier uprisings, and we shall see that the bourgeois “scien-tific” view of the December uprising is not only absurd. 
It is a subterfuge resorted to by the representatives of thecowardly bourgeoisie, which sees in the proletariat its most dangerous class enemy. 
 In reality, the inexorable trend of the Russian revolu-tion was towards an armed, decisive battle between thetsarist government and the vanguard of the class-consciousproletariat. 
 I have already pointed out, in my previous remarks, wherein lay the weakness of the Russian revolution that led to its temporary defeat. 
 The suppression of the December uprising marked the beginning of the ebb of the revolution. 
 But in this period,too, extremely interesting moments are to be observed. 
Suffice it to recall that twice the foremost militant ele-ments of the working class tried to check the retreat of the revolution and to prepare a new offensive. 
 But my time has nearly expired, and I do not want to abuse the patience of my audience. 
 I think, however, thatI have outlined the most important aspects of the revolu-tion—its class character, its driving forces and its methods of struggle—as fully as so big a subject can be dealt with in a brief lecture. 
 * A few brief remarks concerning the world significance of the Russian revolution. 
 Geographically, economically and historically, Russia belongs not only to Europe, but also to Asia. 
 That is why the Russian revolution succeeded not only in finally *In the manuscript this sentence is crossed out. 
— Ed. 
 awakening Europe’s biggest and most backward country and in creating a revolutionary people led by a revolutionary proletariat. 
 It achieved more than that. 
 The Russian revolution engendered a movement throughout the whole of Asia. 
 Therevolutions in Turkey, Persia and China prove that themighty uprising of 1905 left a deep imprint, and that itsinfluence, expressed in the forward movement of hundreds and hundreds of millions, is ineradicable. 
 In an indirect way, the Russian revolution influenced also the countries of the West. 
 One must not forget that newsof the tsar’s constitutional manifesto, on reaching Vienna onOctober 30, 1905, played a decisive part in the final victoryof universal suffrage in Austria. 
 A telegram bearing the news was placed on the speaker’s rostrum at the Congress of the Austrian Social-DemocraticParty just as Comrade Ellenbogen—at that time he was notyet a social-patriot, but a comrade—was delivering hisreport on the political strike. 
 The discussion was immedi-ately adjourned. 
 “Our place is in the streets!”—was the cry that resounded through the hall where the delegates of the Austrian Social-Democracy were assembled. 
 And the fol-lowing days witnessed the biggest street demonstrations inVienna and barricades in Prague. 
 The battle for universalsuffrage in Austria was won. 
 We very often meet West-Europeans who talk of the Rus-sian revolution as if events, the course and methods of struggle in that backward country have very little resemb-lance to West-European patterns, and, therefore, can hardlyhave any practical significance. 
 Nothing could he more erroneous. 
The forms and occasions for the impending battles in the coming European revolution will doubtlessly differ in many respects from the forms of the Russian revolution. 
 Nevertheless, the Russian revolution—precisely because of its proletarian character, in that particular sense ofwhich I have spoken—is the prologue to the coming Euro-pean revolution. 
 Undoubtedly, this coming revolution can only be a proletarian revolution, and in an even more profound sense of the word: a proletarian, socialist revolu-tion also in its content. 
 This coming revolution will show to an even greater degree, on the one hand, that only stern battles, only civil wars, can free humanity from the yoke of capital, and, on the other hand, that only class-conscious proletarians can and will give leadership to the vast majorityof the exploited. 
 We must not be deceived by the present grave-like still-ness in Europe. 
 Europe is pregnant with revolution. 
 Themonstrous horrors of the imperialist war, the suffering caused by the high cost of living everywhere engender a revo-lutionary mood; and the ruling classes, the bourgeoisie,and its servitors, the governments, are more and moremoving into a blind alley from which they can never extri-cate themselves without tremendous upheavals. 
 Just as in Russia in 1905, a popular uprising against the tsarist government began under the leadership of the proletariat with the aim of achieving a democratic republic,so, in Europe, the coming years, precisely because of thispredatory war, will lead to popular uprisings under the lead-ership of the proletariat against the power of finance capi-tal, against the big banks, against the capitalists; and these upheavals cannot end otherwise than with the expro-priation of the bourgeoisie, with the victory of socialism. 
 We of the older generation may not live to see the decisive battles of this coming revolution. 
 But I can, Ibelieve, express the confident hope that the youth which isworking so splendidly in the socialist movement of Swit-zerland, and of the whole world, will be fortunate enough not only to fight, but also to win, in the coming proletarianrevolution. 
 Written in German before January 9 (2), 1917 First published in Pravda Published according to No. 
 18, January 22, 1925 the manuscript Signed: N. 
 Lenin Translated from the German TWELV E BRIE F THESES ON H. 
 GREULICH’S DEFENC E OF FATHERLAN D DEFENC E104 1. 
 Greulich begins his first article with the statement that there are now “socialists” (he probably means pseudo-socialists) who “trust Junker and bourgeois governments”. 
 That accusation of one trend in present-day socialism, namely, social-patriotism, is, of course, correct. 
 But what do all Comrade Greulich’s four articles show if not that he,too, blindly “trusts” the Swiss “bourgeois government”?? He even overlooks the fact that the Swiss “bourgeois govern-ment”, because of the numerous ties of Swiss banking capital, is not merely a “bourgeois government”, but animperialist bourgeois government. 
 2. 
 In his first article, Greulich admits the existence of two main trends in the international Social-Democraticmovement. 
 He defines one ( social-patriotism , of course) absolutely correctly by branding its supporters “as agents”of bourgeois governments. 
 But Greulich is strangely oblivious to the facts, first, that the Swiss social-patriots, too, are agents of the Swissbourgeois government; second, that just as Switzerland ingeneral cannot break out of the network of world-market ties, present-day, highly developed and immensely rich bour-geois Switzerland cannot break out of the network of world-imperialist relationships; third, that it would be well worthwhile examining the arguments for and against defence ofthe fatherland as presented throughout the internationalSocial-Democratic movement, particularly in context with these world-imperialist, finance-capital relationships; fourth, that there is no reconciling these two main trends in theinternational Social-Democratic movement, and, consequent-ly, the Swiss party must choose which trend it wants to fol-low. 
 3. 
 In the second article Greulich says: “Switzerland cannot wage an offensive war. 
” Greulich strangely overlooks the irrefutable and obvious fact that in both possible eventualities—namely, if Swit-zerland joins Germany against England, or England againstGermany—in either case Switzerland will be participating in an imperialist war, in a predatory war, in an offensive war. 
 Bourgeois Switzerland can under no circumstances either alter the nature of the present war or, in general, wage ananti-imperialist war. 
 Is it permissible for Greulich to depart from the “realm of facts” (see his fourth article) and discuss some hypo-thetical war instead of discussing the present one? 4. 
 Greulich states in his second article: “For Switzerland, neutrality and defence of the father-land are identical. 
 Whoever rejects defence of the fatherlandendangers neutrality. 
 One must appreciate that. 
” Two modest questions to Comrade Greulich. 
 First, shouldn’t one appreciate the fact that faith in proclamations of neutrality and intentions to maintain itin the present war is tantamount not only to blind faith inone’s own “bourgeois government” and other “bourgeois gov-ernments”, but is simply absurd? Second, shouldn’t one appreciate that in reality the posi-tion is as follows? Whoever in this war accepts defence of the fatherland becomes an accomplice of his “ own ” national bourgeoisie, which, in Switzerland, too, is a thoroughly imperialistbourgeoisie, since it is financially tied to the Great Powersand is involved in imperialist world politics. 
 Whoever in this war rejects defence of the fatherland destroys the proletariat’s faith in the bourgeoisie andhelps the international proletariat wage its struggle against the bourgeoisie’s domination. 
 5. 
 At the close of his second article Greulich says: “Abolishing the Swiss militia would not yet mean elimi-nating war between the Great Powers. 
” Why does Comrade Greulich overlook the fact that the Social-Democrats conceive abolition of every army (and, consequently, militia) as taking place only after a victo-rious social revolution? That precisely now it is necessary to fight for social revolution in alliance with the internation-alist revolutionary minorities in all the Great Powers? From whom does Greulich expect elimination of “war between the Great Powers”? From the militia of a smallbourgeois state with a four million population? We Social-Democrats expect elimination of “war between the Great Powers” to result from the revolutionary actions of the proletariat of all the powers, great and small . 
 6. 
 In the third article Greulich contends that the Swiss workers must “defend” “democracy”!! Is Comrade Greulich really unaware that in this war not a single European state is defending, nor can defend, democracy? On the contrary, for all states, big and small, participation in this imperialist war means strangling democracy, the triumph of reaction over democracy. 
 Eng-land, Germany, France, etc. 
, offer a thousand examples. 
Can it really be that Greulich is unaware of them? Or doesComrade Greulich so implicitly trust the Swiss, i. 
e. 
, his own, “bourgeois government”, that he regards all Swiss bank directors and millionaires as veritable WilliamTells? Revolutionary struggle against all bourgeois govern-ments—that, and that alone, and not participation in theimperialist war, or in national mobilisation allegedly to defend the country’s neutrality, can lead to socialism, and without socialism there is no guarantee of democracy. 
 7. 
 Comrade Greulich writes in the third article: “Does Switzerland expect the proletariat to ‘fight against itself in imperialist battles’?” That question shows that Comrade Greulich has his feet securely planted on national soil, but, unfortunately, in the present war there is no such soil for Switzerland. 
 It is not Switzerland that “expects” this of the prole-tariat, but capitalism, which in Switzerland, as in allcivilised countries, has become imperialist capitalism. 
 Today, the ruling bourgeoisie “expects” the proletariat of all countries to “fight against itself in imperialist battles”. 
 That is what Greulich overlooks. 
 And today there is nomeans of protecting ourselves against that eventuality save international revolutionary class struggle against the bour-geoisie! Why does Greulich forget that, way back in 1912, the Basle Manifesto of the International directly stated, first,that the basic character of the future war is determined byimperialist capitalism, and, second, spoke of proletarian revolution precisely in connection with this war? 8. 
 In the third article Greulich writes: Revolutionary mass struggle “instead of utilising demo-cratic rights” is a “very vague concept”. 
 This proves that Greulich accepts only the bourgeois-reformist path and rejects or ignores revolution . 
 That befits a Grütlian, but it certainly does not befit a Social-Democrat. 
 Revolution without “revolutionary mass struggle” is im-possible. 
 There have never been such revolutions. 
 In the imperialist era that has now begun, revolutions are inevi-table in Europe too. 
 9. 
 In the fourth article Comrade Greulich frankly says he will “naturally” resign from the National Council if theparty rejects defence of the fatherland in principle , adding that such a rejection would imply “violation of our unity”. 
 That is not open to misinterpretation: it is a clear ulti-matum to the party on the part of the social-patriot Nation-al Council members. 
 Either the party accepts these social-patriot views, or “we” (Greulich, Müller, etc. 
) will resign. 
 But, frankly, what kind of “unity” can we speak of? Only, of course, of “unity” of the social-patriot leaderswith their seats on the National Council?! Principled proletarian unity implies something quite different: the social-patriots, i. 
e. 
, the defenders of the“fatherland”, should “unite” with the social-patriot, thor-oughly bourgeois Grütli-Verein. 
 The Social-Democrats, who reject fatherland defence, should “unite” with the socialistproletariat. 
 That is perfectly obvious. 
 We firmly hope that Comrade Greulich will not wish to disgrace himself by trying to disprove (despite the experi-ence of England, Germany, Sweden, etc. 
) that “unity” of the social-patriots, those “agents” of bourgeois governments, with the socialist proletariat can lead only to sheer disor-ganisation, demoralisation, hypocrisy and lies. 
 10. 
 The “pledge” of National Council members to defend the country’s independence is “incompatible”, in Greulich’s view, with refusal to defend the country. 
 Very well! But what revolutionary activity is “compat-ible” with “pledges” to uphold the laws of capitalist states??The Grütlians, i. 
e. 
, servants of the bourgeoisie, recogniseonly legal methods as a matter of principle. 
 So far, not asingle Social-Democrat has rejected revolution, or accepted only such revolutions as were “compatible” with “pledges” to uphold bourgeois laws. 
 11. 
 Greulich denies that Switzerland is a “bourgeois class state” “in the absolute meaning of the term”. 
 Hedefines socialism (at the end of his fourth article) in a waythat wholly precludes both social revolution and all revolu-tionary action. 
 Social revolution is “utopian”—that is the short meaning of all Greulich’s long speeches and articles. 
 Very well! But that is the most blatant Grütlianism, not socialism. 
 It is bourgeois reformism, not socialism. 
 Why does not Comrade Greulich openly propose that the words about “proletarian revolution” be deleted from the 1912 Basle Manifesto? Or the words about “revolutionary mass action” from the 1915 Aarau resolution? Or that allthe Zimmerwald and Kienthal resolutions be burned? 12. 
 Comrade Greulich has both feet planted on national soil—on bourgeois-reformist, Grütli soil. 
 He obstinately ignores the imperialist character of the present war and the imperialist ties of the present-day Swiss bourgeoisie. 
 He ignores the fact that the socialistsof the whole world are split into social-patriots and revo-lutionary internationalists. 
 He forgets that, in reality, only two paths are open to the Swiss proletariat: First path. 
 Help its own national bourgeoisie to arm, support mobilisation for the alleged purpose of defendingneutrality, and face the daily menace of being inveigledinto the imperialist war. 
 In the event of “victory” in thiswar—be reduced to semi-starvation, record the loss of100,000 killed, put more billions of war profits into the pockets of the Swiss bourgeoisie, assure it more profitable investments abroad, and fall into more financial dependenceon its imperialist “allies”—the Great Powers. 
 Second path. 
 In close alliance with the internationalist revolutionary minority in all the Great Powers, wage a resolute struggle against all “bourgeois governments”, and primarily against its own “bourgeois government”, placing no “trust” whatever in its own bourgeois government, or inits talk of defending neutrality, and politely invite thesocial-patriots to move over to the Grütli-Verein. 
 In the event of victory—be for ever rid of high costs of living, hunger and war and, together with the French, German and other workers, stage the socialist revolution. 
 Both paths are difficult, both entail sacrifices. 
The Swiss proletariat must choose—does it want to make these sacrifices for the sake of the Swiss imperialist bour-geoisie and one of the Great-Power coalitions, or to deliver humanity from capitalism, hunger and war. 
 The proletariat must choose. 
 Written (in German) between January 13 and 17 (26 and 30), 1917 Published in Volksrecht Nos. 
 Published according to 26 and 27, January 31 the manuscript and February 1, 1917 Translated from the German Signed: —e— First published in Russian in 1931 in Lenin Miscellany XVII DEFENCE OF NEUTRALITY Acceptance of the proposition that the present war is imperialist, i. 
e. 
, a war between two big freebooters forworld domination and plunder, does not yet prove that weshould reject defence of the Swiss fatherland. 
 We, Swiss,are defending our neutrality; we have stationed troops on our boundaries for the express purpose of avoiding partici-pation in this robber war! This is the argument of the social-patriots, the Grütli-ans, both within the Socialist Party and outside it. 
 It is based on the following tacitly accepted or dexterous-ly manipulated promises. 
 Uncritical repetition of what the bourgeoisie says, and what it has to say, to maintain its class domination. 
 Complete trust in the bourgeoisie and complete distrust of the proletariat. 
 Disregard of the real, rather than imaginary, interna-tional situation resulting from the imperialist pattern of European relationships and the imperialist “tie-up” of the Swiss capitalist class. 
 Did not the Rumanian and Bulgarian bourgeoisie give the most solemn assurances, over a period of many months,that their military preparations were dictated “solely” by theneed to safeguard their neutrality? Is there any serious, scientific basis for drawing a fundamen-tal distinction, on this issue, between the bourgeoisie of the afore-mentioned countries and that of Switzerland? Certainly not. 
 The Rumanian and Bulgarian bourgeoisie, we are told, are notoriously obsessed by a lust for conquest and annexation, and this does not apply to the Swiss bour-geoisie. 
 But that cannot be considered a fundamental dis-tinction. 
 Imperialist interests are manifested, as everyone knows, not only in territorial, but also in financial acqui-sitions. 
 It should be borne in mind that the Swiss bourgeoi-sie exports capital, no less than 3,000 million francs a year, i. 
e. 
, imperialistically exploits backward nations. 
 That is a fact, and another fact is that Swiss banking capital isintimately associated and intertwined with the bankingcapital of the Great Powers, that the Swiss Fremdenindust-rie, * etc. 
, represent a permanent division of imperialist wealth between the Great Powers and Switzerland. 
 More-over, Switzerland has reached a much higher level of capital-ist development than Rumania and Bulgaria. 
 There can beno question whatever of a popular “national” movement inSwitzerland: that period in its historical developmentended many centuries ago. 
 This cannot be said of either ofthe Balkan states referred to above. 
 It therefore befits the bourgeois to try to instil in the people, in the exploited, faith in the bourgeoisie of his owncountry and use plausible phrases to conceal the realities of its imperialist policies. 
 Something quite different, however, is expected of the socialist, namely: merciless exposure that leaves no room for illusions about the real policies of his “own” bourgeoisie. 
 And continuation of these real policies by the Swiss bour-geoisie, such as selling the nation to one of the imperialist coalitions of states, is much more probable and much more“natural” (i. 
e. 
, more in conformity with the nature ofthis bourgeoisie) than defence of democracy in the true sense of the word, which would be contrary to its profit interests. 
 “To each his own”: let the Grütlians, as servants and agents of the bourgeoisie, deceive the people with phrases about“defending neutrality”. 
 Socialists, on the other hand, as fighters against the bourgeoisie, must open the people’s eyes to the very real danger, proved by the whole history of Swiss bourgeois politics, of being sold by their “own” bourgeoisie! Written (in German) in January 1917 First published in 1931 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany XVII the manuscript Translated from the German *Industries catering to foreigners. 
— Ed. 
 A TURN IN WORLD POLITICS There is something of a holiday atmosphere in the paci-fist camp. 
 The virtuous bourgeois of the neutral countriesare rejoicing: “We’ve made our little pile out of war profitsand high prices; isn’t it time to stop? We can’t make more profits anyway, and the people’s patience may not last to the very end. 
” Why shouldn’t they rejoice when Wilson “himself” “pa-raphrases” the pacifist declaration of the Italian SocialistParty, which only just recently passed an official and solemnresolution in Kienthal to the effect that social-pacifism is utterly unsound? Is it surprising that in Avanti! Turati exults at Wilson’s having paraphrased their , Italian, “pseudo-socialist” pacifist phrases? Is it surprising that, in Le Populaire , 105 the French social-pacifists and Kautskyites lovingly “unite” with Turatiand Kautsky, who published in the German Social-Demo-cratic press five particularly foolish pacifist articles, which also, of course, “paraphrase” the talk events have broughtto the fore about a nice little democratic peace? And the present talk does differ from the previous talk in that there is some objective ground for it. 
 This ground was created by the turn in world politics from imperialist war , which brought the peoples utter misery and the greatest betrayal of socialism by Messrs. 
 Plekhanov, Albert Thomas,Legien, Scheidemann, etc. 
, towards an imperialist peace , which will bring the peoples the greatest deception in theform of pious phrases, semi-reforms, semi-concessions,etc. 
 This turn has taken place. 
 One cannot know at the present moment—even those who direct imperialist policy, the financial kings and the crowned robbers, are not in a position to determine this exactly—when this imperialist peace will come, what changes in the course of the war will precede it, what the details of that peace will be. 
 Nor is that important. 
 What is important is thefact that a turn towards peace has been made; the important thing is the fundamental character of that peace. 
 And these two circumstances have been made sufficiently clear by thepreceding development of events. 
 In the twenty-nine months of war, the extent of the re-sources of both imperialist coalitions has become sufficientlyevident. 
 All, or nearly all, possible allies of any importanceamong the nearest “neighbours” have been drawn into theslaughter; the strength of the armies and navies has beentested and re-tested, measured and re-measured. 
 Finance capital has made billions: the mountain of war debts shows the extent of the tribute the proletariat and the property-less masses “must” now pay for decades to the internationalbourgeoisie for having graciously permitted them to killoff millions of their fellow wage-slaves in a war for thedivision of imperialist booty. 
 It is probably impossible, in the present war, to skin the oxen of wage-labour any more than has been done al-ready—this is one of the profound economic reasons for theturn we now observe in world politics. 
 It is impossible,because all resources in general are becoming exhausted. 
The American multimillionaires and their younger brethren in Holland, Switzerland, Denmark and other neutral coun-tries are beginning to notice that the gold mine is giving out. 
That is behind the growth of neutral pacifism, and not noblehumanitarian sentiments, as the naïve, wretched and ridic-ulous Turati, Kautsky and Co. 
 think. 
 Added to this is the growing discontent and anger among the masses. 
 In our last issue we quoted the evidence of Guchkov and Helfferich, 106 showing that both dread revolu-tion. 
 Is it not about time to stop the first imperialistslaughter? The objective conditions compelling cessation of the war are thus supplemented by the influence of the class instinct and class interests of the profit-glutted bourgeoisie. 
 The political turn based on this economic turn follows two main lines: victorious Germany is driving a wedge between her main enemy, England, and England’s allies. 
 She is able to do this because it is these allies and not England who have sustained (and may yet sustain) the heaviest blows, and also because German imperialism, having amassed aconsiderable amount of loot, is in a position to make minorconcessions to England’s allies. 
 It is possible that a separate peace between Germany and Russia has been concluded after all. 
 Only the form of the political pact between those two freebooters may have been changed. 
 The tsar may have told Wilhelm: “If I openlysign a separate peace, then tomorrow, you, my august part-ner, may have to deal with a government of Milyukov andGuchkov, if not of Milyukov and Kerensky. 
 For the revo-lution is growing, and I cannot answer for the army, whose generals are in correspondence with Guchkov and whose officers are mainly yesterday’s high-school boys. 
 Is thereany point in my risking my throne and your losing a goodpartner?” “Of course not,” Wilhelm must have replied, if such a suggestion was put to him, directly or indirectly. 
 “Indeed, why should we conclude an open separate peace, or any written peace treaty? Can’t we achieve the same results byother, more subtle means? I will openly appeal to all human-ity, offering to bestow upon it the blessings of peace. 
 Atthe same time I will drop a quiet hint to the French, to letthem know that I am prepared to give back all, or nearly all of France and Belgium in return for a ‘fair’ share of their African colonies. 
 I will let the Italians know that theycan count on scraps of Austria’s Italian lands and, in addi-tion, on a few scraps in the Balkans. 
 And I can bring theseproposals and plans to the knowledge of the peoples: will theEnglish be able to retain their West-European allies after that? You and I will then divide Rumania, Galicia, Armenia. 
 As for Constantinople, my august brother, you stand asmuch chance of seeing it as of seeing your own ears! And Po-land too, my august brother—you stand as much chanceof seeing it as of seeing your own ears!” Whether or not such a conversation actually took place it is impossible to say. 
 Nor does it matter very much. 
 What does matter is that events have taken precisely this turn. 
 If the arguments of the German diplomats were unable to convince the tsar, the “ arguments ” of Mackensen’s army in Rumania must have been more convincing. 
 The plan to divide Rumania between Russia and the “Quadruple Alliance” (i. 
e. 
, Germany’s allies, Austria andBulgaria) is already being openly discussed in the German imperialist press! Loquacious Hervé is already blurtingout: It will be impossible to compel the people to fight anylonger if they learn that we can get back Belgium and France immediately . 
 The pacifist simpletons of the neutral bourgeoi-sie have already been put “into action”: Wilhelm has loos-ened their tongues! And the pacifist ... wiseacres among thesocialists, Turati in Italy, Kautsky in Germany, etc. 
, etc. 
,are exerting all their humanitarianism, their love of human-ity, their celestial virtue (and their high intellect) to em-bellish the coming imperialist peace! In general, how well things are arranged in this best of all possible worlds! We, the financial kings and crownedrobbers, got ourselves entangled in the politics of imperial-ist plunder; we had to fight. 
 Well, what of it? We are makingas good a thing out of war as we make out of peace; a much better thing, in fact! And we have lackeys in plenty, all the Plekhanovs, Albert Thomases, Legiens, Scheidemanns andCo. 
, to proclaim ours a “liberation” war! The time is comingto conclude an imperialist peace? Well, suppose it is? Thereare the war debts. 
 Aren’t they obligations guaranteeing oursacred right to exact a hundredfold tribute from the peoples? And aren’t there simpletons to glorify this imperialist peace, to fool the peoples by sentimental speeches? We have themin plenty—Turati, Kautsky and the other “leaders” of worldsocialism. 
 The tragicomedy of Turati’s and Kautsky’s utterances is precisely that they do not understand the real objective, political role they are playing, the role of parsons to console the people instead of rousing them to revolution, the role ofbourgeois advocates , who by means of flamboyant phrases about good things in general, and a democratic peace in par-ticular, obscure, cover up, embellish and cloak the hideousnakedness of an imperialist peace that trades in nations and carves up countries. 
 What unites the social-chauvinists (the Plekhanovs and Scheidemanns) and the social-pacifists (Turati and Kautsky) in principle is that objectively both are servants of imperi-alism. 
 The former serve it by glorifying the imperialist war, describing it as a war for “defence of the fatherland”; the latter serve the same imperialism by glorifying, with their talk of a democratic peace, the imperialist peace thatis maturing and being prepared. 
 The imperialist bourgeoisie needs lackeys of both spe-cies and varieties: the Plekhanovs, to encourage the conti-nuation of the slaughter by shouting “Down with the con-querors”; the Kautskys, to console and placate the embit-tered masses by sweet songs of peace. 
 Hence the general amalgamation of the social-chauvinists of all countries with the social-pacifists—the general “con-spiracy against socialism” referred to in the manifesto of the Berne International Socialist Committee, 107 the “gen-eral amnesty” to which we have more than once referred—will not be an accident, but an expression of the unity onprinciple of both these trends of world pseudo -“socialism”. 
 It is no accident that Plekhanov, while shouting franticallyabout the “treachery” of the Scheidemanns, hints at peace and unity with those gentry when the time is ripe for it. 
 The reader may argue, can we forget that an imperi-alist peace is “after all better” than imperialist war? that,if not the whole, then at least “parts” of the democratic peaceprogramme might possibly be achieved? that an independentPoland is better than a Russian Poland? that integration in Italy of Austrian-held Italian territory is a step forward? But these are exactly the arguments defenders of Turati and Kautsky use as a cover, failing to see that this trans-forms them from revolutionary Marxists into ordinary bour-geois reformists. 
 Can anyone in his right mind deny that Bismarck Germany and her social laws are “better” than pre-1848 Germany? that the Stolypin reforms 108 are “better” than pre-1905 Russia? Did the German Social-Democrats (they were stillSocial-Democrats at that time) vote for Bismarck’s reformson these grounds? Were Stolypin’s reforms extolled, or evensupported, by the Russian Social-Democrats, except, of course, for Messrs. 
 Potresov, Maslov and Co. 
, from whom even Martov, a member of their own party , now turns away with contempt? History does not stand still even in times of counter-revolution. 
 History has been advancing even during the imperialist slaughter of 1914-16, which is a continuation of the imperialist policies of preceding decades. 
 World capi-talism, which in the sixties and seventies of the last centurywas an advanced and progressive force of free competition,and which at the beginning of the twentieth century grewinto monopoly capitalism, i. 
e. 
, imperialism, took a big step forward during the war, not only towards greater concen-tration of finance capital, but also towards transformationinto state capitalism . 
 The force of national cohesion, the significance of national sympathies, were revealed in thiswar, for example, by the conduct of the Irish in one imperial-ist coalition, and of the Czechs in the other. 
 The intelli-gent leaders of imperialism say to themselves: Of course, we cannot achieve our aims without throttling the smallnations; but there are two ways of doing that. 
 Sometimesthe more reliable and profitable way is to obtain the ser-vices of sincere and conscientious advocates of “fatherlanddefence” in an imperialist war by creating politically inde-pendent states; “we”, of course, will see to it that they are financially dependent ! It is more profitable (when imperial-ist powers are engaged in a major war) to be an ally of anindependent Bulgaria than the master of a dependent Ire-land! To complete what has been left undone in the realmof national reforms may sometimes internally strengthen an imperialist coalition—this is properly taken into account by, for instance, one of the most servile lackeys of Germanimperialism, Karl Renner, who, of course, is a staunch sup-porter of “unity” in the Social-Democratic parties in general,and of unity with Scheidemann and Kautsky in particular. 
 The objective course of events is having its effect, and just as the executioners of the 1848 and 1905 revolutions were, in a certain sense, their executors, so the stage managers ofthe imperialist slaughter are compelled to carry out certain state-capitalist, certain national reforms. 
 Moreover, it isnecessary, by throwing out a few sops, to pacify the masses, angered by the war and the high cost of living: why not pro-mise (and partly carry out, for it does not commit one to anything!) “reduction of armaments”? After all, war is a“branch of industry” similar to forestry: it takes decades for trees of proper size—that is to say, for a sufficiently abundant supply of adult “cannon fodder”—to grow up. 
 Du-ring these decades, we hope, new Plekhanovs, new Scheide-manns, new sentimental conciliators like Kautsky willgrow up from the depths of “united” international Social-Democracy. 
 Bourgeois reformists and pacifists are people who, as a general rule, are paid , in one form or another, to strengthen the rule of capitalism by patching it up, to lull the massesand divert them from the revolutionary struggle. 
 When so-cialist “leaders” like Turati and Kautsky try to convincethe masses, either by direct statements (Turati “blurted”one out in his notorious speech of December 17, 1916 109), or by silent evasions (of which Kautsky is a past master), that the present imperialist war can result in a democraticpeace, while the bourgeois governments remain in power and without a revolutionary insurrection against the whole net-work of imperialist world relations, it is our duty to declarethat such propaganda is a deception of the people, thatit has nothing in common with socialism, that it amounts to the embellishment of an imperialist peace. 
 We are for a democratic peace; and that is precisely why we do not want to lie to the peoples as Turati and Kautsky do—of course with the best intentions, and for the mostvirtuous motives! We shall tell the truth , namely, that a democratic peace is impossible unless the revolutionary proletariat of England, France, Germany and Russia over-throws the bourgeois governments. 
 We think it would be theheight of absurdity for revolutionary Social-Democrats torefrain from fighting for reforms in general, including “con-stitutional reform”. 
 But at the present moment, Europe isgoing through a period in which it is more than ever neces-sary to bear in mind the truth that reforms are a by-product of the revolutionary class struggle ; for the task of the day— not because we want it, not because of anybody’s plans, but because of the objective course of events—is to solvethe great historical problems by means of direct mass vio-lence, which will create new foundations, and not by means of agreements on the basis of the old, decaying and moribund. 
 It is precisely at the present time, when the ruling bour-geoisie is preparing peacefully to disarm millions of prole-tarians and to transfer them safely—under cover of a plaus-ible ideology, and sprinkling them with the holy water of sentimental pacifist phrases!—from the filthy, stinking, fetid trenches, where they were engaged in slaughter, tothe penal servitude of the capitalist factories, where bytheir “honest toil” they must repay the hundreds of mil-lions of national debt, it is precisely at this time that theslogan, which our Party issued to the people in the autumn of 1914, * viz. 
, transform the imperialist war into a civil war for socialism, acquires still greater significance thanit had at the beginning of the war. 
 Karl Liebknecht, nowsentenced to hard labour, adopted that slogan when he saidfrom the Reichstag tribune: “Turn your weapons againstyour class enemies within the country!” The extent to which present-day society has matured for the transition to social-ism has been demonstrated by this war, in which the exer-tion of national effort called for the direction of theeconomic life of over fifty million people from a single centre. 
 If this is possible under the leadership of a handful ofJunker aristocrats in the interests of a handful of financial magnates, it is certainly no less possible under the leadership of class-conscious workers in the interests of nine-tenths ofthe population, exhausted by starvation and war. 
 But to lead the masses, the class-conscious workers must understand the utter corruption of such socialist leadersas Turati, Kautsky and Co. 
 These gentlemen imagine they are revolutionary Social-Democrats, and they are very indignant when they are told that their place is in the partyof Messrs. 
 Bissolati, Scheidemann, Legien and Co. 
 ButTurati and Kautsky wholly fail to realise that only a revo-lution of the masses can solve the great problems of the day. 
They have not a grain of faith in the revolution, they do not pay the slightest attention to, or display the slightest interest in, the way it is maturing in the minds and moodsof the masses precisely in connection with the war. 
 Theirattention is entirely absorbed in reforms, in pacts betweensections of the ruling classes; it is to them that they addressthemselves, it is them they seek to “persuade”, it is to them they wish to adapt the labour movement. 
 *See present edition, Vol. 
 21, pp. 
 25-34. 
— Ed. 
 But the whole thing now is to get the class-conscious van-guard of the proletariat to direct its thoughts to, and muster its forces for, a revolutionary struggle to overthrow their governments. 
 Revolutions such as Turati and Kautsky are“prepared” to accept, i. 
e. 
, revolutions for which the dateand the chances of success can be set in advance, never hap-pen. 
 The revolutionary situation in Europe is a fact. 
 Theextreme discontent, the unrest and anger of the masses are facts. 
 It is on strengthening this torrent that revolution-ary Social-Democrats must concentrate all their efforts. 
Upon the strength of the revolutionary movement, in theevent of its not being entirely successful, will depend whatportion of the “promised” reforms will be realised in practice,and what use they will be for the further struggle of the work-ing class. 
 Upon the strength of the revolutionary movement, in the event of its being entirely successful, will depend thevictory of socialism in Europe and the achievement not ofan imperialist armistice in Germany’s struggle againstRussia and England, or in Russia’s and Germany’s struggleagainst England, or the United States’ struggle against Ger-many and England, etc. 
, but of a really lasting and really democratic peace. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat Published according to No. 
 58, January 31, 1917 the Sotsial-Demokrat text STATISTIC S AND SOCIOLO GY110 FOREWORD Of the essays here presented for the reader’s attention, some are published for the first time, others appeared in various periodicals before the war. 
 They deal with a ques-tion which now, naturally, arouses especial interest—the sig-nificance and role of national movements, the relationshipbetween the national and the international. 
 The biggestdrawback, one most frequently encountered in all the arguments on this question, is lack of concreteness and historical perspective. 
 It has become customary to smugglein every manner of contraband under cover of generalphrases. 
 We believe, therefore, that a few statistics will proveanything but superfluous. 
 A comparison with the lessons ofthe war of what we said before the war is not, in our view. 
 unuseful. 
 Unity of theory and perspective gives the essays continuity. 
 January 1917 The Author HISTORICAL BACKGROUND TO NATIONAL MOVEMENTS Facts are stubborn things, runs the English saying. 
 It comes to mind, in particular, when a certain author waxes enthusiastic about the greatness of the “nationality prin-ciple” in its different implications and relationships. 
 What is more, in most cases the “principle” is applied just as aptly,and is just as much in place, as the exclamation “many happy returns of the day,” by a certain folk-tale character at the sight of a funeral. 
 Precise facts, indisputable facts—they are especially abhorrent to this type of author, but are especially neces-sary if we want to form a proper understanding of this com-plicated, difficult and often deliberately confused question. 
But how to gather the facts? How to establish their connec-tion and interdependence? The most widely used, and most fallacious, method in the realm of social phenomena is to tear out individual minor facts and juggle with examples. 
 Selecting chance examplespresents no difficulty at all, but is of no value, or of purelynegative value, for in each individual case everything hingeson the historically concrete situation. 
 Facts, if we take them in their entirety , in their interconnection , are not only stub-born things, but undoubtedly proof-bearing things. 
 Minorfacts, if taken out of their entirety, out of their interconnec-tion, if they are arbitrarily selected and torn out of context,are merely things for juggling, or even worse. 
 For instance,when an author who was once a serious author and wishes to be regarded as such now too takes the fact of the Mongo-lian yoke and presents it as an example that explainscertain events in twentieth-century Europe, can this beconsidered merely juggling, or would it not be more correctto consider it political chicanery? The Mongolian yoke is afact of history, and one doubtlessly connected with the nation-al question, just as in twentieth-century Europe we observe a number of facts likewise doubtlessly connected with thisquestion. 
 But you will find few people—of the type the Frenchdescribe as “national clowns”—who would venture, whileclaiming to be serious, to use this fact of the Mongolian yokeas an illustration of events in twentieth-century Europe. 
 The inference is clear: we must seek to build a reliable foundation of precise and indisputable facts that can be con-fronted to any of the “general” or “example-based” argumentsnow so grossly misused in certain countries. 
 And if it isto be a real foundation, we must take not individual facts,but the sum total of facts, without a single exception, relat-ing to the question under discussion. 
 Otherwise there will be the inevitable, and fully justified, suspicion that the factswere selected or compiled arbitrarily, that instead of his-torical phenomena being presented in objective interconnec-tion and interdependence and treated as a whole, we are presenting a “subjective” concoction to justify what might prove to be a dirty business. 
 This does happen ... and moreoften than one might think. 
 Proceeding from these considerations, we have decided to begin with statistics, fully aware of course that statis-tics are deeply antipathetic to certain readers, who prefer “flattering deception” to “base truths”, and to certain auth-ors, who are prone to smuggle in political contrabandunder cover of “general” disquisitions about internationalism,cosmopolitanism, nationalism, patriotism, etc. 
 C H A P T E R 1 A FEW STATISTICS I For a proper survey of the whole complex of data on nation-al movements, we must take the whole population of the earth. 
 And in so doing, two criteria must be established with the utmost accuracy and examined with the utmost fullness:first, national homogeneity or heterogeneity of the popula-tion of various states; second, division of states (or of state-like formations in cases where there is doubt that we arereally dealing with a state) into politically independent and politically dependent. 
 Let us take the very latest data, published in 1916, and rely on two sources: one German, the Geographical Statisti-cal Tables compiled by Otto Hübner, and one English, The Statesman ’s Year-Book . 
 The first source will have to serve as a basis, for it contains much more comprehensive data on the question that interests us; the second we shall use to check and in some, mostly minor, cases to correct the first. 
 We shall begin our survey with the politically indepen-dent and nationally most homogeneous states. 
 First andforemost among these is a group of West-European states, i. 
e. 
, situated to the west of Russia and Austria. 
 Here we have 17 states of which five, however, though very homogeneous in national composition, are Lilliputianin size and population. 
 These are Luxembourg, Monaco, San Marino, Liechtenstein and Andorra, with a combined popu-lation of only 310,000. 
 Doubtlessly, it would be much more correct not to include them among the states under examina-tion. 
 Of the remaining 12 states, seven are absolutely homo-geneous in national composition: in Italy, Holland, Portu-gal, Sweden, and Norway, 99 per cent of the population areof one and the same nationality; in Spain and Denmark theproportion is 96 per cent. 
 Then come three states with a nearly homogeneous national composition: France, England and Germany. 
 In France, the Italians make up only 1. 
3 percent, in areas annexed by Napoleon III by violating and fal-sifying the will of their people. 
 England’s annexed territory,Ireland, has a population of 4. 
4 million, which is less thanone-tenth of the total (46. 
8 million). 
 In Germany, out of a population of 64. 
9 million, the non-German element, which in practically all cases is just as nationally oppressedas the Irish in England, is represented by the Poles (5. 
47per cent), Danes (0. 
25 per cent) and the population of Alsace-Lorrain (1. 
87 million). 
 However, part of the latter (the exactproportion is not known) undoubtedly incline towards Ger-many, due not only to language, but also to economic inter-ests and sympathies. 
 All in all, about 5 million of Germany’spopulation belong to alien, unequal and even oppressednations. 
 Only two small states in Western Europe are of mixed national composition: Switzerland, whose population of somewhat less than four million consists of Germans (69 per cent), French (21 per cent) and Italians (8 per cent)—andBelgium (population less than 8 million; probably about 53per cent Flemings and about 47 per cent French). 
 It shouldbe observed, however, that in spite of the high nationalheterogeneity in these countries, there can be no question of national oppression. 
 In both countries all nationalities are equal under the constitution; in Switzerland this equal-ity is fully implemented in practice; in Belgium there isinequality in relation to the Flemish population, thoughthey make up the majority, but this inequality is insignif-icant compared, for instance, with what the Poles have to put up with in Germany, or the Irish in England, not to mention what has become customary in countries outsidethis group. 
 That is why, incidentally, the term “state of nationalities”, to which the Austrian authors Karl Renner and Otto Bauer, opportunists on the national question, have given such wide currency, is correct only in a very restrict-ed sense. 
 Namely, if, on the one hand, we remember the spe-cial historical place of the majority of the countries of thistype (which we shall discuss later) and, on the other, if wedo not allow this term to obscure the fundamental differencebetween genuine national equality and national oppression. 
 Taking all the countries we have discussed, we get a group of 12 West-European states with a total population of 242million. 
 Of these 242 million only about 9. 
5 million, i. 
e. 
,only 4 per cent, represent oppressed nations (in England andGermany). 
 If we add together those sections of the popula-tion in all these countries that do not belong to the princi-pal nationalities, we get about 15 million, i. 
e. 
, 6 per cent. 
 On the whole, consequently, this group of states is charac-terised by the following: they are the most advanced capi-talist countries, the most developed both economicallyand politically. 
 Their cultural level, too, is the highest. 
In national composition most of these countries are homoge-neous or nearly homogeneous. 
 National inequality, as a specific political phenomenon, plays a very insignificantpart. 
 What we have is the type of “national state” people sooften refer to, oblivious, in most cases, to the historicallyconditional and transitory character of this type in thegeneral capitalist development of mankind. 
 But that will be dealt with in its proper place. 
 It might be asked: Is this type of state confined to Western Europe? Obviously not. 
 All its basic characteristics—eco-nomic (high and particularly rapid capitalist development),political (representative government), cultural and nation-al—are to be observed also in the advanced states of Amer-ica and Asia: the United States and Japan. 
 The latter’s national composition took shape long ago and is absolutelyhomogeneous: Japanese make up more than 99 per cent ofthe population. 
 In the United States, the Negroes (and alsothe Mulattos and Indians) account for only 11. 
1 per cent. 
They should be classed as an oppressed nation, for the equal-ity won in the Civil War of 1861-65 and guaranteed by the Constitution of the republic was in many respects increas-ingly curtailed in the chief Negro areas (the South) in connection with the transition from the progressive, pre-monopoly capitalism of 1860-70 to the reactionary, monopoly capitalism (imperialism) of the new era, which in America was especially sharply etched out by the Spanish-Americanimperialist war of 1898 (i. 
e. 
, a war between two robbers overthe division of the booty). 
 The white population of the United States makes up 88. 
7 per cent of the total, and of this figure 74. 
3 per cent are Amer-icans and only 14. 
4 per cent foreign-born, i. 
e. 
, immigrants. 
 We know that the especially favourable conditions in Ameri-ca for the development of capitalism and the rapidity ofthis development have produced a situation in which vastnational differences are speedily and fundamentally, asnowhere else in the world, smoothed out to form a single “American” nation. 
 Adding the United States and Japan to the West-European countries enumerated above, we get 14 states with anaggregate population of 394 million, of which 26 million, i. 
e. 
,7 per cent, belong to unequal nationalities. 
 Though thiswill be dealt with later, I might observe that at the turn of the century, i. 
e. 
, in the period when capitalism was being transformed into imperialism, the majority of preciselythese 14 advanced states made especially great strides incolonial policy, with the result that they now “dispose” of apopulation of over 500 million in dependent and colonialcountries. 
 II The group of East-European states—Russia, Austria, Turkey (which geographically should now be consideredamong the Asian states, and economically a “semi-colony”),and the six small Balkan states—Rumania, Bulgaria, Greece, Serbia, Montenegro and Albania—clearly reveal a fun-damentally different picture. 
 Not a single nationally fully homogeneous state! Only the small Balkan countries can bedescribed as national states, though we should not forgetthat here, too, other nationalities comprise from 5 to 10 percent, that very great numbers (compared with the total num-ber of people belonging to the given nation) of Rumanians and Serbs live outside their “own” states, and that, in gener-al, the bourgeois-national development of Balkan statehood was not completed even by “yesterday’s” wars of 1911-12. 
 There is not a single national state like Spain, Sweden, etc. 
, among the small Balkan countries. 
 And in the big East-European states, in all three, the proportion of their“own”, principal nationality is only 43 per cent. 
 More thanhalf the population of each of these three big states, 57 percent, is made up of other nationalities (or, to use the officialRussian term, of “aliens”). 
 Statistically, the difference between the West-European and East-European groups of states can be expressed as follows: In the first group we have ten homogeneous or near homo-geneous national states with an aggregate population of231 million. 
 There are only two heterogeneous states, butwithout national oppression and with constitutional and factual equality; their population is 11. 
5 million. 
 In the second group 6 states, with a population of 23 million, are nearly homogeneous; three states, with a popu-lation of 249 million, are heterogeneous or “mixed” andwithout national equality. 
 On the whole, the proportion of the foreign-nationality population (i. 
e. 
, not belonging to the principal nation * o f the given state) is 6 per cent in Western Europe, and 7 percent if we add the United States and Japan. 
 In EasternEurope, on the other hand, the proportion is 53 per cent! ** First published in the magazine Published according to Bolshevik No. 
 2, 1935 the manuscript *The Great Russians in Russia, the Germans and Hungarians in Austria, the Turks in Turkey. 
 **The manuscript breaks off here. 
— Ed. 
 IMAGINAR Y OR REA L MARS H?111 In his article on the majority and minority ( Berner Tag-wacht and Neues Leben ) Comrade R. 
 Grimm maintains that “we too invented” “the marsh, an imaginary Centrist trend in the party”. 
 We shall prove that the stand taken by Grimm in this article is a typically Centrist one. 
 In his polemic with the majority, Grimm writes: “No party that subscribes to Zimmerwald and Kienthal has advocated refusal to serve in the army and simultaneous-ly obligated its members to put that slogan into effect. 
 Liebknecht himself donned military uniform and enteredthe army. 
 The Italian party has confined itself to rejectingwar credits and civil peace. 
 The French minority has donelikewise. 
” We rub our eyes in sheer astonishment. 
 We reread this important passage in Grimm’s article and advise the readerto ponder on it. 
 Incredible but true! To prove that we invented the Cen-trist trend, a representative of this very Centre, Grimm,lumps together the Left internationalists (Liebknecht) andthe Zimmerwald Right or Centre!!! Does Grimm really think that he can deceive the Swiss workers and convince them that Liebknecht and the Italianparty belong to one and the same trend? That they are notseparated by the very difference that distinguishes the Left from the Centre? Let us set out our arguments: First, let us hear a witness who does not belong either to the Centre or to the Left. 
 The German social-imperialistErnst Heilmann wrote in Die Glocke 112 of August 12, 1916, p. 
 772: ...“Die Arbeitsgemeinschaft, * or the Zimmerwald Right , of which Kautsky is the theoretician and Haase and Ledebour the political leaders .... 
” Can Grimm challenge the fact that Kautsky, Haase and Ledebour are typical men ofthe Centre? Second, can Grimm be unaware of the fact that in present-day socialism the Zimmerwald Right or Centre is opposed to an immediate break with the I. 
S. 
B. 
, the International Socialist Bureau in The Hague, the bureau of social-patriots ? That the Left favours such a break? That at Kienthal representatives of the Internationale group—the group to which Liebknecht belongs—fought against convocation ofthe I. 
S. 
B. 
 and insisted on a break with it? Third, has Grimm forgotten that social-pacifism, directly condemned by the Kienthal resolution, has now become the platform of the Centre in France, Germany and Italy?That the whole Italian party, which did not protest eitheragainst the numerous social-pacifist resolutions and state-ments of its parliamentary group, or against Turati’s dis-graceful December 17 speech, subscribes to social-pacifism? That both Left groups in Germany, the I. 
S. 
D. 
 (International Socialists of Germany) and the Internationale (or Spartacus group to which Liebknecht belongs), have forthrightly rejected the social-pacifism of the Centre? Nor should it be forgotten that the worst social-imperialists and social-pat-riots in France, led by Sembat, Renaudel and Jouhaux, like-wise voted for social-pacifist resolutions, thereby strikingly demonstrating and exposing the real, objective meaning ofsocial-pacifism. 
 Fourth ... but enough! Grimm is expounding precisely the Centrist-view when he advises the Swiss party to “satisfyitself” with rejection of credits and civil peace, as the Ital-ian party has done. 
 Grimm criticises the majority proposal precisely from the Centrist standpoint, because the majoritywants to move nearer to Liebknecht ’s standpoint. 
 Grimm calls for clarity, frankness and honesty. 
 Very well! But don’t these virtuous qualities call for a clear,frank and honest distinction between the views and tactics *Commonwealth of Labour. 
— Ed. 
 of Liebknecht and those of the Centre, which should not be lumped together? To side with Liebknecht implies: (1) attacking the main enemy in your own country; (2) exposing the social-patriotsof your own country and (with your permission, ComradeGrimm!) not merely of other countries; combating them, and not uniting with them—as you do—against the Left Radicals;(3) openly criticising and exposing the weaknesses not only of the social-patriots, but also of the social-pacifists and Centrists of your own country; (4) utilising the parliamentarytribune to summon the proletariat to revolutionary struggle,urging it to turn its weapons against its enemy; (5) circu-lating illegal literature and organising illegal meetings;6) organising proletarian demonstrations such as, for in-stance, the demonstration on Potsdam Square in Berlin at which Liebknecht was arrested; (7) calling on the workersin the war industries to strike, as the Internationale group has done through its illegal leaflets; (8) openly demonstrat-ing the need for complete “regeneration” of the present par-ties, which confine themselves to reformist activity; acting as Liebknecht acted; (9) unreservedly rejecting defence of the fatherland in an imperialist war; (10) fighting reform-ism and opportunism within the Social-Democratic movementall along the line; (11) just as relentlessly combating thetrade union leaders, who in all countries, particularlyGermany, England and Switzerland, are the vanguard of social-patriotism and opportunism, etc. 
 Clearly, from this point of view much in the majority draft is subject to criticism. 
 But that can be discussed onlyin a separate article. 
 Here it is necessary to emphasise thatthe majority at any rate proposes certain steps in this direc-tion, while Grimm attacks the majority not from the Left, but from the Right , not from Liebknecht’s positions, but from those of the Centre. 
 Throughout his article Grimm confuses two fundamentally different questions: first, the question of when , at what precise moment, should one or another revolutionary actionbe carried out. 
 Attempts to decide that question in advance are meaningless, and Grimm is only throwing dust in the workers’ eyes when he reproaches the majority onthis point. 
 Second question: how to refashion, transform a party now incapable of conducting a systematic, persistent and, under any concrete conditions, genuinely revolutionary struggle into a party capable of waging this struggle. 
 And that is the cardinal question. 
 Here we have the very root of the whole controversy, of the whole struggle of trends, both on the war issue and on defence of the father-land! But that is the very question Grimm tries to pass over in silence, gloss over, obscure. 
 More: Grimm’s explanations boil down to denying the very existence of this question. 
 Everything remains as of old —that idea runs through his whole article. 
 In this lies the most profound justification ofthe contention that the article speaks for the Centre . 
 Every-thing remains as of old: only rejection of war credits and civil peace! Every intelligent bourgeois is bound to admit that, in the final analysis, this is not unacceptable to the bour-geoisie too: this does not threaten its domination, does notprevent it from prosecuting the war (“we submit” as the “mi-nority of the country”—these words of Grimm’s have veryfar-reaching political implications, much more than would appear at first sight!). 
 And isn’t it an international fact that the bourgeoisie itself, and its governments in the warring countries, primarilyEngland and Germany, are persecuting only supporters of Liebknecht and are tolerating men of the Centre? Forward, to the Left, even if this means the resignation of certain social-patriot leaders! This, in a few words, is the political point and purpose of the majority proposals. 
 Retreat from Zimmerwald to the Right, to social-paci-fism, to positions of the Centre, to “peace” with the social-patriot leaders, no mass action, no revolutionising of themovement, no regeneration of the party! That is Grimm’s point of view. 
 It is to be hoped that, at long last, it will open the eyes of the Swiss Left Radicals to his Centrist position. 
 Written (in German) in late January 1917 First published in 1931 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany XVII the manuscript Translated from the German PROPOSE D AMENDMENTS TO THE RESOLUTIO N ON THE WAR ISSU E113 1. 
 Party parliamentary deputies shall be under obliga-tion to reject, stating their principled grounds, all war demands and credits and insist on demobilisation. 
 2. 
 No civil peace; intensification of principled struggle against all bourgeois parties, also against nationalist-Grütli ideas in the labour movement and the party. 
 3. 
 Systematic revolutionary propaganda in the army. 
 4. 
 Support of all revolutionary movements and of the struggle against the war and against one’s own governmentin every warring country. 
 5. 
 Assistance to every revolutionary mass action in Swit-zerland—strikes, demonstrations—and their developmentinto open armed struggle. 
 6. 
 The party shall proclaim the socialist transformation of Switzerland to be the aim of the revolutionary mass struggledecided upon at the 1915 Party Congress at Aarau. 
 Thisrevolution is the only, and really effective, way of liberatingthe working class from the horror of high prices and hunger,and is essential for the complete elimination of militarismand war. 
 Written between January 27 and 29 (February 9 and 11), 1917 First published in 1931 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany XVII a typewritten copy Translated from the German THE STORY OF ONE SHORT PERIOD IN THE LIFE OF ONE SOCIALIST PARTY Jan. 
 7, 1917. 
 Meeting of the Swiss Socialist Party Execu-tive. 
 Centrist leader R. 
 Grimm unites with social-patriot leaders to postpone indefinitely the party congress (originally appointed for Feb. 
 11, 1917 to discuss the war issue). 
 Nobs, Platten, Naine and others protest and vote against. 
Postponement rouses the greatest indignation among class-conscious workers. 
 Jan. 
 9, 1917. 
 Publication of majority and minority reso-lutions. 
 114 Clear statement against fatherland defence totally lacking in majority draft (Affolter and Schmid were against this), but §3 does contain this demand: “Partyparliamentary deputies shall be under obligation to reject,stating their principled grounds, all war demands andcredits. 
” That should be especially noted! Jan. 
 23, 1917. 
 The Zurich Volksrecht puts the case for a referendum 115. 
 Sharply, but quite correctly, it character-ises the postponement as a victory of Grütlianism over social-ism. 
 Leaders infuriated by referendum proposal. 
 Grimm in the Berner Tagwacht , Jacques Schmid (Olten) in the Neue Freie Zeitung ,116 F. 
 Schneider in the Basler Vorwärts ,117 and, besides these “Centrists”, social-patriot Huber in the St. 
 Gallen Volksstimme —all heap abuse and threats on the referendum initiators. 
 R. 
 Grimm stands at the head of this unholy crusade, mak-ing a special effort to intimidate the “youth organisation” and promising to come out against it at the next party congress. 
 Hundreds and hundreds of workers in German and French Switzerland eagerly sign referendum papers. 
 Naine wires Münzenberg that one cantonal secretariat will, in all proba-bility, support referendum. 
 Jan. 
 22, 1917. 
 The Berner Tagwacht and Volksrecht carry a statement by National Council member Gustav Müller . 
 He presents the party a veritable ultimatum, stating onbehalf of his group (he writes: “our group”) that he willresign from the National Council because he cannot accept “the principle of rejecting war credits”. 
 Jan. 
 26, 1917. 
 In his fourth Volksrecht article, Greulich presents the same ultimatum to the party, saying that hewill “naturally” resign if the party congress approves para-graph 3 of the majority resolution . 
 118 Jan. 
 27, 1917. 
 E. 
 Nobs says in an editorial comment (“On the Referendum”) that under no circumstances can he endorse the referendum motivation. 
119 Platten is silent. 
 Jan. 
 31, 1917. 
 The Secretariat decides to convene the party congress on June 2 and 3, 1917 (it will be remembered thatthe Secretariat had earlier decided to convene it on Feb. 
 11,1917, but the decision was repealed by the Party Executive!). 
 Feb. 
 1, 1917. 
 Part of the Zimmerwald Conference meets at Olten, attended by representatives of organisations invitedto the conference of Entente socialists (March 1917). 
 Radek, Zinoviev, Münzenberg, one member of the Interna-tionale (the Spartacus group in Germany, of which Karl Liebknecht was a member) publicly castigate R. 
 Grimm, stat-ing that his alliance with the social-patriots against the Swiss socialist workers makes him a “political corpse”. 
 Press is silent about this conference. 
Feb. 
 1, 1917. 
 Platten publishes his first article on the war issue. 
 120 Attention should be drawn to the following two of his statements. 
 First, Platten writes, literally: “Of course, the absence was felt in the commission of the cool-headed, courageousand consistent Zimmerwald champion who would have in-sisted on pigeon-holing the war issue till the end of the war. 
” No name was mentioned, but it should not be hard to guess against whom this blow was aimed. 
 Second, Platten makes this statement of principle: “The war issue is not only a battle of opinions around this question, but is indicative also of a definite trend in the further development of the party; it is a struggle against opportunism within the party, and an act of opposition to the reformists and in favour of revolutionary class struggle. 
” Feb. 
 3, 1917. 
 A private meeting of Centrists (Grimm, Schneider, Rimathe and others) attended also by Nobsand Platten. 
 Münzenberg and Dr. 
 Bronski are invited butdecline. 
 A decision is adopted to “amend” the majority resolu-tion in a way that materially worsens it and turns it into a “Centrist resolution”, especially because paragraph 3 is deleted and replaced by a deliberately indefinite and hazyexpression. 
 Feb. 
 6, 1917. 
 General meeting of Social-Democratic Party members in Zurich. 
 Main item: committee elections. 
 Poor attendance, especially on the part or workers. 
 Platten suggests postponing the meeting. 
 Social-patriots and Nobs object. 
 Proposal is defeated. 
 Elections are held. 
 When it turns out that Dr. 
 Bronski is elected, social-patriot Baumann announces on behalf of four committee members that he refuses to work with Dr. 
 Bronski. 
 Platten suggests accepting this ultimatum (submitting to it), proposing (absolutely undemocratically and unlawful-ly) that the elections be declared invalid. 
 That proposal iscarried!!! Feb. 
 9, 1917. 
 Publication of a “new” majority resolution. 
 The signatures: the “Centrists” Grimm, Rimathe, Schneider, Jacques Schmid, etc. 
, also Nobs and Platten. 
 The resolutionhas been greatly worsened and paragraph 3 , as indicated above, deleted. 
 121 The resolution does not even hint at combating opportu-nism and reformism, or at a firm decision to follow Karl Liebknecht’s tactics! It is a typical Centrist resolution, in which “general”, supposedly “theoretical” disquisitions predominate, whilepractical demands are deliberately couched in such feebleand hazy language that, it can be hoped, not only Greulichand G. 
 Müller, but even Baumann—Zurich will probably deign to withdraw their ultimatum and ... amnesty the party. 
 To sum up: the leaders of the Swiss party have solemnly buried Zimmerwaldism in the “marsh”. 
 Addition: The St. 
 Gallen Volksstimme of Jan. 
 25, 1917 (to which Huber —Rorschach frequently contributes): “It suffices to oppose to this shamelessness [i. 
e. 
, the refe-rendum motivation] the fact that the postponement proposal(Jan. 
 7) was made by Comrade Grimm and energetically supported, among others, by Comrades Manz , Greulich , Müller , Affolter and Schmid . 
” The Basler Vorwärts of Jan. 
 16, 1917 reports that the post-ponement proposal (Jan. 
 7) was tabled by the followingcomrades: “Grimm, Rimathe, Studer, Münch, Lang—Zurich, Schnei-der—Basel, Keel—St. 
 Gallen and Schnurrenberger (!!? ob-viously a misprint for Schneeberger?). 
 The workers have every reason to be grateful to the two papers for listing these names !... Written (in German) in late February 1917 First published in 1931 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany XVII the manuscript Translated from the German DRAF T THESES , MARC H 4 (17), 1917122 Information reaching Zurich from Russia at this moment, March 17, 1917, is so scanty, and events in our country are developing so rapidly, that any judgement of the situation must of needs be very cautious. 
 Yesterday’s dispatches indicated that the tsar had already abdicated and that the new, Octobrist-Cadet governmen t123 had already made an agreement with other representatives of the Romanov dynasty. 
 Today there are reports fromEngland that the tsar has not yet abdicated, and that his whereabouts are unknown. 
 This suggests that he is trying to put up resistance, organise a party, perhaps even an armedforce, in an attempt to restore the monarchy. 
 If he succeedsin fleeing from Russia or winning over part of the armed forces,the tsar might, to mislead the people, issue a manifestoannouncing immediate conclusion of a separate peace with Germany! That being the position, the proletariat’s task is a pretty complex one. 
 There can be no doubt that it must organise itself in the most efficient way, rally all its forces, arm,strengthen and extend its alliance with all sections of theworking masses of town and country in order to put up a stubborn resistance to tsarist reaction and crush the tsarist monarchy once and for all. 
 Another factor to bear in mind is that the new government that has seized power in St. 
 Petersburg, or, more correctly,wrested it from the proletariat, which has waged a victori-ous, heroic and fierce struggle, consists of liberal bourgeois and landlords whose lead is being followed by Kerensky, the spokesman of the democratic peasants and, possibly,of that part of the workers who have forgotten their interna-tionalism and have been led on to the bourgeois path. 
 The new government is composed of avowed advocates and sup-porters of the imperialist war with Germany, i. 
e. 
, a war in alliance with the English and French imperialist govern-ments, a war for the plunder and conquest of foreign lands—Armenia, Galicia, Constantinople, etc. 
 The new government cannot give the peoples of Russia (and the nations tied to us by the war) either peace, bread, or full freedom. 
 The working class must therefore continue its fight for socialism and peace, utilising for this purposethe new situation and explaining it as widely as possibleamong the masses. 
 The new government cannot give the people peace, because it represents the capitalists and landlords and because it is tied to the English and French capitalists by treaties and financial commitments. 
 Russian Social-Democracy musttherefore, while remaining true to internationalism, firstand foremost explain to the people who long for peace thatit cannot be won under the present government whose firstappeal to the people (March 17) does not as much as mention the chief and basic issue of the time, peace. 
 It is keeping secret the predatory treaties tsarism concluded with England,France, Italy, Japan, etc. 
 It wants to conceal from the peoplethe truth about its war programme, the fact that it standsfor continuation of the war, for victory over Germany. 
 It isnot in a position to do what the people so vitally need: direct-ly and frankly propose to all belligerent countries an imme-diate ceasefire, to be followed by peace based on completeliberation of all the colonies and dependent and unequalnations. 
 That requires a workers’ government acting in alli-ance with, first, the poorest section of the rural population,and, second, the revolutionary workers of all countries in the war. 
 The new government cannot give the people bread. 
 And no freedom can satisfy the masses suffering from hunger dueto shortages and inefficient distribution of available stocks,and, most important, to the seizure of these stocks by thelandlords and capitalists. 
 It requires revolutionary meas-ures against the landlords and capitalists to give the people bread, and such measures can be carried out only by a work-ers’ government. 
 Lastly, the new government is not in a position to give the people full freedom, though in its March 17 manifesto it speaks of nothing but political freedom and is silent on other, no less important, issues. 
 The new government has alreadyendeavoured to reach agreement with the Romanov dynasty,for it has suggested recognising the Romanovs, in defianceof the people’s will, on the understanding that Nicholas IIwould abdicate in favour of his son, with a member of the Romanov family appointed regent. 
 In its manifesto, the new government promises every kind of freedom, but hasfailed in its direct and unconditional duty immediately toimplement such freedoms as election of officers, etc. 
, by thesoldiers, elections to the St. 
 Petersburg, Moscow and otherCity Councils on a basis of genuinely universal, and not merely male, suffrage, make all government and public build-ings available for public meetings, appoint elections toall local institutions and Zemstvos, likewise on the basisof genuinely universal suffrage, repeal all restrictions on therights of local government bodies, dismiss all officialsappointed to supervise local government bodies, introduce not only freedom of religion, but also freedom from religion, immediately separate the school from the church and freeit of control by government officials, etc. 
 The new government’s March 17 manifesto arouses the deepest distrust, for it consists entirely of promises anddoes not provide for the immediate carrying out of a single one of the vital measures that can and should be carried out right now. 
 The new government’s programme does not contain a single word on the eight-hour day or on any other economicmeasure to improve the worker’s position. 
 It contains not asingle word about land for the peasants, about the uncompen-sated transfer to the peasants of all the estates. 
 By its silence on these vital issues the new government reveals its capital-ist and landlord nature. 
 Only a workers’ government that relies, first, on the overwhelming majority of the peasant population, thefarm labourers and poor peasants, and, second, on an alliance with the revolutionary workers of all countries in the war, can give the people peace, bread and fullfreedom. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR The revolutionary proletariat can therefore only regard the revolution of March 1 (14) as its initial, and by no means complete, victory on its momentous path. 
 It cannot but set itself the task of continuing the light for a democratic republicand socialism. 
 To do that, the proletariat and the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 must above all utilise the relative and partial freedom the newgovernment is introducing, and which can be guaranteed and extended only by continued, persistent and persevering revolutionary struggle. 
 The truth about the present government and its real atti-tude on pressing issues must be made known to all workingpeople in town and country, and also to the army. 
 Sovietsof Workers’ Deputies must be organised, the workers must be armed. 
 Proletarian organisations must be extended to the army (which the new government has likewise promisedpolitical rights) and to the rural areas. 
 In particular theremust be a separate class organisation for farm labourers. 
 Only by making the truth known to the widest masses of the population, only by organising them, can we guarantee full victory in the next stage of the revolution and the winning of power by a workers’ government. 
 Fulfilment of this task, which in revolutionary times and under the impact of the severe lessons of the war canbe brought home to the people in an immeasurably shortertime than under ordinary conditions, requires the revolution-ary proletarian party to be ideologically and organisation-ally independent. 
 It must remain true to internationalismand not succumb to the false bourgeois phraseology meantto dupe the people by talk of “defending the fatherland” inthe present imperialist and predatory war. 
 Not only this government, but even a democratic bour-geois republican government, were it to consist exclusively of Kerensky and other Narodnik and “Marxist” social-patri-ots, cannot lead the people out of the imperialist war andguarantee peace. 
 For that reason we cannot consent to any blocs, or alli-ances, or even agreements with the defencists among the workers, nor with the Gvozdyov-Potresov-Chkhenkeli-Kerensky, etc. 
, trend, nor with men who, like Chkheidze andothers, have taken a vacillating and indefinite stand on this crucial issue. 
 Those agreements would not only inject an ele-ment of falseness in the minds of the masses, making them dependent on the Russian imperialist bourgeoisie, but would also weaken and undermine the leading role of the proletar-iat in ridding the people of imperialist war and guaranteeinga genuinely durable peace between the workers’ govern-ments of all countries. 
 First published in 1924 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany II the manuscript TELEGRA M TO THE BOLSHEVIK S LEAVING FOR RUSSI A124 Our tactics: no trust in and no support of the new govern-ment; Kerensky is especially suspect; arming of the prole-tariat is the only guarantee; immediate elections to the Pet-rograd City Council; no rapprochement with other parties. 
Telegraph this to Petrograd. 
 Ulyanov Written on March 6 (19), 1917 First published in 1930 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany XIII the manuscript Translated from the French LETTE R TO VOLKSRECH T 125 Various German newspapers have published a distorted version of the telegram I sent on Monday, March 19, to certain members of our Party in Scandinavia who were leaving for Russia and who asked my advice about the tactics Social-Democrats should follow. 
 My telegram reads:“Our tactics: no trust in and no support of the new govern-ment; Kerensky is especially suspect; arming of the prole-tariat is the only guarantee; immediate elections to the Pet-rograd City Council; no rapprochement with other parties. 
 Telegraph this to Petrograd. 
 ” I sent the telegram in the name of Central Committee members living abroad , not in the name of the Central Com-mittee itself. 
 Reference is not to the Constituent Assembly,but to elections to municipal bodies. 
 Elections to the Con-stituent Assembly are, so far, merely an empty promise. 
Elections to the Petrograd City Council could and should beheld immediately , if the government is really capable of introducing its promised freedoms. 
 These elections couldhelp the proletariat organise and strengthen its revolution-ary positions. 
 N. 
 Lenin Written after March 6 (19), 1917 Published in Volksrecht No. 
 75, Published according to March 29, 1917 the Volksrecht text Translated from the GermanFirst published in Russian in the fourth edition of the Collected Works LETTERS AFA R126 LETTERS AFAR126 LETTERS AFAR F I R S T L E T T E R THE FIRST STAGE OF THE FIRST REVOLUTION127 The first revolution engendered by the imperialist world war has broken out. 
 The first revolution but certainly not the last. 
 Judging by the scanty information available in Switzer-land, the first stage of this first revolution, namely, of theRussian revolution of March 1, 1917, has ended. 
 This firststage of our revolution will certainly not be the last. 
 How could such a “miracle” have happened, that in only eight days—the period indicated by Mr. 
 Milyukov in hisboastful telegram to all Russia’s representatives abroad—a monarchy collapsed that had maintained itself for cen-turies, and that in spite of everything had managed tomaintain itself throughout the three years of the tremendous, nation-wide class battles of 1905-07? There are no miracles in nature or history, but every abrupt turn in history, and this applies to every revolution, presents such a wealth of content, unfolds such unexpectedand specific combinations of forms of struggle and align-ment of forces of the contestants, that to the lay mind there is much that must appear miraculous. 
 The combination of a number of factors of world-historic importance was required for the tsarist monarchy to have collapsed in a few days. 
 We shall mention the chief ofthem. 
 Without the tremendous class battles and the revolution-ary energy displayed by the Russian proletariat during thethree years 1905-07, the second revolution could not possiblyhave been so rapid in the sense that its initial stage was completed in a few days. 
 The first revolution (1905) deeply ploughed the soil, uprooted age-old prejudices, awakened millions of workers and tens of millions of peasants to polit-ical life and political struggle and revealed to each other—and to the world— all classes (and all the principal parties) of Russian society in their true character and in the true align-ment of their interests, their forces, their modes of action,and their immediate and ultimate aims. 
 This first revolution, and the succeeding period of counter-revolution (1907-14), laid bare the very essence of the tsarist monarchy, brought it tothe “utmost limit”, exposed all the rottenness and infamy,the cynicism and corruption of the tsar’s clique, domi-nated by that monster, Rasputin. 
 It exposed all the besti-ality of the Romanov family—those pogrom-mongers who drenched Russia in the blood of Jews, workers and revolution-aries, those landlords , “first among peers”, who own millions of dessiatines of land and are prepared to stoop to anybrutality, to any crime, to ruin and strangle any numberof citizens in order to preserve the “sacred right of property”for themselves and their class . 
 Without the Revolution of 1905-07 and the counter-revo-lution of 1907-14, there could not have been that clear “self-determination” of all classes of the Russian people and ofthe nations inhabiting Russia, that determination of the rela-tion of these classes to each other and to the tsarist monarchy,which manifested itself during the eight days of the Februa-ry-March Revolution of 1917. 
 This eight-day revolution was “performed”, if we may use a metaphorical expression, asthough after a dozen major and minor rehearsals; the “act-ors” knew each other, their parts, their places and their set-ting in every detail, through and through, down to everymore or less important shade of political trend and mode of action. 
 For the first great Revolution of 1905, which the Guch-kovs and Milyukovs and their hangers-on denounced as a“great rebellion”, led, after the lapse of twelve years, to the“brilliant”, the “glorious” Revolution of 1917—the Guchkovsand Milyukovs have proclaimed it “glorious” because it has put them in power ( for the time being ). 
 But this required a great, mighty and all-powerful “stage manager”, capable,on the one hand, of vastly accelerating the course of world history, and, on the other, of engendering world-wide crises of unparalleled intensity—economic, political, national and international. 
 Apart from an extraordinary acceleration of world history, it was also necessary that history make partic-ularly abrupt turns, in order that at one such turn the filthyand blood-stained cart of the Romanov monarchy should beoverturned at one stroke . 
 This all-powerful “stage manager”, this mighty acceler-ator was the imperialist world war. 
 That it is a world war is now indisputable, for the United States and China are already half-involved today, and willbe fully involved tomorrow. 
 That it is an imperialist war on both sides is now likewise indisputable. 
 Only the capitalists and their hangers-on, the social-patriots and social-chauvinists, or—if instead of gener-al critical definitions we use political names familiar inRussia—only the Guchkovs and Lvovs, Milyukovs and Shin-garyovs on the one hand, and only the Gvozdyovs, Potresovs,Chkhenkelis, Kerenskys and Chkheidzes on the other, candeny or gloss over this fact. 
 Both the German and the Anglo-French bourgeoisie are waging the war for the plunder of foreign countries and the strangling of small nations, forfinancial world supremacy and the division and redivisionof colonies, and in order to save the tottering capitalistregime by misleading and dividing the workers of the variouscountries. 
 The imperialist war was bound, with objective inevitabil-ity, immensely to accelerate and intensify to an unprecedent-ed degree the class struggle of the proletariat against thebourgeoisie; it was bound to turn into a civil war betweenthe hostile classes. 
 This transformation has been started by the February-March Revolution of 1917, the first stage of which has been marked, firstly, by a joint blow at tsarism struck by twoforces: one, the whole of bourgeois and landlord Russia,with all her unconscious hangers-on and all her consciousleaders, the British and French ambassadors and capitalists,and the other, the Soviet of Workers ’ Deputies , which has begun to win over the soldiers’ and peasants’ deputies. 
128 These three political camps, these three fundamental polit-ical forces—(1) the tsarist monarchy, the head of the feudal landlords, of the old bureaucracy and the military caste; (2) bourgeois and landlord-Octobrist-Cadet Russia, behind which trailed the petty bourgeoisie (of which Kerensky and Chkheidze are the principal representatives); (3) the Sovietof Workers’ Deputies, which is seeking to make the entireproletariat and the entire mass of the poorest part of thepopulation its allies—these three fundamental political forces fully and clearly revealed themselves even in the eight days of the “first stage” and even to an observer so remote from the scene of events as the present writer, who is obliged to con-tent himself with the meagre foreign press dispatches. 
 But before dealing with this in greater detail, I must return to the part of my letter devoted to a factor of primeimportance, namely, the imperialist world war. 
 The war shackled the belligerent powers, the belligerent groups of capitalists, the “bosses” of the capitalist system, theslave-owners of the capitalist slave system, to each otherwith chains of iron. 
 One bloody clot —such is the social and political life of the present moment in history. 
 The socialists who deserted to the bourgeoisie on the outbreak of the war—all these Davids and Scheidemanns in Germany and the Plekhanovs, Potresovs, Gvozdyovs and Co. 
in Russia—clamoured loud and long against the “illusions”of the revolutionaries, against the “illusions” of the BasleManifesto, against the “farcical dream” of turning the impe-rialist war into a civil war. 
 They sang praises in every key to the strength, tenacity and adaptability allegedly revealed by capitalism— they , who had aided the capitalists to “adapt”, tame, mislead and divide the working classesof the various countries! But “he who laughs last laughs best”. 
 The bourgeoisie has been unable to delay for long the revolutionary crisis engendered by the war. 
 That crisis is growing with irresis-tible force in all countries, beginning with Germany, which,according to an observer who recently visited that country,is suffering “brilliantly organised famine”, and ending withEngland and France, where famine is also looming, but where organisation is far less “brilliant”. 
 It was natural that the revolutionary crisis should have broken out first of all in tsarist Russia, where the disorgan-isation was most appalling and the proletariat most revolu-tionary (not by virtue of any special qualities, but because of the living traditions of 1905). 
 This crisis was precipitated by the series of extremely severe defeats sustained by Russia and her allies. 
 They shook up the old machinery of govern-ment and the old order and roused the anger of all classes of the population against them; they embittered the army,wiped out a very large part of the old commanding person-nel, composed of die-hard aristocrats and exceptionally corrupt bureaucratic elements, and replaced it by a young, fresh, mainly bourgeois, commoner, petty-bourgeois person-nel. 
 Those who, grovelling to the bourgeoisie or simply lack-ing backbone, howled and wailed about “defeatism”, arenow faced by the fact of the historical connection betweenthe defeat of the most backward and barbarous tsarist mon-archy and the beginning of the revolutionary conflagration. 
 But while the defeats early in the war were a negative factor that precipitated the upheaval, the connection between Anglo-French finance capital, Anglo-French imperialism,and Russian Octobrist-Cadet capital was a factor that hast-ened this crisis by the direct organisation of a plot against Nicholas Romanov. 
 This highly important aspect of the situation is, for ob-vious reasons, hushed up by the Anglo-French press andmaliciously emphasised by the German. 
 We Marxists mustsoberly face the truth and not allow ourselves to be confusedeither by the lies, the official sugary diplomatic and mi-nisterial lies, of the first group of imperialist belligerents, or by the sniggering and smirking of their financial and mil-itary rivals of the other belligerent group. 
 The whole courseof events in the February-March Revolution clearly showsthat the British and French embassies, with their agents and“connections”, who had long been making the most desperate efforts to prevent “separate” agreements and a separate peace between Nicholas II (and last, we hope, and we will endeav-our to make him that) and Wilhelm II, directly organiseda plot in conjunction with the Octobrists and Cadets,in conjunction with a section of the generals and army andSt. 
 Petersburg garrison officers, with the express object of deposing Nicholas Romanov. 
 Let us not harbour any illusions. 
 Let us not make the- mistake of those who—like certain O. 
C. 
 supporters or Men-sheviks who are oscillating between Gvozdyov-Potresov poli-cy and internationalism and only too often slip into petty-bourgeois pacifism—are now ready to extol “agreement” be-tween the workers’ party and the Cadets, “support” of thelatter by the former, etc. 
 In conformity with the old (andby no means Marxist) doctrine that they have learned byrote, they are trying to veil the plot of the Anglo-French im-perialists and the Guchkovs and Milyukovs aimed at depos-ing the “chief warrior”, Nicholas Romanov, and putting more energetic, fresh and more capable warriors in his place. 
 That the revolution succeeded so quickly and—seemingly, at the first superficial glance—so radically, is only due tothe fact that, as a result of an extremely unique historicalsituation, absolutely dissimilar currents , absolutely hetero-geneous class interests, absolutely contrary political and social strivings have merged , and in a strikingly “harmonious” manner. 
 Namely, the conspiracy of the Anglo-French impe-rialists, who impelled Milyukov, Guchkov and Co. 
 to seizepower for the purpose of continuing the imperialist war , for the purpose of conducting the war still more ferociously and obstinately, for the purpose of slaughtering fresh millions of Russian workers and peasants in order that the Guchkovsmight obtain Constantinople, the French capitalists Syria,the British capitalists Mesopotamia, and so on. 
 This on theone hand. 
 On the other, there was a profound proletarian andmass popular movement of a revolutionary character (a movement of the entire poorest section of the population of town and country) for bread , for peace , for real freedom . 
 It would simply be foolish to speak of the revolutionary proletariat of Russia “supporting” the Cadet-Octobrist im-perialism, which has been “patched up” with English moneyand is as abominable as tsarist imperialism. 
 The revolutionary workers were destroying, have already destroyed to a con-siderable degree and will destroy to its foundations theinfamous tsarist monarchy . 
 They are neither elated nor dis-mayed by the fact that at certain brief and exceptional his-torical conjunctures they were aided by the struggle of Bu-chanan, Guchkov, Milyukov and Co. 
 to replace one monarch by another monarch , also preferably a Romanov! Such, and only such, is the way the situation developed. 
 Such, and only such, in the view that can be taken by a poli-tician who does not fear the truth, who soberly weighs the balance of social forces in the revolution, who appraises every “current situation” not only from the standpoint of all its present, current peculiarities, but also from thestandpoint of the more fundamental motivations, the deeperinterest-relationship of the proletariat and the bourgeoisie,both in Russia and throughout the world. 
 The workers of Petrograd, like the workers of the whole of Russia, self-sacrificingly fought the tsarist monarchy— fought for freedom, land for the peasants, and for peace , against the imperialist slaughter. 
 To continue and intensi-fy that slaughter, Anglo-French imperialist capital hatchedCourt intrigues, conspired with the officers of the Guards,incited and encouraged the Guchkovs and Milyukov, and fixed up a complete new government , which in fact did seize po-wer immediately the proletarian struggle had struck the first blows at tsarism. 
 This new government, in which Lvov and Guchkov of the Octobrists and Peaceful Renovation Party, 129 yesterday’s abettors of Stolypin the Hangman, control really important posts, vital posts, decisive posts, the army and the bureauc-racy—this government, in which Milyukov and the otherCadets 130 are more than anything decorations, a signboard— they are there to deliver sentimental professorial speeches—and in which the Trudovik 131 Kerensky is a balalaika on which they play to deceive the workers and peasants—this government is not a fortuitous assemblage of persons. 
 They are representatives of the new class that has risen to political power in Russia, the class of capitalist land-lords and bourgeoisie which has long been ruling our country economically, and which during the Revolution of 1905-07,the counter-revolutionary period of 1907-14, and finally— and with especial rapidity—the war period of 1914-17, was quick to organise itself politically, taking over control ofthe local government bodies, public education, congressesof various types, the Duma, the war industries committees,etc. 
 This new class was already “almost completely” in power by 1917, and therefore it needed only the first blows to bring tsarism to the ground and clear the way for the bour-geoisie. 
 The imperialist war, which required an incredibleexertion of effort, so accelerated the course of backward Russia’s development that we have “at one blow” ( seemingly at one blow) caught up with Italy, England, and almost with France. 
 We have obtained a “coalition”, a “national” (i. 
e. 
, adapted for carrying on the imperialist slaughter andfor fooling the people) “parliamentary” government. 
 Side by side with this government—which as regards the present war is but the agent of the billion-dollar “firm” “England and France”—there has arisen the chief, unof-ficial, as yet undeveloped and comparatively weak workers ’ government , which expresses the interests of the proletariat and of the entire poor section of the urban and rural popula-tion. 
 This is the Soviet of Workers ’ Deputies in Petrograd, which is seeking connections with the soldiers and peasants,and also with the agricultural workers, with the latter partic-ularly and primarily, of course, more than with the peasants. 
 Such is the actual political situation, which we must first endeavour to define with the greatest possible objectiveprecision, in order that Marxist tactics may be based uponthe only possible solid foundation—the foundation of facts . 
 The tsarist monarchy has been smashed, but not finally destroyed. 
 The Octobrist-Cadet bourgeois government, which wants to fight the imperialist war “to a finish”, and which in real-ity is the agent of the financial firm “England and France”, isobliged to promise the people the maximum of liberties and sops compatible with the maintenance of its power over the people and the possibility of continuing the imperialist slaughter. 
 The Soviet of Workers’ Deputies is an organisation of the workers, the embryo of a workers’ government, the repre-sentative of the interests of the entire mass of the poor section of the population, i. 
e. 
, of nine-tenths of the popu-lation, which is striving for peace , bread and freedom . 
 The conflict of these three forces determines the situation that has now arisen, a situation that is transitional from the first stage of the revolution to the second. 
 The antagonism between the first and second force is not profound, it is temporary, the result solely of the present conjuncture of circumstances, of the abrupt turn of events in the imperialist war. 
 The whole of the new government is monarchist, for Kerensky’s verbal republicanism simply cannot be taken seriously, is not worthy of a statesman and, objectively , is political chicanery. 
 The new government, which has not dealt the tsarist monarchy the final blow, has already begun to strike a bargain with the landlord Romanov dynasty. 
 The bourgeoisie of the Octobrist-Cadet type needs a monarchy to serve as the head of the bureaucracy and thearmy in order to protect the privileges of capital againstthe working people. 
 He who says that the workers must support the new gov-ernment in the interests of the struggle against tsarist reac-tion (and apparently this is being said by the Potresovs,Gvozdyovs. 
 Chkhenkelis and also, all evasiveness notwith-standing, by Chkheidze ) is a traitor to the workers, a traitor to the cause of the proletariat, to the cause of peace and free-dom. 
 For actually, precisely this new government is already bound hand and foot by imperialist capital, by the imperi-alist policy of war and plunder, has already begun to strike a bargain (without consulting the people!) with the dynasty,is already working to restore the tsarist monarchy , is already soliciting the candidature of Mikhail Romanov as the new kinglet, is already taking measures to prop up the throne, to substitute for the legitimate (lawful, ruling by virtueof the old law) monarchy a Bonapartist, plebiscite monarchy(ruling by virtue of a fraudulent plebiscite). 
 No, if there is to be a real struggle against the tsarist monarchy, if freedom is to be guaranteed in fact and not merely in words, in the glib promises of Milyukov and Ke-rensky, the workers must not support the new government; the government must “support” the workers! For the onlyguarantee of freedom and of the complete destruction of tsarism lies in arming the proletariat , in strengthening, extending and developing the role, significance and power of the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies. 
 All the rest is mere phrase-mongering and lies, self-decep-tion on the part of the politicians of the liberal and radicalcamp, fraudulent trickery. 
 Help, or at least do not hinder, the arming of the workers, and freedom in Russia will be invincible, the monarchy irrestorable, the republic secure. 
 Otherwise the Guchkovs and Milyukovs will restore the monarchy and grant none , absolutely none of the “liberties” they promised. 
 All bourgeois politicians in all bourgeois revolutions “fed” the people and fooled the workers with promises. 
 Ours is a bourgeois revolution, therefore , the workers must support the bourgeoisie, say the Potresovs, Gvozdyovsand Chkheidzes, as Plekhanov said yesterday. 
 Ours is a bourgeois revolution, we Marxists say, therefore the workers must open the eyes of the people to the deception practised by the bourgeois politicians, teach them to put no faith in words, to depend entirely on their own strength, their own organisation, their own unity, and their own weapons . 
 The government of the Octobrists and Cadets, of the Guchkovs and Milyukovs, cannot , even if it sincerely wanted to (only infants can think that Guchkov and Lvov are sin-cere), cannot give the people either peace , bread , or freedom . 
 It cannot give peace because it is a war government, a government for the continuation of the imperialist slaughter,a government of plunder , out to plunder Armenia, Galicia and Turkey, annex (Constantinople, reconquer Poland, Cour-land, Lithuania, etc. 
 It is a government bound hand and foot by Anglo-French imperialist capital. 
 Russian capitalis merely a branch of the world-wide “firm” which manipu-lates hundreds of billions of rubles and is called “England and France”. 
 It cannot give bread because it is a bourgeois government. 
 At best , it can give the people “brilliantly organised famine”, as Germany has done. 
 But the people will not accept famine. 
They will learn, and probably very soon, that there is breadand that it can be obtained, but only by methods that do not respect the sanctity of capital and landownership . 
 It cannot give freedom because it is a landlord and cap-italist government which fears the people and has already begun to strike a bargain with the Romanov dynasty. 
 The tactical problems of our immediate attitude towards this government will be dealt with in another article. 
 Init, we shall explain the peculiarity of the present situation,which is a transition from the first stage of the revolution to the second, and why the slogan, the “task of the day”, at this moment must be: Workers , you have performed miracles of proletarian heroism , the heroism of the people , in the civil war against tsarism. 
 You must perform miracles of organ-isation , organisation of the proletariat and of the whole people , to prepare the way for your victory in the second stage of the revolution . 
 Confining ourselves for the present to an analysis of the class struggle and the alignment of class forces at this stageof the revolution, we have still to put the question: who arethe proletariat’s allies in this revolution? It has two allies: first, the broad mass of the semi-prole-tarian and partly also of the small-peasant population, whonumber scores of millions and constitute the overwhelm-ing majority of the population of Russia. 
 For this masspeace, bread, freedom and land are essential . 
 It is inevitable that to a certain extent this mass will be under the influence of the bourgeoisie, particularly of the petty bourgeoisie, to which it is most akin in its conditions of life, vacillatingbetween the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. 
 The cruellessons of war, and they will be the more cruel the more vig-orously the war is prosecuted by Guchkov, Lvov, Milyukovand Co. 
, will inevitably push this mass towards the proletar-iat, compel it to follow the proletariat. 
 We must now take advantage of the relative freedom of the new order and of theSoviets of Workers’ Deputies to enlighten and organise this mass first of all and above all. 
 Soviets of Peasants’ Depu-ties and Soviets of Agricultural Workers—that is one of ourmost urgent tasks. 
 In this connection we shall strive not only for the agricultural workers to establish their own separate Soviets, but also for the propertyless and poorestpeasants to organise separately from the well-to-do peasants. 
 The special tasks and special forms of organisation urgentlyneeded at the present time will be dealt with in the nextletter. 
 Second, the ally of the Russian proletariat is the pro-letariat of all the belligerent countries and of all countriesin general. 
 At present this ally is to a large degree repressedby the war, and all too often the European social-chauvinistsspeak in its name—men who, like Plekhanov, Gvozdyov andPotresov in Russia, have deserted to the bourgeoisie. 
 But the liberation of the proletariat from their influence has progressed with every month of the imperialist war, and the Russianrevolution will inevitably immensely hasten this process. 
 With these two allies, the proletariat, utilising the peculiar-ities of the present transition situation, can and will pro-ceed, first, to the achievement of a democratic republic and complete victory of the peasantry over the landlords,instead of the Guchkov-Milyukov semi-monarchy, and thento socialism , which alone can give the war-weary people peace , bread and freedom . 
 N. 
 Lenin Written on March 1 (20), 1917 Published in Pravda Published according to Nos. 
 14 and 15,a typewritten copy verified March 21 and 22, 1917 with the Pravda text First page of Lenin’s manuscript “Letters from Afar. 
 Second Letter. 
 The New Government and the Proletariat” March 22 (9), 1917 ReducedFirst page of Lenin’s manuscript “Letters from Afar. 
 Second Letter. 
 The New Government and the Proletariat” March 22 (9), 1917 Reduced LETTERS AFAR S E C O N D L E T T E R THE NEW GOVERNMENT AND THE PROLETARIAT The principal document I have at my disposal at today’s dated (March 8/21) is a copy of that most conservative and bourgeois English newspaper The Times of March 16, contain-ing a batch of reports about the revolution in Russia. 
 Clear-ly, a source more favourably inclined—to put it mildly—towards the Guchkov and Milyukov government it wouldnot be easy to find. 
 This newspaper’s correspondent reports from St. 
 Peters-burg on Wednesday, March 1 (14), when the first Provisional (government still existed, i. 
e. 
, the thirteen-member DumaExecutive Committee, 132 headed by Rodzyanko and in-cluding two “socialists”, as the newspaper puts it, Kerenskyand Chkheidze: “A group of 22 elected members of the Upper House [State Council] including M. 
 Guchkov, M. 
 Stakhovich, PrinceTrubetskoi, and Professor Vassiliev, Grimm, and Vernadsky,yesterday addressed a telegram to the Tsar” imploring him inorder to save the “dynasty”, etc. 
, etc. 
, to convoke the Dumaand to name as the head of the government some one who enjoys the “confidence of the nation”. 
 “What the Emperor may decide to do on his arrival today is unknown at the hourof telegraphing,” writes the correspondent, “but one thingis quite certain. 
 Unless His Majesty immediately complieswith the wishes of the most moderate elements among hisloyal subjects, the influence at present exercised by the Provisional Committee of the Imperial Duma will pass wholesale into the hands of the socialists, who want to see arepublic established, but who are unable to institute any kind of orderly government and would inevitably precipitate the country into anarchy within and disaster without.... 
” What political sagacity and clarity this reveals. 
 How well this Englishman, who thinks like (if he does not guide)the Guchkovs and Milyukovs, understands the alignment ofclass forces and interests! “The most moderate elementsamong his loyal subjects”, i. 
e. 
, the monarchist landlordsand capitalists, want to take power into their hands, fully realising that otherwise “influence” will pass into the hands of the “socialists”. 
 Why the “socialists” and not somebodyelse? Because the English Guchkovite is fully aware thatthere is no other social force in the political arena, nor can there be . 
 The revolution was made by the proletariat. 
 It displayed heroism; it shed its blood; it swept along with it the broadest masses of the toilers and the poor; it is demand-ing bread, peace and freedom; it is demanding a republic;it sympathises with socialism. 
 But the handful of landlordsand capitalists headed by the Guchkovs and Milyukovswant to betray the will, or strivings, of the vast majorityand conclude a deal with the tottering monarchy , bolster it up, save it: appoint Lvov and Guchkov, Your Majesty, and we will be with the monarchy against the people. 
 Such isthe entire meaning, the sum and substance of the new govern-ment’s policy! But how to justify the deception, the fooling of the people, the violation of the will of the overwhelming majority of the population? By slandering the people—the old but eternally new meth-od of the bourgeoisie. 
 And the English Guchkovite slanders,scolds, spits and splutters: “anarchy within and disasterwithout”, no “orderly government”!! That is not true, Mr. 
 Guchkovite! The workers want a republic; and a republic represents far more “orderly” government than monarchy does. 
 What guarantee have thepeople that the second Romanov will not get himself asecond Rasputin? Disaster will be brought on preciselyby continuation of the war, i. 
e. 
, precisely by the newgovernment. 
 Only a proletarian republic, backed by the rural workers and the poorest section of the peasants and town dwellers, can secure peace, provide bread, order andfreedom. 
 All the shouts about anarchy are merely a screen to con-ceal the selfish interests of the capitalists, who want to make profit out of the war, out of war loans, who want to restore the monarchy against the people. 
 “...Yesterday,” continues the correspondent, “the Social-Democratic Party issued a proclamation of a most sedi-tious character, which was spread broadcast throughout thecity. 
 They [i. 
e. 
, the Social-Democratic Party] are mere doctrinaires, but their power for mischief is enormous at a time like the present. 
 M. 
 Kerensky and M. 
 Chkheidze, whorealise that without the support of the officers and the moremoderate elements of the people they cannot hope to avoidanarchy, have to reckon with their less prudent associates,and are insensibly driven to take up an attitude which complicates the task of the Provisional Committee.... 
” O great English, Guchkovite diplomat! How “imprudent-ly” you have blurted out the truth! “The Social-Democratic Party” and their less prudent associates” with whom Kerensky and Chkheidze have toreckon”, evidently mean the Central or the St. 
 Petersburg Committee of our Party, which was restored at the January 1912 Conference, 133 those very same Bolsheviks at whom the bourgeoisie always hurl the abusive term “doctrinaires”,because of their faithfulness to the “doctrine”, i. 
e. 
, the fun-damentals, the principles, teachings, aims of socialism . 
 Obvi-ously, the English Guchkovite hurls the abusive terms sedi-tious and doctrinaire at the manifesto 134 and at the conduct of our Party in urging a fight for a republic, peace, completedestruction of the tsarist monarchy, bread for the people. 
 Bread for the people and peace—that’s sedition, but mini-sterial posts for Guchkov and Milyukov—that’s “order”. 
Old and familiar talk! What, then, are the tactics of Kerensky and Chkheidze as characterised by the English Guchkovite? Vacillation: on the one hand, the Guchkovite praises them: they ‘realise” (Good boys! Clever boys!) that withoutthe “support” of the army officers and the more moderateelements, anarchy cannot be avoided (we, however, have always thought, in keeping with our doctrine, with our socialist teachings, that it is the capitalists who introduceanarchy and war into human society, that only the transfer of all political power to the proletariat and the poorest people can rid us of war, of anarchy and starvation!). 
 On the other hand, they “have to reckon with their less prudent associates”, i. 
e. 
, the Bolsheviks, the Russian Social-Demo-cratic Labour Party, restored and united by the Central Com-mittee. 
 What is the force that compels Kerensky and Chkheidze to “reckon” with the Bolshevik Party to which they have never belonged, which they, or their literary representatives (Socialist-Revolutionaries, Popular Socialists, 135 the Men-shevik O. 
C. 
 supporters, and so forth), have always abused,condemned, denounced as an insignificant underground cir-cle, a sect of doctrinaires, and so forth? Where and when hasit ever happened that in time of revolution, at a time of predominantly mass action, sane-minded politicians should “reckon” with “doctrinaires”?? He is all mixed up, our poor English Guchkovite; he has failed to produce a logical argument, has failed to telleither a whole lie or the whole truth, he has merely givenhimself away. 
 Kerensky and Chkheidze are compelled to reckon with the Social-Democratic Party of the Central Committee by theinfluence it exerts on the proletariat, on the masses. 
 OurParty was found to be with the masses, with the revolution-ary proletariat, in spite of the arrest and deportation of our Duma deputies to Siberia, as far back as 1914, in spite of the fierce persecution and arrests to which the St. 
 Petersburg Committee was subjected for its undergroundactivities during the war, against the war and against tsarism. 
 “Facts are stubborn things,” as the English proverb has it. 
 Let me remind you of it, most esteemed English Guchkov-ite! That our Party guided, or at least rendered devoted assistance to, the St. 
 Petersburg workers in the great daysof revolution is a fact the English Guchkovite “ himself ” was obliged to admit. 
 And he was equally obliged to admit the fact that Kerensky and Chkheidze are oscillating between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. 
 The Gvozdyovites, the “defencists”, i. 
e. 
, the social-chauvinists, i. 
e. 
, the defenders of the imperialist, predatory war, are now completely fol-lowing the bourgeoisie; Kerensky, by entering the ministry, i. 
e. 
, the second Provisional Government, has also completely deserted to the bourgeoisie; Chkheidze has not; he con-tinues to oscillate between the Provisional Government of the bourgeoisie, the Guchkovs and Milyukovs, and the“provisional government” of the proletariat and the poorestmasses of the people, the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies andthe Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party united by theCentral Committee. 
 Consequently, the revolution has confirmed what we especially insisted on when we urged the workers clearly torealise the class difference between the principal parties andprincipal trends in the working-class movement and amongthe petty bourgeoisie—what we wrote, for example, in theGeneva Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 41, nearly eighteen months ago, on October 13, 1915. 
 “As hitherto, we consider it admissible for Social-Demo-crats to join a provisional revolutionary government togetherwith the democratic petty bourgeoisie, but not with the revolutionary chauvinists. 
 By revolutionary chauvinists wemean those who want a victory over tsarism so as to achieve victory over Germany—plunder other countries—consolidate Great-Russian rule over the other peoples of Russia, etc. 
Revolutionary chauvinism is based on the class position ofthe petty bourgeoisie. 
 The latter always vacillates betweenthe bourgeoisie and the proletariat. 
 At present it is vacillat-ing between chauvinism (which prevents it from being con-sistently revolutionary, even in the meaning of a democratic revolution) and proletarian internationalism. 
 At the momentthe Trudoviks, the Socialist-Revolutionaries, Nasha Zarya (now Dyelo ), Chkheidze’s Duma group, the Organising Com-mittee, Mr. 
 Plekhanov and the like are political spokesmenfor this petty bourgeoisie in Russia. 
 If the revolutionary chauvinists won in Russia, we would be opposed to a defence of their “fatherland” in the present war. 
 Our slogan is: against the chauvinists, even if they are revolutionary and republi-can— against them and for an alliance of the international proletariat for the socialist revolution. 
” * *See present edition, Vol. 
 21, p. 
 403. 
— Ed. 
 But let us return to the English Guchkovite. 
 “...The Provisional Committee of the Imperial Duma,” he continues, “appreciating the dangers ahead, have pur-posely refrained from carrying out the original intention ofarresting Ministers, although they could have done so yes-terday without the slightest difficulty. 
 The door is thus leftopen for negotiations, thanks to which we [“we” =British finance capital and imperialism] may obtain all the benefits of the new regime without passing through the dread ordeal of the Commune and the anarchy of civil war .... 
” The Guchkovites were for a civil war from which they would benefit, but they are against a civil war from which the peo-ple, i. 
e. 
, the actual majority of the working people, wouldbenefit. 
 “...The relations between the Provisional Committee of the Duma, which represents the whole nation [imagine sayingthis about the committee of the landlord and capitalistFourth Duma!], and the Council of Labour Deputies, repre-senting purely class interests [this is the language of a diplo-mat who has heard learned words with one ear and wants to conceal the fact that the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies rep-resents the proletariat and the poor, i. 
e. 
, nine-tenths of thepopulation], but in a crisis like the present wielding enor-mous power, have aroused no small misgivings amongreasonable men regarding the possibility of a conflictbetween them—the results of which might be too terrible to describe. 
 “Happily this danger has been averted, at least for the present [note the “at least”!], thanks to the influence ofM. 
 Kerensky, a young lawyer of much oratorical ability,who clearly realises [unlike Chkheidze, who also “realised”,but evidently less clearly in the opinion of the Guchkovite?] the necessity of working with the Committee in the interests of his Labour constituents [i. 
e. 
, to catch the workers’ votes,to flirt with them]. 
 A satisfactory Agreement 136 was concluded today [Wednesday, March 1/14], whereby all unnecessaryfriction will be avoided. 
” What this agreement was, whether it was concluded with the whole of the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies and on what terms, we do not know. 
 On this chief point, the English Guchkovite says nothing at all this time. 
 And no wonder! It is not to the advantage of the bourgeoisie to have these terms made clear, precise and known to all, for it would then be more difficult for it to violate them! The preceding lines were already written when I read two very important communications. 
 First, in that most conserv-ative and bourgeois Paris newspaper Le Temps137 of March 20, the text of the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies manifestoappealing for “support” of the new government 138; second, excerpts from Skobelev’s speech in the State Duma on March 1(14), reproduced in a Zurich newspaper ( Neue Zürcher Zeitung , 1 Mit. 
-bl. 
, March 21) from a Berlin newspaper ( National-Zeitung 139). 
 The manifesto of the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies, if the text has not been distorted by the French imperialists, is amost remarkable document. 
 It shows that the St. 
 Peters-burg proletariat, at least at the time the manifesto wasissued, was under the predominating influence of petty-bourgeois politicians. 
 You will recall that in this category of politicians I include, as has been already mentioned above, people of the type of Kerensky and Chkheidze. 
 In the manifesto we find two political ideas, and two slo-gans corresponding to them: Firstly. 
 The manifesto says that the government (the new one) consists of “moderate elements”. 
 A strange descrip-tion, by no means complete, of a purely liberal, not of a Marxist character. 
 I too am prepared to agree that in a cer-tain sense—in my next letter I will show in precisely whatsense—now, with the first stage of the revolution completed,every government must be “moderate”. 
 But it is absolutelyimpermissible to conceal from ourselves and from the people that this government wants to continue the imperialist war, that it is an agent of British capital, that it wants torestore the monarchy and strengthen the rule of the landlordsand capitalists. 
 The manifesto declares that all democrats must “support” the new government and that the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies requests and authorises Kerensky to enter the Provisional Government. 
 The conditions—implementation of the prom-ised reforms already during the war, guarantees for the “free cultural” (only??) development of the nationalities (a purely Cadet, wretchedly liberal programme), and the establish-ment of a special committee consisting of members of the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies and of “military men”140 t o supervise the activities of the Provisional Government. 
 This Supervising Committee, which comes within the sec-ond category of ideas and slogans, we will discuss separatelyfurther on. 
 The appointment of the Russian Louis Blanc, Kerensky, and the appeal to support the new government is, one maysay, a classical example of betrayal of the cause of the revo-lution and the cause of the proletariat, a betrayal whichdoomed a number of nineteenth-century revolutions, irres-pective of how sincere and devoted to socialism the leaders and supporters of such a policy may have been. 
 The proletariat cannot and must not support a war govern-ment, a restoration government. 
 To fight reaction, to rebuffall possible and probable attempts by the Romanovs andtheir friends to restore the monarchy and muster a counter-revolutionary army, it is necessary not to support Guchkov and Co. 
, but to organise , expand and strengthen a proletar-ian militia, to arm the people under the leadership of the workers. 
 Without this principal, fundamental, radical meas-ure, there can be no question either of offering seriousresistance to the restoration of the monarchy and attempts torescind or curtail the promised freedoms, or of firmly taking the road that will give the people bread, peace and free-dom. 
 If it is true that Chkheidze, who, with Kerensky, was a member of the first Provisional Government (the Dumacommittee of thirteen), refrained from entering the secondProvisional Government out of principled considerations of the above-mentioned or similar character, then that does him credit. 
 That must be said frankly. 
 Unfortunately, suchan interpretation is contradicted by the facts, and primarilyby the speech delivered by Skobelev, who has always gonehand in hand with Chkheidze. 
 Skobelev said, if the above-mentioned source is to be trusted, that “the social [? evidently the Social-Democratic] group and the workers are only slightly in touch (have littlecontact) with the aims of the Provisional Government”, that the workers are demanding peace, and that if the war is continued there will be disaster in the spring anyhow, that “the workers have concluded with society [liberal so-ciety] a temporary agreement [ eine vorläufige Waffenfreund-schaft ], although their political aims are as far removed from the aims of society as heaven is from earth”, that “the liber-als must abandon the senseless [ unsinnige ] aims of the war”, etc. 
 This speech is a sample of what we called above, in the excerpt from Sotsial-Demokrat , “oscillation” between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. 
 The liberals, while remainingliberals, cannot “abandon” the “senseless” aims of the war, which, incidently, are not determined by them alone, butby Anglo-French finance capital, a world-mighty force meas-ured by hundreds of billions. 
 The task is not to “coax” the liberals, but to explain to the workers why the liberals find themselves in a blind alley, why they are bound hand and foot, why they conceal both the treaties tsarism concluded with England and other countries and the deals betweenRussian and Anglo-French capital, and so forth. 
 If Skobelev says that the workers have concluded an agreement with liberal society, no matter of what character,and since he does not protest against it, does not explainfrom the Duma rostrum how harmful it is for the workers,he thereby approves of the agreement. 
 And that is exactly what he should not do. 
 Skobelev’s direct or indirect, clearly expressed or tacit, approval of the agreement between the Soviet of Workers’Deputies and the Provisional Government is Skobelev’sswing towards the bourgeoisie. 
 Skobelev’s statement thatthe workers are demanding peace, that their aims are as farremoved from the liberals’ aims as heaven is from earth, is Skobelev’s swing towards the proletariat. 
 Purely proletarian, truly revolutionary and profoundly correct in design is the second political idea in the mani-festo of the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies that we are studying,namely, the idea of establishing a “Supervising Committee”(I do not know whether this is what it is called in Russian; I am translating freely from the French), of proletarian-soldier supervision over the ProvisionalGovernment. 
 Now, that’s something real! It is worthy of the workers who have shed their blood for freedom, peace, bread for the people! It is a real step towards real guarantees against tsarism, against a monarchy and against the monarchistsGuchkov, Lvov and Co. 
! It is a sign that the Russian prole-tariat, in spite of everything, has made progress comparedwith the French proletariat in 1848, when it “authorised”Louis Blanc! It is proof that the instinct and mind of the proletarian masses are not satisfied with declamations, ex-clamations, promises of reforms and freedoms, with the titleof “minister authorised by the workers”, and similar tinsel,but are seeking support only where it is to be found, in the armed masses of the people organised and led by the prole-tariat, the class-conscious workers. 
 It is a step along the right road, but only the first step. 
 If this “Supervising Committee” remains a purely political-type parliamentary institution, a committee that will “putquestions” to the Provisional Government and receive an-swers from it, then it will remain a plaything, will amountto nothing. 
 If, on the other hand, it leads, immediately and despite all obstacles, to the formation of a workers ’ militia , or work-ers’ home guard , extending to the whole people, to all men and women, which would not only replace the exterminatedand dissolved police force, not only make the latter’s restora-tion impossible by any government, constitutional-monarch-ist or democratic-republican, either in St. 
 Petersburg or anywhere else in Russia—then the advanced workers ofRussia will really take the road towards new and great vic-tories, the road to victory over war, to the realisation of theslogan which, as the newspapers report, adorned the coloursof the cavalry troops that demonstrated in St. 
 Petersburg, in the square outside the State Duma: “Long Live Socialist Republics in All Countries!”I will set out my ideas about this workers’ militia in my next letter. 
 In it I will try to show, on the one hand, that the forma-tion of a militia embracing the entire people and led by the workers is the correct slogan of the day, one that corre-sponds to the tactical tasks of the peculiar transitionalmoment through which the Russian revolution (and the world revolution) is passing; and, on the other hand, that to be suc-cessful, this workers’ militia must, firstly, embrace the entire people, must be a mass organisation to the degree of being universal , must really embrace the entire able-bodied popula-tion of both sexes; secondly, it must proceed to combine notonly purely police, but general state functions with militaryfunctions and with the control of social production and dis-tribution. 
 N. 
 Lenin Zurich, March 22 (9), 1917 P. 
S. 
 I forgot to date my previous letter March 20 (7). 
 First published in 1924 Published according to in the magazine Bolshevik No. 
 3-4 the manuscript LETTERS AFAR T H I R D L E T T E R CONCERNING A PROLETARIAN MILITIA The conclusion I drew yesterday about Chkheidze’s vacil-lating tactics has been fully confirmed today. 
 March 10 (23), by two documents. 
 First—a telegraphic report from Stock-holm in the Frankfurter Zeitung 141 containing excerpts from the manifesto of the Central Committee of our Party,the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, in St. 
 Pe-tersburg. 
 In this document there is not a word about either supporting the Guchkov government or overthrowing it; the workers and soldiers are called upon to organise aroundthe Soviet of Workers’ Deputies, to elect representatives toit for the fight against tsarism and for a republic, for aneight-hour day, for the confiscation of the landed estatesand grain stocks, and chiefly, for an end to the predatory war. 
 Particularly important and particularly urgent in this connection is our Central Committee’s absolutely correctidea that to obtain peace relations must be established withthe proletarians of all the belligerent countries . 
 To expect peace from negotiations and relations between the bourgeois governments would be self-deception and deception of the people. 
 The second document is a Stockholm report, also by tele-graph, to another German newspaper ( Vossische Zeitung 142) about a conference between the Chkheidze group in theDuma, the workers’ group (? Arbeiterfraction ) and repre-sentatives of fifteen workers’ unions on March 2 (15) and a manifesto published next day. 
 Of the eleven points of this manifesto, the telegram reports only three; the first, thedemand for a republic; the seventh, the demand for peace and immediate peace negotiations; and the third, the demand for “adequate participation in the government of representa-tives of the Russian working class”. 
 If this point is correctly reported, I can understand why the bourgeoisie is praising Chkheidze. 
 I can understandwhy the praise of the English Guchkovites in The Times which I quoted elsewhere has been supplemented by thepraise of the French Guchkovites in Le Temps . 
 This newspa-per of the French millionaires and imperialists writes on March 22: “The leaders of the workers’ parties, particularlyM. 
 Chkheidze, are exercising all their influence to moderatethe wishes of the working classes. 
” Indeed, to demand workers’ “participation” in the Gu-chkov-Milyukov government is a theoretical and political absurdity: to participate as a minority would mean serving as a pawn; to participate on an “equal footing” is impossible,because the demand to continue the war cannot be recon-ciled with the demand to conclude an armistice and startpeace negotiations; to “participate” as a majority requiresthe strength to overthrow the Guchkov-Milyukov govern-ment. 
 In practice, the demand for “participation” is the worst sort of Louis Blanc-ism, i. 
e. 
, oblivion to the classstruggle and the actual conditions under which it is beingwaged, infatuation with a most hollow-sounding phrase,spreading illusions among the workers, loss, in negotiationswith Milyukov or Kerensky, of precious time which must be used to create a real class and revolutionary force, a prole-tarian militia that will enjoy the confidence of all the poor strata of the population, and they constitute the vast major-ity, and will help them to organise , help them to fight for bread, peace, freedom. 
 This mistake in the manifesto issued by Chkheidze and his group (I am not speaking of the O. 
C. 
, Organising Com-mittee party , because in the sources available to me there is not a word about the O. 
C. 
)—this mistake is all the morestrange considering that at the March 2 (15) conference,Chkheidze’s closest collaborator, Skobelev, said, accordingto the newspapers: “Russia is on the eve of a second, real [wirklich ] revolution. 
” Now that is the truth, from which Skobelev and Chkheidze have forgotten to draw the practical conclusions. 
 I cannot judge from here, from my accursed afar, how near this sec-ond revolution is. 
 Being on the spot, Skobelev can see things better. 
 Therefore, I am not raising for myself prob-lems, for the solution of which I have not and cannot havethe necessary concrete data. 
 I am merely emphasising theconfirmation by Skobelev, an “outside witness”, i. 
e. 
, onewho does not belong to our Party, of the factual conclusion I drew in my first letter, namely: that the February-March Revolution was merely the first stage of the revolution. 
 Rus-sia is passing through a peculiar historical moment oftransition to the next stage of the revolution, or, to use Skobelev’s expression, to a “second revolution”. 
 If we want to be Marxists and learn from the experience of revolution in the whole world, we must strive to under-stand in what, precisely, lies the peculiarity of this transi-tional moment, and what tactics follow from its objective specific features. 
 The peculiarity of the situation lies in that the Guchkov-Milyukov government gained the first victory with extraor-dinary ease due to the following three major circumstances: (1) assistance from Anglo-French finance capital and its agents; (2) assistance from part of the top ranks of the army;(3) the already existing organisation of the entire Russianbourgeoisie in the shape of the rural and urban local govern-ment institutions, the State Duma, the war industriescommittees, and so forth. 
 The Guchkov government is held in a vise: bound by the interests of capital, it is compelled to strive to continuethe predatory, robber war, to protect the monstrous profitsof capital and the landlords, to restore the monarchy. 
 Boundby its revolutionary origin and by the need for an abruptchange from tsarism to democracy, pressed by the bread-hungry and peace-hungry masses, the government is com-pelled to lie, to wriggle, to play for time, to “proclaim” andpromise (promises are the only things that are very cheapeven at a time of madly rocketing prices) as much as possibleand do as little as possible, to make concessions with onehand and to withdraw them with the other. 
 Under certain circumstances, the new government can at best postpone its collapse somewhat by leaning on all theorganising ability of the entire Russian bourgeoisie and bour-geois intelligentsia. 
 But even in that case it is unable to avoid collapse, because it is impossible to escape from the claws of the terrible monster of imperialist war and famine nurtured by world capitalism unless one renounces bour-geois relationships, passes to revolutionary measures, ap-peals to the supreme historic heroism of both the Russian andworld proletariat. 
 Hence the conclusion: we cannot overthrow the new gov-ernment at one stroke, or, if we can (in revolutionary times the limits of what is possible expand a thousandfold), wewill not be able to maintain power unless we counter the magnificent organisation of the entire Russian bourgeoisieand the entire bourgeois intelligentsia with an equally mag-nificent organisation of the proletariat , which must lead the entire vast mass of urban and rural poor, the semi-proletar-iat and small proprietors. 
 Irrespective of whether the “second revolution” has al-ready broken out in St. 
 Petersburg (I have said that it wouldbe absolutely absurd to think that it is possible from abroadto assess the actual tempo at which it is maturing), whether it has been postponed for some time, or whether it has al-ready begun in individual areas (of which some signs areevident)—in any case, the slogan of the moment on the eve of the new revolution, during it, and on the morrow of it,must be proletarian organisation . 
 Comrade workers! You performed miracles of proletarian heroism yesterday in overthrowing the tsarist monarchy. 
 In the more or less near future (perhaps even now, as theselines are being written) you will again have to perform thesame miracles of heroism to overthrow the rule of the land-lords and capitalists, who are waging the imperialist war. 
You will not achieve durable victory in this next “real” re-volution if you do not perform miracles of proletarian organi-sation ! Organisation is the slogan of the moment. 
 But to confine oneself to that is to say nothing, for, on the one hand, or-ganisation is always needed; hence, mere reference to the necessity of “organising the masses” explains absolutely nothing. 
 On the other hand, he who confines himself solely to this becomes an abettor of the liberals, for the very thing the liberals want in order to strengthen their rule is that the workers should not go beyond their ordinary “legal” (from the standpoint of “normal” bourgeois society) organi-sations, i. 
e. 
, that they should only join their party, their trade union, their co-operative society, etc. 
, etc. 
 Guided by their class instinct, the workers have realised that in revolutionary times they need not only ordinary, but an entirely different organisation. 
 They have rightlytaken the path indicated by the experience of our 1905 Revolution and of the 1871 Paris Commune; they have set up a Soviet of Workers ’ Deputies ; they have begun to deve-lop, expand and strengthen it by drawing in soldiers ’ depu-ties, and, undoubtedly, deputies from rural wage-workers, and then (in one form or another) from the entire peasantpoor. 
 The prime and most important task, and one that brooks no delay, is to set up organisations of this kind in all partsof Russia without exception, for all trades and strata of theproletarian and semi-proletarian population without ex-ception, i. 
e. 
, for all the working and exploited people, touse a less economically exact but more popular term. 
 Run-ning ahead somewhat, I shall mention that for the entire mass of the peasantry our Party (its special role in the new type of proletarian organisations I hope to discuss in one ofmy next letters) should especially recommend Soviets ofwage-workers and Soviets of small tillers who do not sellgrain, to be formed separately from the well-to-do peasants. 
 Without this, it will be impossible either to conduct a truly proletarian policy in general, * or correctly to approach the extremely important practical question which is a mat-ter of life and death for millions of people: the proper di-stribution of grain , increasing its production, etc. 
 It might be asked: What should be the function of the Soviets of Workers’ Deputies. 
? They “must be regarded as organs of insurrection, of revolutionary rule”, we wrote inNo. 
 47 of the Geneva Sotsial-Demokrat , of October 13, 1915. 
 ** *In the rural districts a struggle will now develop for the small and, partly, middle peasants. 
 The landlords, leaning on the well-to-dopeasants, will try to lead them into subordination to the bourgeoisie. 
Leaning on the rural wage-workers and rural poor, we must lead theminto the closet alliance with the urban proletariat. 
 **See present edition, Vol. 
 21, p. 
 402. 
— Ed. 
 This theoretical proposition, deduced from the experi-ence of the Commune of 1871 and of the Russian Revolution of 1905, must be explained and concretely developed on the basis of the practical experience of precisely the presentstage of the present revolution in Russia. 
 We need revolutionary government , we need (for a certain transitional period) a state . 
 This is what distinguishes us from the anarchists. 
 The difference between the revolution-ary Marxists and the anarchists is not only that the former stand for centralised, large-scale communist production,while the latter stand for disconnected small production. 
The difference between us precisely on the question of gov-ernment, of the state, is that we are for, and the anarchists against , utilising revolutionary forms of the state in a revolutionary way for the struggle for socialism. 
 We need a state. 
 But not the kind of state the bourgeoi-sie has created everywhere, from constitutional monarchiesto the most democratic republics. 
 And in this we differfrom the opportunists and Kautskyites of the old, and de-caying, socialist parties, who have distorted, or have for-gotten, the lessons of the Paris Commune and the analysis of these lessons made by Marx and Engels. 
 * We need a state, but not the kind the bourgeoisie needs, with organs of government in the shape of a police force,an army and a bureaucracy (officialdom) separate fromand opposed to the people. 
 All bourgeois revolutions merely perfected this state machine, merely transferred it from the hands of one party to those of another. 
 The proletariat, on the other hand, if it wants to uphold the gains of the present revolution and proceed further, towin peace, bread and freedom, must “ smash ”, to use Marx’s expression, this “ready-made” state machine and substit-ute a new one for it by merging the police force, the army and the bureaucracy with the entire armed people . 
 Follow-*In one of my next letters, or in a special article, I will deal in detail with this analysis, given in particular in Marx’s The Civil War in France , in Engels’s preface to the third edition of that work, in the letters: Marx’s of April 12, 1871, and Engels’s of March 18-28, 1875,and also with the utter distortion of Marxism by Kautsky in his cont-roversy with Pannekoek in 1912 on the question of the so-called “des-truction of the state”. 
 143 ing the path indicated by the experience of the Paris Com-mune of 1871 and the Russian Revolution of 1905, the proletariat must organise and arm all the poor, exploited sections of the population in order that they themselves should take the organs of state power directly into theirown hands, in order that they themselves should constitute these organs of state power. 
 And the workers of Russia have already taken this path in the first stage of the first revolution, in February-March 1917. 
 The whole task now is clearly to understand what thisnew path is, to proceed along it further, boldly, firmly andperseveringly. 
 The Anglo-French and Russian capitalists wanted “only” to remove, or only to “frighten”, Nicholas II and to leave intact the old state machine, the police force, the army and the bureaucracy. 
 The workers went further and smashed it. 
 And now, not only the Anglo-French, but also the German capitalists arehowling with rage and horror as they see, for example, Russian soldiers shooting their officers, as in the case of Admiral Nepenin, that supporter of Guchkov and Milyu-kov. 
 I said that the workers have smashed the old state machine. 
 It will be more correct to say: have begun to smash it. 
 Let us take a concrete example. 
In St. 
 Petersburg and in many other places the police force has been partly wiped out and partly dissolved. 
 The Guchkov-Milyukov government cannot either restore the monarchy or, in general, maintain power without restor-ing the police force as a special organisation of armed men under the command of the bourgeoisie, separate from andopposed to the people. 
 That is as clear as daylight. 
 On the other hand, the new government must reckon with the revolutionary people, must feed them with half-conces-sions and promises, must play for time. 
 That is why it re-sorts to half-measures: it establishes a “people’s militia”with elected officials (this sounds awfully respectable,awfully democratic, revolutionary and beautiful!)— but ... but, firstly, it places this militia under the control of the rural and urban local government bodies, i. 
e. 
, under thecommand of landlords and capitalists who have been elect-ed in conformity with laws passed by Nicholas the Bloody and Stolypin the Hangman!! Secondly, although calling it a “people’s militia” in order to throw dust in the eyes of the “people”, it does not call upon the entire people to join this militia, and does not compel the employers and capital-ists to pay workers and office employees their ordinary wages for the hours and days they spend in the public service , i. 
e. 
, in the militia. 
 That’s their trick. 
 That is how the landlord and capital-ist government of the Guchkovs and Milyukovs manages tohave a “people’s militia” on paper, while in reality, it isrestoring, gradually and on the quiet, the bourgeois , anti-people’s militia. 
 At first it is to consist of “eight thousandstudents and professors” (as foreign newspapers describe the present St. 
 Petersburg militia)—an obvious plaything!— and will gradually be built up of the old and new police force . 
 Prevent restoration of the police force! Do not let the local government bodies slip out of your hands! Set up amilitia that will really embrace the entire people, be really universal, and be led by the proletariat!—such is the task of the day, such is the slogan of the moment which equallyconforms with the properly understood interests of further-ing the class struggle, furthering the revolutionary move-ment, and the democratic instinct of every worker, of everypeasant, of every exploited toiler who cannot help hating the policemen, the rural police patrols, the village con-stables, the command of landlords and capitalists over armedmen with power over the people. 
 What kind of police force do they need, the Guchkovs and Milyukovs, the landlords and capitalists? The same kind asexisted under the tsarist monarchy. 
 After the briefest rev-olutionary periods all the bourgeois and bourgeois-democrat-ic republics in the world set up or restored precisely such a police force, a special organisation of armed men subor-dinate to the bourgeoisie in one way or another, separate fromand opposed to the people. 
 What kind of militia do we need, the proletariat, all the toiling people? A genuine people ’s militia, i. 
e. 
, one that, first, consists of the entire population, of all adult citizens of both sexes; and, second, one that combines the functions of a people’s army with police functions, with the functions of the chief and fundamental organ of public order and public administration. 
 To make these propositions more comprehensible I will take a purely schematic example. 
 Needless to say, it wouldbe absurd to think of drawing up any kind of a “plan” for aproletarian militia: when the workers and the entire peopleset about it practically, on a truly mass scale, they will work it out and organise it a hundred times better than any theoretician. 
 I am not offering a “plan”, I only want toillustrate my idea. 
 St. 
 Petersburg has a population of about two million. 
 Of these, more than half are between the ages of 15 and 65. 
Take half—one million. 
 Let us even subtract an entire fourth as physically unfit, etc. 
, taking no part in public service at the present moment for justifiable reasons. 
 Thereremain 750,000 who, serving in the militia, say one dayin fifteen (and receiving their pay for this time from theiremployers), would form an army of 50,000. 
 That ’s the type of “state” we need! That’s the kind of militia that would be a “people’s militia” in deed and not only in words. 
 That is how we must proceed in order to prevent the res-toration either of a special police force, or of a specialarmy separate from the people. 
 Such a militia, 95 hundredths of which would consist of workers and peasants, would express the real mind and will, the strength and power of the vast majority of the people. 
Such a militia would really arm, and provide military train-ing for, the entire people, would be a safeguard, but not of the Guchkov or Milyukov type, against all attempts torestore reaction, against all the designs of tsarist agents. 
 Such a militia would be the executive organ of the Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, it would enjoy theboundless respect and confidence of the people, for it itself would be an organisation of the entire people. 
 Such a mili-tia would transform democracy from a beautiful signboard,which covers up the enslavement and torment of the people by the capitalists, into a means of actually training the mas-ses for participation in all affairs of state. 
 Such a militia would draw the young people into political life and teach them not only by words, but also by action, by work . 
 Such a militia would develop those functions which, speaking in scientific language, come within the purview of the “wel-fare police”, sanitary inspection, and so forth, and wouldenlist for such work all adult women. 
 If women are not drawninto public service, into the militia, into political life, ifwomen are not torn out of their stupefying house and kit-chen environment, it will be impossible to guarantee real freedom, it will be impossible to build even democracy let alone socialism. 
 Such a militia would be a proletarian militia, for the industrial and urban workers would exert a guiding influenceon the masses of the poor as naturally and inevitably asthey came to hold the leading place in the people’s revolu-tionary struggle both in 1905-07 and in 1917. 
 Such a militia would ensure absolute order and devotedly observed comradely discipline. 
 At the same time, in thesevere crisis that all the belligerent countries are experienc-ing, it would make it possible to combat this crisis in avery democratic way, properly and rapidly to distribute grain and other supplies, introduce “universal labour ser-vice”, which the French now call “civilian mobilisation”and the (Germans “civilian service” and without which it is impossible—it has proved to be impossible —to heal the wounds that have been and are being inflicted by the pred-atory and horrible war. 
 Has the proletariat of Russia shed its blood only in order to receive fine promises of political democratic reforms andnothing more? Can it be that it will not demand, and se-cure, that every toiler should forthwith see and feel some improvement in his life? That every family should havebread? That every child should have a bottle of good milk and that not a single adult in a rich family should dare take extra milk until children are provided for? That the palacesand rich apartments abandoned by the tsar and the aristoc-racy should not remain vacant, but provide shelter for thehomeless and the destitute? Who can carry out these mea-sures except a people’s militia, to which women must be-long equally with men? These measures do not yet constitute socialism. 
 They concern the distribution of consumption, not the reorganisa-tion of production. 
 They would not yet constitute the “dic-tatorship of the proletariat”, only the “revolutionary-demo-cratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the poor peasantry”. 
 It is not a matter of finding a theoretical classification. 
 Wewould be committing a great mistake if we attempted toforce the complete, urgent, rapidly developing practicaltasks of the revolution into the Procrustean bed of narrowlyconceived “theory” instead of regarding theory primarily and predominantly as a guide to action . 
 Do the masses of the Russian workers possess sufficient class-consciousness, fortitude and heroism to perform“miracles of proletarian organisation” after they have per-formed miracles of daring, initiative and self-sacrifice in thedirect revolutionary struggle? That we do not know, and it would be idle to indulge in guessing, for practice alone furnishes the answers to such questions. 
 What we do know definitely, and what we, as a party, I must explain to the masses is, on the one hand, the immensepower of the locomotive of history that is engendering anunprecedented crisis, starvation and incalculable hardship. 
 That locomotive is the war, waged for predatory aims by the capitalists of both belligerent camps. 
 This “locomotive” has brought a number of the richest, freest and most enlight-ened nations to the brink of doom. 
 It is forcing the peoples to strain to the utmost all their energies, placing them inunbearable conditions, putting on the order of the day not the application of certain “theories” (an illusion against which Marx always warned socialists), but implementationof the most extreme practical measures; for without extreme measures, death—immediate and certain death from star-vation—awaits millions of people. 
 That the revolutionary enthusiasm of the advanced class can do a great deal when the objective situation demands extreme measures from the entire people, needs no proof. 
This aspect is clearly seen and felt by everybody in Rus-sia. 
 It is important to realise that in revolutionary times the objective situation changes with the same swiftness and abruptness as the current of life in general. 
 And we must be able to adapt our tactics and immediate tasks to the specific features of every given situation. 
 Before February 1917, the immediate task was to conduct bold revolutionary- internationalist propaganda, summon the masses to fight, rouse them. 
 The February-March days required the heroism of devoted struggle to crush the immediate enemy—tsarism. 
Now we are in transition from that first stage of the revolu-tion to the second, from “coming to grips” with tsarism to“coming to grips” with Guchkov-Milyukov landlord and cap-italist imperialism. 
 The immediate task is organisation , not only in the stereotyped sense of working to form stereo-typed organisations, but in the sense of drawing unprecedent-edly broad masses of the oppressed classes into an organi-sation that would take over the military, political and eco-nomic functions of the state. 
 The proletariat has approached, and will approach, this singular task in different ways. 
 In some parts of Russia the February-March Revolution puts nearly complete powerin its hands. 
 In others the proletariat may, perhaps, in a“usurpatory” manner, begin to form and develop a prole-tarian militia. 
 In still others, it will probably strive forimmediate elections of urban and rural local government bodies on the basis of universal, etc. 
, suffrage, in order to turn them into revolutionary centres, etc. 
, until the growthof proletarian organisation, the coming together of the sol-diers with the workers, the movement among the peasantryand the disillusionment of very many in the war-imperial-ist government of Guchkov and Milyukov bring near the hour when this government will be replaced by the “govern-ment” of the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies. 
 Nor ought we to forget that close to St. 
 Petersburg we have one of the most advanced, factually republican, countries,namely, Finland, which, from 1905 to 1917, shielded by therevolutionary battles of Russia, has in a relatively peaceful way developed democracy and has won the majority of the people for socialism. 
 The Russian proletariat will guaran-tee the Finnish Republic complete freedom, includingfreedom to secede (it is doubtful now whether a single Social-Democrat will waver on this point when the Cadet Rodi-chev is so meanly haggling in Helsingfors for bits of privi-leges for the Great Russians 144)—and precisely in this way will win the complete confidence and comradely assis-tance of the Finnish workers for the all-Russian proletarian cause. 
 In a difficult and big undertaking mistakes are inevitable, nor will we avoid them. 
 The Finnish workers are better organisers, they will help us in this sphere, they will, in their own way , push forward the establishment of the socialist republic. 
 Revolutionary victories in Russia proper—peaceful or-ganisational successes in Finland shielded by these victo-ries—the Russian workers’ transition to revolutionary organ-isational tasks on a new scale—capture of power by the proletariat and poorest strata of the population—encoura-gement and development of the socialist revolution in theWest—this is the road that will lead us to peace and social-ism. 
 N. 
 Lenin Zurich, March 11 (24), 1917 First published Published according to in the magazine the manuscript The Communist International No. 
 3-4, 1924 . 
 LETTERS AFAR F O U R T H L E T T E R HOW TO ACHIEVE PEACE I have just (March 12/25) read in the Neue Zürcher Zei-tung (No. 
 517 of March 24) the following telegraphic dis-patch from Berlin: “It is reported from Sweden that Maxim Gorky has sent the government and the Executive Committee greetingscouched in enthusiastic terms. 
 He greats the people’s victory over the lords of reaction and calls upon all Russia’s sons to help erect the edifice of the new Russian state. 
 At thesame time he urges the government to crown the cause ofemancipation by concluding peace. 
 It must not, he says, bepeace at any price; Russia now has less reason than ever tostrive for peace at any price. 
 It must be a peace that will enable Russia to live in honour among the other nations of the earth. 
 Mankind has shed much blood; the new gov-ernment would render not only Russia, but all mankind,the greatest service if it succeeded in concluding an earlypeace. 
” That is how Maxim Gorky’s letter is reported. 
 It is with deep chagrin that one reads this letter, impreg-nated through and through with stock philistine prejudices. 
The author of these lines has had many occasions, in meet-ings with Gorky in Capri, to warn and reproach him for hispolitical mistakes. 
 Gorky parried these reproaches withhis inimitable charming smile and with the ingenuous remark: “I know I am a bad Marxist. 
 And besides, we art-ists are all somewhat irresponsible. 
” It is not easy toargue against that. 
 There can be no doubt that Gorky’s is an enormous artistic talent which has been, and will be, of great benefit to the world proletarian movement. 
 But why should Gorky meddle in politics?In my opinion, Gorky’s letter expresses prejudices that are exceedingly widespread not only among the pettybourgeoisie, but also among a section of the workers underits influence. 
 All the energies of our Party, all the efforts of the class-conscious workers, must be concentrated on a persistent, persevering, all-round struggle against theseprejudices. 
 The tsarist government began and waged the present war as an imperialist , predatory war to rob and strangle weak nations. 
 The government of the Guchkovs and Milyu-kovs, which is a landlord and capitalist government, is forced to continue, and wants to continue, this very same kind of war. 
 To urge that government to conclude a demo-cratic peace is like preaching virtue to brothel keepers. 
 Let me explain what is meant. 
What is imperialism? In my Imperialism , the Highest Stage of Capitalism , the manuscript of which was delivered to the ParusPublishers some time before the revolution, was accepted bythem and announced in the magazine Letopis , 145 I answered this question as follows: “Imperialism is capitalism at that stage of development at which the dominance of monopolies and finance capital is established; in which the export of capital has acquiredpronounced importance; in which the division of the worldamong the international trusts has begun; in which the di-vision of all territories of the globe among the biggestcapitalist powers has been completed” (Chapter VII of the above-mentioned book, the publication of which was announced in Letopis , when the censorship still existed, under the title: “Modern Capitalism”, by V. 
 Ilyin). 
 * The whole thing hinges on the fact that capital has grown to huge dimensions. 
 Associations of a small number of thebiggest capitalists (cartels, syndicates, trusts) manipulate billions and divide the whole world among themselves. 
 *See present edition, Vol. 
 22, pp. 
 266-67. 
— Ed. 
 The world has been completely divided up. 
 The war was brought on by the clash of the two most powerful groups of multimillionaires, Anglo-French and German, for the redivision of the world. 
 The Anglo-French group of capitalists wants first to rob Germany, deprive her of her colonies (nearly all of whichhave already been seized), and then to rob Turkey. 
 The German group of capitalists wants to seize Turkey for itself and to compensate itself for the loss of its colonies by seizing neighbouring small states (Belgium, Serbia,Rumania). 
 This is the real truth; it is being concealed by all sorts of bourgeois lies about a “liberating”, “national” war, a“war for right and justice”, and similar jingle with which the capitalists always fool the common people. 
 Russia is waging this war with foreign money. 
 Russian capital is a partner of Anglo-French capital. 
 Russia is waging the war in order to rob Armenia, Turkey, Galicia. 
 Guchkov, Lvov and Milyukov, our present ministers, are not chance comers. 
 They are the representatives and lead-ers of the entire landlord and capitalist class. 
 They are bound by the interests of capital. 
 The capitalists can no more renounce their interests than a man can lift himself by hisbootstraps. 
 Secondly, Guchkov-Milyukov and Co. 
 are bound by Anglo-French capital. 
 They have waged, and are still wag-ing, the war with foreign money. 
 They have borrowed bil-lions, promising to pay hundreds of millions in interest every year , and to squeeze this tribute out of the Russian workers and Russian peasants. 
 Thirdly, Guchkov-Milyukov and Co. 
 are bound to Eng-land, France, Italy, Japan and other groups of robber capitalists by direct treaties concerning the predatory aims of this war. 
 These treaties were concluded by Tsar Nicho-las II . 
 Guchkov-Milyukov and Co. 
 took advantage of the workers’ struggle against the tsarist monarchy to seize power,and they have confirmed the treaties concluded by the tsar. 
 This was done by the whole of the Guchkov-Milyukov government in a Manifesto which the St. 
 Petersburg Teleg-raph Agency circulated on March 7(20): “The government [of Guchkov and Milyukov] will faithfully abide by all the treaties that bind us with other powers,” says the manifes-to. 
 Milyukov, the new Minister for Foreign Affairs, said the same thing in his telegram of March 5 (18), 1917 to all Russian representatives abroad. 
 These are all secret treaties, and Milyukov and Co. 
 re-fuse to make them public for two reasons: (1) they fear the people, who are opposed to the predatory war; (2) they are bound by Anglo-French capital which insists that the treaties remain secret. 
 But every newspaper reader who hasfollowed events knows that these treaties envisage the rob-bery of China by Japan; of Persia, Armenia, Turkey (es-pecially Constantinople) and Galicia by Russia; of Albaniaby Italy; of Turkey and the German colonies by France and England, etc. 
 This is how things stand. 
Hence, to urge the Guchkov-Milyukov government to con-clude a speedy, honest, democratic and good-neighbourlypeace is like the good village priest urging the landlords andthe merchants to “walk in the way of God”, to love their neighbours and to turn the other cheek. 
 The landlords and merchants listen to these sermons, continue to oppress androb the people and praise the priest for his ability to consoleand pacify the “muzhiks”. 
 Exactly the same role is played—consciously or uncon-ciously—by all those who in the present imperialist war address pious peace appeals to the bourgeois governments. 
 The bourgeois governments either refuse to listen to suchappeals and even prohibit them, or they allow them to bemade and assure all and sundry that they are only fightingto conclude the speediest and “justest” peace, and that allthe blame lies with the enemy. 
 Actually, talking peace to bourgeois governments turns out to be deception of the people . 
 The groups of capitalists who have drenched the world in blood for the sake of dividing territories, markets andconcessions cannot conclude an “honourable” peace. 
 They can conclude only a shameful peace, a peace based on the division of the spoils , on the partition of Turkey and the colonies. 
 Moreover, the Guchkov-Milyukov government is in gener-al opposed to peace at the present moment, because the /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR “only ” “loot” it would get now would be Armenia and part of Galicia, whereas it also wants to get Constantinople and re-gain from the Germans Poland, which tsarism has always so inhumanly and shamelessly oppressed. 
 Further, the Guchkov-Milyukov government is, in essence, only the agent of Anglo-French capital, which wants to retain the colonies it haswrested from Germany and, on top of that , compel Germany hand back Belgium and part of France. 
 Anglo-French capi-tal helped the Guchkovs and Milyukovs remove Nicholas II in order that they might help it to “vanquish” Germany. 
 What, then, is to be done?To achieve peace (and still more to achieve a really democratic, a really honourable peace), it is necessary thatpolitical power be in the hands of the workers and poorest peasants , not the landlords and capitalists. 
 The latter represent an insignificant minority of the population, andthe capitalists, as everybody knows, are making fantasticprofits out of the war. 
 The workers and poorest peasants are the vast majority of the population. 
 They are not making profit out of the war; on the contrary, they are being reduced to ruin and starvation. 
 They are bound neither by capital nor by thetreaties between the predatory groups of capitalists; theycan and sincerely want to end the war. 
 If political power in Russia were in the hands of the Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies, these Soviets, and the All-Russia Soviet elected by them, could, and no doubt would, agree to carry out the peace programmewhich our Party (the Russian Social-Democratic LabourParty) outlined as early as October 13, 1915, in No. 
 47 ofits Central Organ, Sotsial-Demokrat * (then published in Geneva because of the Draconic tsarist censorship). 
 This programme would probably be the following: 1) The All-Russia Soviet of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies (or the St. 
 Petersburg Soviet tempo-rarily acting for it) would forthwith declare that it is not bound by any treaties concluded either by the tsarist mon-archy or by the bourgeois governments. 
 *See present edition, Vol. 
 21, pp. 
 401-04. 
— Ed. 
 2) It would forthwith publish all these treaties in order to hold up to public shame the predatory aims of the tsarist monarchy and of all the bourgeois governments without exception. 
 3) It would forthwith publicly call upon all the bellig-erent powers to conclude an immediate armistice . 
 4) It would immediately bring to the knowledge of all the people our, the workers’ and peasants’ peace terms : liberation of all colonies; liberation of all dependent, oppressed and unequal na-tions. 
 5) It would declare that it expects nothing good from the bourgeois governments and calls upon the workers of allcountries to overthrow them and to transfer all political power to Soviets of Workers’ Deputies. 
 6) It would declare that the capitalist gentry themselves can repay the billions of debts contracted by the bour-geois governments to wage this criminal, predatory warand that the workers and peasants refuse to recognise these debts. 
 To pay the interest on these loans would mean paying the capitalists tribute for many years for having graciously allowed the workers to kill one another in order that thecapitalists might divide the spoils. 
 Workers and peasants!—the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies would say—are you willing to pay these gentry, the capi-talists, hundreds of millions of rubles every year for a war waged for the division of the African colonies, Turkey, etc. 
? For these peace terms the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies would, in my opinion, agree to wage war against any bour-geois government and against all the bourgeois governments of the world, because this would really be a just war, be-cause all the workers and toilers in all countries would work for its success . 
 The German worker now sees that the bellicose mon-archy in Russia is being replaced by a bellicose republic, a republic of capitalists who want to continue the imperialistwar, and who have confirmed the predatory treaties of the Tsarist monarchy. 
 Judge for yourselves, can the German worker trust such a republic? Judge for yourselves, can the war continue, can the capitalist domination continue on earth, if the Russian people, always sustained by the living memories of the great Revolution of 1905, win complete freedom and transfer allpolitical power to the Soviets of Workers’ and Peasants’Deputies? N. 
 Lenin Zurich, March 12 (25), 1917 First published Published according to in the magazine the manuscript The Communist International No. 
 3-4, 1924 . 
 LETTERS AFAR F I F T H L E T T E R THE TASKS INVOLVED IN THE BUILDING OF THE REVOLUTIONARY PROLETARIAN STATE In the preceding letters, the immediate tasks of the revolutionary proletariat in Russia were formulated as fol-lows: (1) to find the surest road to the next stage of therevolution, or to the second revolution, which (2) musttransfer political power from the government of the land-lords and capitalists (the Guchkovs, Lvovs, Milyukovs, Ke-renskys) to a government of the workers and poorest peas-ants. 
 (3) This latter government must be organised on themodel of the Soviets of Workers’ and Peasants’ Deputies,namely, (4) it must smash, completely eliminate, the oldstate machine, the army, the police force and bureaucracy (officialdom), that is common to all bourgeois states, and substitute for this machine (5) not only a mass organisa-tion, but a universal organisation of the entire armedpeople. 
 (6) Only such a government, of “such” a class com-position (“revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of theproletariat and peasantry”) and such organs of government (“proletarian militia”) will be capable of successfully car-rying out the extremely difficult and absolutely urgentchief task of the moment, namely: to achieve peace , not an imperialist peace, not a deal between the imperialist powersconcerning the division of the booty by the capitalists andtheir governments, but a really lasting and democratic peace, which cannot be achieved without a proletarian revolution in a number of countries. 
 (7) In Russia the victoryof the proletariat can be achieved in the very near future only if, from the very first step, the workers are supported by the vast majority of the peasants fighting for the confisca-tion of the landed estates (and for the nationalisation of all the land, if we assume that the agrarian programmeof the “104” is still essentially the agrarian programme ofthe peasantry 146). 
 (8) In connection with such a peasant revolution, and on its basis, the proletariat can and must,in alliance with the poorest section of the peasantry, take further steps towards control of the production and dis-tribution of the basic products, towards the introductionof “universal labour service”, etc. 
 These steps are dic-tated, with absolute inevitability, by the conditions creat-ed by the war, which in many respects will become still moreacute in the post-war period. 
 In their entirety and in their development these steps will mark the transition to socialism , which cannot be achieved in Russia directly, at one stroke,without transitional measures, but is quite achievable andurgently necessary as a result of such transitional measures. 
(9) In this connection, the task of immediately organisingspecial Soviets of Workers’ Deputies in the rural districts , i. 
e. 
, Soviets of agricultural wage-workers separate from the Soviets of the other peasant deputies, comes to the fore-front with extreme urgency. 
 Such, briefly, is the programme we have outlined, based on an appraisal of the class forces in the Russian and worldrevolution, and also on the experience of 1871 and 1905. 
 Let us now attempt a general survey of this programme as a whole and, in passing, deal with the way the subjectwas approached by K. 
 Kautsky, the chief theoretician of the“Second” (1889-1914) International and most prominentrepresentative of the “Centre”, “marsh” trend that is now tobe observed in all countries, the trend that oscillates be-tween the social-chauvinists and the revolutionary inter-nationalists. 
 Kautsky discussed this subject in his maga-zine Die Neue Zeit of April 6, 1917 (new style) in an article entitled, “The Prospects of the Russian Revolution”. 
 “First of all,” writes Kautsky, “we must ascertain what tasks confront the revolutionary proletarian regime” (state system). 
 “Two things,” continues the author, “are urgently needed by the proletariat: democracy and socialism. 
” Unfortunately, Kautsky advances this absolutely incon-testable thesis in an exceedingly general form, so that in essence he says nothing and explains nothing. 
 Milyukov and Kerensky, members of a bourgeois and imperialistgovernment, would readily subscribe to this general thesis,one to the first part, and the other to the second .... 
 * Written on March 26 (April 8), 1917 First published in the magazine Published according to Bolshevik No. 
 3-4, 1924 the manuscript *The manuscript breaks off here. 
— Ed. 
 TO OUR COMRADE S IN WAR-PRISONE R CAMP S147 Comrades, a revolution has taken place in Russia. 
 The Petrograd and Moscow workers were again in the vanguard of the great freedom movement. 
 They staged a political strike. 
 They demonstrated in the streets under the Red Flag. 
 They fought like lions against the tsarist police,gendarmerie and the small section of the army that did notimmediately side with the people. 
 More than 2,000 werekilled and wounded in Petrograd alone. 
 The Russian workersbought our country’s freedom at the price of their blood. 
 The workers’ demands were: bread , freedom , peace . 
 Bread —because, as in nearly every other country in-volved in this robber war, the Russian people are suffer-ing from hunger. 
 Freedom —because the tsarist government, taking advan-tage of the war, finally turned the whole of Russia into one big prison. 
 Peace —because the Russian workers, like class-con-scious workers in all other countries, do not want to go on dying for the interests of a handful of the rich, do not wantto continue this criminal war, started by crowned anduncrowned freebooters. 
 The insurgent workers were joined by most of the men of the Petrograd and Moscow garrisons. 
 The workers andpeasants in soldier’s uniform extended a hand of brother-hood to the workers and peasants not in uniform. 
 Thehonest-minded part of the officer corps joined the revolution. 
Officers who tried to go against the people were shot down by the soldiers. 
 The revolution was carried out by the workers and sol-diers. 
 But, as has often been the case in other revolutions, power was at once seized by the bourgeoisie. 
 The state Duma, with its overwhelming majority of landlords and capi-talists, did everything it could to come to terms with Tsar Nicholas II. 
 Even at the last moment, when civil war wasraging in the streets of Petrograd, the State Duma sent thetsar one telegram after another imploring him to consent tominor concessions in order to save his crown. 
 The tsar was overthrown by the insurgent workers and soldiers , not by the State Duma—the Duma of the landlords and the rich. 
 But the State Duma appointed the new, ProvisionalGovernment. 
 It consists of representatives of the liberal capitalists and the big landowners. 
 The chief posts in the governmenthave gone to Prince Lvov (a big landowner and ultra-moderate liberal), A. 
 Guchkov (an associate of Stolypin; he approved the court-martialling of revolutionaries), Te-reshchenko (millionaire sugar king), Milyukov (alwayssupported, and continues to support, the predatory war intowhich our country was embroiled by Tsar Nicholas and hisgang). 
 The “democrat” Kerensky has been brought in only to create the semblance of a “people’s” government and to have a “democratic” stump speaker to feed the people high-falutin but empty phrases , while the Guchkovs and Lvovs work against the people. 
 The new government wants to continue the robber war. 
 It is the agent of the Russian, English and French capital-ists who—like the German capitalists—are determined to “fight it out” and secure for themselves the best part ofthe booty. 
 The new government cannot give Russia peace,nor does it want to. 
 It does not want to turn the landed estates over to the people, nor does it want to make the rich hear the burden of the war. 
 For that reason it cannot give the people bread. 
 The workers and the poor population generally are beingforced to suffer hunger just as before. 
 The new government consists of capitalists and land-lords. 
 It does not want to give Russia full freedom. 
 Underpressure from the insurgent workers and soldiers it has promised to convene a constituent Assembly to decide how Russia should be governed. 
 But it is delaying electionsto the constituent assembly in an attempt to win time and First page of the leaflet, “To Our Comrades in War-Prisoner Camps”. 
 1917 Reduced First page of the leaflet, “To Our Comrades in War-Prisoner Camps”. 
 1917 Reduced then deceive the people, as similar governments have done many times before. 
 It does not want Russia to be a demo-cratic republic. 
 All it wants is to replace the bad Tsar Nicholas II with an allegedly good Tsar, Mikhail. 
 It wantsRussia to be ruled not by her people, but by a new tsartogether with the bourgeoisie. 
 Such is this new government. 
But alongside it another government is gradually taking shape in Petrograd—the workers and soldiers have set up their Soviet, with one elected deputy from each thousandworkers or soldiers. 
 It meets in the Taurida Palace and nowhas more than 1,000 members. 
 And it is genuinely represent-ative of the people. 
 The Soviet might make certain mistakes at first. 
 But it is coming to demand, in a loud and powerful voice, peace, bread and a democratic republic. 
 The Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies insists on immediate convocation of the Constituent Assembly and soldier participation in the elections and in deciding theissue of war and peace. 
 It insists on the transfer to the peasants of land belonging to the tsar and the landlords. 
 It insists on a republic and will not hear of a new, “good”tsar. 
 It demands universal and equal suffrage for all menand women. 
 It has secured the arrest of the tsar and tsari-na. 
 The Soviet wants to appoint a watch committee whichwould check on every step of the new government and would itself become the factual government. 
 The Soviet is work-ing for alliance with the workers of all other countriesfor joint attack on the capitalists. 
 Many revolutionaryworkers have gone to the front in order, taking advantageof the newly won freedom, to arrange with the soldiers forunited action to end the war, assure the people their rights and consolidate Russia’s freedom. 
 The Social-Democratic paper Pravda 148 has resumed publication in Petrograd and is helping the workers carry out all these great tasks. 
 Such, comrades, is the position today. 
You war prisoners cannot remain indifferent. 
 You must be prepared for the great task that will fall to you, and perhaps very soon. 
 The enemies of Russian freedom sometimes count on you. 
 They say: there are about two million Russian war prisoners; if they side with the tsar when they return home, we could again put Nicholas or his “beloved” brother back on the throne. 
 History knows instances when yesterday’s enemies, having made peace with an overthrown tsar,returned to him his imprisoned soldiers in order that theymay help him fight his own people .... 
 149 Comrades, wherever you have the opportunity, discuss the great events taking place in our country. 
 Declare with full voice that you stand together with the best part of the Russian soldiers, that you do not want a tsar, that youdemand a free republic, uncompensated transfer of the land-ed estates to the peasants, an eight-hour day, immediateconvocation of the Constituent Assembly. 
 Declare that youstand on the side of the Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ deputies, that on your return to Russia you will be not with the tsar, but against him, not with the landlordsand the rich, but against them. 
 Organise wherever you have the chance, adopt resolu-tions endorsing the above demands, explain to your morebackward comrades the meaning of the great events taking place in our country. 
 You have gone through enough torment before and during the war and as war prisoners. 
 Now we are advancing towardsbetter days. 
 The dawn of freedom has risen. 
 Return to Russia as an army of the revolution, an army of the people, not an army of the tsar. 
 In 1905, too, the prisoners of war returning from Japan were the best fighters for freedom. 
 When you return home you will go to every part of the country. 
 And you must carry a message of freedom to everyremote corner, to every Russian village that has suffered somuch from hunger, taxes and humiliation. 
 Enlighten your peasant brothers, banish ignorance from the villages, call on the peasant poor to support the workers of town and coun-try in their glorious struggle. 
 Having won a republic, the Russian workers will unite with the workers of all other countries and will boldly leadthe whole of mankind to socialism , a system in which there will be neither rich nor poor, and in which a handful of rich will no longer be able to convert millions into theirwage-slaves. 
 Comrades, at the very first opportunity we shall return to Russia to join our brothers, the workers and soldiers, in their struggle. 
 But in Russia, too, we shall not forget you. 
 From free Russia we will try to send you books, news-papers, and news of what is happening in our country. 
We will demand that you be adequately supplied withmoney and food. 
 And we shall tell the insurgent workers andsoldiers: You can rely on your brothers languishing in war-prisoner camps; they are sons of the people and they will stand shoulder to shoulder with you in the battle for free-dom, for a republic and against the tsar. 
 Editorial Board of Sotsial -Demokrat Written in the middle of March 1917 Published according Printed as a leaflet in 1917 to the leaflet text THE REVOLUTION IN RUSSIA AND THE TASKS OF THE WORKERS OF ALL COUNTRIES Comrade workers, The prediction of the socialists who have remained faith-ful to socialism and have not succumbed to the savage and beastly war hysteria has proved correct. 
 The first revo-lution, caused by the world-wide predatory war among thecapitalists of various countries, has broken out. 
 The im-perialist war, that is, a war for the capitalist division ofspoils, for the strangling of weak nations, has begun to turn into civil war, that is, a war of the workers against the capitalists, of the toilers and the oppressed against theiroppressors, against tsars and kings, landowners and capital-ists, a war for mankind’s complete liberation from wars,from poverty of the masses, from oppression of man by man! To the Russian workers has fallen the honour and the good fortune of being the first to start the revolution— the great and only legitimate and just war, the war of theoppressed against the oppressors. 
 The St. 
 Petersburg workers have vanquished the tsarist monarchy. 
 Having started the uprising unarmed in face ofmachine-guns, in their heroic struggle against the police and the tsar’s armies, the workers won over the majority of the soldiers of the St. 
 Petersburg garrison. 
 The same thingoccurred in Moscow and in other cities. 
 Abandoned by hisarmies, the tsar had to capitulate: he signed an abdicationon behalf of himself and his son. 
 He suggested that thethrone be transferred to his brother Mikhail. 
 Owing to the great rapidity of the revolution, the direct assistance of the Anglo-French capitalists, insufficient class-consciousness of the mass of the workers and the people in St. 
 Petersburg, the organisation and preparedness of the Russian landowners and capitalists, they succeeded in seizing power. 
 The key posts, the premiership and the Ministries of the Interior and War, in the new Russian gov-ernment, the “Provisional Government”, have gone to Lvovand Guchkov, the Octobrists who had done their best tohelp Nicholas the Bloody and Stolypin the Hangman crushthe Revolution of 1905, shoot down and hang workers and peasants fighting for land and freedom. 
 The less important, ministerial posts have gone to the Cadets: Foreign Affairs toMilyukov, Education to Manuilov, Agriculture to Shin-garyov. 
 One quite insignificant post, that of Minister ofJustice, has gone to the glib-tongued Trudovik Kerensky,whom the capitalists need to pacify the people with empty promises, fool them with high-sounding phrases, reconcile them to the government of landlords and capitalists who,in union with the capitalists of England and France, want tocontinue the predatory war, a war for the seizure of Armenia,Constantinople, Galicia, a war to enable the Anglo-Frenchcapitalists to retain the booty they have taken from the Ger-man capitalists (all Germany’s African colonies), and, at the same time, recover the spoils seized by the German capitalist robbers (part of France, Belgium, Serbia, Rumania,etc. 
). 
 The workers could not, of course, trust such a govern-ment. 
 They had overthrown the tsarist monarchy in their fight for peace , bread and freedom . 
 They immediately saw why Guchkov, Milyukov and Co. 
 succeeded in wrestingvictory from the hands of the working people. 
 The reasonwas that the Russian landlords and capitalists were wellprepared and organised; that they had on their side the powerof capital, the wealth both of the Russian capitalists and of the richest capitalists in the world, the English and the French. 
 The workers realised from the very start that inorder to fight for peace, bread, and freedom, the labouringclasses, the workers, soldiers and peasants, must organise , close their ranks, unite independently of the capitalists and against the capitalists. 
 Thus the St. 
 Petersburg workers, having overthrown the tsarist monarchy, immediately set up their own organisa-tion, the Soviet of Workers ’ Deputies , immediately proceeded to strengthen and extend it, to organise independent Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies. 
 Only a few days after the revolution, the St. 
 Petersburg Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies comprised over 1 ,500 deputies of work-ers and peasants dressed in soldier’s uniform. 
 It enjoyedsuch wide confidence among the railway workers and theentire mass of the labouring population that it began todevelop into a real people ’s government. 
 And even the most faithful friends and patrons of Guch-kov-Milyukov, even the most faithful watchdogs of Anglo-French predatory capital, the staff correspondent of therichest newspaper of the English capitalists, Robert Wil-son of The Times , and the staff correspondent of the richest paper of the French capitalists, Charles Rivet of Le Temps , even they, while hurling curses at the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies, have been obliged to admit that there are two gov-ernments in Russia . 
 One—recognised by “everybody” (actual-ly, by everybody among the wealthy ), the landlord and capi-talist government of the Guchkovs and the Milyukovs. 
 Theother—recognised by “nobody” (of the wealthy classes), the government of the workers and the peasants—the St. 
 Peters-burg Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies that is tryingto establish Soviets of Workers’ and Soviets of Peasants’Deputies throughout Russia . 
 Let us see, now, what each of these two governments is saying and doing. 
 1. 
What is the landlord and capitalist government of Lvov-Guchkov-Milyukov doing? It is handing out the most glowing promises right and left. 
 It promises the Russian people the fullest freedom. 
It promises to convoke a national Constituent Assembly todetermine Russia’s form of government. 
 Kerensky and the Cadet leaders declare themselves in favour of a democratic republic. 
 The Guchkovs-Milyukovs are unsurpassed mastersof theatrical revolutionism. 
 Their publicity machine isworking at top speed. 
 But what about their deeds ? While promising freedom, the new government actually negotiated with the tsar’s family, with the dynasty, with a view to restoring the monarchy. 
 It invited Mikhail Roma-nov to become regent, that is, temporary tsar. 
 The monarchyof Russia would have been restored, had not the Guchkovs and the Milyukovs been stopped by the workers, who marched through the streets of St. 
 Petersburg and inscribed on their banners: “Land and Freedom! Death to the Tyrants!”—who, together with the cavalry regiments, assembled on thesquare in front of the Duma and unfurled banners with theinscription: “Long Live Socialist Republics in All Coun-tries!” Mikhail Romanov, the ally of the Guchkovs-Milyu-kovs, realised that in this situation it would be wiser to decline the offer, pending his election to the throne by the constituent assembly, and Russia has—temporarily—re-mained a republic. 
 The government did not deprive the former tsar of his freedom. 
 The workers compelled his arrest. 
 The governmentwanted to hand over the command of the army to Nikolai Nikolayevich Romanov. 
 The workers forced his removal. 
 Obviously, were there no Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’Deputies, the landlords, the Lvovs-Guchkovs, would cometo terms with a Romanov or with some other landowner. 
 In its manifesto to the people and in Milyukov’s tele-gram to all Russian representatives abroad, the government declared that it would abide by all the international treaties entered into by Russia. 
 These treaties had been concludedby the deposed tsar. 
 The government does not dare to pub-lish them—first, because it is bound hand and foot by Rus-sian, English and French capital; second, because it fearsthat the people would tear the Guchkovs and the Milyukovs to pieces if they discovered that the capitalists were ready to sacrifice another five or ten million workers and peasantsin order to win Constantinople, strangle Galicia, etc. 
 What, then, is the value of these promises of freedom, if the people are not allowed to know the truth about thetreaties of the landowner tsar, for which the capitalists are prepared to shed more and more soldiers’ blood? And what is the value of the promises of various free-doms, and even of a democratic republic, to a people threat-ened with famine, a people whom they wish to lead blind-fold to the slaughter in order that the Russian, English,and French capitalists may rob the German capitalists? At the same time the government of the Guchkovs and Milyukovs is suppressing by sheer force every attempt ofthe Russian workers to come to an understanding with their brothers, the workers of other countries: the government does not permit Pravda , which resumed publication in St. 
 Petersburg after the revolution, the manifesto issued in St. 
 Petersburg by the Central Committee of our Party, the Rus-sian Social-Democratic Labour Party, or the proclamations-of Duma Deputy Chkheidze and his group, to be sentabroad. 
 Workers and peasants! You can rest assured: you have been promised freedom—freedom for the dead, freedom for those who have died of hunger, who have been slaughteredin the war! In none of its programmes has the new government said a single word about land for the peasants or higher wages for the workers. 
 No date has as yet been set for convoca-tion of the constituent assembly. 
 No elections to the St. 
 Pe-tersburg City Council have as yet been appointed. 
 Thepeople’s militia is being placed under the supervision ofrural and urban local government bodies which, in accordancewith the Stolypin law, were elected only by capitalist andthe richest landowners. 
 Governors are being appointed from the landowning class—and this is “freedom”! 2. 
What is the government of the workers and peasants doing , and what should it do ?... * Written on March 12 (25), 1917 First published in 1924 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany II the manuscript *The manuscript break off here. 
— Ed. 
 THE TASKS OF THE RUSSIA N SOCIA L-DEMOCRATI C LABOUR PARTY IN THE RUSSIA N REVOLUTI ON150 REPORT OF A LECTURE Lenin’s two-and-a-half-hour lecture consisted of two parts. 
 In the first, Lenin surveyed the historical condi-tions which could, and did, produce such a “miracle” as thecollapse of the tsarist monarchy in a matter of eight days. 
The most important of these was the “great rebellion” of 1905-07, so vilely denounced by the Guchkovs and Milyu-kovs, the present masters of the situation, who are movedto admiration by the “glorious revolution” of 1917. 
 But hadthe really profound Revolution of 1905 not “ploughed up theground”, had it not exposed to view all the parties andclasses in action, had it not exposed the tsarist clique in all its barbarism and savagery, the swift victory of 1917 would not have been possible. 
 In 1917 a very exceptional conjuncture of circumstances made it possible to merge together the attacks of the mostdiverse social forces against tsarism. 
 First, Anglo-Frenchfinance capital, which more than any other dominates and robs the whole world, opposed the Revolution in 1905 and helped the tsar crush it (the 1906 loan). 
 But it took a veryactive and direct part in the present revolution, organisingthe conspiracy of the Guchkovs, Milyukovs and part ofthe army high command to depose Nicholas II or force himto make concessions. 
 From the standpoint of world politics and international finance capital, the Guchkov-Milyukov government is no more than an agent of the banking firm“England and France”, an instrument for continuing the imperialist slaughter. 
 Second, as a result of the military defeats sustained by tsarism, the old officer corps was replaced by new, young, predominantly bourgeois, offi-cers. 
 Third, the entire Russian bourgeoisie, which between1905 and 1914, and particularly between 1914 and 1917,had intensively organised its forces, joined with the land-lords in a common struggle against the decadent tsaristregime in the hope of enriching itself by seizing Armenia, Constantinople, Galicia, etc. 
 Fourth, to these imperialist forces was added the deep-going and rapidly unfolding pro-letarian movement. 
 The proletariat, which performed therevolution, demanded peace , bread and freedom . 
 It had noth-ing in common with the imperialist bourgeoisie, and itgave leadership to the majority of the army, composed of workers and peasants. 
 The conversion of the imperialist war into civil war has begun . 
 Hence, the basic contradiction of the present revolu-tion—one that reveals it merely as the first stage of the first revolution brought about by the imperialist war. 
 TheGuchkov-Milyukov landlord and capitalist government can give the people neither peace, bread, nor freedom. 
 It is a government for continuing the predatory war. 
 It hasopenly declared that it will abide by the tsar’s internation-al treaties, and these are all predatory treaties. 
 At best,it might postpone the crisis, but it cannot ward off famine. 
 Nor can it give the country freedom, no matter how many “promises” it makes (promises are cheap), because it is bound by the interests of landlordism and capital. 
 From thevery start it tried to arrange a deal with the dynasty, the object being to restore the monarchy. 
 That is why it would be the height of folly to adopt tactics of “supporting” the new government in the interests, supposedly, of “combating reaction”. 
 That struggle requires the arming of the proletariat —the only serious, effective guarantee both against tsarism and attempts by the Guch-kovs and Milyukovs to restore the monarchy. 
 Deputy Skobelev is therefore right in saying that Russia is “on the eve of a second, real [ wirklich ] revo-lution”. 
 The people’s organisation for this revolution already exists and is growing. 
 That organisation is the Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies. 
 And it is not for nothing that the agents of Anglo-French capital, the correspondents of The Times and Le Temps , are so anxious to discredit it. 
 A close study of the press reports relating to the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies led Lenin to conclude that therewere three distinct trends in it. 
 The first comes nearest tosocial-patriotism. 
 It puts its trust in Kerensky, that hero of the empty phrase, that pawn in the hands of Guchkov and Milyukov, that representative of the worst type of“Louis Blanc politics”, past master of the empty promise andof the sonorous phrase in the spirit of the European social-patriots and social-pacifists à la Kautsky and Co. 
 In real-ity, however, he “reconciles” the workers to the continua-tion of the predatory war. 
 Through Kerensky the imperial-ist bourgeoisie tells the workers: We shall give you a repub-lic, the eight-hour day (which has already been established in St. 
 Petersburg), we promise you all the freedoms—but all this for the express purpose that you will help usrob Turkey and Austria, snatch from German imperialism its booty, and assure Anglo-French imperialism its booty. 
 The second trend is represented by the Central Commit-tee of our Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party. 
 Thepapers have published an extract from the Manifesto of ourCentral Committee, issued in St. 
 Petersburg on March 18. 
 It demands a democratic republic, the eight-hour day, confiscation of the landed estates and their transfer to thepeasants, confiscation of grain stocks, immediate peacenegotiations, conducted not by the government of Guchkov and Milyukov, but by the Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’Deputies. 
 This Soviet, in the view of the Manifesto, is the real revolutionary government (Lenin added that The Times correspondent, too, speaks of two governments in Russia). 
 Peace negotiations are to be conducted not with the bour-geois governments, but with the proletariat of all the warring countries. 
 The Manifesto calls upon all workers,peasants and soldiers to elect delegates to the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies. 
 These are the only really socialist, really revolutionary tactics. 
 The third trend is represented by Chkheidze and his friends. 
 They are vacillating , and this is reflected in remarks of The Times and Le Temps , one minute praising, the next execrating them. 
 When Chkheidze refused to enter thesecond Provisional Government, when he declared that the war was an imperialist war on both sides, etc. 
, he was pur-suing a proletarian policy. 
 When, however, Chkheidze tookpart in the first Provisional Government (the Duma Com-mittee); when, in §3 of his proclamation, he demanded “ausreichende Teilnahme der Vertreter der russischen Ar-beiterschaft an der Regierung” (participation of interna-tionalists in the government of the imperialist war!); when(together with Skobelev) he invited this imperialist govern-ment to open peace negotiations (instead of explaining to the workers that the bourgeoisie is bound hand and foot by the interests of finance capital which cannot break withimperialism); when friends of Chkheidze—Tulyakov andSkobelev—on the instructions of the Guchkov and Milyu-kov government try to “pacify” the soldiers who are risingagainst the liberal generals (the murder of Admiral Nepe-nin, bemoaned even by the German imperialists!)—then Chkheidze and his friends fall into the worst kind of“Louis Blanc politics”, follow a bourgeois policy and harm the revolution. 
 Lenin also attacked Gorky’s social-pacifist appeal and deplored the fact that the great writer was indulging in politics and reiterating petty-bourgeois prejudices. 
 The second part of his lecture Lenin devoted to an expo-sition of proletarian tactics. 
 He described the peculiar historical situation of the present moment as a moment of transition from the first to the second stage of the revolu-tion, from revolt against tsarism to revolt against the bour-geoisie, against the imperialist war, or transition to a Convention, into which the Constituent Assembly might be turned, if the government keeps its “promise” to convene it. 
 The special task of the moment, one that conforms to this transitional situation, is organisation of the proletariat . 
 Not the routine type of organisation, to which the betrayers of socialism, the social-patriots and opportunists of all countries, as well as the Kautskyites, confine themselves but a revolutionary organisation . 
 It must, first, embrace the entire people and, second, combine military and government functions. 
 The opportunists, who hold sway in the Second Inter-national, have distorted the doctrine of Marx and Engels onthe state in the period of revolution. 
 Kautsky likewisedeparted from Marx’s views 151 in his debate with Panne-koek (1912). 
 Marx teaches us, on the basis of the experience of the Commune of 1871, that “die Arbeiterklasse nicht die fertige Staatsmaschine einfach in Besitz nehmen undsie für ihre eigenen Zwecke in Bewegung setzen kann”. 
 DasProletariat soll (muß?) diese Maschine (Armee, Polizei,Bürokratie) zerbrechen 152. 
 Das ist es, was die Opportunis-ten (Sozialpatrioten) und Kautskyaner (Sozialpazifisten) entweder bestreiten oder vertuschen. 
 Das ist die wichtigste praktische Lehre der Pariser Kommune und der russischenRevolution von 1905. 
 Wir unterscheiden uns vonden Anarchisten dadurch, daß wir die Notwendigkeit des Staates für die revolution-äre Umwälzung anerkennen. 
 Wir unterscheiden uns aber von den Opportunisten und Kautskyanern dadurch, daß wir sagen: Wir brauchen nicht die “fertige” Staatsmaschinerie,wie sie in den demokratischsten bürgerlichen Republikenexistiert, sondern die unmittelbare Macht bewaffneter und organisierter Arbeiter. 
 Das ist der Staat, den wir brauchen. 
 Das sind, ihrem Wesen nach, die Kommune von 1871 und die Arbeiterdelegiertenräte von 1905 und 1917. 
 Auf diesem Fundament müssen wir weiterbauen. 
 * Prevent the *“The working class cannot simply lay hold of the ready-made state machine and wield it for its own purposes. 
” The proletariat must smash this machine (the army, the police, the bureaucracy). 
 It is this that the opportunists (the social-patriots) and Kautskyites (social-pacifists) are denying or minimising. 
 This is the most important prac-tical lesson to be learned from the Paris Commune and the RussianRevolution of 1905. 
 We differ from the anarchists in that we recognise that the state is necessary to carry out revolutionary transformations. 
 But we differ from the opportunists and the Kautskyites in that we say: we do notneed a “ready-made” state machine, such as exists in the most democrat-ic bourgeois republics, but direct power of the armed and organized workers. 
 That is the state that we need. 
 In their essence the Commune of 1871 and the Soviets of Workers ’ Deputies in 1905 and 1917 are just such a state. 
 On this foundation we must build further. 
— Ed. 
 re-establishment of the police! Build up the people’s militia into a genuine all people ’s militia led by the proletariat, into “our state”, with the capitalists paying the workers fortime served in the militia. 
 Supplement the “miracles of proletarian heroism ” which the proletariat displayed yes-terday in battle with tsarism and will display tomorrow in battle with the Guchkovs and Milyukovs, with “ miracles of proletarian organisation ”. 
 That is the slogan of the moment! That is the earnest of success! The workers are being impelled onto that path by objective conditions: famine, the need to distribute grain stocks, the inevitability of “Zivildienstpflicht” *, the need to secure peace. 
 Our peace terms, Lenin said, are as follows:(1) The Soviet of Workers’ Deputies, as a revolutionary government, declares forthwith that it is not bound by any treaties concluded by the tsarist government or the bour-geoisie; (2) it publishes at once all these vile, predatorytreaties; (3) it openly proposes an immediate truce to all countries in the war; (4) it proposes the liberation of all colonies and of all oppressed nations as a condition of peace; (5) it declares that it has no confidence in any of the bour-geois governments and calls on the workers of all countriesto overthrow them; (6) it declares that, since the war loanswere contracted by the bourgeoisie, they must be paid bythe capitalists . 
 This policy would attract to the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies the majority of workers and poor peasants. 
 Con-fiscation of the landed estates would be assured. 
 This would not yet be socialism . 
 It would signify the victory of the work-ers and poor peasants, one that would assure peace, free-dom and bread. 
 For such peace terms we, too, would be prepared to fight a revolutionary war! Lenin recalled the statement made in No. 
 47 of Sotsial-Demokrat (October 13, 1915) that the Social-Democratic movement does not in ad-vance renounce such a revolutionary war. 
 ** Assistance from the socialist proletariat of all countries would be assured. 
The foul appeals of the social-patriots (such as Guesde’s *Civilian-service duty. 
— Ed. 
 **See present edition, Vol. 
 21, pp. 
 401-04. 
 —Ed. 
 disgraceful letter: “First victory, then a republic”) would vanish like smoke. 
 The lecturer concluded with the words: “Long live the Russian Revolution! Long live the world workers’ revo-lution, which has already begun !” Written March 15-16 (28-29), 1917 Published March 31 and April 2, Published according to 1917 in Volksrecht Nos. 
 77 and 78 the manuscript First published in Russian in the magazine Proletarskaya Revolutsia No. 
 10 (93), 1929 TRICK S OF THE REPUBLICA N CHAUVINIST S153 March 30, 1917 I have just read the following in today’s early morning edition of the Neue Zürcher Zeitung No. 
 557, March 30: “Milan, March 29. 
 Our St. 
 Petersburg correspondent reports the, arrest of a certain Chernomazov , editor of the socialist paper Pravda which began publication during the revolution. 
 Under the old regime Chernomazov was as a secret-police agent and was paid a monthly salary of two hundred rubles. 
 The newspaper he edited has been clamouring for a socialist republic and bitterly attacking the Provisional Govern-ment, with the obvious purpose of serving reaction. 
 In general, anti-government agitation by irresponsible groups leads one to suspect col-lusion with the old regime and the enemy. 
 Even the Soviet of Workers’and Soldiers’ Deputies, which is decidedly radical compared with the Provisional Government, has turned away from these groups. 
” This report is a paraphrase of a telegram appearing in the chauvinist Italian paper, Corriere della Sera,154 Milan, March 29, and sent there from St. 
 Petersburg on March “6, at 10:30 p. 
 m. 
 To explain to the reader thefalsification, a thing quite usual among the chauvinists,I must go back a bit. 
 Under the “old regime”, i. 
e. 
, from April 1912 to July 1914, there was published in St. 
 Petersburg a daily Social-Demo-cratic paper, Pravda . 
 It was, in fact, the organ of the Cen-tral Committee of our Party, the Russian Social-Democrat-ic Labour Party. 
 I used to contribute to it almost dailyfrom Cracow, where I then lived as a political émigré. 
 The Social-Democratic Duma members, Badayev, Muranov, Pet-rovsky, Shagov, Samoilov (up to the summer of 1914 thegroup included also Malinovsky), who belonged to our Partyand whom the tsar later exiled to Siberia for agitation againstthe imperialist war, regularly came to Cracow, and wediscussed the policies of the paper. 
 The tsarist government naturally tried not only to sur-round Pravda , whose circulation reached as much as 60,000, with spies, but also to plant provocateurs on its staff. 
 Among these provocateurs was Chernomazov, known inthe Party as Miron. 
 He managed to gain the confidence ofthe Party, and in 1913 became the secretary of Pravda . 
 Having observed, together with the group of Duma mem-bers, Chernomazov’s activities, we came to the conclusion, first, that his articles compromised our political line, and, second, that his political integrity was open to suspicion. 
 However, finding a substitute was not easy, all the more so since communication between the Duma group andCracow was maintained illegally, or through the Dumamembers visiting Cracow, which they could not do very often. 
 Finally, in the spring of 1914, we succeeded in bring-ing Rosenfeld (Kamenev) over to St. 
 Petersburg, buttoward the end of 1914, he was exiled to Siberia togetherwith our Duma group. 
 Rosenfeld (Kamenev) was instructed to remove Cherno-mazov, and he did remove him from all the affairs of the paper. 
 Chernomazov was dismissed. 
 Our Central Committee ordered an investigation , but since it was impossible to find accurate evidence to substantiate the suspicions againstChernomazov, the St. 
 Petersburg comrades did not ventureopenly to brand him as a provocateur. 
 We had to confine ourselves to discharging him from Pravda . 
 That Chernomazov, and of course other provocateurs, helped the tsar banish our Duma members to Siberia, ofthat there can be no doubt. 
 A communication from our Party’s St. 
 Petersburg “Cen-tral Committee Bureau” of November 13, 1916 said Cherno-mazov was again trying to get into the illegal organisa-tion, that the “Bureau” had removed Miron and an individ-ual connected with him from the organisation, and would“take similar action against anyone who continued to haveany dealings with him”. 
 Our reply, of course, was that Chernomazov should not be allowed in the Party, for he had been removed by a deci-sion adopted by the Central Committee and the Duma group. 
 Such is the story of the old Pravda , published under the old regime and suppressed by the tsar before the war, in July 1914. 
 The question arises: Was not Chernomazov, directly or indirectly, connected with the new Pravda , which began publication in St. 
 Petersburg after the revolution? About this I know nothing, for from the first day of the revolu-tion the Guchkov-Milyukov government does not allow my telegrams to reach Pravda , and, of course, Pravd a’s telegrams to reach me. 
 I do not even know whether the C. 
C. 
 Bureau is still in existence, or whether Kamenev and the Duma members have returned to St. 
 Petersburg. 
 They know Miron and would have immediately removed him if he had again wormed his way into the organisation by taking advantage of the fact that new people were in charge . 
155 The French social-chauvinist paper l’Humanité of March 25 quoted a telegram supposedly received from St. 
 Petersburg by the Petit Parisie n. 
156 In this telegram Chernomazov is referred to as the “former editor of the extremist Social-Democratic paper Pravda ”. 
 The reader will, I hope, now understand the perfidy and the foul methods employed by the government of Guch-kov-Milyukov and its friends in their attempt to cast a shadow on our Party by alleging that it is working in col-lusion with the old regime and the enemy. 
 The governmentand its friends hate our Party and slander it, because wedeclared, as far back as October 13, 1915, in No. 
 47 of ourpaper Sotsial-Demokrat (Geneva), that we were unconditionally opposed to the imperialist war, even if it were to be con-ducted not by the tsarist government, but by a chauvinist-revolutionary , chauvinist-republican Russian government. 
 * The Guchkov-Milyukov government is such a govern-ment, for it has confirmed the predatory treaties tsarism concluded with Anglo-French imperialism and in this war is pursuing predatory aims (the conquest of Armenia, Galicia, Constantinople, etc. 
). 
 (Tomorrow I shall forward this to Volksrecht and Avanti! ) Published in Volksrecht Published according to No. 
 81, April 5, 1917 the manuscript Signed: N. 
 Lenin First published in Russian in 1924 in Lenin Miscellany II *See present edition, Vol. 
 21, pp. 
 401-04. 
— Ed. 
 DECISIO N OF THE COLLEGIU M ABOARD, CENTRA L COMMITTEE , RUSSIAN SOCI AL-DEMOCRATI C LABOU R PART Y157 The Collegium Abroad of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Com-mittee resolves to accept Comrade Robert Grimm’s proposal concerning the return to Russia via Germany of émigrésdesiring to return home. 
 158 The Collegium Abroad places on record: 1) That Comrade R. 
 Grimm negotiated with a member of the government of a neutral country, Minister Hoffmann, whodid not consider it possible for Switzerland officially tointervene for the only reason that the English Governmentwould doubtlessly interpret this as a breach of neutrality,since England refuses to permit the passage of international-ists; 2) That R. 
 Grimm’s proposal is fully acceptable since it guarantees free passage irrespective of political affilia-tion, or attitude on the “fatherland defence” issue, oron Russia continuing the war or concluding peace, etc. 
; 3) That the proposal is based on a plan envisaging the exchange of Russian émigrés for German internees in Rus-sia, and that the émigrés have no reason to decline to cam-paign for such an exchange in Russia; 4) That Comrade R. 
 Grimm has submitted this proposal to representatives of all the trends among the political émi-grés, pointing out that in the situation that has arisen this is the only way and that it is fully acceptable under present conditions; 5) That, for our part, we have done everything possible to convince representatives of the different trends of the need to accept the proposal and of the absolute impermis-sibility of delay; 6) That the representatives of certain trends have, unfortunately, urged further delay—a decision which we can-not but regard as a grave mistake, and one that does im-mense damage to the revolutionary movement in Russia. 
 In accordance with these considerations, the Collegium Abroad of the Central Committee resolves to notify all members of our Party of the acceptance of the proposal and of our immediate departure, and to invite them to registerall who wish to make the journey, and send a copy of thisdecision to the representatives of all other trends. 
 Zurich, March 31, 1917 First published in 1923 Published according to the manuscript FAREWEL L LETTE R TO THE SWIS S WORKE RS159 Comrades, Swiss workers, Leaving Switzerland for Russia, to continue revolu-tionary-internationalist activity in our country, we, mem-bers of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party united under the Central Committee (as distinct from another party bearing the same name, but united under the Organis-ing Committee), wish to convey to you our fraternal greet-ings and expression of our profound comradely gratitude foryour comradely treatment of the political émigrés. 
 If the avowed social-patriots and opportunists, the Swiss Grütlians who, like the social-patriots of all countries, havedeserted the camp of the proletariat for the camp of thebourgeoisie; if these people have openly called upon you to fight the harmful influence of foreigners upon the Swisslabour movement; if the disguised social-patriots and op-portunists who constitute a majority among the leaders ofthe Swiss Socialist Party 160 have been pursuing similar tactics under cover , we consider it our duty to state that on the part of the revolutionary, internationalist socialistworkers of Switzerland we have met with warm sympathy,and have greatly benefited from comradely relations with them. 
 We have always been particularly careful in dealing with questions, acquaintance with which requires prolonged participation in the Swiss movement. 
 But those of us—andthere were hardly more than 10 or 15—who have been mem-bers of the Swiss Socialist Party have considered it our duty steadfastly to maintain our point of view, the point of view of the Zimmerwald Left, on general and fundamental ques-tions of the international socialist movement. 
 We considered it our duty determinedly to fight not only social-patriot-ism, but also the so-called “Centrist” trend to which belong R. 
 Grimm, F. 
 Schneider, Jacques Schmid and others in Switzerland, Kautsky, Haase, and the Arbeitsgemeinschaftin Germany, Longuet, Pressemane and others in France,Snowden, Ramsay MacDonald and others in England, Tu-rati, Treves and their friends in Italy, and the above-mentioned party headed by the Organising Committee (Axelrod, Martov, Chkheidze, Skobelev and others) in Russia. 
 We have worked hand in hand with the revolutionary Social-Democrats of Switzerland grouped, in particular,around the magazine Freie Jugend 161. 
 They formulated and circulated (in the German and French languages) the propos-als for a referendum in favour of a party congress in April 1917 to discuss the party’s attitude on the war. 
 At the Zurich cantonal congress in Töss they tabled a resolutionon behalf of the youth and the “Lefts” on the war issue, 162 and in March 1917 issued and circulated in certain locali-ties of French Switzerland a leaflet in the German andFrench languages, entitled “Our Peace Terms”, etc. 
 To these comrades, whose views we share, and with whom we worked hand in hand, we convey our fraternal greetings. 
 We have never had the slightest doubt that the imperial-ist government of England will under no circumstances per-mit the Russian internationalists, who are implacableopponents of the imperialist government of Guchkov-Milyukov and Co. 
 and of Russia continuing the imperialist war, to return to Russia. 
 In this connection, we must briefly explain our under-standing of the tasks of the Russian revolution. 
 Webelieve this all the more necessary because through the Swissworkers we can and must address ourselves to the German, French and Italian workers, who speak the same languages as the population of Switzerland, a country that still enjoysthe benefits of peace and relatively, the largest measure ofpolitical freedom. 
 We abide unconditionally by our declaration, which appeared in the Central Organ of our Party, Sotsial-Democrat (No. 
 47, October 13, 1915), published in Geneva. 
 In it we stated that, should the revolution prove victorious in Rus-sia, and should a republican government come to power, a government intent on continuing the imperialist war, a war in alliance with the imperialist bourgeoisie of England and France, a war for the seizure of Constantinople, Armenia, Galicia, etc. 
,—we would most resolutely oppose such agovernment and would be against the “defence of the fatherland” in such a war. 
 * A contingency approaching the above has now arisen. 
 The new government of Russia, which has negotiated with the brother of Nicholas II for restoration of the monarchy, and in which the most important and influential posts areheld by the monarchists Lvov and Guchkov, this government is trying to deceive the Russian workers with the slogan,“the Germans must overthrow Wilhelm” (correct! but whynot add: the English, the Italians, etc. 
, must overthrow their kings, and the Russians their monarchists, Lvov and Guchkov??). 
 By issuing this slogan, but refusing to pub-lish the imperialist, predatory treaties concluded by thetsar with France, England, etc. 
, and confirmed by the government of Guchkov-Milyukov-Kerensky , this government is trying to represent its imperialist war with Germany as a war of “defence” (i. 
e. 
, as a just war, legitimate even from the standpoint of the proletariat). 
 It is trying to represent awar for the defence of the rapacious, imperialist, predatoryaims of capital—Russian, English, etc. 
, as “defence” ofthe Russian republic (which does not yet exist, and which the Lvovs and the Guchkovs have not even promised !). 
 If there is any truth in the latest press reports about a rapprochement between the avowed Russian social-patriots(such as Plekhanov, Zasulich, Potresov, etc. 
) and the “Centreparty”, the party of the “Organising Committee”, theparty of Chkheidze, Skobelev, etc. 
, based on the commonslogan: “Until the Germans overthrow Wilhelm, our war remains a defensive war,”—if this is true, then we shall redouble our energy in combating the party of Chkheidze,Skobelev, etc. 
, which we have always fought for its opportun-ist, vacillating, unstable political behaviour. 
 Our slogan is: No support for the Guchkov-Milyukov government! He who says that such support is necessary to prevent restoration of the monarchy is deceiving the people. 
 *See present edition, Vol. 
 21, pp. 
 401-04. 
— Ed. 
 On the contrary, the Guchkov government has already conducted negotiations for restoration of the monarchy in Russia. 
 Only the arming and organisation of the proletar-iat can prevent Guchkov and Co. 
 from restoring the monarchy in Russia. 
 Only the revolutionary proletariat of Russiaand the whole of Europe , remaining loyal to internation-alism, is capable of ridding humanity of the horrors of theimperialist war. 
 We do not close our eyes to the tremendous difficulties facing the revolutionary-internationalist vanguard of theRussian proletariat. 
 The most abrupt and swift changesare possible in times such as the present. 
 In No. 
 47 of Sotsial-Democrat we gave a clear and direct answer to the question that naturally arises: What would our Party do, if the revolution immediately placed it in power? Our answer was: (1) We would forthwith offer peace to all the warring nations; (2) we would announce our peace terms—immediateliberation of all the colonies and all the oppressed and non-sovereign peoples; (3) we would immediately begin and car-ry out the liberation of all the peoples oppressed by the Great Russians; (4) we do not deceive ourselves for one mo-ment, we know that these terms would be unacceptable not only to the monarchist, but also to the republican bour-geoisie of Germany, and not only to Germany, but also to the capitalist governments of England and France. 
 We would be forced to wage a revolutionary war against the German—and not only the German—bourgeoisie. 
 And we would wage this war . 
 We are not pacifists. 
 We are opposed to imperialist wars over the division of spoils among thecapitalists, but we have always considered it absurd for therevolutionary proletariat to disavow revolutionary wars thatmay prove necessary in the interests of socialism . 
 The task we outlined in No. 
 47 of Sotsial-Demokrat is a gigantic one. 
 It can be accomplished only by a long seriesof great class battles between the proletariat and the bour-geoisie. 
 However, it was not our impatience, nor our wishes,but the objective conditions created by the imperialist war that brought the whole of humanity to an impasse, that placed it in a dilemma: either allow the destruction of more millions of lives and utterly ruin European civilisation orhand over power in all the civilised countries to the revo-lutionary proletariat, carry through the socialist revo-lution. 
 To the Russian proletariat has fallen the great honour of beginning the series of revolutions which the imperialist war has made an objective inevitability. 
 But the idea thatthe Russian proletariat is the chosen revolutionary prole-tariat among the workers of the world is absolutely alien tous. 
 We know perfectly well that the proletariat of Russia is less organised, less prepared and less class-conscious than the proletariat of other countries. 
 It is not its special qual-ities, but rather the special conjuncture of historical cir-cumstances that for a certain , perhaps very short , time has made the proletariat of Russia the vanguard of the revolution-ary proletariat of the whole world. 
 Russia is a peasant country, one of the most backward of European countries. 
 Socialism cannot triumph there directly and immediately . 
 But the peasant character of the country, the vast reserve of land in the hands of the nobil-ity, may , to judge from the experience of 1905, give tre-mendous sweep to the bourgeois-democratic revolution in Russia and may make our revolution the prologue to the world socialist revolution, a step toward it. 
 Our Party was formed and developed in the struggle for these ideas, which have been fully confirmed by the experi-ence of 1905 and the spring of 1917, in the uncompromisingstruggle against all the other parties; and we shall con-tinue to fight for these ideas. 
 In Russia, socialism cannot triumph directly and imme-diately. 
 But the peasant mass can bring the inevitable and matured agrarian upheaval to the point of confiscating all the immense holdings of the nobility. 
 This has alwaysbeen our slogan and it has now again been advanced in St. 
 Petersburg by the Central Committee of our Party and by Pravda , our Party’s newspaper. 
 The proletariat will fight for this slogan, without closing its eyes to the inevitability of cruel class conflicts between the agricultural labourersand the poorest peasants closely allied with them, on theone band, and the rich peasants , whose position has been strengthened by Stolypin’s agrarian “reform” (1907-14), on the other. 
 The fact should not be overlooked that the 104peasant deputies in the First (1906) and Second (1907) Dumas /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR introduced a revolutionary agrarian bill demanding the na-tionalisation of all lands and their distribution by local committees elected on the basis of complete democracy. 
 Such a revolution would not, in itself, be socialism. 
 But it would give a great impetus to the world labour move-ment. 
 It would immensely strengthen the position of thesocialist proletariat in Russia and its influence on theagricultural labourers and the poorest peasants. 
 It would enable the city proletariat to develop, on the strength of this influence, such revolutionary organisations as the So-viets of Workers’ Deputies to replace the old instruments ofoppression employed by bourgeois states, the army, thepolice, the bureaucracy; to carry out—under pressure ofthe unbearably burdensome imperialist war and its conse-quences—a series of revolutionary measures to control the production and distribution of goods. 
 Single-handed, the Russian proletariat cannot bring the socialist revolution to a victorious conclusion . 
 But it can give the Russian revolution a mighty sweep that would createthe most favourable conditions for a socialist revolution, and would, in a sense, start it. 
 It can facilitate the rise of a situation in which its chief , its most trustworthy and most reliable collaborator, the European and American socialist proletariat, could join the decisive battles. 
 Let the sceptics despair because of the temporary triumph within the European socialist movement of such disgusting lackeys of the imperialist bourgeoisie as the Scheidemanns, Legiens, Davids and Co. 
 in Germany; Sembat, Guesde,Renaudel and Co. 
 in France; the Fabians and the Labour-ites in England. 
 We are firmly convinced that this filthyfroth on the surface of the world labour movement willbe soon swept away by the waves of revolution. 
 In Germany there is already a seething unrest of the proletarian masses, who contributed so much to humanityand socialism by their persistent, unyielding, sustained or-ganisational work during the long decades of European“calm”, from 1871 to 1914. 
 The future of German socialismis represented not by the traitors, the Scheidemanns, Le-giens, Davids and Co. 
, nor by the vacillating and spineless politicians, Haase, Kautsky and their ilk, who have been en-feebled by the routine of the period of “peace”. 
 The future belongs to the trend that has given us Karl Liebknecht, created the Spartacus group, has carried on its propaganda in the Bremen Arbeiterpolitik . 
163 The objective circumstances of the imperialist war make it certain that the revolution will not be limited to thefirst stage of the Russian revolution, that the revolution will not be limited to Russia. 
 The German proletariat is the most trustworthy , the most reliable ally of the Russian and the world proletarian revolu-tion. 
 When, in November 1914, our Party put forward the slogan: “Turn the imperialist war into a civil war” of theoppressed against the oppressors for the attainment of social-ism, the social-patriots met this slogan with hatred and malicious ridicule, and the Social-Democratic “Centre”, with incredulous, sceptical, meek and expectant silence. 
David, the German social-chauvinist and social-imperialist,called it “insane”, while Mr. 
 Plekhanov, the representativeof Russian (and Anglo-French) social-chauvinism, of social-ism in words, imperialism in deeds, called it a “farcical dream” ( Mittelding zwischen Traum und Komödie *). 
 The representatives of the Centre confined themselves tosilence or to cheap little jokes about this “straight line drawnin empty space”. 
 Now, after March 1917, only the blind can fail to see that it is a correct slogan. 
 Transformation of the imperialist war into civil war is becoming a fact. 
 Long live the proletarian revolution that is beginning in Europe! On behalf of the departing comrades, members of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 (united under the Central Committee),who approved this letter at a meeting held April 8 (new style), 1917. 
 N. 
 Lenin Written on March 26 (April 8) 1917 Published in the magazine Published according to Jugend-Internationale the manuscript No. 
 8, May 1917 *Something between a dream and a comedy. 
— Ed. 
 N O T E S 1 2This article and the two that follow it were directed against the un-Marxist and anti-Bolshevik attitude of the Bukharin-Pyatakov-Bosh group which began to take shape in the spring of 1915, when preparations were being made for publication of the magazine Kommunist . 
 It was to be put out in co-operation with Sotsial-Demokrat . 
 Y. 
 L. 
 Pyatakov (P. 
 Kievsky) and Y. 
 B. 
 Bosh undertook to finance the magazine and N. 
 I. 
 Bukharin was made one of its editors. 
 Lenin’s differences with the group were accentuated after the appearance of No. 
 1-2 of Kommunist in September 1915. 
 In their theses “On the Self-Determination Slogan”, which they sent to Sotsial-Demokrat , Bukharin, Pyatakov and Bosh opposed Lenin’s theory of socialist revolution, rejected the struggle for democracy in the imperialist era and insisted on the Party withdrawing its demand for national self-determination. 
 The group did not confine itself to theoretical differences and openly attacked the Party’s policy and slogans. 
 It sought to use Kommunist in furtherance of its factional aims and tried to dictate terms to the editors of Sotsial-Demokrat . 
 Pyatakov and Bosh in-sisted on the Central Committee Bureau Abroad recognising them as a separate group not accountable to it and authorised to maintain independent connections with Central Committee members in Russia and publish leaflets and other literature. 
 Though this de-mand was turned down, the group attempted to establish contact with the Central Committee Bureau in Russia. 
 Lenin was sharply opposed to the Pyatakov-Bosh-Bukharin theses, saying that “we can take no responsibility for them, either direct or indirect—even for harbouring them in the Party, let alone granting them equality”. 
 In letters to N. 
 I. 
 Bukharin, Y. 
 L. 
 Pyata-kov, G. 
 Y. 
 Zinoviev and A. 
 G. 
 Shlyapnikov, Lenin trenchantly criticised the group’s views and anti-Party, factional actions and condemned the conciliatory attitude of Zinoviev and Shlyapnikov. 
 On his proposal, joint publication of Kommunist by the Sotsial-Demokrat editors and the group was discontinued. 
 The “Nascent Trend of Imperialist Economism” was written when the Sotsial-Demokrat editors had received Bukharin’s com-ments on the theses “The Socialist Revolution and the Right of Nations to Self-Determination”. 
 The article was not published at the time. 
 p. 
 13 Economism was an opportunist trend in Russian Social-Democracy at the turn of the century, a Russian variety of international /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR opportunism. 
 The Economists limited the tasks of the working-class movement to the economic struggle for higher wages, better work-ing conditions, etc. 
, maintaining that the political struggle should be left to the liberal bourgeoisie. 
 They denied the leading role of the working-class party. 
 Making a fetish of the spontaneity of the working-class movement, they belittled the importance of revolutionary theory and, by denying the need for a Marxist party to bring socialist consciousness into the working-class movement, cleared the way for bourgeois ideology. 
 They championed the existing disunity, confusion and parochial amateurish approach in the Social-Democratic ranks, and opposed the creation of a cent-ralised working-class party. 
 Comprehensive criticism by Lenin of the Economist standpoint will be found in his “A Protest by Russian Social-Democrats”, “A Retrograde Trend in Russian Social-Democracy”, “Apropos of the Profession de Foi ” and “A Talk with Defenders of Economism” (see present edition, Vol. 
 4, pp. 
 167-82, 255-85, 286-96, and Vol. 
 5, pp. 
 313-20). 
 Lenin’s What Is To Be Done? brought about the ideo-logical rout of Economism (see present edition, Vol. 
 5, pp. 
 347-529). 
 A major part in the struggle against the Economists was also played by the newspaper Iskra . 
 p. 
 13 Narodniks —followers of a petty-bourgeois trend, Narodism, in the Russian revolutionary movement, which arose in the sixties and seventies of the nineteenth century. 
 The Narodniks stood for the abolition of the autocracy and the transfer of the landed estatesto the peasantry. 
 At the same time, they believed capitalism in Russia to be a temporary phenomenon with no prospect of develop-ment and they therefore considered the peasantry, not the prole-tariat, to be the main revolutionary force in Russia. 
 They regarded the village commune as the embryo of socialism. 
 With the object of rousing the peasantry to struggle against the autocracy, the Na-rodniks “went among the people”, to the villages, but found no sup-port there. 
 In the eighties and nineties the Narodniks adopted a policy of conciliation to tsarism, expressed the interests of the kulak class and waged a bitter fight against Marxism. 
 p. 
 13 Reference is to the article “Who Will Perform the Political Revolu-tion?” in the symposium Proletarian Struggle No. 
 1, published by the Urals Social-Democratic Group in 1899. 
 The article was re-published as a pamphlet by the Kiev Committee. 
 The author, A. 
 A. 
 Sanin, an Economist, was opposed to an independent work-ing-class political party and political revolution, believing that Russia’s socialist transformation, which he considered an imme-diate task, could be accomplished through a general strike. 
 p. 
 13 Reference is to the Conference of R. 
 S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 groups abroad , held in Berne between February 14 and 19 (February 27-March 4), 1915. 
 Convened on Lenin’s initiative, it assumed the character of a3 4 5 6 7general Party conference, since neither a Party congress nor an all-Russia conference could be convened during the war. 
 The Conference was attended by representatives of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee, the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Organ, Sotsial-Demokrat , the Social-Democrat Women’s Organisation and delegates from R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 groups in Paris, Zurich, Berne, Lau-sanne, Geneva, London and Baugy. 
 All members of the Berne group and several members of the Lausanne and Baugy groups attended as guests. 
 Lenin was delegated by the Central Committee and Central Organ and directed the work of the Conference. 
 The main item on the agenda, the war and the tasks of the Party, was introduced by Lenin, who amplified the propositions set out in the Central Committee Manifesto, “The War and Russian Social-Democracy”. 
 The resolutions tabled by the Montpellier, and espe-cially the Baugy, groups and adopted by the Conference revealed that some Party members had failed to grasp the implications of Lenin’s proposition on civil war. 
 They objected to the slogan of the defeat of one’s “own” government and advanced their own slo-gan of peace, and failed to appreciate the need and importance of combating Centrism. 
 All these questions were thrashed out in the debate, and Lenin’s theses were unanimously approved. 
 Only Bukha-rin persistently supported the erroneous views of the Baugy reso-lution and objected to the slogans Lenin had formulated for the Party and the international Social-Democratic movement. 
 Bukha-rin opposed the right of nations to self-determination and the mini-mum-programme demands in general, contending that they were “contrary ” to socialist revolution. 
 However, no one supported Bukha-rin at the conference. 
 p. 
 13 Reference is to Bukharin’s theses “On the Self-Determination Slo-gan”, written in November 1915 and submitted to the editors of Sotsial-Demokrat over the signatures of Bukharin, Pyatakov and Bosh. 
 p. 
 13 This refers to the ‘’Programm-Entwurf der R. 
S. 
V. 
 und der S. 
D. 
A. 
P. 
 Hollands” (“Draft Programme of the Revolutionary-Socialist League and the Social-Democratic Labour Party of Holland”) compiled by Henriette Roland-Holst and published on February 29, 1916 in No. 
 3 of the Bulletin of the International Socialist Committee over the signatures of Henriette Roland-Holst, J. 
 Visscher, D. 
 Wijnkoop and J. 
 Ceton. 
 The International Socialist Committee —the executive body of the Zimmerwald group elected at the first International Socialist Conference in Zimmerwald, September 5-8, 1915, and composed of Robert Grimm, Oddino Morgari, Charles Naine and A. 
 Balabanova. 
 Its headquarters were in Berne. 
 Shortly after the Zimmerwald Conference, on Grimm’s suggestion, a larger International Social-ist Committee was formed, composed of representatives of all the parties subscribing to the Zimmerwald decisions. 
 The R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee was represented on it by Lenin, Inessa Armand and Zinoviev. 
 It published the Internationale Sozialistische 8 9 10Kommission zu Bern. 
 Bulletin (Bulletin of the International Socialist Committee in Berne ) in German, French and English language editions. 
 Six issues appeared between September 1915 and January 1917. 
 p. 
 13 Vorbote (The Herald)—theoretical organ of the Zimmerwald Left, published in German in Berne. 
 Two issues appeared, in January and April 1916. 
 The official publishers were Roland-Holst and Pan-nekoek. 
 Lenin had an active share in founding the magazine and, after the appearance of its first issue, in organising a French edition to reach a wider readership. 
 A keen discussion was conducted on its pages by Left Zimmerwaldists on the right of nations to self-deter-mination and the “disarmament” slogan. 
 p. 
 14 Sotsial-Demokrat —illegal Central Organ of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 pub-lished from February 1908 to January 1917. 
 After unsuccessful at-tempts to issue the first number of the paper in Russia, publication was arranged abroad. 
 Nos. 
 2-32 (February 1909-December 1913) were put out in Paris and Nos. 
 33-58 (November 1914-January 1917) in Geneva. 
 Altogether, 58 issues appeared, five of which had sup-plements. 
 From December 1911, Sotsial-Demokrat was edited by Lenin and carried more than 80 of his articles and shorter items. 
 Lenin directed all the affairs of the paper, decided on the con-tents of the current issue, edited the various contributions and looked after the production side. 
 During the First World War, Sotsial-Demokrat played an out-standing part in combating international opportunism, nationalism and chauvinism, in popularising the Bolshevik slogans and in awak-ening the working class and the working people generally for struggle against the imperialist war and its instigators, against the tsarist autocracy and capitalism. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat also played a major part in uniting the internationalist forces in the Social-Democratic movement. 
 p. 
 14 The Zimmerwald Left was formed on Lenin’s initiative at the In-ternational Socialist Conference in Zimmerwald in September 1915. 
 The group consisted of eight of the Conference delegates, represent-ing the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee, Left Social-Democrats in Sweden, Norway, Switzerland and Germany, the Polish Social-Democratic opposition and the Latvian Social-Democrats. 
 Led by Lenin, it combated the Centrist conference majority. 
 Its draft resolutions and draft Manifesto condemning the war, exposing the treachery of the social-chauvinists and emphasising the need for active struggle against the war were rejected by the Centrist majority. 
 However, the Zimmerwald Left did succeed in including in the adopted Manifesto a number of important points from its draft resolution. 
 Regarding the Manifesto as a first step in the struggle against the imperialist war, the Zimmerwald Left voted for it, but in a special statement pointed out its inadequacy and inconsistency. 
 At the same time, the group stated that while it would remain part 11 12 13of the Zimmerwald movement, it would continue to disseminate its views and conduct independent work internationally. 
 It elected a Bureau, which included Lenin, Zinoviev and Radek, and pub-lished its own organ, Vorbote (see Note No. 
 8). 
 The Bolsheviks, the only ones to take a correct and consistently internationalist position, were the leading force in the Zimmerwald Left. 
 Lenin combated Radek’s opportunist vacillations and criti-cised the mistakes of other members of the group. 
 The Zimmerwald Left became the rallying point for internation-alist elements in the world Social-Democratic movement (see also Note No. 
 36). 
 p. 
 14 This meeting, held in Berne, February 5-9, 1916, was attended by 22 representatives of internationalist socialists in Germany, Rus-sia, Italy, Norway, Austria, Poland, Switzerland, Bulgaria, Ruma-nia and several more countries. 
 The composition of the meeting was indicative of the changed alignment of forces in favour of the Left, though most of the delegates, as at the original Zimmerwald Conference, were Centrists. 
 The meeting adopted an appeal to all affiliated parties and groups (Rundschreiben an alle angeschlossen Parteien und Gruppen), in which were included, as a result of pressure from the Bolsheviks and other Left forces, amendments in line with the Zimmerwald Left policy. 
 The appeal condemned socialist participation in bour-geois governments, denounced the slogan of “fatherland defence” in an imperialist war and approval of war credits. 
 It stressed the need to support the labour movement and prepare for mass revolu-tionary actions against the imperialist war. 
 However, the appeal was inconsistent, since it did not call for a break with social-chau-vinism and opportunism. 
 Not all of Lenin’s amendments were adopt-ed. 
 The Zimmerwald Lefts declared that though they did not con-sider the appeal satisfactory in all its points, they would vote for it as a step forward compared with the decisions of the first Zim-merwald Conference. 
 p. 
 14 Rabochaya Mysl (Workers’ Thought)—a newspaper published by a group of Economists in Russia from October 1897 to December 1902. 
 A critique of the paper as representative of the Russian variety of international opportunism will be found in Lenin’s What Is To Be Done? p. 
 16 Prosveshcheniye (Enlightenment)—a monthly theoretical, legal Bolshevik magazine, published in St. 
 Petersburg from December 1911 to June 1914. 
 Its circulation reached 5,000 copies. 
 While in Paris, and later in Cracow and Poronin, Lenin directed the maga-zine, edited articles published in it and regularly corresponded with the members of the editorial board. 
 Among his own articles pub-lished in Prosveshcheniye are the following: “Fundamental Problems of the Election Campaign”, “The Three Sources and Three Compo-nent Parts of Marxism ”, “Critical Remarks on the National Ques-tion”, “The Right of Nations to Self-Determination”, “Disruption 14 15 16 17 18of Unity Concealed by Shouts for Unity” and “The Methods of Struggle of the Bourgeois Intellectuals Against the Workers”. 
 p. 
 16 Lenin is here referring to the programme of the French Workers’ Party adopted in 1880, and to the programmes of the German Social-Democratic Party adopted in Gotha in 1875 and in Erfurtin 1891. 
 p. 
 16 Reference is to the pamphlet Socialism and War (see present edition, Vol. 
 21, pp. 
 295-338). 
 p. 
 19 Reference is to the Declaration of the Polish Social-Democrats at the 1915 Zimmerwald Conference . 
 The Declaration protested against the oppressive policy of the tsarist and German and Austriangovernments which “deprive the Polish people of the opportunity toshape their own destiny, regard the Polish lands as a pawn in future bargaining over compensation .... 
” “And this,” the Declaration said, “brings out with especial crudity the very essence of thepolicy of the capitalist governments which, in sending the massesto the slaughter, are at the same time arbitrarily shaping the des-tinies of nations for generations to come. 
” The Polish Social-Demo-crats, the Declaration said, are convinced that only participation in the impending struggle of the international revolutionary prole-tariat for socialism— “in the struggle that will tear the fetters of national oppression and destroy alien domination in whateverform or shape—will assure the Polish people, too, the opportunityfor all-round development as an equal member of the alliance ofthe nations”. 
 p. 
 21 This article was written in reply to one by Y. 
 L. 
 Pyatakov (P. 
 Ki-evsky), “The Proletariat and the “Right of Nations to Self-Determi-nation, in the Era of Finance Capital” (August 1916). 
 The manu-script bears Lenin’s marginal note: “Kievsky’s article on self-deter-mination and Lenin’s reply. 
” Both articles were meant for No. 
 3 of Sbornik Sotsial-Demokrata . 
 Somewhat later, Lenin wrote anoth-er article in reply to Kievsky, “A Caricature of Marxism andImperialist Economism” (see pp. 
 28-76 of this volume). 
 Due tofinancial difficulties, No. 
 3 was not published and the articles didnot appear in print. 
 Lenin’s article, however, was widely known inmanuscript to Bolsheviks living abroad and to a number of Left Social-Democrats. 
 p. 
 22 Lenin is alluding to the article “Miliz oder Abrüstung?” (“Militia or Disarmament?”) by Henriette Roland-Holst, a Left-wing DutchSocial-Democrat, in the Swiss Social-Democratic journal Neues Leben (New Life) No. 
 10-11 (October-November) and No. 
 12 (De-cember) 1915. 
 In referring to the Swiss young Social-Democrats, Lenin had in view chiefly the magazine Jugend-Internationale (The Youth Inter-national), organ of the International League of Socialist Youth Organ-19 20 21 22isations, published in Switzerland; it spoke for the Left forces in the Swiss Social-Democratic Party. 
 Issue No. 
 3 of the magazinecarried an editorial “Volksheer oder Entwaffnung?” (“A People’sArmy or Disarmament?”). 
 The attitude of the Scandinavian (Swedish and Norwegian) Left Social-Democrats on this issue was set out in articles by KarlKilbom, “Swedish Social-Democracy and the World War”, andArvid Hansen, “Certain Aspects of the Present-Day NorwegianLabour Movement”, both of which appeared in Sbornik Sotsial-Demokrata No. 
 2. 
 Lenin discusses the “disarmament” slogan in “The Military Pro-grammme of the Proletarian Revolution” and “The ‘Disarmament’Slogan” (see pp. 
 77-78, 94-104 of this volume). 
 p. 
 23 See Note No. 
 17. 
 p. 
 28 Iskrists —supporters of Lenin’s newspaper Iskra , the most consistent revolutionary Social-Democrats. 
 Iskra —the first all-Russian illegal Marxist newspaper founded in December 1900, published abroad and secretly sent into Russia. 
 It was taken over by the Mensheviks in 1903, and beginning withNo. 
 52 ceased to be the organ of revolutionary Marxism. 
 It came to be known as the new Iskra as distinct from the old, Bolshevik Iskra. 
 p. 
 28 The Bulygin Duma derived its name from Minister of the Interior A. 
 C. 
 Bulygin, who drafted the act for its convocation and theregulations governing the elections. 
 The Duma was intended to be an advisory body under the tsar. 
 The Bolsheviks called for an active boycott of the Duma and concentrated their propagan-da on the following slogans: armed uprising, revolutionary army,provisional revolutionary government. 
 They used the boycottcampaign to mobilise all the revolutionary forces carry out masspolitical strikes and prepare an armed uprising. 
 The nation-wide general political strike of October 1905 and the mounting wave of revolution prevented the elections and the Duma was neverconvened. 
 Lenin discusses the Bulygin Duma in his articles: “TheConstitutional Market-Place”, “The Boycott of the Bulygin Dumaand Insurrection”, “Oneness of the Tsar and the People, and of thePeople and the Tsar”, “In the Wake of the Monarchist Bourgeoisie, or in the Van of the Revolutionary Proletariat and Peasantry?” 212-29). 
 p. 
 28 Reference is to the otzovists and ultimatumists . 
 Otzovists —an opportunist group composed of A. 
 A. 
 Bogdanov, G. 
 A. 
 Alexinsky, A. 
 V. 
 Sokolov (S. 
 Volsky), A. 
 V. 
 Lunacharsky, M. 
 N. 
 Lyadov and others, which emerged among a section of theBolsheviks in 1908. 
 Under cover of revolutionary phrases theydemanded the recall (the Russian word otozvat means recall) of the(see present edition, Vol. 
 8, pp. 
 352-56; Vol. 
 9, pp. 
 179-87, 191-99, /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR 23 24Social-Democratic members of the Third Duma. 
 They also refused to work in legal organisations—the trade unions, co-operatives and other mass organisations—contending that in conditions of rampant reaction the Party must confine itself exclusively to illegal activ-ity. 
 The otzovists did immense damage to the Party. 
 Their policy would have isolated the Party from the masses and, in the end, would have turned it into a sectarian organisation. 
 Ultimatumism —a variety of otzovism, from which it differed only in form. 
 The ultimatumists proposed that the Social-Democratic Duma members be presented with an ultimatum—either they fully submit to the decisions of the Party Central Committee or be recalled from the Duma. 
 The ultimatumists failed to appreciate the need for painstaking work to help the Social-Democratic depu-ties overcome their mistakes and adopt a consistent revolutionary line. 
 Ultimatumism was, in fact, disguised otzovism. 
 Lenin called the ultimatumists “bashful otzovists”. 
 p. 
 28 Die Neue Zeit (New Times)—theoretical organ of the German Social-Democratic Party, published in Stuttgart from 1883 to 1923; edited by Karl Kautsky up to October 1917 and after that by H. 
 Cunow. 
 Die Neue Zeit was the first to publish several works of Marx and Engels. 
 Engels helped the magazine by his advice and not infrequent-ly criticised it for deviating from Marxism. 
 After Engels’s death in 1895, Die Neue Zeit threw its pages open to articles by Edu-ard Bernstein and other revisionists. 
 It published Bernstein’s “Prob-lems of Socialism”, which became the starting-point of a revisionist campaign against Marxism. 
 In the First World War Die Neue Zeit took a Centrist position and gave factual support to the social-chau-vinists. 
 p. 
 35 The Internationale Group —a revolutionary organisation of Left German Social-Democrats, founded in the early days of the First World War by Karl Liebknecht, Rosa Luxemburg, Franz Mehring, Clara Zetkin, Julian Marchlewski, Léon Jogiches (Tyszka) and Wilhelm Pieck. 
 In April 1915, Rosa Luxemburg and Franz Mehring started the Internationale magazine, which served to unite the core of the Left forces in Germany. 
 A national conference of these forces was held in Berlin on January 1, 1916, and of officially inaugu-rated the Internationale group. 
 It also adopted its platform of “Bas-ic Principles” (“Leitsätze”), drawn up by Rosa Luxemburg in co-operation with Liebknecht, Mehring and Clara Zetkin. 
 In 1915 the group issued a number of political leaflets and in 1916 began illegal publication of its Political Letters signed Spartacus (they appeared regularly up to October 1918), and the group came to be known by that name. 
 It conducted mass revolutionary propaganda, organised mass anti-war demonstrations, directed strike struggles and exposed the imperialist nature of the world war and the treachery of the oppor-tunist Social-Democratic leaders. 
 However, the Spartacus group made serious mistakes on questions of theory and policy: they negat-ed the possibility of national liberation wars in the imperialist 25 26 27 28 29 30 31era, were inconsistent on the question of turning the imperialist war into a civil war, underestimated the vanguard role of the proletarian party, and did not work for a decisive break with the opportunists. 
 In April 1917 the group joined the Centrist Independent Social-Democratic Party of Germany as an organisationally autonomous unit, but broke with the Independents following the November 1918 Revolution in Germany and organised the Spartacus League. 
 It published its programme on December 14, 1918 and at its inaugural Congress (December 30, 1918-January 1, 1919) founded the Commu-nist Party of Germany. 
 Lenin repeatedly criticised the errors and inconsistency of the German Left Social-Democrats, but had a high regard for their revolutionary activity. 
 p. 
 37 Sbornik Sotsial-Demokrata was founded by Lenin and published by the newspaper Sotsial-Demokrat . 
 Two issues appeared, in October and December 1916 (see also Note 17). 
 p. 
 37 The quotation is from Engels’s The Origin of the Family , Private Property and the State (see Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1962, p. 
 321). 
 p. 
 46 This is from Engels’s Anti-Dühring , Moscow, 1959, pp. 
 63-64. 
 p. 
 55 Fracy (“Revolutionary Faction”)—the Right wing of the Polish Socialist Party (P. 
S. 
P. 
), a reformist nationalist party founded in 1892 and led by Pilsudski. 
 While advocating independence for Poland, the P. 
S. 
P. 
 conducted separatist nationalist propaganda among the Polish workers, endeavouring to discourage them from joint struggle with the Russian workers against the autocracy and capitalism. 
 In 1906 the party split into the Left P. 
S. 
P. 
 and Right P. 
S. 
P. 
 or Fracy. 
 The latter continued the P. 
S. 
P. 
 nationalist and chauvinist policy before, during and after the First World War. 
 p. 
 57 Reference is to Engels’s letter to Kautsky of September 12, 1882. 
 Lenin cites it in his article “The Discussion on Self-Determination Summed Up” (see present edition, Vol. 
 22, pp. 
 352-53). 
 p. 
 59 Junius was the pen-name of Rosa Luxemburg. 
 p. 
 62 Golos (The Voice)—a Menshevik daily paper published in Paris from September 1914 to January 1915, with Trotsky playing a leading part in its editorship. 
 The first five issues appeared under the title Nash Golos (Our Voice). 
 Followed a Centrist policy and in the early days of the First World War published L. 
 Martov’s articles against the social-chauvinists. 
 Subsequently Martov shifted to the right and the paper’s policy changed in favour of the social-chauvinists. 
 In January 1915 it was replaced by Nashe Slovo (Our Word). 
 32 33 34The Organising Committee —the leading Menshevik centre inau-guarated at the August 1912 Conference of liquidators. 
 In the First World War the Organising Committee followed a social-chauvinist policy, justified tsarist Russia’s part in the war and carried on jingoist propaganda. 
 Published a magazine Nasha Zarya (Our Dawn) and, after its closure, Nashe Dyelo (Our Cause), later renamed Dyelo , and the newspaper Rabocheye Utro (Workers’ Morning), later renamed Utro . 
 The O. 
C. 
 functioned up to the elections of the Menshevik Central Committee in August 1917. 
 Besides the O. 
C. 
 which operated inside Russia, there was a Secretariat Abroad composed of five secretaries—P. 
 B. 
 Axelrod, I. 
 S. 
 Astrov-Poves, Y. 
 O. 
 Martov, A. 
 S. 
 Martynov and S. 
 Y. 
 Semkovsky. 
 It followed a pro-Centrist line and used internationalist phraseology to cover up its support of the Russian social-chauvinists. 
 The Secretariat Abroad published a newspaper, Izvestia (News), which appeared from February 1915 to March 1917. 
 Semkovsky’s article “Russia Disintegrating?”, to which Lenin evidently refers, appeared in Nashe Slovo No. 
 45, March 21. 
 1915. 
 p. 
 73 The “Military Programme of the Proletarian Revolution” (in a letter Lenin refers to it as an article “On Disarmament”) was written in German and meant for publication in the Swiss, Swedish and Norwegian Left Social-Democratic press. 
 However, it was not pub-lished at the time. 
 Lenin somewhat re-edited it for publication in Russian. 
 The article “The ‘Disarmament’ Slogan” appeared in Sbornik Sotsial-Demokrata No. 
 2, December 1916 (see pp. 
 94-104 of this volume). 
 The original, German text appeared in Jugend-International , organ of the International League of Socialist Youth Organisa-tions, Nos. 
 9 and 10, September and October 1917 under the heading “Das Militärprogramm der proletarischen Revolution”. 
 The article was printed with this editorial foreword: “In our day, when Lenin is one of the most spoken-of leaders of the Russian revolu-tion, the following article by this veteran revolutionary stalwart, in which he sets out a large part of his political programme, is of especial interest. 
 We received it shortly before his departure from Zurich in April 1917. 
” The heading was apparently given by the editors of Jugend-International . 
p . 
 7 7 p. 
 77 Reference is to Robert Grimm’s theses on the war question , pub-lished in the Grütlianer Nos. 
 162 and 164, July 14 and 17, 1916. 
 With the growing danger of Switzerland being drawn into the war, a discussion on the war issue arose in the Social-Democratic Party. 
 In April 1916, the Executive instructed Grimm, Müller, Naine, Pflüger and several other prominent party leaders to state their views in the press and their articles were published in the Berner Tagwacht , Volksrecht and Grütlianer . 
p . 
 7 7See Note No. 
 18. 
 35 36Neues Leben (New Life)—a monthly journal of the Swiss Social-Democratic Party published in Berne from January 1915 to Decem-ber 1917. 
 Spoke for the Zimmerwald Right and early in 1917 took up a social-chauvinist position. 
 p. 
 77 Reference is to the international socialist conferences at Zimmerwald and Kienthal. 
 The first, Zimmerwald Conference, met on September 5-8, 1915 and was attended by 38 delegates from 11 European countries— Germany, France, Italy, Russia, Poland, Rumania, Bulgaria, Sweden, Norway, Holland and Switzerland. 
 Lenin led the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee delegation. 
 The Conference discussed: (1) reports from the various countries; (2) a joint declaration by the German and French representatives; (3) the Zimmerwald Left proposal for a policy resolution; (4) the Zimmerwald Manifesto; (5) elections to the International Socialist Committee; (6) a message of sympathy with war victims. 
 It adopted the Manifesto “To the European Proletariat” in which, at the insistence of Lenin and the Left Social-Democrats, several basic propositions of revolutionary Marxism were included. 
 The Conference also adopted a joint declaration by the German and French delegations, a message of sympathy with war victims and fighters persecuted for their political activities, and elected the International Socialist Committee (I. 
S. 
C. 
). 
 The Zimmerwald Left group was formed at this Conference. 
 Lenin’s appraisal of the Conference and the Bolshevik tactics will be found in his articles “The First Step” and “Revolutionary Marxists at the International Socialist Conference, September 5-8, 1915”. 
 The second International Conference was held between April 24 and 30, 1916 in Kienthal , a village near Berne, and was attended by 43 delegates from 10 countries—Russia, Germany, France, Italy, Switzerland, Poland, Norway, Austria, Serbia, Portugal. 
 In addition there was a fraternal delegate from Britain and a rep-resentative of the Youth International Secretariat. 
 Representatives of the British Independent Labour Party, the U. 
S. 
 socialists, and delegates from Bulgaria, Rumania, Greece and Sweden were denied passports and could not therefore attend. 
 Some Left groups were represented by delegates of other parties: the Latvian Social-Democrats transferred their mandate to the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee: Henriette Roland-Holst, delegated by the Dutch Lefts, gave her mandate to the Polish and Lithuanian Social-Democratic representative. 
 The R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee was represented by Lenin and two other delegates. 
 The Conference discussed: (1) the struggle to end the war, (2) attitude of the proletariat on the peace issue, (3) agitation and prop-aganda, (4) parliamentary activity, (5) mass struggle, (6) convo-cation of the International Socialist Bureau. 
 Led by Lenin, the Zimmerwald Left was much stronger, both in influence and representation, than at the earlier, Zimmerwald Conference. 
 At Kienthal it united 12 delegates and some of its 37 38 39proposals obtained as much as 20 votes, or nearly half of the total. 
 This was indicative of how the relation of forces in the world labour movement had changed in favour of internationalism. 
 The Conference adopted a Manifesto to the “Peoples Suffering Ruination and Death” and a resolution criticising pacifism and the International Socialist Bureau. 
 Lenin regarded the Conference decisions as a further step in uniting the internationalist forces against the imperialist war. 
 The Zimmerwald and Kienthal conferences helped to unite the Left elements in the West-European Social-Democratic move-ment on the principles of Marxism-Leninism. 
 p. 
 83 The Social-Democratic Labour Group (Arbeitsgemeinschaft)—an organisation of German Centrists founded in March 1916 by Reichs-tag members who had broken with the Social-Democratic Reichs-tag group. 
 Its leaders were Hugo Haase, Georg Ledebour and Wil-helm Dittmann. 
 It published Lose Blätter (Leaflets) and up to April 1916 dominated the editorial board of Vorwärts . 
 Expelled from the editorial board, the group started its own publication, Mitteilungs-blätter (Information Leaflets), in Berlin. 
 It had the support of the majority of the Berlin organisation and became the backbone of the Independent Social-Democratic Party of Germany, founded in April 1917. 
 The new party sought to justify avowed social-chauvinists and advocated preservation of unity with them. 
 p. 
 83 The war industries committees were established in Russia in May 1915 by the imperialist bourgeoisie to help the tsarist govern-ment in the prosecution of the war. 
 The Central War Industry Committee was headed by one of Russia’s biggest capitalists, Guchkov, leader of the Octobrists, and included manufacturer Konovalov, banker and sugar king Tereshchenko and other big capitalists. 
 In an attempt to bring the workers under their influence, foster chauvinist sentiments, and create the impression that a “civil peace” had been achieved, the bourgeoisie decided to organise “workers’ groups” in these committees. 
 The Bolshevik boycott of the committees was supported by the workers. 
 At a worker dele-gates’ meeting in Petrograd on September 27 (October 10), 1915, the Bolshevik resolution calling for a boycott and for a revolution-ary withdrawal from the war obtained 95 votes to the Mensheviks’ 81. 
 Only at the second meeting, held without the pro-Bolshevik delegates, were the Mensheviks able to elect a “workers’ group” of ten, led by K. 
 A. 
 Gvozdyov. 
 As a result of Bolshevik propaganda, elections to the “workers’ groups” were held in only 70 areas out of a total of 239, and workers’ representatives were actually elected only in 36 areas. 
 p. 
 84 The Basle Manifesto on the war issue was adopted at the emergency International Socialist Congress held in Basle, Switzerland, on November 24-25, 1912, to discuss the struggle against the imminent danger of a world imperialist war, heightened by the first Balkan War. 
 The Congress was attended by 555 delegates. 
 The R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 40 41Central (Committee had six delegates. 
 A huge anti-war demonstra-tion and international anti-war rally were held on the opening day. 
 The Manifesto was unanimously endorsed on November 25. 
 It warned the peoples against the mounting danger of world war. 
 It said that “the great nations of Europe are always on the point of being driven at each other, without the slightest reason of real national interests for such attempts on reason and humanity.... 
 It would be madness if the governments did not comprehend that the mere notion of a world war will call forth indignation and passion among the workers. 
 The latter consider it a crime to shoot each other in the interest and for the profit of capitalism, for the sake of dynastic honour and of diplomatic secret treaties. 
” The Manifesto disclosed the predatory aims of the war the impe-rialists were preparing and urged workers everywhere resolutely to combat the war danger, “to pit against the might of capitalist imperialism the international solidarity of the working class” and in the event of imperialist war breaking out, to take advantage of the economic and political crisis to hasten the socialist revolution. 
 Kautsky, Vandervelde and the other Second International leaders voted for the Manifesto, but as soon as the world war broke out, they went back on it, as on other anti-war decisions of inter-national socialist congresses, and sided with their imperialist governments. 
 p. 
 84 La Sentinelle —organ of the Social-Democratic organisation of Neuchâtel Canton, French Switzerland, published at La Chaux-de-Fonds from 1890 to 1906 and resumed in 1910. 
 Followed an inter-nationalist policy in the First World War and in its November 13, 1914 issue (No. 
 265) carried an abridged version of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee Manifesto. 
 “The War and Russian Social-Democracy”. 
 Volksrecht (People’s Right)—daily Social-Democratic newspaper founded in Zurich in 1898 and edited during the First World War by Ernst Nobs. 
 Published articles of Left Zimmerwaldists, and Lenin’s “Twelve Brief Theses on H. 
 Greulich’s Defence of Fatherland De-fence”, “Tasks of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in the Russian Revolution”, “Tricks of the Republican Chauvinists” and others. 
 At present Volks-recht ’s policy on principal home and international issues is practi-cally identical with that of the bourgeois press. 
 Berner Tagwacht —Social-Democratic newspaper founded in 1893 in Berne. 
 Published articles by Liebknecht, Mehring and other Left socialists in the early days of the First World War. 
 In 1917 came out in open support of the social-chauvinists. 
 p. 
 87 The Aarau Congress of the Swiss Social-Democratic Party met on November 20-21, 1915: The central issue was the party’s attitude towards the Zimmerwald internationalist group, and the struggle developed between three following trends (1) anti-Zimmerwaldists (H. 
 Greulich, P Pflüger and others), (2) supporters of the Zimmer-wald Right (R. 
 Grimm, P. 
 Graber and others), and (3) supporters of the Zimmerwald Left (F. 
 Platten, E. 
 Nobs and others). 
 Grimm 42 43 44tabled a resolution urging the party to affiliate with Zimmerwald and endorse the political programme of the Zimmerwald Right. 
 The Left forces, in an amendment moved by the Lausanne branch, called for mass revolutionary struggle against the war, declaring that only a victorious proletarian revolution could put an end to imperialist war. 
 Under Grimm’s pressure, the amendment was with-drawn, but it was again proposed by M. 
 M . 
 Kharitonov, a Bolshevik delegated by one of the party’s branches. 
 Out of tactical considera-tions Grimm and his supporters were obliged to approve the amend-ment and it was carried by 258 votes to 141. 
 p. 
 87 Bund (General Jewish Workers ’ Union of Lithuania , Poland and Russia ) was composed mainly of semi-proletarian elements, Jewish artisans in Russia’s Western areas. 
 Was a vehicle of nationalism and separatism in the labour movement. 
 Bulletin of the Bund Committee Abroad , successor to the Infor-mation Letter of the Bund Organisation Abroad , published in Geneva. 
 Two issues appeared, in September and December 1916. 
 Followed a social-chauvinist policy. 
 The “Letter from Russia” here quoted by Lenin appeared in No. 
 1 of the Bulletin and is analysed in more detail in Lenin’s article “The Chkheidze Faction and Its Role” (see pp. 
 171-74 of this volume). 
 p. 
 88 Potresov , A. 
 N. 
 (1869-1934)—prominent Menshevik leader and theoretician of liquidationism. 
 Played a leading part in the maga-zines Vozrozhdeniye (Regeneration), Nasha Zarya (Our Dawn) and other publications of the Menshevik liquidators. 
 Took a social-chauvinist stand in the First World War. 
 p. 
 88 The Italian Socialist Party was founded in 1892 and from the very start became the scene of a sharp struggle on all basic politi-cal and tactical issues between the opportunist and revolutionary forces. 
 At its Congress in Reggio-Emilia (1912), the more outspoken reformists, who supported the war and co-operation with the govern-ment and the bourgeoisie, were expelled under pressure from the Left. 
 Prior to Italy’s entry into the First World War, the party op-posed war and advocated neutrality. 
 In December 1914 it expelled a group of renegades (among them Mussolini) for supporting the im-perialist policy of the bourgeoisie and urging Italy’s entry into the war. 
 When Italy did enter, in May 1915, the party split into three distinct factions: (1) the Right wing, which helped the bour-geoisie prosecute the war, (2) the Centrists, who made up the major-ity of the party and pursued a policy of “no participation in the war and no sabotage of the war” and (3) the Left wing which took a more resolute stand, but failed to organise a consistent struggle against the war. 
 The Lefts did not realise the need to turn the imperialist war into a civil war, or to break with the reformists, who were cooperating with the bourgeoisie. 
 The Italian socialists held a joint conference with the Swiss socialists in Lugano (1914), took an active part in the international socialist conferences at Zimmerwald (1915) and Kienthal (1916). 
 45 46 47 48The party leaders, Lazzari and Serrati, exposed the imperialist and predatory plans of the bourgeoisie and actively facilitated the restoration of international Social-Democratic contacts. 
 Lenin’s message of greetings was addressed to the party Congress held in Zurich on October 15-16, 1916, and was read at its opening session on October 15. 
 A brief report of the Congress appeared in Avanti! No. 
 290, October 18, 1916. 
 Towards the end of 1916, the reformists gained the upper hand and the party shifted to social-pacifism. 
 p. 
 90 International Socialists of Germany (Internationale Sozialisten Deutschlands , I. 
S. 
D. 
)—a group of Left-wing German Social-Demo-crats who during the First World War united around the magazine Lichtstrahlen (Rays), published in Berlin from 1913 to 1921. 
 The I. 
S. 
D. 
 openly opposed war and opportunism, were the most consistent advocates of a break with the social-chauvinists and Centrists. 
 Their leader, Julian Borhardt, signed the draft resolu-tions and manifesto of the Zimmerwald Left, to which the group affiliated shortly after the Zimmerwald Conference, an announce-ment to that effect appeared in its Internationale Flügblätter (In-ternational Leaflets) No. 
 1, 1915. 
 The I. 
S. 
D. 
 had no substantial mass support and soon fell apart. 
 p. 
 91 From the very outbreak of the war, the Bolshevik Duma members A. 
 Y. 
 Badayev, M. 
 K. 
 Muranov, G. 
 I. 
 Petrovsky, F. 
 N. 
 Samoilov and N. 
 R. 
 Shagov, came out in energetic support of working-class interests. 
 In compliance with Party policy, they refused to vote for war credits, exposed the imperialist and anti-popular nature of the war, brought the true facts to the knowledge of the workers and roused them to struggle against tsarism, the bourgeoisie and the landlords. 
 They were tried for their revolutionary activities and exiled to Siberia. 
 Lenin discusses the trial in his article “What Has Been Revealed by the Trial of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Duma Group” (see present edition, Vol. 
 21, pp. 
 171-77). 
 p. 
 93 The Conference of Entente Socialists was sponsored by the French social-chauvinists Albert Thomas, Pierre Renaudel and Marcel Sembat. 
 On Lenin’s advice, the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee issued a statement exposing the treasonous aims of the conference and urging all internationalists to steer clear of it. 
 The R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee asked the Executive Socialist Committee in Berne to call together conference delegates from Zimmerwald organisations in order to work out a joint policy. 
 The R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee statement was published in December 1916, in No. 
 2 of Sbornik Sotsial-Demokrata . 
 The conference was post-poned and was finally held in London on August 28, 1917. 
 p. 
 93 Reference is to the Conference of Entente Socialists held in London on February 14, 1915 and attended by representatives of social-chauvinist and pacifist groups in England, France, Belgium and Russia. 
 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57The Bolsheviks were not invited, but on Lenin’s instructions Litvinov attended the Conference and read a statement ofthe R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee, based on a draft drawn up byLenin. 
 It demanded that socialists resign from bourgeois govern-ments, renounce alliance and co-operation with the imperialists, wage an energetic struggle against imperialist governments andrefuse to vote war credits. 
 The statement was published in Sotsial-Demokrat , the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Organ, March 29, 1915, No. 
 40. 
 Lenin discusses the Conference in his articles “The London Confer-ence” and “On the London Conference” (see present edition, Vol. 
 21, pp. 
 132-34, 178-80). 
 p. 
 93 This refers to Karl Kilbom’s article “Swedish Social-Democracy and the World War” and Arvid Hansen’s “Certain Features of the Con-temporary Labour Movement in Norway”, both of which appeared in Sbornik Sotsial-Demokrata No. 
 2, December 1916. 
 p. 
 94 The Socialist Review —a monthly magazine published in London by the reformist Independent Labour Party of England from 1908 to1934. 
 During the First World War its contributors included RamsayMacDonald, Philip Snowden, Algernon Lee and others. 
 p. 
 104 K. 
 Marx, Preface to the second edition of The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (see Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1962, p. 
 244). 
 p. 
 107 Kommunist —a magazine founded by Lenin and published in Gene-va in 1915 jointly by Sotsial-Demokrat and Y. 
 L. 
 Pyatakov and Y. 
 B. 
 Bosh, who financed it. 
 N. 
 I. 
 Bukharin was one of the editors. 
 Only one double issue appeared, in September 1915. 
 It containedthree of Lenin’s articles: “The Collapse of the Second International,”“The Honest Voice of a French Socialist”, and “Imperialism andSocialism in Italy”. 
 (See also Note No. 
 1. 
) p. 
 107 Bulletin of the R. 
 S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Organising Committee , Secretariat Abroad —a Menshevik Centrist organ, published in Geneva from February 1915 to March 1917. 
 Altogether ten issues appeared. 
 p. 
 110 See Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1955, p. 
 132. 
 p. 
 112 See Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1955, pp. 
 422-23. 
 p. 
 112 See Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1955, p. 
 491. 
 p. 
 113 See Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1962, pp. 
 406-19. 
 p. 
 113 58 59 60Chkheidze faction —the Menshevik group in the Fourth Duma led by N. 
 S. 
 Chkheidze. 
 Officially followed a Centrist policy in the FirstWorld War, but factually supported the Russian social-chauvin-ists. 
 In 1916 the group was composed of M. 
 I. 
 Skobelev, I. 
 N. 
 Tulyakov, V. 
 I. 
 Khaustov, N. 
 S. 
 Chkheidze and A. 
 I. 
 Chkhenkeli. 
 Lenin criticises their opportunist policy in several articles, includ-ing “The Chkheidze Faction and Its Role”, “Have the OrganisingCommittee and the Chkheidze Group a Policy of Their Own?” p. 
 118 Nashe Dyelo (Our Cause)—a Menshevik monthly, chief mouthpiece of the liquidators and Russian social-chauvinists. 
 Published inPetrograd in 1915 in place of Nasha Zarya (Our Dawn) which was closed in October 1914. 
 Contributors included Y. 
 Mayevsky, P. 
 P. 
Maslov, A. 
 N. 
 Potresov, and N. 
 Cherevanin. 
 Six issues appearedaltogether. 
 Golos Truda (Voice of Labour)—a legal Menshevik paper pub-lished in Samara in 1916 after the closure of Nash Golos (Our Voice). 
 Three issues appeared. 
 p. 
 118 The Swiss Social-Democratic Party Congress in Zurich, November 4-5, 1916, discussed the work of the Social-Democratic group in the National Council, the financial reform, attitude on the Kienthal resolutions and the Grütli-Verein, revision of the party constitu-tion. 
 Lenin attended all the sessions, and addressed the opening ses-sion on behalf of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee. 
 His speech,delivered in German, was followed with close attention. 
 There was a sharp struggle between the diverse trends in the party on practical-ly every agenda item. 
 A positive feature of the Congress, in Lenin’s view, was the vigor-ous fight the Left waged against the Right and Centre. 
 The reso-lution on the Social-Democratic group in the National Councilurged it to set an example of struggle for working-class interests and insisted that it be guided in all its activities by party deci-sions. 
 The resolution on the financial reform, tabled by Grimmand Huber, approved direct taxation and allowed for indirecttaxes on tobacco, alcoholic beverages, stamp duty, etc. 
 Tworesolutions were submitted on the attitude towards Kienthal, oneby the party Executive and the other by the Left wing; the question was referred to an emergency congress. 
 On the Grütli-Verein—an affiliated organisation enjoying special status, whichtook an extreme chauvinist stand in the war—the Congressdeclared membership in it to be incompatible with membership inthe party. 
 Revision of the party constitution was referred to anemergency congress. 
 The Zurich Congress, Lenin wrote, “definitely proved that the decision to join Zimmerwald and accept revolutionary mass struggle (resolution of the 1915 Aarau Congress) remains on paper, and thatwithin the party there has been definitely formed a ‘Centre’ .... 
 61 62 63 64This ‘Centre’, of which R. 
 Grimm has become the head, combines ‘Left’ declarations with ‘Right’, i. 
e. 
, opportunist, tactics” (seep. 
 137 of this volume). 
 p. 
 121 The Committee for the Re-establishment of International Contacts was formed in Paris in January 1916 by French internationalists. 
This was the first attempt to set up in France a revolutionary social-ist organisation as a counterweight to the official social-chauvinistorganisations. 
 The Committee conducted propaganda against theimperialist war, published a number of pamphlets and leaflets, exposing the predatory aims of the imperialists and the social-chau-vinists’ betrayal of the working class. 
 It did not, however, appre-ciate the need for a decisive break with the opportunists, and hadno clear-cut and consistent programme of revolutionary struggle. 
Nevertheless Lenin regarded the Committee as a factor in rally-ing the internationalist forces in France and in extending the Left Zimmerwaldist influence. 
 Inessa Armand participated in the Com-mittee on Lenin’s instructions. 
 Under the influence of the October Revolution in Russia and the growth of the French labour movement, the Committee became thecentre of the revolutionary internationalist forces in France, andin 1920 merged with the Communist Party. 
 p. 
 122 The allusion is to the assassination of Austrian Prime Minister Stürgkh by Friedrich Adler, the Austrian Social-Democraticleader. 
 p. 
 123 Lenin is here referring to the Berner Tagwacht , which published the following articles on the Russo-German negotiations for a separate peace: “Die Vorbereitung des Separatfriedens” (“Preparation of aSeparate Peace”) in its issue of October 11, 1916, No. 
 230; an edito-rial, “Die Friedensgerüchte” (“Peace Rumors”), in No. 
 241 ofOctober 13, and a shorter item, “Zum Separatfrieden” (“On a Sepa-rate Peace”), in No. 
 242 of October 14. 
 p. 
 125 Reference is to the International Socialist Bureau (I. 
S. 
B. 
)—the permanent executive and information body of the Second Interna-tional, founded by decision of the Paris International Congress(1900) and headquartered in Brussels. 
 Each national affiliate hadtwo members on the Bureau, which was to meet four times a year, with the Executive of the Belgian Labour Party acting for it in the intervals. 
 Emile Vandervelde was Chairman of theBureau and Camille Huysmans Secretary. 
 Lenin was electedR. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 representative in 1905 and re-elected in 1912 at theSixth All-Russia Party Conference in Prague. 
 M. 
 M. 
 Litvinovwas appointed R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 representative in June 1914 at Lenin’s suggestion. 
 With the outbreak of the First World War the I. 
S. 
B. 
 become a pliant tool of the social-chauvinists. 
 Its headquarters were moved toThe Hague and its activities were directed by Huysmans. 
 p. 
 134 65 66 67 68 69Volksstimme (People’s Voice)—organ of the German Social-Demo-cratic Party, published in Chemnitz from January 1891 to February1933. 
 Followed a social-chauvinist line in the First World War. 
 p. 
 134 During the First World War Lenin lived in Switzerland from where he directed the activities of the Bolshevik Party . 
 He was alsoa member of the Swiss Social-Democratic Party and shared in theactivities of its Left wing, attending its meetings and helping itwith his advice. 
 Dr. 
 F. 
 Brupbacher, a Zurich Social-Democrat whofrequently met Lenin in that period, wrote: “Lenin was in close touch with the Zurich labour organisations, attending their meetings every time an important issue wasdiscussed . 
 For instance, he was present when a report on Youth Daywas made to a meeting of woodworkers, at meetings of the ZurichLabour Union when the war question was debated, a youthmeeting in Hottingen at which Platten spoke on refusal to do mili-tary service and on revolutionary propaganda in the army, a meet-ing of the Unterstrasse branch which I addressed on the war issue .... 
 Lenin displayed the patience of Job in his relations with the Swisscomrades (Maurice Pianzola, “Lenin in Switzerland”). 
 The theses “The Tasks of the Left Zimmerwaldists in the Swiss Social-Democratic Party” were written in Russian and German and translated into French. 
 They were circulated to Bolshevik groups in Switzerland, to Swiss Left Social-Democrats and were discussed attheir meetings. 
 p. 
 137 See Note No. 
 37. 
 p. 
 137 The slogan was advanced by Karl Liebknecht in his letter of October 2, 1914 to the German Social-Democratic Party Executive. 
 Leninquotes this letter in his rough draft of “Theses for an Appeal to theInternational Socialist Committee and All Socialist Parties”(see pp. 
 205-16 of this volume). 
 This is the background to Liebknecht’s letter: In August 1914, Liebknecht asked the party Executive to arrange a number of anti-war rallies and issue a manifesto in the name of the Reichstag groupurging all party members to oppose the war. 
 The proposal wasrejected. 
 In September 1914, Liebknecht toured Belgium and Hol-land, informing internationalist socialists of the situation in theGerman party, for which he was disciplined by the Executive. 
 The letter was a reply to this disciplinary action. 
 p. 
 137 Egli , Karl Heinrich —Swiss colonel. 
 Spied for Germany and her allies during the First World War, when he was deputy chief of theSwiss General Staff. 
 Tried early in 1916 at the insistence of theSocial-Democratic press and parliamentary group, he was acquit-ted, due to pressure from the bourgeoisie and the military clique, but was obliged to leave the army. 
 De Lohs (Loys , Treytorrens )—Swiss colonel. 
 In August 1916 published several articles urging Swiss participation in the war. 
 70 71 72 73 74Was exposed by the Social-Democratic press, which demanded his dismissal from the service, but the military command confined it-self to a reprimand. 
 p. 
 138 The Olten resolution on the war question was adopted by the emer-gency congress of the Swiss Social-Democratic Party at Olten, Feb-ruary 10-11, 1906. 
 p. 
 144 Grütli-Verein —a bourgeois reformist organisation founded in Swit-zerland in 1838, long before the organisation of the Swiss Social-Democratic Party. 
 The name derives from the sixteenth-century Union of Grütlians (conspirators), who rose against Austrian rule. 
 In 1901 the Grütli-Verein affiliated with the Social-Democratic Party but remained organisationally independent. 
 Its newspaper, Grütlianer , followed a bourgeois-nationalist policy. 
 In the First World War the Grütli-Verein took up an extreme chauvinist posi-tion and became the mainstay of the Right-wing social-chauvinists. 
 This led the Zurich Congress of the Social-Democratic Party (Novem-ber 1916) to declare that membership in the Grütli-Verein was incompatible with membership in the party. 
 p. 
 146 These theses and several other items in this volume (“Principles Involved in the War Issue”; “An Open Letter to Charles Naine”; “Twelve Brief Theses on H. 
 Greulich’s Defence of Fatherland De-fence”; “Imaginary or Real Marsh?”; “Proposed Amendments to the Resolution on the War Issue”; “The Story of One Short Period in the Life of One Socialist Party”) were written in connection with the discussion of the war issue in the Swiss Social-Democratic Party. 
 In August 1916 the party Executive decided to call an emergency congress for February 11-12, 1917 to discuss the war issue. 
 The Zu-rich Congress (November 4-5, 1916) endorsed that decision and ap-pointed a commission to draw up draft resolutions for the emergency congress. 
 The commission framed two drafts: the majority draft, based on Grimm’s Centrist theses, published in July 1916, and the minority social-chauvinist draft which called on Social-Democrats to “defend the fatherland” in the event of Switzerland entering the war. 
 Lenin, who was closely associated with the Swiss Left, was well informed of the commission’s activities. 
 His “Theses on the Attitude of the Swiss Social-Democratic Party Towards the War” were writ-ten to help the Swiss Left. 
 Lenin drew up several variants and drafts, devoting special attention to practical proposals, before working out the final text. 
 p. 
 149 See Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1962, pp. 
 549-50. 
 p. 
 154 Schweizerische Metallarbeiter-Zeitung (Swiss Metalworkers’ Gazet-te)—a weekly paper founded in Berne in 1902; adopted a social-chauvinist position during the First World War. 
 p. 
 155 75 76 77 78 79Socialist-Revolutionaries —members of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, a petty-bourgeois party in Russia, which arose at the end of 1901 and beginning of 1902 as a result of the merger of various Narodnik groups and circles. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionaries were oblivious to the class differences between the proletariat and petty proprietors, glossed over the class differentiation and contradictions within the peasantry and negated the leading role of the proletariat in the revolution. 
 The views of the Socialist-Revolutionaries were an eclectic mixture of the ideas of Narodism and revisionism. 
 The Bolshevik Party exposed their attempts to masquerade as socialists, carried out a determined struggle against them for influence over the peasantry and showed the danger to the working-class movement of their tactics of individual terrorism. 
 The fact that the peasantry, to which the Socialist-Revolution-aries appealed, was not a homogeneous class determined their po-litical and ideological instability and organisational disunity and their constant waverings between the liberal bourgeoisie and the proletariat. 
 As early as the first Russian revolution (1905-07) the Right wing of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party broke away and formed the legal Trudovik Popular Socialist Party whose outlook was close to that of the Cadets, and the Left wing formed the semi-anarchist League of Maximalists. 
 The majority of Socialist-Revolu-tionaries adopted a social-chauvinist position during the First World War. 
 O. 
C. 
-ists —See Note No 31. 
 p. 
 164 Nota-Bene —pen-name used by Bukharin. 
 p. 
 165 Towards the end of 1916 and early in 1917 Lenin devoted much of his time to intensive research on the problem of the state, studying the works of Marx and Engels and other sources. 
 His copious notes, comments and conclusions were recorded in a notebook, the famous Blue Notebook, under the general heading “Marxism and the State”. 
 In a letter to Alexandra Kollontai dated February 4 (17), 1917 he wrote: “I’m working on an article (have already prepared nearly all the material) on the Marxist position on the state. 
” The article was meant for No. 
 4 of Sbornik Sotsial-Demokrata , and Lenin had appar-ently drawn up the plan for it. 
 However, the article was not written at the time. 
 The materials collected for it were made the basis of Lenin’s celebrated The State and Revolution , written in the summer of 1917. 
 p. 
 166 See Note No 31. 
 p. 
 167 Liquidators —exponents of an opportunist trend that spread among the Menshevik Social-Democrats after the defeat of the 190-07 Revolution. 
 The liquidators demanded the dissolution of the illegal revolution-ary working-class party. 
 They urged the workers to abandon the revolutionary struggle against tsarism and intended to establish a broad opportunist party, which would renounce revolutionary slo-80 81 82 83 84 85 86gans and engage only in the legal activity permitted by the tsarist government. 
 Lenin and other Bolsheviks ceaselessly exposed this betrayal of the revolution by the liquidators. 
 The policy of the liquidators was not supported by the workers. 
 The Prague Confe-rence of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 (January 1912) expelled them from the Party. 
 p. 
 167 Reference is to the draft platform which the Menshevik Organising Committee Secretariat Abroad issued in Zurich in 1915 and circu-lated to organisations affiliated to the August bloc. 
 It was in the form of a letter headed “The Proletariat and the War” and signed by L. 
 Martov and four other Organising Committee secretaries. 
 p. 
 170 The “ initiating groups ” were formed by the Menshevik liquidators from the end of 1910 onwards as a counterweight to the illegal Party organisations. 
 They were meant to be the nuclei of a new, broad legal party, functioning within the framework of the June 3, Stolypin regime. 
 The liquidators succeeded in forming “initiating groups” in St. 
 Petersburg, Moscow, Ekaterinoslav and Konstanti-novka (Donets coalfield) in the shape of small groups of intellectu-als dissociated from the working class. 
 In the First World War they followed a social-chauvinist policy. 
 p. 
 172 Orthodox —the pen-name of Lyubov Axelrod, a Menshevik. 
 p. 
 172 Dyelo (The Cause)—a fortnightly Menshevik magazine published in Moscow from August 1916 to January 1917 under the editorship of A. 
 N. 
 Potresov, P. 
 P. 
 Maslov and Lyubov Axelrod (Orthodox). 
 Ten issues, including three double issues, appeared in 1916 and one issue in 1917. 
 The magazine followed a chauvinist policy. 
 p. 
 173 Diskussionny Listok (Discussion Bulletin)—a supplement to the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Organ, Sotsial-Demokrat , published in Paris from March 6 (19), 1910 to April 29 (May 12), 1911. 
 Three issues appeared. 
 The editorial board was composed of representatives of the Bolsheviks, Mensheviks, ultimatumists, Bundists, Plekhanovites and of the Polish and Latvian Social-Democratic organisations. 
 p. 
 173 Golos (Voice)—a Menshevik social-chauvinist newspaper pub-lished in Samara in 1916, continuer of the Menshevik papers Nash Golos (Our Voice) and Golos Truda (Voice of Labour). 
 Alto-gether four issues appeared. 
 p. 
 174 Reference is to the Menshevik pamphlet Kriegs und Friedensprobleme der Arbeiterklasse (War and Peace Issues Facing the Working Class), a reprint of the draft resolutions and Manifesto of the second Zim-merwald Conference on the tasks of the proletariat in the struggle for peace, submitted to the Conference by P. 
 Axelrod, S. 
 Lapinsky and L. 
 Martov. 
 p. 
 174 87 88 89 90 91 92Lenin intended this article for the newspaper Novy Mir (New World) published in New York by Russian socialist émigrés. 
 The article did not appear in Novy Mir and Lenin re-edited the first two sections, which were published in the last issue (No. 
 58) of Sotsial-Demokrat , January 31, 1917, under the heading “A Turn in World Politics” (see pp. 
 262-70 of this volume). 
 p. 
 175 The Manifesto of February 19, 1861 abolished serfdom in Russia. 
 p. 
 186 The French Confédération générale du Travail (General Confedera-tion of Labour) was founded in 1895 and was strongly influenced by anarcho-syndicalists and reformists. 
 Its leaders recognised only economic struggle, opposed proletarian party leadership of the trade union movement, sided with the imperialist bourgeoisie in the First World War and advocated class collaboration and “defence of the fatherland”. 
 The congress mentioned by Lenin met in Paris on December 24-26, 1916 and discussed: (1) report of the Executive for the peri-od from August 1914, and (2) industrial issues. 
 At the concluding session the Executive informed the congress of President Wilson’s peace appeal to the belligerent nations, and the congress adopted, by a nearly unanimous vote, the resolution cited by Lenin. 
 p. 
 186 The French Socialist Party was founded in 1905 by the merger of the Socialist Party of France led by Guesde and the French Socialist Party led by Jaurès. 
 Dominated by reformists, the party adopted a chauvinist position from the very start of the imperialist war. 
 Its leaders openly supported the war and justified participation in the bourgeois government. 
 The Centrist wing, led by Longuet, took a social-pacifist line and a conciliatory attitude towards the social-chauvinists. 
 The Left, revolutionary wing adhered to internation-alist positions and drew its support mainly from the party rank and file. 
 The party congress mentioned by Lenin met on December 25-30, 1916, the chief agenda item being the question of peace. 
 A number of resolutions were adopted, including one opposing propaganda of the Zimmerwald principles, and another moved by Renaudel, ap-proving socialist participation in the war-time government. 
 p. 
 186 La Bataille (The Battle)—organ of the French anarcho-syndicalists, published in Paris from 1915 to 1920 in place of the banned La Bataille Syndicaliste . 
 Leading contributors included Grave, Jouhaux, and Cornelissen. 
 Adopted a social-chauvinist position in the First World War. 
 p. 
 189 This article was written in reply to an open letter by Boris Souva-rine, the French Centrist, “A nos amis qui sont en Suisse” (“To Our Friends in Switzerland”), published in Le Populaire du Centre , December 10, 1916. 
 93 94 95Lenin sent the article to Souvarine who in January 1918 turned it over to the socialist La Vérité for publication, together with his preface. 
 The article was to have appeared on January 24, in No 45 of the paper, but was banned by the censor. 
 La Vérité came out with a blank space, over which was the heading “Un document inédit. 
 Une lettre de Lénine” (“Unpublished document. 
 A Letter from Lenin”) with the signature “Lénine”. 
 Three days later, on January 27, La Vérité published the article, with many cuts and with its own subheadings, in No. 
 48. 
 The full text was published in the magazine Proletarskaya Revolutsia (Proletarian Revolution) No. 
 7, 1929 from the La Vérité galleys. 
 p. 
 195 l’Humanité —daily French socialist newspaper founded in 1904 by Jean Jaurès. 
 During the First World War was controlled by the socialist Right wing and followed a chauvinist policy. 
 In 1918 Marcel Cachin, an outstanding leader of the French and international workers’ movement, became its political editor. 
 In 1918-20 l’Humanité campaigned against the French Government’s imperialist policy of armed intervention in Soviet Russia. 
 In De-cember 1920, following the split in the Socialist Party and the founding of the Communist Party, l’Humanité became the Commu-nist Central Organ. 
 p. 
 197 Appeal to Reason —a newspaper published by the American social-ists, founded in Girard, Kansas, in 1895. 
 Had no official connec-tions with the U. 
S. 
 Socialist Party but propagated socialist ideas and enjoyed wide popularity among the workers. 
 Took up an inter-nationalist position in the First World War. 
 Lenin’s reference is to Eugene Debs’ article “When I Shall Fight”, in the issue of September 11, 1915 (No. 
 1032). 
 p. 
 200 In January 1912 the Mensheviks were expelled from the Party by decision of the Sixth (Prague) Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 The Sixth All-Russia Conference of the R. 
 S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 met from January 5 to January 17 (18-30), 1912 in Prague and actually assumed the character of a Party congress. 
 Lenin was the leading figure at the Conference. 
 He delivered the reports on the current situation and the tasks of the Party, the work of the International Socialist Bureau, and took part in the discus-sions. 
 He also drafted the resolutions on all major agenda items. 
 The Conference resolutions on “Liquidationism and the Group of Liquidators and on “The Party Organisation Abroad” were of tremendous theoretical and practical significance. 
 The Conference declared that by their conduct the liquidators had definitely placed themselves outside the Party and expelled them from the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 The Conference condemned the activities of the anti-Party groups abroad—the Menshevik Golos group, the Vperyod and Trotsky groups, and recognised the absolute necessity for a single Party organisation abroad, conducting its work under the supervision and guidance of the C. 
C. 
, and pointed out that Party groups abroad “which refuse to submit to the Russian centre of Social-Democratic activity, i. 
e. 
, to the Central Committee, and which cause disorga-nisation by communicating with Russia independently and ignor-ing the Central Committee, have no right to use the name of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
”. 
 The Conference adopted a resolution on “The Charac-ter and Organisational Forms of Party Work”, approved Lenin’s draft Organisational Rules, made the newspaper Sotsial-Demokrat the Party Central Organ, elected a Party Central Committee and set up the Bureau of the C. 
C. 
 in Russia. 
 The Prague Conference played an outstanding part in building the Bolshevik Party, a party of a new type, and in strengthening its unity. 
 It summed up a whole historical period of struggle against the Mensheviks, consolidated the victory of the Bolsheviks and ex-pelled the Menshevik liquidators from the Party. 
 Local Party orga-nisations rallied still closer round the Party on the basis of the Conference decisions. 
 The Conference strengthened the Party as an all-Russian organisation and defined its political line and tactics in the conditions of the new revolutionary upsurge. 
 The Prague Conference was of great international significance. 
 It showed the revolutionary elements of the parties of the Second International how to conduct a decisive struggle against opportunism by carry-ing the fight to a complete organisational break with the oppor-tunists. 
 p. 
 203 De Tribune —organ of the Left wing of the Social-Democratic Labour Party of Holland. 
 Founded in 1907 by A. 
 Pannekoek H. 
 Gorter, D. 
 Wijnkoop and Henriette Roland-Holst. 
 In 1909, follow-ing the expulsion of the Left wing, became the official organ of the new, Social-Democratic Party, and in 1918 of the Dutch Com-munist Party. 
 It appeared under this name until 1940. 
 p. 
 204 This “rough draft” was written early in January 1917. 
 The manu-script bears this note by Lenin: (for the I. 
S. 
C. 
 and publication in the press)”. 
 On January 7, 1917, Robert Grimm, the Kautskyite Chairman of the International Socialist Committee, induced the Swiss Social-Democratic Party Executive to postpone indefinitely the emergen-cy party congress on the war issue, despite objections from the Left. 
 On the same day the Centrist opposition in the German Social-Democratic Party held a conference in Berlin and adopted a pacifist manifesto framed by Kautsky, “Ein Friedensmanifest der deutschen Parteiopposition” (“Peace Manifesto of the German Party Opposi-tion”), later published in a number of German newspapers and in the Swiss Socialist Volksrecht of January 11. 
 Since this signified an open alliance of the Right Zimmerwaldists with the social-chau-vinists, Lenin altered his draft but decided to postpone its pub-lication. 
 The manuscript bears his note: “Written before January 7, 1917 and therefore partly obsolete. 
” Later, using the draft as a basis, Lenin wrote his appeal “To the Workers Who Support the Struggle Against the War and Against the Socialists Who Have Sided with Their Governments” (see pp. 
 229-35 of this volume). 
 p. 
 20596 97 This letter was written in Zurich and sent to V. 
 A. 
 Karpinsky in Geneva. 
 It was meant for discussion in R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 groups abroad. 
 p. 
 217 Brilliant —G. 
 Y. 
 Sokolnikov (1888-1939), joined the Party in 1905. 
 During the war contributed to Trotsky’s paper Nashe Slovo (Our Word). 
 p. 
 217 Grütlianer —organ of the Swiss bourgeois-reformist Grütli-Verein; founded in Zurich in 1851. 
 Became a social-chauvinist mouthpiece during the war. 
 Lenin described it as the organ of “the consistent and avowed servants of the bourgeoisie in the labour movement”. 
 p. 
 218 The allusion is to the conference of 115 representatives of Swiss labour organisations held in Zurich on August 6, 1916 to discuss the situation created by rising living costs. 
 The main report was made by Grimm. 
 The resolution and a brief account of the confer-ence were published in Volksrecht , August 8, 1916 (No. 
 183), under the heading “Die schweizerische Arbeiterschaft und die Teuerung” (“The Swiss Workers and Rising Living Costs”). 
 The conference appeal to the National Council was published in Volksrecht of August 10 (No. 
 185) under the heading “Massnahmen gegen die Teuerung” (“Measures Against Rising Living Costs”). 
 p. 
 225 The allusion, apparently, is to the editorial “Parteibeschlüsse” (“Party Decisions”) in the Berner Tagwacht of January 8, 1917 (No. 
 6). 
 p. 
 233 The Lecture on the 1905 Revolution was delivered in German on Ja-nuary 9 (22), 1917 a the meeting of young workers in the Zurich People’s House. 
 Lenin began working on the lecture in the closing days of 1916. 
 He referred to the lecture in a letter to Y. 
 A. 
 Karpinsky dated December 7 (20), asking for literature on the subject. 
 p. 
 236 “Twelve Brief Theses on H. 
 Greulich’s Defence of Fatherland Defence” was written in reply to a series of articles by Greulich, a Swiss social-chauvinist, “Zur Landesverteidigung” (“Defence of the Fatherland Issue”), which appeared in Volksrecht , January 23-26, 1917 (Nos. 
 19-22). 
 Lenin’s theses, signed “—e—”, appeared in the same paper on January 31-February 1 (Nos. 
 26-27). 
 Volksrecht editor Ernst Nobs deleted several paragraphs and inserted the word Genosse (Comrade) before the name Greulich. 
 Nobs deleted the following passages: (1) in Section 9, from the third paragraph beginning with the words “But, frankly, what kind of unity...”, and up to the end of the Section; (2) in Section 11, the whole of the second paragraph from the words “Very well! But that is...” and to the words “... not socialism”; (3) in Section 12, the concluding words of the fifth paragraph “... and politely invite the social-patriots to move over to the Grütli-Verein”. 
 p. 
 25498 99 100 101 102 103 104 Le Populaire —a French Centrist newspaper published in Limoges from 1916 and in Paris from July 1917. 
 Edited in 1916 by Jean Longuet; contributors included Pierre Brizon, Adrien Pressemane, Jean-Pierre Raffin-Dugens, Boris Souvarine and Paul Faure. 
 Became the official organ of the French Socialist Party in 1921; at present is controlled by the party’s Right wing. 
 p. 
 262 Reference is to A. 
 I. 
 Guchkov’s letter of August 15 (28), 1916 to General M. 
 V. 
 Alexeyev, Chief of Staff to the Supreme Commander of the Russian Forces, published in No. 
 57 of Sotsial-Demokrat , and excerpts from a Reichstag speech by Interior Minister Helffe-rich in reply to an opposition question about the wholesale arrests of Social-Democrats. 
 The Guchkov letter was sent to Sotsial-Demokrat from Russia along with other materials. 
 In a letter to Inessa Armand dated De-cember 5 (18), 1916, Lenin wrote: “Received another letter from St. 
 Petersburg today. 
 Of late they have been writing frequently. 
 “In addition to the Guchkov letter, which is being published in No. 
 57 of the Central Organ ... we have also received letters by Lvov and Chelnokov on the same subject (resentment against the traitors who are negotiating a separate peace), etc. 
” The Guchkov letter was expressive of the fear inspired in the Russian bourgeoisie by the maturing revolution and of its dissatis-faction with the government for its inability to prevent revolution. 
 The substance of Helfferich’s speech was that, it was better to arrest the leaders of the revolution than to allow the revolution to break out. 
 p. 
 263 This refers to the appeal To Affiliated Parties and Groups adopted at an enlarged meeting of the International Socialist Committee in February 1916. 
 It sharply criticised the social-chauvinists and the social-chauvinist position of the International Socialist Bureau, denouncing its attempts to re-establish the Second International through “mutual amnesty” of socialists as a “plot against socialism”. 
 Socialists, the appeal said should refuse to vote war credits, should organise strikes, demonstrations, fraternisation at the front and other revolutionary actions against the imperialist war. 
 The appeal was published in the International Socialist Committee Bulletin of February 29 (No. 
 3) and in Sotsial-Demokrat of March 25, 1916 (No. 
 52). 
 p. 
 266 On November 9 (22), 1906, the tsarist government issued a decree authorising the withdrawal of peasants from the commune and mak-ing their plots their personal property. 
 Amended by the Duma and Council of State, the decree came into force on June 14, 1910. 
 Known as the Stolypin law, after Prime Minister P. 
 A. 
 Stolypin, it enabled the peasant to withdraw from the commune, take over his land as personal property and sell it if he so chose. 
 The commune was under obligation to allot him land in one place. 
 The Stolypin reform accelerated the development of105 106 107 108 capitalism in agriculture and differentiation of the peasantry, and aggravated the class struggle in the rural areas. 
 p. 
 266 Reference is to a speech by F. 
 Turati in the Italian Parliament on December 17, 1916, in which he sought to justify the imperialist war. 
 The speech appeared on the next day in Avanti! (No. 
 345), and com-ment in the socialist press of various countries was summarised in Volksrecht (December 23, No. 
 301) under the heading “Eine Rede Turatis über das Friedensangebot” (“Turati Speech on Peace Pro-posals”). 
 Lenin quotes and criticises the speech in his article “Bourgeois Pacifism and Socialist Pacifism” (see pp. 
 175-94 of this volume). 
 p. 
 268 Statistics and Sociology was meant for publication, legally, as a separate pamphlet under the pen-name P. 
 Piryuchov. 
 The article was never finished. 
 p. 
 271 This article was written in reply to one by Robert Grimm, “Mehr-heit und Minderheit in der Militärfrage” (“Majority and Minority on the War Issue”), in the Berner Tagwacht of January 23-27, 1917 (Nos. 
 19-23) and the magazine Neues Leben (New Life) No. 
 1 for 1917. 
 p. 
 278 Die Glocke (The Bell)—a fortnightly magazine published in Munich and later in Berlin in 1915-25 by Parvus (Alexander Gelfand), a social-chauvinist member of the German Social-Democratic Party. 
 p. 
 278 These amendments were proposed by the Swiss Lefts at the Zurich cantonal party congress in Töss, February 11-12, 1917. 
 The congress had before it two draft resolutions: (1) a social-chau-vinist draft submitted by minority members of the commission on the war issue, and (2) a Centrist draft from the commission majority. 
 The latter was adopted with the amendments formulated by Lenin by 93 votes to 65. 
 The Lefts voted for the resolution in order to prevent adoption of the social-chauvinist draft. 
 The typewritten copy of the amendments has this note by Lenin on the results of the voting: “For the Right-wing Klöti and Co. 
 resolution — 65 — 82 32 & 32 for this ” ” Grimm Centrist resolution — 93 & resolution 61 out of 158 Total 158” The amendments were published in No. 
 1 of the leaflet “Gegen die Lüge der Vaterlandsverteidigung” (“Against the Fatherland De-fence Lie”) issued by the Swiss Left in February 1917 in close co-operation with Lenin. 
 Lenin discusses the struggle within the Swiss Social-Democratic Party in his article “The Story of One Short Period in the Life of One Socialist Party” (see pp. 
 283-86 of this volume). 
 p. 
 282109 110 111 112 113 ¥¥ Reference is to the majority and minority draft resolutions pub-lished in Volksrecht of January 9, 1917 (No. 
 7) under the heading “Anträge der Militärkommission” (“Proposals of the Commission on the War Issue”). 
 p. 
 283 Lenin here refers to the referendum on the convocation of an emer-gency congress of the Swiss Social-Democratic Party to discuss its attitude towards the war. 
 The referendum was initiated by the Left forces following the party Executive’s decision to postpone the con-gress indefinitely. 
 On January 23, 1917, Volksrecht (No. 
 19) published in the “Party Life” column an appeal of the initiating group under the heading “Das Referendum gegen den Parteivorstandbeschluss ergriffen”) (“Referendum Against Executive’s Decision Begins”). 
 p. 
 283 Neue Freie Zeitung —a newspaper published in Olten by the Solo-thurn cantonal organisation of the Swiss Social-Democratic Party from 1905 to 1920. 
 Took a Centrist stand in the First World War. 
 p. 
 283 Basler Vorwärts —organ of the Basle organisation of the Swiss Social-Democratic Party, founded in 1898; followed a Centrist policy in the First World War. 
 p. 
 283 Reference is to H. 
 Greulich’s article “Zur Landesverteidigung” (“Defence of the Fatherland Issue”) in Volksrecht , January 26, 1917 (No. 
 22). 
 Lenin quotes §3 of the majority resolution at the begin-ning of this article. 
 p. 
 284 The editorial “Zum Referendum” (“On the Referendum”) ap-peared in the “Party Life” section of Volksrecht , January 27, 1917 (No. 
 23). 
 p. 
 284 This refers to Fritz Platten’s article “Die Militärfrage” (“The Milita-ry Question”), published as an editorial in Volksrecht , February 1, 1917 (No. 
 27), and continued in the paper’s issues of February 2, 5 and 6 (Nos. 
 28, 30 and 31). 
 p. 
 284 Lenin here alludes to “Abänderungsanträge zu der Resolution der Militärkommission” (“Amendments to the Majority Resolution on the War Issue”) published in Volksrecht , February 9, 1917 (No. 
 34). 
 p. 
 285 The first news of the February bourgeois-democratic revolution in Russia reached Lenin on March 2 (15), 1917. 
 Reports of the victory of the revolution and the advent to power of an Octobrist-Cadet government of capitalists and landlords appeared in the Zürcher Post and Neue Zürcher Zeitung by the evening of March 4 (17). 
 Lenin had drawn up a rough draft of theses, not meant for publication, on the tasks of the proletariat in the revolution. 
 The theses were immediately sent via Stockholm to Oslo for the Bolshe-viks leaving for Russia. 
 p. 
 287114 115 116 117 118 119 120 121 122 Lenin uses the appellation Octobrist-Cadet to describe the bourgeois Provisional Government formed at 3 p. 
 m. 
 on March 2 (15) 1917 by agreement between the Provisional Committee of the State Duma and the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik leaders of the Executive Committee of the Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and Sol-diers’ Deputies. 
 The government was made up of Prince G. 
 Y. 
 Lvov (Prime Minister and Minister of the Interior), the Cadet leader P. 
 N. 
 Milyukov (Minister of Foreign Affairs) the Octobrist leader A. 
 I. 
 Guchkov (Minister of War and Acting Minister of the Navy) and other representatives of the big bourgeoisie and landlords. 
 It also included A. 
 F. 
 Kerensky, of the Trudovik group, who was appointed Minister of Justice. 
 The manifesto of March 4 (17) mentioned by Lenin later on was originally drawn up by Menshevik members of the Petrograd Soviet Executive Committee. 
 It set out the terms on which the Executive was prepared to support the Provisional Government. 
 In the course of negotiations with the Duma Committee, it was revised by P. 
 N. 
 Milyukov and became the basis of the Provisional Government’s first appeal to the people. 
 p. 
 287 The telegram was sent to Stockholm, addressed to Lundström, a Swedish Social-Democrat, for communication to the Bolsheviks returning to Russia from Stockholm and Oslo. 
 It reached Petrograd on March 13 (26) and was read out by Y. 
 B. 
 Bosh at a meeting of the C. 
C. 
 Bureau in Russia and, on the same day, at a meeting of the Executive Commission of the Petrograd Party Committee. 
 p. 
 292 The letter was published in Volksrecht under the heading “Feststell-ung” (“Factual Note”), and began with the words: “Comrade Lenin writes.... 
” p. 
 293 The first four Letters from Afar were written between March 7 and 12 (20 and 25), the fifth, unfinished letter was written on the eve of Lenin’s departure from Switzerland, on March 26 (April 8), 1917. 
 As soon as the first news reached him of the revolutionary events in Russia and the composition of the bourgeois Provisional Govern-ment and the Executive Committee of the Petrograd Soviet, Lenin began work on an article for Pravda —he regarded the press as an important vehicle of propaganda and organisation. 
 “The press is now the main thing”, he wrote to Alexandra Kollontai on March 3 (16). 
 “I cannot deliver lectures or attend meetings, for I must write daily for Pravda ,” he wrote to V. 
 A. 
 Karpinsky on March 8 (21), in reply to the latter’s invitation to deliver a lecture on the tasks of the Party in the revolution to Russian émigrés and Swiss social-ists in Geneva. 
 The first and second “Letters from Afar” were sent to Alexandra Kollontai in Oslo on March 9 (22) for forwarding to Petrograd. 
 On March 17 (30) Lenin asked J. 
 S. 
 Hanecki whether the first four letters had reached Pravda in Petrograd, adding that if they had not, he would send copies. 
 The letters were brought to Petrograd by123 124 125 126 Alexandra Kollontai, who handed them over to Pravda on March 19 (April 1). 
 The first letter appeared in Nos. 
 14 and 15 of Pravda , March 21 and 22 (April 3 and 4), with considerable abridgements and certain changes by the editorial board, which, beginning with mid-March, included L. 
 B. 
 Kamenev and J. 
 V. 
 Stalin. 
 The full text of the letter was first published in 1949, in the fourth Russian edition of Lenin’s Collected Works . 
 The second, third and fourth letters were not published in 1917. 
 The basic ideas of the unfinished fifth letter were developed by Lenin in his “Letters on Tactics” and “The Tasks of the Proletariat in Our Revolution”. 
 Before leaving for Russia, Lenin took measures to circulate the first and second letters among Bolsheviks living in France and Switzerland. 
 p. 
 295 The Pravda editors deleted about one fifth of the first letter. 
 The cuts concern chiefly Lenin’s characterisation of the Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary leaders as conciliators and flunkeys of the bourgeoisie, their attempts to hide from the people the fact that representatives of the British and French governments helped the Cadets and Octobrists secure the abdication of Nicholas II, and also Lenin’s exposure of the monarchist and imperialist proclivities of the Provisional Government, which was determined to continue the predatory war. 
 p. 
 297 Lenin here refers to the Petrograd Soviet of Workers ’ Deputies , which emerged in the very early days of the February Revolution. 
 Elections to the Soviet began spontaneously at individual factories and within a few days spread to all the factories in the capital. 
 On February 27 (March 12), before the Soviet had assembled for its first meeting, the Menshevik liquidators K. 
 A. 
 Gvozdyov and B. 
 O. 
 Bogdanov, and Duma members N . 
 S. 
 Chkheidze, M. 
 I. 
 Skobelev and others proclaimed themselves the Provisional Executive Committee of the Soviet in an attempt to bring it under their complete control. 
 At its first meeting in the evening of the same day, the Soviet formed a Presidium composed of Chkheidze, Kerensky and Skobe-lev who, together with A. 
 G. 
 Shlyapnikov, N. 
 N. 
 Sukhanov and Y. 
 M. 
 Steklov, made up the Executive Committee. 
 Provision was made for inclusion of representatives of the central and Pet-rograd committees of the socialist parties. 
 The Socialist-Revolution-aries were at first opposed to the organisation of the Soviet, but subsequently delegated their representatives, V. 
 A. 
 Alexandrovich, V. 
 M. 
 Zenzinov and others. 
 The Soviet proclaimed itself the organ of the workers and soldiers, and up to the first Congress of Soviets (June 1917) was factually an all-Russian centre. 
 On March 1 (14) the Executive Com-mittee was extended to include soldiers’ deputies, among them F. 
 F. 
 Linde, A. 
 I. 
 Paderin and A. 
 D. 
 Sadovsky. 
 The Bureau of the Executive Committee was composed among others, of N. 
 S. 
 Chkheidze, Y. 
 M. 
 Steklov, B. 
 O. 
 Bogdanov,127 128 P. 
 I. 
 Stu 0ka, P. 
 A. 
 Krasikov, K. 
 A. 
 Gvozdyov. 
 N. 
 S. 
 Chkheidze and A. 
 F. 
 Kerensky were delegated to represent the Soviet on the Duma Committee. 
 On February 28 (March 13), the Soviet issued its Manifesto to the Population of Petrograd and Russia. 
 It called on the people to ral-ly around the Soviet and take over the administration of local af-fairs. 
 On March 3 (14), the Soviet appointed several commissions— on food, military affairs, public order and the press. 
 The latter com-mission provided the first editorial board of Izvestia , composed of N. 
 D. 
 Sokolov, Y. 
 M. 
 Steklov, N. 
 N. 
 Sukhanov and K. 
 S. 
 Grinevich; V. 
 A. 
 Bazarov and B. 
 V. 
 Avilov were added somewhat later. 
 Meetings of the Executive Committee were attended, in a consult-ative capacity, by the Social-Democratic members of all the four State Dumas, five representatives of the Soldiers’ Commission, two representatives of the Central Trade Union Bureau, representa-tives of the district Soviets, the Izvestia editorial board, and other organisations. 
 The Soviet appointed special delegates to organise district So-viets and began the formation of a militia (100 volunteers for every 1,000 workers). 
 Though leadership of the Soviet was in the hands of compromising elements, the pressure of the militant workers and soldiers compelled it to take a number of revolutionary measures—the arrest of tsarist officials, release of political prisoners, etc. 
 On March 1 (14), the Soviet issued its “Order No. 
 1 to the Petrograd Garrison”. 
 It played a very big part in revolutionising the army. 
 Henceforth all military units were to be guided in their political actions solely by the Soviet, all weapons were to be placed at the disposal and under the control of company and battalion soldiers’ committees, orders issued by the Provisional Committee of the State Duma were to be obeyed only if they did not conflict with the orders of the Soviet, etc. 
 But at the crucial moment, on the night following March 1 (14), the compromising leaders of the Soviet Executive voluntarily turned over power to the bourgeoisie: they endorsed the Provisional Government composed of representatives of the bourgeoisie and landlords. 
 This was not known abroad, since papers standing to the left of the Cadets were not allowed out of the country. 
 Lenin learned of the surrender of power only when he returned to Russia. 
 p. 
 299 Octobrists —members of the Union of October Seventeen, a counter-revolutionary party formed after promulgation of the tsar’s Mani-festo of October 17 (30) 1905. 
 It represented and upheld the inter-ests of the big bourgeoisie and of the landlords who ran their estates on capitalist lines. 
 Its leaders were A. 
 I. 
 Guchkov, a big Moscow manufacturer and real estate owner, and M. 
 V. 
 Rodzyanko, a rich landlord. 
 The Octobrists gave their full support to the tsar’s home and foreign policy and in the First World War joined the “Progressist bloc”, a sham opposition group demanding responsible government, in other words, a government that would enjoy the129 confidence of the bourgeoisie and landlords. 
 The Octobrists became the ruling party after the February Revolution and did everything they could to ward off socialist revolution. 
 Their leader, Guchkov, was War Minister in the First Provisional Government. 
 Following the Great October Socialist Revolution, the party became one of the main forces in the battle against Soviet power. 
 The party of Peaceful Renovation was a constitutional-monarchist organisation of the big bourgeoisie and landlords. 
 It took final shape in 1906 following the dissolution of the First Duma. 
 It united the “Left” Octobrists and “Right” Cadets and its chief lead-ers were P. 
 A. 
 Heiden, N. 
 N. 
 Lvov, P. 
 P. 
 Ryabushinsky, M. 
 A. 
 Stakhovich, Y. 
 N. 
 and G. 
 N. 
 Trubetskoi, D. 
 N. 
 Shipov. 
 Like the Octobrists, it sought to safeguard and promote the interests of the industrial and commercial bourgeoisie and of the landlords who ran their estates along capitalist lines. 
 In the Third Duma the party joined with the so-called Party of Democratic Reforms to form the Progressist group. 
 p. 
 303 Cadets —the name derives from the Constitutional-Democratic Party, the chief party of the Russian liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie. 
 Founded in October 1905, it was composed chiefly of capitalists, Zemstvo leaders, landlords and bourgeois intellectuals. 
 Prominent in the leadership were P. 
 N. 
 Milyukov, S. 
 A. 
 Muromtsev, V. 
 A. 
 Maklakov, A. 
 I. 
 Shingaryov, P. 
 B. 
 Struve and F. 
 I. 
 Rodichev. 
 The Cadets became the party of the imperialist bourgeoisie and in the First World War actively supported the tsarist government’s predatory policies and in the February Revolution tried to save the monarchy. 
 The dominant force in the Provisional Government, they followed a counter-revolutionary policy inimical to the people but advantageous to U. 
S. 
, British and French imperialism. 
 Implacable enemies of Soviet power, the Cadets had an active part in all the armed counter-revolutionary actions and foreign intervention campaigns. 
 Most of their leaders emigrated after the defeat of the counter-revolutionary forces and continued their anti-Soviet and counter-revolutionary work abroad. 
 p. 
 303 Trudovik —member of the Trudovik group in the State Dumas, formed in April 1906 by petty-bourgeois democrats—peasants and intellectuals of the Narodnik persuasion. 
 The group wavered between the Cadets and the revolutionary Social-Democrats, and in the First World War most of its members adopted a social-chauvinist position. 
 The Trudoviks spoke for the rich peasants, the kulaks, and after the February Revolution actively supported the Provisional Government. 
 One of their representatives, Zarudny, became Minister of Justice following the July events and directed the police cam-paign against the Bolsheviks. 
 After the October Revolution the Trudoviks sided with the counter-revolutionary forces. 
 p. 
 303 The first Provisional Government , or the Provisional Committee of the State Duma, was formed on February 27 (March 12), 1917. 
130 131 132 On that day the Duma Council of Doyens sent a telegram to the tsar drawing his attention to the critical situation in the capital and urging immediate measures “to save the fatherland and the dynasty”. 
 The tsar replied by sending the Duma President, M. 
 V. 
 Rodzyanko, a decree dissolving the Duma. 
 By this time the in-surgent people had surrounded the Duma building, the Taurida Palace, where Duma members were meeting in private conference, and blocked all the streets leading to it. 
 Soldiers and armed workers were in occupation of the building. 
 In this situation the Duma hastened to elect A Provisional Committee to “maintain order in Petrograd and for communication with various institutions and individuals”. 
 The Provisional Committee was composed of V. 
 V. 
 Shulgin and V. 
 N. 
 Lvov, both of the extreme Right, Octobrists S. 
 I. 
 Shidlovsky, I. 
 I. 
 Dmitryukov, M. 
 V. 
 Rodzyanko (chairman), Progressists V. 
 A. 
 Rzhevsky and A. 
 I. 
 Konovalov, Cadets P. 
 N . 
 Milyukov and N. 
 V. 
 Ne-krasov, the Trudovik A. 
 F. 
 Kerensky, and the Menshevik N. 
 S. 
 Chkheidze. 
 p. 
 309 The composition of the C. 
C. 
 Bureau in Russia on March 9 (22), 1917 was as follows: A. 
 I. 
 Yelizarova, K. 
 S. 
 Yeremeyev, V. 
 N. 
 Zalezhsky, P. 
 A. 
 Zalutsky, M. 
 I. 
 Kalinin, V. 
 M. 
 Molotov, M. 
 S. 
 Olminsky, A. 
 M. 
 Smirnov, Y. 
 D. 
 Stasova, M. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova, M. 
 I. 
 Khakharev, K. 
 M. 
 Shvedchikov, A. 
 C. 
 Shlyapnikov and K. 
 I. 
 Shutko. 
 On March 12 (25). 
 G. 
 I. 
 Bokii and M. 
 K. 
 Muranov were added, also J. 
 V. 
 Stalin, with voice but no vote. 
 The Petrograd Committee of the R. 
 S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 was formed at a meeting on March 2 (15), 1917, and was composed of all those who had served on the illegal committees and newly co-opted members. 
 The composition was: B. 
 V. 
 Avilov, N. 
 K. 
 Antipov, B. 
 A. 
 Zhem-chuzhin, V. 
 N. 
 Zalezhsky, M. 
 I. 
 Kalinin, N. 
 P. 
 Komarov, L. 
 M. 
 Mikhailov, V. 
 M. 
 Molotov, K. 
 Orlov, N. 
 1. 
 Podvoisky, P. 
 I. 
 Stu 0-ka, V. 
 V. 
 Schmidt, K. 
 I. 
 Shutko and A. 
 G. 
 Shlyapnikov, represent-ing the Central Committee Bureau. 
 For the January (Prague) Conference, to which Lenin refers, see Note No. 
 95. 
 p. 
 311 This refers to the Manifesto of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party to All Citizens of Russia , issued by the Central Commit-tee and published as a supplement to Izvestia of February 28 (March 13), 1917 (No. 
 1). 
 Lenin learned of the Manifesto from an abridged version in the morning edition of the Frankfurter Zeitung , March 9 (22), 1917. 
 On the following day he wired Pravda in Petrograd via Oslo: “Have just read excerpts from the Central Committee Manifesto. 
 Best wishes. 
 Long live the proletarian militia, harbinger of peace and socialism!” p. 
 311 See Note No. 
 75. 
 p. 
 312 Reference is to the agreement concluded on the night following March 1 (14), 1917 between the Duma Provisional Committee and the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik leaders of the Petro-133 134 135 136 grad Soviet Executive Committee. 
 The latter voluntarily surrendered power to the bourgeoisie and authorised the Duma Provisional Committee to form a Provisional Government of its own choice. 
 p. 
 314 Le Temps —a daily paper published in Paris from 1861 to 1942. 
 Spoke for the ruling element and was the factual organ of the French Foreign Ministry. 
 p. 
 315 The Manifesto of the Executive Committee of the Soviet of Work-ers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies was published in Izvestia on March 3 (16), 1917 (No. 
 4), simultaneously with the announcement of the for-mation of a Provisional Government under Prince Lvov. 
 Drawn up by the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik members of the Exec-utive Committee, it declared that the democratic forces would support the new government “to the extent that it carries out its undertakings and wages a determined struggle against the old regime”. 
 The Manifesto did not mention the fact that the Soviet had auth-orised Kerensky to join the new government, inasmuch as on March 1 (14) the Executive Committee had decided “not to delegate demo-cratic representatives to the government”. 
 Le Temps reported this in a despatch from its correspondent. 
 On March 2 (15) the Soviet, “defying the protest of the minority”, approved Kerensky’s entry into the government as Minister of Justice. 
 p. 
 315 Neue Zürcher Zeitung —a bourgeois newspaper, founded in Zurich in 1780 and until 1821 published under the name Zürcher Zeitung , now the most influential paper in Switzerland. 
 National-Zeitung —a capitalist newspaper published in Berlin from 1848 to 1938; beginning with 1914 appeared under the name Acht-Uhr Abendsblatt . 
 National-Zeitung . 
 p. 
 315 The foreign press reported the appointment by the Petrograd Soviet of a special body to keep check on the Provisional Govern-ment. 
 On the basis of this report, Lenin at first welcomed the or-ganisation of this control body, pointing out, however, that only experience would show whether it would live up to expectations. 
 Actually, this so-called Contact Committee, appointed by the Executive on March 8 (21) to “influence” and “control” the work of the Provisional Government, only helped the latter exploit the pres-tige of the Soviet as a cover for its counter-revolutionary policy. 
 The Contact Committee consisted of M. 
 I. 
 Skobelev, Y. 
 M. 
 Steklov, N. 
 N. 
 Sukhanov, V. 
 N. 
 Filippovsky, N S. 
 Chkheidze and, later V. 
 M. 
 Chernov and I. 
 G. 
 Tsereteli. 
 It helped keep the masses from active revolutionary struggle for the transfer of power to the Soviets. 
 The committee was dissolved in April 1917, when its func-tions were taken over by the Petrograd Soviet Executive Committee Bureau. 
 p. 
 316 Frankfurter Zeitung —an influential German capitalist daily paper, published in Frankfurt-on-Main, from 1856 to 1943. 
 Resumed137 138 139 140 141 publication in 1949 under the name Frarkfurter Allgemeine Zeitung ; speaks for West German monopoly interests. 
 p. 
 320 Vossische Zeitung —a moderate liberal newspaper published in Berlin from 1704 to 1934. 
 p. 
 320 See Lenin’s The State and Revolution (present edition, Vol. 
 25). 
 p. 
 325 Soon after its formation, the Provisional Government appointed the Octobrist M. 
 A. 
 Stakhovich Governor-General of Finland and the Cadet F. 
 I. 
 Rodichev Minister (or Commissioner) for Finnish Affairs. 
 On March 8 (21), the Provisional Government issued its Manifesto “On Approval and Enforcement of the Constitution of the Grand Duchy of Finland”. 
 Under this Finland was allowed auton-omy with the proviso that laws promulgated by the Finnish Diet would be subject to confirmation by the Russian Government. 
 Laws that ran counter to Finnish legislation were to remain in force for the duration of the war. 
 The Provisional Government wanted the Finnish Diet to amend the Constitution to give “Russian citizens equal rights with Finnish citizens in commerce and industry”, for under the tsarist govern-ment such equality was imposed in defiance of Finnish laws. 
 At the same time, the Provisional Government refused to discuss self-determination for Finland “pending convocation of the constituent assembly”. 
 This led to a sharp conflict, resolved only after the Great October Socialist Revolution when, on December 18 (31), 1917, the Soviet Government granted Finland full independence. 
 p. 
 331 Imperialism , the Highest Stage of Capitalism was written in the first half of 1916, and on June 19 (July 2) was sent to Petrograd via Pa-ris. 
 It was to have been published by the Parus publishing house which, on Maxim Gorky’s initiative, was putting out a series of popular surveys of West-European countries involved in the war. 
 Lenin maintained contact with the publishers through the editor of the series, M. 
 N. 
 Pokrovsky. 
 On September 29, 1916, Gorky wrote Pokrovsky in Paris that Lenin’s book was “really excellent” and would be put out in addition to the regular series. 
 However, the Parus editors strongly objected to Lenin’s criticism of Kautsky’s renegade position and substantially altered the text, deleting all criticism of Kautsky’s theory of ultra-impe-rialism and distorting a number of Lenin’s formulations. 
 The book was finally published in mid-1917 with a preface by Lenin, dated April 26. 
 Parus (Sail) and Letopis (Annals)—the names of the publishing house and magazine founded by Gorky in Petrograd. 
 Letopis —a magazine of literature, science and politics whose con-tributors included former Bolsheviks (the Machists V. 
 A. 
 Bazarov and A. 
 A. 
 Bogdanov) and Mensheviks. 
 Gorky was literary editor, and among the other prominent writers contributing to Letopis were Alexander Blok, Valeri Bryusov, Fyodor Gladkov, Sergei Yesenin. 
142 143 144 145 A. 
 V. 
 Lunacharsky, Vladimir Mayakovsky, Vyacheslav Shishkov and A. 
 Chaplygin. 
 Letopis appeared from December 1915 to De-cember 1917. 
 The Parus publishing house existed from 1915 through 1918. 
 p. 
 334 The agrarian programme of the “104”—the land reform bill the Trudovik members submitted to the 13th meeting of the First State Duma on May 23 (June 5) 1906. 
 Its purpose was to “establish a system under which all the land, with its deposits and waters, would belong to the entire people, and farmlands would be allowed only those tilling them by their own labour” ( Documents and Mate-rials of the State Duma , Moscow, 1957, p. 
 172). 
 The Trudoviks advocated organisation of a “national land fund” that would include all state, crown, monastery and church lands, also part of pri-vately owned lands, which were to be alienated if the size of the holding exceeded the labor norm fixed for the given area. 
 Partial compensation was to be paid for such alienated land. 
 Small holdings were to remain the property of the owner, but would eventually be brought into the national fund. 
 Implementation of the reform was to be supervised by local committees elected by universal, direct and equal suffrage and by secret ballot. 
 p. 
 341 This was written early in March 1917 and published in Berne over the signature: “Editorial Board, Sotsial-Demokrat ”, with the fol-lowing note: “Comrades, continue to write to the Prisoners’ Relief Committee at the following address: Schweiz, Bern, Falkenweg 9, Dr. 
 Schklowsky . 
 The comrades will try to keep on sending books, etc. 
” Contact with Russian war prisoners in German and Austrian camps began in 1915, when the Committee of R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Organisations Abroad set up in Berne the Social-Democratic Commission for Contact with War Prisoners. 
 Nearly 250 letters a month were sent to and received from war prisoners in more than 20 camps. 
 Communication was established with Social-Democrats in these camps, mostly Bolsheviks and Bolshevik sym-pathisers, and through them camp libraries were built up, diverse propaganda work conducted, May Day celebrations organised, etc. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat , the Bolshevik Central Organ, Sbornik Sotsial-Demokrata , Kommunist , Alexandra Kollontai’s pamphlet Who Needs This War? (in two editions) a leaflet on the land question, Gorky’s leaflet “The Black-Hundred Pogrom-Mongers and the Jews”, various textbooks and other literature were supplied to the camps. 
 In February 1917, No. 
 1 of the magazine In War Prison was put out, financed by collections among war prisoners. 
 Issue No. 
 2 was prepared for publication at the end of March 1917, on the eve of the Bolsheviks departure for Russia, but did not appear in print. 
 Lenin attached great importance to work among war prisoners who, on returning home, would be drawn into the revolutionary struggle. 
 Regular personal contacts were out of the question, but two war prisoners who had escaped from German camps visited Lenin in Zurich towards the close of January 1917. 
146 147 Through the war prisoners the Bolshevik ideas penetrated to the population. 
 In 1917-18, Russian war prisoners look an active partin the revolutionary struggle of the German working class. 
 p. 
 343 Pravda (Truth)—daily legal Bolshevik newspaper, started pub-lication in St. 
 Petersburg on April 22 (May 5), 1912 in pursuance ofa decision of the Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of theR. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Lenin directed Pravda , wrote for it nearly every day, advised its editors and saw to it that the paper was conducted in a militant, revolutionary spirit. 
 Much of the Party’s organisation work was centered in Pravda , which organised meetings with representatives of Party nuclei, collected information on Party activity in the fac-tories, and transmitted to local organisations directives of theCentral and St. 
 Petersburg committees. 
 Pravda was subjected to constant police harassment and per-secution and was closed shortly before the outbreak of the First World War, on July 8 (21), 1914. 
 Publication was resumed after the February Revolution, on March 5 (18), 1917, as the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central and St. 
 Petersburgorgan. 
 Lenin joined the editorial board on his return to Petrograd, and from that day Pravda began to popularise his plan for transition from bourgeois-democratic to socialist revolution. 
 In July-October 1917, Pravda was persecuted by the counter-revolutionary Provisional Government and frequently had to changeits name. 
 It appeared as Listok Pravdy (Pravda Bulletin), Proletary (Proletarian), Rabochy (Worker), Rabochy Put (Worker’s Path), resuming its original name after the victory of the October Revolu-tion. 
 Pravda played a very special part in the history of the Bolshevik Party and the revolution. 
 It was a major medium of mass propagan-da and organisation in the struggle to achieve the Party’s aims. 
It waged a determined fight for the Party principles against the Menshevik liquidators, otzovists and Trotskyites and exposed their treasonous role. 
 It fought international opportunism and Centrismand educated the workers in the spirit of revolutionary Marxism. 
It played a cardinal role also in building up the Party, achievingclose cohesion of its ranks and strengthening its contacts with themasses. 
 The generation of front-rank workers trained by Pravda had a conspicuous part in the Great October Socialist Revolution and in the building of socialism. 
 Pravda holds a special place in the history of the Bolshevik press. 
 The first legally published Russian mass working-class paper, itushered in a new stage in the development of the Russian and worldProletarian press. 
 The day of its foundation, May 5, has since 1914 been celebrated as Workers’ Press Day. 
 p. 
 347 Lenin points to the lessons of the Franco-Prussian war of 1870-71, when Prussia handed over French war prisoners to the counter-148 149 revolutionary Versailles government to help suppress the Paris Com-mune. 
 p. 
 348 The lecture “ The Tasks of the R. 
 S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in the Russian Revolu-tion ” (“The Russian Revolution, Its Significance and Tasks”) was delivered in German on March 14 (27), 1917 at a meeting of Swissworkers in the Zurich People’s House. 
 Lenin gave a summary toVolksrecht , and later, on March 31 (April 13), when he was passing through Stockholm en route to Russia, also to the editors of theSwedish Left Social-Democratic Politiken , in which it appeared, slightly abridged, on April 15 (No. 
 86) under the heading: “Lenin on the Russian Revolution. 
 Direct Peace Negotiations BetweenPeoples, Not Governments”. 
 p. 
 355 This is discussed in more detail in The State and Revolution , Chapter VI, §3, “Kautsky’s Controversy with Pannekoek” (see present edition, Vol. 
 25). 
 p. 
 359 See Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte , The Civil War in France , Address of the General Council of the International Working Men ’s Association , and Engels’s Letter to L. 
 Kugelmann, April 12, 1871; Marx and Engels, Preface to the German edition of the Communist Manifesto (Marx and Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1962, pp. 
 332-33, 516-17; Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1962,pp. 
 463-64; Vol. 
 I, p. 
 22). 
 p. 
 359 This article appeared in Volksrecht , April 5 (No. 
 81) and in abridged form in Avanti! , April 10 (No: 99). 
 Judging from J. 
 S. 
 Hanecki’s letter of March 24 (April 6) to the Bureau in Russia of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee, the article was sent to Petrogradon March 22 (April 4). 
 It did not appear in Pravda , presumably be-cause the role played by the police agent Chernomazov had alreadybeen explained in the press. 
 p. 
 362 Corriere della Sera—an influential Italian capitalist newspaper, founded in Milan in 1876. 
 p. 
 362 Upon his return to Petrograd on March 12 (25), 1917, M. 
 K. 
 Mura-nov, a Bolshevik member of the Fourth State Duma, immediatelywrote to the newspaper Dyen stating the facts about Chernomazov and his connection with Pravda . 
 The letter was published on March 14 (27). 
 Muranov wrote that Chernomazov had worked onPravda from May 1913 to February 1914 and was dismissed on sus-picion of being a police informer. 
 The R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Commit-tee Bureau instructed Party organisations and members to discon-tinue all contact with him. 
 Muranov wrote: “M Chernomazov had never been, nor could have been, the chief and sole director of Pravda , which was edited by a board composed of R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee members and R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Duma deputies. 
” p. 
 364150 151 152 153 154 155 Petit Parisien —a daily mass-circulation yellow sheet published in Paris from 1876 to 1944. 
 During the First World War its pages were devoted to jingoist propaganda of the very worst kind. 
 p. 
 364 The decision was signed by Lenin, and also by G. 
 Y. 
 Zinoviev. 
 p. 
 365 Lenin began to make arrangements for returning to Russia as soon as the news of the February Revolution was confirmed. 
 “I’m beside myself at the thought that I cannot go to Scandinavia! I cannot for-give myself for not having risked going there in 1915,” he wrote to Inessa Armand on March 2 (15), 1917. 
 Both the Provisional Government and the Allies, England and France, took measures to prevent the internationalists returning to Russia. 
 The Russian police drew up a black list of persons subject to arrest at the frontier Most of the names were those of Zimmerwald internationalists; opponents of the imperialist war. 
 Only defencists were allowed to enter the country. 
 Knowing that his return would encounter formi-dable obstacles, Lenin weighed the possibility of travelling on someone else’s passport. 
 He discussed this in letters to V. 
 A. 
 Karpin-sky in Geneva and J. 
 S. 
 Hanecki in Stockholm. 
 At a private meeting of the Russian Party centres in Berne on March 6 (19), Martov suggested travelling via Germany in exchange for Germans interned in Russia. 
 The plan was eagerly supported by Lenin, all the more so that, on March 11 (24), the Russian Lega-tion in Berne had held up permits for the return of a number of émigrés. 
 Robert Grimm, a Social-Democratic member of the Swiss Federal Council, negotiated with the German Minister in Berne permission for Russian political émigrés to make the trip through Germany. 
 In view of Grimm’s ambiguous attitude, the Bolsheviks asked Fritz Platten, a Left Zimmerwaldist and Secretary of the Swiss Social-Democratic Party, to take over the negotiations. 
 The German Government agreed to the terms proposed by Platten and drawn up by Lenin: the group would be accorded ex-territorial rights on German soil, would not be subjected to customs inspection or political verification; the German authorities would deal only with Platten, who was to accompany the Russians throughout the journey. 
 The group left only on March 27 (April 9). 
 The delay was caused by the Mensheviks demanding prior agreement by the Provisional Government or the Petrograd Soviet to exchange Russian émigrés for German internees. 
 Yet, it was perfectly clear that the Provisional Government, taking its cue from the British Government, would do everything to impede the return of these determined revolution-ary opponents of the imperialist war. 
 The Bolsheviks therefore decided to leave immediately. 
 The terms and procedures agreed upon were only recorded in a protocol which was communicated to Left Zimmerwaldists in Germany—Paul Levi (Hartstein), France—Fernand Loriot and156 157 158 Henri Guilbeaux, Poland—M. 
 Bronski, and Switzerland—Fritz Platten. 
 In addition, a Statement for the press was drawn up in their name and signed in Stockholm by Swedish Left Social-Democrats Carl Lindhagen, Fredrik Ström, C. 
 N. 
 Carleson, Karl Kilbom and Ture Nerman, and by the Norwegian Left Social-Democrat Arvid Han-sen. 
 The statement read in part: “We the undersigned are aware of the obstacles the Entente governments have created to the return of the Russian internation-alists. 
 We are aware of the terms on which the German Government has permitted their journey to Sweden .... 
 The undersigned inter-nationalists of France, Switzerland, Poland, Germany, Sweden and Norway believe that our Russian comrades not only have the right, but also the obligation to avail themselves of this opportunity to return to Russia. 
 We wish them every success in their struggle against the imperialist policy of the Russian bourgeoisie—a struggle that is part of our common fight for the emancipation of the working class and for the socialist revolution. 
” The statement appeared in the Swedish left Social-Democratic Politiken of April 15, 1917 (No. 
 86). 
 In view of French press reports that Foreign Minister Milyukov threatened to have the émigrés arrested on charges of high treason, Lenin and all the other members of the group, irrespective of pol-litical affiliation, signed the following statement: “I hereby certify, “1. 
 that I have been informed of the conditions laid down by Platten and the German Legation; “2. 
 that I submit to all the instructions of Platten as leader of the group; “3. 
 that I have been told of the report in Petit Parisien that the Russian Provisional Government has threatened to try all Russian citizens travelling through Germany on charges of high treason; “4. 
 that I assume full political responsibility for my participa-tion in the journey; “5. 
 that Platten has guaranteed my trip only to Stockholm. 
 “April 9, 1917, “Berne-Zurich. 
” (Central Party Archives, Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the C. 
C. 
, C. 
P. 
S. 
U. 
) Lenin was the first to sign the statement, during the train journey from Berne to Zurich. 
 The possibility was thus precluded of anyone pleading ignorance of the consequences of his participation in the journey and laying the blame on its organisers. 
 The text of the statement suggests that Lenin had a share in drafting it. 
 The group left on March 27 (April 9), on March 31 (April 13) they arrived in Stockholm, and on the same day Lenin left for Russia via Finland. 
 p. 
 365 This letter was written in mid-March 1917 before it became known, on March 19 (April 1), that Grimm had taken an ambiguous attitude159 in the negotiations with the German representatives. 
 The original text was written while Grimm was still negotiating, and the passages referring to this were deleted by Lenin after all the arran-gements had been turned over to Platten. 
 The letter was discussed and approved on March 26 (April 8), at a meeting of Bolsheviks returning to Russia. 
 After that Lenin added the opening lines: “Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party (unit-ed by the Central Committee )”, “Workers of All Countries, Unite!” and the concluding paragraph. 
 Lenin was associated with a number of Swiss Social-Democratic leaders, whom he had contacted upon his arrival in Berne from Poronin in 1914. 
 It was through them that his famous theses “The Tasks of Revo-lutionary Social-Democracy in the European War”, adopted by the Berne Bolshevik Conference, August 24-26 (September 6-8, 1914, were transmitted to the Conference of Italian and Swiss Socialists in Lugano on September 27, 1914. 
 Members of the Zurich Bolshevik group who belonged to Swiss trade unions recall that Lenin emphasised the need to work in the Swiss Social-Democratic Party, and they joined its Zurich organisation. 
 Lenin had a prominent part in the inner-party struggle first in Berne and later in Zurich, against the Right wing led by social-patriot Greulich, and against the Centrists led by Grimm. 
 He used all his influence on the side of the Left Zimmerwaldists (Platten, Nobs and others), helping them to overcome indecision in the fight against the Centrists. 
 The numerous documents the Lefts issued against opportunism were drafted in close co-operation with Lenin. 
 Written chiefly in German, some of them were published in the Swiss socialist press (“Speech at the Congress of the Swiss Social-Democratic Party, November 4, 1916”; “Twelve Brief Theses on H. 
 Greulich’s Defence of Fatherland Defence”); but most of them were circulated to party organisations opposed to social-patriotism, which had gained the upper hand in January 1917. 
 At the Zurich Cantonal Party Congress at Töss (February 11-12, 1917) the Left tabled Lenin’s amendments to the Centrist resolution on the war issue (see p. 
 282 of this volume). 
 Though the Centrist resolution was adopted a fifth of the Congress voted for Lenin’s amendments. 
 Immediately after the Congress Lenin helped the Swiss Zimmerwaldists put out No. 
 1 of their bulletin (“ Gegen die Lüge der Vaterlandsverteidigung ”, published under the signature: “Gruppe der Zimmerwalder linken in der Schweiz”. 
 Lenin edited the bulletin and was instrumental in circulating it outside Swit erland. 
 It contained the full text of his amendments and also his remarks on the annexation issue. 
 The official party leaders viciously attacked Lenin as a “foreign-er” and tried to prevent his influence on Social-Democratic workers. 
 However, in 1915 there were already elements among the Swiss socialists who favoured a break with the Second International and formation of the Third International. 
 There was also the Swiss Zimmerwald Left group which included émigrés from Russia, Po-land, France and Germany. 
 p. 
 367 Lenin here refers to the Social-Democratic Party of Switzerland (known as the Socialist Party in the French and Italian cantons) founded in the 1870s and affiliated to the First International and re-established in 1888. 
 The party was strongly influenced by opportu-nists, who assumed a social-chauvinist position in the First World War. 
 The Right wing broke away from the party in the autumn of 1916 and founded its own organisation. 
 The party majority, led by Robert Grimm, followed a Centrist, social-pacifist policy; the Left, internationalist wing, which became much more influential after the October Socialist Revolution in Russia, withdrew from the par-ty in December 1920, and in 1921 merged with the Swiss Communist Party (now the Swiss Party of Labour) formed in 1919. 
 p. 
 367 Freie Jugend —organ of the Swiss Social-Democratic youth organi-sation published in Zurich from 1906 to February 1918. 
 Was af-filiated to the Zimmerwald Left. 
 p. 
 368 Reference is to the amendments to the resolution on the war issue, written by Lenin (see p. 
 282 of this volume). 
 p. 
 368 Arbeiterpolitik —a weekly journal of scientific socialism published in Bremen from 1916 to 1919 by the Bremen Left Radical Group led by J. 
 Kniff and P. 
 Froelich. 
 The group joined the Communist Party of Germany in 1919. 
 Arbeiterpolitik fought social-chauvinism in the German and international labour movement. 
 Its contribu-tors included N. 
 I. 
 Bukharin, A. 
 Guilbeaux, Alexandra Kollon-tai, Nadezhda Krupskaya, A. 
 Pannekoek, K. 
 Radek and Y. 
 M. 
 Stek-lov. 
 After the October Socialist Revolution Arbeiterpolitik widely publicised revolutionary progress in Soviet Russia. 
 In 1917-18 it printed several of Lenin’s articles and speeches (“The Crisis Has Matured”, “Report on the Immediate Tasks of the Soviet Govern-ment”, “Speech at a Meeting of the Moscow Soviet of Workers’, Peasants’ and Red Army Deputies, April 23, 1918”). 
 In November 1918, during the revolution in Germany, it published chapters I and II of Lenin’s article “The Military Programme of the Proletar-ian Revolution” and passages from The State and Revolution (§§ 1, 3, 4 of Chapter 1, §3 of Chapter III, and §1 of Chapter IV). 
 p. 
 373160 161 162 163 THE LIFE AND WORK OF V. 
 I. 
 LENIN Outstanding Dates (August 1916-March 1917 ) End of August-beginning of September August-Septem-ber August-October September 17 (30) September First half of Oc-tober October October 21 and 22 (November 3 and 4 October 22 (No-vember 4 ) October 24 (No-1916 Lenin returns to Zurich from Flums. 
 Lenin writes “The Nascent Trend of Imperialist Economism” and “Reply to P. 
 Kievsky (Y. 
 Pya-takov)”. 
 Lenin writes “A Caricature of Marxism and Impe-rialist Economism”. 
 Lenin attends a conference of the International Socialist Committee in Berne. 
 Lenin writes “The Military Programme of the Proletarian Revolution”, published in Jugend-Internationale Nos. 
 9 and 10, 1917. 
 Lenin writes a message of greetings from the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee to the Italian Social-ist Party Congress in Zurich. 
 The message is read at the Congress session of October 2 (15). 
 Lenin writes “The ‘Disarmament’ Slogan” and “Imperialism and the Split in Socialism”, both of which appear in Sbornik Sotsial-Demokrata No. 
 2, December 1916. 
 Lenin attends meetings of Left delegates to the Swiss Social-Democratic Party Congress and shares in drafting the Congress resolution on the attitude towards Kienthal. 
 Lenin addresses the Swiss Social-Democratic Party Congress in Zurich on behalf of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee. 
 Lenin’s articles “A Separate Peace” and “Ten October End of October-beginning of November November 7 (20) November 17 (30 November 1916-February 1917 Beginning of December December 19 (January 1, 1917 ) Second half of December Before December 25 (January 7, 1917 ) December 26-27 (January 8-9, 1917 ) End of Decem-berPublication of Sbornik Sotsial-Demokrata No. 
 1, with Lenin’s articles “The Discussion on Self-Deter-mination Summed Up”, “The Junius Pamphlet” and the theses “The Socialist Revolution and the Right of Nations to Self-Determination”. 
 Lenin writes the theses “Tasks of the Left Zimmer-waldists in the Swiss Social-Democratic Party” and arranges for their circulation and translation into French. 
 The French translation was published as a separate pamphlet in 1918. 
 Lenin discusses these theses with a group of Left Zimmerwaldists. 
 Second discussion of the theses and of the Swiss Social-Democratic Party’s attitude towards the war with a group of Left Zimmerwald supporters. 
 In Letters to Inessa Armand, Lenin substantiates and amplifies the principal Marxist propositions on the war and fatherland defence. 
 Lenin trenchantly criticises the views and fac-tional activity of the Pyatakov-Bosh-Bukharin group, exposes the political intrigue of Radek and Zinoviev’s unprincipled, conciliatory attitude, discloses and criticises the errors and inconsistency of the Left Social-Democrats. 
 Lenin works on his “Theses on the Attitude of the Swiss Social-Democratic Party Towards the War”. 
 Lenin writes “Bourgeois Pacifism and Socialist Pacifism”. 
 Lenin writes “An Open Letter to Boris Souvarine” published, in abridged form, in La Vérité No. 
 48, January 27, 1918. 
 Lenin draws up rough draft of “Theses for an Appeal to the International Socialist Committee and All Socialist Parties”. 
 Lenin writes “An Open Letter to Charles Naine, Member of the International Socialist Committee in Berne”. 
 Lenin writes his appeal “To the Workers Who Support the Struggle Against the War and Against the Socialists Who Have Sided with Their December December 1916-February 1917 January 1-2 (14-15) January 6 (19) January 9 (22) January 13-17 (26-30 ) January 18 (31) January January 24 (Feb-ruary 6 ) January 27-29 (February 9-11 )Publication of Sbornik Sotsial-Demokrata No 2, with Lenin’s articles “The ‘Disarmament’ Slogan”, “Imperialism and the Split in Socialism”, “The Youth International”, “Efforts To Whitewash Opportunism” and “The Chkheidze Faction and Its Role”. 
 Lenin writes “Principles Involved in the War Issue” and “On the Defence of the Fatherland Issue”. 
 Lenin works in the Zurich Library on the Marxist attitude towards the state. 
 His Notes from Marx and Engels, together with his own comments and conclusions, are gathered together under the title “Marxism on the State”. 
 1917 Lenin presides at a meeting of Swiss Left Social-Democrats to discuss a statement against Grimm. 
 Lenin circulates to Bolshevik organisations abroad the resolution of the Swiss Left Social-Democrats initiating a referendum on convocation of the emergency party congress indefinitely postponed by the party Executive. 
 Lenin delivers a lecture on the 1905 Revolution at a youth gathering in Zurich. 
 Lenin writes his article “Twelve Brief Theses on H. 
 Greulich’s Defence of Fatherland Defence”. 
 It appeared in Volksrecht Nos. 
 26 and 27. 
 Lenin’s article “A Turn in World Politics” is published in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 
 58 Lenin works on his unfinished pamphlet Statis-tics and Sociology , writes the articles “Imaginary or Real Marsh ?” and “Defence of Neutrality”. 
 Lenin attends a general meeting of the Zurich Social-Democratic organisation at which a new committee is elected. 
 Lenin writes “Proposed Amendments to the Reso-lution on the War Issue” (or submission on behalf of the Left Social-Democrats, to the Zurich Cantonal Congress of the Swiss Social-Democratic February 4 (17) February 20 (March 5 ) End of February February-March March 2 (16) March 3 and 4 (16 and 17 ) March 4 (17) March 5 (18) March 6 (19) March 7 (20) March 8-9 (21-22) March 10 (23) March 10-11 (23-24 )Lenin writes to Alexandra Kollontai in Stock-holm, asking her to sound out the possibility of contact with the Swedish Left Social-Democrats and participation in their press organ. 
 In a letter to Alexandra Kollontai in Stockholm, Lenin indicates concrete measures to unite the Left and suggests a plan for theses in connection with the Social-Democratic Youth Congress. 
 Lenin writes “The Story of One Short Period in the Life of One Socialist Party”. 
 Lenin shares in editing Bulletin No. 
 1 of the Swiss Zimmerwald Lefts and arranges for its translation and circulation. 
 Lenin receives the first news of the February Revolution and takes measures for an immediate return to Russia. 
 In a letter to Alexandra Kollontai in Oslo Lenin gives his appraisal of the February Revolution and outlines Bolshevik tactics. 
 Lenin writes his “Draft Theses, March 4 (17) 1917” and sends them to Stockholm for the guidance of the Bolsheviks returning to Russia. 
 Lenin delivers a lecture on the Paris Commune and the prospects of the Russian revolution at La Chaux-de-Fonds, Switzerland. 
 Lenin wires (via Stockholm) to the Bolsheviks in Oslo about to leave for Russia, giving concrete advice on the Party’s tactics in the revolution. 
 Lenin writes his first “Letter from Afar”—”The First Stage of the First Revolution”. 
 It appears in Pravda Nos. 
 14 and 15. 
 Lenin writes his second “Letter from Afar”— “The New Government and the Proletariat”. 
 Lenin sends the first and second “Letters from Afar” to Bolshevik organisations in other coun-tries. 
 Lenin writes the third “Letter from Afar”—“Con-cerning a Proletarian Militia”. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR March 12 (25) Mid-March March 14 (27) March 17 (30) March 18 (31) March 22 (Ap-ril 9 ) March 26 (Ap-ril 8 ) March 27 (Ap-ril 9 ) March 27-30 (April 9-12 ) March 31 (Ap-ril 13 )Lenin writes the fourth “Letter from Afar”—“How To Achieve Peace” and the article “The Revolution in Russia and the Tasks of the Workers of All Countries”. 
 Lenin writes the appeal “To Our Comrades in War-Prisoner Camps”, published as a leaflet over the signature of the Sotsial-Demokrat Editorial Board. 
 Lenin delivers a lecture at a meeting of Swiss workers in Zurich on “The Russian Revolution, Its Significance and Tasks”. 
 Lenin writes “Tricks of the Republican Chauvin-ists”, published in Volksrecht No. 
 81 and, in abridged form, in Avanti! No. 
 99. 
 Collegium Abroad of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee approves Lenin’s draft of rules for the émigrés returning to Russia. 
 Lenin attends a meeting in Zurich to discuss organisation of the journey to Russia. 
 Lenin goes to Berne to sign the Protocol on the return journey from Switzerland to Russia. 
 Lenin writes the fifth (unfinished) “Letter from Afar”—“The Tasks Involved in the Building of the Revolutionary Proletarian State”. 
 Lenin writes his “Farewell Letter to the Swiss Workers”, which is approved in Berne by a meet-ing of R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 members returning to Russia. 
 Lenin and Krupskaya leave Berne for Zurich, where they join a group of émigrés returning to Russia. 
 During the journey Lenin works on his theses on the tasks of the proletariat in the revolution (the “April Theses”). 
 En route to Russia, Lenin makes a one-day stop in Stockholm, attends a meeting of Swedish Social-Democrat internationalists, organises the Bureau Abroad of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Central Committee. 
 B. 
 n. 
 leHnH coЧnHeHnr TOM 23 На английскот языке Printed in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics