L E N I N COLLECTED WORKS 1/FL0102 A IN ACCORDANCE WITH A DECISION OF THE NINTH CONGRESS OF THE R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) AND THE SECOND CONGRESS OF SOVIETS OF THE U. 
S. 
S. 
R. 
 B. 
 n. 
 l d H n H С О Ч И Н E Н И Я И з д a н u е ч е m в е p m o e ГОСУДАРСТВ ЕНН ОЕ ИЗ ДАТ ЕЛЬ СТВО ПОЛИТИЧЕ СКОЙ ЛИ ТЕРАТУ РЫ M О С К В А V. 
 I. 
 L E N I N cOLLEcTED WORKS VOLUME 1/FL0102 March 1908 – August 1909 PROGRESS PUBLISHERS MOSCOW TRANSLATED THE RUSSIAN EDITED BY ANDREW ROTHSTEIN AND BERNARD ISAACS First printing 1963 Second printing 1973 Third printing 1977 l 10102–672 ÇÜà èÇõÄÉå. 
 014(01)–77 From Marx to Mao M L © Digital Reprints 2010 www. 
marx 2mao. 
com 13 15 22 2940 48 5063 69 71 83 92 106118 127 135 158CONTENTS Preface ........................ 1908 ON TO THE STRAIGHT ROAD ............... ON THE “NATURE” OF THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION ...... ISM AND REVISIONISM ............... ON THE BEATEN TRACK! ................ 
 A BLOC OF THE CADETS AND THE OCTOBRISTS? ....... 
 THE ASSESSMENT OF THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION ...... CADETS OF THE SECOND GENERATION .......... 
. 
 THE AGRARIAN QUESTION IN RUSSIA TOWARDS THE CLOSE OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY ............... I...................... 
. 
 II...................... 
. 
 III ...................... 
. 
 IV...................... 
. 
 V...................... 
. 
 VI...................... 
. 
 VII ...................... 
. 
 THE AGRARIAN PROGRAMME OF SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY IN THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION. 
 Autoabstract .......... 
. 
SOME FEATURES OF THE PRESENT COLLAPSE . 
. 
 .... 
 . 
. 
148 INFLAMMABLE MATERIAL IN WORLD POLITICS ....... 
. 
 THE EDITORIAL BOARD ............... BELLICOSE MILITARISM AND THE ANTI-MILITARIST TACTICS OF SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY ................... 
 I...................... 
. 
 II...................... 
. 
 III ...................... 
. 
 LEO TOLSTOY AS THE MIRROR OF THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION BRITISH AND GERMAN WORKERS DEMONSTRATE FOR PEACE . 
. 
 THE STUDENT MOVEMENT AND T HE P RES ENT P O LITICAL SITUATION ...................... 
 EVENTS IN THE BALKANS AND IN PERSIA .......... 
 MEETING OF THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIALIST BUREAU .... 
. 
 P. 
 MASLOV IN HYSTERICS ................ 
 SOME REMARKS ON THE “REPLY” BY P. 
 MASLOV ....... 
 THE ASSESSMENT OF THE PRESENT SITUATION ....... 
 HOW PLEKHANOV AND CO. 
 DEFEND REVISIONISM ....... 
 TWO LETTERS ..................... THE AGRARIAN DEBATES IN THE THIRD DUMA ....... 
. 
 THE FIFTH (ALL-RUSSIAN) CONFERENCE OF THE R . 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 December 21-27 , 1908 (January 3-9, 1909 ).......... 
 1. 
 DRAFT RESOLUTION ON THE PRESENT MOMENT AND THE TASKS OF THE PARTY ............... 2. 
 DIRECTIVES FOR THE COMMITTEE ON QUESTIONS OF OR-GANISATION ................... 
 3. 
 PRACTICAL INSTRUCTIONS ON VOTING FOR THE BUDGET BY THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC GROUP IN THE DUMA ... First Variant .................. Second Variant ................ 
. 
182 189 191 191 193 196 202 210 213 220 231 247 255 267 281 286 303 319321325 326 326 326 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR 4. 
 ADDENDUM TO THE RESOLUTION ON “THE SOCIAL-DEMO-CRATIC GROUP IN THE DUMA” .......... 
. 
 5. 
 STATEMENT BY THE BOLSHEVIKS. 
 Statement of Facts . 
. 
 1909 HOW THE SOCIALIST-REVOLUTIONARIES SUM UP THE REVOLU-TION AND HOW THE REVOLUTION HAS SUMMED THEM UP ... ON THE ROAD ..................... ON THE ARTICLE “QUESTIONS OF THE DAY” ......... THE AIM OF THE PROLETARIAN STRUGGLE IN OUR REVOLUTION I...................... 
. 
 II...................... 
. 
 III...................... 
. 
 IV...................... 
. 
 V...................... 
. 
 TO THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE GERMAN SOCIAL-DEM-OCRATIC LABOUR PARTY ................ 
. 
 A CARICATURE OF BOLSHEVISM ............. 
. 
 THE “LEFTWARD SWING” OF THE BOURGEOISIE AND THE TASKSOF THE PROLETARIAT.................. THE ATTITUDE OF THE WORKERS’ PARTY TO RELIGION .... 
 CLASSES AND PARTIES IN THEIR ATTITUDE TO RELIGION AND THE CHURCH ...................... 
 CONFERENCE OF THE EXTENDED EDITORIAL BOARD OF “ PRO-LETARY ”, June 8-17 (21-30 ), 1909 ............. 
 REPORT ON THE CONFERENCE OF THE EXTENDED EDITORIAL BOARD OF PROLETARY ................ 
328 329 330 345 356360 360 367370 375 378 380 383 395 402 414 425427 SPEECH ON THE QUESTION OF THE TASKS OF THE BOLSHE-VIKS IN THE PARTY, JUNE 11 (24) .......... 
. 
 SPEECH AND DRAFT RESOLUTION ON THE TASKS OF THE BOLSHEVIKS IN RELATION TO DUMA ACTIVITY ...... RESOLUTIONS OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE EXTENDEDEDITORIAL BOARD OF PROLETARY.......... 
. 
 1. 
 On Otzovism and Ultimatumism .......... 
 2. 
 The Tasks of the Bolsheviks in the Party ...... 3. 
 Agitation for a Bolshevik Congress or Bolshevik Con-ference Separate from the Party .......... 
 4. 
 The Party School Being Set Up Abroad at X— ... 5. 
 The Breakaway of Comrade Maximov ....... 
. 
 THE LIQUIDATION OF LIQUIDATIONISM .......... 
. 
 THE TSAR VISITS EUROPE AND MEMBERS OF THE BLACK-HUN-DRED DUMA VISIT ENGLAND............... M. 
 LYADOV’S LETTER TO PROLETARY .......... 
. 
 A LETTER TO THE ORGANISERS OF THE PARTY SCHOOL ON CAPRI ........................ DRAFT LETTER OF THE BOLSHEVIK CENTRE TO THE COUNCIL OF THE SCHOOL ON CAPRI ................ 
 A LETTER TO COMRADES JULIUS, VANYA, SAVELY, IVAN, VLA-DIMIR, STANISLAV AND FOMA, STUDENTS AT THE CAPRI PARTYSCHOOL...................... 
. 
 Notes ......................... 
 The Life and Work of V. 
 I. 
 Lenin . 
 Outstanding Dates436 438442 442 446 449 450 451 452 461 467 468 470 472 479 . 
. 
 . 
. 
513 23 203 347 436-37ILLUSTRATIONS Front page of the newspaper Proletary , No. 
 27, March 26 (April 8), 1908, featuring Lenin’s articles “On the ‘Nature’ of the Russian Revolution”, and “The Debate on the Extension of the Duma’s Budgetary Powers” .......... 
. 
 . 
 The first page of the manuscript of Lenin’s “Leo Tolstoy as theMirror of the Russian Revolution”, 1908 ....... 
. 
 . 
 Front page of the Central Organ of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
—the news-paper Sotsial-Demokrat , No. 
 2, January 28 (February 10), 1909, containing Lenin’s article “On the Road” ....... 
. 
 . 
 The first page of Lenin’s manuscript “Speech on theQuestion of the Tasks of the Bolsheviks in the Party”, June 11 (24), 1909 .................. . 
 PREFACE Volume 16 contains works written by V. 
 I. 
 Lenin during the period from March 1908 to August 1909. 
 The volume contains articles and other items by Lenin published in the newspapers Proletary and Sotsial-Demo-krat ; documents of the Fifth (All-Russian) Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 and the conference of the extended edito-rial board of Proletary . 
 In his writings: “On to the Straight Road”, “The Assess-ment of the Russian Revolution”, “On the ‘Nature’ of the Russian Revolution”, “The Assessment of the Present Situation”, “On the Road”, Lenin gives an analysis of thecoup d’état of June 3, 1907, outlines the tasks and tactics ofthe Party during the period of the Stolypin reaction, andexposes the liquidationism of the Mensheviks. 
 His articles “Two Letters”, “On the Article ‘Questions of the Day’”, “A Caricature of Bolshevism”, ‘~he Liqui-dation of Liquidationism” and the documents of the confer-ence of the extended editorial board of Proletary are direct-ed against “liquidationism from the left”—otzovism,ultimatumism and god-building. 
 In his works: “The Agrarian Question in Russia Towards the Close of the Nineteenth Century”, “The Agrarian Pro-gramme of Social-Democracy in the Russian Revolution. 
Autoabstract”, “P. 
 Maslov in Hysterics”, “Some Remarkson the ‘Reply’ by P. 
 Maslov”, “From the Editorial Board”and “How Plekhanov and Co. 
 Defend Revisionism”, Lenindefends and develops Marxist theory on the agrarian question. 
 In the articles “Inflammable Material in World Poli-tics”, “Bellicose Militarism and the Anti-Militarist Tactics of Social-Democracy”, “Events in the Balkans and in Persia” and “Meeting of the International Socialist Bu-reau”, Lenin discusses the most important international events and defines the tactics of revolutionary Social-Democracy in the struggle against militarism. 
 This volume includes six documents printed for the first time in Lenin’s Works . 
 In the article, “British and German Workers Demonstrate for Peace” Lenin exposed the predatory aspirations of the capitalists and their war preparations, and showed the rise of the revolutionaryworking-class movement. 
 Two documents, “Statement bythe Bolsheviks” and “To the Executive Committee of theGerman Social-Democratic Labour Party”, are devoted tothe struggle of the Bolsheviks against the Menshevik liqui-dators at the Fifth (All-Russian) Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Two speeches at the conference of the extendededitorial board of Proletary and the “Draft Letter of the Bolshevik Centre to the Council of the School on Capri”are directed against the otzovists, ultimatumists and god-builders. 
 ON TO THE STRAIGHT ROAD1 Published in the newspaper Published according Proletary , No. 
 26,t o the text in the newspaper March 19 (April 1), 1908 ON TO THE STRAIGHT ROAD1 Published in the newspaper Published according Proletary , No. 
 26,t o the text in the newspaper March 19 (April 1), 1908 The dissolution of the Second Duma2 and the coup d’état of June 3, 19073 were a turning-point in the history of our revolution, the beginning of a kind of special period or zigzag in its development. 
 We have spoken more thanonce of the significance of this zigzag from the standpointof the general relation of class forces in Russia and thetasks of the uncompleted bourgeois revolution. 
 We wantnow to deal with the state of our Party work in connection with this turn of the revolution. 
 More than six months have passed since the reactionary coup of June 3, and beyond doubt this first half-year hasbeen marked by a considerable decline and weakening ofall revolutionary organisations, including that of the Social-Democrats. 
 Wavering, disunity and disintegration—such have been the general features of this half-year. 
 Indeed, it could not be otherwise, because the extreme intensificationof reaction and its temporary triumph, coupled with aslowing-down in the direct class struggle, were bound to beaccompanied by a crisis in the revolutionary parties. 
 Now there can be observed, and quite plainly, a number of symptoms showing that the crisis is coming to an end, that the worst is over, that the right road has already beenfound and that the Party is once again entering the straightroad of consistent and sustained guidance of the revolution-ary struggle of the socialist proletariat. 
 Take one of the very characteristic (by far not the most profound, of course, but probably among the most visible) external expressions of the Party crisis. 
 I mean the flightof the intellectuals from the Party. 
 This flight is strikinglycharacterised in the first issue of our Party’s Central Organ, 4 which appeared in February this year. 
 This issue, whichprovides a great deal of material for assessing the Party’s internal life, is largely reproduced in this number. 
 “Recently through lack of intellectual workers the area organisation has been dead,” writes a correspondent from the Kulebaki Works (Vladimir area organisation of the Central Industrial Region). 
 “Our ideological forces are melting away like snow,” they write from the Urals. 
 “The elements who avoid illegal organisations in general ... and who joined the Partyonly at the time of the upsurge and of the de facto liberty that then existed in many places, have left our Party organ-isations. 
” And an article in the Central Organ entitled“Questions of Organisation” sums up these reports, and others which we do not print, with the words: “The intellec-tuals, as is well known, have been deserting in masses inrecent months. 
” But the liberation of the Party from the half-proletarian, half-petty-bourgeois intellectuals is beginning to awaketo a new life the new purely proletarian forces accumulated during the period of the heroic struggle of the proletarian masses. 
 That same Kulebaki organisation which was, asthe quotation from the report shows, in a desperate condi-tion—and was even quite “dead”—has been resurrected, itturns out. 
 “Party nests among the workers [we read] * scattered in large numbers throughout the area, in most cases without any intellectual forces, without literature, even without any connection with the Party Centres, don’twant to die.... 
 The number of organised members is notdecreasing but increasing.... 
 There are no intellectuals,and the workers themselves, the most class-conscious amongthem, have to carry on propaganda work. 
” And the general conclusion reached is that “in a number of places responsible work, owing to the flight of the intellectuals, is passinginto the hands of the advanced workers” ( Sotsial-Demo-krat , No. 
 1, p. 
 28). 
 This reconstruction of the Party organisations on, so to speak, a different class foundation is of course a difficult thing, and it is not likely to develop without some hesita-tions. 
 But it is only the first step that is difficult; andthat has already been made. 
 The Party has already enteredthe straight road of leadership of the working masses byadvanced “intellectuals” drawn from the ranks of theworkers themselves. 
 *Interpolations in square brackets (within passages quoted by Lenin) have been introduced by Lenin, unless otherwise indicated. 
— Ed. 
 Work in the trade unions and the co-operative societies, which was at first taken up gropingly, is now assuming definite shape. 
 Two resolutions of the Central Committee, about the trade unions and the co-operative societies respec-tively, both adopted unanimously , were already suggested by the developing local activities. 
 Party groups in all non-party organisations; their leadership in the spirit of themilitant tasks of the proletariat, the spirit of revolutionary class struggle; “from non-party to Party ideology” ( So-tsial-Demokrat , No. 
 1, p. 
 28)—this is the path upon which the working-class movement has entered in this field too. 
The correspondent of a Party organisation in the remotelittle provincial town of Minsk, reports: “The more revolu-tionary-minded workers are drawing apart from them [from the legal unions topsy-turvified by the administra-tion] and are more and more sympathetic to the formationof illegal unions. 
” In the same direction, “from non-party to Party ideology”, is developing the work in quite a different sphere, that ofthe Social-Democratic group in the Duma. 
 Strange though it may sound, it is a fact that we cannot all at once raise the work of our parliamentary representatives to a Partylevel—just as we did not all at once begin to work “in aParty way” in the co-operatives. 
 Elected under a law whichfalsifies the will of the people, elected from the ranks ofSocial-Democrats who have preserved their legality, ranks which have thinned very greatly as a result of persecution during the first two Dumas, our Duma Social-Democratsin effect inevitably were at first non-party Social-Demo-crats rather than real members of the Party. 
 This is deplorable, but it is a fact—and it could hardly be otherwise in a capitalist country entangled by thou-sands of bonds inherited from serfdom and with a legal workers’ party that has been in existence for only two years. 
And it was not only non-party people who wanted on thisfact to base their tactics of setting up a non-revolutionarySocial-Democracy, but also those “Bezzaglavtsi” 5 Social-Democrat-like intellectuals who clustered around the Duma group like flies round a honey-pot. 
 But it seems as if the efforts of these worthy followers of Bernstein are sufferingdefeat! It seems as if the work of the Social-Democrats has begun to straighten itself out in this sphere, too. 
 We will not undertake to prophesy, nor shall we close our eyes to what vast efforts are still required to organise more or less tolerable parliamentary Social-Democratic work inour conditions. 
 But we may note that in the first issue ofthe Central Organ there is Party criticism of the Dumagroup, and a direct resolution of the Central Committee about better direction for its work. 
 We do not by any means consider that the criticism in the Central Organ covers all the defects. 
 We think, for example, that the Social-Demo-crats should not have voted, either for placing the landtaxes at the disposal of the Zemstvos 6 in the first instance, nor for purchase at a low price of urban land rented by the poor (No. 
 1 of the Central Organ, p. 
 36). 
 But these are, comparatively speaking, minor questions. 
 What is basic and most important is that the transformation of the Dumagroup into a really Party organisation now features in allour work, and that consequently the Party will achieveit, however hard this may be, and however the road maybe beset with trials, vacillations, partial crises, personal clashes, etc. 
 Among the same signs that really Social-Democratic and genuinely Party work is being straightened out there is theobviously outstanding fact of the increase in illegal publica-tions. 
 “The Urals are publishing eight papers,” we read inthe Central Organ. 
 “There are two in the Crimea, one in Odes-sa, and a paper is starting soon in Ekaterinoslav. 
 Publishing activity in St. 
 Petersburg, in the Caucasus and by thenon-Russian organisations is considerable. 
” In addition tothe two Social-Democratic papers appearing abroad, theCentral Organ has been issued in Russia, in spite of quiteextraordinary police obstacles. 
 A regional organ, Rabocheye Znamya , 7 will appear soon in the Central Industrial Region. 
 From all that has been said, one can form a quite def-inite picture of the path on which the Social-DemocraticParty is firmly entering. 
 A strong illegal organisation ofthe Party Centres, systematic illegal publications and—most important of all—local and particularly factory Party groups, led by advanced members from among the workers themselves, living in direct contact with the masses;such is the foundation on which we were building, and have built, a hard and solid core of a revolutionary and Social-Democratic working-class movement. 
 And this illegal core will spread its feelers, its influence, incomparably wider than ever before, both through the Duma and thetrade unions, both in the co-operative societies and inthe cultural and educational organisations. 
 At first sight there is a remarkable similarity between this system of Party work and that which was established by the Germans during the Anti-Socialist Law (1878-90). 
 8 The distance which the German working-class movement covered during the thirty years following the bourgeoisrevolution (1848-78), the Russian working-class movementis covering in three years (from the end of 1905 to 1908). 
But behind this outward similarity is hidden a profound inward difference. 
 The thirty-year period which followed the bourgeois-democratic revolution in Germany completelyfulfilled the objectively necessary tasks of that revolution. 
 It fulfilled itself in the constitutional parliament of theearly sixties, in dynastic wars which united the greaterpart of German-speaking territories, and in the creation of the Empire with the help of universal suffrage. 
 In Russia the three years which have not yet passed since the firstgreat victory and the first great defeat of the bourgeois-democratic revolution not only have not fulfilled its tasksbut, on the contrary, have for the first time spread realisa-tion of those tasks among broad masses of the proletariat and the peasantry. 
 What has been outlived during these two odd years is constitutional illusions and belief in thedemocratism of the liberal lackeys of Black-Hundred 9 tsarism. 
 A crisis on the basis of the unfulfilled objective tasks of the bourgeois revolution in Russia is inevitable. 
 Purelyeconomic, specifically financial, internal political and external events, circumstances and vicissitudes may make it acute. 
 And the party of the proletariat—having enteredthe straight road of building a strong illegal Social-Demo-cratic organisation, possessed of more numerous and morevaried implements for legal and semi-legal influence thanbefore—will be able to meet that crisis more prepared for resolute struggle than it was in October and December 1905. 
 ON THE “NATURE ” OF THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION Drive Nature out of the door and she will fly in at the window, exclaims the Cadet Rech10 in a recent editorial. 
 This valuable admission of the official organ of our counter-revolutionary liberals needs to be particularly emphasised, because what is referred to is the nature of the Russian revolution. 
 And one cannot sufficiently insist on the forcewith which events are confirming the basic view of Bolshe-vism as to this “nature” of the peasant bourgeois revolution, which can win only in opposition to wavering, wobbling, counter-revolutionary bourgeois liberalism. 
 At the beginning of 1906, prior to the First Duma, Mr. 
 Struve wrote: “The peasant in the Duma will be a Cadet. 
”At that time this was the bold assertion of a liberal who still dreamt of re-educating the muzhik from a naïve monarch-ist into a supporter of the opposition. 
 It was at a time when Russkoye Gosudarstvo , 11 the organ of the bureaucracy, the newspaper of the lackeys of Mr. 
 Witte, was assuring itsreaders that “the muzhik will help us out”, i. 
e. 
, that broadrepresentation of the peasants would prove favourable forthe autocracy. 
 Such opinions were so widespread in thosedays (remote days! two whole years divide us from them!) that even in the Mensheviks’ speeches at the Stockholm Congress 12 kindred notes were clearly heard. 
 But the First Duma had dispelled these illusions of the monarchists and the illusions of the liberals completely. 
 The most ignorant, undeveloped, politically virgin, unorgan-ised muzhik proved to be incomparably more left than the Cadets. 
 13 The struggle of the Cadets against the “Trudovik spirit” and Trudovik politics14 formed the main content of liberal “activity” during the first two Dumas. 
 And when Front page of the newspaper Proletary , No. 
 27, Mar c h 26 (April 8), 1908, featuring Lenin’s articles “On the ‘Nature’ of the Russian Revolution”, and “The Debate on the Extension of the Duma’s Budgetary Powers” Reduced Front page of the newspaper Proletary , No. 
 27, March 26 (April 8), 1908, featuring Lenin’s articles “On the “Nature’ of theRussian Revolution”, and “The Debate on the Extension of the Duma’s Budgetary Powers” Reduced after the Second Duma had been dissolved, Mr. 
 Struve—an advanced man among the liberal counter-revolutionaries— hurled his angry judgements on the Trudoviks, and pro-claimed a crusade against the “intellectualist” leaders ofthe peasantry who were “playing at radicals”, he was there-by expressing the utter bankruptcy of liberalism. 
 The experience of the two Dumas brought liberalism a complete fiasco. 
 It did not succeed in “taming the muzhik”. 
 It did not succeed in making him modest, tractable, ready for compromise with the landlord autocracy. 
 The liberalismof the bourgeois lawyers, professors and other intellectualisttrash could not “adjust itself” to the “Trudovik” peasantry. 
It turned out to be politically and economically far behind them. 
 And the whole historic significance of the first period of the Russian revolution may be summed up as follows: liberalism has already conclusively demonstrated its coun-ter-revolutionary nature, its incapacity to lead the peasantrevolution; the peasantry has not yet fully understood that it is only along the path of revolution and republic, underthe guidance of the socialist proletariat, that a real vic-tory can be won. 
 The bankruptcy of liberalism meant the triumph of the reactionary landlords. 
 Today, intimidated by those reaction-aries, humiliated and spat upon by them, transformed into aserf-bound accomplice of Stolypin’s constitutional farce,liberalism will shed an occasional tear for the past. 
 Of course the fight against the Trudovik spirit was hard, un-bearably hard. 
 But ... all the same ... may we not win asecond time, if that spirit rises again? May we not thenplay the part of a broker more successfully? Did not ourgreat and famous Pyotr Struve write, even before the revo-lution, that the middle parties always gained from the sharpening of the struggle between extremes? And lo, the liberals, exhausted in struggle with the Trudoviks, are playing against the reactionaries the card ofa revival of the Trudovik spirit! “The Land Bills justintroduced into the Duma by the Right-wing peasants andthe clergy,” writes Rech in the same editorial, “reveal the old Trudovik spirit: Trudovik and not Cadet. 
” “One Bill belongs to the peasants and is signed by 41 members of theDuma. 
 The other belongs to the clergy. 
 The former is more radical than the latter, but the latter, too, in some respects [listen to the Cadet Rech !] leaves the Cadet draft of agrarian reform far behind. 
” The liberals are obliged to admit that, after all the filtering of the electors undertaken and carriedout in accordance with the notorious law of June 3, this fact(as we already noted in No. 
 22 of Proletary ) is evidence not of some accident, but of the nature of the Russian revolu-tion. 
 * The peasants, writes Rech , have a distributable land reserve not in the sense of a transmitting agency, “but inthe sense of a permanent institution”. 
 The Cadets admitthis, but modestly keep silent about the fact that theythemselves, while playing up to the reactionaries andcringing to them, in the interim between the First and Second Dumas threw the distributable land reserve out of their programme (i. 
e. 
, in one way or another, the recogni-tion of land nationalisation) and adopted Gurko’s 15 point of view, namely, full private ownership of the land. 
 The peasants, writes Rech , buy land at a fair valuation (i. 
e. 
, in the Cadet fashion) but—and a momentous “but” this is—the valuation is to be made by the local land institutions “elected by the whole population of the localityconcerned”. 
 And once again the Cadets have to keep quiet about one aspect. 
 They have to keep quiet about the fact thatthis election by the whole population obviously resembles the well-known “Trudovik” Bill in the First Duma and the Second—the Bill providing for local land committeeselected on the basis of universal, direct and equal suffrageby secret ballot. 
 They have to keep quiet about how theliberals in the first two Dumas carried on a disgustingstruggle against this Bill, which was the only possible one from a democratic point of view: how abjectly they turned and twisted, wishing not to say from the Duma rostrum everything they had said in their press—in the leadingarticle of Rech later reprinted by Milyukov (“A Year of Struggle”), in Kutler’s draft and in Chuprov’s article (theCadet “Agrarian Question”, Volume 2). 
 And what they ad-mitted in their press was that according to their idea the *See present edition, Vol. 
 13, pp. 
 455-59. 
— Ed. 
 local land committees should consist of an equal number of representatives of the peasantry and of the landlords, with a representative of the government as a third party. 
 In other words, the Cadets were betraying the muzhikto the landlord, by assuring that everywhere the latterwould have the majority (the landlords plus a represen-tative of the landlord autocracy are always in a majorityagainst the peasants). 
 We quite understand the swindlers of parliamentary bourgeois liberalism having to keep quiet about all this. 
 They are wrong, though, in thinking that the workers andpeasants are likely to forget these most important landmarkson the road of the Russian revolution. 
 Even the clergy—those ultra-reactionaries, those Black-Hundred obscurantists purposely maintained by the govern-ment—have gone further than the Cadets in their agrarianBill. 
 Even they have begun talking about lowering the“artificially inflated prices” of land, and about a progressiveland tax in which holdings not exceeding the subsistencestandard would be free of tax. 
 Why has the village priest— that policeman of official orthodoxy—proved to be more on the side of the peasant than the bourgeois liberal? Becausethe village priest has to live side by side with the peasant,to depend on him in a thousand different ways, and some-times—as when the priests practice small-scale peasantagriculture on church land—even to be in a peasant’s skin himself. 
 The village priest will have to return from the most police-ridden Duma into his own village: andhowever greatly the village has been purged by Stolypin’spunitive expeditions and chronic billeting of the soldiery,there is no return to it for those who have taken the side of the landlords. 
 So it turns out that the most reactionary priest finds it more difficult than the enlightened lawyer and professor to betray the peasant to the landlord. 
 Yes, indeed! Drive Nature out of the door and she will fly in at the window. 
 The nature of the great bourgeois revolu-tion in peasant Russia is such that only the victory of apeasant uprising, unthinkable without the proletariat as guide, is capable of bringing that revolution to victory in the teeth of the congenital counter-revolutionism of thebourgeois liberals. 
 It remains for the liberals either to disbelieve the strength of the Trudovik spirit—and that is impossible when the facts stare them in the face—or else to pin their faith on some new political trickery. 
 And here is the programmeof that piece of trickery in the concluding words of Rech : “Only serious practical provisions for this kind of reform[namely, agrarian reform “on the broadest democraticbasis”] can cure the population of utopian attempts. 
” This may be read as follows. 
 Mr. 
 Stolypin, Your Excellency, even with all your gallows and your June Third laws you havenot “cured” the population of its “utopian Trudovik spirit”. 
Allow us to try just once more. 
 We shall promise the peoplethe widest democratic reform, and in practice will “cure”them by means of buying out the land from the landlords and giving the latter a majority in the local land institutions! On our part, we shall thank Messrs. 
 Milyukov, Struve and Co. 
 from the bottom of our hearts for the zeal withwhich they are “curing” the population of its “utopian”belief in peaceful constitutional methods. 
 They are curingit and, in all probability, will effect a final cure. 
 Proletary , No. 
 27, Published according March 26 (April 8), 1908 to the text in Proletary ISM AND REVISIONISM Written not later than April 3 (16), 1908 Published in 1908 in the Published according symposium Karl Marx— 1818-1883 to the symposium Signed: Vl. 
 Ilyin ISM AND REVISIONISM Written not later than April 3 (16), 1908 Published in 1908 in the Published according symposium Karl Marx— 1818-1883 to the symposium Signed: Vl. 
 Ilyin There is a well-known saying that if geometrical axioms affected human interests attempts would certainly be madeto refute them. 
 Theories of natural history which conflictedwith the old prejudices of theology provoked, and still provoke, the most rabid opposition. 
 No wonder, therefore, that the Marxian doctrine, which directly serves to enlightenand organise the advanced class in modern society, indicatesthe tasks facing this class and demonstrates the inevitablereplacement (by virtue of economic development) of thepresent system by a new order—no wonder that this doctrine has had to fight for every step forward in the course of its life. 
 Needless to say, this applies to bourgeois science and philosophy, officially taught by official professors in orderto befuddle the rising generation of the propertied classesand to “coach” it against internal and foreign enemies. 
 This science will not even hear of Marxism, declaring that it has been refuted and annihilated. 
 Marx is attacked withequal zest by young scholars who are making a career byrefuting socialism, and by decrepit elders who are preserv-ing the tradition of all kinds of outworn “systems”. 
 Theprogress of Marxism, the fact that its ideas are spreading and taking firm hold among the working class, inevitably increase the frequency and intensity of these bourgeoisattacks on Marxism, which becomes stronger, more hardenedand more vigorous every time it is “annihilated” by officialscience. 
 But even among doctrines connected with the struggle of the working class, and current mainly among the prole-tariat, Marxism by no means consolidated its position allat once. 
 In the first half-century of its existence (from the 1840s on) Marxism was engaged in combating theories fundamentally hostile to it. 
 In the early forties Marx and Engels settled accounts with the radical Young Hegelians whose viewpoint was that of philosophical ideal-ism. 
 At the end of the forties the struggle began in thefield of economic doctrine, against Proudhonism. 
 Thefifties saw the completion of this struggle in criticism ofthe parties and doctrines which manifested themselves in the stormy year of 1848. 
 In the sixties the struggle shifted from the field of general theory to one closer to the directlabour movement: the ejection of Bakuninism from theInternational. 
 In the early seventies the stage in Germanywas occupied for a short while by the Proudhonist Mühl-berger, and in the late seventies by the positivist Dühring. 
 But the influence of both on the proletariat was already absolutely insignificant. 
 Marxism was already gainingan unquestionable victory over all other ideologies in thelabour movement. 
 By the nineties this victory was in the main completed. 
 Even in the Latin countries, where the traditions of Prou-dhonism held their ground longest of all, the workers’ parties in effect built their programmes and their tactics on Marx-ist foundations. 
 The revived international organisationof the labour movement—in the shape of periodical inter-national congresses—from the outset, and almost withouta struggle, adopted the Marxist standpoint in all essen-tials. 
 But after Marxism had ousted all the more or less integral doctrines hostile to it, the tendencies expressedin those doctrines began to seek other channels. 
 The formsand causes of the struggle changed, but the strugglecontinued. 
 And the second half-century of the existenceof Marxism began (in the nineties) with the struggle of a trend hostile to Marxism within Marxism itself. 
 Bernstein, a one-time orthodox Marxist, gave his name to this trend by coming forward with the most noise and withthe most purposeful expression of amendments to Marx,revision of Marx, revisionism. 
 Even in Russia where—owing to the economic backwardness of the country and the preponderance of a peasant population weighed down by the relics of serfdom—non-Marxist socialism has naturallyheld its ground longest of all, it is plainly passing into revisionism before our very eyes. 
 Both in the agrarian question (the programme of the municipalisation of all land) and in general questions of programme and tactics, our Social-Narodniks are more and more substituting“amendments” to Marx for the moribund and obsolescentremnants of their old system, which in its own way wasintegral and fundamentally hostile to Marxism. 
 Pre-Marxist socialism has been defeated. 
 It is continuing the struggle, no longer on its own independent ground, but on the general ground of Marxism, as revisionism. 
Let us, then, examine the ideological content of revision-ism. 
 In the sphere of philosophy revisionism followed in the wake of bourgeois professorial “science”. 
 The professors went “back to Kant”—and revisionism dragged along after the neo-Kantians. 
 The professors repeated the plati-tudes that priests have uttered a thousand times againstphilosophical materialism—and the revisionists, smilingindulgently, mumbled (word for word alter the latest Hand-buch ) that materialism had been “refuted” long ago. 
 The professors treated Hegel as a “dead dog”, 16 and while them-selves preaching idealism, only an idealism a thousandtimes more petty and banal than Hegel’s, contemptuouslyshrugged their shoulders at dialectics—and the revision-ists floundered after them into the swamp of philosoph-ical vulgarisation of science, replacing “artful” (and revo-lutionary) dialectics by “simple” (and tranquil) “evolu-tion”. 
 The professors earned their official salaries by adjust-ing both their idealist and their “critical” systems to thedominant medieval “philosophy” (i. 
e. 
, to theology)—andthe revisionists drew close to them, trying to make religion a“private affair”, not in relation to the modern state, but in relation to the party of the advanced class. 
 What such “amendments” to Marx really meant in class terms need not be stated: it is self-evident. 
 We shall simplynote that the only Marxist in the international Social-Democratic movement to criticise the incredible platitudesof the revisionists from the standpoint of consistent dialec-tical materialism was Plekhanov. 
 This must be stressed all the more emphatically since profoundly mistakenattempts are being made at the present time to smuggle in old and reactionary philosophical rubbish disguised as a criticism of Plekhanov’s tactical opportunism. 
 * Passing to political economy, it must be noted first of all that in this sphere the “amendments” of the revisionistswere much more comprehensive and circumstantial; attemptswere made to influence the public by “new data on economicdevelopment”. 
 It was said that concentration and the oust-ing of small-scale production by large-scale production do not occur in agriculture at all, while they proceed very slowly in commerce and industry. 
 It was said that criseshad now become rarer and weaker, and that cartels andtrusts would probably enable capital to eliminate themaltogether. 
 It was said that the “theory of collapse” towhich capitalism is heading was unsound, owing to the tendency of class antagonisms to become milder and less acute. 
 It was said, finally, that it would not be amiss tocorrect Marx’s theory of value, too, in accordance withBöhm-Bawerk. 
 17 The fight against the revisionists on these questions result-ed in as fruitful a revival of the theoretical thought in international socialism as did Engels’s controversy with Dühring twenty years earlier. 
 The arguments of the revision-ists were analysed with the help of facts and figures. 
 Itwas proved that the revisionists were systematically paint-ing a rose-coloured picture of modern small-scale produc-tion. 
 The technical and commercial superiority of large-scale production over small-scale production not only in industry, but also in agriculture, is proved by irrefutablefacts. 
 But commodity production is far less developed inagriculture, and modern statisticians and economists are,as a rule, not very skilful in picking out the special branches(sometimes even the operations) in agriculture which indi-cate that agriculture is being progressively drawn into the process of exchange in world economy. 
 Small-scale produc-*See Studies in the Philosophy of Marxism by Bogdanov, Ba-zarov and others. 
 This is not the place to discuss the book, and I must at present confine myself to stating that in the very near future I shall prove in a series of articles, or in a separate pamphlet, thateverything I have said in the text about neo-Kantian revisionists essentially applies also to these “new” neo-Humist and neo-Berkeleyanrevisionists. 
 (See present edition, Vol. 
 14. 
— Ed. 
) tion maintains itself on the ruins of natural economy by constant worsening of diet, by chronic starvation, by length-ening of the working day, by deterioration in the quality and the care of cattle, in a word, by the very methodswhereby handicraft production maintained itself againstcapitalist manufacture. 
 Every advance in science andtechnology inevitably and relentlessly undermines thefoundations of small-scale production in capitalist society; and it is the task of socialist political economy to investigate this process in all its forms, often complicated and intri-cate, and to demonstrate to the small producer the impossi-bility of his holding his own under capitalism, the hope-lessness of peasant farming under capitalism, and thenecessity for the peasant to adopt the standpoint of the proletarian. 
 On this question the revisionists sinned, in the scientific sense, by superficial generalisations based onfacts selected one-sidedly and without reference to thesystem of capitalism as a whole. 
 From the political pointof view, they sinned by the fact that they inevitably,whether they wanted to or not, invited or urged the peasant to adopt the attitude of a small proprietor (i. 
e. 
, the atti-tude of the bourgeoisie) instead of urging him to adopt thepoint of view of the revolutionary proletarian. 
 The position of revisionism was even worse as regards the theory of crises and the theory of collapse. 
 Only fora very short time could people, and then only the most short-sighted, think of refashioning the foundations of Marx’s theory under the influence of a few years of indus-trial boom and prosperity. 
 Realities very soon made itclear to the revisionists that crises were not a thing of thepast: prosperity was followed by a crisis. 
 The forms, thesequence, the picture of particular crises changed, but crises remained an inevitable component of the capitalist system. 
 While uniting production, the cartels and trusts atthe same time, and in a way that was obvious to all, aggra-vated the anarchy of production, the insecurity of existenceof the proletariat and the oppression of capital, therebyintensifying class antagonisms to an unprecedented degree. 
 That capitalism is heading for a break-down—in the sense both of individual political and economic crises andof the complete collapse of the entire capitalist system— has been made particularly clear, and on a particularly large scale, precisely by the new giant trusts. 
 The recent financial crisis in America and the appalling increase of unemployment all over Europe, to say nothing of the impend-ing industrial crisis to which many symptoms are point-ing—all this has resulted in the recent “theories” ofthe revisionists having been forgotten by everybody, includ-ing, apparently, many of the revisionists themselves. 
 But the lessons which this instability of the intellectuals had given the working class must not be forgotten. 
 As to the theory of value, it need only be said that apart from-the vaguest of hints and sighs, à la Böhm-Bawerk, the revisionists have contributed absolutely nothing, andhave therefore left no traces whatever on the development of scientific thought. 
 In the sphere of politics, revisionism did really try to revise the foundation of Marxism, namely, the doctrineof the class struggle. 
 Political freedom, democracy anduniversal suffrage remove the ground for the class struggle—we were told—and render untrue the old proposition of the Communist Manifesto that the working men have no country. 
 For, they said, since the “will of the majority” prevailsin a democracy, one must neither regard the state as anorgan of class rule, nor reject alliances with the progressive,social-reform bourgeoisie against the reactionaries. 
 It cannot be disputed that these arguments of the revi-sionists amounted to a fairly well-balanced system of views, namely, the old and well-known liberal-bourgeoisviews. 
 The liberals have always said that bourgeois parlia-mentarism destroys classes and class divisions, since theright to vote and the right to participate in the governmentof the country are shared by all citizens without distinction. 
 The whole history of Europe in the second half of the nine-teenth century, and the whole history of the Russian revolu-tion in the early twentieth, clearly show how absurd suchviews are. 
 Economic distinctions are not mitigated butaggravated and intensified under the freedom of “democrat-ic” capitalism. 
 Parliamentarism does not eliminate, but lays bare the innate character even of the most democratic bourgeois republics as organs of class oppression. 
 By help-ing to enlighten and to organise immeasurably wider masses of the population than those which previously took an active part in political events, parliamentarism does not make for the elimination of crises and political revolutions, but for the maximum intensification of civilwar during such revolutions. 
 The events in Paris in thespring of 1871 and the events in Russia in the winter of1905 showed as clearly as could be how inevitably thisintensification comes about. 
 The French bourgeoisie with-out a moment’s hesitation made a deal with the enemy of the whole nation, with the foreign army which had ruinedits country, in order to crush the proletarian movement. 
Whoever does not understand the inevitable inner dialecticsof parliamentarism and bourgeois democracy—which leadsto an even sharper decision of the argument by mass vio-lence than formerly—will never be able on the basis of this parliamentarism to conduct propaganda and agitationconsistent in principle, really preparing the working-classmasses for victorious participation in such “arguments”. 
The experience of alliances, agreements and blocs with thesocial-reform liberals in the West and with the liberal reformists (Cadets) in the Russian revolution, has convinc-ingly shown that these agreements only blunt the conscious-ness of the masses, that they do not enhance but weakenthe actual significance of their struggle, by linking fighterswith elements who are least capable of fighting and mostvacillating and treacherous. 
 Millerandism in France—the biggest experiment in applying revisionist political tactics on a wide, a really national scale—has provided a practi-cal appraisal of revisionism that will never be forgotten bythe proletariat all over the world. 
 A natural complement to the economic and political tendencies of revisionism was its attitude to the ultimate aim of the socialist movement. 
 “The movement is every-thing, the ultimate aim is nothing”—this catch-phraseof Bernstein’s expresses the substance of revisionism betterthan many long disquisitions. 
 To determine its conductfrom case to case, to adapt itself to the events of the dayand to the chopping and changing of petty politics, to forget the primary interests of the proletariat and the basic features of the whole capitalist system, of all capital-ist evolution, to sacrifice these primary interests for the real or assumed advantages of the moment—such is the policy of revisionism. 
 And it patently follows from the very nature of this policy that it may assume an infinite variety of forms, and that every more or less “new” question,every more or less unexpected and unforeseen turn of events,even though it change the basic line of development onlyto an insignificant degree and only for the briefest period,will always inevitably give rise to one variety of revision-ism or another. 
 The inevitability of revisionism is determined by its class roots in modern society. 
 Revisionism is an interna-tional phenomenon. 
 No thinking socialist who is in theleast informed can have the slightest doubt that the relationbetween the orthodox and the Bernsteinians in Germany, the Guesdists and the Jaurèsists (and now particularly the Broussists) in France, the Social Democratic Federationand the Independent Labour Party in Great Britain,Brouckère and Vandervelde in Belgium, the Integralists andthe Reformists in Italy, the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviksin Russia, is everywhere essentially similar, notwithstand-ing the immense variety of national conditions and histor-ical factors in the present state of all these countries. 
 Inreality, the “division” within the present internationalsocialist movement is now proceeding along the same lines in all the various countries of the world, which testifies to atremendous advance compared with thirty or forty years ago, when heterogeneous trends in the various countries were struggling within the one international socialist movement. 
And that “revisionism from the left” which has taken shapein the Latin countries as “revolutionary syndicalism”, 18 is also adapting itself to Marxism, “amending” it: Labriolain Italy and Lagardelle in France frequently appeal from Marx who is understood wrongly to Marx who is understood rightly. 
 We cannot stop here to analyse the ideological content of this revisionism, which as yet is far from having devel-oped to the same extent as opportunist revisionism: it hasnot yet become international, has not yet stood the test of a single big practical battle with a socialist party in any single country. 
 We confine ourselves therefore to that“revisionism from the right” which was described above. 
 Wherein lies its inevitability in capitalist society? Why is it more profound than the differences of national peculiarities and of degrees of capitalist development? Because in every capitalist country, side by side with theproletariat, there are always broad strata of the pettybourgeoisie, small proprietors. 
 Capitalism arose and isconstantly arising out of small production. 
 A number ofnew “middle strata” are inevitably brought into existence again and again by capitalism (appendages to the factory, work at home, small workshops scattered all over the countryto meet the requirements of big industries, such as thebicycle and automobile industries, etc. 
). 
 These new smallproducers are just as inevitably being cast again into theranks of the proletariat. 
 It is quite natural that the petty-bourgeois world-outlook should again and again crop up in the ranks of the broad workers’ parties. 
 It is quite naturalthat this should be so and always will be so, right up to thechanges of fortune that will take place in the proletarianrevolution. 
 For it would be a profound mistake to thinkthat the “complete” proletarianisation of the majority of the population is essential for bringing about such a revo-lution. 
 What we now frequently experience only in thedomain of ideology, namely, disputes over theoreticalamendments to Marx; what now crops up in practice onlyover individual side issues of the labour movement, astactical differences with the revisionists and splits on this basis—is bound to be experienced by the working class on an incomparably larger scale when the proletarianrevolution will sharpen all disputed issues, will focus alldifferences on points which are of the most immediateimportance in determining the conduct of the masses, andwill make it necessary in the heat of the fight to distin-guish enemies from friends, and to cast out bad allies in order to deal decisive blows at the enemy. 
 The ideological struggle waged by revolutionary Marx-ism against revisionism at the end of the nineteenth cen-tury is but the prelude to the great revolutionary battlesof the proletariat, which is marching forward to the complete victory of its cause despite all the waverings and weak-nesses of the petty bourgeoisie. 
 ON THE BEATEN TRACK! Assessment of the Russian revolution, i. 
e. 
, of its three first years, is the topic of the day. 
 Unless the class natureof our political parties is ascertained, unless the interests and the mutual relations of classes in our revolution are taken into account, no step forward can be made in definingthe immediate aims and tactics of the proletariat. 
 Weintend in this article to draw the attention of our readersto one attempt at such an assessment. 
 In issue No. 
 3 of Golos Sotsial-Demokrata ,19 F. 
 Dan and G. 
 Plekhanov have written, the one a systematic assess-ment of the results of the revolution, the other summarisedconclusions about the tactics of the workers’ party. 
 Dan’sassessment amounts to this, that hopes of a dictatorshipof the proletariat and the peasantry were bound to proveillusory. 
 “The possibility of new revolutionary mass action of the proletariat ... depends to a great extent on the posi-tion of the bourgeoisie. 
” “In the first stages [of such up-surge], so long as the mounting revolutionary working-class movement has not stirred up the town middle class,and the development of revolution in the towns has notlit a conflagration in the countryside—the proletariat and the bourgeoisie will find themselves face to face as the principal political forces. 
” On the tactical conclusions to be drawn from this kind of “truth” F. 
 Dan is obviously reticent. 
 He was evidentlyashamed to say, in so many words, what follows automati-cally from his statement, namely, that the working class should be recommended to adopt the famous tactics of the Mensheviks, that is, support of the bourgeoisie (recall theblocs with the Cadets, support of the watchword of a Cadet Ministry, Plekhanov’s Duma with full powers, etc. 
). 
 But Plekhanov supplements Dan by ending his article in issue N o . 
 3 o f Golos Sotsial-Demokrata with the words: “It would be a good thing for Russia if the Russian Marxists in1905-06 had been able to avoid these mistakes made byMarx and Engels in Germany more than half a century ago!”(He is referring to underestimation of the capacity of capi-talism at the time to develop further, and overestimation of the capacity of the proletariat for revolutionary action. 
) Nothing could be clearer. 
 Dan and Plekhanov are trying ever so carefully, not calling things directly by their propernames, to justify the Menshevik policy of proletarian de-pendence on the Cadets. 
 So let us look more closely at the“theoretical case” they try to make out. 
 Dan argues that the “peasant movement” depends on the “growth and development of the urban revolution in itsbourgeois and proletarian channels”. 
 Therefore the rise ofthe “urban revolution” was followed by the rise of the peasantmovement, while after its decline “the internal antagonismsof the countryside, held in check by the rise of revolution, once again began to become acute”, and “the government’s agrarian policy, the policy of dividing the peasantry, etc. 
,began to enjoy a relative success”. 
 Hence the conclusion wehave quoted earlier—that in the first stages of the newupsurge the main political forces will be the proletariatand the bourgeoisie. 
 “This situation,” in Dan’s opinion, “can and must be made use of by the proletariat for such a development of the revolution as will leave far behindthe point of departure of the new upsurge, and will lead to the complete democratisation of society under the badge[sic!] of a radical [!!] solution of the agrarian question. 
” It is not difficult to see that this whole argument is based on a radical failure to understand the agrarian question in our revolution, and that this incomprehension is badlycovered up by cheap and empty phrases about “completedemocratisation”, “under the badge” of a “solution” of thequestion. 
 F. 
 Dan imagines that “hopes of a dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry” depend and depended on Narodnik prejudices, on forgetting the internal antagonismsin the countryside and the individualist character of the peasant movement. 
 These are the usual Menshevik views, long known to everyone. 
 But hardly anyone yet has revealed all their absurdity so strikingly as F. 
 Dan has done in the article in question. 
 Our most worthy publicist has contrivednot to notice that both the “ solutions ” of the agrarian question which he contrasts are in keeping with the “indi-vidualist character of the peasant movement”! For theStolypin solution, which in Dan’s opinion is enjoying “relative success”, is in fact founded on the individualism of the peasants. 
 That is unquestionable. 
 Well, and whatabout the other solution, which F. 
 Dan called “radical”and bound up with “the complete democratisation of so-ciety”? Does the most worthy Dan imagine, by any chance,that it is not founded on the individualism of the peasants? The trouble is that Dan’s empty phrase about “the com-plete democratisation of society under the badge of a radi-cal solution of the agrarian question” serves to conceal aradical piece of stupidity. 
 Unthinkingly, groping like ablind man, he bumps up against two objectively possible, and historically not yet finally chosen, “solutions” of the agrarian question, without being able clearly and precisely to grasp the nature of both solutions, and the conditions in which one and other are feasible. 
 Why can Stolypin’s agrarian policy enjoy “relative success”? Because within our peasantry capitalist develop-ment has long ago brought into being two hostile classes— a peasant bourgeoisie and a peasant proletariat. 
 Is the complete success of Stolypin’s agrarian policy possible,and if so, what does it mean? It is possible, if circumstancesdevelop exceptionally favourably for Stolypin, and itmeans the “solution” of the agrarian question in bourgeoisRussia in the sense of the final (up to the proletarian revo-lution) consolidation of private property over all the land both that of the landlords and that of the peasants. 
 Thiswill be a “solution” of the Prussian type, which will cer-tainly ensure the capitalist development of Russia, but anincredibly slow development, endowing the Junker withauthority for many years, and a thousand times more agonising for the proletariat and the peasantry than the other, objectively possible and also capitalist, “solution of the agrarian question”. 
 This other solution Dan has called “radical”, without thinking of what it implies. 
 It is a cheap catchword, and there is not the very germ of an idea in it. 
 Stolypin’s solu-tion is also very radical, since it is radically breaking upthe old village commune and the old agrarian system inRussia. 
 The real difference between the peasant solution of the agrarian question in the Russian bourgeois revolu-tion, and the Stolypin-Cadet solution, is that the first destroys the landlords’ private property in land beyond question, and peasant private property very probably(we shall not deal here with this particular question ofthe peasants’ allotment land, because all Dan’s argumentsare wrong even from the standpoint of our present “munici-palising” agrarian programme). 
 Now one may ask, is it true that this second solution is objectively possible? Beyond doubt. 
 All thinking Marx-ists are in agreement on this, for otherwise the support by the proletariat of the small proprietor’s striving toconfiscate large-scale landed property would be a reactionarypiece of charlatanry. 
 In no other capitalist country will a single Marxist draw up a programme supporting the peasants ’ aspiration to confiscate large-scale landed proper-ty. 
 In Russia both Bolsheviks and Mensheviks are in agree-ment as to the necessity of such support. 
 Why? Becauseobjectively , for Russia another path of capitalist agrarian development is possible—not the “Prussian” but the “American”, not the landlord-bourgeois (or Junker) but the peasant-bourgeois path. 
 Stolypin and the Cadets, the autocracy and the bourgeoisie, Nicholas II and Pyotr Struve are all agreed that theremust be a capitalist “cleansing” of the decaying agrariansystem in Russia by preserving the landed property of the landlords. 
 All they differ on is how best to preserve it, and how much of it to preserve. 
 The workers and peasants, the Social-Democrats and the Narodniks (Trudoviks, Popular Socialists, Socialist-Revolutionaries included) are all agreed that there shouldbe a capitalist “cleansing” of the decaying agrarian system in Russia by means of the forcible abolition of the landed property of the landlords. 
 They differ in this, that theSocial-Democrats understand the capitalist character in present society of any agrarian revolution, however ultra-radical it may be—municipalisation and nationalisation, socialisation and division—while the Narodniks don’t understand this, and wrap up their struggle for peasant-bourgeois agrarian evolution against landlord-bourgeoisevolution in philistine and utopian phrases about equalisa-tion. 
 All the muddle and shallow thinking of F. 
 Dan are due to the fact that he has radically failed to understand the economic basis of the Russian bourgeois revolution. 
 Thedifferences between Marxist and petty-bourgeois socialismin Russia on the question of the economic content and sig-nificance of the peasants’ struggle for the land in thisrevolution loomed so large for him that he has “ failed to notice ” the struggle of the real forces in society for one or other of the objectively possible roads in capitalist agrarianevolution. 
 And he has covered up this complete incompre-hension with phrases about the “relative success” of Sto-lypin and “the complete democratisation of societyunder the badge of a radical solution of the agrarian question”. 
 Actually, the situation in regard to the agrarian question in Russia today is this. 
 The success of Stolypin’s policywould involve long years of violent suppression and exter-mination of a mass of peasants who refuse to starve todeath and be expelled from their villages. 
 History has known examples of the success of such a policy. 
 It would be empty and foolish democratic phrase-mongering forus to say that the success of such a policy in Russia is “impos-sible”. 
 It is possible! But our business is to make the peoplesee clearly at what a price such a success is won, and tofight with all our strength for another, shorter and more rapid road of capitalist agrarian development through a peasant revolution. 
 A peasant revolution under the lead-ership of the proletariat in a capitalist country is difficult,very difficult, but it is possible, and we must fight for it. 
Three years of the revolution have taught us and the wholepeople not only that we must fight for it but also how to fight for it. 
 No Menshevik “methods of approach” to the policy of supporting the Cadets will drive these lessons ofthe revolution out of the consciousness of the workers. 
 To proceed. 
 What if, in spite of the struggle of the masses, Stolypin’s policy holds good long enough for the “Prussian” way to succeed? Then the agrarian system in Russia will become completely bourgeois, the big peasants will grabnearly all the allotment land, agriculture will becomecapitalist, and no “solution” of the agrarian question undercapitalism —whether radical or non-radical—will be possible any more. 
 Then Marxists who are honest with themselves will straightforwardly and openly throw all “agrarian programmes” on the scrap-heap altogether, andwill say to the masses: “The workers have done all theycould to give Russia not a Junker but an American capi-talism. 
 The workers call you now to join in the social revo-lution of the proletariat, for after the ‘solution’ of the agrarian question in the Stolypin spirit there can be no other revolution capable of making a serious change in the economic conditions of life of the peasant masses. 
” That is how the question of the relationship between a bourgeois and a socialist revolution in Russia stands to-day—a question muddled up particularly by Dan in his German version of his Russian article ( Neue Zeit , 20 No. 
 27). 
 Bourgeois revolutions are possible, even inevitable, in Russia as well on the basis of Stolypin-Cadet agrarianpolicies. 
 But in such revolutions, as in the French revolu-tions of 1830 and 1848, there could be no question of “thecomplete democratisation of society under the badge of a radical solution of the agrarian question”. 
 Or, more pre-cisely, in such revolutions only petty-bourgeois quasi-So-cialists will still babble about a “solution” (and especiallya “radical” solution) of an agrarian question which hasalready been solved in a country where capitalism is fullydeveloped. 
 But in Russia a capitalist agrarian system is very far as yet from having been developed. 
 This is clear not only tous, both Mensheviks and Bolsheviks, not only for peoplewho sympathise with the revolution and hope that it mayrise again; it is clear even to such consistent, consciousand frankly outspoken enemies of the revolution and friends of the Black-Hundred autocracy as Mr. 
 Pyotr Struve. 
 If he “cries with a loud voice” that we need a Bismarck, thatwe need the transformation of reaction into revolution from above, it is because Struve sees in Russia neither a Bismarck nor revolution from above. 
 Struve sees that the Stolypin reaction and a thousand gallows alone are not enough to create a landlord-bourgeois Russia, made safefor the Knecht . 
 You need something more, something like the solution (albeit a Bismarckian solution) of the historictasks of the nation, like the unification of Germany, theintroduction of universal suffrage. 
 But Stolypin can only unite Dumbadze with the heroes of the Riga museum! 21 He even has to abolish the franchise introduced by Witte under the law of December 11, 1905!22 Instead of peasants contented with Dan’s “relative success” of the agrarianpolicy, Stolypin is forced to hear “Trudovik” demandsput forward even by the peasant deputies of the Third Duma! How can Pyotr Struve, then, not “cry with a loud voice”, not groan and weep, when he sees clearly that it isn ’t working —that we are still not getting anything like a well-regulated, modest, moderate and precise, curtailedbut stable “constitution”? Struve knows very well where he is going. 
 But F. 
 Dan has learned nothing and forgotten nothing during the threeyears of revolution. 
 He is still, like a blind man, seekingto drag the proletariat under the wing of the Struves. 
 Heis still muttering the same reactionary Menshevik speechesabout our proletariat and bourgeoisie being able to appear as “the principal political forces” ... against whom, most worthy Dan? Against Guchkov, or against the mon-archy? The incredible lengths to which Dan goes here in painting the liberals in rosy colours is revealed by his German articleHe is not ashamed even to tell the German public that in the Third Duma the petty bourgeoisie in the towns chose “progressive electors” (meaning the Cadets) whilethe peasants gave 40 per cent of reactionary electors! Longlive the “progressive” Milyukovs and Struves, applaudingStolypin! Long live the alliance of the Dans and the Milyu-kovs against the “reactionary” peasants, displaying their Trudovik spirit in the Third Duma! And Plekhanov falsifies Engels to serve the purpose of the same reactionary Menshevik theories. 
 Engels said that the tactics of Marx in 1848 were correct , that they and only they really provided reliable, firm and unforgettable les-sons for the proletariat. 
 Engels said that these tactics were unsuccessful in spite of their being the only correct tactics. 
 They were unsuccessful because the proletariatwas insufficiently prepared, and capitalism was insuffi-ciently developed. 
 23 While Plekhanov, as though he were trying to make fun of Engels, as though to gladden the heart of the Bernsteins and the Streltsovs,24 interprets Engels as though he “regretted” Marx’s tactics, as thoughhe later admitted them to be mistaken, and declared hispreference for the tactics of supporting the German Cadets! Will not G. 
 Plekhanov tomorrow tell us that in regard to the risings in 1849 Engels came to the conclusion that “they should not have taken to arms”? Marx and Engels taught the proletariat revolutionary tactics, the tactics of developing the struggle to its veryhighest forms, the tactics which rally the peasantry behindthe proletariat—and not the proletariat behind the liberaltraitors. 
 Proletary , No. 
 29, Published according April 16 (29), 1908 to the text in Proletary A BLOC OF THE CADETS AND THE OCTOBRISTS? A private telegram from St. 
 Petersburg to the Frankfurter Zeitung25 of April 1 (14) states: “Since the end of March secret negotiations have been going on between the Octo-brists, 26 the moderate Rights, the Cadets and the Party of Peaceful Renovation27 about whether they can form a bloc . 
 The plan was initiated by the Octobrists, who can no longer count on the support of the extreme Right. 
 The latter, particularly dissatisfied with the Octobrists on account of their interpellation regarding Dumbadze, intendto vote with the opposition against the Centre. 
 Such amanoeuvre would render difficult the work of the Dumasince a combination of the extreme Right and the opposi-tion would command 217 votes against the 223 of the Centre and moderate Rights. 
 The first talk (about a bloc) took place on April 12 (March 30, O. 
 S. 
), and was attended by30 representatives, chosen on a proportional basis. 
 Thetalks led to no result, and it was decided to hold a newconsultation during the coming week. 
” How reliable this information may be, we do not know. 
 In any case the silence of the Russian newspapers does not prove that it is wrong, and we think it necessary to informour readers about this report in the foreign press. 
 In principle there is nothing incredible in the fact that secret negotiations are going on. 
 By all their politi-cal history, beginning with Struve's visit to Witte in Novem-ber 1905, continuing with the backstairs talks with Trepov and Co. 
 in the summer of 1906, 28 and so forth and so on, the Cadets have proved that the essence of their tactics is to slip in at the backdoor for talks with those in power. 
 But even if this report about negotiations proved to be un-true, it remains beyond doubt that in practice in the Third Duma there exists a tacit bloc of the Cadets and the Octo-brists on the basis of the former taking a turn to the right. 
A number of Cadet votes in the Third Duma have provedthis irrefutably, quite apart from the Cadet speeches andthe character of their political activities. 
 In the Third Duma, we said even before it had been con-vened, there are two majorities (see Proletary and the resolution of the All-Russian Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
in November 1907). 
 * And we were already demonstrating then that to evade recognition of this fact, as the Menshe-viks were doing, and above all to evade a class description of the Cadet-Octobrist majority, means to let oneself be dragged at the tail of bourgeois liberalism. 
 The class nature of the Cadets is showing itself moreand more clearly. 
 Those who would not see this in 1906are being obliged by facts to recognise it today, or else sink completely into opportunism. 
 Proletary , No. 
 29, Published according April 16 (29), 1908 to the text in Proletary *See present edition, Vol. 
 13, pp. 
 123-32 and 144-46. 
— Ed. 
 THE ASSESSMENT OF THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION29 No one in Russia would now dream of making a revolu-tion according to Marx. 
 This, or approximately this, wasrecently announced by a liberal—even an almost democrat-ic—even an almost Social-Democratic—(Menshevik) pa-per, Stolichnaya Pochta . 
30 And to be quite fair to the au-thors of this pronouncement, they have successfully caughtthe essence of the current political mood and of the attitude to the lessons of our revolution which undoubtedly prevailamong the widest circles of the intellectuals, half-educated philistines and probably in many sections of the quite uneducated petty bourgeoisie as well. 
 This pronouncement does not only express hatred of Marxism in general, with its unswerving conviction of therevolutionary mission of the proletariat and its whole-hearted readiness to support any revolutionary movement of the masses, to sharpen their struggle and to go through with it. 
 It expresses also hatred of the methods of struggle,the forms of action, and the tactics which have been testedquite recently in the actual practice of the Russian revolu-tion. 
 All those victories—or half-victories, quarter-victories, rather—which our revolution won, were achieved entirely and exclusively thanks to the direct revolutionary onset of the proletariat, which was marchingat the head of the non-proletarian elements of the workingpeople. 
 All the defeats were due to the weakening of suchan onset, to the tactics of avoiding it, tactics based on theabsence of it, and sometimes (among the Cadets) on directly seeking to eliminate it. 
 And today, in the period of sweeping counter-revolu-tionary repressions, the philistines are adapting themselves in cowardly fashion to the new masters, currying favour with the new caliphs for an hour, renouncing the past, trying to forget it, to persuade themselves and others that no one in Russia now dreams of making a revolution accord-ing to Marx, no one is dreaming of the “dictatorship ofthe proletariat” and so forth . 
 In other revolutions of the bourgeoisie, the physical victory of the old authorities over the insurgent people always aroused despondency and demoralisation among wide circles of “educated” society. 
 But among the bourgeoisparties which had made a real fight for liberty, which hadplayed any appreciable part in real revolutionary events,there were always to be traced illusions the reverse of thosewhich now prevail among the intellectualist petty bour-geoisie in Russia. 
 They were illusions about an inevitable, immediate and complete victory of “liberty, equality and fraternity”, illusions about a republic not of the bourgeoisiebut of all humanity, a republic which would introduce peaceon earth and good will among men. 
 They were illusionsabout the absence of class differences within the people oppressed by the monarchy and the medieval order of things, about the impossibility of conquering an “idea”by methods of violence, about the absolutely oppositenature of the feudalism that had outlived its day and thenew free democratic republican system, the bourgeois natureof which was not realised at all, or was realised only very vaguely. 
 Therefore in periods of counter-revolution representa-tives of the proletariat who had worked their way throughto the standpoint of scientific socialism had to fight (as,for example, Marx and Engels did in 1850) against the illu-sions of the bourgeois republicans, against an idealist con-ception of the traditions of the revolution and of its essence, against superficial phrases which were replacing consistentand serious work within a definite class. 
 31 But in Russia the exact opposite prevails. 
 We don’t see any illusions ofprimitive republicanism hindering the essential work ofcontinuing revolutionary activity in the new and changed conditions. 
 We see no exaggeration of the meaning of a republic, the transformation of this essential watchwordof the struggle against feudalism and the monarchy into a watchword of each and every struggle for the liberation of all those that work and are exploited. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionaries32 and the groups akin to them, who were encouraging ideas similar to these, have remained a mere handful, and the period of the three years’ revolutionarystorm (1905-07) has brought them—instead of wide-spread enthusiasm for republicanism—a new party of theopportunist petty bourgeoisie, the Popular Socialists, a new increase in anti-political rebelliousness and anarchism. 
 In petty-bourgeois Germany, the day after the first onset of the revolution in 1848 the illusions prevalent amongthe petty-bourgeois republican democrats were strikinglyin evidence. 
 In petty-bourgeois Russia, on the day afterthe onset of the revolution in 1905, there was striking evidence, and there is still evidence, of the illusions of petty-bourgeois opportunism, which hoped to achieve acompromise without a struggle, feared a struggle and afterthe first defeat hastened to renounce its own past, poisoningthe public atmosphere with despondence, faint-heartednessand apostasy. 
 Evidently this difference arises from the difference in the social system and in the historical circumstances ofthe two revolutions. 
 But it is not a question of the massof the petty-bourgeois population in Russia finding itselfin less sharp opposition to the old order. 
 Just the reverse. 
Our peasantry in the very first stage of the Russian revolu-tion brought into being an agrarian movement incomparably more powerful, definite, and politically conscious thanthose that arose in the previous bourgeois revolutions ofthe nineteenth century. 
 The trouble is that the socialstratum which formed the core of the revolutionary demo-crats in Europe—the master craftsmen in the towns, the urban bourgeoisie and petty bourgeoisie— were bound i n Russia to turn to counter-revolutionary liberalism. 
 Theclass-consciousness of the socialist proletariat, moving handin hand with the international army of socialist revolutionin Europe, the extreme revolutionary spirit of the muzhik,driven by the age-old yoke of the feudal-minded landlords to a state of utter desperation and to the demand for confis-cation of the landed estates—these are the circumstanceswhich threw Russian liberalism into the arms of counter-revolution much more powerfully than ever they did the liberals of Europe. 
 And therefore on the Russian working class there has devolved with particular force the task of preserving the traditions of revolutionary struggle whichthe intellectuals and the petty bourgeoisie are hasteningto renounce, developing and strengthening these traditions,imbuing with them the consciousness of the great mass ofthe people, and carrying them forward to the next inevi-table upsurge of the democratic movement. 
 The workers themselves are spontaneously carrying on just such a struggle. 
 Too passionately did they live throughthe great struggle in October and December. 
 Too clearlydid they see the change which took place in their conditiononly as a result of that direct revolutionary struggle. 
 They talk now, or at any rate they all feel, like that weaver who said in a letter to his trade union journal: “The factoryowners have taken away what we won, the foremen are onceagain bullying us, just wait , 1905 will come again . 
” Just wait, 1905 will come again. 
 That is how the workers look at things. 
 For them that year of struggle provided a model of what has to be done . 
 For the intellectuals and the renegading petty bourgeois it was the “insane year”, a modelof what should not be done . 
 For the proletariat, the working over and critical acceptance of the experience of the revolu-tion must consist in learning how to apply the then methods of struggle more successfully , so as to make the same October strike struggle and December armed struggle more massive, more concentrated and more conscious. 
 For counter-revolu-tionary liberalism, which leads the renegading intelligent-sia on a halter, assimilating the experience of the revolu-tion is bound to consist in finishing for ever with the “naïve”impulsiveness of “untamed” mass struggle, and replacing it by “cultured and civilised” constitutional work, on the basis of Stolypin’s “constitutionalism”. 
 Today all and sundry are talking about the assimilation and critical evaluation of the experience of the revolution. 
Socialists and liberals talk about it. 
 Opportunists and revo-lutionary Social-Democrats talk about it. 
 But not all understand that it is between the two opposites above-mentioned that all the multiform recipes for assimilation of the experience of the revolution fluctuate. 
 Not all put /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR the question clearly: is it the experience of the revolutionary struggle which we must assimilate, and help the masses to assimilate, for the purpose of a more consistent, stubborn and resolute fight; or is it the “experiment” of Cadet betrayalof the revolution that we must assimilate and pass on tothe masses? Karl Kautsky has approached this question in its funda-mental theoretical aspect. 
 In the second edition of his well-known work The Social Revolution , which has been translat-ed into all the principal European languages, he made anumber of additions and amendments touching on the expe-rience of the Russian revolution. 
 The preface to the secondedition is dated October 1906: therefore the author alreadyhad the material to judge, not only of the Sturm und Drang of 1905, but also of the chief events in the “Cadet period” of our revolution, the period of universal (almost universal)enthusiasm over the electoral victories of the Cadets andthe First Duma. 
 What problems in the experience of the Russian revolu-tion, then, did Kautsky consider sufficiently outstanding and basic, or at least sufficiently important to provide new material for a Marxist studying in general “the forms and weapons of the social revolution” (the heading to para-graph seven in Kautsky’s work, as supplemented in keepingwith the experience of 1905-06)? The author has taken two questions. 
 First, the question of the class composition of the forces which are capable of winning victory in the Russian revo-lution, making it a really victorious revolution. 
 Secondly, the question of the importance of those higher forms of mass struggle—higher in the direction of theirrevolutionary energy and in their aggressive character— which the Russian revolution brought forth, namely, the struggle in December, i. 
e. 
, the armed uprising. 
 Any socialist (and especially a Marxist) studying at all attentively the events of the Russian revolution is bound torecognise that these really are the root and fundamentalquestions in assessing the Russian revolution, and also in assessing the line of tactics dictated to a workers’ party by the present state of affairs. 
 Unless we fully and clearlyrealise what classes are capable , in the light of objective economic conditions, of making the Russian bourgeois revolution victorious, all our words about seeking to make that revolution victorious will be empty phrases, mere democratic declamation, while our tactics in the bour-geois revolution will inevitably be unprincipled and wavering. 
 On the other hand, in order concretely to determine the tactics of a revolutionary party at the stormiest momentsof the general crisis which the country is living through, it is obviously insufficient merely to indicate the classes capable of acting in the spirit of a victorious completion of the revolution. 
 Revolutionary periods are distinguishedfrom periods of so-called peaceful development, periodswhen economic conditions do not give rise to profoundcrises or powerful mass movements, precisely in this: that the forms of struggle in periods of the first type inevitably are much more varied , and the direct revolutionary struggle of the masses predominates rather than the propaganda andagitation activities conducted by leaders in parliament,in the press, etc. 
 Therefore if, in assessing revolutionaryperiods, we confine ourselves to defining the line of activity of the various classes, without analysing the forms of their struggle, our discussion in the scientific sense will be incom-plete and undialectical, while from the standpoint of practicalpolitics it will degenerate into the dead letter of the raiso-neur (with which, we may say in parenthesis, comrade Plekhanov contents himself in nine-tenths of his writings on Social-Democratic tactics in the Russian revolution). 
 In order to make a genuinely Marxist assessment of the revolution, from the standpoint of dialectical materialism,it has to be assessed as the struggle of live social forces,placed in particular objective conditions, acting in a partic-ular way and applying with greater or less success partic-ular forms of struggle. 
 It is on the basis of such an analysis, and only on that basis of course, that it is appropriate andindeed essential for a Marxist to assess the technical side of the struggle, the technical questions which arise in itscourse. 
 To recognise a definite form of struggle and not torecognise the necessity of studying its technique, is like recognising the necessity of taking part in particular elec-tions while ignoring the law which lays down the techniqueof these elections. 
 Let us go on now to the reply given by Kautsky to both the above-stated questions, which, as we know, aroused a very prolonged and heated dispute among the Russian Social-Democrats throughout the revolution, beginning with the spring of 1905, when the Bolshevik Third Congressof the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in London and the simultaneous Men-shevik conference in Geneva laid down the basic principlesof their tactics in precise resolutions, and ending with the London Congress of the United R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in the spring of 1907. 
 34 To the first question Kautsky gives the following reply. 
 In Western Europe, he says, the proletariat constitutes thegreat mass of the population. 
 Therefore the victory of democ-racy in present-day Europe means the political supremacy of the proletariat. 
 “In Russia, with her predominantly peas-ant population, this cannot be expected. 
 Of course, thevictory of Social-Democracy in the foreseeable (in German,absehbar ) future is not ruled out in Russia either: but that victory could be only the result of an alliance ( Koalition ) of the proletariat and the peasantry. 
” And Kautsky even expresses the opinion that such a victory would inevitably give a tremendous impetus to proletarian revolution inWestern Europe. 
 Thus we see that the concept of bourgeois revolution is not a sufficient definition of the forces which may achievevictory in such a revolution. 
 Bourgeois revolutions are possible, and have occurred, in which the commercial, or commercial and industrial, bourgeoisie played the part ofthe chief motive force. 
 The victory of such revolutions waspossible as the victory of the appropriate section of thebourgeoisie over its adversaries (such as the privileged no-bility or the absolute monarchy). 
 In Russia things are different. 
 The victory of the bourgeois revolution is im-possible in our country as the victory of the bourgeoisie . 
 This sounds paradoxical, but it is a fact. 
 The preponderanceof the peasant population, its terrible oppression by thesemi-feudal big landowning system, the strength andclass-consciousness of the proletariat already organised in a socialist party—all these circumstances impart to our bourgeois revolution a specific character. 
 This peculiar-ity does not eliminate the bourgeois character of the revo-33 lution (as Martov and Plekhanov attempted to present the case in their more than lame remarks on Kautsky’s atti-tude). 
 It only determines the counter-revolutionary charac-ter of our bourgeoisie and the necessity of a dictatorshipof the proletariat and the peasantry for victory in such a revolution. 
 For a “coalition of the proletariat and thepeasantry”, winning victory in a bourgeois revolution, happens to be nothing else than the revolutionary-demo-cratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry. 
 This proposition is the point of departure of the tactical differences which arose in the ranks of the Social-Demo-crats during the revolution. 
 Only if this is taken into accountcan one understand all the disputes on particular questions(support of the Cadets in general, a Left bloc and its charac-ter, etc. 
) and the clashes in individual cases. 
 It is only this basic tactical divergence—and not at all the questionof “boyevism” 35 or “boycottism”, as uninformed people sometimes think—that is the source of the differences between the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks in the firstperiod of the revolution (1905-07). 
 And one cannot sufficiently urge the necessity of studying this source of the differences with every attention, and ofexamining from this point of view the experience of the First and Second Dumas and of the direct struggle of thepeasantry. 
 If we don’t do this work now , we shall not be able to take a single step in the tactical field, when the next upsurge comes, without awakening old disputes or creating group conflicts and dissensions within the Party. 
The attitude of Social-Democracy to liberalism and to peas-ant bourgeois democracy must be determined on the basisof the experience of the Russian revolution. 
 Otherwise weshall have no principle or consistency in the tactics of the proletariat. 
 “The alliance of the proletariat and the peas-antry”, let us note in passing, should not in any circumstancesbe understood as meaning the fusion of various classes,or of the parties of the proletariat and the peasantry. 
 Notonly fusion, but any prolonged agreement would be destruc-tive for the socialist party of the working class, and would enfeeble the revolutionary-democratic struggle. 
 That the peasantry inevitably avers between the liberal bourgeoisieand the proletariat follows from its position as a class; and our revolution has provided many examples of this in the most varied fields of struggle (the boycott of the Witte Duma; the elections; the Trudoviks in the First and Second Dumas, etc. 
). 
 Only if it pursues an unquestionably inde-pendent policy as vanguard of the revolution will the pro-letariat be able to split the peasantry away from the liberals,rid it of their influence, rally the peasantry behind it in thestruggle and thus bring about an “alliance” de facto —one that emerges and becomes effective, when and to the extent that the peasantry are conducting a revolutionaryfight. 
 It is not flirtations with the Trudoviks, but mercilesscriticism of their weaknesses and vacillations, the propagandaof the idea of a republican and revolutionary peasant party,that can give effect to the “alliance” of the proletariat and the peasantry for victory over their common enemies, and not for playing at blocs and agreements. 
 This specific character of the Russian bourgeois revolution which we have pointed out distinguishes it from the otherbourgeois revolutions of modern times, but identifies itwith the great bourgeois revolutions of former times, when the peasantry played an outstanding revolutionary part. 
 In this respect the greatest attention should be paid towhat Frederick Engels wrote in his remarkably profoundand thought-stimulating article “On Historical Material-ism” (the English introduction to Socialism : Utopian and Scientific , translated into German by Engels himself in Neue Zeit , 1892-93, 11th year, Vol. 
 1). 
 “Curiously enough,” says Engels, “in all the three great bourgeois risings [theReformation in Germany and the Peasant War in the six-teenth century; the English revolution in the seventeenthcentury; the French revolution in the eighteenth century]the peasantry furnishes the army that has to do the fighting; and the peasantry is just the class that, the victory once gained, is most surely ruined by the economic consequencesof that victory. 
 A hundred years after Cromwell, the yeo-manry of England had almost disappeared. 
 Anyhow, had itnot been for that yeomanry and for the plebeian element inthe towns, the bourgeoisie alone would never have fought the matter out to the bitter end, and would never have brought Charles I to the scaffold. 
 In order to secure eventhose conquests of the bourgeoisie that were ripe for gathering at the time, the revolution had to be carried consid-erably further exactly as in 1793 in France and 1848 in Germany. 
 This seems, in fact, to be one of the laws of evolution of bourgeois society. 
” And in another passage inthe same article Engels points out that the French revolu-tion was the first uprising “that was really fought out up tothe destruction of one of the combatants, the aristocracy,and the complete triumph of the other, the bourgeoisie”. 
 36 Both these historical observations or general conclusions by Engels have been remarkably confirmed in the course ofthe Russian revolution. 
 It has also been confirmed that onlythe intervention of the peasantry and the proletariat—“the plebeian element in the towns”—is capable of substan-tially pushing forward the bourgeois revolution. 
 (Whereas in sixteenth-century Germany, seventeenth-century England and eighteenth-century France the peasantry could be putin the front rank, in twentieth-century Russia the ordermust decidedly be reversed, since without the initiativeand guidance of the proletariat the peasantry counts fornothing. 
) It has also been confirmed that the revolution must be taken very much further than its direct, immediate and already fully-matured bourgeois aims, if those aims are really to be achieved, and if even minimum bourgeoisconquests are to be irreversibly consolidated. 
 We can judgetherefore with what scorn Engels would have treated thephilistine recipes for squeezing the revolution beforehand into a directly bourgeois, narrowly bourgeois framework— in order not to frighten off the bourgeoisie”, as the Men-sheviks in the Caucasus said in their 1905 resolution, or inorder that there should be “a guarantee against a restora-tion”, as Plekhanov said in Stockholm. 
 Kautsky discusses the other question, the assessment of the insurrection of December 1905, in the preface to the second edition of his booklet. 
 He writes: “I can now nolonger assert as definitely as I did in, 1902 that armeduprisings and barricade fighting will not play the decisivepart in the coming revolutions. 
 Too clear evidence to thecontrary is provided by the experience of the street battles in Moscow, when a handful of men held up a whole army for a week in barricade fighting, and would have almostgained the victory, had not the failure of the revolutionary movement in other cities made it possible to dispatch such reinforcements to the army that in the end a monstrously superior force was concentrated against the insurgents. 
 Of course, this relative success of the struggle on the barri-cades was possible only because the city population energet-ically supported the revolutionaries, while the troopswere completely demoralised. 
 But who can affirm withcertainty that something similar is impossible in Western Europe?” And so, nearly a year after the insurrection, when there could be no question of any desire to cheer the spirits ofthe fighting men, such a careful investigator as Kautskyfirmly recognises that the Moscow insurrection representsa “relative success” of struggle on the barricades, and thinks it necessary to amend his previous general conclusion that the role of street battles in future revolutions cannot bea great one. 
 The struggle of December 1905 proved that armed upris-ing can be victorious in modern conditions of military technique and military organisation. 
 As a result of the December struggle the whole international labour move-ment must henceforth reckon with the probability of similarforms of fighting in the coming proletarian revolutions. 
These are the conclusions which really follow from theexperience of our revolution: these are the lessons whichthe broadest masses of the people should assimilate. 
 How remote are these conclusions and these lessons from that line of argument which Plekhanov opened up by his famous Herostratean comment on the December insurrection:“They should not have taken to arms. 
” What an ocean ofrenegade comment was called forth by that assessment!What an endless number of dirty liberal hands seized upon it, in order to carry demoralisation and a spirit of petty-bourgeois compromise into the ranks of the workers! There is not a grain of historical truth in Plekhanov’s assessment. 
 If Marx, who had said six months before theCommune that an insurrection would be madness, never-theless was able to sum up that “madness” as the greatest mass movement of the proletariat in the nineteenth century, then with a thousand times more justification must theRussian Social-Democrats inspire the masses with the con-viction that the December struggle was the most essential, the most legitimate, the greatest proletarian movement since the Commune. 
 And the working class of Russia will be trained up in such views, whatever individual intellec-tuals in the ranks of Social-Democracy may say, andhowever loudly they may lament. 
 Here perhaps one remark is necessary, bearing in mind that this article is being written for the Polish comrades. 
 Not being familiar, to my regret, with the Polish language, I know Polish conditions only by hearsay. 
 And it may beeasy to retort that it is precisely in Poland that a wholeparty strangled itself by impotent guerrilla warfare, terror-ism and fireworky outbreaks, and those precisely in the nameof rebel traditions and a joint struggle of the proletariat and the peasantry (the so-called Right wing in the Polish Socialist Party 37). 
 It may very well be that from this standpoint Polish conditions do in fact radically differfrom conditions in the rest of the Russian Empire. 
 I cannotjudge of this. 
 I must say, however, that nowhere except inPoland have we seen such a senseless departure from revo-lutionary tactics, one that has aroused justified resistance and opposition. 
 And here the thought arises unbidden:why, it was precisely in Poland that there was no massarmed struggle in December 1905! And is it not for thisvery reason that in Poland, and only in Poland, the dis-torted and senseless tactics of revolution-“making” anarch-ism have found their home, and that conditions did not permit of the development there of mass armed struggle,were it only for a short time? Is it not the tradition ofjust such a struggle, the tradition of the December armed uprising, that is at times the only serious means of overcom-ing anarchist tendencies within the workers’ party— not by means of hackneyed, philistine, petty-bourgeois moralising, but by turning from aimless, senseless, sporadicacts of violence to purposeful, mass violence, linked withthe broad movement and the sharpening of the direct pro-letarian struggle? The question of evaluating our revolution is important not only theoretically by any means. 
 It is important directly, practically, in the everyday sense. 
 All our work of propa-ganda, agitation and organisation is indissolubly bound up at the present time with the process of the assimilation of the lessons of these three great years by the widest mass of the working class and the semi-proletarian population. 
 We cannot now confine ourselves to the bare statement(in the spirit of the resolutions adopted by the Tenth Con-gress of the P. 
S. 
P. 
 Left wing) that the data available donot allow us to determine at present whether it is the pathof revolutionary explosion or the path of long, slow, tiny steps forward that lies ahead of us. 
 Of course, no statistics in the world can at present lay that down. 
 Of course, wemust carry on our work in such a way that it should be allimbued with a general socialist spirit and content, whatever painful trials the future has in store. 
 But that is not all. 
To halt at this point means not to give any effective leader-ship to the proletarian party. 
 We must frankly put and firmly answer the question, in what direction will we nowproceed to assimilate the experience of the three years ofrevolution? We must proclaim openly, for all to hear, forthe behoof of the wavering and feeble in spirit, to shamethose who are turning renegade and deserting socialism, that the workers’ party sees in the direct revolutionary struggle of the masses, in the October and December strug-gles of 1905, the greatest movements of the proletariat sincethe Commune; that only in the development of such formsof struggle lies the pledge of coming successes of the revolu-tion; and that these examples of struggle must serve as a beacon for us in training up new generations of fighters. 
 Carrying on our daily work in that direction, and remem-bering that only years of serious and consistent preparatoryactivity ensured the Party its full influence on the prole-tariat in 1905, we shall be able to reach the point that,whatever the turn of events and the rate of disintegration of the autocracy, the working class will continue to grow stronger and develop into a class-conscious, revolutionarySocial-Democratic force. 
 Published in April 1908 in the journal Przegl Zd Socjaldemokratyczny , No. 
 2 Signed: N. 
 LeninPublished according Published in Russian (translated to the text in Proletary from Polish) on May 10 (23), verified with 1908 in Proletary , No. 
 30 the text of the journal CADETS OF THE SECOND GENERATION The report from Russia printed in this issue under the heading of “News from the Intellectuals”, deserves the partic-ular attention of the reader. 
 Just before our paper appeared, we received confirmation of the facts about which our correspondent writes, and must dwell on them in greaterdetail. 
 A new political organisation is coming into existence. 
 The social movement is taking a new turn. 
 There is a group-ing of elements among the bourgeois democrats who want to be “more left than the Cadets”, and who are attracting Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries. 
 It seems asthough some dim realisation is breaking through that theCadet opposition in the Third Duma is a decaying corpse,and that “something must be done” apart from it. 
 Such are the facts. 
 They are anything but conspicuously definite as yet, but they already anticipate events that are understandable and inevitable from the standpoint ofthe lessons provided by the first three years of the revolu-tion. 
 The Cadets of the first generation appeared on the open stage of the revolution in the spring of 1905. 
 They have managed during this period of nearly three years to fade without ever having blossomed. 
 Now they are being replacedby Cadets of the second generation. 
 What is the meaningof this generation, and with what problems does it face theworkers’ party? The Cadets of the first generation made a noise at their banquets in 1904, carried on the Zemstvo campaign, 38 and expressed the beginnings of the social upswing at a time when relations between the various classes and the autocracy, and among themselves, were still quite undeter-mined, i. 
e. 
, up to the time when the open struggle of the masses and the policy of classes, not of little groups, deter-mined those relations. 
 The Cadets at that time groupedtogether all sorts of elements in bourgeois, so-called educatedsociety, beginning with the landlord who was not so keenon a constitution as he was on getting a slice of cake forhimself, and ending with the working, salaried intellectuals. 
 The Cadets were preparing to act as mediators between the “historic authorities”, i. 
e. 
, the tsarist autocracy, and thestruggling masses of the working class and the peasantry. 
The deputation to the tsar in the summer of 1905 was thebeginning of this toadyism—for the Russian liberalsunderstand no other form of mediation than toadyism. 
 And since then there has literally not been a single, at all important, stage of the Russian revolution when the bour-geois liberals did not “mediate” by the same method oftoadying to the autocracy and to the servants of the Black-Hundred landlord clique. 
 In August 1905 they opposed therevolutionary tactics of boycotting the Bulygin Duma. 
 In October 1905 they formed the openly counter-revolution-ary party of the Octobrists, while at the same time send-ing Pyotr Struve into Witte’s ante-room and preachingmoderation and accurate behaviour. 
 In November 1905 theycondemned the post and telegraph workers’ strike andvoiced their condolences at the “horrors” of the soldiers’ revolts. 
 In December 1905 they fearfully stuck close to Dubasov, 39 in order next day to hit out against (perhaps one ought to say, to take a kick at) “the madness”. 
 At thebeginning of 1906 they hotly defended themselves againstthe “shameful” suspicion that they were capable of campaign-ing abroad against the 1,000-million ruble loan to strength-en the autocracy. 
 In the First Duma the liberals mouthed phrases about the people’s freedom, while on the sly theyran to Trepov’s backdoor and fought the Trudoviks andthe workers’ deputies. 
 By the Vyborg Manifesto 40 they sought to kill two birds with one stone, manoeuvring insuch a way that their behaviour could be interpreted, as the occasion required, either in the spirit of support of the revolution or in the spirit of fighting the revolution. 
Needless to speak of the Second and Third Dumas, where the liberalism of the Cadets stood revealed in its true Octob-rist colours. 
 During these three years the Cadets have done their job so thoroughly that attempts at a new revival are linkedfrom the very outset with the slogan “more left than theCadets”! The Cadets of the first generation have made themselves impossible . 
 They have buried themselves by their continuous betrayal of the people’s freedom. 
 But are not the Cadets of the second generation, who are replacing those of the first, infected with the same poisonof putrefaction? Are not the “Social-Cadets”, the PopularSocialist gentry, who are making a particular fuss aroundthe new organisation, intending to repeat the old evolu-tion of which we have had three years’ experience? One has to answer this question not with guesses about the future but by analysis of the past. 
 And this analysisirrefutably shows that the “Socialist-Revolutionary Men-sheviks”, the Popular Socialist gentry, really did play thepart of Cadets in that Trudovik, peasant political organisa-tion—or to be more accurate, political movement—in which they were functioning in their “heydays”, for example in the period of the First Duma. 
 Rememberthe main facts in the history of the “party” (group?) ofPopular Socialists in the Russian revolution. 
 They receivedtheir baptism in the Osvobozhdeniye League. 
 41 A t the congress of the S. 
R. 
 party in December 1905 they, wavering eternally between the Cadets and the S. 
R. 
s, took a stupid middle-of-the-road stand, wishing to be bothtogether with and separate from the Socialist-Revolution-aries. 
 During the period of liberties in October they rantheir political newspapers in a bloc with the S. 
R. 
s. 
 Andthe same in the period of the First Duma—“high” diplo-macy, “skilful” concealment of differences from the eyes of the world ! After the dissolution of the First Duma,after the failure of the second wave of insurrections, afterthe suppression of the Sveaborg rising, 42 these gentlemen take their decision —to turn to the right. 
 They “legalise” their party, for no other purpose, naturally, than to denounce the idea of insurrection quite legally in the press, and to prove the untimeliness of active republican propaganda. 
In face of the peasant deputies in the First Duma they win a victory over the Socialist-Revolutionaries, collecting 104 signatures to their Land Bill43 as against the 33 for the S. 
R. 
 Bill. 
44 The “sober” bourgeois aspirations of the peasant small proprietor for nationalisation of the land get theupper hand over the vagueness of “socialisation”. 
 Insteadof striving for the political and revolutionary organisationof the peasants, organisation for insurrection, we see theSocial-Cadets striving to play at legality and parliamentar-ism, striving towards the parochialism of the intellectual-ist circles. 
 The wavering of the Russian peasant between theCadet and the intellectualist Popular Socialist opportuniston the one hand, and the intellectually unsteadfast revolu-tionary S. 
R. 
 on the other, reflects the dual position of thepetty tiller of the soil, his incapacity for conducting a con-sistent class struggle without guidance by the proletariat. 
 And if today the Popular Socialist gentlemen are once again beginning their “affair” without the Left Cadets, draggingin their wake the slow-witted Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s, thismeans that the whole lot of them have learned nothingduring the three years of the revolution. 
 They say that economic demands lead to disunity. 
 They want to unite on the basis of more immediate demands—political demands. 
They have understood absolutely nothing in the courseof the revolution, which in Russia, as in other countries,has demonstrated that only the mass struggle is strong, andthat such a struggle can develop only in the name of serious economic changes. 
 That the Mensheviks and the S. 
R. 
s keep trailing after the Left Cadets is no news. 
 This happened at the electionsto the Second Duma in St. 
 Petersburg. 
 This happened onthe question of a Cadet Ministry and a Duma with fullpowers, with some of them, and on the question of a secret bloc with the Popular Socialists with others. 
 There are evidently profound reasons which rouse among the petty-bourgeois intellectuals “a passion akin to sickness”, a passionfor coming under the wing of the liberal bourgeoisie. 
 They cover up this passion, of course, in the usual way— with speeches about making use of the revival, or new grouping of forces, and so forth. 
 To be sure, gentlemen, we also stand for making use ... of a corpse—only not for its “revival”, but to fertilise the soil with it; not to encourage rotten theories and philis-tine moods, but that it may play the part of “devil’s advo-cate”. 
 We shall use this new, good, excellent example of the Popular Socialists and the Left Cadets to teach thepeople, to teach them what not to do, and how to avoidCadet treachery and petty-bourgeois flabbiness. 
 We shallclosely follow the growth and development of this newlittle freak (if it is not still-born), hourly reminding people that every such foetus, if not still-born , inevitably and unavoidably signifies in present-day Russia the heraldingof the mass struggle of the working class and the peasantry. 
The Osvobozhdeniye League is being reborn. 
 If that is so, it means that the people at the top are beginning to anticipatesomething: and if that is so, it means that after the begin-ning will come the continuation, after the fussing of the intellectuals will come the proletarian struggle. 
 And it is the lessons of struggle, the lessons of revolution-ary alignment only in struggle and only with the peasantmasses fighting for revolution, that we shall teach thepeople, in connection with the appearance on the stage of the Cadets of the second generation. 
 Proletary , No. 
 30, Published according May 10 (21), 1908 to the text in Proletary THE AGRARIAN QUESTION IN RUSSIA TOWARDS THE CLOSE OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY45 First published in 1918 as Published according a separate pamphlet to the pamphlet text by the Zhizn i Znaniye Publishers THE AGRARIAN QUESTION IN RUSSIA TOWARDS THE CLOSE OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY45 First published in 1918 as Published according a separate pamphlet to the pamphlet text by the Zhizn i Znaniye Publishers The object of this article is to give a brief outline of the sum total of the social and economic relations in Russian agriculture. 
 A work of this kind cannot bear the character of a special research. 
 It must sum up the results of Marxistresearch, it must indicate the place of every more or lessimportant feature of our agricultural economy in the gener-al scheme of the Russian national economy, it must tracethe general line of development of agrarian relations in Russia and ascertain the class forces which determine that development, one way or another. 
 Therefore we shallexamine from this point of view the system of landown-ership in Russia, then the landlord and peasant systemsof farming, and lastly draw general conclusions as to whatour evolution during the nineteenth century has led to, and what tasks it has bequeathed to the twentieth century. 
 I We are able to outline the system of landownership in European Russia towards the close of the nineteenth cen-tury according to the returns of the latest land statistics of 1905 (published by the Central Statistical Committee,St. 
 Petersburg, 1907 46). 
 The total area of registered land in European Russia according to this investigation was 395. 
2 million dessia-tines. 
 * This area was divided into three main groups as fol-lows: *Dessiatine =2. 
7 acres. 
— Tr. 
 Mill. 
 dess. 
 1st group: Privately-owned land ....... 
. 
 101. 
7 2nd group: Allotment land .......... 
 138. 
8 3rd group: State lands, etc. 
 ......... 154. 
7 Total in European Russia ....... 
. 
 395. 
2 It should be said that our statistics include among state lands more than one hundred million dessiatines in the Far North, in the Archangel, Olonets and Vologda guber-nias. 
 * A great part of the state lands must be excluded, once we are dealing with the real area of agricultural lands in European Russia. 
 In my work on the agrarian programme of the Social-Democrats in the Russian revolution (written at the end of 1907, but delayed in publication through cir-cumstances beyond the control of the author), I estimate the actual area of agricultural lands in European Russia at approximately 280 million dessiatines. 
 ** This figure includes not 150 million but 39. 
5 million dessiatines of state land. 
 Hence, less than one-seventh of the total land area in European Russia is not in the possession of the land-lords and the peasants. 
 Six-sevenths are in the hands of the two antagonistic classes. 
 Let us examine the way the land is owned by these classes, which differ from each other also as social-estates, since the greater part of the privately-owned lands belongs to the nobility, while the allotment lands are held by the peasants. 
 Out of 101. 
7 million dessiatines of privately-owned land, 15. 
8 million dessiatines belong to societies and associations, while the remaining 85. 
9 million dessiatines belong to pri-vate individuals. 
 The following table shows the distribu-*Gubernia , uyezd , volost —Russian administrative-territorial units. 
 The largest of these was the gubernia, which had its subdi-visions in uyezds, which in turn were subdivided into volosts. 
 This system of districting continued under the Soviet power until the introduction of the new system of administrative-territorial divi sion of the country in 1929-30. 
— Ed. 
 **See present edition, Vol. 
 13, p. 
 221. 
— Ed. 
 tion of the latter category of land according to social-estates in 1905, and the parallel figures for 1877: 1905 1877Incr. 
 or decr. 
 in 1905 Mill. 
 Mill. 
 Mill. 
How Social-estate of ownersdess. 
%dess. 
%dess. 
many-fold Nobility ....... 
. 
 53. 
2 61. 
9 73. 
1 79. 
9 —19. 
9 —1. 
40 Clergy ......... 0. 
3 0. 
4 0. 
2 0. 
2 $0. 
1 $1. 
74 Merchants and notable citizens ....... 
 12. 
9 15. 
0 9. 
8 10. 
7 $3. 
1 $1. 
30 Urban petty bourgeois . 
3. 
8 4. 
4 1. 
9 2. 
1 $1. 
9 $1. 
85 Peasants ....... 
. 
 3. 
2 15. 
4 5. 
8 6. 
3 $7. 
4 $2. 
21 Other social-estates ... 2. 
2 2. 
5 0. 
3 0. 
3 $1. 
9 $8. 
07 Foreign subjects .... 
 0. 
3 0. 
4 0. 
4 0. 
5 —0. 
1 —1. 
52 Total belonging to private owners ....... 
. 
 85. 
9 100. 
0 91. 
5 100. 
0 —5. 
6 —1. 
09 Thus the principal private owners of land in Russia are the nobility. 
 They own an enormous amount of land. 
 But the trend of development is towards a decline in landowner-ship by the nobility. 
 Landownership by people irrespective of the social-estate they belong to is increasing, and increas-ing very rapidly. 
 The speediest increase in the period between 1877 and 1905 was in landownership by “other social-estates” (eightfold in the 28 years), and then by peasants (more than twofold). 
 The peasants are consequently increasingly crystallising out social elements which are turning into private owners of land. 
 This is a general fact. 
 And in our analysis of peasant farming we shall have to ascertain the social and economic mechanism which is carrying out this crystallisation. 
 For the time being, we must definitely establish the fact that private ownership of land in Russia is developing away from social-estate to non-social-estate ownership. 
 At the end of the nineteenth century, feudal landownership of the nobility still embraced the overwhelming majority of all privately-owned lands, but the trend of development is obviously towards the creation of bourgeois private landownership. 
 Private owner-ship of land acquired by inheritance from the olden-time armed retainers, manorial landowners, and tenants by service, etc. 
, is on the decline. 
 Private ownership of land acquired purely and simply with money is on the increase. 
The power of land is declining, the power of money is grow-ing. 
 Land is being drawn more and more into the stream of commerce; and later on we shall see that this process isgoing on to a far greater extent than the mere statistics of landownership indicate. 
 But to what extent the “power of the land”, that is to say, the power of medieval landlordism, was still strong in Russia at the end of the nineteenth century is strikingly shown by the figures of the distribution of privately-ownedland according to size of properties. 
 The source from which we quote the figures specifies in particular detail the data concerning private landownership on the biggest scale. 
The following is the distribution according to size of prop-erties: Groups of properties Number of Total area of Average dess. 
 properties land (dess. 
) per property 10 dess. 
 and less .... 
. 
 409,864 1,625,226 3. 
9 10 to 50 dess . 
 .... 
 209,119 4,891,031 23. 
4 50 to 500 ”.... 
. 
 106,065 17,326,495 163. 
3 500 to 2,000 ”.... 
. 
 21,748 20,590,708 947. 
0 2,000 to 10,000 ”.... 
. 
 5,386 20,602,109 3,825. 
0 Over 10,000 ”.... 
. 
 699 20,798,504 29,754. 
0 Total over 500 dess ...... 27,833 61,991,321 2,227. 
0 Grand total for European Russia 752,881 85,834,073 114. 
0 These figures show that small properties represent an insignificant share of the land owned by private individ-uals. 
 Six-sevenths of all landowners—619,000 out of 753,000—possess 6. 
5 million dessiatines of land in all. 
 Onthe other hand enormous latifundia exist: seven hundred owners possess, on the average , 30,000 dessiatines of land each. 
 These seven hundred people possess three times asmuch land as do 600,000 small owners. 
 And in general the latifundia represent a distinguishing feature of Russian private landownership. 
 If we take all properties over 500 dessiatines, we get 28,000 owners, possessing 62 milliondessiatines, or an average of 2,227 dessiatines each. 
 These 28,000 possess three-fourths of all the privately-owned land. 
 * Taken from the angle of the social-estates to which their owners belong, these enormous latifundia are mainly the property of the nobility. 
 Of 27,833 properties, 18,102, i. 
e. 
, almost two-thirds, belong to members of the nobility, whopossess 44. 
5 million dessiatines of land, i. 
e. 
, more than 70 per cent of the total latifundia land. 
 Thus it is clear that in Russia, at the end of the nineteenth century, anenormous amount of land—and the best land at that— was concentrated as before (in the medieval way) in the hands of that privileged social-estate, the nobility, in thehands of the serf-owning landlords of yesterday. 
 Below we shall describe in detail the forms of economy that are taking shape on these latifundia. 
 For the moment weshall merely allude briefly to the well-known fact, strikingly described by Mr. 
 Rubakin, that high-ranking members of the bureaucracy figure, one after another,among these owners of latifundia held by the nobility. 
 47 Let us now pass to allotment holdings. 
 Except for 1. 
9 million dessiatines, not allocated according to size of hold-ing, all the rest of the land, totalling 136. 
9 million des-siatines, belongs to 12 $ million peasant households. 
 On the average this is 11. 
1 dessiatines per household. 
 But allotment land too is distributed unevenly: almost half, i. 
e. 
, 64 million out of 137 million dessiatines, belongs to2. 
1 million households rich in land, i. 
e. 
, to one-sixth o f the total number. 
 Here are the returns showing the distribution of allotment land in European Russia: *In order not to overburden the text with quotations, let us state now that most of our data are taken from the above-mentionedwork and from The Development of Capitalism in Russia , 2nd ed. 
, St. 
 Petersburg, 1908. 
 (See present edition, Vol. 
 3,pp. 
 21-607. 
— Ed. 
) Average des-Groups of households Number of Total dess. 
 siatines per households household Up to 5 dess ....... 
. 
 2,857,650 9,030,333 3. 
1 5 to 8 dess ....... 
. 
 3,317,601 21,706,550 6. 
5 Total up to 8 dess .... 
. 
 6,175,251 30,736,883 4. 
9 8 to 15 dess ....... 
. 
 3,932,485 42,182,923 10. 
7 15 to 30 dess ....... 
. 
 1,551,904 31,271,922 20. 
1 Over 30 dess ....... 
. 
 617,715 32,695,510 52. 
9 Total for European Russia 12,277,355 136,887,238 11. 
1 Thus more than half of the allotment households, 6. 
2 million out of 12. 
3, have up to 8 dessiatines per household. 
 Taken on the average for Russia as a whole, this amount of land is absolutely insufficient to maintain a family. 
 Inorder to judge the economic condition of these households,let us recall the general returns of the army-horse censuses(the only statistics which periodically and regularly coverthe whole of Russia). 
 In 48 gubernias of European Russia, i. 
e. 
, excluding the Don Region and Archangel Gubernia, a count taken in the years 1896-1900 showed a total of11,112,287 peasant households. 
 Of these, 3,242,462, i. 
e. 
,29. 
2 per cent, had no horses, and 3,361,778, or 30. 
3 percent, had one horse each. 
 We know what a horseless peasantin Russia is (of course we are dealing here with gross figures and not with exceptional districts specialising in suburban dairy farming or tobacco-growing, etc. 
). 
 We also know ofthe poverty and want suffered by the peasant who owns onehorse. 
 Six million households stand for a population of from24 to 30 million. 
 And this whole mass consists of paupers,who have been allotted paltry strips of land which can provide no livelihood, and on which one can only die of starvation. 
 If we assume that in order to make ends meet ona more or less solvent farm not less than 15 dessiatines arerequired, then we get 10 million peasant households belowthat standard, possessing 72. 
9 million dessiatines of land. 
 To proceed. 
 In regard to allotment holdings, a very impor-tant feature must be noted. 
 The unevenness in the distri-bution of allotment land among the peasants is immeas-urably less than that in the distribution of privately-owned land. 
 On the other hand, among the allotment-holding peas-ants there is a host of other distinctions, classifications and divisions. 
 These are the distinctions between the vari-ous categories of peasants that have arisen historically, inthe course of many centuries. 
 In order to give a graphicillustration of these divisions, let us first take the totalreturns for the whole of European Russia. 
 The statisticsfor 1905 give the following main categories: peasants who formerly were landlords’ serfs—on the average, 6. 
7 dessia-tines of allotment land per household; peasants who form-erly were state serfs—12. 
5 dessiatines; peasants whoformerly were crown-land serfs—9. 
5 dessiatines; col-onists—20. 
2 dessiatines; Chinsh peasants—3. 
1 dessiatines;Rezeshi—5. 
3 dessiatines; Bashkirs and Teptyars 48—28. 
3 dessiatines; Baltic peasants—36. 
9 dessiatines; Cossacks— 52. 
7 dessiatines. 
 From this alone it is clear that peasantallotment landownership is purely medieval. 
 Serfdom stilllives on in this multiplicity of divisions which have survivedamong the peasants. 
 The various categories differ fromeach other, not only in the amount of land they possess, but also in the size of redemption payments, terms of pur-chase, character of landownership, etc. 
 Instead of takingall-round figures for the whole of Russia, let us take thefigures for a single gubernia, and we shall see what all thesedivisions mean. 
 Take the Zemstvo Statistical Returnsfor Saratov Gubernia. 
 49 Apart from the categories for Russia as a whole, i. 
e. 
, those already enumerated above, we find that local investigators distinguish the followingadditional categories: gift-land peasants; full owners; statepeasants with communal holdings; state peasants withquarter holding; state peasants who formerly were land-lords’ serfs; state-land tenants; colonist freeholders; set-tlers; manumitted peasants; peasants who do not pay quit-rent; free tillers; former factory-bound peasants, etc. 
 50 This system of medieval divisions is carried so far thatsometimes peasants living in one and the same village aredivided into two quite distinct categories, like peasants“formerly owned by Mr. 
 N. 
 N. 
” and “formerly owned by Madame M. 
 M. 
”. 
 This fact is usually ignored by our writers of the liberal-Narodnik camp, who are incapable of seeingRussian economic relations in development, as the replace-ment of the feudal order by the bourgeois order. 
 As a matter of fact, unless the full significance of this is appre-ciated, one cannot begin to understand the history of Russia in the nineteenth century, and particularly the direct resultsof that history, the events in Russia at the beginning ofthe twentieth century. 
 A country in which exchange isgrowing and capitalism is developing cannot but undergocrises of all kinds if in the principal branch of the national economy medieval relations constitute an obstacle and hindrance at every step. 
 The notorious village commune 51— the significance of which we shall have to discuss later—does not save the peasant from turning into a proletarian,yet in practice acts as a medieval barrier dividing thepeasants, who are, as it were, chained to small associations and to categories which have lost all “reason for existence”. 
 Before proceeding to draw our final conclusions about the ownership of land in European Russia, we must refer toyet another aspect of the question. 
 Neither the figures ofthe amount of land belonging to the “upper 30,000” land-lords and to the millions of peasant households, nor the data concerning the medieval divisions in peasant landown-ership are sufficient to enable us to estimate the actualdegree to which our peasant is “hemmed in”, oppressed andcrushed by these living survivals of serfdom. 
 In the firstplace, the lands allotted to the peasants after that expro-priation of the peasants for the landlords’ benefit which is called the Great Reform of 1861, 52 are of incomparably inferior quality to the land in the possession of the land-lords. 
 This is borne out by all the vast literature describ-ing and investigating local conditions issued by the Zemstvostatisticians. 
 It is supported by a mass of irrefutable evi-dence showing the lower yield on peasant land as compared with that on the landlords’ land; it is generally admitted that this difference is due primarily to the inferior qualityof the allotment lands, and only secondarily to inferiorcultivation and the deficiencies of beggarly peasant farming. 
Moreover, in a host of cases when the peasants were “freed”from the land by the landlords in 1861, the land was allocat-ed in such a way that the peasants found themselves en-snared by “their” landlords. 
 Russian Zemstvo statistical literature has enriched the science of political economy with descriptions of the remarkably original, truly native method, hardly to be found anywhere else in the world, of conducting landlord economy. 
 This is the method of farming by means of cut-off lands . 
 The peasants were “freed” in 1861 from the watering-places for cattle, from pastures,etc. 
, necessary for their farms. 
 The peasants’ lands werewedged in between those of the landlords in such a way asto provide these gentry with an exceedingly reliable—and exceedingly noble—source of revenue in the shape of fines for damages caused by stray cattle, etc. 
 “There’sno room to turn a chicken out”—this bitter peasant truth,this grim “humour of the gallows-bird” describes better thanany long quotations that peculiar feature of peasant land-ownership which is beyond the power of statistics to express. 
 Needless to say, this peculiar feature is serfdom pure and simple, both in its origin and in the effect it has upon themethod of organisation of landlord economy. 
 We will now draw our conclusions regarding landowner-ship in European Russia. 
 We have shown the conditions oflandlord and peasant landownership taken separately. 
 We must now examine them in their interrelation. 
 In order to do so let us take the approximate figure, quoted above,of the size of the land area in European Russia—280 milliondessiatines—and see how all this land is distributed amongthe various types of holdings. 
 We shall describe the varioustypes in detail later on; for the moment, running some-what ahead, we will take tentatively the main types. 
 Hold-ings up to 15 dessiatines per household we shall place inthe first group—ruined peasants, crushed by feudal exploita-tion. 
 The second group will consist of the middle peas-antry—holdings ranging from 15 to 20 dessiatines. 
 Thethird group—well-to-do peasants (peasant bourgeoisie) and capitalist landowners—holdings ranging from 20 to 500 dessiatines. 
 The fourth group consists of feudal latifun-dia, exceeding 500 dessiatines. 
 By combining in these groupsthe peasant and landlord holdings, and by rounding offthe figures somewhat, * and making approximate calcula-*For example, among the latifundia are included, besides the 62 million dessiatines of landlords’ land, 5. 
1 million dessiatines of demesne lands and 3. 
6 million dessiatines of land belonging to 272 tradingand industrial companies, each owning more than 1,000 dessiatines. 
 tions (which I have indicated in detail in the work mentioned above), we get the following picture of Russian landown-ership towards the close of the nineteenth century: Landownership in European Russia Towards the Close of the Nineteenth Century Number Total area Average Group of in dess. 
 per holdings dessiatines holding (millions) (a) Ruined peasantry, crushed by feudal exploitation . 
. 
 10. 
5 75. 
0 7. 
0 (b) Middle peasantry .... 
 1. 
0 15. 
0 15. 
0 (c) Peasant bourgeoisie and capitalist landownership . 
 1. 
5 70. 
0 46. 
7 (d) Feudal latifundia .... 
 0. 
03 70. 
0 2,333. 
0 Total ....... 
. 
 13. 
03 230. 
0 17. 
6 Not classified according to size of property ....... 
 — 50. 
0 — Grand total ...... 13. 
03 280. 
0 21. 
4 We repeat: the correctness of the economic description of the groups taken will be proved later on. 
 And if partic-ular details of this picture (which cannot but be approxi-mate) give rise to criticism, we shall ask the reader to takegood care that this criticism of details is not used as a screen for denying the substance of the matter. 
 And the substance of the matter is that at one pole of Russian land-ownership we have 10. 
5 million households (about 50 mil-lion of the population) with 75 million dessiatines of land,and at the other pole thirty thousand families (about 150,000 of the population) with 70 million dessiatines of land. 
 To finish with the question of landownership we must now go beyond the confines of European Russia proper andexamine, in general outline, the significance of colonisation. 
In order to give the reader some idea of the total land areain the Russian Empire (excluding Finland) let us refer tothe figures compiled by Mr. 
 Mertvago. 
 For the sake of clarity we give the figures in tabulated form, adding the figures of the population according to the census of 1897. 
 Total land area Including Including Population in 1897ArableMead-For-Total ows ests Million Dessiatins 10 gubernias in King-dom of Poland...111. 
6 11. 
6 — 11. 
6 7. 
4 0. 
9 2. 
5 10. 
8 9,402. 
2 84. 
3 38 gubernias west of theVolga....... 
. 
1,755. 
6 183. 
0 — 183. 
0 93. 
6 18. 
7 34. 
0 146. 
3 — — 12 gubernias north andeast of the Volga. 
. 
2,474. 
9 258. 
0 — 258. 
0 22. 
3 7. 
1 132. 
0 161. 
4 — — Total for 50 guberniasof European Russia. 
4,230. 
5 441. 
0 — 441. 
0 115. 
9 25. 
8 166. 
0 307. 
7 93,442. 
9 22. 
1 Caucasus....... 
411. 
7 42. 
9 22. 
1 20. 
8 6. 
5 2. 
2 2. 
5 11. 
2 9,289. 
4 22. 
6 Siberia....... 
. 
10,966. 
1 1,142. 
6 639. 
7 502. 
9 4. 
3 3. 
9 121. 
0 129. 
2 5,758. 
8 0. 
5 Central Asia.... 
. 
3,141. 
6 327. 
3 157. 
4 169. 
9 0. 
9 1. 
6 8. 
0 10. 
5 7,746. 
7 2. 
5 Total for Asiatic Russia 14,519. 
4 1,512. 
8 819. 
2 693. 
6 11. 
7 7. 
7 131. 
5 150. 
9 — — Total for Russian Em-pire....... 
. 
18,861. 
5 1,965. 
4 819. 
21,146. 
2 135. 
034. 
4 300. 
0 469. 
4 125,640. 
0 6. 
7Square versts (thousands) Dessiatines (millions) Lands of which no data are avail-able (mill. 
 dess. 
) Lands registered (mill. 
 dess. 
) Total (thou-sands) These figures clearly show how little we know as yet about the outlying regions of Russia. 
 Of course it would be the height of absurdity to think of “solving” the agrarian question in Russia proper by migration to outlying regions. 
There is not the slightest doubt that only charlatans couldpropose such a “solution”, that those contradictions betweenthe old latifundia in European Russia and the new condi-tions of life and economy in that same European Russia to which we referred above, will have to be “solved” by a rad-ical change of one kind or another within European Russia , and not outside it. 
 The point is not that of delivering thepeasants from the survivals of feudalism by means of migra-tion. 
 The fact is that, side by side with the agrarian questionof the centre of Russia, we have the agrarian question of colonisation. 
 The point is not that of covering up the crisis in European Russia with the question of colonisation,but of showing the disastrous effects of the feudal latifundiaboth in the centre and in the outlying districts. 
 Russian colonisation is being hindered by the remnants of serfdom in the centre of Russia. 
 Except by an agrarian revolution in European Russia, except by liberating the peasants from the oppression of the feudal latifundia there can be no clear-ing the way for, and regulation of, Russian colonisation. 
This regulation must consist not of bureaucratic “concern”for migration nor of the “organisation of migration”, aboutwhich the writers in the liberal-Narodnik camp like to talk, but of eliminating the conditions which condemn the Rus-sian peasant to ignorance, squalor, and backwardness in astate of permanent bondage to the owners of latifundia. 
 In his pamphlet ( How Much Land There Is in Russia and How We Use It , Moscow, 1907), written in conjunction with Mr. 
 Prokopovich, Mr. 
 Mertvago justly points out that the advance of agriculture turns bad land into good land. 
 Academicians Baer and Helmersen, experts on the subjectwrote in 1845 that the Taurida Steppe “owing to the climate,and the scarcity of water will always be one of the poorest and least suitable regions for cultivation!” 53 At that time the population of Taurida Gubernia produced 1. 
8 million chet-verts * of grain. 
 Sixty years later the population had doubled, *Chetverts =5. 
77 bushels. 
— Ed. 
 and produces 17. 
6 million chetverts, i. 
e. 
, almost ten times as much. 
 That is a true and important observation, but Mr. 
 Mertvago forgot one thing: the principal factor making for the rapidcolonisation of Novorossia was the fall of serfdom in the centre of Russia. 
 Only the upheaval in the centre made it possibleto settle and industrialise the South rapidly, extensively, inthe American way (a very great deal has been said about the American growth of southern Russia after 1861). 
 And now, too, only a radical change in European Russia, onlythe complete elimination of the remnants of serfdom there,the deliverance of the peasantry from the grip of the medi-eval latifundia, can really open a new era of colonisation. 
 The colonisation question in Russia is a subordinate one in relation to the agrarian question in the centre of the country. 
 The end of the nineteenth century confronts us withthe alternative: either the survivals of serfdom are decisive-ly abolished in the “primordial” gubernias of Russia, inwhich case rapid, extensive, American-style development inthe colonisation of our outlying regions is assured; or the agrarian question in the centre drags on, in which case development of the productive forces will necessarily be longdelayed, and feudal traditions will be preserved in colonisa-tion as well. 
 In the first case, agriculture will be carried onby a free farmer; in the second case by a debt-bound muzhikand by a gentleman “carrying on” by means of “cut-off” lands. 
 II Let us now examine the organisation of the landlord economy. 
 It is generally known that the main feature of thisorganisation is the combination of the capitalist system (“free hire”) and labour-service economy. 
 What is this labour-service system? To answer this question we must glance back to the organ-isation of landlord economy under serfdom. 
 Everyoneknows what serfdom was legally, administratively and domes-tically. 
 But seldom do people ask themselves, what essential-ly were the economic relations between the landlords and the peasants under serfdom? At that time the landlords allottedland to the peasants. 
 Sometimes they loaned the peasants other means of production too, for example, wood lots, cattle, etc. 
 What did this allotment of the landlords’ land to the serf peasants mean? The allotment at that time was a form of wages , to employ a term applicable to present-day relation-ships. 
 In capitalist production, wages are paid to the workersin money. 
 The profit of the capitalist is realised in the formof money. 
 Necessary labour and surplus-labour (i. 
e. 
, thelabour that pays for the maintenance of the worker and the labour that yields unpaid surplus-value to the capitalist) are combined in the single process of labour in the factory,in a single working day at the factory, etc. 
 The situation isdifferent in the corvée economy. 
 Here, too, there is necessarylabour and surplus-labour, just as there is in the system ofslavery. 
 But these two kinds of labour are separated in time and space. 
 The serf peasant works three days for his lord and three days for himself. 
 He works for his lord on the latter’sland or on the production of grain for him. 
 For himself heworks on allotted land, producing for himself and for hisfamily the grain that is necessary for maintaining labour-power for the landlord. 
 Consequently, the feudal or corvée system of economy is similar to the capitalist system in that under both systemsthe one who works receives only the product of necessarylabour, and turns over the product of surplus-labour gratisto the owner of the means of production. 
 Serfdom, however,differs from the capitalist system in the three following respects. 
 First, serf economy is natural economy, whereas capitalist economy is money economy. 
 Secondly, in serfeconomy the instrument of exploitation is the tying of the worker to the land, the allotting of land to him, whereasunder the capitalist economy it is the releasing of the workerfrom the land. 
 In order to obtain an income (i. 
e. 
, surplus-product), the serf-owning landlord must have on his land a peasant who possesses an allotment, implements and live-stock. 
 A landless, horseless, non-farming peasant is uselessas an object of feudal exploitation. 
 In order to obtain anincome (profit), the capitalist must have before him pre-cisely a worker without land and without a farm, one who is compelled to sell his labour-power on a free labour-market. 
 Thirdly, the allotment-holding peasant must be personally dependent upon the landlord, because he will not, possessing land, work for the landlord except under coercion . 
 This sys-tem of economy gives rise to “non-economic coercion”, to serfdom, juridical dependence, lack of full rights, etc. 
 On the other hand, “ideal” capitalism implies the fullest freedomof contract on a free market—between the property-ownerand the proletarian. 
 Only if we are clear in our minds as to this economic substance of serf economy, or what is the same thing, corvée economy, can we understand the historical place-and sig-nificance of labour service. 
 Labour service is the direct andimmediate survival of the corvée. 
 Labour service is thetransition from the corvée to capitalism. 
 The substance oflabour service is this: the landlord’s land is cultivated bythe peasants with their own implements in return for pay partly in cash and partly in kind (for land, for cut-off land, for use of pastures, for loans granted in the winter, etc. 
). 
The form of economy known as the métayer system is a va-riety of labour service. 
 The landlord economy based on labourservice requires a peasant who has an allotment, as well as implements and livestock if only of the poorest kind; it requires also that the peasant be weighed down by want and place himself in bondage. 
 Bondage instead of free hire isthe necessary concomitant of labour-service economy. 
 Herethe landlord acts not as a capitalist entrepreneur who ownsmoney and the sum total of the instruments of labour, but—in a system of labour-service economy—as a usurer, taking advantage of the poverty of his peasant neighbour to acquire his labour for next to nothing. 
 To illustrate this point more clearly, let us take the data of the Department of Agriculture—a source above allsuspicion of being unfriendly towards the landowning gentle-men. 
 The well-known publication, Freely Hired Labour on Farms , etc. 
 (Issue V, “Agric. 
 and Stat. 
 Inf. 
 Obtd. 
 from Agricultural Employers ”, St. 
 Petersburg, 1892), 54 gives information concerning the Central Black-Earth Belt overeight years (1883-91). 
 The average payment for thecomplete cultivation of a dessiatine of winter grain by apeasant using his own implements should be reckoned as 6 rubles. 
 If we calculate the cost of the same amount of work performed by freely hired labour—says the same pub-lication—we get 6 rubles 19 kopeks for the work of the man alone, not counting the work of the horse, which cannot be put at less than 4 rubles 50 kopeks (ibid. 
, p. 
 45, quot-ed in The Development of Capitalism in Russia , p. 
 141 *). 
 Consequently, the price of freely hired labour amounts to10 rubles 69 kopeks, while under labour service it is 6 rubles. 
How is this phenomenon to be accounted for, if it is not some-thing accidental or exceptional, but normal and usual? Wordslike “bondage”, “usury”, “extortion”, etc. 
, describe the form and nature of the transaction, but do not explain its economic substance. 
 How is a peasant able over a number of yearsto perform work that is worth 10 rubles 69 kopeks for 6rubles? He is able to do it because his allotment covers part of the expenditure of his family and makes it possible for his wage to be forced down below the “free-hire” level. 
 The peasant is compelled to do so precisely because his wretched allotment ties him down to his landlord neighbour, for itdoes not enable him to live off his own farm. 
 Of course, thisphenomenon can be “normal” only as one of the links of theprocess by which the corvée system is eliminated by capi-talism. 
 For the peasant is inevitably ruined by these condi-tions, and is slowly but surely being transformed into a proletarian. 
 The following are similar, but slightly more complete data concerning Saratov Uyezd. 
 The average price for tillingone dessiatine of land, and for reaping, carting and threshingthe grain, is 9 rubles 60 kopeks if contracted in the winter, 80 to 100 per cent of the wage being paid in advance. 
 The price is 9 rubles 40 kopeks when the job is done as labourservice for the lease of land. 
 In the case of freely hired labourit is 17 rubles 50 kopeks! Reaping and carting done as labourservice is valued at 3 rubles 80 kopek’s per dessiatine, and inthe case of freely hired labour at 8 rubles 50 kopeks, etc. 
 Each of these figures tells its long story of the peasant’s endless poverty, bondage and ruin. 
 Each of these figuresshows to what extent feudal exploitation and the survivalsof the corvée persist in Russia at the end of the nineteenth century. 
 It is very difficult to calculate to what extent the labour-service system is prevalent. 
 Usually, on the landed estates the *See present edition, Vol. 
 3, p. 
 202. 
— Ed. 
 labour-service system is combined with the capitalist system, and both are applied to various operations in agriculture. 
 An inconsiderable part of the land is tilled by hired labour-ers using the landlords’ implements. 
 The greater part ofthe land is rented to peasants on a métayer and labour-service basis. 
 The following are a few illustrations taken fromthe detailed work by Mr. 
 Kaufman, who has compiled someof the latest data on privately-owned estates. 
 * Tula Gubernia (the data refer to 1897-98): “the landlords have retained the old three-field system ... the outlying land is taken bythe peasants”; the cultivation of the landlords’ land isextremely unsatisfactory. 
 Kursk Gubernia: “the distribu-tion of land to the peasants in dessiatines, which was profit-able owing to the high prices prevailing ... has led to the exhaustion of the soil. 
” Voronezh Gubernia: ...the medium and small proprietors “largely run their economies exclusive-ly with the aid of peasants’ implements, or lease themout ... on most estates the methods practised are distinguishedfor the complete absence of any improvements”. 
 Statements like these show that the general description of the various gubernias of European Russia given by Mr. 
 Annensky in his book The Influence of Harvests , etc. 
, as regards the prevalence of the labour-service or the capitalistsystems can be fully applied to the conditions prevailingat the end of the nineteenth century. 
 We shall quote thisdescription in tabular form: Number of gubernias Black-Non-Total private-Earth Black-ly-owned Belt Earth Total arable (thou-Belt sand dess. 
) I. 
 Gubernias where the cap-italist system prevails . 
 9 10 19 7,407 II. 
 Gubernias where a mixed system prevails .... 
 3 4 7 2,222 III. 
 Gubernias where the labour-service system pre-prevails ....... 
 12 5 17 6,281 Total ....... 
 24 19 43 15,910 *The Agrarian Question . 
 Published by Dolgorukov and Petrun-kevich, Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1907, pp. 
 442-628, “Regarding the Cultural and Economic Significance of Private Landownership ”. 
 Thus labour service definitely prevails in the Black-Earth Belt, but yields place in the total of the 43 gubernias included in the above table. 
 It is important to note that group I (the capitalist system) includes areas which are not representative of the central agricultural regions, viz. 
: the Baltic gubernias, those in the south-west (sugar-beet area) and in the South, and the gubernias of the two capital cities. 
 The influence of the labour-service system on the develop-ment of the productive forces in agriculture is graphically illustrated by the material compiled in Mr. 
 Kaufman’sbook. 
 “There cannot be any doubt,” he writes, “that small peasant renting of land and métayage represent one of the conditions which most of all retard the progress of agri-culture. 
” ... In the reviews of agriculture covering PoltavaGubernia, repeated reference is made to the fact that “thetenants till the land badly, sow it with poor seed and allowit to become overgrown with weeds”. 
 In Mogilyov Gubernia (1898), “any improvement in farm-ing is hindered by the inconveniences of the métayersystem”. 
 The existence of skopshchina 55 is one of the main reasons why “agriculture in Dnieper Uyezd is in such a statethat it is futile to expect any innovations or improvements”. 
“Our data,” writes Mr. 
 Kaufman (p. 
 517), “definitely point to the fact that even within the bounds of one and the same estate, old and obsolete farming methods continue to be em-ployed on land that is rented out, whereas new and improvedmethods have already been introduced on land that iscultivated by the owners. 
” For example, on the land that isrented out, the three-field system is retained, sometimes even without the land being manured; on lands farmed on economic lines, however, crop rotation has been introduced. 
Métayage hinders grass cultivation, the extended use of ferti-lisers, and the employment of the best agricultural imple-ments. 
 The result of all this is strikingly reflected in the yieldfigures. 
 For example, on a large estate in Simbirsk Guber-nia, the rye crop in the part cultivated on economic lines is 90 poods per dessiatine, wheat 60 poods, oats 74 poods; in themétayer lands it is 58, 28 and 50 poods respectively. 
 Here aregeneral figures for a whole uyezd (Gorbatov Uyezd, Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia). 
 Yield of rye in poods per dessiatine Privately-owned lands Soil grades Allotment Economic Métayer Rented land crops I...... 62 74 — 44 II...... 55 63 49 — III...... 51 60 50 42 IV...... 48 69 51 51 All grades .... 
 54* 66 50 45 * Thus, landlords ’ lands cultivated in feudal fashion (on a métayer basis and rented out in small lots) produce small-er yields than allotment lands! This is a fact of tremendous importance, because it irrefutably proves that the main andfundamental cause of Russia’s agricultural backwardness,of the stagnation of the whole of the national economyand the degradation of the tiller of the soil to a degreeunparalleled anywhere else in the world, is the labour-service system , i. 
e. 
, the direct survival of serfdom. 
 No credits, no land reclamation, no “aid” to the peasant,none of the measures of “assistance” beloved of the bureau-crats and liberals, will yield results of any importance so longas there remains the yoke of the feudal latifundia, tradi-tions, and systems of economy. 
 On the other hand, an agrarian revolution which abolishes landlordism and breaks up the old medieval village commune (the nationali-sation of the land, for example, will break it up, not in thepolice and bureaucratic manner), would unfailingly serveas the basis for remarkably rapid and really wide progress. 
The incredibly low yield on métayer and rented lands is due to the system of working “for the squire”. 
 If this same farmer were relieved of the duty of working “for the squire”,yields would increase not only on these lands, but would inev-itably increase on the allotment lands as well, simply becauseof the elimination of the feudal hindrances to farming. 
 As things are at present, there is, of course, some capital-ist progress on the privately-owned economies, but it is exceedingly slow, and inevitably burdens Russia for many *In Mr. 
 Kaufman’s book, p. 
 521, there is obviously a misprint in these two figures. 
 years to come with the political and social domination of the “wild landlord”. 
56 We shall now examine how this progress manifests itself, and try to define some of its general results. 
 The fact that the yield of the “economic” crops, i. 
e. 
, the landed estates cultivated on capitalist lines, is higher than on the peasant lands is an indication of the technical progress of capitalism in agriculture. 
 This progress is due tothe transition from the labour-service to the wage-laboursystem. 
 The ruin of the peasants, the decline in horse owner-ship, the loss of implements, the proletarisation of the tiller, compel landlords to change over to cultivating their land with their own implements. 
 Increased use is beingmade in agriculture of machinery, which raises theproductivity of labour and inevitably leads to the develop-ment of purely capitalist relations of production. 
 Agricul-tural machinery was imported into Russia to the value of 788,000 rubles in 1869-72, 2. 
9 million rubles in 1873-80,4. 
2 million rubles in 1881-88, 3. 
7 million rubles in 1889-96, and 15. 
2 and 20. 
6 million rubles respectively in 1902 and 1903. 
 The output of agricultural machinery inRussia was (approximately, according to rough industrialstatistics) 2. 
3 million rubles in 1876, 9. 
4 million in 1894and 12. 
1 million in 1900-03. 
 It is indisputable that thesefigures indicate progress in agriculture, and precisely capi-talist progress, of course. 
 But it is similarly indisputable that this progress is exceedingly slow compared to what ispossible in a modern capitalist state: for example, in Amer-ica. 
 According to the census of June 1, 1900, the acreage offarms in the United States was 838. 
6 million acres, i. 
e. 
,about 324 million dessiatines. 
 The number of farms was 5. 
7 million, the average acreage per farm being 146. 
2 acres (about 60 dessiatines). 
 Now, the production of agriculturalimplements for these farms amounted to 157. 
7 million dol-lars in 1900 (in 1890, 145. 
3 million dollars, in 1880, 62. 
1 million dollars). 
 * The Russian figures are ridiculously small by comparison, and they are small because the feudal latifundia in Russia are great and strong. 
 The extent to which improved agricultural implements *Abstract of the Twelfth Census , 1900, third edition, Washington, 1904, pp. 
 217 and 302—agricultural implements. 
 were employed by landowners and peasants respectively was the subject of a special questionnaire circulated by the Ministry of Agriculture in the middle of the nineties of last century. 
 The results of this enquiry, which are given indetail in Mr. 
 Kaufman’s book, can be summarised in the fol-lowing table. 
 Percentage of replies indicating extensive employment of im-District proved agricultural implements Landlords Peasants Central Agricultural .... 
 20-51 8-20 Middle Volga ....... 
 18-66 14 Novorussia ....... 
. 
 50-91 33-65 Byelorussia ....... 
. 
 54-86 17-41 Priozyorny ....... 
. 
 24-47 1-21 Moscow ......... 22-51 10-26 Industrial ....... 
. 
 4-8 2 The average for all these districts is 42 per cent among the landlords and 21 per cent among the peasants. 
 In regard to the employment of manure, all the statistical data irrefutably prove that “in this respect the landlords’farms have always been, and still are, far ahead of thepeasant farms” (Kaufman, p. 
 544). 
 Moreover, it was a wide-spread practice in post-Reform Russia for the landlord topurchase manure from the peasant. 
 That is the result of direst poverty among the peasants. 
 Recently this practice has been on the decline. 
 Finally, precise and abundant statistics are available on the level of agricultural technique on landlord andpeasant farms respectively as regards grass cultivation(Kaufman, p. 
 561). 
 The following are the principal conclu-sions. 
 Area under fodder grasses in European Russia Year On peasant On landlords’ farms (dess. 
) estates (dess. 
) 1881 .......... 
. 
 49,800 499,000 1901 .......... 
. 
 491,600 1,046,000 What is the effect of all these differences between landlord and peasant farming? All we have to go on here are the yieldfigures. 
 Throughout the whole of European Russia, theaverage yield over a period of eighteen years (1883-1900) was as follows (in chetverts): RyeWinter SpringOatswheat wheat Landlords ... 6. 
0 5. 
75 5. 
0 8. 
5 Peasants ... 5. 
0 5. 
0 4. 
25 7. 
0 Difference ... 16. 
7% 13. 
0% 15. 
0% 17. 
6% Mr. 
 Kaufman is quite right when he says that the “differ-ence is very slight” (p. 
 592). 
 We must bear in mind not onlythat the peasants were left with the worst land in 1861, but also that general averages for the whole of the peasantry conceal (as we shall see in a moment) big differences. 
 The general conclusion we must arrive at from the exami-nation of landlord farming is the following. 
 Capitalism isquite obviously paving a way for itself in this field. 
 Farm-ing on a corvée basis is being replaced by farming on thebasis of freely hired labour. 
 Technical progress in capital-ist agriculture compared with labour-service and petty-peas-ant farming is definitely in evidence in all directions. 
But this progress is exceptionally slow for a modern capital-ist country. 
 The end of the nineteenth century finds inRussia the most acute contradiction between the require-ments of social development as a whole and serf agriculture which, in the shape of the latifundia owned by the landed nobility and the labour-service system, is a brake on econom-ic evolution and a source of oppression, barbarism, andof innumerable forms of Tatarism in Russian life. 
 III Peasant farming is the focal point of the agrarian ques-tion today in Russia. 
 We have shown above the condi-tions of peasant landownership and now we must deal with theorganisation of peasant farming—not in the technicalsense, but from the standpoint of political economy. 
 In the forefront we encounter here the question of the peasant commune. 
 A very extensive literature has been devot-ed to this question, and the Narodnik trend in Russiansocial thought connects the main points of its world-outlookwith the national peculiarities of this “equalitarian” insti-tution. 
 In this respect it should be said, in the first place, that in the literature on the Russian land commune two distinct aspects of the question are constantly interwoven and very often confused; these are the aspect relating to agricultural methods and mode of life, on the one hand, and the po-litico-economic aspect, on the other. 
 In most works on thevillage commune (V. 
 Orlov, Trirogov, Keussler, V. 
 V. 
), 57 so much space and attention is devoted to the first aspectof the question that the second is left completely in theshade. 
 This method of treating the subject is absolutely wrong. 
 That agrarian relations in Russia differ from those in other countries is beyond doubt, but no two purely capi-talist countries, generally recognised as such, will be found,where village life, the history of agrarian relations, theforms of ownership and use of the land, etc. 
, do not differ tothe same degree. 
 It is by no means the aspect relating to agricultural methods nor that of village life which have made the question of the Russian land commune so impor-tant and acute and have, since the second half of the nine-teenth century, divided the two main trends in Russiansocial thought, i. 
e. 
, the Narodnik and the Marxist. 
 Possiblylocal investigators have had to devote so much attention to this aspect of the question in order both to be able to make a comprehensive study of local peculiarities in the agricul-tural mode of life and to repel the ignorant and brazen at-tempts of the bureaucracy to introduce petty-detailed regula-tion permeated with a police spirit. 
 But it is quite imper-missible, for an economist at any rate, to allow the study of the various forms of land redistribution, the tech-nique of this redistribution, etc. 
, to obscure the question ofwhat types of economies are emerging within the commune, how these types are developing, what sort of relationsare building up between those who hire workers and thosewho hire themselves out as labourers, between the well-to-do and the poor, between those who are improving their farms and introducing better techniques, and those who arebeing ruined, who are abandoning their farms, and fleeingfrom the village. 
 No doubt it was awareness of this truththat induced our Zemstvo statisticians—who have con-tributed invaluable material for the study of the national economy of Russia—to abandon, in the eighties of last century, the official grouping of the peasantry according to commune, allotment, the number of “registered souls” 58 or available males, and to adopt the only scientific grouping, according to economic strength of households. 
 It should be remembered that at that time, when interest in the econom-ic study of Russia was particularly great, even a writerlike V. 
 V. 
, such a “party” man on this subject, heartilywelcomed “the new type of local statistical publication”(the title of V. 
 V. 
’s article in Severny Vestnik ,59 No. 
 3 for 1885) and declared: “These statistics must be adapted, not to such an agglomeration of the most varied economic groups of the peasantry as the village or the commune, but to thesegroups themselves. 
” The fundamental feature of our commune, which lent it special importance in the eyes of the Narodniks, is equal-ised land tenure. 
 We shall leave aside entirely the question of how the village commune achieves this equalisation, and address ourselves directly to the economic facts, to theresults of this equalisation. 
 As we have shown above on thebasis of precise data, the distribution of the total allotmentland in European Russia is by no means equalitarian. 
 Noris the distribution of land among the various categories of peasants, among the peasants of different villages, even among the peasants belonging (“formerly belonging”) todifferent landlords in the same village in the least equali-tarian. 
 Only within the small communes does the machineryof redistribution create the equalisation of these small,exclusive associations. 
 Let us examine the Zemstvo sta-tistics regarding the distribution of allotment land among households. 
 In doing so, of course, we must take the group-ing of households not according to the size of families,not according to the number of those working, but accord-ing to the economic strength of the different households (crop area, number of draught animals, number of cows, etc. 
). 
 For the entire essence of the capitalist evolution of small farming lies in the creation and intensification ofinequality of property within patriarchal associations, andfurther in the transformation of simple inequality intocapitalist relationships. 
 Hence we should be obscuring allthe peculiar features of the new economic evolution if we did not set out to make a special study of the differences in economic strength within the peasantry. 
 Let us take, at first, one typical uyezd (house-to-house /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR investigations by Zemstvo statisticians with detailed com-bined tables, adapted to separate uyezds), and then state the reasons that oblige us to apply the conclusions which interest us to the peasants of the whole of Russia. 
 Thematerial is taken from The Development of Capitalism , Chapter II. 
 * In Krasnoufimsk Uyezd, Perm Gubernia, where peasant landownership is entirely communal, allotment land is distributed as follows: Per household Persons of Allotment both sexes land (dess. 
) Cultivating no land .... 
. 
 3. 
5 9. 
8 ” up to 5 dessiatines 4. 
5 12. 
9 ” 5t o1 0 ” 5. 
4 17. 
4 ” 10 to 20 ” 6. 
7 21. 
8 ” 20 to 50 ” 7. 
9 28. 
8 ” over 50 ” 8. 
2 44. 
6 Total .......... 
 5. 
5 17. 
4 We see that with the improvement in the economic strength of the household, the size of the family increases withabsolute regularity. 
 Clearly, a large family is one of thefactors in peasant well-being. 
 That is indisputable. 
 Theonly question is, to what social and economic relations doesthis well-being lead in the present state of the national economy as a whole? As far as allotment land is concerned, we see unevenness in distribution, although not too consid-erable. 
 The more prosperous a peasant household is, the moreallotment land it has per head . 
 The lowest group has less than 3 dessiatines of allotment land per head of both sexes;in the next groups, nearly 3 dessiatines, 3 dessiatines, nearly 4, and 4 dessiatines respectively; and finally, in the last, the highest group, over 5 dessiatines of allotment landper head of both sexes. 
 Hence large families and the greatestpossession of allotment land serve as the basis of theprosperity of a small minority of the peasants. 
 For the two highest groups cover only one-tenth of the total number of households. 
 The following table shows as percentages the *See present edition, Vol. 
 3, pp. 
 70-187. 
— Ed. 
 number of households, the population, and the distribution of allotment land among the different groups: Percentages of total Groups of households House-Population Allotment holds of both land sexes Cultivating no land .... 
 10. 
2 6. 
5 5. 
7 ” up to 5 dessia-tines .... 
. 
 30. 
3 24. 
8 22. 
6 ” from 5 to 10 des-siatines.... 
 27. 
0 26. 
7 26. 
0 ” from 10 to 20dessiatines. 
. 
 22. 
4 27. 
3 28. 
3 ” from 20 to 50 dessiatines . 
. 
 9. 
4 13. 
5 15. 
5 ” over 50 dessia-tines.... 
. 
 0. 
7 1. 
2 1. 
9 Total ....... 
. 
 100. 
0 100. 
0 100. 
0 These figures clearly show that there is proportion in the distribution of allotment land, and that we do take intoaccount the result of communal equalisation. 
 The ratios of the population and of allotment land according to groups are fairly close to each other. 
 But here, too, the economicstrength of the different households begins to take effect:among the lower groups the ratio of land is less than the ratio of the population, and among the higher groups it isgreater . 
 And this is not an isolated phenomenon, relating to just one uyezd, but is true for the whole of Russia. 
 In the work mentioned above, I have combined similar data for 21uyezds of 7 gubernias in the most varied parts of-Russia. 
These data, which cover half a million peasant households,show the same relations in all places. 
 Well-to-do house-holds, constituting 20 per cent of the total, account for 26. 
1 to 30. 
3 per cent of the population and have 29. 
0 to 36. 
7 per cent of the allotment land. 
 The poorest households, constitu-ting 50 per cent of the total, account for 36. 
6 to 44. 
7 percent of the population and have 33. 
0 to 37. 
7 per cent of theallotment land. 
 We have this ratio in the distribution of theallotment land everywhere, but at the same time the trend of the village commune everywhere is towards the peasant bourgeoisie: departures from the ratio proceed inall cases in favour of the higher groups of the peasantry. 
 Hence it would be a profound mistake to think that, in studying the grouping of the peasantry according to economic strength, we ignore the “equalising” influence of the commune. 
 On the contrary, by means of precise data we establishthe real economic significance of this equalisation. 
 Wedemonstrate just how far it extends, and what the wholesystem of land redistribution leads to in the final analy-sis. 
 Even if this system provides the best distribution of land of various qualities and various categories, it is an indisputable fact that the position of the well-to-do peas-ants is superior to that of the poor peasants also in the matter of the distribution of allotment land. 
 The distributionof other, non-allotment land, as we shall see in a moment,is immeasurably more uneven. 
 The importance of rented land in peasant farming is well known. 
 The need for land gives rise to an extraordinaryvariety of forms of bondage relations on this basis. 
 As wehave already stated above, very often the renting of land bypeasants is in effect a labour-service system of landlordfarming—a feudalist way of securing hands for the squire. 
 Thus the feudalist character of land renting by our peas-ants is beyond doubt. 
 But since we have beforeus the capitalist evolution of this country, we must makea special study of the question as to how bourgeois relations manifest themselves, and whether they do manifest them-selves, in peasant land renting. 
 Here again we need data on the various economic groups of the peasantry and not on entire communes and villages. 
 For example, in hisResults of Zemstvo Statistical Investigations , Mr. 
 Kary-shev had to admit that rents in kind (i. 
e. 
, rentings ofland for which payment is made not in money but by métay-age or by labour service) as a general rule are everywhere more costly than money rent, and very much more costly at that, sometimes twice as much; further, that rent in kindis most widespread among the poorest groups of the peasantry . 
 The peasants who are at all well-to-do try to rent land formoney. 
 “The tenant takes advantage of every opportunityto pay his rent in money and thus reduce the cost of using other people’s land” (Karyshev, op. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 265). 
 60 Hence the whole weight of the feudal features of our land-renting system falls upon the poorest peasants. 
 The well-to-do peasants try to escape from the medieval yoke, and they succeed in doing so only to the extent that they have sufficient money. 
 If you have money, you can rent land for cash at the ordinary market price. 
 If you have no money,you go into bondage and pay three times as dear for theland, either by métayage or by labour service. 
 We have seenabove how many times lower are the prices of work done bylabour service than those of work done by freely hired labour-ers. 
 And if the terms of renting are different for peasants of different economic strength, it is clear that we cannotconfine ourselves (as Karyshev constantly does) to groupingthe peasants according to their allotment, since such amethod of grouping artificially lumps together households of different economic strength, and mixes up the rural proletariat with the peasant bourgeoisie. 
 As an illustration, let us take the figures covering Kamy-shin Uyezd, Saratov Gubernia, which consists almost entire-ly of communes (out of 2,455 communes in this gubernia,2,436 hold the land in communal tenure). 
 The followingtable shows the ratio between the various groups of house-holds in regard to the renting of land. 
 Percent-Dessiatines per Groups of householders age of households household Allotment Rented land land With no draught animals 26. 
4 5. 
4 0. 
3 ” 1 ” animal 20. 
3 6. 
5 1. 
6 ” 2 ” animals 14. 
6 8. 
5 3. 
5 ” 3 ”” 9. 
3 10. 
1 5. 
6 ” 4 ”” 8. 
3 12. 
5 7. 
4 ” 5 ””and more 21. 
1 16. 
1 16. 
6 Total ......... 100. 
0 9. 
3 5. 
4 The distribution of allotment land is a familiar picture: the prosperous households are better provided with landper head of the population than the poor ones. 
 The distri-bution of rented land is dozens of times more uneven. 
 The highest group has three times as much allotment land as thelowest group (16. 
1 as against 5. 
4); but in regard to rentedland the highest group has fifty times as much as the lowest group (16. 
6 as against 0. 
3). 
 Thus, renting does not even out differences in the peasants’ economic strength, but intensi-fies, increases them dozens of times over. 
 The opposite con-clusion, which is repeatedly met with in the writings of the Narodnik economists (V. 
 V. 
, Nik. 
—on,61 Maress, Karyshev, Vikhlayev and others), is due to the following error. 
 Theyusually take the peasants grouped according to the size ofallotment land, and show that those with small allotmentsrent more than those with large allotments—and there they stop. 
 They do not mention that it is largely the well-to-do households in village communes with small allotments thatrent land and that, therefore, seeming communal equali-sation merely covers up the tremendous unevenness ofdistribution within the commune. 
 Karyshev himself, forexample, admits that “large amounts of land are rented by (a) the categories less provided with land, but (b) by the more well-to-do groups within these categories” (op. 
 cit. 
 p. 
 139). 
Nevertheless, he does not systematically study the distri-bution of rentings by groups. 
 In order to bring out more clearly the mistake of the Na-rodnik economists, let us cite the example of Mr. 
 Maress (in his book The Influence of Harvests and Grain Prices , Vol. 
 I, p. 
 34). 
 From data covering Melitopol Uyezd he draws the conclusion that “the distribution of rented land per head is approximately equal”. 
 How does he arrive at this? In this way: if households are grouped according to the number of male workers in them, it will be found that households with no workers rent “on the average” 1. 
6 dessiatines per renting household, those with one worker rent 4. 
4 dessiatines, those with two workers, 8. 
3 dessiatines, those with three workers, 14. 
0 dessiatines per household. 
 But the point is that these “averages” cover households of absolutely different economic strength; that among the households having one worker, forexample, there are those which rent four dessiatines, cul-tivate five to ten dessiatines and have two or three draught animals, and households which rent 38 dessiatines, cultivate more than 50 dessiatines and have four and more draughtanimals. 
 Consequently, the equality Mr. 
 Maress arrives at isfictitious . 
 As a matter of fact, in Melitopol Uyezd the richest households, constituting 20 per cent of the total, notwith-standing the fact that they are best provided with both allot-ment and purchased land, account for 66. 
3 per cent, i. 
e. 
, two-thirds of all the rented land, leaving only 5. 
6 per cent as the share of the poorest households which constitute one-half of the total. 
 To proceed. 
 If we see, on the one hand, households with no horses, or with only one horse, renting one dessiatine, oreven part of a dessiatine, and, on the other hand, householdswith four or more horses, renting from 7 to 16 dessiatines, itis clear that here quantity is turning into quality. 
 In the first case renting is the result of poverty, and amounts to bond-age. 
 The “tenant” placed in such conditions cannot but be-come an object of exploitation by means of labour service,winter hiring, 62 money loans, etc. 
 On the other hand, the household that has from 12 to 16 dessiatines of allotment landand, over and above this , rents from 7 to 16 dessiatines, obvious-ly does so not because it is poor, but because it is well off, not to subsist but to get rich, to “make money”. 
 We havehere a clear example of the conversion of land renting intocapitalist farming, of the rise of capitalist enterprise in agri-culture. 
 Such households, as we shall see further on, do notget along without hiring agricultural labourers. 
 The question now arises: to what extent is this obvious entrepreneur renting of land a general phenomenon? Be-low we shall quote data which show that the growth of entre-preneur farming varies in different districts of commercialfarming. 
 For the moment let us quote a few more examples anddraw our general conclusions regarding the renting of land. 
 In Dnieper Uyezd, Taurida Gubernia, households culti-vating 25 dessiatines and over comprise 18. 
2 per cent of thetotal number. 
 These have from 16 to 17 dessiatines of allot-ment land and rent from 17 to 44 dessiatines per household. 
In Novouzensk Uyezd, Samara Gubernia, households havingfive draught animals and more represent 24. 
7 per cent of the total. 
 They cultivate averages of 25, 53, and 149 dessiatines, and rent respectively 14, 54, and 304 dessiatines of non-allot-ment land per household (the first figure refers to the groupwith from 5 to 10 draught animals, representing 17. 
1 percent of the households; the second to the group with from 10to 20 draught animals, representing 5. 
8 per cent of the house-holds; the third to the group with 20 and more draught ani-mals, representing 1. 
8 per cent of the households). 
 Thesehouseholds rent averages of 12, 29, and 67 dessiatines respec-tively of allotment land from other communities, and 9, 21, and 74 dessiatines in their own communities. 
 In Kras-noufimsk Uyezd, Perm Gubernia, 10. 
1 per cent of the total households cultivate 20 and more dessiatines per household. 
These have 28 to 44 dessiatines of allotment land per house-hold and rent 14 to 40 dessiatines of arable land and 118 to261 dessiatines of grassland. 
 In two uyezds in Orel Gubernia(Yelets and Trubchevsk), households with four horses and more comprise 7. 
2 per cent of the total. 
 They have 15. 
2 dessia-tines per household of allotment land, and by purchasing andrenting land they bring up the amount of land they use to28. 
4 dessiatines. 
 In Zadonsk Uyezd, Voronezh Gubernia,the corresponding figures are: 3. 
2 per cent of the householdsaveraging 17. 
1 dessiatines of allotment land, and 33. 
2 dessia-tines as the total area in use per household. 
 In three uyezds in Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia (Knyaginin, Makaryev andVasil), 9. 
5 per cent of the households possess three horses andmore. 
 These households average from 13 to 16 dessiatinesof allotment land but farm a total of 21 to 34 dessiatines. 
 From this it is evident that entrepreneur renting of land among the peasantry is no isolated or casual phenomenon, but is general and universal. 
 Everywhere there emerge inthe village communes well-to-do households, which alwaysconstitute an insignificant minority and always organisecapitalist farming with the aid of entrepreneur renting ofland. 
 For this reason general phrases about subsistence and capitalist renting can do nothing to clear up questions relat-ing to our peasant farming; a study must be made of theconcrete facts regarding the development of feudal features in the renting of land, and regarding the formation of capi-talist relations within this very renting of land . 
 We quoted figures above showing what ratios of the popu-lation and of allotment land are accounted for by the most well-to-do peasant households, comprising 20 per cent of thetotal. 
 Now we may add that these concentrate in their handsfrom 50. 
8 to 83. 
7 per cent of all the land rented by thepeasantry, leaving to the poorest groups, comprising 50 percent of all households, from 5 to 16 per cent of the total rent-ed land. 
 The conclusion to be drawn from this is clear: if we are asked what kind of renting preponderates in Russia,subsistence or entrepreneur renting, renting through poverty or renting by well-to-do peasants, feudal renting (based on labour service and bondage) or bourgeois renting, there can be only one answer. 
 Among the households which rent land, undoubtedly the majority do so because of poverty. 
For the overwhelming majority of the peasants renting meansbondage. 
 If we take the quantity of land rented, undoubted-ly not less than half of it is in the hands of well-to-do peasants,the rural bourgeoisie, who are organising agriculture on cap-italist lines. 
 Usually statistics of the prices of rented land are only given in “averages”, covering the total number of tenants andthe total amount of land. 
 The extent to which these averagescamouflage the extreme poverty and oppression of the peas-antry can be seen from the Zemstvo statistics for Dnieper Uyezd, Taurida Gubernia, which, by a lucky exception, show the rental prices paid by the various groups of peasants,viz. 
: Percentage Arable inPrice per Groups of householdsof house-dess. 
 perdess. 
 inholds rent-rentingrublesing land household Cultivating up to 5 dessia-tines .... 
. 
 25 2. 
4 15. 
25 ” from 5 to 10 des-siatines .... 
 42 3. 
9 12. 
00 ” from 10 to 25 dessiatines . 
. 
 69 8. 
5 4. 
75 ” from 25 to 50 dessiatines . 
. 
 88 20. 
0 3. 
75 ” over 50 dessia-tines .... 
. 
 91 48. 
6 3. 
55 Total ....... 
. 
 56. 
2 12. 
4 4. 
23 Thus, the “average” rental price of 4 rubles 23 kopeks per dessiatine is an outright distortion of the real situation; it obscures the contradictions which are the very crux of thematter. 
 The poor peasants are compelled to rent land at aruinous price, more than three times the average. 
 The richbuy up land “wholesale” at advantageous prices, and, ofcourse, as occasion offers, lease it to their needy neighbour at a profit of 275 per cent. 
 There is renting and renting. 
 There is feudal bondage, there is Irish renting, and there is tradingin land, capitalist farming. 
 The phenomenon of peasants leasing their allotment land reveals still more strikingly the capitalist relations with-in the village commune, the pauperisation of the poor and the enrichment of a minority at the expense of thispeasant mass which is being reduced to ruin. 
 The rentingand letting of land are phenomena in no way connected withthe village commune and communal equalisation. 
 Of what sig-nificance in real life will this equalised distribution of allot-ment land be, if the poor are forced to let to the rich the land allotted to them on the basis of equalisation? And what morestriking refutation of “communalist” views can one imaginethan this fact, that real life circumvents the official, the reg-ister-established equalisation of allotments? The impo-tence of any kind of equalisation in face of developing capi-talism is clearly demonstrated by the fact of the poor letting their allotments and of the rich concentrating rented land intheir hands. 
 How prevalent is this practice of letting allotment land? According to the now obsolete Zemstvo statistical investiga-tions made in the eighties of the last century, to which we have perforce to confine ourselves for the time being, the num-ber of households letting their land and the percentage ofallotment land thus let appear to be small. 
 For example, inDnieper Uyezd, Taurida Gubernia, 25. 
7 per cent of the house-holders let their allotment land, the amount of allotmentland let representing 14. 
9 per cent of the total. 
 In Novou-zensk Uyezd, Samara Gubernia, 12 per cent of the households let their land. 
 In Kamyshin Uyezd, Saratov Gubernia, theamount of land let represents 16 per cent of the total. 
 InKrasnoufimsk Uyezd, Perm Gubernia, allotment arableland is let by 8,500 householders out of a total of 23,500,i. 
e. 
, more than one-third. 
 The allotment land let amounts to 50,500 dessiatines out of a total of 410,000 dessiatines, i. 
e. 
, about 12 per cent. 
 In Zadonsk Uyezd, Voronezh Gubernia,6,500 dessiatines of allotment land out of a total of 135,500dessiatines are let, i. 
e. 
, less than 5 per cent. 
 In three uyezdsof Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia, 19,000 out of a total of 433,000dessiatines are let, i. 
e. 
, also less than 5 per cent. 
 But all these figures only seem insignificant because such percentages tacitly assume that the householders in all groups let theirland more or less evenly. 
 But such an assumption is quite contrary to the facts. 
 What is more important than the abso-lute figures of renting and letting, than the average percent-ages of the amount of land let or of the householders letting their land, is the fact that it is the poor peasants who mostlylet their land, and that the largest amount of land is rentedby the well-to-do peasants. 
 The data of the Zemstvo statisti-cal investigations leave no doubt whatever on this score. 
The most well-to-do households, comprising 20 per cent of the total, account for from 0. 
3 to 12. 
5 per cent of the total land let. 
 On the other hand, the poor groups, comprising50 per cent of the total households, let from 63. 
3 per cent to98. 
0 per cent of the total land let. 
 And, of course, it is theself same well-to-do peasants who rent the land let by thepoor peasants. 
 Here again it is clear that the significance of land-letting varies in the different groups of peasants: the poor peasant lets his land out of poverty, as he is unable tocultivate his land, having no seed, no cattle, no implements,and being desperately hard up for money. 
 The rich peasantslet little land: they either exchange one plot of land for anoth-er more suitable for their farm, or directly trade in land. 
 The following are concrete figures for Dnieper Uyezd, Taurida Gubernia: Percentages of householdersallotmentletting allot-land letment land Cultivating no land .... 
. 
 80 87. 
1 ” up to 5 dessiatines 30 38. 
4 ” 5t o1 0 ” 23 17. 
2 ” 10 to 25 ” 16 8. 
1 ” 25 to 50 ” 7 2. 
9 ” over 50 ” 71 3 . 
 8 In the uyezd ....... 
 25. 
7 14. 
9 Is it not clear from these figures that the abandonment of the land and proletarisation on a huge scale are combined herewith trading in land by a handful of rich people? Is it notcharacteristic that the percentage of allotment land let risesprecisely among those big cultivators who have an average of17 dessiatines of allotment land per household, 30 dessiatines of purchased land and 44 dessiatines of rented land? All in all, the entire poor group in Dnieper Uyezd, i. 
e. 
, 40per cent of the total number of households, having 56,000 dessiatines of allotment land, rents 8,000 and lets 21,500 dessiatines. 
 The well-to-do group, on the other hand, which represents 18. 
4 per cent of the households, and has 62,000 des-siatines of allotment land, lets 3,000 dessiatines of allotmentland and rents 82,000 dessiatines. 
 In three uyezds in Tauri-da Gubernia, this well-to-do group rents 150,000 dessiatinesof allotment land, i. 
e. 
, three-fifths of the total allotmentland let! In Novouzensk Uyezd, Samara Gubernia, house-holds possessing no horse (47 per cent of all households) and those having one horse (13 per cent of the total) let allot-ment land, while owners of ten and more draught animals,i. 
e. 
, only 7. 
6 per cent of all households, rent 20, 30, 60 and70 dessiatines of allotment land. 
 In regard to purchased land, almost the same thing has to be said as in regard to rented land. 
 The difference is that in the renting of land there are feudal features, that in certaincircumstances renting is on the basis of labour service and ofbondage, i. 
e. 
, it is a method of binding impoverished neigh-bouring peasants to the landed estate as farm-hands. 
Whereas the purchase of land as private property by peasants who have allotment land represents a purely bour-geois phenomenon. 
 In the West, farm-hands and day-labour-ers are sometimes tied to the land by selling them smallplots. 
 In Russia, a similar operation was officially carriedout long ago in the shape of the “Great Reform” of 1861, and at the present time the purchase of land by peasants solely expresses the crystallisation out of the village commune ofmembers of the rural bourgeoisie. 
 The way in which the purchase of land by peasants developed after 1861 has been dealt with above in our examination of the statistics oflandownership. 
 Here, however, we must point out the enor-mous concentration of purchased land in the hands of a minor-ity. 
 The well-to-do households, constituting 20 per cent ofthe total, have concentrated in their hands from 59. 
7 to 99per cent of land purchased. 
 The poorest households, 50 percent of the total, possess from 0. 
4 to 15. 
4 per cent of all theland purchased by peasants. 
 We can safely say, therefore,that out of the 7,500,000 dessiatines of land which have be-come the private property of peasants in the period from 1877 to 1905 (see above), from two-thirds to three-fourthsare in the hands of an insignificant minority of well-to-do households. 
 The same applies, of course, to the purchase of land by peasant societies and associations. 
 In 1877, peasant societies owned 765,000 dessiatines of purchased-land and in 1905 the figure was 3,700,000 dessiatines, while peasant as-sociations in 1905 were the private owners of 7,600,000 dessia-tines. 
 It would be a mistake to think that land purchased orrented by societies is distributed differently from that pur-chased or rented individually. 
 The facts prove the contrary. 
 For example in the three mainland uyezds of Taurida Gubernia, statistics collected on the distribution of land rented from thestate by peasant societies showed that 76 per cent of the rent-ed land was in the hands of the well-to-do group (about 20percent of the households), while the poorest households,constituting 40 per cent of the total, had only 4 per cent of the total rented land. 
 The peasants divide rented or purchased land only according to “money put down”. 
 IV Taken all round, the figures quoted above concerning peasants’ allotment land, rented land, land purchased and let, lead to the conclusion that with every passing day the actual use of land by the peasantry corresponds less and less to the official description of peasant allotment land-ownership. 
 Of course, if we take gross figures, or “averages”then the amount of allotment land that is let will be balanced by the amount that is rented, the rest of the land rented and purchased will be distributed equally, as it were,among all the peasant households, and the impression willbe created that the actual use of land is not very muchdifferent from the official, i. 
e. 
, allotment landownership. 
But such an impression would be pure fiction, because the actual use of land by the peasantry departs most of all from the original equalised distribution of allotment land pre-cisely in the extreme groups : so that “averages” inevitably distort the picture. 
 As a matter of fact, in the lower groups the total land used by the peasants is relatively—and sometimes absolutely— less than the allotment distribution (letting of land; in-significant share of rented laud). 
 For the higher groups,on the contrary, the total land in use is always both rela-tively and absolutely larger than the land held as allot-ments, owing to the concentration of purchased and rented land. 
 We have seen that the poorest groups, constituting 50 per cent of all households, hold from 33 to 37 per centof the allotment land, but only from 18. 
6 to 31. 
9 per cent ofthe total land used by the peasants. 
 In some cases the dropis almost 50 per cent; for example, in Krasnoufimsk Uyezd,Perm Gubernia, the percentage of allotment land is 37. 
4, while that of total land in use is 19. 
2. 
 The well-to-do house-holds, constituting 20 per cent of the total, hold from 29 to36 per cent of the allotment land, but from 34 to 49 per centof the total land in use. 
 Here are some concrete figures illus-trating these relations. 
 In Dnieper Uyezd, Taurida Guber-nia, the poorest households, constituting 40 per cent of the total, have 56,000 dessiatines of allotment land, but they use only 45,000 dessiatines, i. 
e. 
, 11,000 dessiatines less. 
 The well-to-do group (18 per cent of the households) holds 62,000dessiatines of allotment land, but uses a total of 167,000dessiatines, i. 
e. 
, 105,000 dessiatines more. 
 The followingtable gives the figures for three uyezds in Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia. 
 Dessiatines per household Allotment Total land land in use Peasants with no horse .... 
 5. 
1 4. 
4 ”” 1 ”.... 
 8. 
1 9. 
4 ”” 2 horses ... 10. 
5 13. 
8 ”” 3 ”.... 
 13. 
2 21. 
0 ”” 4 ”and more 16. 
4 34. 
6 Total ....... 
 8. 
3 10. 
3 Here, too, as a result of renting and letting, there is an absolute decline in the amount of land in actual use by thelowest group. 
 And this lowest group, i. 
e. 
, the horselesspeasants, comprises fully 30 per cent of the households. 
 Near-ly one-third of the households suffer an absolute loss as a result of renting and letting land. 
 The one-horse households (37 per cent of the total) have increased their use of land, but to an exceedingly small extent, proportionately less than theaverage increase in the use of land by the peasants (from 8. 
3 to 10. 
3 dessiatines). 
 Hence the share of this group in the to-tal land used has diminished: it had 36. 
6 per cent of the al-lotment lands in all the three uyezds, now it accounts for 34. 
1 per cent of the total land in use. 
 On the other hand, an insig-nificant minority constituting the higher groups haveincreased their use of land far above the average. 
 Those owningthree horses (7. 
3 per cent of the households) increased theamount of land in their possession by half as much again: from 13 to 21 dessiatines; and those owning many horses (2. 
3 per cent of the total households) more than doubled theamount of land in use: from 16 to 35 dessiatines. 
 We see, therefore, as a general phenomenon, a decline in the role of allotment land in peasant farming . 
 This decline is taking place at both poles in the countryside, in differ-ent ways. 
 Among the poor peasants the role of allotment land is declining because their growing poverty and ruincompel them to let their land, to abandon it, to reduce the land under cultivation because they lack livestock, imple-ments, seed, and money, and either to hire themselves outon some job or ... to enter the kingdom of heaven. 
 The lower groups of peasants are dying out; famine, scurvy, typhus are doing their work. 
 Among the higher groups of peas-ants the importance of allotment land is declining becausetheir expanding farms are forced far beyond the bounds ofthis allotment land, and they have to base themselves on anew type of landownership, not bonded but tree, not of the ancient-tribal kind but bought in the market: on the purchase and renting of land. 
 The richer the peasants are in land,the fainter are the traces of serfdom; the more rapidly eco-nomic development proceeds, the more energetic is thisemancipation from allotment land, the drawing of all landinto the sphere of commerce, the establishment of commer-cial farming on rented land. 
 Novorossia is a case in point. 
 We have just seen that farming by the well-to-do peasantsis done there to a greater extent on purchased and rentedland than on allotment land. 
 This may seem paradoxical,but it is a fact: in the part of Russia where land is availablein the greatest quantities, the well-to-do peasants, possess-ing the biggest allotments (from 16 to 17 dessiatines per household) are shifting the centre of gravity of their farmingfrom allotment land to non-allotment land ! The fact that the role of allotment land is declining at both rapidly progressing poles of the peasantry is, by the way, of enormous importance in appraising the conditions of that agrarian revolution which the nineteenth centuryhas bequeathed to the twentieth, and which gave rise to thestruggle of classes in our revolution. 
 This fact graphic-ally demonstrates that the break-up of the old system of landownership—both landlord and peasant ownership— has become an absolute economic necessity . 
 This break-up is absolutely inevitable, and no power on earth can prevent it. 
The struggle is about the form of this break-up and howit is to be effected—in the Stolypin way, by preservinglandlordism and by the plunder of the communes by thekulaks, or in the peasant way, by abolishing landlordism and removing all medieval obstacles from the land through its nationalisation. 
 We shall, however, deal with this ques-tion in greater detail further on. 
 Here it is necessary to pointout the important fact that the decline in the role of allot-ment land is leading to an extremely uneven distribution ofpeasant dues and obligations. 
 It is well known that the dues and obligations falling on the Russian peasant bear very strong traces of the MiddleAges. 
 We cannot here go into the details of Russia’sfinancial history. 
 It is sufficient to mention redemptionpayments—that direct continuation of medieval quit-rent,that tribute paid to the serf-owning landlords, extracted with the aid of the police state. 
 Suffice it to recall how unequally the lands of the nobility and the peas-antry are taxed, the obligations in kind, etc. 
 We quote onlytotal figures of dues and obligations, from the data of theVoronezh peasant budget statistics. 
 63 The average gross income of a peasant family (according to data of 66 typical budgets) is given at 491 rubles 44 kopeks; the gross expend-iture, 443 rubles. 
 Net income, 48 rubles 44 kopeks. 
 Thetotal of dues and obligations per “average” household, how-ever, is 34 rubles 35 kopeks. 
 Thus, dues and obligationsamount to 70 per cent of the net income . 
 Of course, these are only dues in their form, but in fact they are the former feudal exploitation of the “ bonded social-estate ”. 
 The net money income of the average family amounts in all to 17rubles 83 kopeks, i. 
e. 
, the “taxes” drawn from the Russian peasant are double his net money income—and this is accord-ing to the statistics of 1889, not 1849! But in this case, too, average figures camouflage the peasant’s poverty, and present the position of the peasantryin a much better light than it really is. 
 The statistics of thedistribution of dues and obligations among the variousgroups of peasants according to their economic strength showthat those paid by the horseless or one-horse peasants (i. 
e. 
, three-fifths of the total peasant families in Russia) are many times in excess not only of their net money income, buteven of their net gross income. 
 Here are the figures: Budget figures (rubles per household) Gross Expend-Dues and Also as per-income itureobliga-centage of tions expenditure a) With no horse .... 
 118. 
10 109. 
08 15. 
47 14. 
19 b) Owning 1 horse ... 178. 
12 174. 
26 17. 
77 10. 
20 c) ” 2 horses ... 429. 
72 379. 
17 32. 
02 8. 
44 d) ” 3” ... 753. 
19 632. 
36 49. 
55 7. 
83 e) ” 4” ... 978. 
66 937. 
30 67. 
90 7. 
23 f) ” 5”and more 1, 755. 
79 1,593. 
77 86. 
34 5. 
42 Average ...... 491. 
44 443. 
00 34. 
35 7. 
75 The horseless and one-horse peasants pay in the form of dues one-seventh and one-tenth respectively of all their gross expenditure. 
 It is doubtful whether serf quit-rent was as high as that: the inevitable ruin of the mass of thepeasants belonging to him would not have been to the advan-tage of the landlord. 
 As to the uneven allocation of the dues it is, as we see, enormous. 
 In proportion to their income, the well-to-do peasants pay three to two times less. 
 Whatis the cause of this inequality? The cause is that the peas-ants divide the bulk of the dues according to the amountof allotment land held. 
 For the peasant the share of duesand the share of allotment land merge into the single con-cept—“head”. 
 And if, in our example, we calculate the amount of dues and obligations for different groups per des-siatine of allotment land, we will get the following: (a)2. 
6 rubles; (b) 2. 
4 rubles; (c) 2. 
5 rubles; (d) 2. 
6 rubles; (e)2. 
9 rubles; (f) 3. 
7 rubles. 
 With the exception of the highest group, which owns large industrial establishments that are assessed separately, we see an approximately even distri-bution of the dues. 
 Here, too, the share of allotment land corresponds, as a whole, to the share of dues paid. 
 Thisphenomenon is a direct survival (and direct proof) of thefeudal character of our village commune. 
 From the very con-ditions of the labour-service system of farming, this couldnot be otherwise: the landlords could not have provided themselves with bonded labourers from among the local peasants for half a century after the “emancipation” had thesepeasants not been tied to starvation allotments and not beenobliged to pay three times as dear for them. 
 It must not beforgotten that at the end of the nineteenth century it has been no rare thing in Russia for the peasant to have to pay in order to get rid of his allotment land, to pay “extras” for giving up his allotment, i. 
e. 
, to pay a certain sum to the personwho took over his allotment. 
 For example, Mr. 
 Zhbankovdescribing the life of the Kostroma peasants in his bookWomen ’s Country (Kostroma, 1891), 64 says that, among Kostroma folk who leave their holdings in search of work, “it is rare that peasants receive for their land some small part of the dues; usually they let their land on the sole condi-tion that the tenants make some use of it, the ownerhimself paying all the dues”. 
 In The Survey of Yaroslavl Gubernia , which appeared in 1896, we find quite a number of similar references to the fact that peasants who become migratory workers have to pay to get rid of their allotments. 
 Of course, we will find no such “power of land” in the purely agricultural gubernias. 
 But even in these guberniasthe phenomenon of the declining role of allotment land atboth poles in the countryside is undoubtedly to be observedin another form. 
 This fact is universal. 
 That being the case, the distribution of taxes according to the amount of allot-ment land inevitably gives rise to increasing inequality intaxation. 
 From all sides and by diverse ways economic de-velopment is leading to the break-down of the medievalforms of landownership, the scrapping of the social-estate di-visions (allotment, landlords’ and other lands), to the rise of new forms of economy, evolving indifferently out of frag-ments of the one and the other type of landownership. 
 Thenineteenth century bequeaths to the twentieth century the imperative and obligatory task of completing this “clearing away” of the medieval forms of landownership. 
 The fight is whether this “clearing” will be done in the form of peasant nationalisation of the land, or in the form of the accelerat-ed plunder of the communes by the kulaks and of the trans-formation of landlord into Junker economy. 
 Continuing our examination of the data concerning the present-day system of peasant economy, let us pass from the question of land to the question of livestock raising. 
 Here again we have to establish that, as a general rule, the dis-tribution of livestock among peasant households is much more uneven than the distribution of allotment land. 
 Here, for example, we see the extent of livestock raising amongthe peasants in Dnieper Uyezd, Taurida Gubernia: Per household Allotment Total live-land (dess. 
) stock (head) Cultivating no land .... 
. 
 6. 
4 1. 
1 ” up to 5 dessiatines 5. 
5 2. 
4 ” 5-10 ” 8. 
7 4. 
2 ” 10-25 ” 12. 
5 7. 
3 ” 25-50 ” 16. 
6 13. 
9 ” over 50 ” 17. 
4 30. 
0 Average ....... 
. 
 11. 
2 7. 
6 The difference in number of livestock between the extreme groups is ten times greater than in the amount of allot-ment land held. 
 The data for livestock raising, too, showthat the actual size of the property has little resemblance to what is usually believed to be the case when only average figures are used, and when it is assumed that the allotmentdetermines everything. 
 No matter what uyezd we take, every-where the distribution of livestock is found to be much moreuneven than the distribution of allotment land. 
 The well-to-do households, constituting 20 per cent of the total, and having from 29 to 36 per cent of the allotment land, have concentrated in their hands from 37 to 57 per cent of all live-stock owned by the peasants in the given uyezd or groupof uyezds. 
 The lower groups, constituting 50 per cent of thetotal households, own 14 to 30 per cent of all the livestock. 
 But these figures by no means fully reveal the actual differ-ences. 
 No less important, and sometimes even more impor-tant than the question of the quantity of livestock, is the question of their quality . 
 It goes without saying that the half-ruined peasant, with his poverty-stricken farm, en-meshed on all sides in the toils of bondage, is not in a posi-tion to acquire and keep livestock at all good in quality. 
 Ifthe owner (owner indeed!) starves, his livestock must starve; it cannot be otherwise. 
 Budget statistics for Voronezh Gu-bernia illustrate with extraordinary clarity the wretchedcondition of livestock raising by the horseless and one-horsepeasants, i. 
e. 
, three-fifths of the total peasant farms in Rus-sia. 
 We quote below some extracts from these statistics inorder to characterise the state of peasant livestock raising. 
 Average annual expendi-ture (in rubles) For acquisi-Total live-tion and re-stock per pair of imple Cattle household, in ments and feed terms of cattle purchase of cattle (a) With no horse ...... 0. 
8 0. 
08 8. 
12 (b) Owning 1 horse ...... 2. 
6 5. 
36 36. 
70 (c) ” 2 horses ...... 4. 
9 8. 
78 71. 
21 (d) ” 3” ...... 9. 
1 9. 
70 127. 
03 (e) ” 4” ...... 12. 
8 30. 
80 173. 
24 (f) ” 5” and more 19. 
3 75. 
80 510. 
07 Average ......... 5. 
8 13. 
14 98. 
91 In the period from 1896 to 1900 there were in European Russia 3 $ million horseless peasant households. 
 One can imagine the state of their “farms” if they spent eight kopeks per annum on livestock and implements. 
 One-horse house-holds numbered 3 # millions. 
 With an expenditure of five rubles per annum for buying livestock and implements they can only linger on in a state of everlasting, hopeless poverty. 
 Even in the case of two-horse peasants (2 @ million house-holds) and three-horse peasants (1 million households), ex-penditure on livestock and implements amounts to only9-10 rubles per annum. 
 Only in the two higher groups (in the whole of Russia there are 1 million households of this type out of a total of 11 million) does expenditure on live-stock and implements come anywhere near that required for carrying on proper farming. 
 Quite naturally, in these conditions, the quality of the livestock cannot be the same in the different groups of farms. 
For example, the value of a draught horse belonging to aone-horse peasant is estimated at 27 rubles, that of a two-horse peasant at 37 rubles, that of a three-horse peasant at 61 rubles, that of a four-horse peasant at 52 rubles and thatof a peasant owning many horses at 69 rubles. 
 The differencebetween the extreme groups is more than 100 per cent. 
And this phenomenon is general for all capitalist countrieswhere there is small-and large-scale farming. 
 In my book, The Agrarian Question (Part I, St. 
 Petersburg, 1908), * I have shown that the investigations made by Drech-sler into the conditions of farming and livestock raisingin Germany revealed exactly the same state of affairs. 
 Theaverage weight of the average animal on large estates was619 kilogrammes (op. 
 cit. 
, 1884, p. 
 259); on peasant farms of 25 and more hectares, 427 kilogrammes, on farms of 7 @ t o 25 hectares, 382 kilogrammes, on farms of 2 @ to 7 @ hec-tares, 352 kilogrammes, and finally on farms up to 2 @ hec-tares, 301 kilogrammes. 
 The quantity and quality of the livestock also determine the manner in which the land is tended, particularlythe way it is manured. 
 We showed above that all the statis-tics for the whole of Russia attest that the landlords’land is better manured than the peasants’ land. 
 Now we seethat this division, which was proper and legitimate for the days of serfdom, is now obsolete. 
 Between the various cate-gories of peasant farms lies a deep gulf, and all investiga-tions, calculations, findings and theories based on the “aver-age” peasant farm lead to absolutely wrong conclusions onthis question. 
 Zemstvo statistics, unfortunately, veryrarely study the various groups of households and are confined to figures covering the commune. 
 But as an exception to the *See present edition, Vol. 
 13, pp. 
 183-94. 
— Ed. 
 rule, during a house-to-house investigation made in Perm Gubernia (Krasnoufimsk Uyezd) the following precise data as to the manuring of land by the various peasant house-holds were collected: PercentageNumber of of farmscart-loads of manuringmanure per land at allmanure-using household Cultivating up to 5 dess. 
 33. 
9 80 ” from 5 to 10 ” 66. 
2 116 ” from 10 to 25 ” 70. 
3 197 ” from 25 to 50 ” 76. 
9 358 ” more than 50 ” 84. 
3 732 Average ....... 
. 
 51. 
7 176 Here we see types of farm that differ in agricultural methods according to the size of farm. 
 And investigatorsworking in another area who paid attention to this questionarrived at similar conclusions. 
 Statisticians in Orel Guber-nia report that the amount of manure obtained per head of cattle on the farms of well-to-do peasants is almost twice the amount obtained on the farms of needy peasants. 
 Inthe group with an average of 7. 
4 head of livestock per house-hold, 391 poods of manure are obtained, while in the groupwith 2. 
8 head of livestock per household 208 poods are ob-tained. 
 The “normal” amount is considered to be 400 poods, so that only a small minority of well-to-do peasants are able to reach this norm. 
 The poor peasants are obliged to use strawand manure for fuel, and sometimes even to sell manure,etc. 
 In this connection we must examine the question of the increase in the number of horseless peasants. 
 In 1888-91 there were, in 48 gubernias of European Russia, 2. 
8 million horseless households, out of a total of 10. 
1 million house-holds, i. 
e. 
, 27. 
3 per cent. 
 After approximately nine or tenyears, in 1896-1900, out of a total of 11. 
1 million households,3. 
2 million, or 29. 
2 per cent, were horseless. 
 The increasingexpropriation of the peasantry is, therefore, beyond doubt. 
 But if one examines this process from the agronomical point of view, one arrives at a conclusion which at first sight isparadoxical. 
 This was the conclusion arrived at by the well-known Narodnik writer, Mr. 
 V. 
 V. 
, as early as 1884 ( Vestnik Yevropy ,65 1884, No. 
 7), when he compared the number of dessiatines of arable per horse on our peasant farms with thatin the “normal” three-field farm—normal from the point of view of agronomy. 
 It turned out that peasants keep too many horses: they plough only 5 to 8 dessiatines per horse, instead of 7 to 10 as required by agronomy. 
 “Consequently,” conclud-ed Mr. 
 V. 
 V. 
, “the decline in horse-ownership among a sec-tion of the population in this part of Russia [the Central Black-Earth Belt] must, to a certain extent, be regarded as the restoration of the normal ratio between the number of draught animals and the area to be cultivated. 
” In reality, the paradox is due to the fact that decline in horse-ownershipis accompanied by the concentration of land in the hands ofthe well-to-do households, who arrive at a “normal” ratiobetween the number of horses and the cultivated area. 
 This“normal” ratio is not “restored” (for it never existed in ourpeasant economy) but is achieved only by the peasant bour-geoisie. 
 The “abnormality”, on the other hand, boils down to the fragmentation of the means of production on the smallpeasant farms: the amount of land cultivated by a millionone-horse peasants, with the aid of a million horses, is betterand more thoroughly cultivated by well-to-do peasants withthe aid of one-half or three-quarters of a million horses. 
 In regard to implements on the peasant farms, a distinc-tion must be drawn between ordinary peasant implementsand improved agricultural implements. 
 Generally speaking,the distribution of the first category corresponds to the dis-tribution of draught animals; we shall find nothing new instatistics of this kind to characterise peasant farming. 
 Im-proved implements, on the other hand, which are much more expensive, and are a paying proposition only on larger farms,are introduced only on successfully developing farms, and areimmeasurably more concentrated. 
 Data concerning this con-centration are extremely important, because they aloneenable us to judge precisely in what direction, and in what social conditions, there is progress in peasant farming. 
 There is no doubt that a step forward has been made in this direct-ion since 1861, but very often the capitalist character ofthis progress, not only in landlord farming, but also in peas-ant farming, is contested or called in question. 
 The following Zemstvo statistical data show the distri-bution of improved implements among the peasantry: Improved agricul-tural implements per 100 households Two uyezds One uyezd of Orel of Voronezh Gubernia Gubernia With no horses ....... 
 0. 
01 — ” 1 horse ....... 
 0. 
2 0. 
06 ”2-3 horses ....... 
 3. 
5 1. 
6 ” 4 horses and more ... 36. 
0 23. 
0 Average ......... 2. 
2 1. 
2 In these localities, improved implements are compara-tively little to be found among the peasants. 
 The proportionof households possessing such implements is quite insignif-icant But the lower groups hardly employ them at all,whereas among the higher groups they are in regular use. 
 InNovouzensk Uyezd, Samara Gubernia, only 13 per cent of the peasants have improved implements: but the percentage rises to 40 per cent in the group owning 5 to 20 draught ani-mals and to 62 per cent in the group owning 20 and more ani-mals. 
 In Krasnoufimsk Uyezd, Perm Gubernia (threedistricts of this uyezd), there are 10 improved implements forevery hundred farms—this is the general average; but for every hundred farms cultivating from 20 to 50 dessiatines there are 50 improved implements and for every hundredfarms cultivating 50 dessiatines there are as many as 180implements. 
 If we take the ratios we used earlier to comparethe data of different uyezds, we find that the well-to-dohouseholds, constituting 20 per cent of the total, possess from 70 to 86 per cent of all the improved implements, where-as the poor households, which constitute 50 per cent ofthe total, account for from 1. 
3 to 3. 
6 per cent. 
 There-fore, there cannot be the slightest doubt that the progressmade in the spread of improved implements among thepeasantry (reference to this progress is made, by the way, in the above-mentioned work of the year 1907 by Mr. 
 Kauf-man) is the progress of the well-to-do peasantry. 
 Three-fifthsof the total peasant households, the horseless and one-horsepeasants, are almost completely unable to employ these im-provements. 
 V In examining peasant farming, we have up till now taken the peasants mainly as proprietors; at the same time we point-ed to the fact that the lower groups are being continuouslysqueezed out of that category. 
 Where do they land? Evident-ly in the ranks of the proletariat. 
 We must now investigatein detail how this formation of the proletariat, particularly the rural proletariat, is actually taking place, and how the market for labour-power in agriculture is being formed. 
 Inthe case of the labour-service system of farming the typicalclass figures are the feudal landlord and the bonded peasantwho has been allotted land; in capitalist farming the typicalfigures are the employer-farmer and the farm-hand or the day-labourer who hires himself out. 
 We have shown how the landlord and the well-to-do peasant are transformed intoemployers of labour. 
 Now let us see how the peasant istransformed into a hired labourer. 
 Is the employment of hired labour by well-to-do peasants widespread? If we take-the average percentage of households employing farm-hands among the total peasant households (as is usually done), the percentage will not be very high:in Dnieper Uyezd, Taurida Gubernia, it is 12. 
9 per cent; inNovouzensk Uyezd, Samara Gubernia, 9 per cent; in Kamy-shin Uyezd, Saratov Gubernia, 8 per cent; in KrasnoufimskUyezd, Perm Gubernia, 10. 
6 per cent; two uyezds in Orel Gubernia, 3. 
5 per cent; one uyezd in Voronezh Gubernia, 3. 
8 per cent; three uyezds in Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia,2. 
6 per cent. 
 But statistics of this kind are, strictly speak-ing, fictitious, since they express the percentage of householdsemploying farm-hands to the total number of households—including those which provide the farm-hands. 
 In every cap-italist society the bourgeoisie constitute an insignificant minority of the population. 
 The number of households em-ploying hired labour will always be “small”. 
 The question is,whether it means that a special type of farm is arising, orwhether the employment of labour is a chance affair. 
 To thisquestion, too, a very definite answer is provided by Zemstvo statistics, which in all cases show the percentage of house-holds employing farm-hands to be immeasurably larger inthe groups of well-to-do peasants than the average for the uyezd as a whole. 
 Let us quote the figures for Krasnoufimsk Uyezd, Perm Gubernia, which, as an exception to the rule, give information not only about the hiring of farm-hands, but also about the hiring of day-labourers, i. 
e. 
, the formof hiring that is more typical of agriculture. 
 Percentage of farms hiring labours Number of Hired for For For For male work-definite mow-reap-thresh-ers per periods ing ing ing household Cultivating no land .... 
 0. 
6 0. 
15 0. 
6 — — ” up to 5 dessia-tines .... 
. 
 1. 
0 0. 
7 5. 
1 4. 
7 9. 
2 ” 5 to 10 dessia-tines.... 
. 
 1. 
2 4. 
2 14. 
3 20. 
1 22. 
3 ” 10 to 20 dessia-tines.... 
. 
 1. 
5 17. 
2 27. 
2 43. 
9 25. 
9 ” 20 to 50 dessia-tines.... 
. 
 1. 
7 50. 
0 47. 
9 69. 
6 33. 
7 ” more than 50 des-siatines.... 
 2. 
0 83. 
1 64. 
5 87. 
2 44. 
7 Average ...... 1. 
2 10. 
3 16. 
4 24. 
3 18. 
8 It will be seen that a distinguishing feature of the well-to-do households is that they have larger families, they havemore of their own family as workers than the poor householdshave. 
 Nevertheless, they employ incomparably more hired labourers. 
 “Family co-operation” serves as a basis for extend-ing the scale of farming and is thus transformed into capi-talist co-operation. 
 In the higher groups, the hiring of labour-ers is obviously becoming a system, a condition for conduct-ing expanded farming. 
 Moreover, the hiring of day-labour-ers turns out to be very considerably widespread even among the middle group of peasants: in the two higher groups (con-stituting 10. 
3 per cent of the households) the majority of thehouseholds hire labourers, while in the group cultivatingfrom 10 to 20 dessiatines (22. 
4 per cent), more than two-fifths of the households hire labourers for reaping. 
 The con-clusion to be drawn from this is that the well-to-do peasants could not exist if there were not a vast army of agricultural labourers ready to serve them. 
 And if, as we have seen, thedata concerning the average percentages of households hiring labourers show considerable fluctuations for the different uyezds, what is universal is the concentration of households employing agricultural labourers in the higher groups of the peasantry, that is to say, the transformation of the well-to-dohouseholds into employers of labour. 
 The well-to-do house-holds, constituting 20 per cent of the total, account for from48 to 78 per cent of the total number of households employ-ing labourers. 
 In regard to the other pole in the countryside, statistics do not usually indicate the number of households whichprovide hired labour of all kinds. 
 On quite a number ofquestions our Zemstvo statistics have made considerableprogress compared with the old, official statistics given ingovernors’ reports and issued by various departments. 
 But in one question, the old, official point of view has been re-tained even in Zemstvo statistics, and that is in regard tothe so-called peasant “employments”. 
 Farming on his allot-ment is regarded as the peasant’s real occupation; all otheroccupations are classed as side “employments” or “industries”and in doing so economic categories are lumped together that should be entered separately by anyone knowing the ABC of political economy. 
 For example, the category “ag-ricultural industrialists” includes, together with the mass ofwage-labourers, also entrepreneur farmers (for example,melon growers); next to them, also in the category “house-holds with employments”, will be included beggars and traders, domestic servants and master-craftsmen, etc. 
 Clear-ly, this crying political and economic muddle is a directsurvival of serfdom. 
 Indeed, it was a matter of indifferenceto the feudal landlord what occupation his quit-rent peasant followed on the side, whether that of a trader, a hired labour-er or a master-industrialist. 
 All the serfs were equally bound to pay quit-rent, all were regarded as being temporarily or conditionally absent from their real occupation. 
 After the abolition of serfdom, this point of view came, with every passing day, into increasingly sharp conflict withreality. 
 Most of the peasant households having earnings onthe side undoubtedly belong to the category of households which provide wage-labourers; but we cannot obtain a real-ly exact picture of the situation, because the minority whoare master -industrialists are included in the general total and embellis h the position of the needy ones. 
 Let us quote an example to illustrate the point. 
 In Novouzensk Uyezd, Sa-mara Gubernia, the statisticians have singled out the category of “agricultural industries” from the general mass of “industries ”. 
66 Of course, this term is not exact either, but the list of occupations at least indicates that out of a total of 14,063 “industrialists” of this kind, 13,297 are farm-hands and day-labourers. 
 Thus wage-labourers predominate very largely. 
 The distribution of agricultural industries is found to be the following: Percentage of male peasants engaged in agricultural industries Having no draught animals .... 
 71. 
4 ” 1 draught animal .... 
. 
 48. 
7 ” 2 to 3 draught animals ... 20. 
4 ” 4 ”” ... 8. 
5 ” 5 to 10 ”” ... 5. 
0 ” 10 to 20 ”” ... 3. 
9 ” 20 draught animals and more 2. 
0 In the uyezd .... 
 .... 
 25. 
0 Thus seven-tenths of the horseless peasants and almost half the one-horse peasants are hired labourers. 
 In Krasnou-fimsk Uyezd, Perm Gubernia, the average percentage of house-holds whose members engage in agricultural industriesis 16. 
2; but of those which do not cultivate their land 52. 
3 per cent engage in agricultural industries, and of those which cultivate up to five dessiatines, 26. 
4 per cent. 
 In other uyezds,where the agricultural industries are not specified, the posi-tion is not quite so clear; nevertheless, it remains the generalrule that “industries” and “employments” are, broadly speak-ing, the speciality of the lower groups. 
 The lower groups, constituting 50 per cent of the total households, account for from 60 to 93 per cent of the households with “employments”. 
 We see from this that, in the general scheme of the nation-al economy, the position of the lower groups of the peasantry,particularly the one-horse and horseless households, is thatof farm-hands and day-labourers (more broadly—hired labourers) possessing allotments . 
 This conclusion is con-firmed by the statistics showing the increase in the employ-ment of hired labour since 1861 over the whole of Russia, by the investigations made into the budgets of the lower groups to trace the sources of their incomes, and finally by the statistics on the standard of living of these groups. 
 We shall dwell in somewhat greater detail on this threefoldproof. 
 General statistics regarding the growth in the number of rural hired labour in the whole of Russia are available onlyfor migratory workers, without indicating whether they are engaged in agricultural or non-agricultural occupations. 
 The question as to whether the former or the latter prepon-derate in the total number was decided in Narodnik litera-ture in favour of the former, but we shall give below the rea-sons for an opposite point of view. 
 There is no doubt whateverthat the number of migratory workers among the peasantry increased rapidly after 1861. 
 All evidence goes to prove this. 
 An approximate statistical expression of this phenome-non is found in the returns dealing with passport revenue andthe number of passports issued. 
 Passport revenue amountedto 2,100,000 rubles in 1868; 3,300,000 rubles in 1884, and4,500,000 rubles in 1894. 
 This shows a more than doubled revenue. 
 The number of passports and certificates issued in European Russia was 4,700,000 in 1884, 7,800,000 in 1897and 9,300,000 in 1898. 
 In thirteen years, as we see, the num-ber doubled. 
 All these figures correspond, on the whole, withother estimates, for example, with that made by Mr. 
 Uvarov,who summarised the figures of Zemstvo statistics—for the most part obsolete—for 126 uyezds in 20 gubernias and arrived at the likely total of 5,000,000 migratory workers. 
 67 Mr. 
 S. 
 Korolenko, on the basis of data on the number ofsurplus local workers, arrived at the figure of 6,000,000. 
 In the opinion of Mr. 
 Nikolai—on, the “overwhelming majority” of these are engaged in agricultural industries. 
 In The Development of Capitalism * I showed in detail that the statistics and investigations of the sixties, eighties and nineties fully prove this conclusion to be wrong. 
 The major-ity, although not the overwhelming majority, of the migra-tory workers are engaged in non-agricultural occupations. 
 Thefollowing are the fullest and latest data concerning the dis-*See present edition, Vol. 
 3, pp. 
 568-81— Ed. 
 tribution, by gubernias, of residential permits issued in European Russia in 1898: Total residential permits of allGroups of guberniaskinds issued in 1898 (1) 17 gubernias with predominance of non-agricultural migration .... 
 3,369,597 (2) 12 gubernias, intermediate .... 
 1,674,231 (3) 21 gubernias with predominance of agricultural migration ...... 2,765,762 Total for 50 gubernias .... 
. 
 7,809,590 If we assume that in the intermediate gubernias half are workers in agricultural jobs, then the approximate , the most probable distribution will be as follows: about 4,200,000 non-agricultural hired labourers and about 3 ,600,000 agri-cultural hired labourers . 
 Alongside this figure should be placed the figure given by Mr. 
 Rudnev,68 who in 1894 summed up the returns of Zemstvo statistics for 148 uyezds in 19 guber-nias and arrived at the approximate figure of 3,500,000 agri-cultural wage-workers. 
 This figure, based on the returns for the eighties, includes both local and migratory agricultural workers. 
 At the end of the nineties, there were so many migra-tory agricultural workers alone. 
 The growth in the number of agricultural wage-workers is directly connected with the development of that capital-ist enterprise in agriculture which we have traced in land-lord and peasant economy. 
 Take, for example, the use of ma-chinery in agriculture. 
 We have quoted precise data provingthat, so far as concerns the well-to-do peasants, it signifiesthe transition to capitalist enterprise. 
 As for landlord econ-omy, the use of machinery, and in general of improved im-plements, means inevitably the squeezing out of the labour-service system by capitalism. 
 The implements of the peasant are replaced by the implements of the landlord; the old three-field system is supplanted by new farming methods connect-ed with the change in the implements employed; the bondedpeasant is not suitable for work with improved implementsand his place is taken by the farm-hand or the day-labourer. 
 In the region of European Russia where the use of machin-ery developed most after the Reform, the employment ofhired labour from outside is also most widespread. 
 This region comprises the southern and eastern borderlands of European Russia. 
 The influx of agricultural labourers into that region has given rise to extremely typical and clearly expressed capitalist relations. 
 These relations deserve to bedealt with, in order to compare the old and hitherto predom-inant system of labour-service economy with the new ten-dencies increasingly coming to the fore. 
 First of all, it must benoted that the southern area is distinguished by the high-est wages paid in agriculture. 
 According to statistics for a whole decade (1881-91), which preclude any casualfluctuations, the highest wages in Russia are paid in Tauri-da, Bessarabia and Don gubernias. 
 Here the wages of a labour-er hired by the year, including keep, amount to 143 rubles50 kopeks, and those of a seasonal labourer (for the summer), 55 rubles 67 kopeks. 
 Next highest wages are those paid in the most highly industrial area—St. 
 Petersburg, Moscow,Vladimir and Yaroslavl gubernias. 
 Here the wages of an ag-ricultural labourer hired for the year amount to 135 rubles80 kopeks, and those of a seasonal worker 53 rubles. 
 The low-est wages are paid in the central agricultural gubernias— Kazan, Penza, Tambov, Ryazan, Tula, Orel and Kursk, i. 
e. 
, the principal districts where labour service, bondage andall sorts of survivals of serfdom prevail. 
 Here the labourerhired for the year receives only 92 rubles 95 kopeks, a thirdless than the wages paid in the most highly capitalist guber-nias, and the seasonal worker 35 rubles 64 kopeks, 20 rubles less for the summer than is paid in the south. 
 It is precisely from this central district that we see an enormous migrationof workers. 
 Every spring more than one and a half millionpeople leave this district, partly to seek agricultural employ-ment (mainly in the south, and partly, as we shall see below,in the industrial gubernias), and also to seek non-agricultur-al employment in the capital cities and in the industrial gubernias. 
 Between this principal area of egress and the twoprincipal areas of ingress (the agricultural south and the cap-ital cities with the two industrial gubernias) there are zonesof gubernias in which average wages are paid. 
 These guber-nias attract part of the workers from the “cheapest” and most hunger-stricken central area, while in their turn supplying part of the workers for districts where higher wages are paid. 
In Mr. 
 S. 
 Korolenko’s book, Freely Hired Labour , the author uses very extensive material to give a detailed description of this process of workers’ migration and of the shifts in pop-ulation. 
 In this way capitalism achieves a more even dis-tribution of the population (even, of course, from the pointof view of the requirements of capital); levels wages through-out the country; creates a really single, national labour-market; gradually cuts the ground from under the old modesof production by “enticing” the bonded peasant with high wages. 
 Hence the endless complaints of the landed gentry about the local workers becoming corrupted, about the de-bauchery and drunkenness created by migration, about theworkers being “spoilt” by the towns, etc. 
, etc. 
 By the end of the nineteenth century fairly large capital-ist agricultural enterprises were established in the dis-tricts to which the greatest number of workers migrated. 
 Capitalist co-operation arose in the employment, for exam-ple, of machines like threshers. 
 Mr. 
 Tezyakov, in describingthe conditions of life and labour of agricultural workers inKherson Gubernia, 69 points out that the horse-drawn threshing-machine requires from 14 to 23 and more labour-ers, while the steam thresher requires from 50 to 70. 
 Some farms employed between 500 and 1,000 workers—an extreme-ly high figure for agriculture. 
 Capitalism made it possibleto replace more costly male labour by female and child la-bour. 
 For example, in the small town of Kakhovka—oneof the chief labour-markets in Taurida Gubernia, where as many as 40,000 workers used to gather, and where, in the nineties of the last century, there were between 20,000 and30,000, the number of women in 1890 comprised 12. 
7 per centof all the registered workers, while in 1895 the percentagewas already 25. 
6. 
 Children, in 1893, constituted 0. 
7 per centof the total, and in 1895 already 1. 
69 per cent. 
 Collecting workers from all over Russia, the capitalist farms sorted them out according to their requirements,and created something akin to the hierarchy of factory work-ers. 
 For example, the following categories are indicated:full workers and semi-workers, these again being subdividedinto “workers of great strength” (16 to 20 years of age) and semi-workers of “little assistance” (children between the ages of 8 and 14). 
 No trace here remains of the old, so-called“patriarchal” relations between the landlord and “his” peas- /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR ant. 
 Labour-power becomes a commodity like any other. 
 The “truly Russian” type of bondage disappears, yielding place to weekly wage payment, fierce competition, bargain-ing between workers and employers. 
 The accumulation ofenormous masses of workers in the labour-markets, and in-credibly arduous and insanitary working conditions, havegiven rise to attempts to establish public control over the bigfarms. 
 These attempts are characteristic of “large-scale in-dustry” in agriculture, but of course they cannot be durable so long as political liberties and legal labour organisationsare lacking. 
 How hard the working conditions of the immi-grant workers are may be judged by the fact that the working day ranges from 12 @ to 15 hours. 
 Injuries to workers tending machines have become a common occurrence. 
 Occupational diseases have spread (for example, among workers tendingthreshing-machines, etc. 
). 
 All the “charms” of purely capi-talist exploitation in the most developed, American, form areto be observed in Russia at the end of the nineteenth century,side by side with purely medieval labour-service and corvée systems of economy, which have long ago disappeared in the advanced countries. 
 The whole great variety of agrarian re-lations in Russia amounts to the interweaving of feudal andbourgeois methods of exploitation. 
 To complete this account of the conditions of hired labour in Russian agriculture, we may quote statistics regarding the budgets of peasant farms in the lower groups. 
 Wage-labour is included here under the euphemistic heading of “employ-ments” or “industries”. 
 In what relation does the income fromthese “employments” stand to the income from agriculture?The budgets of the horseless and one-horse peasants in Voronezh Gubernia give an exact answer to this question. 
 The gross income of a horseless peasant from all sources is estimated at 118 rubles 10 kopeks, of which 57 rubles 11kopeks is from farming and 59 rubles 4 kopeks from “indus-tries”. 
 The latter sum is made up of 36 rubles 75 kopeks income from “personal industries” and 22 rubles 29 kopeks miscel-laneous income. 
 Included in the latter item is income from the letting of land ! The gross income of a one-horse peasant is 178 rubles 12 kopeks, of which 127 rubles 69 kopeks is fromfarming and 49 rubles 22 kopeks from “industries” (35 rubles from personal industries, 6 rubles carting, 2 rubles from “commercial and industrial establishments and enterprises” and 6 rubles miscellaneous income). 
 If we sub-tract the expenditure on farming, we will get 69 rubles 37kopeks income from farming, as against 49 rubles 22 kopeksincome from “industries”. 
 That is how three-fifths of thepeasant households in Russia obtain their livelihood. 
 Natu-rally, the standard of living of these peasants is no higher, and sometimes even lower, than that of farm-hands. 
 In this same Voronezh Gubernia the average yearly wage of a farm-hand (during the decade 1881-91) was 57 rubles, plus keep,which cost 42 rubles. 
 Yet the cost of maintaining a whole family of four persons amounted to 78 rubles per annum in the case of a horseless peasant and 98 rubles per annum for a family of five in the case of a one-horse peasant. 
 The Russian peasant has been reduced by labour service, taxes,and capitalist exploitation to such a miserable, starvationstandard of life as seems incredible in Europe. 
 In Europesuch social types are called paupers . 
 VI To sum up all that has been said above concerning the differentiation of the peasantry, we will first of all quotethe only printed summary statistics for the whole of EuropeanRussia, enabling us to judge of the various groups existingwithin the peasantry at various periods. 
 These are the re-turns of the army-horse censuses. 
 In the second edition of my book, The Development of Capitalism , * I summarised these returns for 48 gubernias in European Russia for theperiods 188-91 and 1896-1900. 
 The following is an abstractof the most important results: Number of peasant house-holds (in millions) 1888-91 1896-1900 Total % Total % Horseless ...... 2. 
8 27. 
3 3. 
2 29. 
2 Having 1 horse .... 
 2. 
9 28. 
5 3. 
4 30. 
3 ” 2 horses .... 
 2. 
2 22. 
2 2. 
5 22. 
0 ” 3”.... 
 1. 
1 10. 
6 1. 
0 9. 
4 ” 4 horses and more 1. 
1 11. 
4 1. 
0 9. 
1 Total ...... 10. 
1 100. 
0 11. 
1 100. 
0 *See present edition, Vol. 
 3, p. 
 146. 
— Ed. 
 As I have already mentioned, incidentally, above, these figures evidence the increasing expropriation of the peasant-ry. 
 The one-million increase in the number of households went entirely to enlarge the two lowest groups. 
 The totalnumber of horses declined in this period from 16. 
91 to 16. 
87millions, that is to say, the peasantry as a whole becamesomewhat poorer in horses. 
 The highest group also becamepoorer in horses: in 188-91 it had 5. 
5 horses per household compared with 5. 
4 in 1896-1900. 
 It is easy to draw the conclusion from these figures that no “differentiation” is taking place among the peasantry; thepoorest group increased most, whereas the richest group di-minished most (in number of households). 
 This is notdifferentiation, but levelling up of poverty! And such conclu-sions, based on similar methods, can very often be found in the literature on the subject. 
 But if we ask: have therelations between the groups within the peasantry changed?—we see something different. 
 In 1888-91 the lowest groups,constituting half the households, owned 13. 
7 per cent ofthe total number of horses, and in 1896-1900 the percentage was exactly the same. 
 The most well-to-do groups, which constituted one-fifth of the households, owned 52. 
6 per centof the total number of horses in the first period, and 53. 
2per cent in the second period. 
 Clearly, the relations be-tween the groups remained almost unchanged. 
 The peasantrybecame poorer, the well-to-do groups became poorer, the crisis of 1891 made itself felt very seriously, but the rela-tions between the rural bourgeoisie and the peasantry thatwas being driven to ruin did not change as a result, norcould they change essentially. 
 This circumstance is often overlooked by those who under-take to judge of the differentiation of the peasantry on the basis of fragmentary statistics. 
 It would be ridiculous to imagine, for instance, that isolated statistics on the distri-bution of horses are able to explain anything at all in regard tothe differentiation of the peasantry. 
 This distribution provesabsolutely nothing, if it is not taken together with the entire sum total of data on peasant farming. 
 If, in examining these data, we have established what is common among the groups in regard to distribution of the renting and the let-ting of land, improved implements and manure, earnings and purchased land, hired labourers and numbers of livestock, if we have proved that all these various aspects of the phe-nomenon are inseparably interconnected, and reveal in fact the formation of opposite economic types—a proletariat anda rural bourgeoisie—if we have established all this, and onlyto the extent that we have established this, we can take iso-lated figures showing, say, the distribution of horses, to illus-trate all that has been said above. 
 On the other hand, if we are referred to this or that case of diminution in the num-ber of horses owned by the well-to-do group, say, over a giv-en period, it would be sheer nonsense to draw any generalconclusions from this alone as to the relation within the peas-antry between the rural bourgeoisie and the other groups. 
In no single capitalist country, in no single branch of econo-my, is there, or can there be (the market being predominant) an even process of development: capitalism cannot develop otherwise than in leaps and zigzags, now rapidly advancing,now dropping temporarily below the previous level. 
 And thecrux of the matter concerning the Russian agrarian crisisand the forthcoming upheaval is not what degree of devel-opment has been reached by capitalism, or what the rate of that development is, but whether it is, or is not, a capital-ist crisis and upheaval, whether it is, or is not, taking placein conditions in which the peasantry is being transformedinto a rural bourgeoisie and a proletariat, and whether therelations between the various households within the commune are, or are not, bourgeois relations. 
 In other words: the primary object of any study of the agrarian question in Rus-sia is to establish the basic data for characterising the classsubstance of agrarian relations. 
 And only after we have es-tablished what classes and what trend of development weare dealing with, can we take up particular questions about the rate of development, the various modifications in the gen-eral trend of development, etc. 
 Marxist views on post-Reform peasant economy in Russia are grounded on the recognition of this economy as petty-bourgeois in type. 
 And the controversy which economistsin the Marxist camp have waged with the Narodnik econo-mists has revolved primarily (and cannot but do so, if the real nature of the differences between them is to be ascer-tained) around the point as to whether this characterisation is correct, whether it is applicable or not. 
 Unless this point is quite definitely cleared up, no progress whatever can be made towards more concrete or practical questions. 
 For example, it would be an absolutely hopeless and confusing task to exam-ine the different ways of solving the agrarian question be-queathed by the nineteenth century to the twentieth century,if we have not first cleared up in what general direction ouragrarian evolution is proceeding, what classes stand to gain should events take this or that course, etc. 
 The detailed figures on the differentiation of the peasantry quoted above reveal precisely that foundation of all the oth-er questions of the agrarian revolution without an under-standing of which it is impossible to proceed. 
 The sum totalof the relations between the various groups of the peasantry which we have studied in detail at opposite ends of Russia, reveals to us precisely what is the essence of the social andeconomic relations existing within the commune. 
 These re-lations strikingly reveal the petty-bourgeois nature of peas-ant economy in the present historical situation. 
 When theMarxists used to say that the small producer in agriculture (irrespective of whether he cultivates allotment or any other land) is inevitably, with the development of commodity econ-omy, a petty bourgeois, this proposition caused astonish-ment; it was said to be a mechanical, groundless attempt toapply outside models to our own original conditions. 
 But thedata on the relations between the groups, on the way the rich members of the commune outbid the poorer members for pos-session of the rented land, on the employment of farm-handsby the former and the conversion of the latter into hiredlabourers, etc. 
, etc. 
—all these data confirm the theoreticalconclusions of Marxism and render them incontrovertible. 
The question of the significance of the commune in the trend of Russia’s economic development is decided irrevocably by these data, because it is this actual trend of the actual(and not imaginary) commune that our data indicate. 
 De-spite all the equalised distribution of allotment land and de-spite the redistributions, etc. 
, it turns out that the trend of the real economic development of members of the peasant commune consists precisely in the formation of a rural bour-geoisie and in the squeezing-out of the mass of the poorestpeasants into the ranks of the proletariat. 
 As we shall see further on, both the Stolypin agrarian policy and the nation-alisation of the land demanded by the Trudoviks are in line with this trend of development, even though there is an enor-mous difference between these two forms of “solution” of theagrarian question from the point of view of the rapidity ofsocial development, the growth of productive forces and themaximum observance of the interests of the masses. 
 We must now also examine the question of the develop-ment of commercial farming in Russia. 
 The foregoing expo-sition included, as a premise, the well-known fact that thewhole of the post-Reform period is distinguished by thegrowth of trade and exchange. 
 We think it is quite super-fluous to cite statistics in confirmation of this. 
 But we mustshow, first, precisely to what extent present-day peasant econ-omy is already subordinated to the market and, secondly, what special forms agriculture assumes as it becomes subor-dinated to the market. 
 The most precise data on the first question are contained in the budget statistics of the Voronezh Zemstvo. 
 From thesestatistics we are able to separate the money expenditure and income of a peasant family from the total expenditure and in-come (gross incomes and expenditures were given above). 
Here is a table showing the role of the market: What percentage of his total expenditure and income is the peasant’s money expenditure and income? %% With no horse .... 
. 
 57. 
1 54. 
6 ” 1 horse .... 
. 
 46. 
5 41. 
4 ”2 horses .... 
. 
 43. 
6 45. 
7 ”3”.... 
. 
 41. 
5 42. 
3 ”4”.... 
. 
 46. 
9 40. 
8 ”5” and more 60. 
2 59. 
2 Average ...... 49. 
1 47. 
9 Thus, even the farm of the middle peasant—leave alone that of the well-to-do and of the impoverished, semi-prole-tarian, peasants—is subordinated to the market to a very powerful extent. 
 Hence all arguments about peasant farmingwhich ignore the predominant and growing role of the market,of exchange, of commodity production, are fundamentallywrong. 
 The abolition of the feudalist latifundia and of landlordism—a measure upon which all the thoughts of the Russian peasantry were concentrated at the end of the nine-teenth century—will increase and not diminish the power of the market, for the growth of trade and commodity produc-tion is retarded by labour service and bondage. 
 In regard to the second question, it must be pointed out that the penetration of capital into agriculture is a distinc-tive process which cannot be properly understood if we confine ourselves to bald figures covering the whole of Rus-sia. 
 Agriculture becomes commercial not suddenly, andnot to an equal degree on different farms and in differentparts of the country. 
 On the contrary, the market usuallysubordinates to itself one aspect of the complex economyof agriculture in one locality and another aspect in anoth-er, the remaining aspects not disappearing, but adapting themselves to the “main”, i. 
e. 
, the money, aspect. 
 For exam-ple, in one area it is mainly commercial grain farming thatdevelops: the staple produced for sale is grain. 
 Livestockraising plays a subordinate role in such farming, and fur-ther—in extreme cases of the one-sided development of grain farming—almost disappears. 
 The Far-West “wheat factories” in America, for instance, were sometimes organ-ised for one summer, almost without livestock. 
 In other areasit is mainly commercial stock-farming that develops:the staples produced for sale are meat or dairy produce. 
 Pure-ly crop farming adapts itself to stock-farming. 
 Of course, both the size of the farm and the methods of farm organisa-tion will differ in each case. 
 Suburban dairy farming cannotbe judged by the area of land under cultivation. 
 The samemeasure of what is large and small farming cannot be appliedto the steppe farmer, the market gardener, the tobacco-grow-er and the “dairy farmer” (to use an English term), etc. 
 The penetration of exchange and trade into agriculture gives rise to its specialisation, and this specialisation stead-ily increases. 
 The same economic indexes (the number ofhorses, for example) acquire a different significance in differ-ent regions of commercial agriculture. 
 Among the horse-less peasants in the environs of the capital cities there are, for example, big farmers who possess, say, dairy cattle, do a big volume of business and employ wage-labour. 
 Of course,the number of such farmers among the mass of horseless and one-horse peasants is absolutely insignificant; but if we take just the gross figures covering the whole country we shall not be able to trace the special type of capitalism in agriculture. 
 This circumstance deserves special notice. 
 If it is ignored, a correct picture of the development of capitalism in agricul-ture cannot be obtained, and it is easy to fall into the errorof vulgarisation. 
 The full complexity of the process can begrasped only by taking into account the real specific features of agriculture. 
 It is utterly wrong to say that, owing to its specific features, agriculture is not subject to the laws ofcapitalist development. 
 It is true that the specific featuresof agriculture hinder its subordination to the market; never-theless, everywhere and in all countries the growth of commer-cial agriculture is proceeding apace. 
 But the forms in which this formation of commercial agriculture takes place are indeed distinctive, and call for special methods of study. 
 To illustrate what has been said, let us take graphic examples from various regions of commercial agriculture inRussia. 
 In the commercial grain farming regions (Novoros-sia, Trans-Volga region) we see an extremely rapid increase in the harvest of cereals. 
 In 1864-66 these gubernias were be-hind the Central Black-Earth gubernias, with a net harvestof only 2. 
1 chetverts per head of population; in 1883-87these gubernias were ahead of the central area with a netharvest of 3. 
4 chetverts per head. 
 The most characteristicfeature of this region in the post-Reform period is expansion of the area under crops. 
 Very often the methods of tilling the land here are of the most primitive kind; attention isconcentrated exclusively on sowing the largest possible area. 
In the second half of the nineteenth century something simi-lar to the American “wheat factories” developed here. 
 Onecan judge quite well from the area under crops (which among peasants in the higher groups attained 271 dessiatines per household) as to the size and type of farm. 
 In another region—the industrial, and particularly in the environs of the capi-tal cities—such an expansion of the crop area is out of thequestion. 
 It is not commercial grain farming, but commer-cial stock-farming, that is particularly characteristic here. 
 In this case a proper picture of the farm cannot be got from the number of dessiatines tilled or the number of horses em-ployed. 
 A much more suitable gauge is the number of cows (dairy farming). 
 A change in crop rotation, grass cultivation and not the expansion of the crop area, are the characteristic indications here of progress in large-scale farming. 
 The num-ber of households with many horses is smaller here; a small-er number of horses may sometimes even be a sign of prog-ress. 
 On the other hand, the peasants in these parts are bet-ter off for cows than in the rest of Russia. 
 Mr. 
 Blagoveshchen-sky, in summing up the Zemstvo statistics, considered the average to be 1. 
2 cows per household; in 18 uyezds of St. 
 Petersburg, Moscow, Tver and Smolensk gubernias, we have1. 
6, and in St. 
 Petersburg Gubernia alone 1. 
8 per household. 
 70 Both commercial capital and capital invested in productionare applied mainly to livestock produce. 
 The size of incomedepends largely on the number of milch cows owned. 
 Dairy farms are developing. 
 The hiring of agricultural labourers by well-to-do peasants is developing; we have alreadymentioned that people migrate from the impoverished cen-tral area to the industrial gubernias to take up agricultural work. 
 In a word, the very same socio-economic relations man-ifest themselves here in an altogether different form, under farming conditions that do not resemble purely crop-raising conditions. 
 And if we take the cultivation of special crops, like tobacco-growing, or the combination of agriculture and technicalprocessing of the produce (distilling, beet-sugar refining,oil seed-pressing, potato-starch making and other industries), the forms in which capitalist relations manifest them-selves will resemble neither those which exist in commercialgrain farming nor those which develop in commercial live-stock farming. 
 In this case we must take as our gauge eitherthe area under special crops, or the size of the undertakingconnected with the given farm, which is engaged in process-ing the produce. 
 Gross agricultural statistics, which deal only with the sizes of land plots or with the number of cattle, do not bya long way take account of all this variety of forms, so thatconclusions based only on statistics of this kind quite oftenprove to be wrong. 
 Commercial farming is growing much more rapidly, the influence of exchange is wider, and capital is transforming agriculture much more profoundly than onemight suppose from aggregate figures and abstract averages. 
 VII Let us now sum up what has been said above about the es-sence of the agrarian question and the agrarian crisis in Rus-sia at the end of the nineteenth century. 
 What is the essence of this crisis? M. 
 Shanin, in his pamphlet Municipalisation or Division for Private Property (Vilna, 1907), insists that our agrarian crisis is a crisis of agricultural methods, and that its root cause lies in the need for raising the technique of agriculture, whichis incredibly low in Russia, in the need for changing over tomore efficient methods of arable farming, etc. 
 This opinion is wrong, because it is too abstract. 
 Undoubt-edly a change over to higher techniques is necessary, but, in the first place, this transition has actually been going on in Russia since 1861. 
 However slow the progress, it isbeyond all doubt that both landlord farming and peasantfarming, as represented by the well-to-do minority, have beengoing over to grass cultivation, to the use of improved imple-ments, to more systematic and careful manuring of the soil, etc. 
 And since this slow progress in agricultural technique has been a general process since 1861, it is obvious that itis not enough to quote it as an explanation of the universal-ly admitted intensification of the agricultural crisis at the endof the nineteenth century. 
 Secondly, both forms of “solu-tion” of the agrarian question that have been advanced in prac-tice—both the Stolypin solution from above , by preserving landlordism and finally doing away with the commune, byhaving the kulaks plunder it, and also the peasant (Trudovik)solution from below , by abolishing landlordism and by nation-alising all the land—both these solutions, each in its ownway, facilitate the transition to a higher technique and pro-mote agricultural progress. 
 The only difference is that one solution bases this progress on accelerating the process offorcing the poor peasants out of agriculture, while the otherbases it on accelerating the process of eliminating labourservice by abolishing the feudalist latifundia. 
 That the poorpeasants farm their land very badly is an undoubted fact. 
 Undoubtedly, therefore, if their land is allowed to be sacked and plundered by a handful of well-to-do peasants, agricul-tural technique advances to a higher level. 
 But it is just as undoubted a fact that the landed estates worked on the basis of the labour-service system and bondage, are cultivated very badly, worse than the allotment lands (recall the figures quot-ed above: 54 poods per dessiatine from allotment land; 66from landed estates farmed on capitalist lines, 50 from estatescultivated on the métayer system, and 45 from land rentedby peasants by the year). 
 The labour-service system of land-lord economy means the preservation of incredibly obsolete methods of cultivation, the perpetuation of barbarism both in agricultural technique and in the entire life of society. 
It is beyond doubt, therefore, that if labour service is rootedout, i. 
e. 
, if landlordism is completely abolished (and with-out redemption), then agricultural technique will advanceto a higher level. 
 Consequently, in the agrarian question and the agrarian crisis the heart of the matter is not simply the removal ofobstacles to the advance of agricultural technique, but what way these obstacles are to be removed, what class is to effect this removal and by what methods. 
 And it is absolutely neces-sary to remove the obstacles to the development of the coun-try’s productive forces—necessary not only in the subjec-tive sense of the word, but also in the objective sense, i. 
e. 
,this removal is inevitable, and no power on earth can pre-vent it. 
 The mistake made by M. 
 Shanin, as well as by many others who write on the agrarian question, is that he approached the correct thesis of the need to raise the level of farming technique in too abstract a fashion, failing to take accountof the peculiar forms in which feudalist and capitalist fea-tures are interwoven in Russian agriculture. 
 The main andfundamental obstacle to the development of the productiveforces in Russian agriculture is the survivals of serfdom, i. 
e. 
, primarily labour service and bondage, then feudalist taxes, the peasant’s inequality in the matter of civic rights,his degraded status in relation to the higher estate of society,etc. 
, etc. 
 The elimination of these survivals of serfdom haslong become an economic necessity, and the crisis in agricul-ture at the end of the nineteenth century has become so intense-ly aggravated precisely because the process of emancipating Russia from medievalism has been dragging out too long,because labour service and bondage have lingered too long. 
 They have been dying out since 1861 so slowly that the new organism has come to need violent means for ridding itself of them quickly. 
 What is this new economic organism of Russian agricul-ture? We have tried above to show this in particular detail,because the economists in the liberal-Narodnik camp haveparticularly wrong ideas on this subject. 
 The new economicorganism that is hatching out of its feudalist shell in Russia is commercial agriculture and capitalism. 
 The economics of landlord farming, when it is not being conducted on the basisof labour service or the bondage of the allotment-holdingpeasant, clearly reveal capitalist features. 
 The economicsof peasant farming—in so far as we are able to look inside thecommune and see what is going on in real life despite the official equalisation of allotment land—again reveal purely capitalist features everywhere. 
 Commercial agriculture issteadily growing in Russia in spite of all obstacles, andthis commercial agriculture is inevitably being transformedinto capitalist agriculture, although the forms of this trans-formation are diverse in the highest degree and vary from district to district. 
 What should constitute that violent elimination of the medieval shell, which has become necessary for the furtherfree development of the new economic organism? The aboli-tion of medieval forms of landownership. 
 In Russia, to thisvery day, ownership both by the landlords and, to a consid-erable extent, by the peasants is medieval. 
 We have seen how the new economic conditions are breaking down thismedieval framework and divisions in landowning, compel-ling the poor peasant to let his allotment which he has heldfrom time immemorial, compelling the well-to-do peasantto build up his own comparatively large farm out of the frag-ments of different types of land: allotments, purchased land, land rented from the landlord. 
 On the landed estate, too, itsdivision into lands cultivated on the basis of labour service,rented to peasants on annual leases, and farmed on capital-ist lines, shows that new systems of farming are being builtup outside the framework of the old, medieval system of land-ownership. 
 That system can be abolished at one stroke by a determined break with the past. 
 Such a measure would be the nation-alisation of the land, which all the representatives of the peasantry were demanding, more or less consistently, in the period between 1905 and 1907. 
 The abolition of private prop-erty in land in no way changes the bourgeois basis of commer-cial and capitalist landowning. 
 There is nothing more erro-neous than the opinion that the nationalisation of the land hasanything in common with socialism, or even with equalisedland tenure. 
 Socialism, as we know, means the abolition of commodity economy. 
 Nationalisation, on the other hand, means converting the land into the property of the state, andsuch a conversion does not in the least affect private farmingon the land. 
 The system of farming on the land is not alteredby whether the land is the property or “possession” of thewhole country, of the whole nation, just as the (capitalist) system of farming by the well-to-do muzhik is not altered by whether he buys land “in perpetuity”, rents land from thelandlord or the state, or “gathers up” the allotment plots ofimpoverished, insolvent peasants. 
 So long as exchange re-mains, it is ridiculous to talk of socialism. 
 The exchange ofagricultural produce and means of production does not de-pend upon the forms of landowning at all. 
 (I will remark in parenthesis that I am setting forth here only the economicsignificance of nationalisation, not advocating it as a pro-gramme; that I have done in the work referred to above. 
 *) As to equalisation, we have already shown above how it is applied in practice in the distribution of allotment land. 
 We have seen that, within the commune, allotment land is distributed fairly equally, with only a slight tendency infavour of the rich peasants. 
 But in the long run very littletrace is left of this equalisation, owing to the fact that thepoor let their land and that rented land is concentrated inthe hands of the rich. 
 Clearly, no equalisation of landholding is able to eliminate inequality in the actual use of the land, so long as there exist property differences among the peasantsand a system of exchange which aggravates these differences. 
 The economic significance of nationalisation does not lie at all where it is very often sought. 
 It does not consist in thefight against bourgeois relationships (as Marx showed long ago, 71 nationalisation is a highly consistent bourgeois *See present edition, Vol. 
 13, pp. 
 294-325. 
— Ed. 
 measure), but in the fight against feudalist relationships. 
 The multiplicity of medieval forms of landowning hampers eco-nomic development; the social-estate divisions hamper trade; the disparity between the old system of landowningand the new economy gives rise to sharp contradictions;owing to the latifundia, the landlords prolong the existenceof labour service; the peasants are shut up, as in a ghetto,within the allotment system, the framework of which is being broken down in practice at every step. 
 Nationalisation makes a clean sweep of all medieval relations in landowning, doesaway with all artificial barriers on the land, and makesthe land really free—for whom? For every citizen? Nothing of the kind. 
 The freedom of the horseless peasant (i. 
e. 
, 3 $ million households) consists, as we have seen, in letting his allotment land. 
 The land becomes free for the farmer , for the one who really wants, and is able , to cultivate it according to the requirements of modern farming in general and of theworld market in particular. 
 Nationalisation would hastenthe death of serfdom and the development of purely bour-geois farming on land free of all medieval lumber. 
 That is the real historical significance of nationalisation in Russia—what it has come to mean by the end of the nineteenth century. 
 As for the other, objectively not impossible, road to clear up landowning for capitalism, it consists, as we have seen,in the accelerated plundering of the commune by the rich, and in consolidating private landed property among the well-to-do peasantry. 
 This way leaves the principal source oflabour service and bondage untouched; the landlord latifun-dia are left intact. 
 Obviously, this method of clearing theway for capitalism guarantees free development of theproductive forces to a far lesser degree than the first one. 
 Once the latifundia are retained, this inevitably means also the retention of the bonded peasant, of métayage, of therenting of small plots by the year, the cultivation of the“squire’s” land with the implements of the peasants, i. 
e. 
,the retention of the most backward farming methods and ofall that Asiatic barbarism which is called patriarchal rural life. 
 The two ways I have indicated of “solving” the agrarian question in developing bourgeois Russia correspond to the two paths of development of capitalism in agriculture. 
 I call these two paths the Prussian and the American paths. 
 The characteristic feature of the first is that medieval rela-tions in landowning are not liquidated at one stroke, but are gradually adapted to capitalism, which because of this for a long time retains semi-feudal features. 
 Prussian landlordism was not crushed by the bourgeois revolution; it survived and became the basis of “Junker” economy, which is essentially capitalistic, but involves a certain degree of dependence of 72 As a consequence, the social and political domination of the Junkers was consolidated for many decades after 1848, and the productive forces of German agriculture developed far more slowly than in America. 
 There, on the contrary, it was not the old slave-holding economy of the big landowners that became the basis of capitalist agriculture (the Civil War smashed the slave-owners’ estates), but the free economy of the free farmer working on free land—free from all medieval fetters, from serfdom and feudalism on the one hand, and from the fetters of private property in land, on the other. 
 Land was given away in America, out of its vast resources, at a nominal price; and it is only on a new, fully capitalist basis that private property in land has now developed there. 
 Both these paths of capitalist development quite clear-ly emerged in Russia after 1861. 
 The progress of landlord farming is undoubted, and the slowness of this progress is not accidental, but inevitable so long as the survivals of serfdom remain. 
 It is also beyond doubt that the freer the peasants are, the less they are weighed down by the remnants of serfdom (in the south, for example, all these favourable conditions exist), and finally, the better, all in all, the peasants are provided with land, the greater is the differenti-ation among the peasantry and the more rapid is the process of forming a class of rural capitalist farmers. 
 The whole question of the further development of the country boils down to this: which of the two paths of development will ultimate-ly prevail, and, correspondingly, which class will carry through the necessary and inevitable change—the old land-owning gentry or the free peasant farmer? It is often thought in Russia that nationalisation of the land means removing the land from the sphere of commerce. 
the rural population, such as the Gesindeordnun g, etc. 
 This, undoubtedly, is the point of view of the majority of the advanced peasants and of ideologists of the peasantry. 
 But this view is deeply fallacious. 
 The very opposite is the case. 
 Private property in land is an obstacle to the free in-vestment of capital in land. 
 Therefore, where the free rentingof land from the state exists (and this is the essence of national-isation in bourgeois society) the land is drawn more ener-getically into the sphere of commerce than is the case where private property in land prevails. 
 There is much more free-dom of capital investment in land, and freedom of competi-tion in agriculture, where land is freely rented than whereland is private property. 
 Nationalisation of the land is, asit were, landlordism without the landlord. 
 And what land-lordism in the capitalist development of agriculture means is explained in the remarkably profound arguments of Marx in his Theories of Surplus-Value . 
 I have quoted these argu-ments in my work on the agrarian programme mentionedabove, but in view of the importance of the question, I takethe liberty of repeating them here. 
 * In the paragraph on the historical conditions of Ricardo’s theory of rent ( Theorien über den Mehrwert , II. 
 Band, 2. 
 Teil, Stuttgart, 1905, S. 
 5-7), Marx says that Ricardo andAnderson “start out from the view, regarded as very strangeon the Continent”, viz. 
, they presume that “no landedproperty exists as an obstacle to any investment of capitalin the land”. 
 At first sight this would seem a contradiction, because it is precisely in England that feudal landed property is considered to have been preserved more completely thananywhere else. 
 But Marx explains that it was in England of allcountries that capital “dealt so ruthlessly with the tradition-al relations of agriculture”. 
 England is in this respect “themost revolutionary country in the world”. 
 “All historically inherited relations—not only the position of the villages but the very villages themselves, not only the habitationsof the agricultural population, but this population itself,not only the ancient economic centres, but the very economyitself—have been ruthlessly swept away where they were incontradiction to the conditions of capitalist production in agriculture, or did not correspond to those conditions. 
 The *See present edition, Vol. 
 13, pp. 
 272-76. 
— Ed. 
 German [continues Marx] finds economic relations deter-mined by the traditional common-land relations [ Feldmar-ken], the position of economic centres, and particular conglomerations of the population. 
 The Englishmanfinds that the historical conditions of agriculture havebeen progressively created by capital since the fifteenthcentury. 
 The technical expression customary in theUnited Kingdom, the ‘clearing of estates’, does not oc-cur in any continental country. 
 But what does this ‘clearing of estates’ mean? It means that, without regard for the localpopulation—which is driven away, for existing villages—which are levelled to the ground, for farm buildings—which are torn down, for the kind of agriculture—which istransformed at a stroke, being converted for example from tillage to pasture, all conditions of production, instead of being accepted as they are handed down by tradition, arehistorically fashioned in the form necessary under the cir-cumstances for the most profitable investment of capital. 
To that extent, therefore, no landed property exists ; it allows capital—the farmer—to manage freely, since it is only concerned about the money income. 
 A Pomeranian land-owner [Marx refers to Rodbertus, whose theory of rent herefutes brilliantly and in detail in this work], his mind fullof his ancestral common lands, economic centres, and theagricultural collegium, etc. 
, is quite likely, therefore, tohold up his hands in horror at Ricardo’s ‘unhistorical’ views on the development of agricultural relations. 
” As a mat-ter of fact, “the English conditions are the only ones in whichmodern landed property, i. 
e. 
, landed property modified b y capitalist production, has developed adequately [in idealperfection]. 
 Here the English theory [i. 
e. 
, Ricardo’s theoryof rent] is the classical one for the modern, i. 
e. 
, capitalist mode of production. 
” In England, the clearing of the estates proceeded in revolutionary forms, accompanied by the violent break-upof peasant landowning. 
 The break-up of the old and obsoleteorder is absolutely inevitable in Russia too; but the nine-teenth century (and the first seven years of the twentieth) have not yet settled the question as to which class will do the breaking-up that we need, and in what form. 
 We haveshown above what the basis of the distribution of land is in Russia at the present time. 
 We have seen that 10 @ mil-lion peasant households with 75 million dessiatines of land are confronted by 30,000 owners of latifundia with 70 milli-on dessiatines. 
 A possible outcome of the struggle, whichcannot help breaking out on this basis, is that the holdingof land by the ten million households will be almost doubledwhile the holding of land by the upper 30,000 will disap-pear. 
 Let us examine this possible outcome from the purely theoretical point of view, from the point of view of the stateof the agrarian question in Russia at the end of the nineteenthcentury. 
 What should be the results of such a change? Fromthe standpoint of landowning relations, it is obvious thatthe medieval ownership of allotments and medieval landlord-ism would be completely refashioned. 
 The old order would be utterly swept away. 
 Nothing traditional would be left inlandowning relations. 
 What factor, however, would deter-mine the new agrarian relations? The “principle” of equali-sation? That is what the advanced peasant, affected by Na-rodnik ideology, is inclined to believe. 
 That is what the Narodnik thinks. 
 But it is an illusion. 
 In the commune the “principle” of equalisation, recognised by law and hallowedby custom, leads, in fact, to landownership becoming adapt-ed to differences in property status. 
 And on the basis of thiseconomic fact , confirmed a thousand times over both by Russian and West-European data, we assert that hopes of equalisation would be shattered as an illusion, and that the refashioning of landownership would be the only durable re-sult. 
 Would the significance of such a result be great? Very great, because no other measure, no other reform, no othertransformation could give such complete guarantees for themost rapid, wide and free progress of agricultural technique in Russia, and for the disappearance from our life of all traces of serfdom, social-estates, and the Asiatic way of life. 
 Progress of technique?—some may object. 
 But has it not been proved above by means-of precise data that land-lord farming is on a higher level than peasant farming inregard to grass cultivation, the employment of machines the manuring of the soil, and, of course, the quality of live-stock, etc. 
? Yes, it has been proved, and this fact is abso-lutely beyond doubt. 
 But it must not be forgotten that all these differences in economic organisation, technique, etc. 
, are summed up in yield . 
 And we have seen that the yield on the landlords’ lands cultivated by peasants on a métayer or other such basis is lower than the yield on allotment land. 
 That is the point nearly always overlooked when the agricultur-al level of landlord and peasant farming in Russia is dis-cussed. 
 Landlord farming is on a higher level insofar as it is conducted on capitalist lines. 
 And the whole point is that this “insofar”, at the end of the nineteenth century, has left the labour-service system as the predominant system offarming in our central districts. 
 Insofar as the landlords’ lands are still cultivated by the bonded peasant with hisantiquated implements, methods, etc. 
, to that extent land-lordism is the principal cause of backwardness and stagna-tion. 
 The change in the system of landownership that we are discussing would increase the yield on métayer and rentedland (at the present time the yield on such land—see thefigures above—is 50 and 45 poods as compared with 54 poodson allotment land and 66 poods on landlords’ land cultivatedon capitalist lines). 
 Even if this yield were increased only to the allotment-land level, the progress would be tremendous. 
 Needless to say, the yield on allotment land would also in-crease, both as a result of the peasant being freed from theyoke of the feudal latifundia, and also because the allotmentlands, like the rest of the land in the state, would then be-come free land, equally accessible (not to all citizens, but to citizens owning agricultural capital, i. 
e. 
—) to farmers. 
 This conclusion follows not at all from the data we have quoted concerning yield. 
 On the contrary, these data havebeen quoted merely to give a graphic illustration of theconclusion that follows from the sum total of data concerning the evolution of Russian landlord and peasant farming. 
 To refute this conclusion, one has to refute the fact that the history of Russian agriculture in the second half of the nine-teenth century is the history of the replacing of feudal bybourgeois production relations. 
 By sticking to the data concerning the number of peasant farms at the present time we may get the impression that the agrarian transformation we are examining would lead to a considerable fragmentation of agriculture. 
 Just thinkof it! Thirteen million households on 280 million dessiatines of land! Is not this a monstrous splitting up of the land? To this we reply: it is now that we see such a tremendous split-ting up of the land, for it is now that thirteen million farms are operating on an area of less than 280 million dessiatines! Consequently, the change we are interested in would not makethings worse at all in this respect. 
 More than that. 
 We wouldask further whether there are any grounds for thinkingthat in the event of this change the number of farms will remain unchanged? That is the view usually taken by those who are influenced by Narodnik theories or by the opinionsof the peasants themselves, whose every thought and striv-ing is drawn to the land and who can even dream of the in-dustrial workers being converted into small tillers of thesoil. 
 Undoubtedly, a certain number of Russian industrial workers at the end of the nineteenth century also adhere to this peasant point of view. 
 The question, however, is whetherthis point of view is correct , whether it conforms to the ob-jective economic conditions and to the course of economic de-velopment. 
 One merely has to put this question clearly inorder to see that the peasant point of view is conditioned by the obsolescent and irrevocable past, and not by the growing future. 
 The peasant point of view is wrong . 
 It represents the ideology of yesterday, whereas economic development is,in effect , leading not to an increase but to a diminution of the agricultural population. 
 The change in landownership relations that we are exam-ining will not and cannot abolish this process of diminution of the proportion of the agricultural population, a processcommon to all countries of developing capitalism. 
 I may beasked, in what way could this change bring about a diminu-tion of the agricultural population, once the land becomesfreely accessible to all? I shall reply to this question with a passage from a speech delivered in the Duma by a peasant deputy Mr. 
 Chizhevsky (Poltava Gubernia). 
 Speaking onMay 24, 1906, he said: “In our district, the peasants, theelectors who sent us here, figured things out like this: ‘If wewere a little better off, and if every one of our families couldafford to spend five or six rubles a year on sugar—then in every uyezd where it is possible to grow sugar-beet several sugar refineries would be built, in addition to those whichalready exist. 
’ It is quite natural that if these sugar refine-ries were built, what a mass of hands would be needed if production were intensified! The output of the sugar refine-ries would increase, etc. 
” (Verbatim Reports, p. 
 622. 
) This is a very characteristic admission by a local lead-er. 
 Had he been asked his opinion on the significance ofagrarian reform in general, he would probably have expressedNarodnik views. 
 But once it was a question not of “opin-ions” but of the concrete consequences of reform, capitalist truth immediately prevailed over Narodnik utopia . 
 For what the peasants told their deputy Mr. 
 Chizhevsky is preciselythe capitalist truth, the truth of capitalist reality. 
 There real-ly would be a tremendous increase in the number of sugarrefineries and in their productivity in the event of any ap-preciable improvement in the condition of the mass of small tillers of the soil. 
 And it goes without saying that not only the beet-sugar industry, but all the manufacturing indus-tries—textile, iron, engineering, building, etc. 
, etc. 
—wouldreceive a tremendous impetus, and would need a “mass ofhands”. 
 And this economic necessity would prove strongerthan all the fond hopes and dreams about equalisation. 
 Three and a quarter million horseless households will not become “farmers” as a result of any agrarian reform, or any changes in landownership, or any “allotting of land”. 
 These millionsof households (and quite a few of one-horse households),as we have seen, struggle on their patches of land, let their allotments . 
 An American development of industry would inevitably divert from agriculture the majority of such farm-ers, whose position in capitalist society is hopeless, andno “right to the land” will be able to prevent this. 
 Thirteenmillion small farmers with the most miserable, beg-garly and obsolete implements, scratching away at theirallotment and the landlords’ land—that is the reality of today; that is artificial over-population in agriculture, artificial in the sense of the forcible retention of those feu-dalist relations which have long outlived their day, andwhich could not be maintained for a single day without floggings, shootings, punitive expeditions, etc. 
 Any tan-gible improvement in the condition of the masses, any serious blow to the survivals of serfdom, would inevitably strike at the roots of this over-population of the countryside andwould immensely accelerate the process (which is taking place slowly even now) of diverting the population from agri-culture into industry, reduce the number of farms from 13 million to a much lower figure, and would lead Russia for-ward in the American and not in the Chinese manner, as isthe case now. 
 The agrarian question in Russia towards the close of the nineteenth century has imposed upon the classes of societythe task of putting an end to the old feudal past and sweep-ing clear the landowning system, sweeping clear the whole way for capitalism, for the growth of the productive forces,for the free and open struggle of classes. 
 And this very strug-gle of classes will determine the manner in which this taskwill be accomplished. 
 July 1 (new style), 1908 SOME FEATURES OF THE PRESENT COLLAPSE We have repeatedly had occasion to comment on the ideolog-ical and organisational collapse on the right , in the camp of the bourgeois democrats and the socialist opportunists, a collapse which is inevitable among parties and trends where petty-bourgeois intellectuals predominate, in a periodwhen counter-revolution is rampant. 
 But the picture ofcollapse would be incomplete if we did not also dwell oncollapse “ on the left ”, in the camp of the petty-bourgeois “Socialist-Revolutionaries”. 
 Of course one can use the expression “on the left” in this case only in a very relative sense, to characterise those whoare inclined to play at Leftism. 
 We have already pointed out in Proletary more than once that it was just the period of the Russian revolution at its highest peak which broughtout particularly clearly, in open mass politics, all the insta-bility, lack of firmness and of principle of S. 
R. 
 “revolution-ism”. 
 It is sufficient to recall only the most outstandingevents. 
 The autumn upswing in 1905; the S. 
R. 
s are in asecret bloc with the Popular Socialists, who are all for alegal “Popular Socialist Party”. 
 The congress of the S. 
R. 
Party in December 1905 rejects the “plan” to form such a double of the S. 
R. 
 Party, but in the spring and summer up-swing of 1906 we again see the S. 
R. 
s in the daily papers, i. 
e. 
, in the main mouthpieces for agitation among the people,working in a bloc with the Popular Socialists. 
 The latteropenly renounce the revolution in the autumn of 1906, afterthe Sveaborg and Kronstadt 73 defeat, and come out openly as opportunists—yet nevertheless the elections to the Second Du-ma in St. 
 Petersburg (in the spring of 1907) again revive theNarodnik bloc” of S. 
R. 
s, Popular Socialists and Trudoviks. 
 In short, the revolution has fully and finally revealed the absence of any definite class foundation for the Social-ist-Revolutionary Party, reduced it in practice to the role of an adjunct or wing of the petty-bourgeois peasant demo-crats and forced it constantly to waver between verbal rev-olutionary impulses and Popular Socialist and Trudovikdiplomacy. 
 The separating out of the Maximalists, whoall through the revolution were constantly separating out of the Socialist-Revolutionaries but could not get fully separated, only confirmed the class instability of Narodnikrevolutionism. 
 There remains nothing for the S. 
R. 
 Centre,the “pure” S. 
R. 
s, to do—we had written in issue No. 
4 of Proletary , in the article entitled “Socialist-Revolution-ary Mensheviks”—but to defend themselves against both the “new” trends in Socialist-Revolutionism with arguments borrowed from the Marxists. 
 * While the Social-Democrats emerged from the revolution with one definite class, the pro-letariat, rallied securely behind it, and with two trends,characteristic of all international Social-Democracy—op-portunist and revolutionary—sharply defined, the Socialist-Revolutionaries emerged without any direct basis, without any defined border-line to divide them on the one hand fromthe Trudoviks and the Popular Socialists, linked with a massof petty proprietors, or on the other hand from the Maximal-ists, as a terrorist group of intellectuals. 
 And now, when Maximalism has disappeared (possibly only for a time) we see the revival of a kindred trend in a new dress. 
 Revolutsionnaya Mysl , 74 the mouthpiece of a “group of Socialist-Revolutionaries”, draws apart (No. 
 1, April1908, No. 
 2, June 1908) from the “official organ of the S. 
R. 
Party”, i. 
e. 
, from the central organ, Znamya Truda , 75 and announces the “ revision of our [i. 
e. 
, S. 
R. 
] theoretical out-look, our S. 
R. 
 methods of struggle and organisation”. 
 Of course all this “revision”, all this “critical creative work”promised by the new paper is sheer phrase-mongering. 
 Inreality there is no question of any revision of theory, norcan there be, since the new paper has no theoretical outlookwhatever—all it has is the re-echo, in a thousand different keys, of appeals for terrorism, and a clumsy, inexpert, naïve *See present edition, Vol. 
 11, p. 
 199. 
— Ed. 
 adaptation of their views on revolution, on the mass move-ment, on the meaning of parties in general, etc. 
, to this allegedly new but in reality old, and indeed very old, meth-od. 
 The amazing poverty of such “theoretical” acquire-ments stares one in the face when comparing them with thebombastic promises to revise, criticise and create. 
 The com-plete confusion of theoretical views both of the “new” andof the “old” tendencies in Socialist-Revolutionism is all the more striking in that Revolutsionnaya Mysl itself underlines “the evolution taking place in the views of those in chargeof the official organ of the S. 
R. 
 Party”—an evolution con-sisting in the most intensified emphasising of “systematiccentral political terror” in order “to precipitate events”. 
That is a quotation from No. 
 8 of Znamya Truda . 
 And in No. 
 10-11 (February-March 1908) we find exactly the same talk about “straining the efforts of the whole party” for“central political terror”, about the necessity of finding “largefunds” for this purpose, and together with this a “delicatehint” as to the possible source of such funds. 
 “All parties,”writes Znamya Truda , pp. 
 7-8, “including the Cadets and the Peaceful Renovators, will enjoy the immediate benefits of this activity. 
 And therefore the party has the right tocount on the very widest public aid in this its struggle. 
” The reader can see that there is nothing new in what the new paper says. 
 The only characteristic thing about it isthat it provides instructive material for the assessment of political collapse , covered up by “Left” and supposedly revolutionary phrases. 
 The Mensheviks in Golos Sotsial-Demokrata (No. 
 1) justify their collection of funds among the liberals on the grounds that there is a certain politi-cal solidarity in their aims. 
 The S. 
R. 
s in Znamya Truda say to the Cadets and the Peaceful Renovators: why, you will enjoy the benefits. 
 Extremes meet. 
 Both petty-bour-geois opportunism and petty-bourgeois revolutionism, al-beit from different sides, “make eyes” at the Cadets and thePeaceful Renovators. 
 And it is not only in this that the extremes meet. 
 The revolution has brought disillusionment to both the Men-sheviks and the “revolutionary” Narodniks. 
 Both are ready to dismiss the Party principle, the old Party traditions, andthe revolutionary mass struggle. 
 “The mistake common to nearly all the revolutionary parties,” writes Revolutsionnoye Nedomyslie ,* “a mistake which has played a harmful role in the present crisis, consists in an exaggerated belief in the possibility and necessity of a mass rising of the people.... 
Events have not justified the expectations of the party. 
” Invain, it appears, did the Socialist-Revolutionaries build“a socialist programme according to the Marxist model”,build up “a conception of the revolution which identified it with a mass movement and mass insurrection caused by economic needs, with a correction being made, however,for a minority with initiative”. 
 Instead of corrections, onemust develop “the theory and practice of the active function-ing of an initiating minority” (No. 
 1, pp. 
 6-7). 
 One mustexalt the significance “of the spontaneous feeling which grips the revolutionary and the ideals which inspire him” (No. 
 2, p. 
 1); as for theoretical questions, philosophy, scien-tific socialism—all these are nonsense, in the opinion of the“new” social-revolutionary obscurantists. 
 “Is there hope ofan armed uprising in the more or less immediate future?”(that’s how they put it: “more or less immediate”)—asks Revolutsionnoye Nedomyslie , and answers itself: “All are agreed that there is no such hope” (No. 
 2, p. 
 2). 
 The conclu-sion is that in Russia “a political revolution cannot be car-ried out except by a revolutionary minority” (p. 
 7). 
 “Thereasons for the failure of the revolutionary parties duringthe last three years were not accidental, and depended in our view not only on objective conditions and not only on tactical mistakes, but lay also in the very conception oftheir organisation” (p. 
 10). 
 The revolutionaries, you see,set themselves the “impossible tasks” of really leading themasses. 
 The Social-Democrats confused the S. 
R. 
s and in-duced them, to the detriment of their real job of terrorist struggle, to think about organising the peasantry and pre-paring it for a universal armed uprising (p. 
 11). 
 Extremecentralisation of the parties—“rule by generals”, “thespirit of authoritarianism” (p. 
 12)—there is the evil. 
 “Ina large and strong party the revolutionaries saw the only *Lenin is sarcastically calling Revolutsionnaya Mysl (Revolu-tionary Thought) by the title, which means “Revolutionary Thought-lessness, Stupidity”. 
— Ed. 
 means and guarantee for achieving the object aimed at, and did not notice either the practical impossibility in our Russian conditions of creating such a party or all its dark sides” (p. 
 12). 
 This is enough, we think! The mental chaos that reigns in Revolutsionnaya Mysl , the obscurantism it preaches, the mean philistine despair, timidity and disheartenment inface of the first encountered difficulties on which its al-legedly revolutionary programme is built, are not worth wasting words on. 
 The quotations we have made speak forthemselves. 
 But let not the reader think that these arguments are pure nonsense, accidentally blurted out by an unknown andinsignificant little group. 
 No, such a view would be mis-taken. 
 There is logic here, the logic of disillusionment in their party and in a people’s revolution, disillusionment in thecapacity of the masses for direct revolutionary struggle. 
 It is the logic of the keyed-up intellectual, of hysteria, ofincapacity for steady, stubborn work, of inability to applythe basic principles of theory and tactics to altered circum-stances, of inability to carry on the work of propaganda, agitation and organisation in conditions sharply differingfrom those which we recently experienced. 
 Instead of exert-ing every effort to fight the spirit of philistine chaos whichis penetrating not only the upper classes but the lower classesas well; instead of gathering together more firmly the scat-tered party forces to defend tried revolutionary principles; instead of this, unbalanced people, detached from any classconnection with the masses, throw overboard all they everlearned, and proclaim “a revision”, i. 
e. 
, a return to the oldrubbish-heap, to revolutionary rule-of-thumb methods, tothe sporadic petty group activities. 
 No heroism on the part of these groups or individuals in the terrorist struggle will alter the fact that their activity as members of a party i s an expression of collapse . 
 And it is extremely important to grasp the truth, confirmed by the experience of all countrieswhich have undergone the defeat of a revolution, that oneand the same psychology, one and the same class peculiarity (that of the petty bourgeoisie, for example) is displayed both in the dejection of the opportunist and in the despera-tion of the terrorist. 
 “All are agreed that there is no hope of an armed uprising in the more or less immediate future. 
” Meditate over this flashy and hackneyed phrase. 
 These people have evidently never stopped to consider the objective conditions whichat first give rise to a full-scale political crisis, and then,when the crisis becomes acute, to civil war. 
 These people havelearned by heart the “ slogan ” of armed uprising, without having understood the meaning of this slogan or its applic-ability. 
 That is why, after the first defeats of the revolu-tion they so lightly throw aside their ill-digested slogans,taken on trust. 
 Whereas if these people valued Marxism asthe only revolutionary theory of the twentieth century, ifthey had studied the history of the Russian revolutionarymovement, they would have seen the difference between phrase-mongering and the development of really revolution-ary slogans. 
 The Social-Democrats did not put forward the“slogan” of insurrection either in 1901, when demonstrationscaused Krichevsky and Martynov to begin shouting about“the assault”, or in 1902 and 1903, when the late Nadezhdincalled the plan of the old Iskra 76 “literary exercises”. 
 They put forward the slogan of insurrection only after January 9, 1905,77 when not a single person could doubt any longer that a general political crisis had broken out , that it was growing more acute daily and hourly, by the direct move-ment of the masses. 
 And within a few months this crisisled to insurrection. 
 What lesson follows from this? The lesson that we must now carefully follow the new political crisis that is nowbrewing, teach the masses the lessons of 1905 and the inevi-tability of every acute crisis developing into an insurrection,and strengthen the organisation that will release this sloganat the moment the crisis arrives. 
 But it is a barren occupa-tion to ask, “is there hope in the immediate future”? The state of affairs in Russia is such that no thoughtful socialist willventure to prophesy. 
 All that we know and can say amounts to this, that without reconstructing agrarian relations,without completely breaking up the old land system, Russiacannot live—but live she will. 
 The struggle is about whether Stolypin will succeed in breaking it up the landlords’ way, or whether the peasants, under the leadership of the workers,will do it themselves to suit their own purpose. 
 The business of the Social-Democrats is to imbue the masses with a clear understanding of this economic foundation of the growing crisis, and to train up a serious party organisation which could help the people to assimilate the abundant lessonsof the revolution, and would be capable of leading them in struggle, when the maturing forces become fully ripe fora new revolutionary “campaign”. 
 But this reply, of course, will seem “vague” to people who regard “slogans”, not as a practical conclusion from a class analysis and assessment of a particular moment in history,but as a charm with which a party or a tendency has beenprovided once and for all. 
 Such people don’t understandthat incapacity to adapt their tactics to the differences be-tween fully defined and not yet defined moments is the result of political inexperience and narrowness of outlook. 
 To strengthen organisation, indeed! Our heroes of the revolu-tionary “screech” turn up their noses at such a humble,innocent task, which does not promise “immediately”, atonce, tomorrow morning, to provide a roar and a crash. 
“Events have not justified the expectations of the party. 
” And this is said after three years of revolution, which gave unexampled confirmation of the role and significance of strong parties. 
 It was the Russian revolution which in itsvery first period demonstrated that it was possible even under the Plehve regime 78 to create a party that was really capable of leading classes . 
 In the spring of 1905 our Party was a league of underground circles; in the autumn it became the party of the millions of the proletariat. 
 Did this happen “all at once”, gentlemen, or did it take ten years of slow,steady, unobtrusive and quiet work to prepare and ensure such a result? And if at such a moment as the present one, the official and unofficial S. 
R. 
 gentlemen are putting regi-cide to the fore and not the task of setting up a party organ-isation among the peasant masses capable of hammering out something more solid, more ideologically consistent, something more firm and staunch, out of the jelly-like revo-lutionism of the Trudovik current of opinion, we shall say that Narodnik socialism in Russia is dying, that it has long since died, that its leaders are dimly aware of their “bank-ruptcy” as Narodniks after the very first campaign of a peo-ple’s revolution. 
 We did not expect that peasants would display capacity for a leading role, or even an independent role, in the revo-lution; and we shall not lose heart at the failure of the first campaign, which revealed the vast extent to which revolu-tionary-democratic ideas had spread among the peasantry,even though these ideas were extremely hazy and sloppy. 
And we will be able to work again as consistently and stub-bornly as we did before the revolution in order that the Party tradition should not be broken, in order that the Party should grow stronger and be able in the second campaign to lead, not two or three million proletarians, but five timesor ten times as many. 
 You don’t believe in this task?You find it dull? Well, the door is open, worthy friends;you are not revolutionaries, you are simply ranters! And your official organ treats the question of taking part in the Third Duma in the same hysterical way. 
 * In Znamya Truda , No. 
 10-11, one such hysterical writer sneers at the mistakes of our Social-Democratic deputies in the Third Duma, and exclaims about their statements: “Who knowsanything about these statements, about these votings and abstentions?” (p. 
 11). 
 We say to this: “Yes, our Social-Democratic deputies in the Third Duma have made many mistakes. 
 And this veryexample the S. 
R. 
s chose to quote demonstrates the differencein the attitude of a workers ’ party and a group of intellec-tuals . 
 A workers’ party understands that in a period of polit-ical lull and collapse the latter must inevitably show itself in the Duma group too, since in the Third Duma it was evenless capable than in the Second of assembling large party *For a detailed analysis of S. 
R. 
 boycottism, see the article on “Parliamentary Cretinism Inside Out” in Proletary , No. 
 18. 
 In the autumn of 1907, seemingly appealing to a genuinely revolutionaryboycottist tradition, the S. 
R. 
s were already in practice degradingthis tradition, cancelling it out, replacing the revolutionary boycott-assault by pitiful and impotent “refusal to participate”. 
 They were already assuring a credulous public then that to “turn one’s back” on the reactionary Duma meant inflicting “a big moral” defeat onthe government, and taking “the first serious step to changing thegeneral political picture”. 
 Then, too, we already exposed the true character of these “revo-lutionary rhetorics ... of gentry who do not scruple to muddle the heads of the masses for the sake of naïve self-advertisement of their party”. 
 forces. 
 Therefore the workers’ party criticises and corrects the mistakes of its deputies. 
 Every organisation, by discuss-ing each speech and arriving at the conclusion that such-and-such a statement or speech was a mistake, providesmaterial for political action by the masses. 
 Don’t worry,gentlemen of the S. 
R. 
 Party: at the moment when the polit-ical crisis becomes acute, our group—and in any case mem-bers of our Duma group— will know how to do their duty . 
 And our criticism of their mistakes is done publicly, and openly, before the masses. 
 Our deputies learn from thiscriticism, the classes learn, the Party learns—the Partywhich has seen hard times, and knows that it is not by rantingbut only by the stubborn and steadfast work of all organi-sations is it possible to emerge with honour from a diffi-cult situation. 
 Even Proletary , which, as a newspaper pub-lished abroad, realised that it was under an obligation togive its advice from afar with care, openly proposed measuresfor improving the work of the group. 
 Our open Party criti-cism, added to the work of the group, achieves the resultthat the masses know both the Duma statements and the nature of the Party’s corrections to them. 
 And failure to appreciate the Duma word at a time when Party organisa-tions and the Party press are facing the effects of the deepcollapse, is a sign of boundless intellectualist irresponsibil-ity. 
 The S. 
R. 
s don’t understand the importance of open social-ist speeches which are frankly criticised and corrected in the Party press. 
 The S. 
R. 
s prefer to hush up the mistakesof their representatives: one more reminder of this was in No. 
 10-11 of Znamya Truda , when it abused us for making “philistine” statements about Gershuni’s love of the Cadets. 
We long ago expressed our opinion on this question, * and would not start repeating it now, so soon after the death by torture at the hands of the tsar’s executioners of a man whoearned deep respect by his loyalty to a revolutionary organi-sation. 
 But since the S. 
R. 
s have raised the question, weshall give our reply. 
 You can answer us in no way exceptby abuse, gentlemen; you cannot say, frankly and openly, which of you approves or does not approve of Gershuni’s * See present edition, Vol. 
 13, pp. 
 153-60. 
— Ed. 
 stand at the February (1907) Congress of the S. 
R. 
 Party. 
 You cannot reply on the substance of the matter and show up the mistakes of your leaders, the number of their supporters, etc. 
, because you do not have a party , you attach no value to educating the masses by open criticism of persons, state-ments, tendencies and shades of opinion. 
 The working class will know how to train up and harden its organisations by open criticism of its representatives. 
 Not all at once, not without friction, not without struggle and not without hard work—but we shall solve the difficult problem which the difficult turn of events has confrontedus with, namely, to combine open speeches in the Dumawith illegal Party activity. 
 In the working out of this prob-lem will be revealed the maturity of a party which has gone through the first campaign of the revolution. 
 And the work-ing out of this problem will provide a guarantee that in thesecond campaign the proletariat will be able, under the lead-ership of Social-Democracy, to fight more ably and moreunitedly, and to gain more decisive victories. 
 Proletary , No. 
 32, Published according July 2 (15), 1908 to the text in Proletary THE AGRARIAN PROGRAMME OF SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY IN THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION79 AUTOABSTRACT In response to the request of the Polish comrades, I will try briefly to set forth here the contents of my book bearingthe above title which was written in November 1907, butwhich has not yet appeared for reasons not under my con-trol. 
 * In the first chapter of this book I examine the “economic basis and nature of the agrarian revolution in Russia”. 
 Comparing the latest data about landownership in Russia(1905 figures) and defining in round figures the land area inall the fifty gubernias of European Russia at 280 milliondessiatines, I arrive at the following picture of the distri-bution of all landed property, both allotment land and pri-vately-owned: Number Total areaAverage of in dessia-dessiatines holdings tinesper hold-ing (millions) (a) Ruined peasantry crushed by feudal exploitation .......... 
 10. 
5 75. 
0 7. 
0 (b) Middle peasantry ....... 
. 
 1. 
0 15. 
0 15. 
0 (c) Peasant bourgeoisie and capitalist landownership ......... 1. 
5 70. 
0 46. 
7 (d) Feudal latifundia ....... 
 0. 
03 70. 
0 2,333. 
0 Total ............ 13. 
03 230. 
0 17. 
6 Unclassified holdings ....... 
. 
 — 50. 
0 — Grand Total ......... 13. 
03 280. 
0 21. 
4 *See present edition, Vol. 
 13, pp. 
 217-431. 
— Ed. 
 Anyone at all familiar with social statistics will under-stand that this picture can be only approximately accurate. 
 For us, however, what is important is not the details, in which economists of the liberal-Narodnik trend usuallyflounder themselves and submerge the essence of the question,but the class content of the process. 
 My picture brings outthis content, showing what the struggle in the Russian rev-olution is about. 
 Thirty thousand landowners—mainly the nobility, but also the state—possess 70 million dessiatines of land. 
 This basic fact should be regarded in the light of another fact: 10 @ million peasant households and smallest proprietors possess 75 million dessiatines. 
 This second group could double their possessions at the expense of the first: such is the objectively inevitable tendency of the struggle, irrespective of the various views about it held by various classes. 
 The economic essence of the agrarian crisis emerges from this picture quite clearly. 
 Millions of petty, ruined, impov-erished peasants, oppressed by poverty, ignorance and the survivals of feudalism, cannot live otherwise than in semi-feudal dependence on the landlord, tilling his landwith their own agricultural implements in exchange forpasturage, commonage, watering-places, for “land” in gener-al, loans in the winter, etc. 
, etc. 
 On the other hand, theowners of vast latifundia cannot in such conditions manage otherwise than with the help of the labour of their ruined local peasants, since that kind of management does notrequire any investment of capital or new systems of cultiva-tion. 
 There necessarily arises what has been described manytimes in Russian economic literature as the labour-servicesystem of economy. 
 This system is merely the further devel-opment of serfdom . 
 The basis of exploitation is not the separ-ation of the worker from the land, but the compulsory at-tachment of the ruined peasant to it; not the proprietor’scapital but his land; not the implements belonging to theowner of latifundia, but the age-old wooden plough of thepeasant; not the progress of agriculture but ancient, cen-turies-old routine; not “freely hired labour”, but enslave-ment to the money-lender. 
 The results of this state of affairs in the sphere of agricul-ture may be expressed in the following figures. 
 Harvest yield on allotment land is 54 poods per dessiatine; on land-lord’s land, with sowing in separate farms, and worked at the expense of the landlord, using his implements and employinghired labour, it is 66 poods; on the same landlord’s landunder the métayer system it is 50 poods; and, finally, onland rented by the peasants from the landlord it is 45 poods. 
Thus landlords’ lands worked on a feudalist-money-lending basis (the above-mentioned métayage and renting by the peasantry) produce worse yields than the exhausted andqualitatively worse allotment lands. 
 This falling into bond-age, consolidated by the feudally-run latifundia, is becom-ing the main obstacle to the development of Russia’s pro-ductive forces. 
 Another thing that emerges from the picture drawn above is that this development in a capitalist country may take place in two different ways. 
 Either the latifundia remain,and gradually become the basis of capitalist economy on theland. 
 This is the Prussian type of agrarian capitalism, inwhich the Junker is master of the situation. 
 For whole de-cades there continue both his political domination and the oppression, degradation, poverty and illiteracy of the peas-ant. 
 The productive forces develop very slowly, as they didin Russian agriculture between 1861 and 1905. 
 Or else the revolution sweeps away the landed estates. 
 The basis of capitalist agriculture now becomes the free farmer on free land, i. 
e. 
, land clear of all medieval junk. 
 This is the American type of agrarian capitalism, and the most rapid development of productive forces under conditions which are more favourable for the mass of the people thanany others under capitalism. 
 In reality the struggle going on in the Russian revolution is not about “socialisation” and other absurdities of the Narodniks—this is merely petty-bourgeois ideology, petty-bourgeois phrase-mongering and nothing more— but about what road capitalist development of Russia will take: the “Prussian”or the “American”. 
 Without ascertaining this economic basis of the revolution, it is absolutely impossible to understand anything about an agrarian programme (as Maslov has not understood it, because he examines the abstractly desirable,without ascertaining the economically inevitable). 
 Shortage of space prevents me from setting forth the rest of the first chapter: I will sum up in a few words. 
 All the Cadets do their utmost to obscure the essence of the agra-rian revolution, while the Prokopoviches help them in this. 
 The Cadets mix up (“reconcile”) the two main types o f agrarian programme in the revolution—the landlord andthe peasant types. 
 Then (also in a few words): in Russiaboth types of capitalist agrarian evolution already made their appearance in the years between 1861 and 1905—both the Prussian (the gradual development of landlord economy in the direction of capitalism) and the American (differen-tiation of the peasantry and a rapid development of produc-tive forces in the more free South, with its abundance ofland). 
 Finally, there is the question of colonisation which I deal with in this chapter, and which I shall not be able to dwell on here. 
 I will only mention that the main obstacle in Russia to putting into use hundreds of millions of dessia-tines is the feudal latifundia persisting in Central Russia. 
Victory over these landlords will give such a powerfulimpetus to the development of technique and scientific cultivation that the area of arable land will increase ten times faster than it did after 1861. 
 Here are a few figures. 
 Outof the total area throughout the Russian Empire—1,965million dessiatines—there is no information whatever about 819 million dessiatines. 
 Thus, only 1,146 million dessiatinesare available for consideration—of which 469 million dessia-tines are in use, but they include 300 million dessiatines of forest. 
 A vast amount of land that is not fit for anythingnow will become useful in the immediate future if Russia frees herself from the latifundia. 
 * Chapter II of my book is devoted to the testing of the agrarian programmes of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 by the revolution. 
 The principal error of all previous programmes has been an *The liberal-Narodnik economists argue in this way: in view of the lack of land in the centre, in view of the unsuitability of Si-beria, Central Asia, etc. 
, for colonisation, it is necessary to allot sup-plementary lands to the peasantry. 
 This means that there would be noneed to hurry with the latifundia, but for the lack of land. 
 Marxistshave to argue quite differently: so long as the latifundia are not abol-ished, a rapid development of the productive forces is impossible, either in the centre or in the colonies (in Russia’s borderlands). 
 insufficiently concrete idea of what the type of capitalist agrarian revolution in Russia can be. 
 And this mistake was repeated by the Mensheviks, who were victorious at the Stockholm Congress, and gave the Party a programme ofmunicipalisation . 
 It was precisely the economic aspect of the question—the most important aspect—that at Stockholmwas not examined at all . 
 Instead, it was “political” considera-tions, the manoeuvres of politicians and not Marxist analy-sis, that prevailed. 
 An explanation of this can only par-tially be found in the actual moment when the Stockholm Congress met, when the assessment of December 1905 andthe First Duma of 1906 claimed all the attention of the Con-gress. 
 That was why Plekhanov, who at Stockholm carried Maslov’s plan for municipalisation, gave no thought at all to the economic content of a “peasant agrarian revolution” (Minutes of the Stockholm Congress, p. 
 42, the words ofPlekhanov) in a capitalist country. 
 Either this was a merephrase, and “capturing” the peasants by means of demagogyand deception (“ Bauernfang ”) unworthy of a Marxist; or there exists the economic possibility of the most rapid devel-opment of capitalism through the victory of the peasantry . 
 And in that case it is essential clearly to realise the kindof victory, the kind of path of agrarian capitalism, the kindof system of relations in landownership, which correspondto that victory of the “peasant agrarian revolution”. 
 The main argument of the most influential “municipal-isers” in Stockholm was based on the assertion that the peasants are hostile to the nationalisation of the allotment lands. 
 John, 80 who was reporting for the supporters of munic-ipalisation, exclaimed: “We would have not one Vendée,81 but a general revolt of the peasantry [how terrible!] againstattempts by the state to interfere with the peasants’ own allotments, against attempts to ‘nationalise’ the latter” (Minutes of the Stockholm Congress, p. 
 40). 
 Kostrov 82 e x-claimed: “To go to the peasants with it [nationalisation]means antagonising them. 
 The peasant movement will goon apart from or against us, and we shall find ourselvesthrown overboard in the revolution. 
 Nationalisation deprives Social-Democracy of its strength, isolates it from the peasant-ry and thus also deprives the revolution of its strength”(p. 
 88). 
 That is clear, it would seem. 
 The peasants are hostile to nationalisation: this is the main argument of the Menshe-viks. 
 And if this is true , is it not obvious that it is ridicu-lous to carry out “a peasant agrarian revolution” against the will of the peasants? But is it true? In 1905 P. 
 Maslov wrote: “Nationalisation of the land as a means of solving the agrarian problem inRussia at the present time cannot be accepted, first of all [note this “first of all”] because it is hopelessly utopian .... 
 But will the peasants ... agree?” (P. 
 Maslov, A Critique of Agrarian Programmes , 1905, p. 
 20. 
) But in March 1907 : “All the Narodnik groups [the Trudo-viks, the Popular Socialists, and the Socialist-Revolutiona-ries] are advocating nationalisation of the land in one form or another” (the journal Obrazovaniye , 83 1907, No. 
 3, p. 
 100). 
 And who wrote this? That same P. 
 Maslov! There’s your new Vendée! There’s your revolt of the peas-antry against nationalisation! And instead of honestlyadmitting his mistake, instead of making an economic study of the reason why the peasants should declare in favour of nationalisation, Maslov acted like Ivan the Forgetful. 
 He preferred to forget his own words and all the speeches at the Stockholm Congress. 
 Not only that. 
 In order to cover up the traces of this “unpleasant occurrence”, Maslov invented the fable that theTrudoviks had declared for nationalisation for petty-bourgeois reasons, “ placing their hopes in the central authority ” (ibid. 
). 
 The following comparison shows that this is a fable. 
 Theagrarian Bill moved by the Trudoviks in both the First and the Second Dumas says in Clause 16: “The management of the national lands must be entrusted to local self-govern-ing bodies elected by universal, equal, and direct suffrage by secret ballot, which shall act independently within the limits laid down by the law. 
” The agrarian programme of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, carried by the Mensheviks, proclaims that the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 demands ...“(4) the confiscation of privately-owned lands, except smallholdings, which shall be placed at the disposal of large local self-governing bodies (comprising urban and rural districts, as per Point 3) to be elected on democratic prin-ciples”. 
 The essential difference between these programmes is not in the words “management” and “disposal”, * but on the question of purchase (which at the Stockholm Congress was rejected by Bolshevik votes against Dan and Co. 
 and which the Mensheviks again tried to drag in after the Congress)and on the question of the peasant lands. 
 The Mensheviks separate them, the Trudoviks do not. 
 The Trudoviks have demonstrated to the municipalisers that I was right. 
 There can be no doubt that the programme of the Trudo-viks brought forward in the First and Second Dumas is theprogramme of the peasant masses. 
 The literature of the peas-ant deputies, their signatures to the Bills and the gubernias-they come from, all prove this quite convincingly. 
 In1905 Maslov wrote that the homestead peasants “in partic-ular” could not agree to nationalisation (p. 
 20 of the pamphlet I have already quoted). 
 This turned out to be“particular ” nonsense. 
 In Podolsk Gubernia, for example, the peasants are homesteaders, yet 13 Podolsk peasants inthe First Duma, and 10 in the Second, signed the Land Billof the “104” (the Trudovik Bill quoted above). 
 Why, then, did the peasants declare for nationalisation? Because they instinctively realised the necessity of abolishing all medieval forms of landed property much better than didshort-sighted so-called Marxists. 
 Medieval landed propertymust be abolished in order to clear the way for capitalism in agriculture; and in various countries and to various degrees capital has abolished the old medieval landownership, subordinating it to the requirements of the market and trans-forming it in keeping with the conditions of commercialagriculture. 
 Marx already pointed out in the third volumeof Capital that the capitalist mode of production finds landed property in historical forms incompatible with capitalism (clan ownership, communal, feudal, patriarchal, etc. 
, ownership) and re-creates them in keeping with the neweconomic demands. 
 84 In the paragraph, “The historical conditions of Ricardo’s theory of rent”, in his Theories of Surplus-Value ** Marx *An amendment proposing to replace the words “placed at the disposal” by the words “made the private property” was rejected at Stockholm by the Mensheviks . 
 (Minutes, p. 
 152. 
) **Theorien über den Mehrwert . 
 II Band, 2. 
 Teil, Stuttgart, 1905. 
 developed this conception with the clarity of genius. 
 He wrote: “Nowhere in the world has capitalist production, since Henry VII, dealt so ruthlessly with the traditional relations of agriculture and so adequately moulded its condi-tions and made them subject to itself. 
 England is in thisrespect, the most revolutionary country in the world.... 
 Butwhat does this ‘clearing of estates’ * mean? It means that without regard for the local population—which is driven away, for existing villages—which are levelled to the ground, for farm buildings—which are torn down, for the kindof agriculture—which is transformed at a stroke, beingconverted, for example, from tillage to pasture, all condi-tions of production, instead of being accepted as they arehanded down by tradition, are historically fashioned i n the form necessary under the circumstances for the most profitable investment of capital. 
 To that extent, therefore, no landed property exists ; it allows capital—the farmer—to manage freely, since it is only concerned about the moneyincome” (pp. 
 6-7). 
 Such are the conditions for the speediest possible abolition of forms inherited from the Middle Ages and for the freest possible development of capitalism—the abolition of all the old system of landowning, the abolition of private prop-erty in land, as an obstacle to capital. 
 In Russia, too, sucha revolutionary “ clearing ” of the medieval landowning system is inevitable , and no power on earth can stave it off. 
 The question is only , and the struggle is solely , about whether this “clearing” will be done by the landlords or by the peas-ants . 
 The “clearing” of medieval landowning by the landlords is the robbery of the peasants that took place in 1861and the Stolypin agrarian reform of 1906 (legislation underArticle 87). 
 The peasant “clearing ” of lands for capitalism is nationalisation of the land . 
 It is this economic substance of nationalisation in a bourgeois revolution carried out by workers and peasants, which Maslov, Plekhanov and Co. 
 have completely failedto understand. 
 They drew up their agrarian programme notfor a struggle against medieval landowning as one of the most important survivals of serfdom, not to clear the way *These words are in English in the original. 
— Ed. 
 completely for capitalism, but for a pitiful philistine attempt to combine “harmoniously” the old with the new, landed property which arose as a result of the system of allotment and the latifundia of the feudalists confiscated by the revo-lution. 
 In order, finally, to demonstrate all the reactionary philis-tine character of the idea of municipalisation, I quote data about the leasing of land. 
 (I pointed out the importance of the question of leasehold in my dispute with Maslov in 1906, in my pamphlet, Revision of the Agrarian Programme of the Workers ’ Party . 
 *) In Kamyshin Uyezd of Saratov Gu-bernia **: Dessiatines per household Groups of householders Allotment Rented Leased Total land land land crop area With no draught animals ... 5. 
4 0. 
3 3. 
0 1. 
1 ” 1 ” animal ... 6. 
5 1. 
6 1. 
3 5. 
0 ” 2 ” animals ... 8. 
5 3. 
5 0. 
9 8. 
8 ” 3 ”” ... 10. 
1 5. 
6 0. 
8 12. 
1 ” 4 ”” ... 12. 
5 7. 
4 0. 
7 15. 
8 ” 5 draught animals and more . 
 ...... 16. 
1 16. 
6 0. 
9 27. 
6 Average . 
. 
 ...... 9. 
3 5. 
4 1. 
5 10. 
8 Take a look at the real economic relationship between allotment land, which the most sage Maslov and Plekhanov leave to the peasants as their property, and the non-allotment land (rented land) which they “municipalised”. 
 The horseless peasants—and in 1896-1900 there were in all 3 @ million such households out of 11. 
1 million— lease ten times more land than they rent themselves. 
 Their area under crops isfive times less than their “allotments”. 
 Among the peasants owning one horse (3. 
3 million households in all Russia) the amount of rented land scarcely exceeds the amount of land which they lease, and their crop area is less than their “allot-ment”. 
 In all the higher groups, i. 
e. 
, among the minorityof the peasants, the land they rent is several times largerthan the land they lease, and the wealthier the peasants *See present edition, Vol. 
 10, pp. 
 165-95. 
— Ed. 
 **The Development of Capitalism in Russia . 
 2nd ed, pp. 
 51, 54 and 82 (See present edition, Vol. 
 3, pp. 
 93, 97, 130-31. 
— Ed. 
). 
 the more does their crop area exceed the size of their “allot-ment”. 
 Relations like this prevail throughout Russia. 
 Capitalism is destroying the agricultural commune; it is liberating the peasants from the yoke of the “allotment”; it is diminishingthe role of the allotment lands at both poles in the country-side—yet the profound Menshevik thinkers exclaim: “Thepeasants will revolt against nationalisation of the allot-ment lands. 
” It is not only landlord property that dates from the Middle Ages in Russia, but also the peasants’ allotment property—a thing the Mensheviks have “overlooked”. 
 The reinforce-ment of allotment property, which is completely at variance with the new capitalist relations, is a reactionary measure, and municipalisation reinforces allotment property as dis-tinct from non-allotment property, which is “subject tomunicipalisation”. 
 Allotment land ownership divides thepeasants with a thousand medieval barriers, and throughthe medieval fiscal “village commune”, retards the develop-ment of productive forces. 
 The “village commune” and this allotment ownership are bound to be destroyed by capitalism. 
 Stolypin realises this, and destroys them the Black-Hundredway. 
 The peasants feel it, and want to destroy them in thepeasant, or revolutionary-democratic way. 
 And the Menshe-viks exclaim: “You mustn’t touch the allotment lands. 
” Nationalisation abolishes the obsolete “village commune” and the medieval allotted property as completely as it is conceivably possible for these institutions to be abolishedin capitalist society while observing the best interests ofthe peasant. 
 In the booklet, Material on the Peasant Question (A Report of the Delegates’ Congress of the All-RussianPeasant Union, November 6-10, 1905), published in St. 
 Petersburg in 1905, we read: “The notorious question of the ‘village commune’ was not raised at all and was tacitlyrejected: the land must be placed at the disposal of individ-uals and associations, state the resolutions passed at boththe First and Second Congresses” (p. 
 12). 
 To the question,whether the peasants themselves would suffer as a result of nationalisation of the allotment lands, the delegates replied: “They will get land in any case when it is distributed” (p. 
 20). 
 The peasant proprietor (and his ideologist Mr. 
 Peshekhonov) understands perfectly well that “they will get land in any case when it is distributed” and that soon the feudal latifundia will be abolished. 
 He needs “redistri-bution” on a vast scale, which means the nationalisationof all lands, in order to shake himself free from the toilsof the Middle Ages, in order to “clear” the land, in order thatits utilisation should be brought into line with the neweconomic conditions. 
 This was well expressed in the Second Duma by Mr. 
 Mushenko when, speaking on behalf of the Socialist-Revolutionaries, he said, with his native simplicity:“The population [farmers] will be properly distributed onlywhen the land is unfenced, only when the fences imposedby the principle of private ownership of land are removed”(Minutes of the Second Duma, p. 
 1172). 
 Compare this state-ment with the words of Marx quoted earlier, and you will realise that the philistine phrases about “socialisation” and“equalisation” conceal a very real content: the bourgeoisrevolutionary clearing of the old medieval system of landedproperty. 
 The municipalisation of lands in the bourgeois revolution is a reactionary measure, because it hinders the economically necessary and inevitable process of abolishing medievallanded property, the process of establishing uniformity of economic conditions on the land for all proprietors , whatever their condition, their past, their allotment in 1861,etc. 
 The division of land into private property now would be reactionary , because it would preserve the present, out-of-date and obsolete allotment ownership; but eventually,after the land will have been completely cleared by meansof nationalisation, division would be possible as the sloganof a new and free farming class . 
 * The business of Marxists is to help the radical bourgeoisie (i. 
e. 
, the peasantry) to carry out the fullest possible elimination of old junk and to ensure the rapid development of capitalism, and not atall to help the petty bourgeoisie in their striving to come toa comfortable arrangement and adapt themselves to the past. 
 *M. 
 Shanin in his pamphlet, Municipalisation or Division for Private Property (Vilna, 1907), underlined that aspect of the question which bears on agriculture, but did not understand the two pathsof development and the importance of abolishing the present landown-ing system. 
 Chapter III is devoted to “The Theoretical Basis of Nation-alisation and of Municipalisation”. 
 Naturally I shall not start repeating to the Polish comrades things that are commonly known to every Marxist, the factthat nationalisation of the land in capitalist society meansabolishing absolute, and not differential rent, etc. 
 But hav-ing in mind my Russian readers, I was obliged to write of this in detail, because Pyotr Maslov was asserting that Karl Marx’s theory of absolute rent is a “contradiction” which “one can only account for [!!] by the fact that Volume IIIis a posthumous publication containing also the roughnotes of the author” ( The Agrarian Question ). 
 * This pretension on the part of Pyotr Maslov, who desires to correct Karl Marx’s rough notes, is not anything new for me. 
 In the journal Zarya ,85 as early as 1901, I pointed out that Maslov in Zhizn86 had distorted Marx’s theory of rent. 
 ** Soon afterwards, however, Pyotr Maslov repeated this presumptuous and unquestionable nonsense in 1906 (thepreface to the 3rd edition is dated April 26, 1906) after the publication of the Theories of Surplus-Value , where Marx explained the theory of absolute rent with complete clarity. 
 Here Maslov surpassed himself! As I am unable to repeathere the detailed analysis of Pyotr Maslov’s “corrections”to Marx given in my book, I will confine myself only to theobservation that these corrections turn out to be the hack-neyed arguments of bourgeois political economy. 
 Pyotr Maslov goes as far as to contrast Marx’s theory of absolute rent to “brickmaking” (p. 
 111); he warms up again “the law of di-minishing returns”, affirms that “without this law it isimpossible to explain ‘trans-Atlantic’ competition” (p. 
 107)and finally talks himself into the assertion that without refuting Marx it is impossible to refute the views of the Na-rodniks : “If it were not for the ‘fact’ that the productivity of successive expenditures of labour on the same plot of landdiminishes, the idyll which the ... Narodniks depict could,perhaps, be realised. 
” (Maslov in the journal Obrazovaniye , 1907, No. 
 2, p. 
 123. 
) In a word, Pyotr Maslov’s economictheory does not contain one single new idea on the question of *The Agrarian Question , 3rd ed. 
, p. 
 108, footnote. 
 **See present edition, Vol. 
 5, p. 
 127. 
— Ed. 
 absolute rent, on the “fact” of diminishing returns, on the principal mistakes of “Narodism”, on the difference between the improvement of cultivation and the improvement of technique. 
 Having refuted the theory of absolute rent bypurely bourgeois arguments worked to death by the officialdefenders of capitalism, Maslov was bound to land in theranks of the distorters of Marxism. 
 But while distortingMarxism, Pyotr Maslov was clever enough to omit all his corrections to Marx’s rough notes from the German transla-tion of his book on The Agrarian Question . 
 Faced with Europeans, Maslov hid his theory in his pocket ! As I wrote in Chapter III, I could not help recalling in this connectionthe story about a stranger who was present for the firsttime at a discussion between ancient philosophers but re-mained silent all the time. 
 One of the philosophers said to the stranger: “If you are wise, you are behaving foolishly; ifyou are a fool, you are behaving wisely. 
” Naturally, to repudiate the theory of absolute rent is to deprive oneself of any chance of understanding the sig-nificance of the nationalisation of land in capitalist society, because nationalisation can lead to the abolition only of absolute, and not differential, rent. 
 To repudiate absoluterent is to repudiate the economic significance of private land-owning as an obstacle to the development of capitalism. 
 Thanks to this, Maslov and Co. 
 inevitably reduce the ques-tion of nationalisation or municipalisation to a political issue (“who should get the land?”) and ignore the economic essence of the question. 
 The combination of private owner-ship of allotment land (i. 
e. 
, of inferior land owned by in-ferior proprietors) with public ownership of the remaining(superior) part of the land becomes an absurdity in any at all developed and free capitalist state. 
 It is nothing more or less, than agrarian bimetallism . 
 As a result of this error of the Mensheviks, it transpires that the Social-Democrats have handed over criticism ofprivate ownership of the land to the Socialist-Revolution-aries. 
 Marx gave an admirable example of such criticism inCapital . 
 * But with us it appears that the Social-Democrats *See, for example, Das Kapital , III, 2. 
 T. 
, S. 
 346-47, on the price of land as a barrier to the development of capitalism; and Ibid. 
,S. 
 344-45, 341, 342. 
 87 do not conduct that criticism from the point of view of the development of capitalism, and all that reaches the masses is criticism by the Narodniks, i. 
e. 
, a distorted philistine criticism of private property in land. 
 I will mention as a detail that the following argument has also been used against nationalisation in Russian litera-ture: it would mean “money rent” for small peasant prop-erty. 
 That is not so. 
 “Money rent” (see Capital , Vol. 
 III) 88 is a modern form of interest for the landlord. 
 In present-day peasant leasehold, payment for land is undoubtedly money rent to a certain degree. 
 The abolition of the feudal lati-fundia will hasten the differentiation of the peasantry andstrengthen the peasant bourgeoisie, which is already carryingout capitalist renting of land (recall the data quoted earlier about renting of land among the higher groups of the peas-antry). 
 Finally, it should be said that the view is fairly wide-spread among Marxists that nationalisation is practicableonly at a very high stage of development of capitalism. 
 Thatis incorrect. 
 It would then be a question not of a bourgeois but of a socialist revolution. 
 Nationalisation of the land is the most consistent bourgeois measure. 
 Marx repeatedly affirmed this, from The Poverty of Philosophy 89 onwards. 
 In his Theories of Surplus-Value Marx says (II. 
 Band, I. 
 Teil, S. 
 208): “In theory the radical bourgeois arrives atthe repudiation of private landed property .... 
 In practice, however, he lacks courage, since the attack on one form of property, private property in relation to the conditions oflabour, would be very dangerous for the other form. 
 Moreover,the bourgeois has territorialised himself. 
” In Russia the bour-geois revolution is taking place in conditions when thereexists a radical bourgeois (the peasant) who “has the courage” to put forward a programme of nationalisation on behalf of a mass of many millions, and who has not yet “territori-alised himself”, i. 
e. 
, he derives more harm from ( medieval ) private property in land, than advantage and “profits” from(bourgeois) property in the same land. 
 The Russian revolu-tion cannot be victorious unless that “radical bourgeois”, who wavers between the Cadet and the worker, supports the proletariat in its revolutionary struggle by mass action. 
 The Russian revolution cannot be victorious except in the form of a revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry. 
 Chapter IV of the book deals with “political and tactical” considerations in questions of the agrarian programme. 
First among these is the “famous” argument of Plekhanov. 
“The key to my position,” he exclaimed at Stockholm, “isthat I draw attention to the possibility of restoration”(Minutes, p. 
 113). 
 But the key is a completely rusty one—the Cadet key of a deal with reaction under the guise of a “guar-antee against restoration”. 
 Plekhanov’s argument is themost pitiful piece of sophistry, for while he asserts that thereis no guarantee against restoration, he nevertheless invents such a guarantee. 
 “It [municipalisation] will not surrenderthe land to the political representatives of the old order” (p. 
 45, Plekhanov’s speech). 
 What is restoration? The passing of power in the state into the hands of representativesof the old order. 
 Can there be a guarantee against restora-tion? “No, there can be no guarantee” (Minutes, p. 
 44, Ple-khanov’s speech). 
 Therefore ... he invents a guarantee—“municipalisation will not surrender the land”. 
 Under municipalisation there will remain the difference between allotment and landlords’ lands in the economic sense , i. 
e. 
, it will facilitate a restoration, or the recognition of this difference de jure. 
 In the political sense municipali-sation is a law changing the ownership of landlords’ estates. 
 What is a law? The expression of the will of the ruling classes. 
 If there is a restoration, the same classes once again become the ruling classes. 
 Will they be bound by law, Comrade Plekhanov? If you gave this any thought, you would under-stand that no law can restrict the expression of the will ofthe ruling classes. 
 Nationalisation makes restoration moredifficult in the economic sense, because it destroys all the old barriers, all medieval property in land, and adapts i t to the new uniform capitalist conditions of production. 
 Plekhanov’s sophistry is an acceptance of the Cadet tactics of leading the proletariat not to complete victorybut to a deal with the old authorities. 
 In fact, the only absolute “guarantee against restoration” is a socialist revolution in the West, while a relative guarantee would be to carry the revolution through to its conclusion, to do away withthe old in the most radical fashion , to provide the greatest degree of democracy in politics (the republic) and to clear the ground for capitalism in the economy. 
 Another argument of Plekhanov’s runs: “In the shape of local self-governing bodies which will possess the land,municipalisation will create a bulwark against reaction. 
And a very powerful bulwark it will be” (Minutes, p. 
 45). 
This is untrue. 
 Never and nowhere has local self-governmentbeen a bulwark against reaction in the epoch of capitalism, nor could it be. 
 Capitalism inevitably leads to centralisation of state power, and every local self-government will unquestion-ably be vanquished if the state authority is reactionary. 
 Plekhanov is preaching opportunism when he concentrates attention not on “democracy in the centre”, or a republic —the only bulwark against reaction conceivable in capitalist society—but on local self-government, which is always impotent in relation to great historical tasks, always small-scale, petty, subordinate and scattered. 
 “A peasant agrarianrevolution” cannot be victorious in Russia unless it defeats the central authority, but Plekhanov suggests to the Men-sheviks views expressed at Stockholm by the Menshevik Novosedsky: “In the event of truly democratic local self-government being established, the programme now adoptedmay be carried into effect [listen to this!] even with a degreeof democratisation of the central government which cannotbe described as the highest degree of its democratisation. 
Even under democratisation of a comparative degree, so to speak, municipalisation will not be harmful, but useful” (Minutes, p. 
 138). 
 Nothing could be more clear. 
 Let us teach the people to adapt itself to the monarchy: perhaps the latter won’t“notice” our regional activity, and will “grant us our lives”like Shchedrin’s gudgeon had his granted. 
 The Third Duma is a good illustration of the possibility of municipalisation and local democracy, given a “relative”, Menshevik democra-cy in the centre. 
 Then municipalisation makes for federalism and separa-tism in the regions. 
 No wonder, in the Second Duma, theRight-wing Cossack Karaulov denounced nationalisation no less strongly than Plekhanov (Minutes, p. 
 1366) and declared for municipalisation by regions . 
 The Cossack lands in Russia already represent an example of municipalisation. 
 And it was just this breaking-up of the state into separate regions that was one of the causes of the defeat of the revolution in the first three years’ campaign! Nationalisation—runs the next argument—strengthens the central authority of the bourgeois state! In the firstplace, this argument is put forward with the object of arous-ing distrust in the Social-Democratic parties of the various nationalities . 
 “Perhaps, in some places, the peasants would agree to share their lands,” wrote P. 
 Maslov in Obrazovaniye (1907, No. 
 3, p. 
 104). 
 “But the refusal of the peasants in asingle large area (for example, Poland) to share their landswould be enough to make the proposal to nationalise all theland an absurdity. 
” A fine argument, to be sure! Shouldwe not give up the idea of a republic, since “the refusal of the peasants in a single large area is enough, etc. 
”? It is not an argument but a piece of demagogy . 
 Our political programme excludes any violence and injustice, demandingwide autonomy for the individual provinces (see Clause 3of the Party programme). 
 Thus, it is not a question of re-inventing new “guarantees” which are unattainable in bour-geois society, but of the party of the proletariat using its propaganda and agitation to call for unity and not for dis-memberment, to solve the lofty problems arising in central-ised states, and not to sink into rusticity and national in-sularity. 
 It is the centre of Russia that solves the agrarianproblem: the borderlands cannot be influenced otherwise than by example . 
 * This is obvious even to every democrat, let alone every Social-Democrat. 
 And the question is onlywhether the proletariat should raise the peasantry to higher aims, or sink to the petty-bourgeois level of the peasantry itself . 
 Secondly, it is asserted that nationalisation will increase the possibility of arbitrary action at the centre, bureaucracy, etc. 
 As regards bureaucracy, it should be observed that themanagement of the land even under nationalisation will remain in the hands of the local self-governing bodies. 
 Thismeans that the argument just quoted is false. 
 The centralauthority will lay down the general conditions: i. 
e. 
, for *In a capitalist state private property in land and nationalisa-tion cannot exist side by side. 
 One of them must gain the upper hand. 
 The business of the workers’ party is to fight for the higher system. 
 example, it will prohibit any alienation of the land, etc. 
 And does not our present, i. 
e. 
, Menshevik, programme hand over to the “democratic state for disposal” not only the “col-onisation lands”, but also “forest and water areas of nationalimportance”? But it is not wise to hide one’s head underone’s wing; here, too, unlimited arbitrary action is possible, since it is the central state authority itself which will deter-mine what forests and waters are of national importance. 
 The Mensheviks are looking for “guarantees” in the wrong place: only complete democracy at the centre, only a re-public , can reduce the probability of disputes between the centre and the regions to a minimum. 
 “The bourgeois state will grow stronger,” cry the Men-sheviks, who in secret support the bourgeois monarchists (the Cadets), and in public beat their breasts at the very thought of supporting bourgeois republicans. 
 The genuinehistorical question which objective historical and socialdevelopment is putting to us is: a Prussian or an Americantype of agrarian evolution? A landlords’ monarchy withthe fig-leaf of a sham constitution, or a peasant (farmers’) republic? To close our eyes to such an objective statement of the case by history means to deceive oneself and others,hiding in philistine fashion from the acute class struggle,from the acute, simple and decisive presentation of the ques-tion of a democratic revolution. 
 We cannot get rid of the “bourgeois state”. 
 Only petty-bourgeois philistines can dream of doing so. 
 Our revolution is a bourgeois revolution precisely because the struggle goingon in it is not between socialism and capitalism, but between two forms of capitalism , two paths of its development, two forms of bourgeois-democratic institutions. 
 The monarchyof the Octobrists or the Cadets is a “ relative ” bourgeois “democracy”, from the point of view of the Menshevik Novosedsky. 
 The proletarian-peasant republic, too, is abourgeois democracy. 
 In our revolution we cannot make asingle step —and we have not made a single step—which did not support in one way or another one section of the bour-geoisie or another against the old order. 
 If we are told that nationalisation means using public funds for the army, while municipalisation means using them for public health and education, it is sophistry worthy of a philistine. 
 Yet literally that is how Maslov argues: “Nationalisation, i. 
e. 
, [ sic!] the expenditure of ground-rent on the army and navy ...; municipalisation of the land, i. 
e. 
, the expenditure of rent on the needs of the population”(Obrazovaniye , 1907, No. 
 3, p. 
 103). 
 This is petty-bourgeois socialism, or the destruction of flies by the use of a powderto be poured on the flies’ tails when they have been caught!Our good Maslov has not realised that, if the Zemstvos in Russia and the municipalities in the West spend more on public health, etc. 
, compared with the state, it is only be-cause the bourgeois state has already carried out its most important expenditures (to assure the domination of thebourgeoisie as a class) out of funds coming from the biggestsources of revenue, and has left the local authorities with secondary sources for the so-called “needs of the population”. 
 Hundreds of thousands for the army, a few farthings for theneeds of the proletariat —that is the true relationship of expenditures in the bourgeois state. 
 And one has to be aMaslov to imagine that it is sufficient to hand over ground-rent for “disposal” by the municipalities, for the bourgeois state to be taken in by those subtle “politicians”, the Men-sheviks! And really, will the bourgeois state, thanks to this“most subtle policy”, begin to give hundreds of thousands tothe proletarians and farthings to the army and the navy? In reality, the Mensheviks are pursuing a philistine policy— seeking refuge in the provincial backwoods of local self-government against having to solve the burning problem with which we are faced by history, namely, should ourcountry have a centralised bourgeois republic of farmers,or a centralised bourgeois monarchy of Junkers? You won’tdodge the issue, gentlemen! No provincialism, no playing atmunicipal socialism, will rescue you from inevitable partic-ipation in the solving of this acute problem. 
 Your wriggling really means only one thing—secret support of the Cadettendency, while failing to understand the importance of therepublican tendency. 
 The Minutes of the Stockholm Congress are clear evidence of the fact that the Mensheviks, in defending municipali-sation, are flirting with the Fabian “municipal socialism” existing in Europe. 
 “Some comrades,” Kostrov said there,“seem to be hearing about municipal ownership for the first time. 
 Let me remind them that in Western Europe there is a whole political trend [precisely! Kostrov, without wish-ing to do so, blurted out the truth!] called ‘municipal so-cialism’ [England]” (Minutes, p. 
 88). 
 That this “ trend ” is the trend of extreme opportunism neither Kostrov nor Larin * took into consideration. 
 It is quite consistent for the Socialist-Revolutionaries to drag in petty-bourgeois ped-dling of reforms as one of the tasks of the bourgeois revo-lution, but it is not for the Social-Democrats to do it, gentle-men! The bourgeois intellectuals in the West (the Fabiansin England, the followers of Bernstein in Germany, thefollowers of Brousse in France) naturally shift the weight ofemphasis from questions of state structure to questions of local self-government . 
 But what we are faced with is precisely the question of the structure of the state, its agrarian basis— and to defend “municipal socialism” here is to play a t agrarian socialism. 
 Let the petty bourgeoisie hasten to“build themselves a nest” in the peaceful municipalities offuture democratic Russia. 
 The task of the proletariat is toorganise the masses not for this purpose, but for the revolu-tionary struggle, for complete democratisation today and a socialist revolution tomorrow. 
 We Bolsheviks are often reproached for the utopianism and fantastic character of our revolutionary views. 
 Andthese reproaches are heard most often in connection withnationalisation. 
 But this is where they are least of all justi-fied. 
 Those who consider nationalisation to be “utopia” do not think about the necessary balance between politicaland agrarian changes. 
 Nationalisation is no less “utopian”—from the point of view of an ordinary philistine—than arepublic. 
 And both are no less utopian than a “ peasant ” agrarian revolution, i. 
e. 
, the victory of a peasant uprising in a capitalist country. 
 All these changes are equally “dif-ficult” as far as everyday peaceful development is concerned. 
And the outcry about nationalisation, of all things, beingutopian, testifies first of all to failure to understand the essential and unbreakable connection between an economic *The Peasant Question and Social-Democracy . 
 A particularly vague commentary on the Menshevik programme. 
 See p. 
 66. 
 On p. 
 103 this wretched defender of municipalisation points to nation-alisation as the best way out! and a political upheaval. 
 Confiscation of the landed estates (a demand in our programme recognised both by the Bol-sheviks and the Mensheviks) is impossible without the abo-lition of the landlord autocracy (and with it the Octobrist,not purely landlord, autocracy). 
 And the autocracy cannotbe abolished without the revolutionary action of class-conscious millions, without a great surge of mass heroism,readiness and ability on their part to “storm heaven”, as Marx put it when speaking of the Paris workers at the time of the Commune. 
 90 In its turn, this revolutionary surge is unthinkable without the radical abolition of all the relics of serfdom which for ages have oppressed the peasantry,including the whole of medieval property in land, all the shackles of the fiscal “village commune”, the crumbs of accursed memory “granted” by the government, etc. 
, etc. 
, etc. 
 Owing to lack of space (I have already gone beyond the length laid down by the editors of Przegl Zd 91) I omit a sum-mary of the fifth chapter of my book (“Classes and Parties in the Debate on the Agrarian Question in the Second Duma”). 
 The speeches of the peasants in the Duma are of tremendous political importance, because in them were expressed thatpassionate desire to get rid of the yoke of the landlords,that fiery hatred of medievalism and the bureaucracy, thatspontaneous, ingenuous, often naïve and not quite definite, but at the same time stormy revolutionary spirit of the ordinary peasants, which prove better than any long argu-ments what potential destructive energy has accumulatedwithin the mass of the peasantry against the nobility, thelandlords and the Romanovs. 
 The task of the class-consciousproletariat is mercilessly to show up, expose and eliminate all the numerous petty-bourgeois deceptions, allegedly socialist phrases, childishly naïve expectations which thepeasants link with an agrarian revolution—but to eliminatethem not in order to calm and pacify the peasants (as thebetrayers of the people’s freedom, the Cadet gentlemen, didin both Dumas) but in order to awaken among the masses a steel-like, unshakable and resolute revolutionary spirit. 
 Without that revolutionary spirit , without a stubborn and merciless struggle of the peasant masses, all such things as confiscation, the republic, and universal, direct and equal suffrage by secret ballot are hopelessly “utopian”. 
 Therefore the Marxists must put the question clearly and definitely: two directions in the economic development ofRussia, two paths of capitalism, have emerged with absoluteclarity. 
 Let all think well on this. 
 During the first revolu-tionary campaign, during the three years 1905-07, boththese directions became clear to us not as theoretical general conclusions, not as lessons to be drawn from such-and-such features of the evolution which has taken place since 1861. 
 No, these directions have now become clear to us preciselyas the directions mapped out by hostile classes. 
 The land-lords and the capitalists (the Octobrists) are quite clear thatthere is no other development except the capitalist one, and that for them it is impossible to travel that road without compulsory and speedy destruction of the “village commune”,that kind of destruction which is identical with ... openrobbery by the money-lender, with “destruction and plun-der” by the police or “punitive” expeditions. 
 It is the kind of“operation” in which it is extremely easy to break one’s neck! As for the masses of the peasantry, they discovered for themselves no less clearly during those same three yearsthat it was hopeless to expect anything from “Our Fatherthe Tsar”, or to count in any way on a peaceful road, andthat revolutionary struggle was necessary to abolish allmedievalism in general and all medieval property in land in particular. 
 All the propaganda and agitation of the Social-Democrats should be based on bringing these results home to the masses,on preparing the masses to make use of this experience for aresolute and unswerving attack, organised in the bestpossible way, during the second campaign of the revolution. 
 That is just why Plekhanov’s speeches at Stockholm were so reactionary when he talked about the seizure of power bythe proletariat and the peasantry meaning the rebirth of“the Narodnaya Volya spirit”. 
 Plekhanov himself reducedhis argument to an absurdity: according to him, there wouldtake place a “peasant agrarian revolution” without seizure of power by the proletariat, without seizure of power by the peasantry! On the other hand, Kautsky—who at the begin-ning of the break between the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks was patently inclined to favour the latter—has gone over ideologically to the side of the former, by recognising that only given “the alliance of the proletariat and the peasantry” is a victory of the revolution possible. 
 Without complete abolition of all medieval property in the land, without the complete “clearing”, i. 
e. 
, withoutnationalisation of the land, such a revolution is unthink-able. 
 The business of the party of the proletariat is to spread most widely this watchword of a most consistent and most radical bourgeois agrarian revolution. 
 And when we havedone that , we shall see what are the further prospects; we shall see whether such a revolution is only the basis for a development of productive forces under capitalism at anAmerican speed, or whether it will become the prologue to a socialist revolution in the West. 
 July 18, 1908 P. 
S. 
 I do not repeat here my draft of an agrarian programme, which was submitted to the Stockholm Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 and which has often been printed in Social-Democratic literature. 
 I will confine myself merely to someobservations. 
 When two directions for capitalist agrarianevolution exist, there must necessarily be included in theprogramme an “if” (the technical expression used at the Stockholm Congress), i. 
e. 
, the programme must take both possibilities into account. 
 In other words, so long as thingsare going as they are, we demand freedom of use of the land,tribunals for lowering rents, abolition of social-estates, etc. 
At the same time we fight the present direction and support the revolutionary demands of the peasantry in the interests of the speediest possible development of productive forces and of wide and free scope for the class struggle. 
 While sup-porting the revolutionary struggle of the peasants againstmedievalism, the Social-Democratic Labour Party makesit clear that the best form of agrarian relations in ca-pitalist society (and at the same time the best form in which survivals of serfdom can be eliminated) is the nation-alisation of the land, that only in connection with a rad-ical political revolution, the abolition of the autocracy and the establishment of a democratic republic, is it possible to carry out a radical agrarian revolution, the confiscation of the landed estates and the nationalisation of the land. 
 Such is the content of my draft agrarian programme. 
 The part which describes the bourgeois features of thewhole of the present agrarian changes, and elucidates the purely proletarian point of view of Social-Democracy, wasadopted at Stockholm and became an integral part of the present programme. 
 Published in August 1908 Published according in the journal Przegl Zd to the text in the journal Socjaldemokratyczny , No. 
 6 Translated from the Polish Signed: N. 
 Lenin INFLAMMABLE MATERIAL IN WORLD POLITICS The revolutionary movement in various European and Asian countries has latterly made itself felt so weightilythat we see before us the fairly clear outlines of a new andincomparably higher stage in the international proletarian struggle. 
 There has been a counter-revolution in Persia—a peculiar combination of the dissolution of Russia’s First Duma,and of the Russian insurrection at the close of 1905. 
 Shame-fully defeated by the Japanese, the armies of the Russiantsar are taking their revenge by zealously serving the coun-ter-revolution. 
 The exploits of the Cossacks in mass shoot-ings, punitive expeditions, manhandling and pillage inRussia are followed by their exploits in suppressing the rev-olution in Persia. 
 That Nicholas Romanov, heading theBlack-Hundred landlords and capitalists, scared by strikesand civil war, should be venting his fury on the Persian revolutionaries, is understandable. 
 It is not the first time that Russia’s Christian soldiers are cast in the role of in-ternational hangmen. 
 That Britain is pharisaically washingher hands of the affair, and maintaining a demonstrativelyfriendly neutrality towards the Persian reactionaries andsupporters of absolutism, is a somewhat different matter. 
 The British Liberal bourgeoisie, angered by the growth of the labour movement at home and frightened by the mount-ing revolutionary struggle in India, are more and morefrequently, frankly and sharply demonstrating what brutes the highly “civilised” European “politicians”, men who havepassed through the high school of constitutionalism, can turn into when it comes to a rise in the mass struggle against capital and the capitalist colonial system, i. 
e. 
, a system ofenslavement, plunder and violence. 
 The position of the Per-sian revolutionaries is a difficult one; theirs is a country which the masters of India on the one hand, and the counter-revolutionary Russian Government on the other, were on the point of dividing up between themselves. 
 But the doggedstruggle in Tabriz and the repeated swing of the fortunesof war to the revolutionaries who, it seemed, had been utterlydefeated, are evidence that the Shah’s bashi-bazouks, eventhough aided by Russian Lyakhovs 92 and British diplomats, are encountering the most vigorous resistance from the peo-ple. 
 A revolutionary movement that can offer armed re-sistance to attempts at restoration, that compels the attempt-ers to call in foreign aid—such a movement cannot be de-stroyed. 
 In these circumstances, even the fullest triumphof Persian reaction would merely be the prelude to fresh popular rebellion. 
 In Turkey, the revolutionary movement in the army, led by the Young Turks, has achieved victory. 
 True, it is onlyhalf a victory, or even less, since Turkey’s Nicholas II hasso far managed to get away with a promise to restore thecelebrated Turkish constitution. 
 But in a revolution such half-victories, such forced and hasty concessions by the old regime, are the surest guarantee of new and much more deci-sive, more acute fluctuations of the civil war, involvingbroader masses of the people. 
 And the school of civil war isnever lost upon nations. 
 It is a hard school, and its completecourse necessarily includes victories for the counter-revolu-tion, the unbridled licence of the infuriated reactionaries, the savage reprisals of the old government against the rebels,etc. 
 But only incurable pedants and doddering mummiescan moan over the fact that the nations have entered thisvery painful school. 
 For it is one that teaches the oppressedclasses how to wage civil war and how to carry the revolu-tion to victory. 
 It concentrates in the masses of contem-porary slaves the hatred which downtrodden, benightedand ignorant slaves have always carried within them, andwhich leads to the supreme history-making feats of slaveswho have realised the shame of their slavery. 
 In India lately, the native slaves of the “civilised” British capitalists have been a source of worry to their “masters”. 
 There is no end to the acts of violence and plunder whichgoes under the name of the British system of government in India. 
 Nowhere in the world—with the exception, of course, of Russia—will you find such abject mass poverty, such chronic starvation among the people. 
 The most Liberal and Radical personalities of free Britain, men like JohnMorley—that authority for Russian and non-Russian Cadets,that luminary of “progressive” journalism (in reality, alackey of capitalism)—become regular Genghis Khanswhen appointed to govern India, and are capable of sanc-tioning every means of “pacifying” the population in their charge, even to the extent of flogging political protestors! Justice , the little weekly of the British Social-Democrats, has been banned in India by these Liberal and “Radical” scoundrels like Morley. 
 And when Keir Hardie, the BritishM. 
 P. 
 and leader of the Independent Labour Party, had the temerity to visit India and speak to the Indians about the most elementary democratic demands, the whole Britishbourgeois press raised a howl against this “rebel”. 
 And nowthe most influential British newspapers are in a fury about“agitators” who disturb the tranquillity of India, and arewelcoming court sentences and administrative measures in the purely Russian, Plehve style to suppress democratic Indian publicists. 
 But in India the street is beginning tostand up for its writers and political leaders. 
 The infamous sentence pronounced by the British jackals on the Indiandemocrat Tilak—he was sentenced to a long term of exile,the question in the British House of Commons the other day revealing that the Indian jurors had declared for acquittal and that the verdict had been passed by the vote of the Brit-ish jurors !—this revenge against a democrat by the lackeys of the money-bag evoked street demonstrations and a strikein Bombay. 
 In India, too, the proletariat has already devel-oped to conscious political mass struggle—and, that being the case, the Russian-style British regime in India is doomed! By their colonial plunder of Asian countries, the Eu-ropeans have succeeded in so steeling one of them, Japan,that she has gained great military victories, which haveensured her independent national development. 
 There canbe no doubt that the age-old plunder of India by the British, and the contemporary struggle of all these “advanced” Eu-ropeans against Persian and Indian democracy, will steel millions, tens of millions of proletarians in Asia to wage a struggle against their oppressors which will be just as victorious as that of the Japanese. 
 The class-conscious Eu-ropean worker now has comrades in Asia, and their number will grow by leaps and bounds. 
 In China, too, the revolutionary movement against the medieval order has made itself felt with particular forcein recent months. 
 True, nothing definite can yet be saidabout the present movement—there is such scanty informa-tion about it and such a spate of reports about revolts in various parts of the country. 
 But there can be no doubtabout the vigorous growth of the “new spirit” and the “Euro-pean currents” that are stirring in China, especially sincethe Russo-Japanese war; and consequently, the old-styleChinese revolts will inevitably develop into a conscious democratic movement. 
 That some of the participants in colonial plunder are this time greatly concerned is borneout by the way the French are acting in Indo-China: theyhelped the “historic authorities” in China to put down the revolutionaries! They feared equally for the safety of their“own” Asian possessions bordering an China. 
 The French bourgeoisie, however, are concerned not only over their Asian possessions. 
 The barricades at Villeneuve-Saint-Georges, near Paris, the shooting down of the strikerswho built these barricades (on Thursday, July 30[17])—these events are renewed evidence of the sharpening ofthe class struggle in Europe. 
 Clemenceau, the Radical, who governs France on behalf of the capitalists, is working with uncommon zeal to shatter the last lingering remnants ofrepublican-bourgeois illusions among the proletariat. 
 Theshooting down of the workers by troops acting on the ordersof a “Radical” government has, under Clemenceau, becomealmost more frequent than before. 
 The French socialists have already dubbed Clemenceau “The Red” for this; and now, when his agents, gendarmes and generals have againshed the blood of the workers, the socialists recall the catch-phrase once uttered by this ultra-progressive bourgeois re-publican to a workers’ delegation: “You and I are on differentsides of the barricade. 
” Yes, the French proletariat and the most extreme bourgeois republicans have finally taken their place on opposite sides of the barricade. 
 The Frenchworking class shed much blood to win and defend the repub-lic, and now, on the basis of the fully established republican order, the decisive struggle between the propertied class and the working people is rapidly coming to a head. 
 “It was not simply brutality,” L’Humanité93 wrote of the July 30 events, “it was part of a battle. 
” The generals and the policewere bent on provoking the workers and turning a peacefulunarmed demonstration into a massacre. 
 But the troops thatsurrounded and attacked the unarmed strikers and demon-strators met with resistance, their action leading to the immediate erection of barricades, and to events which areagitating the whole of France. 
 These barricades, L’Humanité says, were built of boards and were ludicrously ineffectual. 
But that is not important. 
 What is important is that theThird Republic had eliminated the old habit of barricades; whereas now “Clemenceau is reviving that habit”—and he is just as candid about the matter as were “the butchers ofJune 1848, and Galliffet in 1871”, on the subject of civil war. 
 And the socialist press is not alone in recalling these great historic dates in connection with the events of July30. 
 The bourgeois press is furiously attacking the workers, accusing them of behaving as if they intended to start a socialist revolution. 
 One paper cites a minor but characteris-tic incident indicative of the mood of both sides at the sceneof action. 
 When the workers were carrying a woundedcomrade past General Virvaire, who directed the operationsagainst the strikers, there were shouts from the demonstra-tors: “ Saluez !” And the general of the bourgeois republic saluted his wounded enemy. 
 The sharpening of the struggle between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie is to be observed in all the advancedcapitalist countries. 
 The tendency is the same everywhere,though it manifests itself differently in accordance with the difference in historical conditions, political systems and forms of the labour movement. 
 In America and Britain,where complete political liberty exists and where the prole-tariat has no revolutionary and socialist traditions thatcould be called living traditions, this sharpening of the strug-gle is expressed in the mounting movement against the trusts, in the extraordinary growth of socialism and the increasing attention it is getting from the propertied classes,and in workers’ organisations, in some cases purely economic /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR ones, that are beginning to enter upon systematic and inde-pendent proletarian political struggle. 
 In Austria and Ger-many, and partly also in the Scandinavian countries, this sharpening of the class struggle shows itself in election cam-paigns, in party relationships, in the closer alignment of thebourgeoisie of all sorts and shades against their commonenemy, the proletariat, and in the hardening of judicialand police persecution. 
 Slowly but surely, the two opposing camps are building up their strength, consolidating their organisations, drawing apart with increasing sharpness inevery sphere of public life, as if preparing, silently and in-tently, for the impending revolutionary battles. 
 In theLatin countries, Italy and particularly France, the sharp-ening of the class struggle is expressed in especially stormy, violent, and occasionally forthright revolutionary outbreaks, when the pent-up hatred of the proletariat for its oppressorsbursts out with unexpected force, and the “peaceful” atmos-phere of parliamentary struggle gives way to episodes ofreal civil war. 
 The international revolutionary movement of the prole-tariat does not and cannot develop evenly and in identical forms in different countries. 
 The full and all-round utili-sation of every opportunity in every field of activity comesonly as the result of the class struggle of the workers in thevarious countries. 
 Every country contributes its ownvaluable and specific features to the common stream; but in each particular country the movement suffers from its own one-sidedness, its own theoretical and practical shortcomingsof the individual socialist parties. 
 On the whole we clearlysee a tremendous step forward of international socialism,the rallying of million-strong armies of the proletariat inthe course of a series of practical clashes with the enemy, and the approach of a decisive struggle with the bourgeoisie— a struggle for which the working class is far better prepared than in the days of the Commune, that last great proletarianinsurrection. 
 And this step forward of the whole of international so-cialism, along with the sharpening of the revolutionary-democratic struggle in Asia, places the Russian revolution in a special and especially difficult position. 
 The Russianrevolution has a great international ally both in Europe and in Asia, but, at the same time, and for that very reason , it has not only a national, not only a Russian, but also an international enemy. 
 Reaction against the mounting proletarian struggle is inevitable in all capitalist countries,and it is uniting the bourgeois governments of the wholeworld against every popular movement, against every revo-lution both in Asia and, particularly, in Europe. 
 Theopportunists in our Party, like the majority of the Russian liberal intelligentsia, are still dreaming of a bourgeois revolution in Russia that will “not alienate” or scare awaythe bourgeoisie, that will not engender “excessive” reaction,or lead to the seizure of power by the revolutionary classes. 
Vain hopes! A philistine utopia! The amount of inflammablematerial in all the advanced countries of the world is increas-ing so speedily, and the conflagration is so clearly spread-ing to most Asian countries which only yesterday were ina state of deep slumber, that the intensification of interna-tional bourgeois reaction and the aggravation of every singlenational revolution are absolutely inevitable. 
 The historical tasks of our revolution are not being per-formed by the forces of counter-revolution, and cannot be. 
 The Russian bourgeoisie are necessarily gravitating moreand more towards the international anti-proletarianand antidemocratic trend. 
 It is not on liberal allies thatthe Russian proletariat should count. 
 It must follow itsown independent path to the complete victory of the revolution, basing itself on the need for a forcible solu-tion of the agrarian question in Russia by the peasant massesthemselves, helping them to overthrow the rule of the Black-Hundred landlords and the Black-Hundred autocracy, set-ting itself the task of establishing a democratic dictator-ship of the proletariat and the peasantry in Russia, and re-membering that its struggle and its victories are inseparable from the international revolutionary movement. 
 Less illu-sions about the liberalism of the counter-revolutionarybourgeoisie (counter-revolutionary both in Russia and theworld over). 
 More attention to the growth of the internation-al revolutionary proletariat! Proletary , No. 
 33, Published according July 23 (August 5), 1908 to the text in Proletary THE EDITORIAL BOARD94 The present sketch of Comrade Maslov’s theoretical mis-adventures is borrowed from the book by N. 
 Lenin which gives a systematic analysis of the tendencies in our agrarian development. 
 Naturally, the exposure of the “original”agrarian theories of Maslov, which are saturated with a spiritof the most crude revisionism, inevitably involves the crit-icism of some propositions in the Party programme also. 
We think a discussion in the Party press on this question is quite timely. 
 As for Comrade Maslov’s theoretical “discoveries”, we have to address a few words to Comrade Plekhanov in partic-ular about them, since he is the guardian angel of our agra-rian revisionist. 
 In No. 
 6-7 of Golos Sotsial-Demokrata , when discussing mo-mentous theoretical issues, you deigned incidentally to launch upon evasive and ambiguous remarks which arenothing short of indecent . 
 You took upon yourself to declare in print that such-and-such members of our Party were no comrades of yours, while at the same time you lacked the courage to explain openly and plainly whether you had decided to withdraw from our organisation, or whether you sought the expulsion of such-and-such members from it. 
That was at once cowardly and rude. 
 So meditate a little, incorruptible warrior, over the re-visionist feats of your Maslov. 
 They fall, if anything does,under that little local authority where you, judging by published literature, have the reputation of a dread Dum-badze. 
 Where then is your criticism of Comrade Maslov’srevisionist fabrications? Where is your defence of the eco-nomic theory of Karl Marx? And who, if not you, gave Mas-lov every support and encouragement? Our Party Famusovs95 are not unwilling to play the part of mercilessly determined fighters for Marxism—but in theservice of factional favouritism they don’t mind coveringup very serious departures from Marxism! Proletary , No. 
 33, Published according July 23 (August 5), 1908 to the text in Proletary BELLICOSE MILITARISM AND THE ANTI-MILITARIST TACTICS OF SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY I The diplomats are in a flurry. 
 There is a shower of “Notes”, “Reports”, “Statements”; ministers whisper behind the backsof the crowned puppets who, champagne-glasses in hand,are “working for peace”. 
 But their “subjects” know perfectlywell that when crows flock together there must be a smell of carrion about. 
 And the Conservative Earl Cromer in-formed the British Parliament that we were living in timeswhen national (?) interests were involved, and passions wereexcited, and there was a risk, and more than a risk, thata collision would take place, however pacific (!) the inten-tions of rulers may be. 
 Plenty of inflammable material has accumulated in recent times, and it is steadily growing. 
 The revolution in Persiathreatens to upset all the barriers or “spheres of influence”set up there by the European powers. 
 The constitutionalmovement in Turkey threatens to snatch that private estatefrom the claws of the preying wolves of European capitalism; and looming large and threatening are old “questions” which have now become acute—those of Macedonia, Central Asia,the Far East, etc. 
 But with the present network of open and secret treaties, agreements, etc. 
, it is sufficient for some “power” to get theslightest of flicks for “the spark to burst into flame”. 
 And the more menacingly the governments rattle their sabres one against the other, the more ruthlessly do theycrush the anti-militarist movement at home. 
 The persecutions of anti-militarists are growing extensively and intensively. 
 The “Radical-Socialist” Ministry of Clemenceau-Briand acts no less violently than the Junker-Conservative Ministry of Bulow. 
 The dissolution of the “youth organisations”throughout Germany, following the introduction of the newlaw on unions and assemblies, which prohibits persons underthe age of 20 from attending political meetings, has madeanti-militarist agitation in Germany extremely difficult. 
 As a result, the dispute about the anti-militarist tactics of the socialists, which had died down since the StuttgartCongress, 96 is being revived again in the Party press. 
 At first sight it is a strange thing. 
 When the question is so obviously important, when militarism is so patentlyand starkly harmful for the proletariat, it would be difficult to find another question on which such hesitation and con-fusion reign among the Western socialists as in the argumentson anti-militarist tactics. 
 The fundamental premises for a correct solution of this problem have long ago been established quite firmly, anddo not arouse any dispute. 
 Modern militarism is the result of capitalism. 
 In both its forms it is the “vital expression” of capitalism—as a military force used by the capitaliststates in their external conflicts (“ Militarismus nach aussen ”, as the Germans say) and as a weapon in the hands of theruling classes for suppressing every kind of movement, eco-nomic and political, of the proletariat (“ Militarismus nach innen ”). 
 A number of International Congresses (Paris 1889, Brussels 1891, Zurich 1893 and finally Stuttgart 1907)provided a perfect expression of this view in their resolu-tions. 
 The Stuttgart resolution establishes this link betweenmilitarism and capitalism most circumstantially, althoughin keeping with the agenda (“International Conflicts”) the Stuttgart Congress was more concerned with that aspect of militarism which the Germans call “external” (“ Mili-tarismus nach aussen ”). 
 Here is the relevant passage in this resolution: “Wars between capitalist states are usually theresult of their competition on the world market, since eachstate strives not only to assure itself of a sphere of export, but also to conquer new regions, and the principal part in this is played by the enslavement of other peoples and coun-tries. 
 These wars then arise from the continuous armaments produced by militarism, which is the principal implement of class domination of the bourgeoisie and of the political subjugation of the working class. 
 “A favourable soil for wars are nationalist prejudices, which are systematically cultivated in the civilised countriesin the interests of the ruling classes, with the object ofdiverting the proletarian masses from their own class objec-tives and making them forget the duty of international class solidarity. 
 “Thus wars are rooted in the very essence of capitalism; they will end only when the capitalist system ceases to exist,or when the immensity of human and financial sacrificecaused by the development of military technique, and theindignation which armaments arouse in the people, lead to the elimination of the system. 
 “The working class, which is the principal supplier of soldiers, and which bears the brunt of the material sacri-fices, is in particular the natural enemy of wars, becausewars contradict the aim it pursues, namely, the creation ofan economic system founded on socialist principles, which in practice will give effect to the solidarity of peoples.... 
” II Thus the principle which connects militarism and capi-talism is firmly established among socialists, and on this point there are no differences. 
 But the recognition of this link does not of itself concretely determine the anti-mili-tarist tactics of the socialists: it does not solve the practical problem of how to fight the burden of militarism and howto prevent wars. 
 And it is in the answers to these questionsthat a considerable divergence of views is to be found among socialists. 
 At the Stuttgart Congress these differences were very marked. 
 At one pole are German Social-Democrats like Vollmar. 
 Since militarism is the offspring of capitalism, they argue,since wars are a necessary concomitant of capitalist develop-ment, there is no need for any special anti-militarist activ-ity. 
 That exactly is what Vollmar declared at the Essen Party Congress. 
 On the question of how Social-Democratsshould behave if war is declared, the majority of the German Social-Democrats, headed by Bebel and Vollmar, hold rigidly to the view that the Social-Democrats must defend their country against aggression, and that they are bound to take part in a “defensive” war. 
 This proposition led Vollmar todeclare at Stuttgart that “all our love for humanity cannotprevent us being good Germans”, while the Social-Demo-cratic deputy Noske proclaimed in the Reichstag that, in theevent of war against Germany, “the Social-Democrats will not lag behind bourgeois parties and will shoulder their rifles”. 
 From this Noske had to make only one more step todeclare that “we want Germany to be armed as much aspossible”. 
 At the other pole is the small group of supporters of Hervé. 
 The proletariat has no fatherland, they argue. 
 Hence all wars are in the interests of the capitalists. 
 Hence the prole-tariat must combat every war. 
 The proletariat must meetevery declaration of war with a military strike and an up-rising. 
 This must be the main purpose of anti-militaristpropaganda. 
 At Stuttgart Hervé therefore proposed the fol-lowing draft resolution: “The Congress calls for every decla-ration of war , whencesoever it may come , being met with a military strike and an uprising. 
” Such are the two “extreme” positions on this question in the ranks of the Western socialists. 
 “Like the sun in a dropof water”, there are reflected in them the two diseases whichstill cause harm to the activity of the socialist proletariat in the West—opportunist tendencies on the one hand and anarchist phrase-mongering on the other. 
 First of all, a few remarks about patriotism. 
 That “work-ing men have no country” was really said in the Communist Manifesto . 
 That the attitude of Vollmar, Noske and Co. 
 strikes at this basic principle of international socialism is also true. 
 But it does not follow from this that Hervé and his followers are right in asserting that it is of no concernto the proletariat in what country it lives—in monarchicalGermany, republican France or despotic Turkey. 
 The fath-erland, i. 
e. 
, the given political, cultural and social envi-ronment, is a most powerful factor in the class struggle of the proletariat; and if Vollmar is wrong when he lays down some kind of “truly German” attitude of the proletariat to“the fatherland”, Hervé is just as wrong when he takes up an unforgivably uncritical attitude on such an important factor in the struggle of the proletariat for emancipation. 
 The proletariat cannot be indifferent to the political, social and cultural conditions of its struggle; consequently itcannot be indifferent to the destinies of its country. 
 Butthe destinies of the country interest it only to the extent that they affect its class struggle, and not in virtue of somebourgeois “patriotism”, quite indecent on the lips of a Social-Democrat. 
 More complicated is the other question, namely, the atti-tude to militarism and war. 
 At the very first glance it isobvious that Hervé is unforgivably confusing these two ques-tions, and forgetting the causal connection between warand capitalism. 
 By adopting Hervé’s tactics, the proletariat would condemn itself to fruitless activity: it would use up all its fighting preparedness (the reference is to insurrection)in the struggle against the effect (war) and allow the cause(capitalism) to remain. 
 The anarchist mode of thought is displayed in full measure here. 
 Blind faith in the miracle-working power of all direct action *; the wrenching of this “direct action” out of its general social and political context, without the slightestanalysis of the latter: in short the “arbitrarily mechanicalinterpretation of social phenomena” (as Karl Liebknechtput it) is obvious. 
 Hervé’s plan is “very simple”: on the day war is declared the socialist soldiers desert, while the reservists declare a strike and stay in their homes. 
 But “the strike of the reservistsis not passive resistance: the working class would soon goover to open resistance, to insurrection, and the latter wouldhave all the greater chance of ending in triumph because thearmy on active service would be at the frontiers” (G. 
 Hervé, Leur Patrie ). 
 Such is this “effective, direct and practical plan”; and Hervé, confident of its success, proposes that a militarystrike and insurrection should be the reply to every declara-tion of war. 
 It will be clear from this that the question here is not whether the proletariat is able, when it finds such a course *These words are in French in the original: action directé . 
—Ed. 
 desirable, to reply with a strike and insurrection to a dec-laration of war. 
 The point at issue is whether the proletariat should be bound by an obligation to reply with an insurrection to every war. 
 To decide the question in the latter sense means to take away from the proletariat the choice of the momentfor a decisive battle, and to hand it over to its enemies. 
It is not the proletariat which chooses the moment of strug-gle in accordance with its own interests, when its general socialist consciousness stands at a high level, when its or-ganisation is strong, when the occasion is appropriate, etc. 
No, the bourgeois governments would be able to provokeit to an insurrection even when the conditions for it wereunfavourable, for example, by declaring a war speciallycalculated to arouse patriotic and chauvinist feelings among wide sections of the population and thus isolate the insur-gent proletariat. 
 It should be borne in mind, moreover, thatthe bourgeoisie which, from monarchist Germany to repub-lican France and democratic Switzerland, persecutes anti-militarist activity with such ruthlessness in peace-time,would descend with the utmost fury on any attempt at a military strike in the event of war, when war-time laws declarations of martial law, courts martial, etc. 
, are inforce. 
 Kautsky was right when he said of Hervé’s idea: “The idea of a military strike sprang from ‘good’ motives, it isnoble and full of heroism, but it is heroic folly. 
” The proletariat, if it finds it expedient and suitable, may reply with a military strike to a declaration of war. 
 It may,among other means of achieving a social revolution, alsohave recourse to a military strike. 
 But to commit itself tothis “tactical recipe” is not in the interests of the proletariat. 
 And that precisely was the reply given to this debatable question by the Stuttgart International Congress. 
 III But if the views of the Hervéists are “heroic folly” the attitude of Vollmar, Noske and those who think like them on the “Right wing” is opportunist cowardice. 
 Since milita-rism is the offspring of capitalism, and will fall with it—they argued at Stuttgart and still more at Essen—no special anti-militarist agitation is needed: it should not exist. 
 But a radical solution of the labour question and the women’s question, for example—was the reply given them at Stutt-gart—is also impossible while the capitalist system exists;in spite of that, we fight for labour legislation, for extendingthe civil rights of women, etc. 
 Special anti-militarist prop-aganda must be carried on all the more energetically be-cause cases of interference in the struggle between labour and capital on the part of the military forces are becoming more frequent; and because the importance of militarismnot only in the present struggle of the proletariat, but alsoin the future, at the time of the social revolution, is becom-ing more and more obvious. 
 Special anti-militarist propaganda has behind it not only the evidence of principle but also extensive historical expe-rience. 
 Belgium is ahead of other countries in this respect. 
The Belgian Labour Party, apart from its general propagandaof anti-militarist ideas, has organised groups of socialistyouth under the title of Jeunes Gardes (Young Guards). 
Groups in one and the same area constitute an Area Federa-tion, and all the Area Federations in turn form a National Federation, headed by a “Chief Council”. 
 The newspapers ofthe “Young Guards” ( La jeunesse —c’est l’avenir , De Ca-serne , De Loteling , * etc. 
) circulate in tens of thousands of copies! The strongest is the Walloon Federation, which has62 local groups with 10,000 members; in all there are at pres-ent 121 local groups of the “Young Guards”. 
 In addition to agitation in print, there is intensive verbal agitation. 
 In January and September (the months of thecall-up) public meetings and processions are held in the maintowns of Belgium. 
 Outside the town halls, in the open air,socialist speakers explain to the recruits the meaning of militarism. 
 The Chief Council of the “Young Guards” has a Complaints Committee, the duty of which is to gather in-formation about all acts of injustice committed in the bar-racks. 
 This information, under the heading “From the Army”,is daily published in Le Peuple , the central organ of the party. 
 Anti-militarist propaganda does not halt at the threshold of the barracks, and socialist soldiers form propaganda groups *Youth Is the Future , The Barracks , The Recruit . 
—Ed. 
 within the army. 
 At the present time there are about 15 such groups (“soldiers’ unions”). 
 Following the Belgian model, with varying intensity and forms of organisation, anti-militarist propaganda goes on inFrance, * Switzerland, Austria and other countries. 
 Thus specially-anti-militarist activity is not only specially necessary but practically expedient and fruitful. 
 Therefore,since Vollmar opposed it, pointing out the impossible police conditions prevailing in Germany and the danger of it lead-ing to party organisations being broken up, the questionreduced itself to the factual analysis of conditions in thisparticular country. 
 But this was a question of fact and notof principle. 
 Though here, too, there was justice in Jaurès’sremark that the German Social-Democrats, who in their youth, in the difficult years of the Anti-Socialist Laws, stood up against the iron hand of Prince Bismarck, couldnow, with their incomparably greater numbers and strength,not fear persecution at the hands of their present rulers. 
But Vollmar is all the more wrong when he tries to fallback on the argument that special anti-militarist propaganda is inexpedient in principle. 
 No less opportunistic is the conviction of Vollmar and those who think like him that the Social-Democrats are bound totake part in a defensive war. 
 Kautsky’s brilliant criticismmade hay of these views. 
 Kautsky pointed out that it wasoften quite impossible to make out—especially at times of patriotic excitement—whether a particular war has been brought about with defensive or aggressive aims (the example,Kautsky gave was: was Japan attacking or defending herselfat the beginning of the Russo-Japanese War?). 
 Social-Demo-crats would be entangled in a net of diplomatic negotiationsif they took into their heads to determine their attitude to a war by this criterion. 
 Social-Democrats may find them-selves even in a position to demand offensive wars. 
 In 1848(it would not hurt the Hervéists to remember this too) Marx *An interesting feature among the French is the practice known as “The Soldier’s Half-penny”. 
 Every week the worker pays one sou to the secretary of his union. 
 The money collected in this way is sentto the soldiers “as a reminder that, even in soldier’s clothes, theybelong to the exploited class, and that in no circumstances shouldthey forget this”. 
 and Engels thought a war of Germany against Russia to be necessary. 
 Later they strove to influence public opinion in Britain in favour of a war with Russia. 
 Kautsky, by the way, puts forward the following hypothetical example: “Assum-ing,” he says, “that the revolutionary movement in Russiais victorious, and the effects of this victory, in France, leadto power passing into the hands of the proletariat; let usassume, on the other hand, that a coalition of European monarchs is formed against the new Russia. 
 Would inter-national Social-Democracy begin protesting if the FrenchRepublic then came to the aid of Russia?” (K. 
 Kautsky,Our Views on Patriotism and War . 
) It is obvious that on this question (just as in discussing “patriotism”) it is not the defensive or offensive character of the war, but the interests of the class struggle of the proletariat, or—to put it better—the interests of the inter-national movement of the proletariat—that represent thesole criterion for considering and deciding the attitude ofthe Social-Democrats to any particular event in internation-al relations. 
 The lengths to which opportunism can go in such questions too is shown by a recent statement of Jaurès. 
 Expressinghis views on the international situation in a German bour-geois-liberal newspaper, he defends the alliance of Franceand Britain with Russia against the charge of non-peacefulintentions, and treats that alliance as a “guarantee of peace”; he welcomes the fact that “we have now lived to see an alliance of Britain and Russia, two old-standing ene-mies”. 
 Rosa Luxemburg has given a magnificent assessment of such a view, and a warm retort to Jaurès, in her “OpenLetter” to him in the last issue of Neue Zeit . 
 Rosa Luxemburg begins by pointing out that to talk of an alliance between “Russia” and “Britain” means “talkingin the language of bourgeois politicians”, because the inter-ests of the capitalist states and the interests of the proletari-at in foreign policy are opposed to one another, and one can-not speak of a harmony of interests in the sphere of foreign relations. 
 If militarism is the offspring of capitalism, then wars too cannot be abolished by the intrigues of rulersand diplomats; and the task of socialists is not to awaken illusions on this score, but on the contrary constantly to expose the hypocrisy and impotence of diplomatic “peaceful démarches”. 
 But the main point of the “Open Letter” is the assessment of Britain’s and France’s alliance with Russia which Jaurèsso extols. 
 The European bourgeoisie has given tsarism achance to repel the revolutionary onset. 
 “Now, in an attemptto turn its temporary victory over the revolution into a final one, absolutism is having recourse first and foremost to the tried method of all shaken despotisms—successes inforeign policy. 
” All alliances with Russia now mean “a holyalliance between the bourgeoisie of Western Europe andRussian counter-revolution, the suppressors and executionersof Russian and Polish fighters for liberty. 
 Such alliances mean the strengthening of the most bloody reaction, not only inside Russia, but in international relations as well.... 
Therefore the most elementary obligation of socialists andproletarians in all countries is to oppose with all their mightan alliance with counter-revolutionary Russia”. 
 Rosa Luxemburg asks Jaurès: “How are we to explain to ourselves that you will strive ‘most energetically’ to make the government of the bloody executioners of the Russianrevolution and the insurrection in Persia an influentialfactor in European politics, and make the gallows in Russiapillars of international peace—you, who once uttered abrilliant speech in the French Parliament against the loan to Russia; you, who only a few weeks ago printed in your paper L’Humanité a fiery appeal to public opinion against the bloody work of the military tribunals in Russian Po-land? How can one reconcile your plans for peace, whichrely on the Franco-Russian and Anglo-Russian alliances,with the recent protest of the French Parliamentary Social-ist Party and the Administrative Commission of the Nation-al Council of the Socialist Party against President Fall-ieres’ visit to Russia—a protest which you signed, and whichin passionate terms defends the interests of the Russianrevolution? If the President of the French Republic caresto quote your conceptions of the international situation, he will reply to your protest that he who approves the end must approve the means; he who considers alliance with tsaristRussia as the harmony of international peace must accept everything that strengthens that alliance and leads to friendship. 
 “What would you have said if once upon a time in Ger-many, in Russia or in Britain there had appeared socialistsand revolutionaries who in the ‘interests of peace’ had re-commended an alliance with the government of the Resto-ration, or the government of Thiers and Jules Favre, and hadvested such an alliance with their moral authority?!” This letter speaks for itself, and Russian Social-Democrats can only send their greetings to Comrade Rosa Luxemburgfor this her protest and for her defence of the Russian revo-lution before the international proletariat. 
 Proletary , No. 
 33, Published according July 23 (August 5), 1908 to the text in Proletary LEO TOLSTOY AS THE MIRROR OF THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION To identify the great artist with the revolution which he has obviously failed to understand, and from which he obviously stands aloof, may at first sight seem strange andartificial. 
 A mirror which does not reflect things correctlycould hardly be called a mirror. 
 Our revolution, however,is an extremely complicated thing. 
 Among the mass of thosewho are directly making and participating in it there are many social elements which have also obviously not under-stood what is taking place and which also stand aloof fromthe real historical tasks with which the course of eventshas confronted them. 
 And if we have before us a really greatartist, he must have reflected in his work at least some ofthe essential aspects of the revolution. 
 The legal Russian press, though its pages teem with arti-cles, letters and comments on Tolstoy’s eightieth birthday,is least of all interested in analysing his works from thestandpoint of the character of the Russian revolution andits motive forces. 
 The whole of this press is steeped to nauseain hypocrisy, hypocrisy of a double kind: official and lib-eral. 
 The former is the crude hypocrisy of the venal hack who was ordered yesterday to hound Leo Tolstoy, and todayto show that Tolstoy is a patriot, and to try to observe thedecencies before the eyes of Europe. 
 That the hacks of thiskind have been paid for their screeds is common knowledgeand they cannot deceive anybody. 
 Much more refined and, therefore, much more pernicious and dangerous is liberal hypocrisy. 
 To listen to the Cadet Balalaikins 97 of Rech , one would think that their sympathy for Tolstoy is of the The first page of the manuscript of Lenin’s “Leo Tolstoy as the Mirror of the Russian Revolution”, 1908. 
 Reduced The first page of the manuscript of Lenin’s “Leo Tolstoy as the Mirror of the Russian Revolution”, 1908. 
 Reduced most complete and ardent kind. 
 Actually, their calculated declamations and pompous phrases about the “great seeker after God” are false from beginning to end, for no Russian liberal believes in Tolstoy’s God, or sympathises with Tol-stoy’s criticism of the existing social order. 
 He associateshimself with a popular name in order to increase his polit-ical capital, in order to pose as a leader of the nation-wideopposition; he seeks, with the din and thunder of claptrap, to drown the demand for a straight and clear answer to the question: what are the glaring contradictions of “Tolstoy-ism” due to, and what shortcomings and weaknesses ofour revolution do they express? The contradictions in Tolstoy’s works, views, doctrines, in his school, are indeed glaring. 
 On the one hand, we have the great artist, the genius who has not only drawn incompa-rable pictures of Russian life but has made first-class con-tributions to world literature. 
 On the other hand we have thelandlord obsessed with Christ. 
 On the one hand, the remark-ably powerful, forthright and sincere protest against socialfalsehood and hypocrisy; and on the other, the “Tolstoyan”, i. 
e. 
, the jaded, hysterical sniveller called the Russian intellectual, who publicly beats his breast and wails: “Iam a bad wicked man, but I am practising moral self-per-fection; I don’t eat meat any more I now eat rice cutlets. 
”On the one hand, merciless criticism of capitalist exploi-tation, exposure of government outrages, the farcical courts and the state administration, and unmasking of the profound contradictions between the growth of wealth and achieve-ments of civilisation and the growth of poverty, degradationand misery among the working masses. 
 On the other, thecrackpot preaching of submission, “resist not evil” withviolence. 
 On the one hand, the most sober realism, the tear-ing away of all and sundry masks; on the other, the preach-ing of one of the most odious things on earth, namely,religion, the striving to replace officially appointed priestsby priests who will serve from moral conviction, i. 
e. 
, tocultivate the most refined and, therefore, particularly dis-gusting clericalism. 
 Verily: Thou art a pauper, yet thou art abundant, Thou art mighty, yet thou art impotent——Mother Russia! 98 That Tolstoy, owing to these contradictions, could not possibly understand either the working-class movement and its role in the struggle for socialism, or the Russian revo-lution, goes without saying. 
 But the contradictions in Tol-stoy’s views and doctrines are not accidental; they expressthe contradictory conditions of Russian life in the last thirdof the nineteenth century. 
 The patriarchal countryside, onlyrecently emancipated from serfdom, was literally given over to the capitalist and the tax-collector to be fleeced and plund-ered. 
 The ancient foundations of peasant economy andpeasant life, foundations that had really held for centuries,were broken up for scrap with extraordinary rapidity. 
 Andthe contradictions in Tolstoy’s views must be appraised notfrom the standpoint of the present-day working-class move-ment and present-day socialism (such an appraisal is, of course, needed, but it is not enough), but from the standpointof protest against advancing capitalism, against the ruin-ing of the masses, who are being dispossessed of their land—a protest which had to arise from the patriarchal Russiancountryside. 
 Tolstoy is absurd as a prophet who has dis-covered new nostrums for the salvation of mankind—and therefore the foreign and Russian “Tolstoyans” who havesought to convert the weakest side of his doctrine into adogma, are not worth speaking of. 
 Tolstoy is great as thespokesman of the ideas and sentiments that emerged amongthe millions of Russian peasants at the time the bourgeois revolution was approaching in Russia. 
 Tolstoy is original, because the sum total of his views, taken as a whole, happensto express the specific features of our revolution as a peasant bourgeois revolution. 
 From this point of view, the contra-dictions in Tolstoy’s views are indeed a mirror of those con-tradictory conditions in which the peasantry had to play their historical part in our revolution. 
 On the one hand, centuries of feudal oppression and decades of accelerated post-Reformpauperisation piled up mountains of hate, resentment, anddesperate determination. 
 The striving to sweep away com-pletely the official church, the landlords and the landlordgovernment, to destroy all the old forms and ways of landown-ership, to clear the land, to replace the police-class state by a community of free and equal small peasants—this strivingthe is the keynote of every historical step the peasantry has taken in our revolution; and, undoubtedly, the message of Tolstoy’s writings conforms to this peasant striving far more than it does to abstract “Christian Anarchism”, as his “sys-tem” of views is sometimes appraised. 
 On the other hand the peasantry, striving towards new ways of life, had a very crude, patriarchal, semi-religiousidea of what kind of life this should be, by what strugglecould liberty be won, what leaders it could have in this struggle, what was the attitude of the bourgeoisie and the bourgeois intelligentsia towards the interests of peasantrevolution, why the forcible overthrow of tsarist rule wasneeded in order to abolish landlordism. 
 The whole past lifeof the peasantry had taught it to hate the landowner andthe official, but it did not, and could not, teach it where to seek an answer to all these questions. 
 In our revolution a minor part of the peasantry really did fight, did organiseto some extent for this purpose: and a very small part indeedrose up in arms to exterminate its enemies, to destroy thetsar’s servants and protectors of the landlords. 
 Most of thepeasantry wept and prayed, moralised and dreamed, wrote petitions and sent “pleaders”—quite in the vein of Leo Tolstoy! And, as always happens in such cases, the effectof this Tolstoyan abstention from politics, this Tolstoyanrenunciation of politics, this lack of interest in and under-standing of politics, was that only a minority followed thelead of the class-conscious revolutionary proletariat, while the majority became the prey of those unprincipled, servile, bourgeois intellectuals who under the name of Cadets hast-ened from a meeting of Trudoviks to Stolypin’s ante-room, and begged, haggled, reconciled and promised toreconcile—until they were kicked out with a military jack-boot. 
 Tolstoy’s ideas are a mirror of the weakness, the short-comings of our peasant revolt, a reflection of the flabbiness of the patriarchal countryside and of the hidebound cowar-dice of the “enterprising muzhik”. 
 Take the soldiers’ insurrections in 1905-06. 
 In social com-position these men who fought in our revolution were partlypeasants and partly proletarians. 
 The proletarians were in the minority; therefore the movement in the armed forces does not even approximately show the same nation-widesolidarity, the same party consciousness, as were displayed by the proletariat, which became Social-Democratic as if by the wave of a hand. 
 Yet there is nothing more mistaken than the view that the insurrections in the armed forces failed because no officers had led them. 
 On the contrary,the enormous progress the revolution had made since thetime of the Narodnaya Volya 99 was shown precisely by the fact that the “grey herd” rose in arms against their superiors,and it was this self-dependency of theirs that so frightened the liberal landlords and the liberal officers. 
 The common soldier fully sympathised with the peasants’ cause; hiseyes lit up at the very mention of land. 
 There was more thanone case when authority in the armed forces passed to themass of the rank and file, but determined use of this authoritywas hardly made at all; the soldiers wavered; after a couple of days, in some cases a few hours, after killing some hated officer, they released the others who had been arrested, par-leyed with the authorities and then faced the firing squad,or bared their backs for the birch, or put on the yoke again—quite in the vein of Leo Tolstoy! Tolstoy reflected the pent-up hatred, the ripened striving for a better lot, the desire to get rid of the past—and also the immature dreaming, the political inexperience, therevolutionary flabbiness. 
 Historical and economic conditionsexplain both the inevitable beginning of the revolutionarystruggle of the masses and their unpreparedness for thestruggle, their Tolstoyan non-resistance to evil, which was a most serious cause of the defeat of the first revolutionary campaign. 
 It is said that beaten armies learn well. 
 Of course, revo-lutionary classes can be compared with armies only in a verylimited sense. 
 The development of capitalism is hourlychanging and intensifying the conditions which roused the millions of peasants—united by their hatred for the feudalist landlords and their government—for the revolutionary-democratic struggle. 
 Among the peasantry themselves thegrowth of exchange, of the rule of the market and the powerof money is steadily ousting old-fashioned patriarchalismand the patriarchal Tolstoyan ideology. 
 But there is one gain from the first years of the revolution and the first reverses in mass revolutionary struggle about which there can beno doubt. 
 It is the mortal blow struck at the former softness and flabbiness of the masses. 
 The lines of demarcation have become more distinct. 
 The cleavage of classes and parties has taken place. 
 Under the hammer blows of the lessons taught by Stolypin, and with undeviating and consistentagitation by the revolutionary Social-Democrats not onlythe socialist proletariat but also the democratic masses ofthe peasantry will inevitably advance from their midst moreand more steeled fighters who will be less capable of falling into our historical sin of Tolstoyism! Proletary , No. 
 35, Published according September 11 (24), 1908 to the manuscript verified with the text in Proletary BRITISH AND GERMAN WORKERS DEMONSTRATE FOR PEAC E100 As is well known, in Britain and Germany a chauvinist campaign has long been conducted by the bourgeois press, especially the gutter press, in which these countries are in-cited against each other. 
 Competition in the world marketbetween British and German capitalists is becoming more and more bitter. 
 Britain’s former supremacy and her undi-vided ascendancy in the world market, have become a thingof the past. 
 Germany is one of the capitalist countries thatare developing particularly rapidly, and her manufacturesare seeking markets abroad on an ever-growing scale. 
 Thestruggle for colonies and the conflict of commercial inter-ests have in capitalist society become one of the main causes of war. 
 It is therefore not surprising that the capitalists ofboth countries consider war between Britain and Germanyinevitable, and the military men on both sides deem it quitedesirable. 
 The British jingoes want to undermine the strengthof a dangerous rival by smashing Germany’s sea power while it is still immeasurably weaker than Britain’s. 
 The German Junkers and generals, headed by that Bourbon,Wilhelm II, are spoiling for a fight with Britain, hoping tobe able to use their numerical superiority in land forces, andhoping that the clamour of military victories will stifle thegrowing discontent of the working masses and prevent the aggravation of the class struggle in Germany. 
 The British and German workers decided to come out publicly against the growing war danger. 
 For a long time the labour press in both countries had been waging an unremit-ting struggle against chauvinism and militarism. 
 But whatwas required now was some more imposing expression of the will of the working class than through the organs of the press. 
 The British workers decided to send a delegation toBerlin to attend a grand demonstration that would declare the joint determination of the proletariat of both countries to wage war on war. 
 The demonstration took place in Berlin on Sunday, Sep-tember 20 (7, old style). 
 This time the British workers’representatives were able to address the proletariat of Berlinwithout let or hindrance. 
 Two years before, when J. 
 Jaurèshad wanted to speak to the German workers on behalf ofthe French working class at a Social-Democratic mass meeting in Berlin to protest against the bourgeois jingoes, the Ger-man Government banned him. 
 This time it did not ventureto eject the delegates of the British proletariat. 
 A mammoth rally of working men was held in one of Berlin’s biggest halls. 
 About 5,000 people immediatelypacked the place, and an overflow of many thousands occu-pied the surrounding grounds and the street. 
 Stewards wearing red armbands kept order. 
 Comrade Legien, thewell-known leader of the German trade unions (called“free”, i. 
e. 
, actually Social-Democratic unions), greeted theBritish delegation on behalf of the entire politically andindustrially organised working class of Germany. 
 He said that fifty years ago French and British workers had demonstrated on behalf of peace. 
 At that time those pioneer socialists werenot backed by the organised masses. 
 Today Britain and Germany together had an army of 4 # million organised work-ers. 
 It was on behalf of this army that the British delegates and the Berlin rally now spoke, declaring that the decision of war or peace lay in the hands of the working class. 
 In his speech in reply, the British workers’ delegate Mad-dison condemned the jingo slander campaign conducted bythe bourgeoisie, and handed over an Address from the Work-ers of Britain to the Workers of Germany, signed by 3,000 workmen. 
 Among the signatories, he said, were representa-tives of both trends in the British labour movement (i. 
e. 
,both Social-Democrats and adherents of the IndependentLabour Party, who do not yet hold any consistent socialistpoint of view). 
 The Address pointed out that wars servethe interests of the propertied classes. 
 The masses of the workers bear all the burdens of war. 
 The propertied classes derive benefit from national calamities. 
 Let the workersunite to fight militarism, to ensure peace! After other British delegates and a representative of the German Social-Democratic Party, Richard Fischer, had spoken, the meeting closed with the unanimous adoption of a resolution branding the “selfish and short-sighted policy ofthe ruling and exploiting classes” and expressing readinessto act in accordance with the resolution of the InternationalCongress in Stuttgart, i. 
e. 
, to fight war by all ways andmeans. 
 The meeting broke up in an orderly manner amidst the singing of the workers’ Marseillaise . 
 There were no street demonstrations. 
 The Berlin police and local military au-thorities were disappointed. 
 It is characteristic of the regimein Germany that the most peaceful demonstration of theworkers had to have a police and military demonstration toaccompany it. 
 The Berlin garrison was mobilised. 
 Detach-ments of troops were stationed in different parts of the city in accordance with a strict plan, mostly in such a way thattheir hiding-places and numbers could not be easily detected. 
Police units patrolled the streets and squares in the vicinityof the meeting hall, particularly the road leading from thereto the royal palace. 
 The latter was ringed with police in plain clothes and troops concealed in house yards. 
 An intricate system of police pickets was organised; groups of policemenloitered at street corners; police officers were detailed to all“important” spots; police cyclists acted as scouts and keptthe military authorities informed on every step the “enemy”made; bridges and canal crossings were put under triple guard. 
 “They stood watch over the threatened monarchy,” sarcastically wrote Vorwärts , 101 commenting on all these measures taken by the government of Wilhelm II. 
 It was a rehearsal, we add for our part. 
 Wilhelm II and the German bourgeoisie were rehearsing military combat with aninsurgent proletariat. 
 Such rehearsals are undoubtedly and in any case useful to both the masses of workers and to the soldiers. 
 Ça ira (it will be a success!), as the French workers’ song says. 
 Repeated rehearsals are leading, maybe veryslowly as yet, but very surely, to the great historical climax. 
 Written before October 3 (16), 1908 First published in 1933 Published according in Lenin Miscellany XXV to the manuscript THE STUDENT MOVEMENT AND THE PRESENT POLITICAL SITUATION A students’ strike has been called at St. 
 Petersburg Uni-versity. 
 A number of other higher education establishments have joined in. 
 The movement has already spread to Moscowand Kharkov. 
 Judging from all the reports in the foreignand Russian newspapers and in private letters from Russia,we are faced with a fairly broad academic movement. 
 Back to the old days! Back to pre-revolutionary Russia! That is what these events signify above all. 
 As before, of-ficial reaction is tightening the screw in the universities. 
The eternal struggle in autocratic Russia against the studentorganisations has taken the form of a crusade by theBlack-Hundred Minister Schwartz—acting in full agreementwith “Premier” Stolypin—against the autonomy which was promised the students in the autumn of 1905 (what did not the autocracy, faced with the onset of the revolutionaryworking class, “promise” Russian citizens at that time!);against an autonomy which the students enjoyed so long asthe autocracy had “other things to think of than students”,and which the autocracy, if it was to remain such, could not but begin to take away. 
 As before, the liberal press laments and groans, this time together with some Octobrists—the professors lament andsnivel too, imploring the government not to take the roadof reaction and to make use of an excellent opportunity “toensure peace and order with the help of reforms” in “a country exhausted by convulsions”—imploring the students not to resort to unlawful courses which can only play into the handsof reaction, etc. 
, etc. 
, etc. 
 How ancient and antiquated, how hackneyed are all these tunes, and how vividly they resur-rect before our eyes what took place twenty years ago or so, at the end of the eighties of last century! The similarity be-tween that time and this is all the more striking when we take the present moment by itself, apart from the three years of revolution we have gone through. 
 For the Duma (atfirst sight) with only the tiniest difference expresses thatsame pre-revolutionary relation of forces—the supremacy ofthe wild landlord, who prefers using Court connections andthe influence of his friend the official to any kind of repre-sentation; the support of that same official by the merchants (the Octobrists) who do not dare to differ from their benevo-lent patrons; the “opposition” of the bourgeois intellectualswho are concerned most of all to prove their loyalty andwho describe appeals to those in power as the politicalactivity of liberalism. 
 And the workers’ deputies in the Duma recall feebly, far too feebly, the part which the proletariat was recently playing by its open massstruggle. 
 It may be asked, can we in such conditions attribute any importance to the old forms of primitive academic struggleof the students? If the liberals have sunk to the level of the “politics” of the eighties (one can of course only in irony speak of politics in this connection), will it not be a debase-ment of the aims of Social-Democracy if it decides that it isnecessary to support the academic struggle in some way orother? Here and there, apparently, Social-Democratic students are putting this question. 
 At any rate, our editorial board has received a letter from a group of Social-Democraticstudents which says, among other things: “On September 13, a meeting of the students of St. 
 Petersburg University resolved to call upon students for an all-Russian student strike, the reason given for this appeal being the aggressive tacticspursued by Schwartz. 
 The platform of the strike is an academic one,and the meeting even welcomes the ‘first steps’ of the Moscow and St. 
Petersburg Professorial Councils in the struggle for autonomy. 
 Weare puzzled by the academic platform put forward at the St. 
 Peters-burg meeting, and consider it objectionable in present conditions, because it cannot unite the students for an active struggle on a broadfront. 
 We envisage student action only as one co-ordinated withgeneral political action, and in no case apart from it. 
 The elements capable of uniting the students are lacking. 
 In view of this we are against academic action. 
” The mistake which the authors of the letter are making is of much greater political importance than may appear atfirst sight, because their argument, strictly speaking, touchesupon a theme which is incomparably more broad andimportant than the question of taking part in this partic-ular strike. 
 “We envisage student action only as one co-ordinated with general political action. 
 In view of this we are against academic action. 
” Such an argument is radically wrong. 
 The revolutionary slogan—to work towards co-ordinated political action ofthe students and the proletariat, etc. 
—here ceases to be alive guidance for many-sided militant agitation on a broaden-ing basis and becomes a lifeless dogma, mechanically ap-plied to different stages of different forms of the movement. 
It is not sufficient merely to proclaim political co-ordinatedaction, repeating the “last word” in lessons of the revolu-tion. 
 One must be able to agitate for political action, making use of all possibilities, all conditions and, first and foremost, all mass conflicts between advanced elements, whatever they are, and the autocracy. 
 It is not of course a questionof us dividing every student movement beforehand intocompulsory “stages”, and making sure that each stage isproperly gone through, out of fear of switching over to“untimely” political actions, etc. 
 Such a view would be the most harmful pedantry, and would lead only to an oppor-tunist policy. 
 But just as harmful is the opposite mistake,when people refuse to reckon with the actual situation thathas arisen and the actual conditions of the particular massmovement, because of a slogan misinterpreted as unchange-able. 
 Such an application of a slogan inevitably degen-erates into revolutionary phrase-mongering. 
 Conditions are possible when an academic movement low-ers the level of a political movement, or divides it, or dis-tracts from it—and in that case Social-Democratic students’groups would of course be bound to concentrate their agita-tion against such a movement. 
 But anyone can see that the objective political conditions at the present time are differ-ent. 
 The academic movement is expressing the beginning of a movement among the new “generation” of students, who have more or less become accustomed to a narrow measure of autonomy; and this movement is beginning when other forms of mass struggle are lacking at the present time, whena lull has set in, and the broad mass of the people, still si-lently, concentratedly and slowly are continuing to digest the experience of the three years of revolution. 
 In such conditions Social-Democrats would make a big mistake if they declared “against academic action”. 
 No, the groups of students belonging to our Party must use everyeffort to support, utilise and extend the movement. 
 Likeevery other support of primitive forms of movement by So-cial-Democracy, the present support, too, should consistmost of all in ideological and organisational influence on wider sections who have been roused by the conflict, and to whom this form of conflict, as a general rule, is their first experience of political conflicts. 
 The student youth whohave entered the universities during the last two years havelived a life almost completely detached from politics, andhave been educated in a spirit of narrow academic autono-mism, educated not only by the professors of the Establish-ment and the government press but also by the liberal pro-fessors and the whole Cadet Party. 
 For this youth a strikeon a large scale (if that youth is able to organise a large-scale strike: we must do everything to help it in this under-taking, but of course it is not for us socialists to guarantee the success of any bourgeois movement) is the beginning of a political conflict, whether those engaged in the fightrealise it or not. 
 Our job is to explain to the mass of “aca-demic” protesters the objective meaning of the conflict, totry and make it consciously political, to multiply tenfold the agitation carried on by the Social-Democratic groups of students, and to direct all this activity in such a way that revolutionary conclusions will be drawn from the historyof the last three years, that the inevitability of a new revo-lutionary struggle is understood, and that our old—andstill quite timely—slogans calling for the overthrow of theautocracy and the convocation of a constituent assembly should once again become a subject of discussion and the touchstone of political concentration for fresh generationsof democrats. 
 Social-Democratic students have no right to shirk such work under any conditions. 
 And however difficult this work may be at the present time, whatever reverses particular agitators may experience in this or that university, students’association, meeting, etc. 
, we shall say: knock, and it willbe opened unto you! The work of political agitation is neverwasted. 
 Its success is measured not only by whether we havesucceeded here and now in winning a majority, or obtaining consent for co-ordinated political action. 
 It is possible that we shall not achieve this all at once. 
 But that is why weare an organised proletarian party—not to lose heart overtemporary failures, but stubbornly, unswervingly and con-sistently to carry on our work , even in the most difficult conditions. 
 The appeal we print below from the St. 
 Petersburg Joint Student Council shows that even the most active elements ofthe students obstinately cling to pure academic aims, andstill sing the Cadet-Octobrist tune. 
 And this at a time whenthe Cadet-Octobrist press is behaving in the most disgustingfashion towards the strike, trying to prove at the very height of the struggle that it is harmful, criminal, etc. 
 We cannot but welcome the rejoinder which the St. 
 Petersburg Commit-tee of our Party found it necessary to give the Joint Council(see “From the Party” 102). 
 Evidently the whips of Schwartz are not enough as yet to change the present-day students from “academics” into “politicians”; they need the scorpions of more and more Black-Hundred sergeant-majors to give a full revolutionarytraining to new cadres. 
 These cadres, trained by all Stoly-pin’s policy, trained by every step of the counter-revolution,require the constant attention of ourselves, the Social-Demo-crats, who clearly see the objective inevitability of further bourgeois-democratic conflicts on a national scale with the autocracy, which has joined forces with the Black-Hundred-Octobrist Duma. 
 Yes, on a national scale, for the Black-Hundred counter-revolution, which is turning Russia backward, is not onlytempering new fighters in the ranks of the revolutionary pro-letariat, but will inevitably arouse a new movement of the non-proletarian, i. 
e. 
, bourgeois democrats (thereby imply-ing, of course, not that all the opposition will take part in the struggle, but that there will be a wide participation of truly democratic elements of the bourgeoisie and petty bourgeoisie, i. 
e. 
, those capable of struggle). 
 The beginning of a mass student struggle in the Russia of 1908 is a politicalsymptom, a symptom of the whole present situation broughtabout by the counter-revolution. 
 Thousands and millionsof threads tie the student youth with the middle and lowerbourgeoisie, the petty officials, certain groups of the peas-antry, the clergy, etc. 
 If in the spring of 1908 attempts were being made to resurrect the “ Osvobozhdeniye League”, * slightly to the left of the old Cadet semi-landlord union represented by Pyotr Struve; if in the autumn the mass ofyouth which is closest of all to the democratic bourgeoisiein Russia is beginning to be disturbed; if the hireling hacks, with malice tenfold, have started howling once more against revolution in the schools; if base liberal professors and Cadetleaders are groaning and wailing at the untimely, dangerous,disastrous strikes which displease those dear Octobrists,which are capable of “repelling” the Octobrists who holdpower—that means new powder has begun to accumulate in the powder-flask, it means that not only among students is the reaction against reaction beginning! And however weak and embryonic this beginning may be, the party of the working class must make use of it and willdo so. 
 We were able to work years and decades before therevolution, carrying our revolutionary slogans first into the study circles, then among the masses of the workers, then on to the streets, then on to the barricades. 
 We mustbe capable, now too , of organising first and foremost that which constitutes the task of the hour, and without whichall talk about co-ordinated political action will be emptywords, namely, the task of building a strong proletarian organisation, everywhere carrying on political agitation among the masses for its revolutionary watchwords. 
 It isthis task of organisation in their own student midst, thisagitation based on the concrete movement, that our uni-versity groups, too, should tackle. 
 The proletariat will not be behindhand. 
 It often yields the palm to the bourgeois democrats in speeches at banquets, *See pp. 
 63-67 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 in legal unions, within the walls of universities, from the rostrum of representative institutions. 
 It never yields the palm, and will not do so, in the serious and great revolution-ary struggle of the masses. 
 All the conditions for bringingthis struggle to a head are not ripening as quickly and easilyas some of us would hope—but those conditions are ripeningand gathering head unswervingly. 
 And the little beginningof little academic conflicts is a great beginning, for after it— if not today then tomorrow, if not tomorrow then the day after—will follow big continuations. 
 Proletary , No. 
 36, Published according October 3 (16), 1908 to the text in Proletary EVENTS IN THE BALKANS AND IN PERSIA The political press in Russia and throughout Europe is preoccupied lately with the events in the Balkans. 
 Fora time a European war seemed dangerously close, and that danger has by no means been eliminated, though it is much more probable that the whole thing will end up in shoutingand clamour and war will be avoided. 
 Let us take a glance at the nature of the crisis and the tasks it imposes on the workers’ party in Russia. 
 A powerful impetus to the political awakening of the Asian peoples was given by the Russo-Japanese War and the Russian revolution. 
 But this awakening spread so slowlyfrom one country to another that in Persia Russian counter-revolution played and continues to play what amounts toa decisive role, while in Turkey the revolution was at onceconfronted with a counter-revolutionary coalition of the powers, Russia at their head. 
 True, the general tone of the European press and of the diplomatic statements wouldappear to contradict this. 
 If we are to believe these state-ments and the semi-official press, there is universal “sym-pathy” with regenerated Turkey, a universal desire to seeher constitutional regime strengthened and developed, gen-eral praise for the “moderation” of the bourgeois Young Turks. 
 All these fine words, however, are typical of the base bourgeois hypocrisy of Europe’s present-day reactionarygovernments and present-day reactionary bourgeoisie. 
 Forthe fact is that not a single European country calling itself a democracy, and not a single European bourgeois party professing to be democratic, progressive, Liberal, Radical,etc. 
, has in any way demonstrated a genuine desire to promote the victory and consolidation of the Turkish revolution. 
 On the contrary, they all fear its success, for the inevitable result of it would be, on the one hand, to foster the desire for autonomy and genuine democracy in all the Balkannations and, on the other, ensure the victory of the Persianrevolution, give fresh impetus to the democratic movementin Asia, intensify the struggle for independence in India,create free institutions along an immense stretch of Russia’s frontier—and, consequently, new conditions that would hamper the policy of Black-Hundred tsarism and facilitatethe rise of the revolution in Russia, etc. 
 Essentially, what we see now going on in the Balkans, Turkey and Persia is a counter-revolutionary coalition ofthe European powers against the mounting tide of democracy in Asia. 
 All the efforts of our governments, all the preaching of the “big” European papers, are aimed at glossing overthis fact, misleading public opinion, covering up withhypocritical speeches and diplomatic hocus-pocus the counter-revolutionary coalition of the so-called civilised nations of Europe against the nations of Asia, least civilised but most energetic in their striving for democracy. 
 And the very essence of proletarian policy at this stage should be to tear themask from these bourgeois hypocrites and to reveal to thebroadest masses of the people the reactionary character ofthe European governments who, out of fear of the proletar-ian struggle at home, are playing, and helping others play, the part of gendarme in relation to the revolution in Asia. 
 Europe has woven a dense web of intrigue around all the Turkish and Balkan events, and the man in the street isbeing hoodwinked by the diplomats, who try to divert publicattention to trifles, secondary issues, individual aspectsof present developments, in an effort to obscure the meaning of the process as a whole. 
 In contrast to this, our task, the task of international Social-Democracy, should be to showthe people how these developments are interconnected,to bring out their fundamental trend and underlyingmotives. 
 Rivalry among the capitalist powers, anxious to “bite off” as big a piece as they can and extend their possessions and colonies, coupled with fear of an independent democraticmovement among the nations dependent on or “protected” by Europe—these are two mainsprings of all European policy. 
 The Young Turks are praised for their moderation and restraint, i. 
e. 
, the Turkish revolution is being praised because it is weak, because it is not rousing the popular massesto really independent action, because it is hostile to theproletarian struggle beginning in the Ottoman Empire—andat the same time the plunder of Turkey continues. 
 The YoungTurks are praised for making it possible to go on plundering Turkish possessions. 
 They praise the Young Turks and con-tinue a policy, the obvious purpose of which is to partition Turkey . 
 In this connection the Social-Democratic Leipziger Volkszeitung made this very true and apt comment: “In May 1791, far-sighted statesmen who were really concerned for the well-being of their country carried out a political reform inPoland. 
 The King of Prussia and the Emperor of Austria praised theConstitution of May 3, saying it would ‘bring prosperity to a neigh-bouring country’. 
 The whole world extolled the Polish reformers forpractising ‘moderation’, unlike the terrible Jacobins of Paris.... 
 OnJanuary 23, 1793, Prussia, Austria and Russia signed a treaty parti-tioning Poland! “In August 1908, the Young Turks carried out their political reform with uncommon smoothness. 
 The whole world praised them for practising such respectable ‘moderation’, unlike the terrible social-ists of Russia.... 
 Now, in October 1908, we are witnessing a seriesof developments that presage the partition of Turkey. 
” Indeed, it would be childish to believe the words of the diplomats and disregard their deeds , the collective action of the powers against revolutionary Turkey. 
 The very fact that the present developments were preceded by meetings and conversations of the Foreign Ministers and Heads of State of several countries, is enough to dispel this naïvefaith in diplomatic statements. 
 In August and September,immediately after the Young Turk revolution and justbefore the Austrian and Bulgarian declarations, Mr. 
 Izvolskymet King Edward and Premier Clemenceau of the French Republic in Karlsbad and Marienbad; the Austrian and Italian Foreign Ministers, von Aehrenthal and Tittoni, metin Salzburg; then came the meetings between Izvolsky andAehrenthal in Buchloe on September 15; between PrinceFerdinand of Bulgaria and Emperor Franz-Joseph in Bu-dapest; Izvolsky’s meeting with von Schoen, the German Foreign Minister, and later, with Tittoni and the King of Italy. 
 These facts speak for themselves. 
 All the important points had been agreed upon before the Austrian and Bulgarian action secretly and directly, at personal meetings of kingsand ministers, between the six powers: Russia, Austria, Germany, Italy, France and Britain. 
 The subsequent con-troversy in the press as to whether Aehrenthal was speaking the truth when he stated that Italy, Germany and Russia had agreed to Austria’s annexation of Bosnia and Herzego-vina was a farce from beginning to end , a sheer deception , that can fool only liberal philistines. 
 The foreign policydirectors of the European powers—the Izvolskys, Aehren-thals and the whole gang of crowned robbers and their minis-ters—purposely threw this bone to the press: go on bickering, gentlemen, over who cheated whom and who affront-ed whom, whether Austria cheated Russia, or Bulgariacheated Austria, etc. 
, over who was the “first” to begintearing up the Berlin Treaty, 103 over the different attitudes to the proposed conference of the powers, and so on and so forth. 
 Please keep public attention preoccupied with these interesting and important—oh, very important!—questions. 
That is exactly what we need in order to conceal what really matters , namely, that we have already come to a preliminary agreement on the main thing, i. 
e. 
, action against the YoungTurk revolution, further steps to partition Turkey, revi-sion of the Dardanelles arrangement on one pretext or anoth-er, permission for Russia’s Black-Hundred tsar to stranglethe Persian revolution. 
 That is the crux of the matter;that is what we, the leaders of the reactionary bourgeoisieof all Europe, really need, and that is what we are doing. 
As for the liberal simpletons in the press and in parliament, they can spend their time debating how it all began, who said what, and in what guise the policy of colonial plunderand suppression of democratic movements is to be finallysigned, sealed and presented to the world. 
 In each of the European Great Powers—with the excep-tion of Austria, which for the time being is “satiated”— the liberal press is accusing its government of inadequate defence of its national interests. 
 Everywhere the liberals present their country and their government as the most mal-adroit in “utilising” the situation, as having been fooled, etc. 
 And that precisely is the policy of our Cadets too. 
 They have long been saying that Austria’s successes make them “envious” (Mr. 
 Milyukov’s own words). 
 This policy of theliberal bourgeoisie in general, and that of our Cadets inparticular, is the most revolting hypocrisy, the vilestbetrayal of the genuine interests of progress and freedom. 
For it is a policy which, first, befuddles the democratic consciousness of the masses by hushing up the conspiracy of the reactionary governments. 
 Secondly, it impels everycountry to follow a so-called active foreign policy, i. 
e. 
,it sanctions the system of colonial robbery and interferenceby the powers in Balkan affairs, interference which is alwaysreactionary. 
 Thirdly, it plays directly into the hands of re-action, interesting the people in how much “we” will receive, how much “we” will get out of the booty, how much “we”can bargain for “ourselves”. 
 What the reactionary govern-ments need most, at this juncture, is precisely the opportu-nity to plead that “public opinion” supports their territorialseizures, demands for “compensation”, etc. 
 Look, they say, the press of my country accuses me of excessive generosity, of inadequate defence of the national interests, of beingtoo pliable, and it threatens war. 
 Consequently, my demandsare most “modest and fair”, and must therefore be metin full! The policy of the Russian Cadets, like that of the Euro-pean liberal bourgeoisie, is one of subservience to the reac-tionary governments, defence of colonial aggrandisementand plunder, and interference in the affairs of other countries. 
The Cadet policy is especially harmful because it is beingconducted under the “opposition” flag, and therefore mis-leads very many, wins the confidence of those who have no faith in the Russian Government and corrupts the masses. 
 Therefore, our Duma deputies and all our Party organisa-tions must bear in mind that we cannot make a single seriousstep forward in Social-Democratic propaganda and agitationabout the Balkan events without revealing— from the Duma rostrum , in leaflets and at meetings—the connection between the reactionary policy of the autocracy and the hypocritical opposition of the Cadets. 
 We shall never be able to explainto the people how harmful and reactionary the policy of the tsarist government is, unless we explain that Cadet foreign policy is essentially the same . 
 We cannot combat chauvinism and the Black-Hundred spirit in foreign policy, unless we combat the-phrase-mongering, the posing, the mental reser-vations and dodges of the Cadets. 
 Where concessions to the liberal-bourgeois point of view lead socialists will be seen from the following example. 
In the well-known opportunist journal Sozialistische Monats-hefte (Socialist —???— Monthly ), Max Schippel has this to say on the Balkan crisis: “Nearly all thinking party memberswould consider it a mistake if the view which was recentlyexpressed once more in our Berlin Central Organ [ Vorwärts ] prevailed, the view that Germany has nothing to look forin either the present or future revolutions in the Balkans. 
 Certainly, we should not strive for territorial acquisitions.... 
 But there can be no doubt that the major realignments ofthe powers in this area, which is an important connectinglink between Europe, the whole of Asia and part of Africa,have a direct bearing on our international position.... 
 Forthe time being the reactionary Russian colossus is of no decisive importance.... 
 We have no reason to see in Russia an enemy always and everywhere, as she was regarded bythe democrats of the fifties” (S. 
 1319). 
 This silly liberal, parading as a socialist, has failed to notice Russia’s reactionary intrigues behind her “solici-tude” for the “Slav brothers”! By using the words “we” (mean-ing the German bourgeoisie), “our” position, etc. 
, he has failed to notice either the blow dealt the Young Turk revo-lution, or Russia’s action against the Persian revolution! Schippel’s statement appeared in the October 22 issue of the journal. 
 On October 18 (5), Novoye Vremya 104 pub-lished a vitriolic article alleging that the “anarchy in Tabriz has reached incredible dimensions” and the city has been “half destroyed and sacked by semi-savage revolutionaries”. 
In other words, the victory of the revolution over the Shah’stroops in Tabriz has immediately aroused the fury of thesemi-official Russian journal. 
 It describes Sattar Khan,leader of the Persian revolutionary forces, as the “Puga-chov 105 of Aderbaijan” (Aderbaijan, or Azerbaijan, is the northern province of Persia and, according to Reclus, ac-counts for nearly one-fifth of the total population; Tabriz is the capital of the province). 
 “One is entitled to ask,” Novoye Vremya wrote, “whether Russia can endlessly tolerate these outrages, which are ruining our lucrative trade on the Per-sian frontier.... 
 It should be borne in mind that all EasternTranscaucasia and Aderbaijan are an ethnological whole.... 
Tatar semi-intellectuals in Transcaucasia forgetting thatthey are Russian subjects, have displayed warm sympathyfor the disturbances in Tabriz and are sending volunteers to that city... What is much more important for us is that Ader-baijan, which borders on Russia, should be pacified. 
 De-plorable though it may be, circumstances might compelRussia, despite her strong desire not to interfere, to take thistask upon herself. 
” On October 20, the German Frankfurter Zeitung carried a dispatch from St. 
 Petersburg that Russian occupation of Aderbaijan is contemplated by way of “compensation”. 
 OnOctober 24 (11), the same paper published a telegram fromTabriz: “ Two days ago six battalions of Russian infantry , supported by cavalry and artillery , crossed the Persian fron-tier and are today expected in Tabriz. 
” The Russian troops were crossing the Persian frontier on the very day when Max Schippel, slavishly repeating theassurances and the outcries of the liberal and police press, was telling the German workers that Russia’s importance asa reactionary colossus was now a thing of the past, and thatto regard Russia as an enemy under all circumstances would be a mistake! There is to be a new massacre of Persian revolutionaries by the troops of Nicholas the Bloody. 
 The unofficial Lya-khov is being followed by the official occupation of Aderbai-jan, and the repetition in Asia of what Russia did in Europein 1849, when Nicholas I sent his troops against the Hungar-ian revolution. 
 At that time there were genuine democrats among the bourgeois parties of Europe, who were capableof fighting for freedom, and not only hypocritically talkingabout freedom, as all the bourgeois democrats do in our day. 
Russia had then to play the part of European gendarmeagainst at any rate a few European countries. 
 Today all the biggest European powers, not excluding the “democratic” republic of the “red” Clemenceau, mortally afraid as they areof any extension of democracy at home because it would benefit the proletariat, are helping Russia play the gen-darme in Asia. 
 There cannot be the slightest doubt that “freedom of action” for Russia against the Persian revolution was part of the September reactionary conspiracy of Russia, Austria, Germany, Italy, France and Britain. 
 Whether this was explic-itly stated in some secret document (which may be pub-lished many years hence in a collection of historical mate-rials) or whether it was only intimated by Izvolsky to his most obliging fellow-negotiators, or whether the latter“hinted” that they intended to pass from “occupation” to“annexation”, and that the Russians would perhaps like topass from the Lyakhov policy to “occupation”, or whethersome other arrangement was made—all that is not of the least importance. 
 What is important is that, however in-formal, the September counter-revolutionary conspiracy ofthe powers i s a f act , the significance of which becomes in-creasingly clear with every passing day. 
 It is a conspiracyagainst the proletariat and democracy. 
 It is a conspiracyfor directly suppressing the revolution in Asia, or at least for dealing it indirect blows It is a conspiracy for the con-tinuation of colonial plunder and territorial conquest inthe Balkans today, in Persia tomorrow, maybe in AsiaMinor and Egypt the day after, etc. 
, etc. 
 Only the world proletarian revolution can overthrow this combined power of the crowned bandits and interna-tional capital. 
 The urgent task of all socialist parties is to intensify agitation among the masses, unmask the diplomatsof all countries at their tricks and bring out all the factsfor the people to see—the facts revealing the infamous roleof all the allied powers without exception—both as direct performers of the functions of the gendarme, and as his abettors, friends and financiers. 
 An extremely onerous, but at the same time extremely noble and momentous task falls now to the Russian Social-Democratic deputies in the Duma, where a statement byIzvolsky and a question by the Cadets and Octobrists areexpected. 
 The Social-Democratic deputies are members of a body that is a screen for the policy of the chief reactionary power, the chief plotter of counter-revolution, and theymust find in themselves the courage and ability to tell the whole truth . 
 At a time like this, the Social-Democratic depu-ties in the Black-Hundred Duma are people to whom much is given and of whom much is required. 
 For apart from them there is no one in the Duma to voice the protest against tsarism from positions other than those of the Cadets and Octobrists. 
 And a Cadet “protest”, at such times and in thepresent circumstances, is worse than no protest at all sinceit can be made only from amidst the selfsame capitalist wolf-pack, and on behalf of the selfsame wolfish policy. 
 Our Duma group and all our other Party organisations should therefore set to work at once. 
 Agitation among themasses is now a hundredfold more important than in ordinarytimes. 
 Three propositions should take first place in all ourParty agitation. 
 First, in contrast to the whole of the reac-tionary and liberal press—from the Black Hundreds to the Cadets—Social-Democrats should expose the diplomaticgame of conferences, agreement of the powers, allianceswith Britain against Austria, or with Austria against Ger-many, or any other. 
 Our job is to reveal the fact that there exists a reactionary conspiracy of the powers, a conspiracy which the governments are doing everything they possibly can to conceal behind the farce of public negotiations. 
 Ourpolicy should be to denounce this diplomatic farce, bringthe truth to the people, expose international anti-proletari-an reaction! Secondly, we should reveal the real, as distinctfrom the asserted, results of this conspiracy, namely, the blow to the Turkish revolution, Russia’s assistance in strangling the Persian revolution, interference in the affairsof other nations, and violation of that fundamental demo-cratic principle, the right of nations to self-determination. 
That right is championed by our programme and the pro-grammes of all the Social-Democratic parties of the world. 
 And there can be nothing more reactionary than the solici-tude of the Austrians on the one hand, and the RussianBlack Hundreds on the other, for their “Slav brothers”. 
This “solicitude” is being used to screen the vile intriguesthat have long won Russia notoriety in the Balkans. 
 This“solicitude” always boils down to encroachments on genuine democracy in one Balkan country or another. 
 There is only one sincere way for the powers to show “solicitude” for the Bal-kan nations, and that is to leave them alone, stop harassing them by foreign interference, stop putting spokes in the wheel of the Turkish revolution. 
 But, of course, the work-ing class cannot expect that kind of policy from the bour-geoisie. 
 All the bourgeois parties, including the most liberal and “democratic” in name, our Cadets included, support capi-talist foreign policy. 
 That is the third thing which the Social-Democrats must with special vigour bring to the knowledge of the people. 
 For, to all intents and purposes, the liberals and Cadets stand for the present rivalry between the capi-talist nations, differing with the Black Hundreds only asto the forms this should take, and insisting only on inter-national agreements different from those upon which thegovernment now relies. 
 And this liberal struggle against one variety of bourgeois foreign policy in favour of another variety of that same policy, these liberal reproaches levelledat the government for lagging behind other countries (inrapine and intervention!) have the most corrupting effecton the masses. 
 Down with all colonial policy, down withthe whole policy of intervention and capitalist struggle for the conquest of foreign lands and foreign populations, for new privileges, new markets, control of the Straits, etc. 
!Social-Democrats do not subscribe to the stupid philistineutopia of “peaceful and just” capitalist progress. 
 Their strug-gle is against the whole of capitalist society as such, in theknowledge that there is no other champion of peace and liberty in the world than the international revolutionary proletariat. 
 P. 
 S. 
 After this article had been sent to the press, the papers published a dispatch of the St. 
 Petersburg Telegraph Agency denying the report about Russian troops having crossedthe Persian border. 
 The dispatch was published in the Frankfurter Zeitung of October 24, in the second morning edition The third edition carried a report from Constanti-nople dated October 24, 10. 
50 p. 
m. 
 , stating that on the evening of the 24th news of the Russian troops crossing thePersian border had reached Constantinople. 
 The foreignpress, with the exception of the socialist papers , is so far silent on the Russian invasion of Persia. 
 To sum up: we are not yet in a position to learn the whole truth At any rate, the “denials” emanating from the tsarist government and the St. 
 Petersburg Telegraph Agency are not, of course, to be trusted. 
 That Russia, with the knowl-edge of the powers, is fighting the Persian revolution with every means at her command, from intrigue to the sendingof troops, is a fact. 
 That her policy is to occupy Azerbaijan,is likewise beyond doubt. 
 And if the troops have not yetcrossed the border, then very probably all the preparationsfor them to do so have already been made. 
 There is no smoke without fire. 
 Proletary , No. 
 37, Published according October 16 (29), 1908 to the text in Proletary verified with the manuscript MEETING OF THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIALIS T BURE AU106 On Sunday October 11 (N. 
 S. 
) there took place in Brussels the first meeting of the International Socialist Bureau since the Stuttgart Congress. 
 The gathering of representativesof various socialist parties was chosen also as a convenientoccasion for a conference of socialist journalists and parlia-mentarians. 
 The first conference took place on the eve ofthe meeting of the Bureau, the second the day after. 
 The composition of both conferences, it should be mentioned, was scarcely different from that of the Bureau: the majorityof the members of the Bureau were both journalists andM. 
P. 
s. 
 Only a few Belgian socialist deputies were additionalmembers of the conference on Monday October 12. 
 The conference of journalists opened at 3 p. 
m. 
 on Satur-day. 
 The question under discussion was that of regulatingand developing the relations between the periodical press ofthe various socialist parties. 
 The Belgians drew up a listof correspondents, members of their party, who were readyto give information to the newspapers of other parties onvarious particular questions. 
 The wish was expressed that similar lists should be drawn up by other parties, and it was suggested that there should be a note of what languagesthe correspondent knew. 
 The foreign bulletins of the Social-ist-Revolutionary Party ( La Tribune Russe , in French) and of the Social-Democrats (in German) 107 were mentioned as particularly useful publications for our foreign comrades. 
 It was also remarked that in the case of countries where there were different socialist parties, or various tendencies with-in a single party, a note should be made in the lists stating which party, etc. 
, the correspondents belonged to Russian Social-Democrats living abroad ought to make use of this international conference to ensure better arrangements for their reports in foreign socialist newspapers. 
 The conference decided that the International Socialist Bureau was to get in touch with those nations which had nodaily socialist papers on the question of publishing regularbulletins (in one of the three official languages of the Inter-national, or in all three—French, German and English). 
 Following this, the Bureau was to enquire of the editors ofthe socialist daily newspapers of the different countries, whatsum they would agree to pay in order to receive such bulle-tins regularly. 
 The Bureau Abroad of the Central Committee of our Party 108 should take special notice of this decision. 
 The business of informing our foreign comrades about the affairsof Russian Social-Democracy is organised far from satisfac-torily, and there should be an immediate and serious dis-cussion on how to put this matter in order, and on publish-ing a Party bulletin abroad in three languages. 
 Every-thing possible should be done to put such a plan into practice. 
 The next point discussed was the proposal of Camille Huysmans, the Secretary of the Bureau, that the GermanSocial-Democrats, who have 70 daily newspapers, shouldtake the initiative of setting up an international bureau oftelegraph and telephone Communications between the editor-ial offices of the socialist newspapers in Berlin, Vienna, Paris, Brussels, etc. 
 The German delegates said that it wasimpossible to carry out this plan immediately; but theystated that a central information bureau of the GermanSocial-Democratic Labour Party had recently been set upin Germany, and that when this was working satisfactorily it would be possible to consider transforming this bureau into an international organisation. 
 The conference expressedits satisfaction at this promise, and the meeting ended afterdeciding that conferences of the socialist journalists of var-ious countries should be timed as before to coincide withmeetings of the International Socialist Bureau. 
 In the evening there was an international mass meeting at the Maison du Peuple at which Austrian, German, British,Turkish and Bulgarian delegates spoke—mainly on the subject of the international conflicts, and of the struggle of the socialist proletariat of all countries for the preservation of peace. 
 The meeting ended with the unanimous adoption of a resolution as follows: “The international meeting held onOctober 10 (N. 
 S. 
) at the Maison du Peuple reaffirms theenergetic resolution of the world proletariat to defend peaceamong the nations and to struggle with all its strengthagainst capitalist militarism, which ruins and oppresses all peoples. 
 The meeting expresses its confidence that the various national sections of the Workers’ International willapply in full the decision adopted on this question by theInternational Socialist Congress in Stuttgart. 
” The meetingconcluded with the singing of The Internationale . 
 The whole of the next day was taken up with the meeting of the International Socialist Bureau. 
 The first item on the agenda, namely, the affiliation of the British Labour Party,occupied the whole of the morning session. 
 According tothe Rules of the International, organisations eligible formembership are, first, socialist parties which recognisethe class struggle, and secondly, working-class organisations whose standpoint is that of the class struggle (i. 
e. 
, trade unions). 
 The Labour Party recently formed in the BritishHouse of Commons does not openly call itself socialist, anddoes not expressly and definitely recognise the principleof the class struggle (which, be it said in parenthesis, theBritish Social-Democrats call upon it to do). 
 Needless to say this Labour Party was admitted to the International in general and to the Stuttgart Socialist Congress in particular,because, as a matter of fact, this Party is an organisation ofa mixed type, standing between the two types defined inClauses 1 and 2 of the Rules of the International, and embody-ing the political representation of the British trade unions. 
 Nevertheless, the question of the affiliation of this Party was raised, and raised by the Party itself, in the person of theso-called Independent Labour Party (the I. 
L. 
P. 
, as theBritish call it), which is one of the two subsections of theBritish section of the International. 
 The other subsectionis the Social Democratic Federation. 
 The Independent Labour Party demanded the direct recognition of the Labour Party as an affiliated organisationof the International. 
 Its delegate Bruce Glasier urged the enormous significance of this representation in Parliament of hundreds of thousands of organised workers who were steadily and surely moving towards socialism. 
 He was very contemptuous of principles, formulas and catechisms. 
Kautsky, in reply to him, dissociated himself from thisattitude of contempt towards the principles and ulti-mate aim of socialism, but wholly supported the affiliationof the Labour Party as a party waging the class struggle in practice. 
 Kautsky moved the following resolution: “Whereas by previous resolutions of the International Congresses, all organisations adopting the standpoint ofthe proletarian class struggle and recognising the necessityfor political action have been accepted for membership,the International Bureau declares that the British Labour Party is admitted to International Socialist Congresses, because, while not expressly [ ausdrücklich ] accepting the proletarian class struggle, in practice the Labour Partyconducts this struggle, and adopts its standpoint, inasmuchas the Party is organised independently of the bourgeoisparties. 
” Kautsky was supported by the Austrians, by Vail-lant of the French group, and, as the voting showed, by the majority of the small nations. 
 The opposition camefirst of all from Hyndman, the representative of the BritishSocial Democratic Federation, who demanded that thestatus quo be maintained until the Labour Party expressly recognised the principle of the class struggle and of socialism; then from Roussel (the second French delegate and a follow-er of Guesde), Rubanovich of the Socialist-RevolutionaryParty, and Avramov, the delegate of the revolutionarywing of the Bulgarian socialists. 
 I took the floor in order to associate myself with the first part of Kautsky’s resolution. 
 It was impossible, I argued, to refuse to admit the Labour Party, i. 
e. 
, the par-liamentary representation of the trade unions, since Con-gresses had previously admitted all trade unions whatever,even those which had allowed themselves to be representedby bourgeois parliamentarians. 
 But, I said, the second partof Kautsky’s resolution is wrong, because in practice the Labour Party is not a party really independent of the-Liber-als, and does not pursue a fully independent class policy. 
I therefore proposed an amendment that the end of the resolution, beginning with the word “because”, should read as follows: “because it [the Labour Party] represents the first step on the part of the really proletarian organisations of Britaintowards a conscious class policy and towards a socialist workers’ party”. 
 I submitted this amendment to the Bureau,but Kautsky would not accept it, stating in his next speechthat the International Bureau could not adopt decisions based on “expectations”. 
 But the main struggle was between the supporters and the opponents of Kautsky’s resolutionas a whole. 
 When it was about to be voted on, Adler proposedthat it be divided into two parts. 
 This was done, and bothparts were carried by the International Bureau: the firstwith three against and one abstention, and the second with four against and one abstention. 
 Thus Kautsky’s motion became the decision of the Bureau. 
 Rubanovich abstainedon both votes. 
 Let me add that Adler, who spoke after meand before Kautsky’s second speech, replied to me in thefollowing manner—I am quoting from the Belgian socialistorgan Le Peuple , which gave the most detailed and exact reports of the sessions: “Lenin’s proposal is tempting [ sé-duisante , Adler said: verlockend , enticing], but it cannot make us forget that the Labour Party is now outside thebourgeois parties. 
 It is not for us to judge how it did this. 
We recognise the fact of progress. 
” Such was the nature of the debate at the International Bureau on the question under discussion. 
 I shall now take the liberty to deal in greater detail with this debate, inorder to explain the position that I took up to the readersof Proletary . 
 The arguments advanced by V. 
 Adler and K. 
 Kautsky failed to convince me, and I still think they arewrong. 
 By stating in his resolution that the Labour Party “does not expressly accept the proletarian class struggle”, Kautsky undoubtedly voiced a certain “expectation”, acertain “judgement” as to what the policy of the LabourParty is now and what that policy should be. 
 But Kautskyexpressed this indirectly , and in such a way that it amounted to an assertion which, first, is incorrect in substance, and secondly, provides a basis for misrepresenting his idea . 
 That by separating in Parliament (not during the elections! not in its whole policy! not in its propaganda and agitation!) from the bourgeois parties, the Labour Party in Britain is taking the first step towards socialism and towards a class policy of the proletarian mass organisations is indisputable. 
 This is not an “expectation” but a fact, the very fact whichcompels us to admit the Labour Party into the International,since we have already accepted the trade unions. 
 Finally,it is precisely such a formulation that would make hun-dreds of thousands of British workers, who undoubtedly re-spect the decisions of the International but have not yet be-come full socialists, ponder once again over the questionwhy they are regarded as having taken only the first step, and what the next steps along this road should be. 
 My formulation does not contain even the shadow of a claimthat the International should undertake to solve the concrete and detailed problems of a national labour movement, should undertake to determine when the next steps should betaken, and what they should be. 
 But that further steps arenecessary in general must be admitted, in relation to a partywhich does not expressly and clearly accept the principleof the class struggle. 
 Kautsky in his resolution acknowledged this indirectly, instead of doing so directly. 
 It looked as if the International was certifying that the Labour Partywas in practice waging a consistent class struggle, as if it was sufficient for a workers’ organisation to form a separatelabour group in Parliament in order in its entire conduct to become independent of the bourgeoisie! On this question Hyndman, Roussel, Rubanovich and Avra-mov undoubtedly occupied a still more incorrect position(which Rubanovich did not rectify but confused by his ab-stention on both parts of the resolution). 
 When Avramov de-clared that to admit the Labour Party would be to encourageopportunism, he expressed a glaringly wrong view. 
 One need only recall Engels’s letters to Sorge. 
 For a number of years Engels strongly insisted that the British Social-Demo-crats, led by Hyndman, were committing an error by actinglike sectarians, failing to link themselves with the uncon-scious but powerful class instinct of the trade unions, andby turning Marxism into a “dogma”, whereas it should be a “guide to action”. 
 109 When there exist objective conditions which retard the growth of the political consciousness andclass independence of the proletarian masses, one must be able patiently and steadfastly to work hand in hand with them, making no concessions in principles but not refraining from activity right in the midst of the proletarian masses. 
 These lessons of Engels’s have been corroborated by the sub-sequent development of events, when the British trade unions,insular, aristocratic, philistinely selfish, and hostile to so-cialism, which have produced a number of outright traitorsto the working class who have sold themselves to the bour-geoisie for ministerial posts (like the scoundrel John Burns), have nevertheless begun moving towards socialism, awkward-ly, inconsistently, in zigzag fashion, but still moving to-wards socialism. 
 Only the blind can fail to see that socialismis now growing apace among the working class in Britain,that socialism is once again becoming a mass movement in that country, that the social revolution is approaching in Great Britain. 
 The International would undoubtedly have acted wrongly had it not directly and resolutely expressed its completesympathy with this vast step forward by the mass labourmovement in Britain, and voiced its encouragement of the great turn that had begun in the cradle of capitalism. 
 But it does not in the least follow from this that the LabourParty can already be recognised as a party in practice inde-pendent of the bourgeoisie, as a party waging the class strug-gle, as a socialist party, etc. 
 It was necessary to rectifyone undoubted error committed by the British Social Demo-cratic Federation, but there was no need to give even a shad-ow of encouragement to other , undoubted and not less im-portant errors of the British opportunists who lead the so-called Independent Labour Party. 
 That these leaders areopportunists is indisputable. 
 Ramsay MacDonald, the lead-er of the I. 
L. 
P. 
, even proposed at Stuttgart that Clause 2 of the Rules of the International be so amended as to require, in place of the recognition of the class struggle, only the goodfaith ( bona fides ) of labour associations, for affiliation to the International. 
 Kautsky himself immediately detected theopportunist note in the words of Bruce Glasier and dissociat-ed himself from them— in his speech at the Bureau , but unfortunately not in his resolution. 
 The speech at the Bu-reau was delivered before a dozen persons, but the resolutionwas written for millions. 
 I have before me the newspapers published by both trends of British socialism containing comments on the meeting of the International Bureau. 
 The organ of the Independent (ahem! ahem!) Labour Party, the Labour Leader , rejoices, and openly declares to tens of thousands of British workers that the International Socialist Bureau not only recognisedthe Labour Party (that is true, and it had to be done) butalso “ vindicated the policy of the I. 
L. 
P. 
 ” (Labour Leader , October 16, 1908, p. 
 665). 
 This is not true. 
 The Bureau did not vindicate it. 
 This is an illegitimate, opportunist inter-pretation of a slight awkwardness in Kautsky’s resolution. 
This slight awkwardness is beginning to bear rather abundantfruit; on top of this comes a poor translation: no wonder theItalians say that translators are traducers ( traduttori — tradittori ). 
 The official translations of the Bureau resolutions into the three official languages have not been published yet,and it is not known when they will appear. 
 Kautsky’s reso-lution states that the Labour Party “adopts the standpointof the class struggle” (end of the resolution; in the original:sich ... auf seinen , d. 
 h. 
 des Klassenkampfs , Boden stellt ), which, in the translation of the British Social-Democrats reads: “places itself in consequence on the ground of inter-national socialism. 
” In the translation of the British oppor-tunists (I. 
L. 
P. 
) it reads: “ adopts the position of international socialism ”. 
 (Ibid. 
) Now try and rectify such mistakes when you carry on agitation among the British workers! Far be it from me to accuse Bruce Glasier of distorting the resolution. 
 I am sure he could not have had that inmind. 
 And this is not so important. 
 What is important isthat the spirit of Kautsky’s resolution, precisely the second part of it, be applied in practical mass work. 
 On the samepage of the Labour Leader , another member of the I. 
L. 
P. 
, describing his impressions of the Bureau meeting and of the mass meeting in Brussels, complains that at the meeting“the emphasis on the ideal and ethical aspect of socialism ...was almost entirely absent”, an aspect which, he averred,was always emphasised at I. 
L. 
P. 
 meetings. 
 “ In its stead we had ... the barren and uninspiring dogma of the class war . 
” When Kautsky was writing his resolution about the Brit-ish, he had in mind, not a British “Independent”, but aGerman Social-Democrat.... 
 Justice , the organ of the British Social-Democrats, pub-lishes bitter words from Hyndman against the majority of the Bureau as “whittlers-away of principle to suit the con-venience of trimmers”. 
 “I have not the slightest doubt,”writes Hyndman, “that if the British Labour Party had beentold plainly that they either had to accept socialist prin-ciples ... or keep away altogether, they would very quicklyhave decided to bring themselves into line with the Interna-tional Socialist Party. 
” And in another article in the same issue, facts are quoted to prove that in practice the Inde-pendent Labour Party got some of its members elected undera jumbled flag of both Liberalism and the Independent La-bour Party (Liberal-Labour Alliance), and that some of the“Independents” had the backing of the Liberal Minister , John Burns (Justice , October 17, 1908, pp. 
 4 and 7). 
 If Hyndman carries out the plan he speaks of, namely, that of raising this question again at the InternationalSocialist Congress in Copenhagen (1910), then the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
must try to get Kautsky’s resolution amended. 
 The second item on the agenda was the question of joint action by the proletariat and the socialists of various coun-tries against the international and colonial conflicts withwhich the policy of the bourgeois governments is fraught. 
Vaillant moved a resolution which was adopted with slight amendments. 
 During the discussion the Austrian delegates referred to the fact that their party in its delegations offici-ally opposes the policy of Franz-Joseph, and reaffirms therecognition by socialists of the right of all nationalities toself-determination. 
 But in opposing the policy of Franz-Joseph—said the Austrians—we are also against the policy of Abdul Hamid or Edward VII. 
 Our business is to make the government responsible for the consequences of its ac-tions. 
 The British expressed the desire for more explicit dec-larations by the Austrian Social-Democrats against theirgovernment, but the Austrians did not go further than whathas been stated. 
 Avramov, a delegate from the Bulgarian socialists (the “Narrows”, i. 
e. 
, the revolutionary Social-Democrats; in Bulgaria there are also the “Broads”, i. 
e. 
,opportunist Social-Democrats), insisted on the imperialist bourgeoisie of the Balkan states themselves being men-tioned, but the amendment to this effect was rejected. 
 On the subject of the proclamation of Bulgarian independence, stated Avramov, the Bulgarian socialists strongly opposedthe bourgeois parties, considering this proclamation to be aharmful piece of adventurism from the point of view of theworking class. 
 Bruce Glasier moved that the resolutionshould include a statement on the necessity of organising international demonstrations; but it was decided that a recommendation to this effect should be sent through theBureau to the various national parties. 
 Van Kol (a delegatefrom the Dutch Social-Democrats) suggested that there shouldbe included a protest against the infringements of the Ber-lin Treaty by the powers. 
 But before the voting he withdrew this proposition, as it had been pointed out that it was not for socialists to make a point of defending treaties concludedby bourgeois states. 
 The text of the resolution adopted bythe International Bureau is as follows: “Whereas, in the first place, the British and German socialists by their demonstrations for peace, the French socialists by their campaign against the Moroccan expedition, the Danish socialists by their pro-posal for disarmament, were acting in keeping with the decisionsof the International, “Whereas, further, the danger of war persists; capitalist imperial-ism continues to intrigue in Britain and in Germany, the Moroccan expedition and adventure continues; tsarism, seeking new loans above all, is trying to add an element of confusion to the situationin order to strengthen its position in its struggle against the Russianrevolution; in the Balkan Peninsula the intervention of foreign pow-ers and their self-seeking ambitions are inflaming national andreligious passions more than ever; the proclamation, quite recently, of the independence of Bulgaria and particularly the annexation by Austria of Bosnia and Herzegovina have increased the peril of warand brought this peril nearer; and whereas, finally, the conspiraciesof the governments, their intensified armaments militarism andcapitalist competition and plundering of the colonies everywhereconstitute a threat to peace, “The International Socialist Bureau confirms once more that the socialist party and the organised proletariat are the only forcecapable of preserving international peace, and that they considerit their duty to safeguard it. 
 “The Bureau calls upon the socialist parties of all countries, in accordance with the resolution of the Stuttgart International Con-gress, to strengthen their vigilance and their activity, bending every, effort in the direction indicated, and requests the Central Committees and Executives of the parties, their parliamentary groups and their delegates to the bureau to seek out, together with the Secretariat ofthe International Socialist bureaus the means and practical meas-ures, both national and international, which according to particular concrete circumstances could most serve to avert war and maintain peace. 
” The third item on the agenda was a proposal by the Brit-ish section to hold regular meetings of the InternationalSocialist Bureau twice yearly. 
 No binding resolution wasadopted on this question; only a desire was expressed inthis sense. 
 Evidently the vast majority do not consider itnecessary to convene a meeting more frequently than once a year, as has been the case hitherto—except, of course, in emergencies. 
 The fourth item on the agenda was the proposal of the Bureau to alter the contributions made by each party formaintenance of the Bureau. 
 Up till now the nominal incomeof the Bureau was 14,950 francs a year (about 6,000 rubles); it was proposed that this sum should be raised to 26,800 francs or, allowing for the usual arrears, 20,000 francs(8,000 rubles) in round figures. 
 For this purpose each partywould have to contribute 100 francs per annum for eachvote it possesses at International Socialist Congresses. 
 Rus-sia has 20 votes, and consequently would have to pay 2,000 francs, made up of 700 francs by the Socialist-Revolution-aries, 1,000 by the Social-Democrats and 300 francs by thetrade unions. 
 Hitherto Russia has been paying 1,500 francsa year, of which we (by arrangement with the Socialist-Revolutionary Party) paid 900 francs. 
 On this question,too, no binding resolution was adopted. 
 The Bureau was instructed to contact the national parties, and a wish was expressed that contributions should amount to 100 francsyearly per vote. 
 The fifth item was the alteration in the number of votes for Sweden—they were raised to 12—and for Hungary—where a general increase was postponed, but 2 votes were added for Croatia. 
 An Armenian subsection of the Turkish section was also admitted, before the Turkish section it-self had yet come into existence. 
 The Armenian socialistsin Turkey refused to “wait for” the Turks, and this subsec-tion was given 4 votes. 
 It would be desirable that our com-rades, the Armenian Social-Democrats, who know the posi-tion of Armenian socialism in Turkey, should express their opinion on this question. 
 The sixth item on the agenda was on the admission of the Social-Democratic Party of Chile. 
 This party was formedafter a split in the Democratic Party of Chile. 
 The ChileanSocial-Democrats were admitted without any discussion. 
 The seventh item on the agenda was the question of the Zionist socialists in Russia. 
 110 As is known, they approached the Central Committee of our Party before the StuttgartCongress, asking to be admitted to the Social-Democraticsubsection of the Russian section of the International. 
 OurCentral Committee refused, and adopted a resolution stating the reasons why Zionists , even though they called themselves “Zionist socialists”, should not be included among Social-Democrats. 
 A representative of the Z. 
 S. 
 came to Stuttgart,and in Stuttgart too our subsection refused to admit him,while the Socialist-Revolutionaries abstained. 
 As the Rulesallow new members of the International to be admitted only with the consent of the national sections (and if two national subsections are in disagreement a final decision is taken bythe International Bureau), the Z. 
S. 
 could not get into theCongress in the normal way. 
 They appealed to the Bureau,which then adopted a compromise decision—to admit therepresentative of the Z. 
S. 
 to the Congress with a consultative voice. 
 Now we had to clear up the muddle which had been created. 
 Were the Zionist socialists members of the Inter-national or not? Victor Adler declared, as at Stuttgart,strongly against the Z. 
S. 
 and for a refusal to postponediscussion as they had requested (they had sent a telegramsaying they could not attend). 
 Non-appearance, said Adler, was sometimes the best method of defence. 
 I took the floor to recall once again the decision of our Central Committee,and to point out that to admit the Z. 
S. 
 against the willof both Russian subsections would be an impossible infringe-ment of the Rules of the International. 
 Rubanovich andZhitlovsky, the representative of the S. 
J. 
L. 
P. 
 (the Socialist Jewish Labour Party, 111 which the S. 
R. 
s at Stuttgart had admitted into their subsection) warmly spoke against thenon-admission of the Z. 
S. 
 Rubanovich could not however report any other resolution of the S. 
R. 
 Party, beyond its abstention on this question, while Zhitlovsky (in face of the inevitable exclusion of the Z. 
S. 
) was obviously defend-ing himself , asserting with comic vehemence that, if the Zionist Socialists were territorialists, then they too—theS. 
J. 
L. 
P. 
—were territorialists. 
 Naturally, it followed fromthis, not that the Z. 
S. 
 ought to be admitted, but only thatthere was hardly anyone else in the International except the S. 
R. 
s who would agree to admit the S. 
J. 
L. 
P. 
 either. 
 Speaking a second time, I emphatically protested againstRubanovich’s manoeuvre in trying to force the Zionists onsomeone else ’s subsection while at the same time not quoting any resolution of his own subsection in favour of the Zio-nists. 
 In the upshot, the Bureau (with two abstentions, Rubanovich and Vaillant) unanimously adopted Adler’s motion, which runs: “The Bureau states that the admission of the Zionists (with a consultative voice) took place as an exception in relation to the ses-sions of the Stuttgart Congress, that the Zionists at present are notaffiliated to the International Bureau, and proceeds to the next business. 
” The eighth and last item on the agenda was the confirma-tion, almost without discussion, of the special compositionof the delegation of the French Socialists to the InternationalBureau. 
 Guesde was appointed one of the delegates fromFrance, while the second French vote in the Bureau was given to two delegates jointly, Vaillant and Jaurès. 
 The meeting ended with the unanimous adoption of a reso-lution of sympathy with the Turkish revolution, moved bythe Belgian delegate de Brouckère: “The International Socialist Bureau greets with joy the fall of the infamous regime which Abdul Hamid so long maintained in Turkey with the help of the powers, and welcomes the possibility now presented to the peoples of the Turkish Empire to work outtheir own destinies, and the introduction of a regime of politicalliberty which will allow the nascent proletariat to carry on its class struggle in close unity with the proletariat of the whole world. 
” On Monday October 12 a session of the inter-parliamentary conference was held. 
 There were three items on the agenda:(1) The last parliamentary session, (2) Colonial reforms (re- /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR port by van Kol), and (3) Socialist action for peace within the Inter-parliamentary Union (report by the Belgian deputy Lafontaine) followed by four questions: (a) Terms of payment for building workers (in the event of the bankruptcy of theiremployers), (b) Postal voting, (c) New lists of members ofthe parliamentary groups and their secretaries, (d) Dispatchof documents. 
 On the first item, the conference confined itself to confirm-ing, on the proposal of Pernerstorfer, the decision of the Stuttgart Congress: secretaries of the parliamentary groupsare invited to send written reports of the groups to the In-ternational Socialist Bureau. 
 A brief exchange of opinionon the two last “questions” led to a similar reminder. 
 On thefirst two “questions” materials and proposals put forward by some socialist M. 
P. 
s were briefly mentioned. 
 Lafontaine’s report was on his suggestion postponed. 
 In this connectionthe Austrians and Germans said that they were against theparticipation of socialists in bourgeois parliamentary con-ferences for peace. 
 The Swedish delegate Branting referredto the special conditions which, allegedly, explained the participation of the Swedish Social-Democrats in these conferences. 
 On his motion, it was decided to put down thequestion of state insurance for the workers on the agendaof the next inter-parliamentary conference to be held atthe same time as the next meeting of the Bureau. 
 The only subject on the agenda on which a short report was read, and on which there was a discussion of not incon-siderable interest, proved to be the question of colonialreforms. 
 The Dutch delegate van Kol, who made himselffamous by his opportunist resolution on the colonial questionat Stuttgart, tried in his report by a somewhat differentapproach to drag in his favourite idea of a “positive” co-lonial programme for Social-Democracy. 
 Setting aside com-pletely the struggle of Social-Democrats against colonialpolicy, their agitation among the masses against colonialrobbery, the awakening of a spirit of resistance and oppo-sition among the oppressed masses in the colonies, van Kolconcentrated all his attention on a list of possible “reforms” of life in the colonies within the present system. 
 Like a be-nevolent official, he listed a variety of questions, beginningwith property in land and ending with schools, encourage-ment of industry, prisons, etc. 
, all the time underlining the necessity of being as practical as possible—for example, reckoning with the fact that universal suffrage is not always applicable to savages, that sometimes one cannot but agreewith the necessity of introducing compulsory labour in thecolonies instead of prisons, etc. 
, etc. 
 The whole report wassaturated with a spirit, not of proletarian class struggle, butof the most petty-bourgeois—and even worse, bureaucratic— peddling of “reforms”. 
 In conclusion he suggested that a committee be appointed from the five main countries possess-ing colonies to draw up a colonial programme for Social-Democracy. 
 Molkenbuhr on behalf of the Germans, and some Belgians, tentatively sought to follow van Kol, differing from him only on details—whether a single common programme was nec-essary, wouldn’t this be stereotyping, and so forth. 
 Thisapproach to the question served van Kol’s purpose, becausethe very thing he wanted was to reduce everything to “prac-tical details”, and to show that “in practice” the differenceswere smaller than it seemed at Stuttgart. 
 But Kautsky and Ledebour discussed the question in principle, and attacked the fundamental hypocrisy of van Kol’s whole position. 
 VanKol declares, said Kautsky, that in particular cases uni-versal suffrage is inapplicable; therefore, in one form oranother he accepts despotism in the colonies, because hedoes not propose any other electoral system, nor can he do so. 
 Van Kol conceives the possibility of compulsory labour, said Ledebour; therefore, he opens the door to bourgeoispolicy which uses thousands of different pretexts for pre-serving slavery in the colonies. 
 Van Kol defended himselfextremely stubbornly and extremely badly, asserting forexample that sometimes you can’t do without taxes in kind, that “he saw this himself in Java”, that the Papuans don’t know what voting means, that at the elections things aresometimes decided by pure superstition or by getting thevoters drunk on rum, etc. 
 Kautsky and Ledebour ridiculedthese arguments, asserting that our common democraticprogramme is unquestionably applicable to the colonies as well, and that it is essential to bring to the fore the struggle against capitalism in the colonies too. 
 Is the superstition ofour “educated” Catholics any better than the superstitions of the savages, asked Ledebour. 
 Even if parliamentary and representative institutions are not always applicable, said Kautsky, democracy is always applicable, and the struggle against every departure from democracy is always obliga-tory. 
 The respective policies of revolutionary and oppor-tunist Social-Democracy were brought out with completeclarity as a result of this discussion, and van Kol, seeingthat his motion would undoubtedly receive “a first class funeral”, himself withdrew it. 
 Proletary , No. 
 37, Published according October 16 (29), 1908 to the text in Proletary Signed: N. 
 Lenin verified with the manuscript P. 
 MASLOV IN HYSTERICS P. 
 Maslov has published a “Letter to the Editor” in No. 
 8-9 of Golos Sotsial-Demokrata which can only be called hysterical. 
 Indeed, is it not hysterics when he not only tries to shame me by comparing my style with that of the Priest Iliodor, but trots out some conversation or other which took place 14 years ago ? The reader may think this a joke, but it is a fact. 
 “When, before the appearance of Volume III ofCapital , Lenin read my manuscript, in which there was the same answer to the question of the distribution of profit as in Volume III,” writes Maslov, “Lenin stated that he considered the ridiculous solution of the problem by Prof. 
Skvortsov 112 to be correct. 
” Fancy that— before the appear-ance of Volume III, i. 
e. 
, before 1894 ! One must have the naïveté of a child—which cannot be said of my most rever-end opponent—or to be in a state of hysterics, to pretend to remember exactly some conversation which was supposed to have taken place fourteen years ago, and one’s own un-printed manuscripts. 
 Would it not be better to print thatmanuscript, eh, Comrade Maslov? What an advantage itwould be to prove that Maslov, and Maslov alone, before Volume III, solved the problem that Engels put to the world! True, it would seem a bit late perhaps—but better late than never. 
 One cannot really imagine, after all, that Maslovsimply wanted to praise himself by referring to his own re-collections. 
 It would appear that the editors of the paper in which Maslov is writing have not yet praised Maslov’s amendment to Marx, and so Maslov has decided to praise himself for what he did (under his breath) fourteen years ago.... 
 It would alsoappear that (if one is to believe the titanic strength of Com-rade Maslov’s memory) I made mistakes fourteen years ago, before the appearance of Volume III of Capital , and have not printed these mistakes; whereas Maslov began to make mistakes 7 years and 14 years after the appearance of VolumeIII, and prints these mistakes. 
 However, it is possible thatMaslov’s hysterics are not quite unpremeditated. 
 Exactlyfive years ago Martov threw a fit of hysterics in front ofPlekhanov, and thereby impelled him to go over from the Bolsheviks to the Mensheviks. 
 Can P. 
 Maslov be hoping that Plekhanov, after reading his outcries in the newspaper editedby Plekhanov and Co. 
, will go over from the ranks of thesupporters of Marx’s theory of rent to the supporters of Mas-lov’s theory of rent? That would be very interesting; but solong as it has not happened, let us see how matters stand with Maslov’s accusation that my article “consists of a mass of distortion and obvious untruths”. 
 Really, “a mass”, Comrade Maslov?Well, let’s look at all your arguments. 
“Lenin writes: ‘It is not true to say that according to Marx absolute rent results from the low composition of agricultural capital. 
 Absolute rent arises from the private ownership of land. 
 This private ownership creates a special monopoly. 
’” * Here Maslov breaks off my sentence , which does not end at the word “monopoly” and goes on to refer to a definite page in Volume IV (Theories of Surplus-Value ). 
 This is not distortion on Maslov’s part, oh no! It is only a “correction” of somebody else’s exposition.... 
 “This is what Lenin writes,” continues P. 
 Maslov. 
 “And this is what Marx writes: ‘If the average composition ofagricultural capital were equal to, or higher than, that ofthe average social capital, then absolute rent—again inthe sense just described—would disappear; i. 
e. 
, rent which differs equally from differential rent as well as that based upon an actual monopoly price’ ( Capital , Vol. 
 III, p. 
 631, Russian translation 113). 
 I will leave it to the reader to judge who gives a better version of Marx” (then follows a footnoteabout the mistake regarding the law of profit which I madefourteen years ago, as P. 
 Maslov so well remembers, in a private conversation with him). 
 *See present edition, Vol. 
 13, p. 
 301. 
— Ed. 
 I also leave it to the reader to judge on whose side there are “distortions and obvious untruths”. 
 The most worthy Maslov broke off my sentence before my reference to Marx , and gives me another reference! What sort of an argumentis this? Has not Maslov again and again exposed the self-contradiction of Marx’s “rough notes” (I would remind thereader that Maslov in 1906, i. 
e. 
, even after the Theories of Surplus-Value had been published, made so bold as to ac-count for the mistakes he had found in Marx by the fact that Volume III consisted of “rough notes”)? Does not thisprove that Marx’s arguments were faulty, because he derivedabsolute rent now from private property in land, now from the low composition of capital in agriculture? No, it only proves that Maslov is once again in an unholy muddle. 
 You can find in Marx dozens of phrases where abso-lute rent is derived from private property in land, and dozensof phrases where it is derived from the low compositionof agricultural capital. 
 And this for the simple reason thatMarx puts forward both these conditions in the appropriate passages of his exposition—just as I put forward both when I was setting out Marx’s ideas. 
 In that very same passage of my article from which Maslov has taken his quotation Ialso speak of the low composition of agricultural capital! (Proletary , No. 
 33, p. 
 3, cols. 
 2-3. 
 *) Maslov quotes against me Chapter 45 of Volume III, the chapter on absolute rent. 
Maslov takes his quotation from page 298 of the original. 
 Yet earlier on page 287, Marx says that differential rent is not “created” by private property in land (differential rentis inevitable under capitalism even without property in land), whereas property in land creates absolute rent. 
 “Landedproperty itself,” writes Marx in italics, “has created rent”(Vol. 
 III, section 2, S. 
 287 **). 
 And now the question is, does the quotation from page 287 contradict the quotation from page 298? Not at all. 
Having ascertained that private property in land creates rent (i. 
e. 
, absolute rent), Marx goes on to ascertain that thatrent will be either simply a monopoly, only a monopoly,purely a monopoly, or the result of the fact that monopoly prevents the levelling of profits on capital low in its compo-*See present edition, Vol. 
 13, p. 
 301-02. 
— Ed. 
 **See K. 
 Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 III, Moscow, 1959, p. 
 737. 
— Ed. 
 sition (agriculture) with that which is higher in composition (industry). 
 Maslov consequently repeats in the newspaper edited by Plekhanov and Co. 
 his flagrant distortion of Marxism. 
 Maslovconsequently insists, here too—without however saying itstraight out—that there cannot be any absolute rent, thatMarx’s theory is an error, while the theory of bourgeoispolitical economy which denies the existence of absolute rent is true. 
 Why then not say straight out what he has already said in The Agrarian Question and what I gave in my quotation? Isn’t that a “distortion and obvious untruth”? If not, whatis it? In The Agrarian Question he says that Marx was wrong and that there can be no absolute rent, whereas in the newspaper edited by Plekhanov and Co. 
 he keeps silent about this and talks only about who sets out the views of Marx more correctly ! So it transpires that all we were arguing about with Maslov was “who sets out Marx’s theory morecorrectly”, and that I was not telling the truth when I saidthat Maslov had “amended” Marx’s “rough notes” by throw-ing out absolute rent! For shame, Comrade Maslov! “Further. 
 ‘Pyotr Maslov,’ writes Lenin, ‘has failed to under-stand ... Marx’s differential rent as well.... 
 When a freshinvestment of capital in his land yields the tenant additionalprofit and additional rent (Lenin’s italics), it is the tenant, not the landowner, who appropriates that rent. 
’ * In this connection Lenin, of course, reads the ‘ignorant’ Maslov the appropriate lecture. 
 We take Volume I of The Agrarian Question , and on page 112 we find: ‘If the intensification of agriculture, by the fresh investment of 500 rubles, results inthe same quantity of product, the tenant will receive aprofit not of 25 per cent but of 100 per cent, as on the first investment of capital he pays 333 rubles of rent.... 
 If in the investment of the first capital he contented himself withaverage profit..., it is of more advantage to him to reducethe rented area and to expend new capital on the same land,because it will result in a surplus over the profit, it willprovide rent for the tenant also. 
’ But Lenin needed an untruth in order to abuse me. 
” *See present edition, Vol. 
 13, pp. 
 303. 
— Ed. 
 Let us see who has told an untruth. 
 To get to the bottom of this, it is important to notice the dots in the quotation I made, as reproduced by Maslov. 
 For I quoted all that Maslov had said on this subject in full. 
 Dots stand for omissions . 
 And what Maslov has done is to omit in his quotation from page 112 of his first volume the very passage in which he attacks Marx , and which he prints in italics on page 112! This may seem incredible, but it is a fact. 
 In my article in Proletary , as Maslov’s second argument against Marx, I quote the following phrase from page 112 of his first volume:“Rent from the ‘last’ investment of capital, Rodbertus’srent and Marx’s absolute rent, will disappear because the tenant can always make the ‘last’ investment the last but one, if it produces anything besides the ordinary profit ” (Maslov’s italics). 
 * This is Maslov’s argument against Marx. 
 It was this argument which I attacked, and which, I continue to assert,is a mass of falsehood and muddle. 
 And Maslov replies to meby quoting this same page 112, but leaving out his attack on Marx! In place of this attack he puts dots : before the dots he quotes the beginning of the page, after them the end, but the attack on Marx has disappeared. 
 What is this if not adistortion and an obvious untruth? I never asserted and do not assert now, that in the four hundred pages of The Agrarian Question one cannot find sound passages. 
 I only asserted that Maslov ’s arguments against Marx are unheard-of nonsense and incredible mud-dle. 
 If Maslov, in the fourth edition he promises, cuts outthese arguments, if for example, on page 112 he leaves whathe has quoted in Golos Sotsial-Demokrata , I will say, and anyone will say, that as from the fourth edition Maslov hasceased to correct Marx. 
 But until this is done, anyone reading Volume I will see on page 112 Maslov’s argument against Marx, the argument he left out in Golos . 
 And everyone will see that I was right in criticising this argument, i. 
e. 
, that this argument against absolute rent is ridiculous, since the tenant appropriates during the period of his lease the addi-tional rent from his fresh investment of capital in full , i. 
e. 
, both absolute and differential. 
 *See present edition, Vol. 
 13, pp. 
 302. 
— Ed. 
 I will not dwell on Maslov’s next “example”, because it refers to the very argument which Maslov omitted in Golos . 
 Obviously my criticism of the argument falls if Maslov withdraws the argument. 
 But if he does not do this, and only shortens his quotations, I ask the reader, who is responsiblefor “a mass of distortion and obvious untruths”? Maslov’s last quotation from my article is as follows:“‘What is intensification?’ asks Lenin, and replies: ‘It is the further expenditure of labour and capital. 
 A reaping-machine, according to the discovery of our great Maslov,is not (Lenin’s italics) expenditure of capital. 
 A seed drill is not an expenditure of capital. 
’ * Owing to his ignorance of the most elementary terms in the agrarian question, Leninhas given a wrong definition of intensification, and has not only written obvious nonsense but also asserts an obvious untruth. 
 In The Agrarian Question (p. 
 62) I wrote: ‘A threshing-machine diminishes the expenditure of labourper unit of land area, both in an extensive and in an inten-sive economy. 
’ (It is by such expenditure, and not expenditure in general, irrespective of the land area involved, that the degree of intensiveness is determined. 
 P. 
 M. 
 ) A harvester has the same significance. 
” Look here, my worthy friend, I will say to Maslov in reply: one must draw the line somewhere! Was the argumentreally about whether the intensiveness of the expenditure ofcapital is determined per unit of area, or irrespective of the area? That is indeed a distortion and an obvious un-truth! The argument was not about that at all. 
 In the second part of my article, now quoted by Maslov, I was not arguing against The Agrarian Question but against Maslov ’s article in “Obrazovaniye ”, 1907 , No. 
 2. 
 Just try arguing with an individual who now removes from his works the very arguments against Marx which the critic was challenging, now throws out entire articles he has written , and slips under the nose of the reader something quite irrelevant to the matter! The second part of my article is headed: “Is It Necessary to Refute Marx in Order to Refute Narodism?” In this part I criticise only Maslov’s article in Obrazovaniye , 1907, No. 
 2. 
 *See present edition, Vol. 
 13, p. 
 309. 
— Ed. 
 Maslov says nothing in Golos about that article, and quotes from his Agrarian Question ! But that is a silly game of hide-and-seek! I never said that Maslov, in The Agrarian Question , went to the length of asserting that to refute Narodism it was necessary to refute Marx. 
 But in Obrazovaniye Maslov did say this . 
 And it was to this that I was objecting, and not at all to what expenditureof capital determines intensification. 
 Does or does not Maslov maintain his assertion that “if it were not for the fact that the productivity of successive expenditures of labour on thesame plot of land diminishes, the idyll which the Socialist-Revolutionaries ... depict could, perhaps, be realised”? You go into hiding, worthy opponent? But that means acknowledging defeat. 
 Do you maintain your assertion that you “happened to be the first to lay special emphasis on the difference betweenthe significance of the cultivation of the soil and of technicalprogress for the development of farming, and, in particular,for the struggle between large-scale and small production”?That is what you said in Obrazovaniye . 
 And that is what I quoted in Proletary . 
 It is to that, and only to that question, that your argument about the reaping-machine refers—anargument in Obrazovaniye , and not in The Agrarian Ques-tion . 
 By not defending what he has said in Obrazovaniye , Maslov admits he is wrong. 
 Thus on the substance of the question all Maslov does in Golos is to wriggle. 
 He repeats his muddle about Marx not deducing absolute rent from private property in land, butdoes not directly defend his amendments to Marx; his argu-ments against Marx he omits from his quotations; what hehas said in Obrazovaniye he evades altogether. 
 And we re-peat: Maslov’s abolition of Marx’s absolute rent in The Agrarian Question , and Maslov’s arguments in Obrazovaniye , remain unsurpassed pearls of confusion, the importation ofa bourgeois point of view into theory. 
 As regards the German edition of Maslov’s book, I poked fun at the fact that in it all the corrections to Marx are hiddenaway. 
 Maslov defends himself by saying that the publisher did not bring out the whole of the first part of his book. 
 What does this correction by Maslov amount to? I saidMaslov had thrown out these corrections. 
 Maslov says it was the publisher who did it—and the publisher is the Ger-man Social-Democrat Dietz. 
 If it was Dietz who threw out Maslov’s “theory”, Maslov’s “corrections” to Marx, with Maslov’s consent, then my argu-ment is not affected in any way. 
 If Dietz did it without Maslov’s consent, then my argument changes only in itsform: Dietz, by throwing out the stupidities from Maslov’sbook, acted wisely. 
 Was that the correction which the worthy Maslov was seeking? Maslov says that I “begin to seek heresies in my opponents” because I “wish to cover up” the heresy of my friends. 
 Thatis not true. 
 Against what I consider heresy in my friends Ispeak as strongly as I do against you. 
 That can be seen from my footnote in the symposium, In Memory of Marx , * which has just appeared. 
 As for Maslov’s heresies I “began to seek” them in “ Zarya ” in 1901 ,** i. 
e. 
, two years before the split into Bolsheviks and Mensheviks, two years before Maslov’s first municipalisation programme. 
 In 1901 Maslovwas my “opponent” in the Party only on the question of his corrections to Marx’s theory. 
 P. 
S. 
 The present article had already been written when I received a special leaflet from the management of Golos Sotsial-Demokrata , which says: “Owing to a printer’s error in No. 
 8-9 of Golos Sotsial-Demokrata , the comment of the editorial board to Comrade Maslov’s letter was omitted . 
 This mistake will be immediately corrected, and the comment made available to subscribers and purchasers. 
” We have not yet received this correction. 
 I think it my duty to inform our readers about this printer’s error. 
 But is there not yet another printer’s error in the special leaflet I reprint here? Should it not, instead of Comrade Maslov, read Mr. 
 Maslov? Was it not Plekhanov who declared in print that people who depart from Marx are for him notcomrades but gentlemen! Or does not that hold good for Mensheviks who preach departure from Marxism? Proletary , No. 
 37, Published according October 16 (29), 1908 to the text in Proletary Signed: N. 
 Lenin verified with the manuscript *See p. 
 34 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 **See present edition, Vol. 
 5, p. 
 127. 
— Ed. 
 SOME REMARKS ON THE “REPLY ” BY P. 
 MASLOV114 My opponent accuses me of using methods of polemics which distort the issue. 
 To ascertain whether this is true,I will examine P. 
 Maslov’s “Reply” step by step. 
 Maslov’s first example. 
 Lenin says that a new upsurge of the revolution is unthinkable without the radical aboli-tion of all the survivals of serfdom, “as though Social-Democracy, in adopting the programme of municipali-sation of the land, intends to preserve the survivals ofserfdom, to leave the estates in the hands of the landlords”. 
 Every reader will see that Maslov is begging the question; because what I have been pointing out all the time is thatthe term, a survival of serfdom, applies not only to land-lord property but also to the allotment property still in existence. 
 That was what the argument was about. 
 By avoiding this question all through his reply, by not saying a word about whether there is a medieval element in allot-ment property in land, whether to clear away this medi-evalism is advantageous for capitalism or not, Maslov dis-tracts the attention of the reader. 
 Not to reply to an argu-ment of one’s opponent on a question of principle, and toascribe only “pathos” to him, means not to argue but to turn to abuse. 
 The second example. 
 My remark about an agrarian and a political revolution being indissolubly connected Maslovcalls lack of respect for the reader. 
 Municipalisation doesnot break this connection either. 
 Is that a reply? Is notMaslov passing over in silence here—(1) my explicit ref-erence to the Menshevik Novosedsky, who definitely con-nected municipalisation with an incomplete political rev-olution; and (2) my argument that municipalisation does not affect either the medieval village commune or medieval landowning, i. 
e. 
, unquestionably and firmly condemns the agrarian revolution itself, and only the agrarian revolu-tion, to remain half-finished? Maslov’s third argument: “The peasants’ hatred of the landlords and the officials serves Lenin as an argument infavour of his programme and against the programme adopt-ed. 
” Untrue. 
 Every reader will notice that Maslov has substituted “hatred of the landlords ” for “ hatred of medi-evalism ” (Maslov himself admits a few lines earlier that that was what I spoke of). 
 He needed this substitution in orderto pass over in silence my argument as to the medievalcharacter of allotment property. 
 It is not true that I called my programme a Bolshevik one. 
 Nor is it true that the question of nationalisation was voted on at Stockholm. 
 You should not distort facts,Comrade Maslov! “No theory of rent affords the least advantage to the programme of nationalisation or municipalisation, becausethe income from confiscated lands in any case goes to the state or the municipal authority. 
” Here we have at last an argument in substance. 
 An ex-cellent argument, too, because it best shows how monstrous-ly Maslov is distorting Marxism. 
 Only by rejectingMarx’s absolute rent , which Maslov has “refuted”, can one reduce the question purely to “income”, forgetting about the lowering of prices for grain and ensuring access for cap-ital to agriculture! Maslov has confirmed by his argumentthat the economic essence of the question is alien and in-comprehensible to him. 
 It is not a question of income, mydear sir, but of the relations of production in agriculture,which change for the better when absolute rent is abolished. 
 By rejecting absolute rent in Marx’s theory, Maslov has deprived himself of any possibility of understanding theeconomic significance of nationalisation. 
 Why millionsof small proprietors in the Russian bourgeois revolutioncould and were bound to demand it—that economic prob-lem does not exist for Maslov. 
 That’s just the trouble with him! It is true that my articles in the years 1905-08 were directed against the programme of the cut-off lands. 
 But “to leap and dance” on this question as Maslov does means to throw dust in the eyes of the reader, and not to clear up disputed questions. 
 After all, Maslov himself has not stood by all his programme of 1903! Why then does hehide this from the reader, and put forward only one sideof the past? Why does he quote the words, which I do notdeny now either, that nationalisation of the land is harm-ful in a “police state”? Is that argument, or abuse? For Polish readers who don’t know the details of the discussion on the agrarian question among Russian So-cial-Democrats, I will explain that in 1903, before theSecond Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, Maslov put forward inthe press a different programme from the one he recommendedin 1906. 
 I should have thought it impermissible to dig up previous differences, and in my previous article I did not touch on them. 
 But now Maslov himself has broughtup the old dispute. 
 It came into his head that it would be abrilliant piece of wit to refute the programme of 1903 whichI have given up—or was he perhaps attracted by the thoughtthat to argue about the past would draw attention away from the weak points in his new views? The fact remains that, in touching on earlier disputes, Maslov did not tellthe Polish Social-Democrats that he himself had changedhis programme of 1903. 
 While blaming his opponent forthe open and long since completed alteration in the pre-vious programme, he conceals the fact that he himself has changed his programme. 
 He also conceals the fact that in 1903 Pyotr Maslov not only did not insist on the necessityof leaving the allotment lands at all costs in the handsof their owners, but on the contrary, simply included inhis programme the socialisation if possible of the allotment lands as well. 
 Splendid, is it not? For whom are recollections of the past unpleasant? For him who has openly recognised thesource of mistakes in his previous view, or for him whohides the fact that his views have changed? Why was itthat in 1903 P. 
 Maslov thought the socialisation of allot-ment lands possible as well, while in 1906-08 he flies into a rage at the mere thought of such views being entertained? Let the reader judge for himself of such “polemical” meth-ods or rather such covering-up of traces. 
 Maslov follows the recipe of the sly old fellow depicted by Turgenev: denounce as loudly as possible what you want to hide in your own actions! Others have changed their views, and pointed it out themselves. 
 Shout as loudly as possibleagainst these changes, in order to hide the change in yourown views! In the absence of arguments, one needs mustfall back on swindling. 
 My table showing the distribution of landed property in European Russia displeases Maslov. 
 He is indignant that I compare “Kalmyk” property with the “intensive economy”of south-western Russia. 
 The reader who is familiar withthe literature on the agrarian question knows, of course,that Maslov himself as well as other authors compare— though it be for particular districts—the ruined horseless peasant having four dessiatines of land in some remote back-woods, with the rich farmer carrying on intensive market-gardening on the same quantity of land near a large city. 
Out of place, quite out of place, is Comrade Maslov’sboasting of his “detailed analysis”! It is boasting , and not scientific argument: because it is impossible to ascertain the results of the struggle in any other way than the one I adopted, and Maslov himself understands the impossi-bility of making “detailed analyses” in Przegl Zd. 
 In dealing with my argument that when the Trudovik group declared for nationalisation they proved to the Men-sheviks that I was right, Maslov does not simply examine this argument, but tries indirectly to weaken it by saying that (1) the nationalisation was “whittled down” and (2)many joined the autonomists in the First Duma “just be-cause their electorate did not want nationalisation of theland”. 
 Is not this evasion of the question? What has nationali-sation in common with this “whittling down”? And what have the autonomists in common with what Maslov in 1905and all the Mensheviks at Stockholm categorically statedabout the Russian peasants—that they would not in anycase agree to nationalisation, and would reply to it with aVendée? Maslov passes over in silence the fact—for him an unpleasant one—that the adoption of a programme of nationalisation by the Trudovik group after the Stockholm Congress refuted the arguments of the Mensheviks. 
 Such a “reply”, in which the real issue is systematically avoided, is not difficult, but it is not of great value. 
 It is a fact that both the First and Second Dumas often put the workers’ deputies in an embarrassing position, because the Social-Democrats were “whittling down” nationalisation more than the peasants themselves. 
 The Social-Democrats foundthemselves in the position of timorous philistine intellec-tuals advising the peasant to deal more carefully with the old, medieval allotment property, to reinforce it as much as he could, to adapt the new free property in land tocapitalism as slowly as possible! The point is, ComradeMaslov, not that the Trudoviks were whittling down na-tionalisation but that the Social-Democrats, the Marxists,were whittling it down still more—because municipalisa-tion is nationalisation whittled down to the point of distor-tion. 
 The trouble is not that the autonomists sometimesrejected * nationalisation; the trouble is that the Russian Social-Democrats failed to understand the nature of thestruggle of the Russian peasants. 
 Maslov’s demagogy isnot that he records the disagreement of some of the auton-omists with nationalisation, but that he is silent about the fact that many autonomists disagree with municipal-isation, and that he uses petty-bourgeois separatist argu-ments to incite them against nationalisation! The autonomists are against nationalisation. 
 Let the reader consider in whose favour such an argument works. 
 For my part, I would mention that as early as 1903, when criticising Maslov’s programme of that day , I called mu-nicipalisation whittled nationalisation. 
 I would mentionthat, when arguing with Maslov in 1906 before the Stock-holm Congress, I pointed out that it was wrong to confusethe question of national autonomy with that of national-isation of the land. 
 ** The very foundations of our programme guarantee autonomy. 
 Consequently they also guaranteethe autonomous disposal of the nationalised land! Maslovcannot understand this elementary fact! Nationalisationmeans the abolition of absolute rent, the passing of the land *Not at all, not all! The fact that nationalisation was defended by the Ukrainian autonomist, Chizhevsky, should have given Maslovfood for thought. 
 **See present edition, Vol. 
 10, pp. 
 181-84. 
— Ed. 
 into the property of the state, the prohibition of all trans-fers of land, i. 
e. 
, the elimination of all mediators between those who work the land and the owner of the land—the state. 
 Within the limits of this prohibition, the autonomyof countries and peoples in relation to the disposal of theland, the establishment of conditions for settlement, andregulations for distribution, etc. 
, etc. 
, is quite permis-sible, does not in any way contradict nationalisation and is included in the demands of our political programme. 
 It follows clearly from this that only petty bourgeois—and that is what all the “autonomists” were—could coverup their cowardice, their unwillingness to fight activelyto the end for a single, centralised agrarian revolution, byexpressing a fear that they would lose their autonomy. 
 For Social-Democracy the question is posed the other way round: it is the business of the proletariat to carry therevolution through to its very end, both in the politicalsphere and in the agrarian. 
 For this purpose it is necessary to nationalise the land—a thing that is demanded by theTrudoviks, i. 
e. 
, the politically-minded Russian peasants. 
 The important thing for a Marxist is the economic crite-rion of such a step; and this economic criterion proclaimsthat, in keeping with Marx’s teaching, bourgeois national-isation of the land ensures the maximum developmentof productive forces in agriculture. 
 Thus a resolute bour-geois-revolutionary step in the agrarian sphere is indis-solubly bound up with a resolute bourgeois-democratic revolution in the political sphere, i. 
e. 
, with the establish-ment of a republic, which alone guarantees true autonomy . 
 Such is the real relationship between autonomy and anagrarian revolution, which Maslov has completely failedto understand! Maslov calls my reference to Marx’s Theories of Surplus-Value an “evasion”, because Marx never said “that the peas-ants want to expropriate themselves”. 
 Come, come, ComradeMaslov! Can it really be that you have not understood Marx’sclear words? Does Marx say that for capitalism the completeabolition of medieval property in land is an advantage— does he or does he not? Is the nationalisation of the land advocated by the Trudoviks and demanded by the Russianpeasants in 1905-07, abolition of medieval property—is it or is it not? For it was about this that we were talking, my dear sir, and the laughable renaming of bourgeois-peasant nationalisation of the land “expropriation” of the peasants does not in the least refute the correctness of thequestion as I put it.... 
 “In industry as well,” Maslov con-tinues, “capitalism ruins small proprietorship, but does itfollow from this that the Social-Democrats have got to as-sume the task of expropriating the handicraftsmen?” This is a perfect gem! To call the struggle of the peasants against medieval barriers in landownership, the strugglefor nationalisation of the land, which (Marx showed) mostfavours the development of capitalism, “expropriation”of the peasants, and to put it on the same footing as expro-priation of the handicraftsman by the capitalist. 
 For God’s sake, Comrade Maslov! Just think, in the name of all that is holy, why we support the peasant against the landlord, and leave it to the anti-Semites to support the handicrafts-man against the factory! Maslov does not understand that to support the handi-craftsman, i. 
e. 
, petty proprietorship in industry, can never be the job of Social-Democrats, since this activity is de-cidedly and invariably reactionary. 
 But support of pettyproprietorship in agriculture may be the duty of Marxists, and must be their duty wherever petty-bourgeois economy is economically progressive compared with large-scale feu-dal economy. 
 Marx never supported small-scale industry against large-scale, but Marx supported small-scale farm-ing in the forties in respect to America, and peasant agri-culture against the feudal latifundia in 1848 in relationto Germany. 
 In 1848 Marx proposed the breaking-up ofthe German feudal estates. 
 He supported the movement ofthe small farmers against the large-scale slave-owning estates in America, for freedom of the soil and for the abo-lition of private property in land in America. 
 115 Was Marx’s trend of thought in agrarian policy correct? It was correct, esteemed Comrade Maslov—who has “re-vised” the theory of absolute rent in the spirit of bourgeoiseconomics, but has not had time to “revise” the rest of Marx. 
 A bourgeois revolution in the agrarian sphere can be con-sistent and really victorious only when it forcibly anddrastically abolishes all feudal property, when it wipes out all previous property in land, and instead creates a basis for the new free bourgeois property in land, adapted to the requirements of capital and not of the landlords. 
 Nationalisation of the land is fully in keeping with thetrend of such a revolution. 
 Moreover nationalisation ofthe land is the only measure which ensures that such arevolution takes place with the greatest consistency think-able in capitalist society. 
 There is no other means so resolutely and painlessly to liberate the peasants from the “ghetto” of allotment property. 
 There is no other meansto destroy the old rotten village commune without police,bureaucracy and money-lender. 
 Viewed objectively, the question presents itself in the Russian bourgeois revolution in the following way, and only in the following way: will Stolypin (i. 
e. 
, the landlords and the autocracy) adapt the old form of landed propertyto the requirements of capitalism, or will the peasantmasses themselves do it by overthrowing the power of thelandlords and the tsar? In the first case, adaptation is onlypossible by means of reforms, i. 
e. 
, by a half-hearted, long-dragged-out process, involving a much slower growth of the productive forces, the least possible development ofdemocracy condemning Russia to the prolonged supremacyof the Junker. 
 In the second case, only a revolutionaryadaptation is possible, i. 
e. 
, one which forcibly sweepsaway the landlords’ estates and ensures the most rapid possible development of the productive forces. 
 Is that revolutionary abolition of landlord property thinkableif the old allotment property of the peasants remains? No,it is unthinkable—and the peasant deputies in both Dumasdemonstrated that it was impossible. 
 They demonstratedthis by creating a political type of peasantry representative of all Russia in the period of the bourgeois revolution: the Trudovik type, who demands nationalisation of the land. 
 In shouting about the S. 
R. 
 character of nationalisation, Maslov is repeating the old tactic of the Mensheviks: whilethemselves flirting with the Cadets, to accuse the revolu-tionary Social-Democrats of coming closer to the Social-ist-Revolutionaries. 
 People coquette with the liberal-monarchist landlords and merchants, but are indignantthat the revolutionary Social-Democrats in a bourgeois revolution want to march together with the revolutionary peasant bourgeois. 
 Nor is that all. 
 Thundering against the S. 
R. 
 character of nationalisation, Maslov demonstrates his complete incomprehension of the Marxist analysis ofthe Narodnik views and aspirations of the Russian peas-antry. 
 Maslov does not understand that the Social-Dem-ocrats in Russia were long ago pointing out the reaction-ary nature of the socialist, or rather quasi-socialist, the-ories or dreams of a reallotment of the land (the general redistribution), etc. 
, and the bourgeois progressiveness of this ideal in present-day semi-feudal Russia. 
 Beyondthe S. 
R. 
s’ petty-bourgeois phrase about socialism, Maslov is incapable of discovering the bourgeois reality—namely,revolutionary struggle against all the old medieval rubbish. 
 When a Socialist-Revolutionary talks about equalised land tenure, socialisation of lands, etc. 
, the Socialist-Revolu-tionary is talking balderdash from the economic point ofview, he is revealing his illiteracy in the sphere of economicscience and the theory of the development of capitalism. 
But behind these phrases, behind these dreams, is hidden a live and highly realistic content—not at all a socialist one, however, but a purely bourgeois content, namely,clearing the ground for capitalism, abolishing all medievaland social-estate barriers existing on the land, and the crea-tion of a free arena for capitalism. 
 That is what our poorMaslov can’t get himself to understand—and this is di-rectly connected with the fact that Maslov cannot under-stand Marx’s doctrine of absolute rent, which, unlike dif-ferential rent, can be abolished in capitalist society, thedevelopment of which will be advanced by its abolition. 
 Incapable of fighting the S. 
R. 
s, Maslov vulgarises Marx-ism, condemning himself only to contemplation of the “rear aspect” of the peasant, who is shackled to his plot of land, and is quite unable to understand the democracyand the revolutionary bourgeois spirit of the peasant whowants to sweep away both landlord property and allotmentproperty in the soil. 
 Incapable of fighting the S. 
R. 
s, Maslov surrenders to them, to the petty-bourgeois socialists the criticism of private property in land. 
 That criticism from the point ofview of the development of capitalism, was given by Marx and should be given by Marxists. 
 But in cutting himself off from that road by his denial of absolute rent, Maslov capitulates to the S. 
R. 
s, admitting in theory that they are right— when it is Marx who is right! He capitulates to theS. 
R. 
s, who criticise private ownership of the land in apetty-bourgeois way, not from the point of view of thedevelopment of capitalism, but only from the point ofview of delaying its development. 
 Maslov has not under-stood that the mistake of the S. 
R. 
s in their agrarian pro-gramme begins after nationalisation , i. 
e. 
, when they go on to “socialisation” and “equalisation” and reach the pointof denying a class struggle amongst the small peasantry. 
The S. 
R. 
s do not understand the bourgeois character of nationalisation: that is their principal error. 
 And let any Marxist who has studied Capital tell me, is it possible to understand the bourgeois character of nationalisation whenone denies the existence of absolute rent? Furthermore, Maslov says that I am turning all petty-peasant property throughout Europe into medieval prop-erty. 
 Quite untrue. 
 In Europe there is no “allotment” property in land, nor are there barriers deriving from the medieval ranks of society: there exists free and capitalist,not feudal, property in land. 
 In Europe there is no peasantmovement against the landlords supported by the Social-Democrats. 
 P. 
 Maslov has forgotten all this! Let us go on to the political arguments. 
 My argument that the municipalisation advocated by the Mensheviks is bound up with the idea of compromise with the monarchyis described by Maslov as an “insinuation” and a “deliberatelie”—but then how about my textual quotation from thespeech of the Menshevik Novosedsky, Comrade Maslov?On whose side is there a lie? Isn’t the real trouble that you want to use terrible words to wipe away the unpleasant fact of Novosedsky’s admission? Handing over the land to the municipalities increases their chances in the fight against a restoration, assertsMaslov; but I permit myself to think that only the strength-ening of a central republican authority can seriously impede reaction, whereas the dispersal of its forces and resources among various regions facilitates the work ofreaction. 
 We must strive to unite the revolutionary classes, and first of all the proletariat, of the various parts of the state into a single army, and not dream of a hopeless, economically impossible and senseless federalist attempt to hand over revenues from confiscated lands to the variousregions. 
 “Choose, Polish comrades,” says Maslov: “Shoulda Polish Sejm receive the revenues from confiscated lands,or should these revenues be handed over to the Russians inSt. 
 Petersburg?” A magnificent argument! And, of course, not a hint of demagogy in it! No confusion of the agrarian question withthe question of Polish autonomy! But I will say: the freedom of Poland is impossible without the freedom of Russia. 
 And that freedom willnot be achieved if the Polish and Russian workmen do not do their duty of supporting the Russian peasants in their struggle for nationalisation of the land, and in carryingthat struggle to complete victory in both the politicalsphere and the agrarian. 
 Municipalisation and national-isation should be evaluated from the point of view ofthe economic development of the centre of Russia and of the political destinies of the country as a whole, and not from the point of view of the specific features of any partic-ular autonomous national territory. 
 Without the victoryof the proletariat and the revolutionary peasantry in Rus-sia, it is absurd to talk about genuine autonomy for Poland,the rights of municipalities and so forth. 
 They become empty phrases. 
 The peasantry in Russia, on the other hand, inasmuch as it is revolutionary, inasmuch as it rejects theidea of compromise with the bourgeoisie and the Octobrists,but fights together with the workers and all democrats,has already irrefutably proved its sympathy for national-isation of the land. 
 If the peasantry ceases to be revolu-tionary, i. 
e. 
, renounces this sympathy and turns away from a bourgeois-democratic revolution, then the peasantswill be pleased with Maslov’s anxiety to preserve the oldform of property in land—but then Maslov’s municipalisa-tion will be altogether ridiculous. 
 But so long as the rev-olutionary-democratic struggle of the peasantry contin-ues, so long as there is sense in an “agrarian programme” of Marxists in a bourgeois revolution, it is our duty to sup-port the revolutionary demands of the peasantry, including the demand for nationalisation of the land. 
 Maslov will not strike that demand of the Russian peasants out of the history of the Russian revolution; and it can safely be said that the rise of the tide, the revival of the struggle of thepeasants for the land, when it takes place once again, willclearly reveal all the reactionary nature of “municipalisa-tion”. 
 Published in October-November Published according 1908 in he journal Przegl Zdad to the text in the journal Socjaldemokratyczny , No. 
 8-9 Translated from the Polish Signed: N. 
 Lenin THE ASSESSMENT OF THE PRESENT SITUATION The agenda of the forthcoming All-Russian Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 includes the question: “The presentsituation and the tasks of the Party”. 
 The organisations of our Party have already begun (Moscow and St. 
 Peters-burg ahead of all other centres in this respect) systemati-cally to discuss this question, which is undoubtedly ofextreme importance. 
 The present period of lull in the movement for libera-tion, of rampant reaction, of betrayals and despondency in the camp of the democrats, of crisis and partial break-down in the Social-Democratic organisations, makes it particu-larly vital to take into account first of all the main lessonsof the first campaign of our revolution. 
 We have in mindnot tactical lessons in the narrow sense of the word, butin the first place the general lessons of the revolution. 
 And, in keeping with this, our first question will be, what are the objective changes which have taken place in thegrouping of classes and the political balance of forces inRussia between 1904 and 1908? The main changes can bereduced, in our view, to the following five: (1) There hasbeen a fundamental shift in the agrarian policy of the autoc-racy on the peasant question; support and reinforcement of the old village commune have been superseded by apolicy of speeded-up police destruction and plundering ofthat commune. 
 (2) The representative arrangements of theBlack-Hundred nobility and big bourgeoisie have made atremendous step forward: instead of the former local elect-ed committees of the nobles and merchants, instead of sporadic attempts at representing them on an all-Russianscale, there is a single representative body, the State Duma, in which these classes are guaranteed complete preponder-ance. 
 Representation of the liberal professions—to say nothing of the peasantry and the proletariat—is reduced to the role of an appendage and a makeweight in this so-called “constitutional” institution, the purpose of whichis to strengthen the autocracy. 
 (3) For the first time theclasses have achieved a definite cleavage and taken shapein open political struggle during this period: the political parties which now exist openly and secretly (half-secretly, to be more exact, for there are no completely “secret” partiesin Russia since the revolution), express with previouslyunheard-of exactness the interests and viewpoint of classes;which during the three years have matured a hundred timesmore than during the preceding half-century. 
 The Black-Hundred nobility, the national-“liberal” bourgeoisie, the petty-bourgeois democrats (the Trudoviks with their smallLeft wing of S. 
R. 
s) and proletarian Social-Democracy haveall during this period completed the “foetal” stage of theirdevelopment, and for years ahead have defined their nature,not in words but by facts and mass actions. 
 (4) What before the revolution was known as liberal and liberal-Narodnik “society”, or the spokesman and “enlightened” part of the“nation” at large—the broad mass of well-to-do, noblemen’sand intellectuals’ “opposition”, which seemed to be some-thing integral, and homogeneous, permeating the Zemstvos,the universities, all the “decent” press, etc. 
, etc. 
—has displayed itself in the revolution as the ideologues and supporters of the bourgeoisie, and has taken up what allcan recognise now as a counter-revolutionary position in respect of the mass struggle of the socialist proletariat and the democratic peasantry. 
 The counter-revolutionary lib-eral bourgeoisie has come into existence and is growing— and this fact does not cease to be a fact because it is denied by the “progressive” legal press, or because our opportu-nists, the Mensheviks, keep silent about it and do not un-derstand it. 
 (5) Millions among the population have gainedpractical experience , in the most varied forms, of a genu-inely mass and directly revolutionary struggle, including a “general strike”, the expulsion of landowners, the burning of their country-houses, and open armed uprising. 
 He whowas already a revolutionary or a class-conscious worker before the revolution cannot fully realise the tremendous significance of this fact, which has radically changed a number of previous conceptions of the course of develop-ment of a political crisis, the tempo of this development,the dialectics of history created in practice by the masses. 
The assessment of this experience by the masses is an invis-ible, painful and slow process, playing a far more impor-tant part than many an event on the surface of the country’s political life which fascinate infants who are not only of an infantile age in politics buts sometimes a good deal old-er. 
 The leading role of the proletarian masses all throughthe revolution and in all the fields of struggle, from demon-strations, through insurrection, to (in chronological order)“parliamentary” activity, has become apparent for all to see during this period, if we look over it as a whole. 
 Such are the objective changes which have created a gulf between pre-October and present-day Russia. 
 Suchare the results of three years of the most eventful period in our history, results given, of course, in a summarisedform, so to speak, insofar as one is able in a few words to outline what is most important and essential. 
 Now let us examine the conclusions in the sphere of tactics which theseresults dictate. 
 The change in the agrarian policy of the autocracy is of exceptionally great importance for a “peasant” countrylike Russia. 
 This change is not an accident, it is not the fluctuations in ministerial lines of action, not an invention of the bureaucracy. 
 No, it is a profound “shift” towardsagrarian Bonapartism , towards a liberal (economically understood, i. 
e. 
, bourgeois) policy in the sphere of peasantland relations. 
 Bonapartism is the manoeuvring on thepart of a monarchy which has lost its old patriarchal or feudal, simple and solid, foundation—a monarchy which is obliged to walk the tightrope in order not to fall, makeadvances in order to govern, bribe in order to gain affec-tions, fraternise with the dregs of society, with plain thievesand swindlers, in order not to rely only on bayonets. 
Bonapartism is the objectively necessary evolution of the monarchy in any bourgeois country, traced by Marx and Engels through a number of facts in the modern historyof Europe. 
 And the agrarian Bonapartism of Stolypin, on this point quite consciously and steadfastly supported both by the Black-Hundred landlords and the Octobrist bourgeoisie, could not even have seen the light, much less have lasted two years now, if the village commune itselfin Russia were not developing in a capitalist direction,if within the commune elements were not steadily shapingwhich the autocracy could begin its flirtation with, towhich it could say: “Enrich yourselves!”, “Plunder the com-mune but support me!” Therefore, any assessment of Sto-lypin’s agrarian policy that did not reckon with the Bo-napartist methods of the latter, on the one hand, and itsbourgeois (that is, liberal) essence on the other would bedecidedly erroneous. 
 For example, our liberals express their dimly realised understanding that Stolypin’s agrarian policy is Bona-partism by their attacks on its police character, on theidiotic interference of officials in peasant affairs, etc. 
, etc. 
But when the Cadets lament the violent break-up of the “age-old” foundations of our country life, they become reactionary moaners. 
 Without a violent, revolutionary break-up of the foundations of the old Russian countryside there can be no development of Russia. 
 The struggle is going on—though very many indeed of its participants do not realiseit—only about whether it will be the violence of a land-lords’ monarchy against the peasants, or of a peasant re-public against the landlords. 
 In both cases a bourgeois, and no other kind of agrarian revolution in Russia is inevitable , but in the first case it will be a slow and agonising one,in the second a swift, broad and free-moving one. 
 Thestruggle of the workers’ party for this second road is ex-pressed and recognised in our agrarian programme—notin the part where the senseless idea of “municipalisation” is put forward, but in the part which speaks about confiscating all the landed estates. 
 After the experience of three years it is only, perhaps, among the Mensheviks that people canbe still found who do not see the link between the strugglefor that confiscation and the struggle for a republic. 
 Sto-lypin’s agrarian policy, if maintained for a very long time, if it reconstructed all landed relations in the countryside for good and all on purely bourgeois lines, might force usto give up the idea of any agrarian programme in bourgeois society (up to this day even the Mensheviks, and even the Cherevanins among the Mensheviks, have not reached the point of renouncing our agrarian programme). 
 But Stoly-pin’s policy can by no means induce us to change our tacticstoday. 
 Since the “confiscation of all landed estates” standsin the programme, only infants can fail to see the revolu-tionary tactics (in the direct and narrow sense of the word“revolutionary”) which follow from this. 
 And it would be wrong to put the question in this way, that if Stolypin’s policy is suffering “bankruptcy”, that means that a revivalis near—and vice versa. 
 The failure of Bonapartist methodsdoes not imply the failure of the policy of the kulak plunder-ing of the village commune. 
 And, vice versa, Stolypin’s“success” in the countryside now and in the next years to come will necessarily inflame the struggle within the peas-antry rather than quench it, for only by a long, a verylong road, can the “goal”, i. 
e. 
, the final and complete con-solidation of a purely bourgeois peasant economy, be achieved. 
 Stolypin’s “success” in the years immediatelyahead might lead at best to the emergence of a stratum of consciously counter-revolutionary Octobrist peasants, but it is just such a transformation of the well-to-do minority intoa politically conscious and united force that would inevi-tably give a tremendous impetus to the development ofpolitical consciousness and unity of the democratic massagainst such a minority. 
 We Social-Democrats could wish for nothing better than the transformation of the sponta-neous, sporadic, blind struggle between the “sharks” andthe “community” into a conscious and open struggle betweenOctobrists and Trudoviks. 
 Let us go on to the question of the Duma. 
 Undoubtedly this Black-Hundred “constitutional” body is just another development of the absolute monarchy towards Bonapart-ism. 
 All those features of Bonapartism which we notedabove are revealed with perfect clarity in the present elec-toral law, in the faked majority of Black-Hundred repre-sentatives plus the Octobrists, in the sham imitation ofEurope, in the rush for loans, the expenditure of which is allegedly controlled by “the representatives of the na-tion”, and the complete ignoring of all the debates and de-cisions of the Duma by the autocracy in its practical policy. 
 The contradiction between the Black-Hundred autocracy, which virtually reigns supreme, and the window-dressing of a bourgeois “constitution” is revealing itself more and more obviously, as bringing with it the elements of a newrevolutionary crisis. 
 The autocracy was to have been cov-ered up, dressed up, decked out with the help of the Duma;in effect, the Black-Hundred-Octobrist Duma with everyday of its existence reveals, exposes, lays bare the true character of our state power, its clear class foundations and its Bonapartism. 
 One cannot but recall in this connectionthe remarkably profound observation of Engels (in hisletter to Bernstein on August 27, 1883 116) on the meaning of the transition from an absolute to a constitutional mon-archy. 
 While the liberals in general and the Russian Ca-dets in particular see in such a transition the workings of their notorious “peaceful” progress and its guarantee, En-gels pointed out the historic role of the constitutionalmonarchy as a form of state which facilitates a decisive struggle between the feudalists and the bourgeoisie. 
 Engelswrote: “But just as this struggle [between feudalism and the bourgeoisie] could not be fought out to a decisive conclu-sion under the old absolute monarchy but only in a con-stitutional one (England, France 1789-92 and 1815 30),so the struggle between bourgeoisie and proletariat can onlybe fought out in a republic. 
” Engels here gives the titleof constitutional monarchy, among others, to the France of 1816, when the famous Chambre Introuvable, a reac-tionary counter-revolutionary chamber, ran amuck in sup-port of the White Terror against the revolution probablyno less violently than our Third Duma. 
 What does thismean? Does Engels recognise the reactionary assembliesof representatives of the landlords and capitalists, who support absolutism in its struggle with revolution, as being genuinely constitutional institutions? No. 
 It means thatthere may arise historical conditions when institutionswhich falsify a constitution inflame the struggle for a realconstitution, and become a stage in the development of newrevolutionary crises. 
 In the first campaign of our revolu-tion the majority of the people still believed in the possi-bility of reconciling a genuine constitution with the autoc-racy; and the Cadets built their whole policy on system- /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR atically sustaining this belief among the people, while the Trudoviks followed the lead of the Cadets at least half-way in this respect. 
 Now the autocracy by its Third Duma is showing the people in practice with what “constitution”it can “reconcile itself”—and thereby brings nearer a widerand more resolute struggle against the autocracy . 
 It follows from this, incidentally, that it would be quite wrong to replace our old slogan of “down with the autoc-racy” with the slogan “down with the Third Duma”. 
 Under what conditions could a slogan like “down with the Duma”acquire meaning? Let us assume that we are faced with aliberal, reform-seeking, compromising Duma in a periodof the sharpest revolutionary crisis, which had developedto the point of direct civil war. 
 It is quite possible that at such a moment our slogan might be “down with the Duma”, i. 
e. 
, down with peaceable negotiations with the tsar, downwith the deceptive institution of “peace”, let’s call for adirect attack. 
 Now let us assume, on the contrary, thatwe are faced with an arch-reactionary Duma, elected underan obsolete electoral law, and the absence of any acutely revolutionary crisis in the country. 
 In that case the slogan “down with the Duma” might become the slogan of a strugglefor electoral reform. 
 We see neither of these contingenciesat the present time. 
 The Third Duma is not a compromis-ing but a downright counter-revolutionary body, whichdoes not cover up the autocracy, but exposes it, and which plays no independent part in any respect; no one anywhere expects it to produce progressive reforms; no one imaginesthat the source of tsarism’s real power and strength liesin this assembly of diehards. 
 All are agreed that tsarismdoes not repose on it, but makes use of it; that tsarism canpursue its entire present policy, both if the calling of such a Duma be postponed (as the calling of a parliament was “postponed” by Turkey in 1878) and if it be replaced by a“Zemsky Sobor” * or something similar. 
 The slogan “down with the Duma” would mean concentrating the main attackon an institution which is neither independent nor decisive,and which does not play the principal part. 
 Such a slogan would be wrong. 
 We must keep the old slogan of “down *A central representative assembly. 
— Ed. 
 with the autocracy” and “long live the Constituent Assembly”, because it is precisely the autocracy which continues to remain the real authority, the real support and bulwark of reaction. 
 The fall of the autocracy inevitably means theremoval (and the revolutionary removal at that) of theThird Duma as an institution of tsarism; but the fall of theThird Duma by itself would mean either a new adventureby that same autocracy or an attempt at reform—a decep-tive and only apparent reform—undertaken by the same autocracy. 
 * To proceed. 
 We have seen that the class nature of the political parties during the three years of the first revolu-tionary campaign has become defined with remarkableforce and salience. 
 Hence it follows that in all discussions af the present balance of political forces, of the tendencies to change in this balance, etc. 
, it is essential to reckonwith these concrete data of historical experience, and notwith abstract “general arguments”. 
 The entire history ofthe European states bears witness that precisely in theperiods of direct revolutionary struggle deep and lasting foundations of class groupings are laid, and divisions into large political parties take place, which thereafter persisteven in very long periods of stagnation. 
 Some parties maygo underground, give no sign of life, disappear from thefront of the political stage: but at the slightest revival themain political forces inevitably will give signs of them-selves again, perhaps in an altered form but with the same character and direction of their activity, so long as theobjective tasks of the revolution, which has suffered defeatto this or that extent, are not fulfilled. 
 Hence, it wouldbe the greatest short-sightedness, for example, to presumethat because there are no Trudovik organisations in the local areas, and the Trudovik group in the Third Duma is distinguished by its particular confusion and impotence,the masses of the democratic peasantry have thereforecompletely fallen apart, and play no essential role in theprocess of the rise of a new revolutionary crisis. 
 Such a *In the next issue we shall examine the other aspect of the question of “Duma” tactics, and discuss the “letter” from an otzovistcomrade in Rabocheye Znamya , No. 
 5. 
 (See pp. 
 286-302 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
) view is worthy only of the Mensheviks, who more and more are falling into the most humdrum “parliamentary cretinism” (take, for example, their truly disgraceful rene-gade attacks against the illegal Party organisation). 
 Marx-ists should know that the conditions of representation,not only in our Black-Hundred Duma but even in the mostideal bourgeois parliament, will always create an artificialdisparity between the real strength of the various classes and its reflection in the representative institution. 
 For example, the liberal-bourgeois intelligentsia always andeverywhere seems in parliaments to be a hundred timesstronger than it is in reality (in our revolution, too, oppor-tunist Social-Democrats took the Cadets for what theyseemed to be), and on the contrary very broad democratic strata of the petty bourgeoisie (in the towns during the bourgeois revolutions of 1848, in the countryside in Rus-sia) often prove to be an extremely important factor inthe open struggle of the masses, while being quite insig-nificant from the point of view of their representation inparliaments. 
 Our peasantry entered upon the revolution immeasurably less politically conscious than the liberal bourgeois on theone hand and the socialist proletariat on the other. 
 Forthis reason it drew from the revolution more painful butvaluable disillusionments, more bitter but salutory lessons,than any other class. 
 Quite naturally, it is digesting these lessons with particular difficulty and particularly slowly. 
 Quite naturally many “radicals” from among the intelli-gentsia will lose patience, and give it all up as a bad job—and so will some Social-Democratic philistines, on whosefaces a contemptuous grimace appears whenever someonetalks about some peasant democracy or other, but whose mouths water at the mere sight of the “enlightened” liber-als. 
 But the class-conscious proletariat will not so easilystrike out of its memory what it saw and what it took partin during the autumn and winter of 1905. 
 And taking intoaccount the balance of forces in our revolution, we mustknow that the certain sign of a genuinely widespread rise in the social tide, of a genuinely approaching revolutionary crisis, will inevitably be, in the Russia of today, a move-ment among the peasantry. 
 The liberal bourgeoisie in our country has entered upon the path of counter-revolution. 
 Only the brave Cherevanins can deny this—they and the cowardly editors of Golos Sotsial-Demokrata , who deny their own comrade-in-idea and -arms. 
 But if this counter-revolutionary nature of thebourgeois liberals-were to lead anyone to infer that theiropposition and discontent, their conflicts with the Black-Hundred landlords, or any rivalry and struggle of the different sections of the bourgeoisie among themselves, can be of no importance in the process of a new upsurge,this would be a tremendous mistake, and real Menshevisminside out. 
 The experience of the Russian revolution, likethe experience of other countries, proves beyond doubtthat where the objective conditions of a profound political crisis exist, the tiniest conflicts seemingly remote from the real breeding ground of revolution, can be of the mostserious importance as the reason, as the last straw, as aturning-point in public feeling, etc. 
 Let us recall that theZemstvo campaign and the liberals’ petitions of 1904were the forerunner of such an original and purely prole-tarian “petition” as that of January the Ninth. 
 When the Bolsheviks were arguing about the Zemstvo campaign, itwas not against its use for proletarian demonstrations,but against our Mensheviks wanting to confine thesedemonstrations to the Zemstvo assembly halls, against thedemonstrations before the Zemstvo people being declared the highest form of demonstration, and against plans for the demonstrations being drawn up with a view to prevent-ing the liberals from being frightened off. 
 Another exampleis the student movements. 
 In a country which is goingthrough an era of bourgeois-democratic revolution involv-ing a progressive accumulation of inflammable material, these movements may easily spark off events infinitely more far-reaching than a petty and local conflict over the manage-ment of affairs in a single branch of the state admin-istration. 
 Naturally, the Social-Democrats, who carry onthe independent class policy of the proletariat, will neveradapt themselves either to the student struggle or to new Zemstvo congresses, or to the conceptions of sections of the bourgeoisie which have fallen out among themselves;they will never ascribe independent importance to this family quarrel, and so on. 
 But it is precisely the Social-Democratic Party which is the party of the class leading the whole struggle for emancipation; it is unquestionably bound to make use of each and every conflict, to inflameit, to extend its importance, to link with it its own agita-tion for revolutionary slogans, to bring the news of theseconflicts to the broad masses, to induce them to take in-dependent and open action with their own demands, etc. 
 In France after 1793, a counter-revolutionary liberal bourgeoisie came into being and steadily grew; neverthelessthe conflicts and the struggle between its different sectionscontinued for another hundred years to serve in one way oranother as grounds for new revolutions in which the prole-tariat invariably played the part of the principal motive force, and which it carried through to the point of winning a republic. 
 Let us now consider the conditions for an offensive by this leading and advanced class in our bourgeois-demo-cratic revolution, the proletariat. 
 When the Moscow com-rades were discussing this question, they quite rightly underlined the root importance of the industrial crisis. 
 They collected extremely interesting material about thiscrisis, took into account the significance of the strugglebetween Moscow and Lodz, and amended in several respectscertain conceptions which had hitherto prevailed. 
 It re-mains only to be wished that this material should not wither away in the subcommittees of the Moscow Committee or the Moscow Area Committee, but should be worked overand published in the press for the whole Party to discuss. 
For our part we shall confine ourselves to a few remarks onthe presentation of the question. 
 The direction in which the crisis is moving is, by the way, a moot question (it is generally admitted that a very severe depression, bordering on a crisis, once more reigns in our industry after a verybrief and slight boom). 
 Some say that offensive economicstruggles by the workers are as impossible as before, andconsequently a revolutionary upswing is impossible inthe near future. 
 Others say that the impossibility of eco-nomic struggle impels a turn to a political struggle, and therefore a revolutionary upswing is inevitable in the nearfuture. 
 We think that both arguments have at their foundation the same error, which consists in simplifying a complex issue. 
 Undoubtedly the detailed study of the industrial crisis is of the greatest importance. 
 But it is also beyonddoubt that no data about the crisis, even if they were ide-ally accurate, can in reality decide the question of whethera rise of the revolutionary tide is at hand or not: becausesuch a rise depends on a thousand additional factors which it is impossible to measure beforehand. 
 It is indubitable that without the general groundwork of an agrarian crisisin the country, and depression in industry, profound polit-ical crises are impossible. 
 But if the general groundworkexists, that does not permit us to conclude whether thedepression will for a time retard the mass struggle of the workers in general, or whether at a certain stage of events the same depression will not push new masses and fresh forces into the political struggle. 
 To answer such a questionthere is only one way: to keep a careful finger on the pulseof the country’s whole political life, and especially thestate of the movement and of the mood of the mass of the proletariat. 
 Recently, for example, a number of reports from Party workers in different parts of Russia, in bothindustrial and agricultural areas, point to an undoubtedrevival of interest, an influx of fresh forces, a growinginterest in agitation, etc. 
 Comparing with this the begin-ning of mass unrest among the students, on the one hand, and the attempts to revive the Zemstvo congresses, on the other, we can record a certain turn in events, something that isbreaking up the complete stagnation of the last eighteenmonths. 
 How strong that turn is, whether it means theopening stage for a new epoch of open struggle, etc. 
, factswill show. 
 All that we can do now, and all that we must do in any case, is to intensify our efforts to strengthen the illegal Party organisation and multiply tenfold our agita-tion among the mass of the proletariat. 
 Only agitation canreveal on a broad scale the real state of mind of the masses,only agitation can make for close co-operation betweenthe Party and the whole working class, only making use for the purposes of political agitation of every strike, of every important event or issue in working-class life, ofall conflicts within the ruling classes or between one section of those classes or another and the autocracy, of every speech by a Social-Democrat in the Duma, of every new expression of the counter-revolutionary policy of the gov-ernment, etc. 
—only work like this can once again closethe ranks of the revolutionary proletariat, and provideaccurate material for judging the speed with which con-ditions for new and more decisive battles are coming to ahead. 
 To sum up. 
 A survey of the results of the revolution and the present situation show clearly that the objective tasksof the revolution have not been performed. 
 The shift to-wards Bonapartism in the autocracy’s agrarian policy andin its general policy both in the Duma and through themedium of the Duma, only sharpens and widens the con-tradiction between the Black-Hundred autocracy and the supremacy of the “wild landlord”, on the one hand, andthe requirements of the economic and social development ofthe whole country, on the other. 
 The police and kulak driveagainst the masses in the countryside is making the strugglethere more acute and politically conscious, bringing—so to speak—the struggle against the autocracy closer to the everyday and vital problems of every village. 
 The defenceof revolutionary-democratic demands in the agrarianquestion (confiscation of all landed estates) is exceptionallybinding a duty for the Social-Democrats at such a moment. 
The Black-Hundred-Octobrist Duma, which shows clearly in practice with what “constitution” the autocracy can “be reconciled” and which does not resolve a single questioneven within the narrowest limits of meeting the needs ofthe country’s economic development, is turning the struggle“for a constitution” into a revolutionary struggle against the autocracy . 
 The local conflicts of individual sections of the bourgeoisie among themselves and with the government, in these conditions, bring just such a struggle nearer. 
 Theimpoverishment of the countryside, depression in industry,a general feeling that there is no way out in the presentpolitical situation and that the notorious “peaceful consti-tutional” way is hopeless, all give rise more and more to new elements of a revolutionary crisis. 
 Our business now is not artificially to invent any new slogans (like that of“Down with the Duma” instead of “Down with the autoc-racy”), but to strengthen the illegal Party organisation (in spite of the reactionary outcry of the Mensheviks who are trying to bury it) and to develop wide revolutionary Social-Democratic agitation, which will bind the Partyfirmly together with the masses of the proletariat and mo-bilise those masses. 
 Proletary , No. 
 38, Published according November 1 (14), 1908 to the text in Proletary HOW PLEKHANOV AND CO. 
 DEFEND REVISIONISM The editorial comment in Golos Sotsial-Demokrata , i. 
e. 
, by Plekhanov and Co. 
, on our analysis of Comrade Mas-lov’s letter * in Proletary , No. 
 37, has now appeared as a separate supplement to No. 
 8-9 of Golos . 
 This “Comment”, in length about half a column of Pro-letary , merits the attention of Russian Social-Democrats, for it shows how petty factional interests have led Plekh-anov and Co. 
 to defend theoretical revisionism with the aid of the most unseemly sophistry. 
 Here are the facts. 
 “We are the most determined and absolutely irreconcil-able opponents of that re-examination (revision) of Marx-ism which is being performed under the reactionary in-fluence of the ideologists of the West-European bourgeoisieand whose object is to strike at the roots of the philosophi-cal, sociological, and economic doctrines of Marx and Engels. 
” That is the first sentence of the comment. 
 “Most determined and absolutely irreconcilable opponents”—could it be put more sharply? It would be hard to producea more grandiloquent formula for the promises of Plekhanov and Co. 
 But ... the trouble is that our “irreconcilable” enemies of revisionism resort to a very meaningful “but” in relation to Maslov (and Plekhanov and Co. 
 wrote this Comment precisely in connection with Maslov’s article, preciselyon the question of Maslov’s revisionism). 
 “But we have never been Marxist sectarians,” Plekhanov and Co. 
 declare, “and we realise only too well that one can differ from Marx and Engels on one question or another, *See pp. 
 247-54 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 and far from perverting their point of view or repudiating their method, remain true to both. 
” And this example is cited: Cunow, a Social-Democrat, had “partial differences with Engels” on the question of “the origin of the matriarchte”, but “only a morbid mind could accuse him of re-visionism on these grounds”. 
 “The foregoing holds good also for our attitude to Comrade Mas-lov’s views on Marx’s theory of rent. 
 We do not share this view”(Golos adds editorially: “Comrade Martynov made the specific reser-vation in No. 
 1 of Golos that he did not agree with Comrade Maslov’s amendment to the theory of absolute rent”), “but we do not regard itas revisionism.... 
” The reader can now follow the Plekhanov and Co. 
 trend of reasoning. 
 We are “absolutely irreconcilable opponentsof revisionism”, but—“we do not regard it [Maslov’s view on the theory of absolute rent] as revisionism”. 
 Revision-ism strikes at the roots of Marx’s doctrine, whereas Maslovdiffers with Marx on a partial issue—such is the line of de-fence taken by Plekhanov and Co. 
, and fully amplified by the reference to Cunow. 
 We ask the unbiased and thinking reader: is this not sophistry? Marx’s theory of absolute rent is declared a“partial issue”! Differences on his theory of rent are equated with the fact that Cunow had “partial differences” with Engels on the origin of the matriarchate! Plekhanov and Co. 
 apparently consider their Mensheviks little childrento be fed on such explanations. 
 One has to have no respectfor oneself or for one’s reader to play the clown like thisin discussing cardinal questions of principle. 
 Plekhanovand Co. 
 themselves begin their explanation with a solemn phrase in which revisionism is described as striking at the roots of Marx’s and Engels’s doctrine. 
 Very well. 
 But do Plekhanov and Co. 
 renounce that attitude in the case of Maslov? Yes or no? Or have Plekhanov and Co. 
 pennedtheir comment only to conceal their thoughts? Maslov has declared, in a number of articles and in sev-eral editions of his Agrarian Question , that (1) Marx’s theory of absolute rent is wrong; (2) the appearance ofsuch a theory is due to the “rough” nature of Volume III;(3) “diminishing returns” are a fact; (4) if the theory of absolute rent were correct and the “law of diminishing returns” wrong, the Narodniks in Russia and the revi-sionists the world over might prove to be right. 
 These were the four points which were held against Mas-lov in the Proletary article from which the whole polemic began. 
 But just see how Plekhanov and Co. 
 react. 
 First,they very modestly confine themselves to the question ofrent, i. 
e. 
, they maintain complete silence on all the other questions. 
 Is this not defence of revisionism? Are Plekha-nov and Co. 
 going to deny that the revision of Marx’s theoryabout the absurdity of both the law and “fact” of diminish-ing returns “is being performed under the reactionary in-fluence of the ideologists of the West-European bourgeoi-sie”? Secondly, the theory of absolute rent is equated with a partial question, with differences (“partial ”) over the origin of the matriarchate! This, gentlemen, is mental acrobatics! And you are using them to conceal your public defence of revisionism. 
 Foryou do not venture to state openly that recognition of ab-solute rent and negation of the law (or “fact”) of diminishing returns are not the “ roots ” of Marx’s economic doctrine on the agrarian question. 
 You defend your “own chap” byadjusting Marx to fit Maslov, by declaring that, in Maslov ’s case , the very roots of Marx’s theory are no more than a matter of “partial differences”. 
 You thereby confirm whatProletary (No. 
 33 *) said about the Menshevik theoretical Famusovs, ** who reward their household by agreeing to regard Marx’s economic theory as a “partial ” question and by putting it on a par with the question of the origin ofthe matriarchate. 
 Plekhanov and Co. 
 are “irreconcilable enemies of revi-sionism”—but if you are a Menshevik, don’t be afraid of these dread words! You can go to the Golos editors, knowing that for Mensheviks irreconcilability is very reconcilable—so much so that they are prepared to equate “uprootingof theory” with “differences over the origin of the matri-archate”. 
 Indulgences are being offered cheap, ladies andgentlemen, the sale is on! *See pp. 
 189-90 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 **See Note 95. 
— Ed. 
 But to continue. 
 We do not share Maslov’s views on rent, say Plekhanov and Co. 
 Martynov has already made a reservation to that effect, they add. 
 The “individual” whom the editors of Proletary described as “Maslov’s guardian angel” (i. 
e. 
, Plekhanov), has “often [listen to this!] pole-mised in the press [Golos italics] with Comrade Maslov on subjects closely related to our agrarian programme”. 
 That, literally, is what Plekhanov and Co. 
 say in their “Comment”! Learn from your editors how to write disclaimers, Men-shevik comrades. 
 Here you have a classical example. 
 Thepoint at issue is revisionism, and the controversy beganabout whether it was theoretical irreconcilability or only petty factional spite that made Plekhanov refer to several of his opponents, in the Party organ, as “Messrs. 
” But the “disclaimer” says: Plekhanov “often polemised in the press”with Maslov, but not about the rent theory and not about Maslov’s deviations from Marxian theory. 
 Is there a suitable parliamentary expression to describe such methods? Plekhanov, who is a lover of theoretical controversies, and is able, on occasion, to turn them into campaigns, has never , not once , polemised with Maslov about what constitutes his revisionism, i. 
e. 
, his negation of theabsolute rent theory, his describing it as a “rough note”,his defence of the “fact” of diminishing returns, or aboutwhether or not the Narodniks and revisionists might have proved to be right if Maslov had not refuted Marx. 
 Not once did Plekhanov argue on these points : he polemised about something quite different, namely, side issues, whichthe Menshevik Tartuffes * have now concealed behind a subtly hazy, deliberately misleading and diplomaticallyconfused phrase: “subjects closely related to our agrarian programme”! Brilliant, what? One cannot help congratulating Ple-khanov and Co. 
 on this opening defence of revisionism!One cannot help recalling politicians of the Clemenceaustamp. 
 Clemenceau, “irreconcilable” enemy of reaction,“often polemised” with it, but now, with reaction in the *Hypocrites: the character typifying this vice in Molière’s comedy of the same name. 
— Ed. 
 saddle, Clemenceau makes reservations and ... serves it. 
 Plekhanov is an “irreconcilable” enemy of revisionism. 
 Plekhanov has “often polemised” with Maslov (on every imaginable subject except Maslov’s revisionism). 
 And now Maslov has come out against Marx, repeating his old argu-ments against the Marxian theory in the pages of Golos , but Plekhanov and Co. 
 only make reservations ! Buy your indulgences, literary gentlemen, sign up with the Mensheviks! Tomorrow you will be given the oppor-tunity to refute Marx’s theory of value as well in the pagesof Golos —with the reservation in a comment by the editors that they “are not in agreement”.... 
 “Will not Proletary endeavour,” Plekhanov and Co. 
 ask in the same Comment, “‘to substantiate its remark’ about the connection between Maslov’s reflections on ab-solute rent and the programme which repudiates national-isation?” With the greatest of pleasure, dear “irreconcil-ables”. 
 Here is a brief first substantiation to start with: “Is it possible, while failing to understand Marx’s theory of absolute rent, to appreciate the role of private property in land as an obstacle to the development of the productive forces of capitalist society?” Consult Maslov, “irreconcilable” Plekhanov and Co. 
, and answer that question, which gives you the substantia-tion you want! Proletary , No. 
 38, Published according November 1 (14), 1908 to the text in Proletary TWO LETTERS We print in the present issue of Proletary a letter from an otzovist worker117 published in No. 
 5 of Rabocheye Znamya with a note from the editors saying that they do not share his views, and regard the letter as an article for discussion; and secondly a letter from Mikhail Tomsky,a St. 
 Petersburg worker, which our paper has just received. 
We print both letters in full. 
 We are well aware that theremay be malicious critics capable of wrenching separatepassages or phrases from their context, in one or other of these letters, and of grossly misinterpreting them, draw-ing conclusions from them remote from the intentionsof both authors, who were writing hurriedly, in the mostunfavourable conditions of secrecy. 
 But it is not worthtaking notice of such critics. 
 Any person who is seriouslyinterested in the state of the working-class movement and the condition of Social-Democracy in Russia at the present time will most probably agree with us that both lettersare remarkably characteristic of two tendencies among our class-conscious workers. 
 These two tendencies are revealingthemselves at every turn in the life of all the Social-Dem-ocratic organisations of St. 
 Petersburg and Moscow. 
 And as the third tendency, the tendency of Menshevism, which is frankly, and openly—or secretly and shamefacedly—burying the Party, is scarcely represented at all withinthe local organisations, we can say that the clash betweenthese two tendencies is the topic of the day in our Party. 
 That is why it is necessary to dwell in full detail on the two letters. 
 Both writers recognise that our Party is going through a crisis, not only of organisation but also of ideology and policy. 
 This is a fact which it would be stupid to hide. 
 We must clearly realise its reasons and understand the way to combat it. 
 Let us begin with the St. 
 Petersburg worker. 
 It is clear from his whole letter that there are two reasons for thecrisis, in his opinion. 
 On the one hand, the lack of Social-Democratic leaders from among the workers has had thisresult, that the almost mass desertion of the Party by the intellectuals has meant in many places a break-down of the organisation, incapacity to rally and close its ranks,grown thin through heavy repression and the apathy andfatigue of the masses. 
 On the other hand, in the author’sopinion, our propaganda and our agitation greatly exag-gerated “the present situation”, i. 
e. 
, they concentrated on questions of revolutionary tactics of the moment and not on the preaching of socialism, not on developing the Social-Democratic consciousness of the proletariat. 
 “Workersbecame revolutionaries, democrats, anything but social-ists”; and when the wave of the general democratic, i. 
e. 
,bourgeois-democratic movement subsided, they left the ranks of the Social-Democratic Party in very large numbers. 
 The St. 
 Petersburg worker links this view with a sharpcriticism of “groundless” “invention” of slogans, and with ademand for more serious propaganda work. 
 We consider that, in arguing against one extreme, the writer sometimes falls into the other; but by and large his point of view is unquestionably and completely correct. 
 It cannot be said that it was a “mistake” to make “wholecampaigns” out of topics of the day. 
 This is exaggerated. 
This means forgetting yesterday ’s conditions from the point of view of present-day conditions, and in fact the writer corrects himself by admitting that “the moment of direct actions by the proletariat is, of course, an exceptional question”. 
 Let us take two such actions, as far as possiblediffering in character and separated in time: the boycottof the Bulygin Duma in the autumn of 1905 and the elec-tions to the Second Duma at the beginning of 1907. 
 Coulda proletarian party, at all alive and vital, not concentrate its principal attention and main agitation at such a time on the slogans of the day? Could a Social-Democratic Partywhich was leading the masses of the proletariat at both these moments not concentrate its internal struggle on slogans which would determine the immediate action of the masses? To enter the Bulygin Duma or to thwart it? To go into the elections for the Second Duma in a blocwith the Cadets, or against the Cadets? It is sufficient toput these questions clearly, and to recall the conditionsof this not distant past, to shed all doubt about the reply. 
The fierce struggle for this or that slogan came about, not because of a “mistake” by the Party—no, it was aroused by the objective necessity for a swift and solid decision,in conditions when there was no unity in the Party, andwhen there were two lines of tactics, two ideological cur-rents in the Party, a petty-bourgeois opportunist one and aproletarian revolutionary one. 
 Neither should things be represented as though not enough was being done at the time for the propaganda of socialismand for spreading knowledge of Marxism among the masses. 
That would be untrue. 
 It is precisely at that period,from 1905 to 1907, that a mass of serious theoretical Social-Democratic literature—mainly translated—was dissemi-nated in Russia on a scale which will yet bear fruit . 
 We must not be sceptics, we must not impose our own impa-tience on the masses. 
 Such quantities of theoretical literature cast in so short a time among the virgin masses who hadbeen as yet scarcely touched by a socialist pamphlet, arenot digested all at once. 
 The Social-Democratic booklet is not lost. 
 It has been sown . 
 It is growing. 
 And it will bear its fruits—perhaps not tomorrow or the day after, but alittle later; we cannot alter the objective conditions inwhich a new crisis is growing—but it will bear fruit. 
 Nevertheless there is a profound truth in the main idea of the writer. 
 The truth consists in this, that in a bour-geois-democratic revolution there is inevitably a certain interweaving of proletarian-socialist and petty-bourgeois-democratic (both opportunist-democratic and revolution-ary-democratic) elements and tendencies. 
 There could be no first campaign of a bourgeois revolution in a capital-istically developing “peasant” country without the objec-tive fusion of certain proletarian sections and certain petty-bourgeois sections making itself felt. 
 And we are now goingthrough a process of necessary sorting-out, demarcation. 
 new crystallisation of the genuinely proletarian-socialist elements, their cleansing from those who had “ attached themselves to the movement ” (what the Germans call Mit-läufer ) only because of an “arresting” slogan on the one hand, or for the sake of a joint struggle with the Cadets for a“Duma with full powers”, on the other. 
 This sorting-out is taking place, in varying degrees, in both wings of the Social-Democrats. 
 One cannot get away from the fact that the ranks have been thinned both among the Mensheviks and among the Bolsheviks! We must notbe afraid to admit it. 
 There cannot be the least doubt, ofcourse, that the disintegration and demoralisation whichcan be seen in the ranks of the Right wing of the Party hasbeen avoided by the Left wing. 
 And this is not an accident. 
 Lack of stability in principles could not but facilitate collapse. 
 Events will ultimately show in practice where and how the greatest unity of organisation, proletarianloyalty, Marxist consistency have been preserved. 
 Experi-ence resolves such arguments—not words or promises orpledges. 
 The fact remains that disunity and wavering exist, and this fact calls for an explanation. 
 And there can be no other explanation than the necessity of a new sorting-out. 
 Let us illustrate this thought with small examples— the composition of the “prison population” (as the lawyerscall it), i. 
e. 
, the make-up of the people who are in prison, in exile, on hard labour or in emigration for political rea-sons. 
 That composition does correctly reflect the realityof yesterday, And can there be any doubt that the compo-sition of the “politicals” in places remote and not so remote,is distinguished at present by a tremendous variety ofpolitical views and moods, a hotchpotch and utter confu-sion? The revolution raised up to political life such deep-lying sections of the people, it often brought out on to thesurface so many casuals, so many “knights for a day”, somany newcomers, that it was quite inevitable that verymany of them should lack any kind of integrated outlookon the world. 
 Such an outlook cannot be shaped in the course of a few months of feverish activity—and the average “life expectancy” of most of the revolutionaries during thefirst period of our revolution probably does not exceed a few months. 
 Therefore a new sorting-out among the new social layers, the new groups, the new revolutionaries awak-ened by the revolution is quite inevitable. 
 And this sort-ing-out is going on. 
 For example, the burial of the Social-Democratic Party, which a number of Mensheviks areattempting, really means that these worthy gentry are burying themselves as Social-Democrats. 
 We certainly need not fear this sorting-out. 
 We should welcome it, we should help it. 
 Let there be snivelling from the flabby-minded, who here and there will begin shouting: Again struggle!Again internal friction! Again polemics! Our reply is thatwithout unremitting struggle no genuinely proletarian,revolutionary Social-Democracy has ever built up any-where. 
 With us in Russia it is building up even in the present difficult circumstances, and that process will be successful . 
 The guarantee for this is the whole capitalist development of Russia, the impact of international social-ism on us, the revolutionary tendency of the first campaignof 1905-07. 
 In the interests of this new sorting-out a strengthening of theoretical work is essential. 
 The “present moment” in Russia is precisely one in which the theoretical workof Marxism, its deepening and expansion, are dictated notby the state of mind of this or that individual, not by theenthusiasm of one or another group, and not even by theexternal police conditions which have condemned many to elimination from “practical work”—but by the whole ob-jective state of affairs in the country. 
 When the masses aredigesting a new and exceptionally rich experience of directrevolutionary struggle, the theoretical struggle for a revo-lutionary outlook, i. 
e. 
, for revolutionary Marxism, be-comes the watchword of the day. 
 Therefore the St. 
 Peters-burger is a thousand times right when he emphasises the necessity of deepening socialist propaganda, of workingout new questions, of encouraging and developing in everypossible way the study groups which are turning out realSocial-Democrats, Social-Democratic leaders of the masses,from amongst the workers themselves. 
 Here the role of the local Party cells —the very mention of which throws Dan and Co. 
 into epileptic convulsions—is exceptionally great,and the “professional revolutionaries” so hateful to the opportunist intellectuals are called upon to play a new and gratifying part. 
 But even here, while defending an absolutely correct idea, Mikhail Tomsky partly falls into the other extreme. 
Thus, he is wrong when he strikes out of the list of “seriousquestions” a study of the experience of the revolution dur-ing these three years, a study of the practical lessons of thedirect struggle of the masses, a summing up of the results of revolutionary-political agitation, etc. 
 Here, most prob-ably, there is simply a gap in the writer’s statement ofhis case, or minor mistakes due to the conditions in whichhis letter was hastily written. 
 This study, this summingup before the widest possible working-class audience, aremuch more important than the question of “local courts”, “local self-government” and suchlike “reforms” in Stolypin’s Russia about which bureaucrats and liberals love to chat-ter. 
 Such “reforms” under a Black-Hundred Duma and aBlack-Hundred autocracy are bound to be a farce. 
 But Mikhail Tomsky is absolutely right when he strongly objects to the “invention of slogans” in general, and such slogans as “down with the Duma” or “down with the Duma group” in particular. 
 He is a thousand times right whenhe contrasts this “floundering” with sustained Social-Dem-ocratic work of organisation, propaganda and agitationto strengthen the Social-Democratic Party, to reinforceits traditions so hateful to the opportunists, to maintain continuity in its work, to extend and stabilise the influence of this Party, the old Party (rage, editors of the opportu-nists’ Golos !) over the masses of the proletariat. 
 This brings us to the letter of the Moscow comrade and to criticism of its main point, namely, the far-famed “ot-zovism”. 
 We have repeatedly come out in Proletary against otzovism, ever since the time when a minority of the Bol-sheviks at the Moscow conference moved their well-knownresolution on this question (see Proletary , No. 
 31). 
 We now have before us, also in the name of a minority of the MoscowBolsheviks, a first systematic attempt to make out a casefor otzovism. 
 Let us look at it more closely. 
 The otzovist comrade starts from the correct premise that the objective tasks of a bourgeois-democratic revolu-tion in Russia have not been achieved, and that “the rev-olution has not been liquidated”. 
 But from this correct premise he draws wrong conclusions. 
 “To what should our Party adapt itself?” he asks. 
 “To years of stagnation, or to a new social upsurge?” And this is where he goes wrong. 
 Fromthe fact that the revolution has not been liquidated therefollows the inevitability of a new bourgeois-democraticupsurge—and only that. 
 But it does not follow from thiseither that this upsurge will wholly follow the pattern of the old grouping of elements among bourgeois democracy (a re-grouping might take much longer than we and ouropponent might like), or that a “social upsurge” (it werebetter to say: revolutionary upsurge) is impossible after,say, a year of stagnation. 
 We have gone through not less than a year of stagnation, and we are still experiencing it. 
 The otzovist comrade himself admits that “it is difficult and even impossible to say what will be that external cause which will set in motion ... the masses”. 
 Moreover, in invit-ing the Party “to adapt our tactics and organisation to it[to the revolution, i. 
e. 
, to a revolutionary upsurge], andnot to the political moment of stagnation we are going through”, the writer is himself proposing that the organi-sation should be reconstructed in keeping with the momentof stagnation, with the frantic police repressions, with theimpossibility of direct and immediate contacts betweenour committees and the masses of workers. 
 There is nodoubt that in conditions of an upsurge the author would not put forward such a plan of organisation or make it a key issue. 
 Consequently, he is in fact refuting his own state-ment of the question, he is, by his practice , making an amendment to his theory . 
 This happened because he stated his theoretical premise wrongly. 
 From the inevitabilityof a new upsurge there follows the necessity of maintaining both our old programme and the old revolutionary watch-words of all our mass work, the necessity of systematicallypreparing the Party and the masses for new revolutionarybattles. 
 But it does not follow from this whether the up-surge has or has not already begun, and whether we haveto “adapt ourselves” to its opening stage, or to its highest point. 
 In 1897, in 1901, and at the beginning of 1905, it was absolutely true that a new revolutionary upsurge wasinevitable (after the weak upsurges in the early sixties and late seventies); but at these three moments the revolutionary Social-Democrats knew how to adapt their tactics to the varying conditions of mounting crisis. 
 In 1897 we rejected the “plan” of a general strike, as a phrase—and we wereright. 
 In 1901 we did not make the slogan of insurrectionthe order of the day. 
 After January 9, 1905, both this slo-gan and a mass strike were correctly made the order of theday by the revolutionary Social-Democrats. 
 We do not wish to imply by any means that a new upsurge is bound (or even “likely”) to be as slow. 
 On the contrary, all thefacts and all the experience of revolutions in Europe obligeus to expect a tempo incomparably more rapid than inthe years 1897-1905. 
 The fact remains that at differentmoments of the upsurge the revolutionary Social-Democrats always put forward different slogans. 
 The mistake of the otzovist comrade is that he forgets this experience of revo-lutionary Social-Democracy. 
 Proceeding to our Duma group, the otzovist comrade starts out with the premise: “The natural fulfilment of theParty, its diplomatic representative, so to speak, is the Duma group. 
” This is wrong. 
 The author exaggerates the significance and the role of the parliamentary group. 
 Theauthor is extolling that role beyond measure, in Menshevikfashion: there must be something in what people say aboutextremes meeting! From the view that the parliamentarygroup is the “fulfilment” of the Party the Mensheviks ar-rive at the conclusion that it is necessary to adapt the Party to the group. 
 The otzovists arrive at the conclusion thatsuch a poor “fulfilment” of the Party is disastrous to theParty. 
 In both cases the premise is false. 
 Nowhere underany conditions, even in the most “ideal” bourgeois-demo-cratic republic, would revolutionary Social-Democracy agree to recognise its parliamentary group either as the “nat-ural fulfilment” of the Party or as its “diplomatic repre-sentative”. 
 Such a view is deeply fallacious. 
 We send dep-uties into bourgeois and bourgeois-Black-Hundred repre-sentative institutions not for diplomacy, but for a specialtype of subsidiary Party work, for agitation and propa-ganda from a particular rostrum. 
 Even when there is an “ideal” democratic franchise, the parliamentary group of aworkers’ party will always bear certain traces of the influ-ence of the general bourgeois circumstances in which the elections take place: for example, it will always be more “intellectual” than the Party as a whole, and therefore we shall never recognise the group to be the “fulfilment” of theParty. 
 The parliamentary group is not a general staff (ifI may be allowed to use a “military” simile side by sidewith the “diplomatic” one used by the writer), but rathera unit of trumpetors in one case, or a reconnaissance unit in another, or an organisation of some other auxiliary “arm”. 
 The otzovist comrade has transformed the parliamentary group from a subsidiary Party organisation into the “ful-filment” of the Party in order, by exaggerating the sig-nificance of the group, to attribute an entirely wrong characterto the activity of the contingent which we have sent into the bourgeois-Black-Hundred Duma. 
 But possibly the writer would not insist on this “fulfil-ment”. 
 Elsewhere in his article he says quite rightly: “Oneof the chief motives which induced the Party to take partin the elections was its hope of using the Duma rostrumfor propaganda and agitation. 
” That is true, and the writ-er’s objection to this true proposition displays his error most forcibly. 
 He writes: “Events, however, showed thatagitation in the Third Duma was of no value at all, firstbecause of the make-up of the group itself, and secondlybecause the masses are completely indifferent to all thatgoes on within the walls of the Taurida Palace. 
” We shall begin our examination of this proposition, which is so full of errors, from the end. 
 Agitation is of novalue at all because the masses are completely indifferent to all that goes on in the Duma. 
 What is this? What does itmean? It would appear, from this monstrous logic, that weshould have to “recall” not the parliamentary group but the “masses” for their “indifference”! For, as we all know, what is carried on in the Duma is the policy of the autoc-racy, the policy of support for tsarism by the Black-Hun-dred landlord and the Octobrist big capitalist, the policyof servility to tsarism on the part of the liberal Cadet gas-bag. 
 To be indifferent “to all that goes on within the walls of the Taurida Palace” means to be indifferent to the autoc-racy, to the whole internal and external policy of theautocracy! The writer has once again produced an argument in the spirit of Menshevism inside out. 
 “If the masses are indifferent, then the Social-Democrats should be indiffer-ent too. 
” But we are a party leading the masses to social-ism, and not at all one which follows every change in mood or depression in the spirits of the masses. 
 All Social-Demo-cratic parties have had to cope at times with the apathy ofthe masses, or their infatuation with some error, some fash-ion (chauvinism, anti-Semitism, anarchism, Boulangism, 118 etc. 
), but never do consistently revolutionary Social-Demo-crats yield to every changing mood of the masses. 
 One canand must criticise the bad policy of Social-Democrats inthe Third Duma, when they carry on a bad policy there;but to say that the agitation is of no value because of the complete indifference of the masses, means to talk in a non-Social-Democratic way. 
 Or maybe “the complete indifference of the masses” does not mean indifference to the policy of tsarism in general?In other words, the masses are indifferent to all that isgoing on within the walls of the Duma, but are not indiffer-ent, shall we say, to discussion of the question of street demonstrations, new strikes, insurrection, the inner life of revolutionary parties in general and the Social-Demo-cratic Party in particular? And that is just the trouble withthe writer: this, evidently, is just what he thinks, but isobliged not to put this obvious nonsense in so many words! If he really could say and prove that the masses at the present moment are not in the least indifferent to politics in general, but on the contrary have a much more livelyinterest in more active forms of politics, the question nat-urally would present itself otherwise. 
 If instead of a yearof political lull, of decline and disintegration in all Social-Democratic and all workers’ organisations, we had had a year of obvious interest of the masses in directly revolu-tionary forms of struggle, we should be the first to admitthat we were wrong. 
 Only the “parliamentary cretins” ofMenshevism, who hypocritically close their eyes to the ex-perience of the work of Marx, Lassalle, and Liebknecht inperiods of revolution, can stand always and everywhere for participation in any representative institution, without taking into account the conditions of the revolutionarymoment. 
 The question of taking part in the Third Duma or boycotting it, like every other political question, must be considered by Marxists concretely and not abstractly, taking into account the entire revolutionary situation as a whole, and not the pitiably barren argument that, “if rep-resentation exists then one must be represented”. 
 A livelyinterest of the masses in politics would mean that objectiveconditions existed for a growing crisis, that is, it wouldmean that a certain upsurge was already visible and when that upsurge gained strength the feeling among the masses would inevitably find expression in mass action . 
 On the latter question the otzovist comrade makes the following admission: “every change in its [the parliamen-tary group’s] activity is closely linked with a change inthe regime, which we are not at present strong enough to influence”.... 
 Why does the otzovist comrade consider that we are not only powerless at present to change the regimebut even to influence it? Evidently because, as a Social-Democrat, he has in mind solely action by the masses ofthe proletariat, and considers such action at present im-possible and any talk about it useless. 
 But look how, in doing so, he tries to shift the blame, i. 
e. 
, turns an argument which speaks against otzovism against us: “Break through the police barriers which separate the deputies from the masses,” writes the otzovist comrade,“make the parliamentary group come out more sharplyand strikingly, in a word, organically fuse its work with the life of the proletariat, and then the workers perhaps will see some positive value in it. 
 But as every change inits activity is closely linked with a change in the regime,which we are not at present strong enough to influence,all dreams of expanding and deepening the work of thegroup must be abandoned!” If the expansion and deepening of the work of the Duma group depends on “breaking through the police barriers”,why does the conclusion run that “dreams of improving thegroup must be abandoned”, and not that dreams of break-ing through police barriers must be abandoned? The writeris obviously illogical, and his argument should be amended in the following way: there must be unremitting work to improve all Party activity and all links of the Party withthe masses, and the result of this will inevitably be both that police barriers in general will be broken through, and in particular Party co-operation with the Duma group, Party influence on the group will become stronger. 
 It is as though the writer were demanding that we anti-otzovists should “break through police barriers”, and then perhapshe would agree to give up his otzovism. 
 But is it not clearthat thereby he is turning the real interconnection and in-terdependence of political phenomena upside down? Per-haps (we would reply) you might be right, Comrade Ot-zovist, if the mass could “at present” not only “influencethe regime” (every successful political demonstration willinfluence the regime) but also break through the barriers,i. 
e. 
, if the mass could now break through the “barriers” of the Third Duma, it might be useless, perhaps, for the revolutionary Social-Democrats to send their group into this Duma. 
 Perhaps. 
 But you yourself say that this is notthe case: you yourself agree that, in present circumstances,hard and serious preparatory work is still needed to turnthat possibility into reality. 
 “The composition of the group,” you say. 
 If recall were proposed with a view to changing the composition of the group, this argument might be worth while consideringin the light of whether the composition would be improvedby new elections upon the resignation of the present group. 
But the writer has nothing like this in mind. 
 He wantsnot only to recall the Duma group, but to abolish any rep-resentation of Social-Democracy in the Third Duma, declaring participation in the latter to be a mistake. 
 Fromthis point of view to advance “the composition of the group”as a justification for otzovism is the most unforgivabletimidity and lack of faith for a Social-Democrat. 
 OurParty succeeded in making the Black Hundreds choose our Party candidates, the Social-Democrats, from among the worker-electors. 
 119 Are we then to declare that it is hopeless for these Party workmen to be able to expoundtheir socialism, simply and plainly, from the Duma ros-trum? Are we to haul down the flag after a few months ofstruggle against bourgeois “well-informed persons” 120 (see the excellent description of the harm they do, in the letter about the Duma group published in this issue)? Must wedeclare that our Party is incapable, in a period of temporary lull and stagnation, of putting forward worker-Social-Democrats who are able to publicly expound their social-ism? That is not politics but nervousness. 
 Of course our Duma group itself is mostly to blame for this, because itis precisely by its serious mistakes, and by those mistakesalone, that it drives those who are resentful of it intootzovism. 
 But we will not allow this justified resentmentto lead us into a wrong policy. 
 No. 
 We must and shall work hard and persistently to bring the Party and the Duma group closer together, to improve the group itself. 
We shall not forget that in the experience of internationalSocial-Democracy there were examples of much moreprolonged and much more acute struggle between the groupand the Party than we have had during the Third Duma. 
 Remember the Germans. 
 Under the Anti-Socialist Law matters went so far that the parliamentary group made anumber of the most deplorable anti-Party opportunistmistakes (voting for the subsidy to the shipping company,etc. 
). 
 The Party had its weekly central organ abroad, andregularly imported it into Germany. 
 The organisation of the German Social-Democrats at that time, in spite of furious police persecution, in spite of the fact that thesituation was less revolutionary, for a number of objectivereasons, than in present-day Russia, was incomparablybroader and stronger than the present organisation of ourParty. 
 And the German Social-Democratic Party fought a long war against its parliamentary group, and won it. 
 The ridiculous supporters of the “youth”, who spent theirtime on hysterics instead of on improving the parliamentarygroup, came, as we all know, to a very bad end. 
 And thevictory of the Party expressed itself in the subordinationof the parliamentary group. 
 With us in Russia the Party’s struggle with the Duma group to correct the latter’s errors is only just beginning. 
We have not yet had a single Party conference telling thegroup firmly and clearly that it must correct its tacticsin such-and-such definitely specified respects. 
 We havenot as yet a central organ appearing regularly, following every step of the group on behalf of the whole Party and giving it direction. 
 Our local organisations have done stillvery, very little in that field of work—agitation among the masses on the subject of every speech of a Social-Dem-ocrat in the Duma, explaining every mistake in this or that speech. 
 Yet we are being asked to give it all up, to declare the struggle hopeless, to renounce use of the Dumarostrum at times like the present of 1908. 
 Once again,that is not politics but bad nerves. 
 No striking acts, you say. 
 About these “striking acts” one must distinguish two things: first, the poor state of information in the Party and, secondly, a most serious mistake of principle in the way the very question of strik-ing acts is put. 
 On the first question it should be said that so far all who wanted to criticise the group in a business-like wayhave pointed out a number of unquestionably serious mis-takes (the declaration; the voting of millions to Schwartz; the consultation with the Popular Democrats; the recogni-tion of religion as a private matter for the Party ; the lack of any statement on the interpellation of the government onOctober 15, 1908; the lack of any clear criticism of theCadets, etc. 
). 
 To hush up these mistakes as the Mensheviks do—they find everything for the best, with the sole excep-tion of Chilikin’s speech—is simply disgusting. 
 We shouldnot hush up these mistakes but thrash them out publicly,in our local and non-local press, at every meeting, in agi-tational leaflets spread among the masses after every speech. 
We have done very little as yet in the way of practical criticism of the group, and acquainting the proletarian masses with such criticism. 
 We must, all of us everywhere, setto work in this respect. 
 And when we do, we shall see thatthere are a number of speeches by the group, and particu-larly formulas for calling next business, drawn up on thesuggestions of representatives of the Central Committee and in agreement with these representatives, which contain a correct exposition of the programme of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, which are printed in the Reports of the Duma proceedingsand in the supplement to Rossiya 121—and of which not one-hundredth has been used as yet by us in our mass agi-tation. 
 Needless to say, one should criticise the group, it is dishonest to hush up its mistakes. 
 But all of us have also to strengthen our organisations in the local areas, anddevelop the agitation to make use of every act by the Duma group. 
 Only the combination of the two forms of work is activity really worthy of consistent revolutionary Social-Democrats, and only this combination will help us to over-come “the moment of stagnation” and hasten the arrival ofa new upsurge. 
 To proceed. 
 In emphasising “the absence of striking acts”, the writer says that “the impression has been createdon whom? on some Mitläufers who don’t understand the ABC of Marxism?] that the Social-Democrats have accepted the existing situation, and are thinking of peaceable culturalwork. 
 The existence of the group has become a demonstra-tion, as it were, that the revolution has been buried—ifnot in words then ... in practice. 
 Wrong though that opin-ion may be, we can refute it not by arguments but by facts. 
” And the only “fact” which the writer proposed as a means of “reconstructing” all the tactics of “emphasising” the Social-Democratic attitude to the Duma in the eyes of the masses,is recall of the group! It would appear that to recallthe group from the Duma is regarded as a “fact” whichrefutes the “burial of the revolution”, and as a “striking act” which emphasises the new tactics! Our reply is that the writer misunderstands the general significance of “striking acts” and “striking” slogans. 
 Whenwe Bolsheviks were carrying on a boycott of the BulyginDuma in 1905, the slogan was right not because it was“striking” but because it accurately expressed the objective situation: the existence of an upsurge, which tsarism was trying to divert by promising a consultative Duma. 
 Whenin the summer of 1906 we released the slogan of “an executivecommittee of the Left to support insurrection and no supportto the demand of a Cadet Ministry”, this slogan was rightnot because it was “striking”, but because it accurately expressed the objective situation; events proved that the Cadets were hindering the struggle, that their secret negotia-tions with Trepov in June 1906 expressed the manoeuvresof the government, that the real fight took place, and was bound to take place, on a different field, after the Dumahad been dissolved, namely, on the field of armed struggle (Sveaborg and Kronstadt, as the culmination of the soldiers’ and peasants’ mutinies). 
 When in 1907 we were fightingfor the slogan of no bloc with the Cadets, but a bloc against the Cadets, this slogan was correct not because it was “strik-ing”, but because it accurately expressed the objective conditions of the moment. 
 The elections in St. 
 Petersburg, and the sum total of voting and debate) in the SecondDuma, proved that the “Black-Hundred menace” was afiction, and that in reality the struggle was against the Ca-dets and the reactionaries together, not together with theCadets against the reactionaries. 
 Undoubtedly some people joined us during the revolution not because they understood the Marxist criterion of the correctness of Social-Democratic slogans and tactics, butonly because they were “striking”. 
 That today, when thewave has ebbed, there remain and will remain only realMarxists, does not frighten us but rejoices us. 
 And we invite the otzovist comrade to think carefully over his argument that the burial of the revolution must be dis-proved not by words but by facts—and therefore let us recall the Duma group! His argument is absolutely wrong. 
 Torecall the group by way of emphasising the fact that the revolution has not been buried, means the burial of those “revolutionaries” who are capable of applying such a policy. 
 For that kind of “revolutionariness” expresses confusionand impotence in that painful, difficult and slow workwhich is dictated “at present” by objective conditions, andwhich cannot be simply dismissed or passed over in silence. 
 In conclusion we would point out that the otzovist com-rade himself, at the end of his letter, proposes a five-point plan of immediate work which correctly expresses the tasksof the moment and refutes his own wrong tactics. 
 We say again: the practice of the otzovist comrade is better than his theory. 
 He is unquestionably right when he says thata strong illegal organisation is necessary. 
 He will not in-sist, probably, on the utterly impracticable “appointment” of local Committee-men by the Central Committee. 
 Weshould not forget that the professional revolutionary fromamong the Social-Democratic workers is coming to takethe place or rather coming to the aid of the professionalrevolutionary from among the intellectuals (furious though this makes the Mensheviks, it is a fact); consequently the new illegal organisation will not entirely resemble, andmust not entirely resemble, the old one. 
 We think likewise that the expression “to break the Party cells away from each other” in the last sentence of the first point is an awk-ward phrase which has slipped in by accident, and which it would be quite wrong to find fault with. 
 After all, aSocial-Democratic illegal organisation will not break awaybut bring together the local Party cells which at presentare separated from each other. 
 The otzovist comrade isquite right when he emphasises the special importance of socialist propaganda and the opinion poll method of agi-tation. 
 “Everyday links between the masses and the Party”,“drawing the masses into discussion of our agitation slo-gans”—these are the real topics of the day . 
 Recognition of such topical questions shows better than any argument, and in spite of all “invented” slogans (as M. 
 Tomsky aptly puts it) that the course of events confronts all of us, both anti-otzovists and otzovists, with one essential practical task, one “slogan” of revolutionary Social-Democracy. 
 Thisis the ideological strengthening of socialism, the organi-sational strengthening of the illegal workers’ party withleaders from among the workers themselves, the develop-ment of many-sided Social-Democratic agitation among the masses. 
 This work, when tackled more and more ener-getically, will unite us all. 
 It will pull together, discipline,correct our Duma group better than dozens of mere ulti-matums. 
 It will vitalise our work. 
 It will resurrect theatmosphere of vigorous revolutionary activity. 
 It will teach us to gauge exactly the rise of the tide and to determine its symptoms. 
 It will scatter like the dust all the dead,thought-up, “invented” slogans of otzovism! Proletary , No. 
 39, Published according November 13 (26), 1908 to the text in Proletary THE AGRARIAN DEBATES IN THE THIRD DUMA Nearly a month of agrarian debates in the Third Duma has provided exceptionally valuable material for the study of the present state of the agrarian question, the lessons of the revolution and the tasks of the proletariat. 
 We shalltry and draw the main conclusions from this material. 
 Thespeakers fall of themselves into four groups—the Rights,the Cadets, the peasants and the Social-Democrats. 
 Thedifferences between the “Right” in the narrow sense of the word and the Octobrists completely fade out. 
 The peas-ants unquestionably act as a single political tendency onthe agrarian question, the difference between the Right-wing peasants and the Trudoviks being only a distinctionof shadings within a single tendency. 
 Let us analyse theposition which each of these groups took up. 
 (The figures in brackets refer to the pages of the verbatim reports in the supplement to Rossiya . 
) As could have been expected of Black-Hundred “parlia-mentarians”, the Rights and the Octobrists tried to coverup the substance of their agrarian policy with the litter ofjuridical casuistry and archive rubbish, holding forth on the relations between the law of November 9, 1906, and Article 12 of the General Statute on the Peasantry (grantingthe peasants, after redemption, the right to demand a sep-arate piece of land as their private property), then onArticle 165 of the Statute of Land Purchase, etc. 
 Posingas a “liberal”, Shidlovsky tried to prove that the legisla-tion of Count D. 
 Tolstoy on inalienability of allotments, etc. 
, contradicted the “spirit” of 1861, whereas the lawof November 9, 1906, corresponded to that spirit. 
 All this was sheer humbug, calculated to throw dust into the eyes of the peasantry and obscure the real issue. 
 To a consider-able extent the Cadets, as we shall see later, rose to the bait of the Black Hundreds; but for us socialists it is suffi-cient to point out in a few words what a thick layer of bureau-cratic dust must be brushed off the speeches of the Shid-lovskys, the Lykoshins and other lackeys of the Black-Hundred tsarist gang to see the real content of their agrar-ian policy. 
 Mr. 
 Lvov the First, who, we believe, calls himself a Peaceful Renovator, but who in fact is a realBlack Hundreder with the manners and graces of a Mr. 
Struve, expressed this content more clearly than others. 
“Among the peasantry,” said this servant of the landlords,“two elements have emerged: the helpless individual and the lawless mob ( applause from the Right and the Centre ).... 
 Such a condition of the masses is a menace to the lawful[meaning, landlords’] state ( applause from the Right and the Centre ).... 
 The land must belong to all who toil, the land like the air and water; we have come here to get landand freedom. 
” This was the dominating voice. 
 And this voice, snatched directly from those superstitions and prejudices which are rooted in the peasant mass, this voicepointed out to us that superstitious conception of author-ity which can take from some and give to others.... 
 “Letus recall what was said in this building [continued Mr. 
Lvov remembering previous Dumas]. 
 It is painful for me to recall this, but I will say, I cannot but say, what was discussed in the agrarian commission. 
 Yes, when eventhe question of leaving at least vegetable allotments ororchards inviolate met with the strongest opposition, metthe most violent resistance, and was carried only by thesmallest majority; when it was suggested that all land transactions should be stopped, not only mortgages in the Bank of the Nobility, not only sales to the Peasant Bank,but buying and selling land itself, even gifts and inheritanceof land—then obviously one trembled, gentlemen, tremblednot for the interests of the landlord, but trembled for thecondition and the destiny of the state ( applause of the Centre and the Right . 
 Exclamation : “Bravo! ”). 
 On such a foundation it is impossible to build a capitalist, a modernstate” (293). 
 The landlord state “trembled” for its existence, “trem-bled” at the “voice” (and movement) of the peasant masses. 
 These gentlemen cannot even imagine any capitalism that is not based on the preservation of landlordism, i. 
e. 
, feudal-ist landownership. 
 The “educated” Lvovs have not evenheard that capitalism develops most widely, freely andrapidly when all private property in land is completelyabolished! For agitation among the masses, the study of extracts from the speeches of Shidlovsky, Bobrinsky, Lvov, Goli-tsyn, Kapustin and Co. 
 is absolutely necessary. 
 Up till nowwe have seen the autocracy almost exclusively when it wasgiving orders, and sometimes, rarely, publishing statementsin the spirit of Ugryum-Burcheyev. 
 122 Now we have the open defence of the landlord monarchy and the Black-Hundred “constitution” by the organised representativesof the ruling classes, and this defence provides very valu-able material for the awakening of those sections of thepeople who are politically unconscious or indifferent. 
 Letus briefly note two particularly important circumstances. 
 In the first place, when setting out their political programme, the Right constantly bring forward to their audiencethe living enemy against whom they are fighting. 
 Thisenemy is the revolution. 
 “Fear” of the revolution, whichwas so clearly expressed by the stupid Lvov, is no less clear-ly manifest in all who at every step recall the recent past with hatred, anger, and grinding of teeth. 
 This direct posing of all questions on the basis of counter-revolution , this subordination of all arguments to one principal and root argument, the struggle against revolution, containswithin itself a profound truth. 
 And it makes the speechesof the Right incomparably more valuable material, both for the scientific analysis of the present situation and for purposes of agitation, than the speeches of the half-heartedand cowardly liberals. 
 The unrestrained fury with whichthe Right attack the revolution, the end of 1905, the risings,the first two Dumas, shows better than any long speechesthat the protectors of the autocracy see before them a living enemy, that they do not consider the struggle with the revolution ended, that the revival of the revolution loomsbefore them every minute as a very real and immediate threat. 
 You don’t fight a dead enemy in this way. 
 You don’t hate a dead enemy like this. 
 The simple-minded Mr. 
 Balakleyev naïvely expressed this common spirit of all the speeches of the Right. 
 Saying that of course the ukase ofNovember 9 could not he rejected, since it expressed theroyal will, he declared at the same time: “Gentlemen ofthe Imperial Duma! We are living at a time of revolutionwhich, in my profound conviction, has far from ended yet” (364). 
 Mr. 
 Balakleyev fears the “revolutionary origin” of the law of November 9; he is afraid it may inflame anew struggle. 
 “We are going through a painful crisis,” hesaid, “and how it will end no one knows. 
 Imagination drawsthe most sombre pictures, but our duty is not to supportsedition and discord among the people. 
” The second, very important, circumstance refers to the economic, and particularly the agrarian, programme ofthe Right. 
 This is their defence of the private property inland of the peasants , a defence which is the keynote of all their speeches, including that of the arch-priest Mitro-fanushka (Bishop Mitrofan), who spoke immediately after the reporter, evidently seeking to frighten the democratic but downtrodden village priests. 
 Comically trying to over-come in himself the habit of playing the religious sim-pleton and of using the language of the seminary (“the villagecommune is a primordial phenomenon”), he mouthed suchphrases as “Life develops in the direction of a greater and greater individuality of personality”; “We must recognise as useful the new pattern of life among our peasants onthe model of the West-European farmers” (69). 
 It may be asked, why do the class of landlords and the class of capitalists so energetically defend, both in theSecond and in the Third Dumas, the private property in land of the peasants ? Only because such is the “latest gov-ernment instruction”? Of course not. 
 This instruction it-self has been suggested and prompted by the Council ofthe United Nobility. 
 123 The landlords and capitalists know perfectly well what enemy they have to fight, theyrealise only too well that the revolution has bound up the victory of the landlords’ interests with the victory of pri-vate property in land in general; the victory of peasantinterests with the abolition of private property in land in general, both landlords’ and peasants’ property. 
 The com-bination of private property in the allotment lands with social property in the expropriated landlords’ estates is a poor invention of the Cadets and the Mensheviks. 
 In reality the struggle is whether the landlords will be the builderof the new Russia (this is impossible, except on the basisof private property in land of all kinds), or whether it willbe the peasant masses (this is impossible in a semi-feudal country without destroying private property both in land-lords’ and in allotment lands). 
 Let us go on to the Cadets. 
 Their speeches are distinguished from those of the Right and those of the Left by astriving to reconcile the irreconcilable, to straddle twostools. 
 Only in that part of Mr. 
 Milyukov’s speech in which he spoke as a historian , and not as a Cadet , have we a splen-did selection of facts on the history of the Council of theUnited Nobility—a summary which does credit to anydemocrat . 
 But on the whole Shingaryov, Berezovsky, Mi-lyukov, Bobyansky and Rodichev swallowed the bait ofthe Black-Hundred Mr. 
 Shidlovsky, and with enormous zeal stuffed the heads of their audience with juridical casuistry, poured out phrases about “justice” according toRoman law (“for greater show” Rodichev, even inserted theLatin word aequitas ! “We” did learn something in the uni-versity after all!), sank to contemptible boot-licking(Mr. 
 Sningaryov certified his “respect” for Stolypin’s lackey Lykoshin, and tried to prove that compulsory alienation of land was practised in countries where “the institution ofprivate property is most sacredly observed”). 
 All the Cadetspeeches objecting to the law of November 9 struck a noteof “caution”. 
 We Bolsheviks were accused of denigratingthe Cadets by calling them liberal landlords. 
 As a matter of fact, they are worse. 
 They are liberal placemen . 
 One can-not imagine a greater corruption of the democratic conscience of the masses than this pronouncing in the Duma, by theparty of so-called “democrats”, of speeches which blunt the edge of the struggle, which preach the “caution” of bureaucrats, which basely praise that plundering and en-slavement of the peasants by the feudalist landlords known as “the Great Reform” of 1861! To attack Stolypin for the “indiscreetness” of his agrarian policy means to become a prostitute, to offer oneself for the post of such instruments of this policy as would be able to do the very same job “discreetly”, i. 
e. 
, carry out that same landlords’ policy under the false flag of “constitutionaldemocracy”, carry it out not by force alone but also by de-ceiving the peasants. 
 Here is one of the numerous Cadetstatements which reveal precisely this sense of what theywere saying. 
 Mr. 
 Berezovsky, whose speech was highly approved by the Cadet leader Mr. 
 Milyukov (he called it “excellent”), declared: “I am profoundly convinced that this Bill [the Cadet Land Bill] is far more advantageous for the landowners aswell [not only for the peasants]: and I say this, gentlemen,knowing agriculture, engaged in it all my life and owning land myself. 
 For cultured farming the Bill of the party of people’s freedom would undoubtedly be more useful thanthe present system. 
 One should not seize on the bare fact ofcompulsory alienation, get bitter about it, and call it anact of violence; one should look at what is proposed in ourBill, assess what it amounts to, and consider how this com-pulsory alienation is to be carried out [golden words, Mr. 
 Berezovsky. 
 Can you have become a Bolshevik?]. 
 Takethe Bill of the 42 members of the First Duma; it containedonly [that’s just it!] recognition that it was necessary inthe first instance to subject to compulsory alienation thoselands which were not being exploited by the owners them-selves. 
 Then the party of people’s freedom supported the formation of local committees, which at a given time wereto ascertain what lands should be subject to compulsoryalienation, what should not be subject to it, and how muchland the peasants needed to be satisfied. 
 These committeeswere composed in such a way that half the members should be peasants and half non-peasants. 
 [Speak out, Mr. 
 Be-rezovsky, don’t be ashamed! The truth can’t be hiddenanyhow: thanks to the obligatory appointment of a “neutral”chairman by the landlords’ government, the landlordswould always have a safe majority in the committees overthe peasants—see Kutler’s draft in Volume II of the Cadet Agrarian Question . 
] In view of this, the general concrete work in the localities, would of course havemade it clear how much land was available for compulsory alienation, how much land the peasants needed and, finally, the peasants themselves would see how far their just demands could be satisfied. 
 Then all this would go through the Duma and the Council of State [just so!] and after being dealtwith by them [i. 
e. 
, after a second whittling-down of the“reform” by the new landlord-bureaucrat majority!] wouldpass up for the royal sanction [recall the consistent reductionof the size of allotments by similar high authorities in 1861]. 
 The result of this systematic work would undoubtedly have been the genuine satisfaction of the real needs of the popu-lation and, linked with this, pacification and preservationof cultured estates, which the party of people’s freedomnever wished to destroy, except in case of extremenecessity” (143). 
 Mr. 
 Berezovsky in October 1908 admitted everything the Bolsheviks had said in the summer of 1906 about theCadets’ Land Bill! In the First Duma the Cadets were pub-licly advertising the democratic exterior of their reform,while proving in private conversations with Trepov and hishangers-on its favourable character for the landlords. 
 In the Third Duma the Cadets publicly advertise the landlord character of their reform, while demonstrating its demo-cratic character in conversations held secretly from thepolice with those few simpletons who can still listen tograndmother’s tales. 
 The two-faced Janus turns his “faces”now one way, now another, according to the direction from which the wind blows. 
 The “democrats” fall so low that they try to prove to the Black-Hundred diehards howinoffensive their actions and programmes are at a time ofrevolution! Compare with this the speeches of the peasants. 
 Take a typical Right-wing peasant, Storchak. 
 He begins his speech by repeating in full the words of Nicholas II about “the sacred rights of property”, the impermissibility oftheir “infringement”, etc. 
 He continues: “May God grantthe Emperor health. 
 He spoke well for the whole people”(295). 
 And he finishes: “But if His Majesty said that thereshould be justice and order, then, of course, if I am sitting on 3 dessiatines of land, and next to me there are 30,000 dessiatines, that is not order and justice” (296)! Comparethis monarchist with the monarchist Berezovsky. 
 One is an ignorant peasant, the other an educated almost-Euro-pean. 
 The first is as innocent as a babe unborn and amazingly ignorant politically. 
 The link between the monarchy and “order”, i. 
e. 
, the disorder and injustice which protect theowners of 30,000 dessiatines, is not clear to him. 
 The secondis a skilled politician who knows all the ins and outs toWitte, Trepov, Stolypin and Co. 
, and who has studied theniceties of European constitutions. 
 The first is one of those millions who toil and moil all their life on 3 dessiatines, and whom economic realities drive into mass revolutionary struggle against the holders of 30,000 dessiatines. 
 Thesecond is one of the tens of thousands or at most one hundredthousand landlords who wants “peacefully” to keep his“cultured estate” by throwing a sop to the peasant. 
 Is it not clear that the first can make a bourgeois revolution in Russia, abolish landlordism and set up a peasant republic (however much this word may frighten him now)? Is itnot clear that the second cannot but hinder the struggle of the masses without which the victory of the revolutionis impossible? Those people who still cannot for the life of them un-derstand what “the revolutionary-democratic dictatorshipof the proletariat and the peasantry” means, should givesome thought to this! Storchak’s agrarian programme is that same Land Bill of the 42 peasant deputies in the Third Duma about which we wrote in Proletary , * No. 
 22. 
 Outwardly very modest, this Bill is more Left than the Cadet Bill, as the Cadets themselves admit. 
 By demanding discussion of the reformunder which the peasantry is to have land allotted to it bylocal committees elected by a democratic vote, this Billin effect is a revolutionary document—since the discussion of land reform in the local areas by genuinely democratic elected institutions is absolutely incompatible with themaintenance in present-day Russia of the rule of thetsar and of landlordism. 
 And the fact that, in a Black-Hundred Duma elected on the basis of an electoral lawmanipulated in favour of the landlords on the instructions of the united nobility, and at a time when the most violent *See present, edition, Vol. 
 13, pp. 
 458-59. 
— Ed. 
 reaction and unbridled White Terror are rampant, 42 peasants put their signatures to such a Bill in such a Duma demonstrates the revolutionary state of mind of the peasant mass in Russia of today better than any argument. 
 Let theopportunists strive to prove the necessity of an alliancewith the Cadets, the necessity of the proletariat coming closertogether with the bourgeoisie in the bourgeois revolution:class-conscious workers will only be strengthened in their conviction, after reading the debates in the Third Duma, that a victorious bourgeois revolution in Russia is impos-sible without a joint onset by the worker and peasant masses,in spite of the waverings and betrayals of the bourgeoisie. 
 If Storchak, and the deputies who at bottom share his views—the priest Titov, Andreichuk, Popov IV and Ni-kityuk—express the revolutionary temper of the peasant mass unconsciously, spontaneously, afraid themselves notonly to speak out, but even to think out what their wordsand proposals imply, the Trudoviks in the Third Dumaexpress the spirit of the peasants’ mass struggle outspokenly. 
Most valuable in this respect are the speeches of the Tru-dovik peasants, who state their views forthrightly, convey-ing the moods and aspirations of the masses with amazingprecision and liveliness, mixing up programmes (somespeak of their sympathy with the Bill of the 42 peasants,others of sympathy with the Cadets), but all the morestrongly expressing what lies deeper than any programmes. 
 Take Kropotov, deputy from Vyatka Gubernia. 
 “My electors told me that the law of November 9 is a landlords’law.... 
 My electors put questions like this: Why is thisbeing done by force? ... Why are our lands handed over tothe rural superintendents 124? ... The electors mandated me to say: You tell them in the Duma that we can’t go on liv-ing like this.... 
 And as soon as they start applying it [the law of November 9] in our district the new landlords, asour peasants call them, find their houses on fire” (71).... 
 “All they care about is to reward the landlords.... 
 Why isit in the public interest to take the last piece away fromthe poor man and give it to those who, as I put it, managed just by chance, under the law written by the government, to keep their land? Isn’t it in the public interest that peopleshould be forced to cultivate land that is lying idle—the landlords’ land, state, crown and monastery lands? ... 11 rubles 50 kopeks per dessiatine comes in from the peasant, and if, gentlemen, we were fair and imposed this tax equally on all, the land would really prove to be in the hands ofthe peasants, and no compulsory alienation would be needed. 
To be fair, there should be a single tax on the land, andthen it will be in the hands of the working masses, and thenno one will be envious: whoever doesn’t want to work, won’t pay” (73).... 
 What strength as yet untried in struggle, what a striving towards struggle is contained in this naïve speech! To avoid“compulsory alienation”, Kropotov in effect proposes a measure which is tantamount to confiscation of the landed estates and nationalisation of all the land! That the “single tax” which this adherent of Henry George 125 proposes is tantamount to nationalisation of all the land, Kropotovdoes not realise; but that he is expressing the true aspira-tions of millions —of this there can be no shadow of doubt. 
 Take deputy Rozhkov, who begins by saying: “It is difficult for me, a village muzhik, gentlemen, to speak from this rostrum” (77). 
 “The peasants expected from theDuma not the law of November 9, not a law which dividesamongst us land we haven’t got, but a law under which firstour plots of land would have increased, and then divisionwould have begun. 
 The main principles of such a law were submitted on February 20, signed by 47 peasants, but up till now nothing has been done about it.... 
 The ruralsuperintendents are bosses of the land ... but the real mastersof that land are tied down by a reinforced state of security.... 
 We have no definite law in the country for purchase of landin order to make use of it ... which would say: don’t buy it for use.... 
 And lo and behold, on September 16, 1907, the Stavropol land committee decided that land could be boughtonly by a man possessing draught animals and agriculturalimplements. 
 And here, gentlemen, in this very building,nearly half are landlords holding in bondage these menwhom the land committee won’t allow to buy land. 
 Gen-tlemen, we know that these people are working for 60-70 rubles a year.... 
 This poor toiler is doomed for ever to be aworker for the landlord, an eternal drudge for other people, while behind his back his master will consider himself a cultured person. 
” Tomilov: “The only way out ... in our opinion, is this: the land should be redistributed at once, in all the villagecommunes of Russia, on the basis of a census similar tothose previously carried out; this census should establishthe number of male persons as on November 3, 1905. 
 “The fond dream of the peasant is to get land and freedom, but we have heard that so long as the present government is in power, landed property is inviolable. 
 ( Voices in the Centre : “Private property . 
”) Yes, private, noblemen’s property. 
 ( Voices in the Centre : “And yours too . 
”) As far as we are concerned, we are prepared to give up our allotments[there it is, the peasant Vendée , with which the so wise Plekhanov and Co. 
 were frightening us at Stockholm, in the event that all the land was nationalised 126!]. 
 I will say that the peasants in any village are willing to giveup their allotments, unit for unit, and to become equal. 
The statement of the representative of the Ministry amountsto this, that so long as power has not passed into the hands of the peasantry and the people generally, the peasants will not see either the land or political liberties. 
 Thankyou for your frankness, though we knew it already” (149).... 
 “And in 1905, when, under the leadership of the conscious elements, the peasants united together ( noise and laughter on the Right ) and said their grim word ... then the nobility began to say ‘Why, you’ve got land, you’ve got your allot-ments. 
 Go and divide up that little bone...’. 
” Petrov III: “Remember, gentlemen, the times of the reign of Alexei Mikhailovich, and the protest of the peasantpeople which expressed itself in the movement under theleadership of Razin 127 (voices on the Right : “Oho! ”).... 
 The people most strongly expressed its demands in 1905. 
 Then, too, poverty made the people come out into the streetsand say their imperious say about what they needed” (187).... 
 “All the land must pass into equalised tenure of all thepeople.... 
 I am of course an opponent of private property inland [the Vendée predicted by Plekhanov positively begins to extend!] and I say that the working people will not get an easier time until all the land passes into their hands”(204).... 
 “I am absolutely convinced you will see once again the depths of the sea of life disturbed. 
 And then the saying of the Testament will come true: he who lifts the sword shall perish by the sword ( laughter on the Right ). 
 The Trudovik group has not changed its ideals and has notchanged its aspirations.... 
 We ... say: all the land to thosewho work on it, and all power to the working people!” (206). 
 Merzlyakov: “The land must belong to those who till it.... 
 Only there mustn’t be any land racket in Russia, and the land should belong to those who till it by their own labour” (207). 
 And so on. 
 Lack of space obliges us to quote no more. 
 We shall mention only the names of the speakers who expressed thesame ideas less clearly and strongly: Kondratyev, thepriest Popov II, Bulat, Volkov II, Dzióbi [ski, Lachnicki (the last two making official statements on behalf of the Trudovik group). 
 What conclusions in relation to the agrarian programme of Social-Democracy follow from this attitude of the peasantdeputies? All are agreed that the peasants invest the strug-gle against the feudal latifundia and all the survivals of serfdom with the utopias of petty-bourgeois socialism. 
 This is expressed in the concluding section of our agrarian pro-gramme which was drafted by the Bolsheviks and acceptedat Stockholm by the Mensheviks (Minutes of the StockholmCongress). 
 But the question does not end there. 
 Division of the land, municipalisation, nationalisation are all bourgeois-democratic reforms; but what system should the Social-Democrats support? Municipalisation, answer the Menshe-viks headed by Plekhanov, since they got this programmeadopted at Stockholm. 
 Nationalisation of the peasantlands would arouse a Vendée, the Mensheviks flatly declared at Stockholm. 
 Since then, peasant deputies from all over Russia have spoken in three Dumas. 
 Not a single group of peasant depu-ties has been won over to “municipalisation”, which wasinvented specially in order “not to touch” the peasant lands. 
All the peasant Trudoviks in all three Dumas declared for nationalisation of all the land, expressing this demand some-times by directly repeating the Trudoviks’ programme,sometimes by an original restating of the “single tax”, sometimes by numerous declarations that “the land should go to those who till it”, “we are prepared to give up our allotments”, etc. 
 Real life has made a joke of “municipalisation” and the outcry about a “Vendée”. 
 What is the economic basis for the supporting of nation-alisation by all politically-conscious peasants? To answerthis question, let us recall a statistical comparison made in the Duma by Comrade Belousov 128; “Some 76 million dessiatines belong to 30,000 landlords (in European Russia), while 73 million dessiatines belong to10 million peasant households with an allotment of 1 to 15dessiatines.... 
 There is only one conclusion possible—thatfour-fifths of the total number of households could double the size of their holding” (209). 
 Even if one or other of these figures is challenged (we think that they cannot bechallenged), no alteration in them can affect the crux ofthe matter, which is the following. 
 In striving to doubletheir holdings, the peasants cannot but strive for the com-plete fusion and mixing-up of allotment and non-allot-ment lands. 
 The preservation of allotment lands as private property, the property as at present of the peasant house-holds and communes, while the expropriated non-allotmentlands are declared social (“municipal”) property is an eco-nomic absurdity. 
 It is the most stupid agrarian bimetallism,suited only for taking up space in programmes invented by intellectuals. 
 The economy requires the fusion and mixing up of all lands. 
 The economy is already uniting bits ofallotment land with bits of landlords’ land (by leasehold);and the elimination of feudalism is impossible withouteliminating those distinctions in landowning, those boundsand barriers, which “municipalisation” artificially perpet-uates. 
 The economy requires a new landowning, a free landowning adapted to capitalism and not to the old “al-lotments”, distributed and demarcated by bailiffs and officialagents. 
 This requirement of economic development is whatthe peasants express (without realising the capitalist natureof this development) when they declare for nationalisation. 
 The old distinction of allotment and non-allotment landown-ing contradicts the requirements of capitalism, and it willinevitably be broken down, despite all the efforts of the Menshevik municipalisers to prop it up. 
 And the breaking-down of this barrier, the amalgamation, the mixing up, the fusion of all categories of lands for the new economy of the farmer, requires the abolition not only of landlords’property, but of all private property in land (the peasantsthink mistakenly that any citizen will till the soil; it willbe tilled by every master, i. 
e. 
, by the one who has themeans to do it!). 
 Stolypin wants to wipe out all previous barriers of all previous forms of landowning. 
 This desire is economicallycorrect. 
 Capitalism will inevitably put it into effect. 
 Thequestion is only whether this will be done at the expenseof millions of peasant households (robbery under the lawof November 9) or at the expense of the 30,000 biggest landlords. 
 The latter method is impossible without nation-alisation of the land in a bourgeois-democratic revolu-tion. 
 That is why in all the three Dumas all politically-conscious peasants supported nationalisation. 
 It remains for us to examine the speeches of the Social-Democrats in the Third Duma. 
 Only two speakers of our group managed to speak (Gegechkori and Belousov) before a time limit was introduced. 
 The others began refusing tospeak, protesting against the “act of force” expressed inthis restriction. 
 Both the comrades mentioned did theirduty properly. 
 They pointed out the “aristocratic-bureau-cratic spirit” of the government’s policy; they said that the “statute of 1861 was feudalistic through and through”; that “hatred of the government” had sunk deep into the soulof the peasantry, which was demanding “land and freedom”,and which had displayed in 1905 its “solidarity” and itscapacity for “revolutionary action”. 
 Our Social-Democraticstruggle for “confiscation of the latifundia and their transfer to the people” was correctly interpreted by the speakers of our Party, not in the spirit of petty-bourgeois utopias about“equalisation”, “socialisation” and so forth, but as a measureto free the country from the yoke of serf-like bondage. 
 Theway Gegechkori and Belousov put the question was the wayof a revolutionary Social-Democrat. 
 “Might creates Right,” concluded Comrade Belousov, “and in order to win Right we must gather our forces and organise them. 
” Both speechesby the Social-Democratic spokesmen in the Third Duma should be kept for handy reference by every member of the Party who carries on the work of propaganda and agita-tion. 
 The formula for handing over the land proposed by the Social-Democratic group missed out only the demandthat the land should be transferred without compensation. 
This would have been an important breach of our programmeif it had been done deliberately. 
 But Comrade Gegechkori,who read the formula, mentioned twice in his speech the necessity of “alienation without compensation”; therefore the omission can hardly be regarded as deliberate. 
 Proletary , No. 
 40, Published according December 1 (14), 1908 to the text in Proletary Signed: N. 
 L. 
 THE FIFTH (ALL-RUSSIAN) CONFERENCE OF THE R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
129 DECEMBER 21-27 , 1908 (JANUARY 3-9, 1909 ) THE FIFTH (ALL-RUSSIAN) CONFERENCE OF THE R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
129 DECEMBER 21-27 , 1908 (JANUARY 3-9, 1909 ) 1 DRAFT RESOLUTION ON THE PRESENT MOMENT AND THE TASKS OF THE PARTY The present political situation is characterised by the following features: (a) The old feudal autocracy is evolving towards a bourgeois monarchy which covers up absolutism by shamconstitutional forms. 
 The alliance of tsarism with the Black-Hundred landlords and the top commercial and industrialbourgeoisie has been openly solidified and recognised by the coup d’état of June 3 and the establishment of the Third Duma. 
 Having of necessity finally taken the pathof the capitalist development of Russia, and striving tokeep to a path which would preserve the power and therevenues of the feudalist landlords, the autocracy is manoeuvr-ing between that class and the representatives of capital. 
 Their petty disputes are made use of for the maintenance of absolutism, which together with these classes is carryingon a furious counter-revolutionary struggle against the social-ist proletariat and the democratic peasantry, who displayedtheir strength in the recent mass struggle. 
 (b) The agrarian policy of present-day tsarism is distin-guished by the same bourgeois-Bonapartist character. 
 Tsarism has lost all faith in the naïve devotion of the peasant massesto the monarchy. 
 It seeks an alliance with the rich peas-ants, to whom it has given a free hand to plunder thecountryside. 
 The autocracy is making frantic efforts tobreak up all communal allotment landowning as speedily as possible, and to consolidate purely private landowning. 
 Such a policy makes all the contradictions of capitalism inthe countryside a hundred times more acute, and hastens the division of the countryside into an insignificant minority of reactionaries and a revolutionary mass of proletarians and semi-proletarians. 
 (c) The liberal bourgeoisie headed by the Cadet Party, having taken the counter-revolutionary path at the veryfirst mass actions in the revolution, continues to pursuethat path, coming still closer to the Octobrists, and by itstsarist nationalist agitation—which expresses the growth of self-consciousness of the bourgeoisie as a class—is in fact doing a service to absolutism and the feudal-mindedlandlords. 
 (d) The peasant masses, as even their restricted and dis-torted representation in the Third Duma shows continue—in spite of all the persecutions of the democratic element in the countryside—to remain, all their wavering not-withstanding, on the side of a revolutionary-democraticagrarian upheaval which, by completely abolishing land-lordism, would thereby ensure the most rapid, large-scaleand free-development of productive forces in a capitalistRussia. 
 The law of November 9 only hastens the division of the peasant masses into irreconcilably hostile and polit-ically-conscious forces. 
 (e) The proletariat has sustained, and continues to sus-tain, the heaviest blows of all, both from the autocracyand from the rapidly uniting and aggressive capitalists. 
In spite of this, the proletariat in comparison with other classes preserves the greatest unity and the greatest loyalty to its class party, with which it was fused by the revolu-tion. 
 The proletariat is continuing the struggle for itsclass interests and deepening its socialist class-conscious-ness, remaining the only class capable of giving consistentleadership to a new revolutionary struggle. 
 (f) On the whole it is beyond doubt that the objective problems of a bourgeois-democratic revolution in Russiaremain unsolved. 
 The continuing economic crisis, unemploy-ment and famines prove that the latest policy of the autoc-racy cannot provide the conditions for the capitalist de-velopment of Russia. 
 This policy inevitably leads to the deepening of the conflict between the democratic masses and the master classes, the growth of discontent among newsections of the population, the sharpening and deepening of the political struggle between the different classes. 
 In such an economic and political situation a new revolution-ary crisis is inevitably coming to a head. 
 (g) The general sharpening of struggle on the world mar-ket due mainly to the changes in the industrial situationof Western Europe in the direction of a crisis, which hasin 1908 taken the form of a depression, and due to the rev-olutionary movements in the East which herald the forma-tion of national capitalist states, is intensifying competi-tion, leading to more frequent international conflicts,thereby sharpening the class contradiction between thebourgeoisie and the proletariat, and making the generalinternational situation more and more revolutionary. 
 Considering this state of affairs, the All-Russian Con-ference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 recognises that the principal tasks of the Party at the present time are: (1) To explain to the mass of the people the meaning and importance of the latest policy of the autocracy andthe role of the socialist proletariat which, while pursuinga class policy of its own, must give leadership to the demo-cratic peasantry in the present political situation and in the coming revolutionary struggle. 
 (2) To thoroughly study and widely popularise the ex-perience of mass struggle in 1905-07, which has providedindispensable lessons in revolutionary Social-Democratictactics. 
 (3) To strengthen the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in the form it was built up during the revolutionary epoch; to maintain thetraditions of its unfaltering struggle, both against the autoc-racy and reactionary classes and against bourgeois liberal-ism; to struggle against deviations from revolutionaryMarxism and against attempts, revealed among certain elements of the Party who had fallen under the influence of disintegration, to whittle down the slogans of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
and to liquidate the illegal organisation of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 At the same time it should be borne in mind that only by promoting the transfer of Party functionsto Social-Democratic workers themselves—a process which is already definitely materialising—and only by setting up and consolidating illegal Party organisationscan the Party emerge on the right path of development. 
 (4) To assist in every way possible the economic struggle of the working class, in accordance with the resolutions of the London and Stuttgart Congresses. 
 (5) To use the Duma and the Duma rostrum for revolu-tionary Social-Democratic propaganda and agitation. 
 (6) First among immediate tasks comes prolonged effort to train up, organise and unite the class-conscious masses ofthe proletariat. 
 Then, subordinated to this task, the work of organisation should be extended to the peasantry and the army, particularly in the form of printed propagandaand agitation—principal attention being given to the so-cialist education of the proletarian and semi-proletarianelements among the peasantry and in the army. 
 Written in late December 1908 -early January 1909 First published in 1929 Published according in the Second-Third Editions to a hectographed copy of Lenin’s Works , Vol. 
 XIV 2 DIRECTIVES FOR THE COMMITTEE ON QUESTIONS OF ORGANISATION Whereas the draft resolutions submitted, and the debates on the question of organisation, have clearly revealed two basic tendencies in the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 on the question of themain direction in which the present organisational policyin general is to move, the Conference instructs the Committee to base its work on the principles of that tendency which recognises that, for work among the masses—which remains as before the fundamental task of Social-Democracy—attention mustbe focussed on building up and strengthening the illegalParty organisation; and that only under the unfalteringinfluence of this organisation can all work among the masses,all control of the Duma group, all the activity of the Party around the Duma group, all use of legal and semi-legal organisations, be properly arranged, without any debasingof the class aims of Social-Democracy. 
 Written on December 24, 1908 January 6, 1909 Published in 1909 Published according in the Report of the Central Committee to the text in the Report of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party on the Recent General Party Conference , Paris 3 PRACTICAL INSTRUCTIONS ON VOTING FOR THE BUDGET BY THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC GROUP IN THE DUMA FIRST VARIANT Voting for the Budget as a whole is declared wrong in principle. 
 The Conference is of the opinion that, as regards voting for particular items in the Budget, the Duma groupshould be guided by the principle of our programme thatSocial-Democrats firmly reject reforms involving tutelageof the police and the bureaucracy over the working classes. 
Therefore the general rule should be to vote against partic-ular items of the Budget, for they nearly always bring in their train not only such tutelage but also downrightcoercion by the Black-Hundred reactionaries. 
 In caseswhere some improvement of the conditions of the workingpeople seems likely in spite of these circumstances, it isrecommended that the deputies should abstain from voting, but should without fail make a statement setting forth the socialist position. 
 Lastly, in those exceptional caseswhen the group deems it necessary to vote for a particularitem, it is recommended that they should not do so withoutconsulting representatives of the Central Committee and,if possible, the Party organisations in the capital cities. 
 SECOND VARIANT On the question of the Budget the Conference considers that on principle it is wrong to vote for the Budget as awhole. 
 It is also wrong to vote for items of the Budget of the class state which sanction expenditure on instrumentsfor the oppression of the masses (the armed forces, etc. 
) In voting for reforms or for items of expenditure for cul-tural purposes, point of departure should be the principle of our programme that Social-Democrats reject reforms involving tutelage of the police and the bureaucracy overthe working classes. 
 Therefore the general rule should be to vote against the so-called reforms and items of expenditure for so-calledcultural purposes introduced in the Third Duma. 
 In special cases where, in spite of the general conditions, some improvement of the conditions of the working peopleis no more than probable, it is recommended that the dep-uties should abstain from voting and state their reasonsfor doing so. 
 Lastly, in exceptional cases, where there is no doubt that the workers will benefit, it is permissible to vote for a particular item, but it is recommended that the depu-ties should consult representatives of the Central Committeeand Party and trade union bodies. 
 Written December 25-26, 1908 (January 7-8, 1909 ) Published in 1909 in the pamphlet First variant is published Report of the Caucasian Delegation according to the pamphlet. 
 on the General Party Conference , Second variant is published Paris according to the manuscript verified with the pamphlet 4 ADDENDUM TO THE RESOLUTION ON “THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC GROUP IN THE DUMA” ... at the same time recognises that the blame for the group’s deviations does not rest on the group alone, for it has to work in the extremely difficult conditions of a re-actionary Duma, but is shared to some extent by all theorganisations of the Party and its Central Committee,which have not by far yet done all that was necessary andpossible to organise the Party’s work in the Duma on proper lines ... Written December 25-26, 1908 (January 7-8, 1909 ) Published in 1909 in the Report Published according of the Central Committee to the manuscript of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party on the Recent General Party Conference , Paris 5 STATEMENT BY THE BOLSHEVIKS STATEMENT OF FACTS With reference to Dan’s statement about agreements between groups within the Bolsheviks’ ranks, we place on record that our agreements are between Party peopleworking within the Party and writing in the Partyorgans, whereas the Mensheviks, both in their resolutionand in all their activities, enter into agreements betweenParty people and non-Party people who secretly work against the Party, liquidate it and carry on a policy of opportunism without precedent in any European Social-Democratic Party. 
 Written December 26, 1908 (January 8, 1909 ) First published in 1933 Published according in Lenin Miscellany XXV to the manuscript130 HOW THE SOCIALIST-REVOLUTIONARIES SUM UP THE REVOLUTION AND HOW THE REVOLUTION HAS SUMMED THEM UP We have often had occasion during the past year (1908) to discuss the current situation and trends among the bour-geois democrats in Russia. 
 We have noted the attemptsmade with the aid of the Trudoviks to restore the Osvobozh -deniye League ( Proletary , No. 
 32 *); we have described the democratic stand taken by the peasantry and their repre-sentatives on the agrarian and other questions ( Proletary , Nos. 
 21 and 40 **); and we have shown by examples quoted from Revolutsionnaya Mysl the amazingly shallow thinking of the Socialist-Revolutionary group, which imagines thatit is ultra-revolutionary ( Proletary , No. 
 32). 
 To make the picture complete we must now examine the official publi-cations of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party. 
 In 1908, four issues of Znamya Truda were published (Nos. 
 9 to 13, No. 
 10-11 being a double number ***), and a special Report from the Central Committee of the Socialist-RevolutionaryParty on the First Party Conference and the fourth meetingof the Party Council, both held abroad last August. 
 Letus examine this material. 
 “The party,” say the S. 
R. 
 Central Committee in their Report, “was faced with the task of summing up the resultsof that period of the great Russian revolution, now over,during which the town proletariat was the principal and *See pp. 
 148-58 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 **See present edition, Vol. 
 13, pp. 
 440-46 and the present volume, pp. 
 303-317. 
 *** Unfortunately the editorial office of Proletary was unable to obtain No. 
 12. 
 often almost the sole actor. 
” That is very well said. 
 It is a true statement of the case most unusual for the Socialist-Revolutionaries. 
 Five lines further down, however, we read: “The triumph of the counter-revolution has merely strik-ingly confirmed the truth, which we never doubted fromthe very outset, that a successful Russian revolution willeither be the work of a mighty alliance of the forces of thetown proletariat and those of the toiling peasantry, or will not be brought about at all. 
 So far this alliance has existed only as an idea, embodied in the Socialist-Revolu-tionary programme which was brought into being by therealities of Russian life. 
 It scarcely began to come intoexistence. 
 Its rebirth is a matter for the future.... 
” Now see how long the Socialist-Revolutionaries were able to stick to the truth! Anyone who is in the slightest degree familiar with the Socialist-Revolutionary and So-cial-Democratic programmes knows that they differ radi-cally in the following: 1) the Social-Democrats declaredthe Russian revolution to be a bourgeois revolution; the Socialist-Revolutionaries denied this; 2) the Social-Dem-ocrats maintained that the proletariat and the peasantry were distinct classes in capitalist (or semi-feudal, semi-capitalist) society; that the peasantry is a class of pettyproprietors that can “strike together” against the landlords and the autocracy, “on the same side of the barricades”with the proletariat in the bourgeois revolution, and that in this revolution it can, in certain cases, march in “alliance” with the proletariat, while remaining quite a separate classof capitalist society. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionaries deniedthis. 
 The main idea in their programme was not that an “alliance of the forces” of the proletariat and the peasantrywas necessary, but that there was no class gulf between them, that no class distinction should be drawn between them, and that the Social-Democratic idea concerning thepetty-bourgeois character of the peasantry, as distinctfrom the proletariat, is utterly false. 
 And now the Socialist-Revolutionaries are trying to slur over these two radical differences between the Social-Demo-crat and the Socialist-Revolutionary programmes with glib specious phrases! From the way these gentlemen sum upthe revolution one would think that there had been no /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR revolution and no Socialist-Revolutionary programme. 
 But, my dear sirs, there was a Socialist-Revolutionary programme, and the whole difference between it and the programme of the Social-Democrats was that the funda-mental, theoretical section of the former was based on thedenial of the petty-bourgeois character of the peasantry,the denial of any class distinction between the peasantryand the proletariat. 
 There was a revolution, my dear sirs, and the chief lesson it taught was that in their open mass actions the peasantry displayed a class nature of their own,distinct from that of the proletariat, and proved themselvesto be petty-bourgeois. 
 You pretend that you have not noticed this. 
 You do see it, but are merely trying to ignore an unpleasant fact re-vealed by the revolution. 
 You acted, not “in alliance” with the Trudoviks, but completely merged with them—and this at crucial moments when the open revolutionreached its climax—the autumn of 1905 and the summer of1906. 
 The legal organs of the press at that time were So-cialist-Revolutionary-Trudovik organs. 
 Even when the Tru-dovik and Popular Socialist groups were formed, you were not in alliance, but in a bloc, i. 
e. 
, practically mergedwith them in the elections to the Second Duma and in theSecond Duma itself. 
 Unlike the programme of the Trudo-viks and Popular Socialists, your own programme suffered defeat in all the open and truly mass actions of the repre-sentatives of the peasantry. 
 Both in the First and in the Second Dumas the overwhelming majority of the peasantdeputies adopted the agrarian programme of the Trudoviks and not of the Socialist-Revolutionaries. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionaries themselves, in their purely Socialist-Revolutionary publications, from the end of 1906 onwards, were obliged to admit that as a political trend the Trudo-viks were petty-bourgeois , that underlying this trend were the “private-property instincts” of small proprietors (seethe articles written by Mr. 
 Vikhlayev and other Socialist-Revolutionaries against the Popular Socialists). 
 The question arises, whom do the Socialist-Revolution-aries wish to deceive by “summing up the results” of the revolution and concealing the fundamental and most im-portant result in the process? Why did the peasantry during the revolution form into a separate political party (or group)—the Trudovik party? Why did the Trudoviks and not the Socialist-Revolution-aries become the party of the peasant masses during the rev-olution? If the Socialist-Revolutionaries think this wasaccidental, it’s no good talking about either results orprogrammes, for then instead of results and programmeswe get chaos. 
 If it was not accidental, but a result of the fun-damental economic relations in modern society, then the correctness of the principal and cardinal point in the pro-gramme of the Russian Social-Democrats has been proved by history . 
 The revolution has drawn in practice the class distinction between the peasantry and the proletariatthat we Social-Democrats have always drawn in theory. 
 The revolution has proved conclusively that a party, which aspires to be a mass party, a class party, in Russia, musteither be Social-Democratic or Trudovik; for it is these, and only these, two trends that the masses themselves clearlymarked out by their open actions during the most im-portant and crucial moments. 
 As the events of 1905-07 have proved, intermediate groups were never able to merge with the masses at any time or on any issue. 
 And this alsoproved the bourgeois character of our revolution. 
 Not asingle historian, not a single sane politician, can now denythat the political forces in Russia are divided primarilybetween the socialist proletariat and the petty-bourgeois democratic peasantry. 
 “The alliance of the forces of the town proletariat and those of the toiling peasantry ... has so far existed only asan idea. 
” This is an utterly confused and false phrase. 
 Thealliance of proletarian and peasant forces has not beenmerely an “idea”, nor did it “scarcely begin to come into existence”; it was a characteristic feature of the whole of the first period of the Russian revolution, of all the greatevents of 1905-07. 
 The October strike and the Decemberinsurrection on the one hand, the local peasant risings andthe mutinies of soldiers and sailors on the other, representedthat very “alliance of the forces” of the proletariat and the peasantry. 
 It was unorganised, inchoate, often unconscious. 
 The forces were inadequately organised, dispersed, withouta central leadership that was really capable of leading, and so forth. 
 But it was undoubtedly an “alliance of the forces” of the proletariat and the peasantry, the main forces which breached the ramparts of the old autocracy. 
 Unless this fact is understood, it is impossible to understand the“results” of the Russian revolution. 
 The flaw in the con-clusion drawn by the Socialist-Revolutionaries is that theysay “ trudovoye ” * instead of Trudovik peasantry. 
 This slight, negligible difference, a seemingly imperceptible difference, actually reveals the gulf that lies between the pre-revolu-tionary dreams of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and thereality that the revolution finally brought to light. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionaries have always used the term trudovoye peasantry. 
 The revolution revealed the political physiognomy of the present-day Russian peasantry and has proved it to be a Trudovik trend. 
 In that case the Socialist-Revolutionaries were right, you will say? That is not so. 
History in its irony has preserved and perpetuated theSocialist-Revolutionaries’ term , but gave it the connotation that was predicted by the Social-Democrats. 
 On the mootquestion as to the petty-bourgeois nature of the labouring peasantry, the history of the revolution has shared the honours between us and the Socialist-Revolutionaries asfollows: to them it gave the word and to us the substance . 
 The labouring peasants, whom the Socialist-Revolution-aries lauded to the skies before the revolution, proved during the revolution to be such Trudoviks that the Socialist-Revolutionaries had to disown them! And we Social-Dem-ocrats can and must now prove that the peasantry is petty-bourgeois not only by using the analysis given in Marx’sCapital , 131 not only by quotations from the Erfurt Pro-gramme,132 not only by facts and figures from the econom-ic researches of the Narodniks and from Zemstvo statis-tics, but by the behaviour of the peasantry in the Russian revolution in general and the facts concerning the composi-tion and activities of the Trudoviks in particular. 
 No. 
 We have nothing to complain of the way history has shared the honours between us and the Socialist-Revolu-tionaries. 
 *i. 
e. 
, labouring. 
— Ed. 
 Znamya Truda , No. 
 13, p. 
 3, says: “Had the otzovists succeeded in turning the Social-Democrats back to their extreme militant principles, we would have lost some useful material for polemics, but we would have acquired an allyin consistent militant tactics. 
” And a couple of lines ear-lier it says: “The struggle for freedom and socialism wouldonly stand to gain if the Left wing took the lead both amongthe Cadets and among the Social-Democrats. 
” Very good, Messieurs Socialist-Revolutionaries! You want to pay compliments to our “otzovists” and “Lefts”. 
Allow us, then, to return compliment for compliment. 
Permit us, too, to avail ourselves of “useful material forpolemics”. 
 “Let a number of parties, including the Cadets, Trudo-viks and Social-Democrats, support the fiction that a constitutional system exists by their participation in thepasteboard travesty of a Duma” ( Znamya Truda , ibid. 
). 
 So the Third Duma is a pasteboard travesty. 
 This phrase alone is more than sufficient to show the abysmal ignoranceof the Socialist-Revolutionaries. 
 Most esteemed directors of the central organ of the Socialist-Revolutionaries, the Third Duma is much less a pasteboard institution than the First and the Second Dumas were! Your failure to graspthis simple fact only confirms the correctness of what Pro-letary said about you in its article “Parliamentary Creti-nism Inside Out”. 
 You are repeating word for word the com-mon delusion of the vulgar bourgeois democrats, who try to persuade themselves and others that bad, reactionaryDumas are pasteboard institutions, while good, progressiveDumas are not. 
 As a matter of fact, the First and Second Dumas were pasteboard swords in the hands of the liberal-bourgeois intellectuals who wanted to scare the autocracy a little with the threat of revolution. 
 The Third Duma is a real,not a pasteboard, sword in the hands of the autocracy andthe counter-revolution. 
 The First and Second Dumas werepasteboard Dumas because their decisions did not reflectthe actual balance of material forces in the struggle of the classes in society, and were mere hollow words. 
 The impor-tance of these two Dumas lay in the fact that behind the frontrow of Cadet constitutional buffoons were clearly seen the real representatives of that democratic peasantry and that socialist proletariat who were really making the revolution, fighting the enemy in an open mass struggle, but had not yet been able to crush him. 
 The Third Duma is not a paste-board Duma, for the simple reason that its decisions reflectthe actual balance of material forces brought about by thetemporary victory of the counter-revolution and are, there-fore, not mere words but words converted into action. 
 The importance of this Duma lies in the fact that it has given all the politically undeveloped elements of the peoplean object-lesson, showing the relation between representa-tive institutions and the actual possession of state power. 
Representative institutions, even the most “progressive”,are doomed to remain pasteboard institutions so long as the classes represented in them do not possess real state power. 
 Representative institutions, however reactionary they maybe, are not pasteboard if the classes represented in them dopossess real state power. 
 To call the Third Duma a pasteboard travesty is an exam-ple of the extreme shallowness and extravagant revolution-ary phrase-mongering that have so long been the specific distinguishing feature and the chief quality of the Social-ist-Revolutionary Party. 
 Let us proceed. 
 Is it true that the Third Duma is “the fiction of a constitutional system”? No, it is not. 
 Onlypeople ignorant of the elementary principles taught by Lassalle nearly half a century ago could say a thing like that in an official party paper. 
 What does a constitutionmean, most worthy members of that elementary propagandacircle known as the Socialist-Revolutionary Party? Doesit mean that more “freedom” and better conditions of lifeexist for the “toiling people” with a constitution than with-out one? No, only the vulgar democrats think that. 
 The essence of a constitution is that the fundamental laws of thestate in general, and the laws governing elections to and thepowers of the representative institutions, etc. 
, expressthe actual relation of forces in the class struggle. 
 A consti-tution is fictitious when law and reality diverge; it is not fictitious when they coincide. 
 The constitution of Russia in the period of the Third Duma is less fictitious than it was in the periods of the First and Second Dumas. 
 If this conclusion arouses your ire, Messieurs “Socialists”-“Revo-lutionaries”, it is because you do not understand what a constitution is, and cannot tell the difference between a fictitious and a class constitution. 
 A constitution can bea Black-Hundred, landlords’ and reactionary constitution,and yet be less fictitious than some “liberal” constitutions. 
 The trouble with the Socialist-Revolutionaries is that they are ignorant of Marx’s historical materialism and Marx’s dialectical method; they are wholly under the spell of vulgar bourgeois-democratic ideas. 
 For them a consti-tution is not a new field, a new form of the class struggle,but an abstract blessing like the “legality”, the “law andorder”, the “general good” of the liberal professors, and soon and so forth. 
 In reality autocracy, constitutional mon-archy and republic are merely different forms of class struggle; and the dialectics of history are such that eachof these forms passes through different stages of develop-ment of its class content, and the transition from one formto another does not (in itself) at all eliminate the rule ofthe former exploiting classes under the new integument. 
 For instance, the Russian autocracy of the seventeenth cen-tury with its Boyar Council and boyar aristocracy bears no re-semblance to the autocracy of the eighteenth century withits bureaucracy, its ranks and orders of society, and itsoccasional periods of “enlightened absolutism”; while bothdiffer sharply from the autocracy of the nineteenth century, which was compelled to emancipate the peasants “from above”, although pauperising them in the process, paving the way forcapitalism, introducing the principle of local representa-tive institutions for the bourgeoisie. 
 By the twentiethcentury this last form of semi-feudal, semi-patriarchal ab-solutism had also become obsolete. 
 Owing to the growth of capitalism and the increase in the power of the bourgeoisie, etc. 
, it became necessary to introduce representative in-stitutions on a national scale. 
 The revolutionary struggleof 1905 became particularly acute around the issue as to whowas to convene the first all-Russian representative insti-tution, and how. 
 The December defeat settled this question in favour of the old monarchy; and in these circumstances the constitution could be nothing else than a Black-Hundredand Octobrist one. 
 In a new field, under institutions of the Bonapartist monarchy, at a higher stage of political development, the struggle is again beginning with the effort to overthrow the old enemy, the Black-Hundred monarchy. 
 Can a social-ist party refuse to make use in this struggle of the newrepresentative institutions? The Socialist-Revolutionarieshave not even the wit to pose such a question: theymake shift with phrases, and nothing but phrases. 
 Listen to this: “At the present time we have no parliamentary channels of strug-gle—we have only non-parliamentary channels. 
 This conviction mustbecome deep-rooted everywhere, and we must relentlessly fight every-thing that prevents it from becoming so. 
 Let us concentrate on non-parliamentary means of struggle!” This Socialist-Revolutionary argument is based on the celebrated subjective method in sociology. 
 Let the convic-tion become deep-rooted—and the trick is done! It neveroccurs to the subjectivists that convictions as to whether particular channels are available or not must be tested by objective facts. 
 But let us look at the Report and the reso-lutions of the conference of the Socialist-Revolutionaries. 
We read: “...The sombre lull of the hard times, or rather,the time of social stagnation we are now passing through”(p. 
 4) ... “the consolidation of the reactionary social forces” ... “the fact that the energy of the masses is shackled” ... “among the intellectuals, the most impressionable sectionof the population, we see exhaustion, ideological confusionand the ebb of forces from the revolutionary struggle” (p. 
 6),and so on, and so forth. 
 “In view of all this, the Socialist-Revolutionary Party must ... (b) disapprove, for tactical reasons, of schemes for partial mass actions which under present conditions may result in the fruitless waste of pop-ular energy” (p. 
 7). 
 Who are the “ we” in “we have only non-parliamentary channels of struggle”? Obviously a handful of terrorists,for none of the tirades quoted here contains even a hint of the mass struggle. 
 “ The fact that the energy of the masses is shackled ” ... and “concentrate on non-parliamentary means of struggle”—this simple contrast shows us yet once more how historically true it was to call the Socialist-Revo-lutionaries revolutionary adventurists. 
 * Is it not adventur-ism for people to indulge in catchy phrases about concen-trating on means of struggle which they themselves admitthe masses are at present unable to apply? Is this not theold, old psychology of the intellectual in despair? “Let us concentrate on non-parliamentary means of struggle. 
” This slogan was correct in one of the most re-markable periods of the Russian revolution, the autumn of 1905. 
 In repeating it uncritically at the present juncturethe Socialist-Revolutionaries are acting like the hero ofthe popular fable who would persist in shouting the mostinappropriate greetings. 
 You have not understood, my dearsirs, why the boycott slogan was correct in the autumn of 1905, and in repeating it now, uncritically, unthinkingly,like a catchword learned off by heart, you are displaying,not revolutionariness, but just plain foolishness. 
 In the autumn of 1905 nobody said anything about “the fact that the energy of the masses was shackled”. 
 On thecontrary, all parties agreed that the energy of the masses was seething. 
 At that moment, the old regime offered a consultative parliament, obviously with the intention ofsplitting these seething forces and appeasing them, if onlyfor a moment. 
 At that time the slogan: “Concentrate onnon-parliamentary means of struggle”, was not the stock-phrase of a handful of ranters, but the battle-cry of men who really were at the head of the masses, at the head of millions of fighting workers and peasants. 
 The fact thatthese millions responded to the call proved that the sloganwas objectively correct , and that it expressed not merely the “convictions” of a handful of revolutionaries, but theactual situation, the temper and the initiative of the masses. 
 Only ridiculous pedlars of politics can repeat this slogan and in the same breath say that “the energy of the massesis shackled”. 
 And, since we have mentioned the ridiculous, we simply must quote the following gem from Znamya Truda . 
 “Let us leave it [the government] tête-à-tête in the Duma with the Black Hundreds and with the party that obeys the latest *See present edition, Vol. 
 6, pp. 
 184-205. 
— Ed. 
 government order, * and take our word for it that if ever these spiders are capable of devouring each other, this is the very situation in which they will do so”.... 
 This “take our word for it” is inimitable and positively disarms an opponent. 
 “Takeour word for it”, reader, that the leading articles in Znamya Truda are being written by a really sweet Socialist-Revolu-tionary school miss, who sincerely believes that the “spiders”will begin to “devour each other” if the opposition withdraws from the Third Duma. 
 The clause concerning the Cadets in the resolution on our attitude towards the non-proletarian parties adoptedat the London Congress was most severely criticised by the Mensheviks. 
 Scarcely less severe was their criticism of the clause which deals with the Narodnik or Trudovik par-ties. 
 The Mensheviks tried to prove that we were indulgentwith the Socialist-Revolutionaries, or were covering up cer-tain sins which Marxists had long ago proved they wereguilty of, and so forth. 
 There were two reasons for the Men-sheviks’ vehemence on these points. 
 One of them was their fundamental disagreement with us in our appraisal of theRussian revolution. 
 The Mensheviks insist that the prole-tariat must make the revolution together with the Cadets,and not with the Trudovik peasantry against the Cadets. 
On the other hand, the Mensheviks don’t understand that the open action of the masses and classes in the revolution has changed the situation and, in some cases, the character ofthe parties. 
 Before the revolution the Socialist-Revolution-aries were only a group of intellectuals with Narodnik ideas. 
 Would this description be correct after the revolution, oreven after 1906? Obviously not. 
 Only those who have learned nothing from the revolution can uphold the old view formulated in this way. 
 The revolution has proved that this group of intellectuals with Narodnik ideas are the extreme Left wing of an ex-ceedingly broad and undoubtedly mass Narodnik or Trudo-vik trend, which expressed the interests and point of view of the peasantry in the Russian bourgeois revolution. 
 This *Meaning the Octobrists. 
— Ed. 
 has been proved by the peasant insurrections, by the Peas-ant Union, by the Trudovik group in three Dumas, and by the free press of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Trudoviks. 
 But the Mensheviks have failed to understandthis. 
 They regard the Socialist-Revolutionaries from adoctrinaire point of view: like doctrinaires, they see the flaws in other people’s doctrines, but do not see what realinterests of real masses, which are a driving force in the bourgeois-democratic revolution, are expressed or concealed by those doctrines. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionary doctrineis pernicious, fallacious, reactionary, adventurist, petty-bourgeois—cry the Mensheviks. 
 Not one step further, notone word more; all else is the work of the devil. 
 Now that is where your mistake begins, we say to the Mensheviks. 
 True, the Socialist-Revolutionary doctrine is pernicious, fallacious, reactionary, adventurist and petty-bourgeois. 
 But these vices do not prevent this quasi-social-ist doctrine from being the ideological vestments of a real-ly revolutionary—and not compromising—bourgeoisie andpetty bourgeoisie in Russia. 
 For the Socialist-Revolutionary doctrine is only a tiny rivulet in the Trudovik, i. 
e. 
, peas-ant-democratic torrent. 
 As soon as the open struggle ofmasses and classes begins, events immediately compel us all,Bolsheviks and Mensheviks alike, to recognise the fact, toadmit the Socialist-Revolutionaries to the Soviets of Work-ers’ Deputies, establish closer relations with the Soviets of peasants’, soldiers’, post and telegraph workers’, rail-waymen’s, etc. 
, deputies, enter into election agreementswith them against the liberals, vote with them in the Dumasagainst the liberals, and so forth. 
 The revolution has notrefuted our opinion of the Socialist-Revolutionaries butcorroborated it. 
 But in doing so it has not left the ques-tion in its previous shape and position; it has elevated the question to an incomparably higher plane. 
 Previouslythe question was one only of comparing doctrines, ideologiesand the policies of various groups; now it is a matter ofcomparing the historical activities of the classes and masseswhich follow this or a kindred ideology. 
 Formerly the question was, is what the Socialist-Revolutionaries say cor-rect? Are the tactics of this ideological organisation cor-rect? Now the question has arisen, what, in effect, is the behaviour of those sections of the people which consider themselves supporters of the Socialist-Revolutionaries or of ideas akin to theirs (the “labour principle”, etc. 
)? The Mensheviks’ error is due to their failure to understand thischange that the revolution has brought about. 
 But apart from the reasons mentioned, this change is important also because it has strikingly revealed the rela-tion of classes and parties. 
 The lesson our revolution teaches is that only parties which have a definite class backing are strong and able to survive, whatever turn events maytake. 
 Open political struggle compels parties to establishcloser relations with the masses, for without such tiesparties are naught. 
 Nominally, the Socialist-Revolutionariesare independent of the Trudoviks. 
 Actually , however, dur-ing the revolution, they were compelled to join forces with the Trudoviks, on pain of being completely eliminated fromthe political arena. 
 And it can safely be said that at the nextrise of the revolutionary tide the Socialist-Revolutionaries(however loudly they may shout now about their completeindependence) will again be obliged to join forces with the Trudoviks, or with similar organisations of the masses. 
 The objective conditions of social life and the class struggleare more powerful than pious intentions and written pro-grammes. 
 From this aspect, which is the only correct one, thepresent rift between the Trudoviks and the Socialist-Revolu-tionaries is merely evidence of the disintegration of the petty-bourgeois movement, of the lack of steadfastness on the part of the petty bourgeoisie, who are unable to bandtogether in adverse conditions and who “drift apart”. 
 Onthe one hand, we have the Trudoviks—unorganised, unsteady,wavering, without any firm political line in the ThirdDuma, but undoubtedly springing from the masses, connected with the masses, expressing the needs of the masses. 
 On the other hand we have a handful of Socialist-Revolutionary“otzovists”, who have no ties with the masses, who arefrantic with despair, losing faith in the mass struggle (seeRevolutsionnaya Mysl ) and concentrating on terrorism. 
 The extreme opportunism of the Trudoviks (bearing in mind the stand of the revolutionary peasantry) and the extreme, purely verbal and meaningless, revolutionariness of theSocialist-Revolutionaries are two limitations of one and the same petty-bourgeois trend, twin symptoms of the same “disease”, viz. 
, the instability of the petty bourgeoisie, their incapacity for systematic, persevering, staunch and concert-ed mass struggle. 
 These facts throw a new light on the present Duma tac-tics of the revolutionary parties and, in particular, onthe question of otzovism. 
 “We have no parliamentary chan-nels of struggle,” cry the boastful Socialist-Revolutionary intellectuals. 
 Who are “we”, gentlemen? Intellectuals without the masses have never had, and never will have, either parliamentary or non-parliamentary means of strug-gle of any importance. 
 What masses followed or supportedyou yesterday, during the revolution? The Trudovik peas-antry. 
 Is it true that they have “no parliamentary means of struggle”? It is not true. 
 Look at the debates on the agrarian question in the Third Duma. 
 You will find that on thisissue the Trudoviks undoubtedly voiced the needs of themasses. 
 Consequently, the smart phrase of the Socialist-Revolutionaries is nothing more than empty phrase-monger-ing. 
 In 1908, the peasant masses voiced their demands from the rostrum of the Duma, and did not engage in “non-par-liamentary” action. 
 That is a fact that no amount of “Left”screeching and the shouting of Socialist-Revolutionary-otzovist phrases can obscure. 
 What was the reason for this? Was it because the “con-viction” that non-parliamentary channels are preferable was shaken? Nonsense. 
 The answer is that in this period objective conditions had not yet caused widespread unrestamong the masses or stirred them to direct action. 
 If thatis the case, and it certainly is so, it was the duty of everyparty that takes itself seriously to avail itself of indirect channels. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionaries were unable to avail themselves of such channels—and what happened? Only that the Trudoviks made a very bad job of it, made a thou-sand times more mistakes than they would have done had theybeen guided by a party; they stumbled and fell very often. 
Out of touch with their class, with their masses, the Social-ist-Revolutionaries “concentrated” on phrase-mongering; for in practice they did nothing at all in 1908 to promote “non-parliamentary means of struggle”. 
 This dissociationof the Socialist-Revolutionaries from their social roots immediately begins to aggravate their besetting sin— extravagant, unbridled boasting and bragging, as a means of covering up their impotence. 
 “Our Party can congratulate itself,” we read on the first page of the Report ... electionto the conference by “really existing [think of that now!]local party organisations” ... “unanimity of feeling wasreached on all questions” ... “this was truly the attainmentof unanimity” (ibid. 
), and so on and so forth. 
 It is not true, gentlemen. 
 With these loud words you are trying to drown the voices of dissension which havebeen heard quite distinctly, both in Revolutsionnaya Mysl (spring 1908) and in issue No. 
 13 of Znamya Truda (November 1908). 
 This ballyhoo is a sign of weakness. 
 The non-partyopportunism of the Trudoviks and the “party” boastfulness, isolation and phrase-mongering of the Socialist-Revolution-aries are two sides of the same medal, two extremes in thedisintegration of one and the same petty-bourgeois stratum. 
 It was not for nothing that during the revolution, whenthe struggle brought out all the different shadings, theSocialist-Revolutionaries tried, but tried in vain, to con-ceal their wavering between the Popular Socialists and the Maximalists. 
 The cart is in the ditch. 
 The horses have slipped their harness. 
 The coachman sits astride a milestone with hiscap at a jaunty angle, and “congratulates” himself on his“unanimity”. 
 Such is the picture of the Socialist-Revolution-ary Party. 
 Such are the results of Socialist-Revolutionary otzovism, which has recalled a handful of intellectuals fromthe arduous, persevering, but the only really serious andfruitful work of educating and organising the masses, inorder that they should indulge in loud and meaninglesscatchwords. 
 Proletary , No. 
 41, Published according January 7 (20), 1909 to the text in Proletary ON THE ROAD A year of disintegration, a year of ideological and polit-ical disunity, a year of Party driftage lies behind us. 
The membership of all our Party organisations has dropped. 
 Some of them—namely, those whose membership was least proletarian—have fallen to pieces. 
 The Party’s semi-legalinstitutions created by the revolution have been broken uptime after time. 
 Things reached a point when some elementswithin the Party, under the impact of the general break-up,began to ask whether it was necessary to preserve the old Social-Democratic Party, whether it was necessary to con-tinue its work, whether it was necessary to go “underground” once more, and how this was to be done. 
 And the extremeRight (the liquidationist trend, so called) answered thisquestion in the sense that it was necessary to legalise ourselvesat all costs, even at the price of an open renunciation of the Party programme, tactics and organisation. 
 This was undoubtedly an ideological and political crisis as well asan organisational one. 
 The recent All-Russian Conference of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party has led the Party out on to theroad, and evidently marks a turning-point in the develop-ment of the Russian working-class movement after the vic-tory of the counter-revolution. 
 The decisions of the confer-ence, published in a special Report issued by the CentralCommittee of our Party, have been confirmed by the CentralCommittee, and therefore, pending the next Congress, standas the decisions of the whole Party. 
 These decisions give a very definite answer to the question of the causes and the significance of the crisis, as well as the means of overcom-ing it. 
 By working in the spirit of the conference resolutions, by striving to make all Party workers realise clearly and fully the present tasks of the Party, our organisa-tions will be able to strengthen and consolidate their forces for united and effective revolutionary Social-Demo-cratic work. 
 The main cause of the Party crisis is indicated in the preamble of the resolution on organisation. 
 This main causeis the wavering intellectual and petty-bourgeois elements, of which the workers’ party had to rid itself; elements who joined the working-class movement mainly in the hopeof an early triumph of the bourgeois-democratic revolutionand could not stand up to a period of reaction. 
 Their instabil-ity was revealed both in theory (“retreat from revolution-ary Marxism”: the resolution on the present situation) and in tactics (the “whittling down of slogans”), as well as in Party organisation. 
 The class-conscious workers repelledthis instability, came out resolutely against the liquida-tors, began to take the management and guidance of the Partyorganisations into their own hands. 
 If this hard core ofour Party was unable at the outset to overcome the elements of disunity and crisis, this was not only because the task was a great and difficult one amidst the triumph of thecounter-revolution, but also because a certain indifferencetowards the Party showed itself among those workers who,although revolutionary-minded, were not sufficiently socialist-minded. 
 It is precisely to the class-conscious workers of Russia that the decisions of the conference are addressed in the first place—as the crystallised opinion of Social-Democracy concerning the means of combating disunity andvacillation. 
 A Marxist analysis of present-day class relations and of the new policy of tsarism; an indication of the immedi-ate aim of the struggle which our Party continues as before to set itself; an appreciation of the lessons of the revolu-tion as regards the correctness of the revolutionary Social-Democrats’ tactics; elucidation of the causes of the Partycrisis; pointing out the role in combating it of the pro-letarian elements of the Party; solution of the problem of relations between the illegal and legal organisations; recognition of the necessity of utilising the Duma tribuneand drawing up precise instructions for the guidance of Front page of the Central Organ of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 — the newspaper Sotsial-Demokrat , No. 
 2, January 28 (February 10), 1909, containing Lenin’s article “On the Road” Reduced Front page of the Central Organ of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 — the newspaper Sotsial-Demokrat , No. 
 2, January 28 (February 10), 1909, containing Lenin’s article “On the Road” Reduced our Duma group, linked with direct criticism of its mis-takes—such was the principal content of the decisions of the conference, which provide a complete answer to the question of the party of the working class choosing a definite path inthe present difficult period. 
 Let us examine this answermore carefully. 
 The interrelation of classes in their political groupings remains the same as that which prevailed during the past period of direct revolutionary struggle of the masses. 
 The overwhelming majority of the peasants cannot but strivefor an agrarian revolution which would destroy semi-feudallandownership, and which cannot be achieved without theoverthrow of tsarism. 
 The triumph of reaction has bornedown heavily on the democratic elements of the peasantry, which is incapable of forming a solid organisation; but despite all oppression, despite the Black-Hundred Duma, despite theextreme instability of the Trudoviks, the revolutionarymood of the peasant masses is clearly evidenced even by thedebates in the Third Duma. 
 The fundamental position ofthe proletariat in regard to the tasks of the bourgeois-democratic revolution in Russia remains unaltered: to guide the democratic peasantry and to wrest it from the influ-ence of the liberal bourgeoisie, the Cadet Party—whichcontinues to draw closer and closer to the Octobrists notwith-standing petty private squabbles, and which recently hasbeen striving to establish national-liberalism and to sup-port tsarism and reaction by chauvinist agitation. 
 The struggle goes on as before—says the resolution—for thecomplete abolition of the monarchy and the conquest of politi-cal power by the proletariat and the revolutionary peasantry. 
 The autocracy, as hitherto, is the principal enemy of the proletariat and of all democratic trends. 
 It would be a mistake, however, to imagine that it remains unchanged. 
 The Stolypin “constitution” and Stolypin’s agrarian policymark a new stage in the break-down of the old, semi-patri-archal, semi-feudal tsarism, a new step towards its transforma-tion into a bourgeois monarchy. 
 The delegates from the Cau-casus, who wished either to delete such a characterisation of the present situation altogether, or to substitute “pluto-cratic” for “bourgeois”, were wrong. 
 The autocracy haslong been plutocratic; but it is only after the first stage of the revolution, under the impact of its blows, that the autocracy is becoming bourgeois, both in its agrarian policy and its direct, nationally-organised alliance with certain strata of the bourgeoisie. 
 The autocracy has beennursing the bourgeoisie for a long time now; the bourgeoisie,by means of the ruble, has long been winning its way to “thetop”, securing influence on legislation and administration,and a place beside the noble aristocracy. 
 But the peculiar feature of the present situation is that the autocracy has been forced to set up a representative assembly for certainstrata of the bourgeoisie, to balance between them and thefeudalist-landlords, to form an alliance of these sectionsin the Duma; it has been forced to abandon all the hopesit had placed in the patriarchalism of the muzhik, and to seek support against the rural masses among the rich peas-ants, who are ruining the village commune. 
 The autocracy cloaks itself with pseudo-constitutional institutions, but at the same time its class essence is be-ing exposed as never before, owing to the alliance concludedby the tsar with the Purishkeviches and the Guchkovs, and with no one else. 
 The autocracy is attempting to take upon itself the fulfilment of those tasks of the bourgeois revo-lution which are objectively necessary—the setting-up ofa representative assembly of the people which would reallymanage the affairs of bourgeois society, and the purgingof the countryside of medieval, entangled and antiquated agrarian relations. 
 But the practical results of these new steps taken by the autocracy are, so far, exactly nil, andthis only shows more clearly than ever that other forcesand other means are necessary for the fulfilment of thehistorical task. 
 In the minds of millions of people inex-perienced in politics, the autocracy was hitherto contrasted with popular representation in general; now, the struggle is narrowing its aims, and is more concretely defining itstask as the struggle for power in the state, which determinesthe character and significance of representation itself. 
That is why the Third Duma marks a special stage in thebreak-down of the old tsarism, in the intensification of its adventurist character, in the deepening of the old revolu-tionary aims, in the widening of the field of struggle(and of the numbers taking part in the struggle) for these aims. 
 We must get over this stage. 
 The present new conditions require new forms of struggle. 
 The use of the Duma tribune is an absolute necessity. 
 A prolonged effort to educate and organise the masses of the proletariat becomes particularlyimportant. 
 The combination of illegal and legal organisationraises special problems before the Party. 
 The popularisationand clarification of the experience of the revolution, whichthe liberals and liquidationist intellectuals are seeking to discredit, are necessary both for theoretical and practical purposes. 
 But the tactical line of the Party—which mustbe able to take the new conditions into account in its methodsand means of struggle—remains unchanged. 
 The correctnessof revolutionary Social-Democratic tactics, states one ofthe resolutions of the conference, is confirmed by the ex-perience of the mass struggle in 1905-07. 
 The defeat of the revolution resulting from this first campaign revealed,not that the tasks were wrong, not that the immediate aimswere “utopian”, not that the methods and means were mis-taken, but that the forces were insufficiently prepared,that the revolutionary crisis was insufficiently wide and deep—and Stolypin and Co. 
 are working to widen and deepen it with most praiseworthy zeal! Let the liberals and terri-fied intellectuals lose heart after the first genuinely massbattle for freedom, let them repeat like cowards: don’tgo where you have been beaten before, don’t tread thatfatal path again. 
 The class-conscious proletariat will answer them: the great wars in history, the great problems of revolu-tions, were solved only by the advanced classes returningto the attack again and again—and they achieved victoryafter having learned the lessons of defeat. 
 Defeated armieslearn well. 
 The revolutionary classes of Russia have beendefeated in their first campaign, but the revolutionary situation remains. 
 In new forms and by other ways, sometimes much more slowly than we would wish, the revolutionarycrisis is approaching, coming to a head again. 
 We mustcarry on with the lengthy work of preparing larger massesfor that crisis; this preparation must be more serious, takingaccount of higher and more concrete tasks; and the more successfully we do this work, the more certain will be our victory in the new struggle. 
 The Russian proletariat can beproud of the fact that in 1905, under its leadership, a nation of slaves for the first time became a million-strong host, an army of the revolution, striking at tsarism. 
 And now the same proletariat will know how to do persistently, staunchly and patiently the work of educating and training the newcadres of a still mightier revolutionary force. 
 As we have said, utilisation of the Duma tribune is an essential element of this work of education and training. 
The conference resolution on the Duma group indicates to our Party that road which comes nearest—if we are to seek instances in history—to the experience of German Social-Democracy at the time of the Anti-Socialist Law. 
 The illegalParty must know how to use, it must learn how to use, thelegal Duma group; it must train up the latter into a Partyorganisation equal to its tasks. 
 The most mistaken tactics, the most regrettable deviation from consistent proletarian work, dictated by the conditions of the present period, wouldbe to raise the question of recalling the group from theDuma (there were two “otzovists” at the conference, but theydid not raise the question openly), or to refrain from direct-ly and openly criticising its mistakes and from enumerating them in the resolution (as some delegates insisted at the con-ference). 
 The resolution fully recognises that the grouphas committed mistakes for which it was not alone to blame,and which were quite similar to the inevitable mistakes ofall our Party organisations. 
 But there are other mistakes—departures from the political line of the Party. 
 Since these departures occurred, since they were made by an organisation openly acting in the name of the whole Party, the Party wasbound to declare clearly and definitely that these were de-viations. 
 In the history of West-European socialist partiesthere have been a number of instances of abnormal relationsbetween the parliamentary groups and the Party; to this day these relations are quite often abnormal in the Latin coun-tries, where the groups do not display sufficient Party spirit. 
We must from the very outset organise Social-Democraticparliamentarism in Russia on a different basis; we must atonce establish team-work in this field—so that every Social-Democratic deputy may really feel that he has the Party behind him, that the Party is deeply concerned over his mistakes and tries to straighten out his path—so that everyParty worker may take part in the general Duma work of the Party, learning from the practical Marxist criticism of its steps, feeling it his duty to assist it, and striving to gear the special work of the group to the whole propaganda and agitation activity of the Party. 
 The conference was the first authoritative meeting of delegates from the biggest Party organisations to discussthe work of the Duma Social-Democratic group during thewhole session. 
 And the decision of the conference shows very clearly how our Party will shape its Duma work, how very exacting it will be in this field both to itself and to thegroup, how undeviatingly and consistently it proposes towork on developing genuinely Social-Democratic parlia-mentarism. 
 The question of our attitude to the Duma group has a tactical and an organisational aspect. 
 In the latter respect the resolution on the Duma group is only the applicationof our general principles of organisational policy to a par-ticular case, principles laid down by the conference in theresolution giving instructions on the question of organi-sation. 
 The conference has recorded that two main tendencies exist in the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party on this question: one of them throws the weight ofemphasis on the illegal Party organisation, the other—whichis more or less akin to liquidationism—throws the weightof emphasis on the legal and semi-legal organisations. 
 Thepoint is that the present situation is characterised, as we have already pointed out, by a certain number of Party workers leaving the Party—especially intellectuals, but also someproletarians. 
 The liquidationist trend raises the questionas to whether it is the best, the most active elements thatare abandoning the Party and choosing the legal organisa-tions as their field of activity, or whether it is the “vacil-lating intellectualist and petty-bourgeois elements” that are leaving the Party. 
 Needless to say, by emphaticallyrejecting and condemning liquidationism, the conferencereplied that it was the latter elements. 
 The most proletarianelements of the Party, and those elements of the intelligent-sia that were most consistent in principle and most Social-Democratic, remained true to the Russian Social-Democrat-ic Labour Party. 
 The desertions from the Party mean itspurification, they mean getting rid of its least stable element, of its unreliable friends, of its “fellow-travellers” ( Mit-läufer ), who always joined the proletariat for a while and who were recruited from among the petty bourgeoisie or from among the “declassed”, i. 
e. 
, people thrown out ofthe orbit of some definite class. 
 From this evaluation of the principle of Party organisa-tion logically follows the line of organisational policy adopt-ed by the conference. 
 To strengthen the illegal Party organ-isation, to create Party cells in all spheres of work, to set up first of all “entirely Party committees consisting ofworkers, even if their number be small, in each industrialenterprise”, to concentrate the functions of leadership inthe hands of leaders of the Social-Democratic movement fromamong the workers themselves—such is the task today. 
 Need-less to say, the task of these cells and committees must be to utilise all the semi-legal and, as far as possible, legalorganisations, to maintain “close contact with the masses”,and to direct the work in such a way that Social-Democracyresponds to all the needs of the masses. 
 Every Party celland workers’ committee must become a “base for agitation, propaganda and practical organising work among the masses”, i. 
e. 
, they must go where the masses go, and try at everystep to push the consciousness of the masses in the direc-tion of socialism, to link up every specific question withthe general tasks of the proletariat, to transform everyact of organisation into one of class consolidation, to win by dint of energy and ideological influence (not by their ranks and titles, of course) the leading role in all the pro-letarian legal organisations. 
 Even if these cells and commit-tees be very small at times, they will be linked togetherby Party tradition and Party organisation, by a definiteclass programme; and two or three Social-Democratic mem-bers of the Party will thus be able to avoid becoming sub-merged in an amorphous legal organisation and to pursuetheir Party line under all conditions, in all circumstances and in all kinds of situations, to influence their environ-ment in the spirit of the whole Party, and not allow theenvironment to swallow them up. 
 Though mass organisations of one type or another may be dissolved, though the legal trade unions may be hounded outof existence, though every open act of workers’ initiative under a regime of counter-revolution may be ruined by the police on one pretext or another—no power on earth can pre-vent the concentration of masses of workers in a capitalist country, such as Russia has already become. 
 One way oranother, legally or semi-legally, openly or covertly, theworking class will find its own rallying points; the class-conscious Party Social-Democrats will everywhere andalways march in front of the masses, everywhere and always act together in order to influence the masses in the spirit of the Party. 
 And Social-Democracy, which has proved inopen revolution that it is the party of the class, the partythat succeeded in leading millions in strikes, in the upris-ing of 1905, as well as in the elections of 1906-07, willnow also be able to remain the party of the class, the party of the masses, the vanguard, which in the hardest times will not lose touch with the bulk of the army, but will be ableto help the latter overcome these hard times, consolidateits ranks once more, and train more and more new fighters. 
 Let the Black-Hundred diehards rejoice and howl inside the Duma and outside it, in the capital and in the remote provinces, let the reaction rage—the ever so wise Mr. 
 Stoly-pin cannot take a single step without bringing the pre-cariously balancing autocracy nearer its fall, without creatinga new tangle of political impossibilities and absurdities,without adding new and fresh forces to the ranks of the pro-letariat and to the ranks of the revolutionary elements of the peasant masses. 
 A party which succeeds in consolidating itself for persistent work in contact with the masses, aparty of the advanced class, which succeeds in organisingits vanguard, and which directs its forces in such a way asto influence in a Social-Democratic spirit every sign of lifeof the proletariat—such a party will win no matter what happens. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat , No. 
 2, Published according January 28 (February 10), 1909 to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat ON THE ARTICLE “QUESTIONS OF THE DAY ” The splendid article reprinted here from issue No. 
 7 of Rabocheye Znamya , the organ of the Central Industrial Re-gion, is a reply to an otzovist article published in issue No. 
 5 of the same newspaper. 
 The otzovist article was published for the purpose of discussion, with a note by the editorsof Rabocheye Znamya stating that they disagreed with the author. 
 The present article appeared in No. 
 7 without anycomment, so we may take it that the editors agree with theviews expressed. 
 We in Proletary have long been strongly opposing otzo-vism, and have definitely stated that otzovism—to the extentthat it is evolving from a mere mood into a trend , a system of politics—is departing from revolutionary Marxism andbreaking completely with the principles of Bolshevism. 
 Afterthe appearance of this article in the Moscow organ of the Bolsheviks, however, we must admit that we have not raised the question of otzovism sharply enough hitherto, and thatwe have underestimated the danger which threatened theprinciples of our Bolshevik wing on the part of those who wishto wed this otzovism to Bolshevism. 
 We record the fact thatComrade Muscovite, the author of the article we reprint, has put the case as strongly, as definitely and with as firm re-gard for principle as we have done in private discussions withotzovists. 
 Meeting living representatives of otzovism everyday, witnessing locally practical examples of otzovist prop-aganda, which day by day threatens to depart still morefrom the path of revolutionary Social-Democracy, our Moscow organ was quite justified in presenting the issue in the sharp and uncompromising terms it did. 
 Either revolutionary Marxism, i. 
e. 
—in Russia—Bolshevism; or otzovism, i. 
e. 
, the renunciation of Bolshevism; this is how the Moscow com-rade put the question. 
 Thereby he fully supported the way we formulated the question in our preliminary arguments with the otzovist comrades before the general Party conference. 
 We are aware that some Bolshevik working men at pres-ent sympathise with otzovism, but in the majority of casestheir “otzovism” is nothing more than a passing mood , fos-tered by the gross mistakes which our Duma group committed; and the remarks of the author of the article and ourselves do not, of course, apply to them. 
 But inasmuch as otzovismis being erected into a theory, reduced to a complete systemof politics—by a small group imagining itself to be therepresentative of “true” revolutionism—a relentless ideo-logical war must be launched against it. 
 The author of the article here reproduced is quite right when he defines the arguments of the otzovist in No. 
 5 of Rabocheye Znamya (whose article we reprinted in Proletary , No. 
 39) and the otzovist trend in general with its advocacy of a “labour con-gress”, etc. 
 as equivalent to Menshevism turned inside out. 
 And he is even more right when he says that the principles which certain otzovists urge in support of their trend objectively—whether they are politically consciousof it or not—threaten to lead them to anarcho-syndicalismor to just plain anarchism. 
 Moscow’s way of stating the issue shows how politically short-sighted—for all their good intentions—are those Bol-sheviks who refuse to regard otzovism as a danger on grounds of principle , who view the matter merely as “disagreements on practical points”, and who see in otzovism a “sound core”,and not the germ of ideological liquidationism on the left. 
The Moscow comrade’s article should convince them that inscreening the otzovists ideologically, or even maintaining friendly neutrality towards otzovist ideas, they are bringing grist to the otzovist mill, becoming their prisoners of war , damaging the cause of Bolshevism. 
 Otzovism is not Bolshevism, but the worst political travesty of Bolshevism its worst political enemy could in-vent. 
 There must be absolute clarity on this point. 
 We think that all Bolsheviks, down to the smallest circle, should be perfectly clear in their minds what otzovism standsfor, should study it thoroughly and ask themselves: is this not obvious renunciation—under the flag of “revolutionari-ness” and “Leftism”—of the fine traditions of the old Bolshe-vism, as it came into being in the period before the revolu-tion and in the fire of the revolution? That is why we have initiated a discussion on these questions in Proletary . 
 We have published everything that was sent to us, and reprinted all that Bolsheviks in Russiahave written on the subject. 
 So far, we have not rejected a single contribution to the discussion, and we shall con-tinue to pursue the same course. 
 Unfortunately, the otzo-vist comrades and those who sympathise with them have, sofar, sent us little material, and, in general, have avoidedmaking a frank and complete statement of their theoreticalcredo in the press. 
 They prefer to talk “among themselves”. 
 We invite all comrades, otzovists and orthodox Bolsheviks alike, to state their views in the columns of Proletary . 
 If necessary we shall publish these contributions in pamphletform. 
 Ideological clarity and consistency—this is whatwe need, particularly in these difficult times. 
 We shall leave it to the gentlemen of the Socialist-Rev-olutionary Party to play down their dissensions, and to congratulate themselves on their “unanimity” at a momentwhen people are justly saying about them: “You can findanything you like among them—from Popular-Socialistliberalism to liberalism with a bomb. 
” We shall leave the Mensheviks to their ideological hob-nobbing with Cherevanin and Co. 
 Let them practise their double dealing (renouncing Cherevanin in the German press,and embracing him in the Russian); let them cohabit withthe ideological liquidators of the fundamental principlesof revolutionary Marxism; let them play down their disagree-ments, and display all their virtuosity in the paste-pot art as they did in Golos Sotsial-Demokrata (No. 
 10-11), where they “resolved” their differences with Plekhanov by the simpledevice of papering them over. 
 133 Our supporters should not be afraid of an internal ideo-logical struggle, once it is necessary. 
 They will be all thestronger for it. 
 It is our duty to bring our disagreements out into the open, the more so since, in point of fact, the whole Party is beginning to line up more and more withour trend. 
 We call on our Bolshevik comrades for ideologi-cal clarity and for the sweeping away of all backstairs gos-sip, from whatever source it may come. 
 There are no end of people who would like to see the ideological struggle on momentous cardinal issues side-tracked into petty squabbles,like those conducted by the Mensheviks after the SecondCongress. 
 Such people must not be tolerated in the ranksof the Bolsheviks. 
 The Bolshevik working men should strong-ly discourage such attempts and insist on one thing, and one thing alone: ideological clarity , definite opinions , a line based on principle . 
 Once this complete ideological clarity is achieved, all Bolsheviks will be able on matters of organ-isation to display the unanimity and solidarity that ourwing of the Party has always displayed hitherto. 
 Proletary , No. 
 42, Published according February 12 (25), 1909 to the text in Proletary THE AIM OF THE PROLETARIAN STRUGGLE IN OUR REVOLUTION In the article printed above, Comrade Martov touches upon an extremely important question or, rather, series of questions concerning the aim the proletariat and the So-cial-Democrats are fighting for in our revolution. 
 Hetouches upon the history of the discussion of these questionsin our Party, upon their relation to the principles of Marx-ism and to Narodism and upon all the shades of opinion thathave been expressed on the subject. 
 He touches upon all as-pects of the question, but does not clear up a single one of them. 
 To come to the nub of the matter we must make asystematic survey of the question in all its aspects. 
 I We shall begin with the history of the discussion of this question by the Russian Social-Democrats. 
 It was broughtup by the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks at the begin-ning of 1905. 
 The former answered it with the “formula”:revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat andthe peasantry (cf. 
 Vperyod , 134 No. 
 14, April 12, 1905 *). 
 The latter flatly rejected this definition of the class content of a victorious bourgeois revolution. 
 The Third (Bolshevik)Congress held in London in May 1905 and the Menshevikconference held at the same time in Geneva, officially expressedthe views of the two sections of the Party. 
 In keepingwith the spirit of the times, both sections of the Party in their resolutions dealt, not with the theoretical and general *See present edition, Vol. 
 8, pp. 
 293-303. 
— Ed. 
 question of the aim of the struggle and the class content of a victorious revolution in general, but with the narrower question of a provisional revolutionary government. 
 The Bol-shevik resolution read: “... The establishment of a democrat-ic republic in Russia will be possible only as the resultof a victorious popular uprising, whose organ will be a pro-visional revolutionary government.... 
 Subject to the rela-tion of forces and other factors which cannot be determined exactly beforehand, representatives of our Party may par-ticipate in the provisional revolutionary government for thepurpose of waging a relentless struggle against all attemptsat counter-revolution, and of defending the independentinterests of the working class. 
” The Menshevik resolutionread: “... Social-Democracy must not set out to seize power or share it with anyone in the provisional government, but must remain the party of extreme revolutionary opposition. 
” It is evident from the above that the Bolsheviks them-selves, at an all-Bolshevik Congress, did not include i n their official resolution any such “formula” as the dictator-ship of the proletariat and the peasantry, but stated only that it was permissible to participate in the provisional government, and that it was the “mission” of the proletariatto “play the leading role” (resolution on armed uprising). 
The ‘’formula’’: “revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of theproletariat and the peasantry”, given in the Bolshevik pressbefore the Third Congress, was repeated in the pamphlet Two Tactics * after that Congress, and it never entered anybody’s head to accuse the Bolsheviks of saying one thing in theirresolutions and another thing in their commentaries. 
 Itnever entered anybody’s head to demand that the resolutionsof a mass party engaged in political struggle should tally,word for word, with the formulas giving a Marxist definition of the class content of a victorious revolution. 
 Another important conclusion to be drawn from our historical enquiry is this. 
 In the spring of 1905 the key issue of the controversy for both sections of the Party was the conquest of power by the proletariat and the revolution-ary classes in general, and neither section went into the ques-tion of what the relations between these classes conquering *See present edition, Vol. 
 9, pp. 
 15-140. 
— Ed. 
 power might or should be. 
 As we have seen, the Menshe-viks reject both the seizing and the sharing of power. 
 The Bolsheviks speak of the “leading role of the proletariat in the revolution” (resolution on the armed uprising) and saythat Social-Democrats “may” participate in a provisionalgovernment; that the “independence of the Social-DemocraticParty, which aims at the complete socialist revolution shouldbe firmly safeguarded” (resolution on the provisional revo-lutionary government); that the revolutionary movement of the peasants should be “supported”, that “the revolutionary-democratic content of the peasant movement should becleared of reactionary impurities”, that “the revolutionaryconsciousness of the peasants should be developed, and theirdemocratic demands carried to their logical conclusion” (res-olution on the attitude to be adopted to the peasant move-ment). 
 The resolutions of the Bolshevik Congress of 1905contain no other “formulas” on the relations between theproletariat and the peasantry. 
 Now let us take the draft resolutions of the two sec-tions a year later, before the Stockholm Congress. 
 These drafts are often forgotten or ignored in the press in gener-al, and in our Party in particular. 
 That is a great pity,for their significance in the history of the tactical prin-ciples of Social-Democracy is enormous. 
 It is these draftresolutions which show what lessons the two sections of theParty drew from the experience of the struggles of October and December 1905. 
 The Bolsheviks in their draft resolution on the class aims of the proletariat write: “Only the proletariat canbring the democratic revolution to its consummation, thecondition being that the proletariat, as the only thoroughlyrevolutionary class in modern society, leads the mass of the peasantry, and imparts political consciousness to its spon-taneous struggle against landed proprietorship and the feudalstate” (repeated in the draft resolution for the LondonCongress, see Proletary , No. 
 14, March 4, 1907 *). 
 Thus the “formula” which the Bolsheviks here chose for themselves reads: the proletariat leading the peasantry. 
 The Bolshevik resolutions contain no other formula to express the idea of the revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the *See present edition, Vol. 
 12, p. 
 139. 
— Ed. 
 proletariat and the peasantry. 
 This fact cannot be too strong-ly emphasised, for it is in the hope of its being forgotten or ignored that Comrade Martov attempts to place the resolu-tion adopted at the December Conference of 1908 in a totallyfalse light. 
 The Mensheviks in their draft resolution (reprinted in Lenin’s “Report”, pp. 
 68-70, from Partiiniye Izvestia 135) say that it is the task of the proletariat “to be the driving force of the bourgeois revolution”. 
 Please note: not the “leader”, not the “guide”, as the Bolshevik resolution says,but the “driving force”. 
 And among the tasks enumerated isthat of “supporting by mass pressure such oppositional stepsof the bourgeois democrats as do not clash with the demandsin our programme, as may promote their fulfilment and be-come the point of departure for the further advancement of the revolution”. 
 Thus, the difference between them is reduced by the Bolsheviks and Mensheviks themselves to the alternative:“leader” and “guide” of the revolution, who “leads” the peas-antry, or “driving force of the revolution”, which “supports” the various steps taken by the bourgeois democrats. 
 We would add that the Mensheviks, who were the victors at the Stock-holm Congress, themselves withdrew this resolution in spite of the protests and insistence of the Bolsheviks. 
 Why didthe Mensheviks do it? The reader will find the answer tothis question when he reads the following passage from the same Menshevik draft resolution: “The proletariat can prop-erly fulfil its task as the driving force of the bourgeoisrevolution only by organising itself while at the same timedrawing more and more new sections of the town bourgeoisieand the peasantry into the revolutionary struggle, democratis-ing their demands, stimulating them to organise and there-by paving the way for the victory of the revolution. 
” This is obviously a half-hearted concession to the Bol-sheviks, for the proletariat is depicted not only as a driv-ing force, but to some extent at least as a leader, since it“draws” and “stimulates” the peasantry and new sectionsof the town bourgeoisie. 
 To proceed. 
 On the question of the provisional govern-ment, the Menshevik draft resolution reads: “In the eventof a general revolutionary upsurge in the country, the Social-Democrats must everywhere promote the formation of Soviets of Workers’ Deputies, stimulate other revolutionary-democratic elements to form similar bodies, promote the union of all these bodies into general non-party organisa-tions of popular revolutionary struggle, putting before themthose general national tasks of the revolution which fromthe proletarian point of view can and should be fulfilledat the given stage of the revolution” (ibid. 
, p. 
 91). 
 This forgotten draft resolution of the Mensheviks clear-ly shows that the experience of October-December 1905 com-pletely bewildered the Mensheviks, who surrendered theirposition to the Bolsheviks. 
 Indeed, is the passage quotedabove compatible with the following point in the same draft:“The Social-Democrats must not set out to seize power and establish a dictatorship in the present bourgeois revolution” (p. 
 92)? This last proposition is quite consistent in prin-ciple, and (except where it refers to “sharing power”) is anexact repetition of the resolution of 1905. 
 But it hopelesslycontradicts the lessons of October-December 1905 which theMensheviks themselves reduce to the union of all bodies of the proletariat and “ other revolutionary-democratic elements ” into “general non-party organisations of popular revolution-ary struggle”! If the Soviets of Workers’ Deputies “unite”with similar revolutionary-democratic bodies into non-party organisations of popular revolutionary struggle, it is ob-vious that the proletariat does set out to “seize power and establish a dictatorship”, that it is taking part in such seizure of power. 
 The resolution itself says that “the mainobject” of the revolution is to “wrest political power fromthe hands of the reactionary government”. 
 Although shyingat the words “seizure of power and dictatorship”, and renounc-ing these terrible things in the most emphatic manner, the Mensheviks were forced to admit after 1905 that the “union” of the Soviets of Workers’ Deputies with “similar”revolutionary-democratic bodies followed logically from thecourse of events, and that this union must result in the formation of “ general non-party” (this is not quite correct; it should have read: non-party or inter-party) “organisa-tions of popular revolutionary struggle”. 
 But this general organisation is nothing else than a provisional revolutionary government! Afraid to use the exact and direct term, the Mensheviks replaced it by a description ; but that does not alter matters. 
 “An organ of popular revolutionary struggle”, that “wrests political power” from the hands of the old government is nothing more nor less than a provisionalrevolutionary government. 
 While the Mensheviks had to take into account the lessons of October-December 1905 after much blundering and stumbl-ing, the Bolsheviks arrived at their conclusions directly and clearly. 
 The Bolshevik draft resolution on the provisional government declares: “In this open struggle [at the end of1905] those elements among the local population who werecapable of determined action against the old regime (almostexclusively the proletariat and the advanced sections ofthe petty bourgeoisie) were impelled by necessity to set up organisations which were in effect the rudiments of a new revolutionary authority—the Soviets of Workers’ Deputiesin St. 
 Petersburg, Moscow and other cities, the Sovietsof Soldiers’ Deputies in Vladivostok, Krasnoyarsk, etc. 
,the Railwaymen’s Committees in Siberia and in the south,the Peasant Committees in Saratov Gubernia, the Revolution-ary City Committees in Novorossiisk and elsewhere and, last-ly, the elected rural bodies in the Caucasus and the Balticregion” (p. 
 92). 
 The failure of these bodies was due to theirdisunited and rudimentary state, we read further, whilethe provisional revolutionary government is defined asthe “organ of victorious uprising”. 
 The resolution goes on to say: “In order to carry the revolution through to victory, the proletariat is now faced with the urgent taskof promoting, jointly with the revolutionary democrats, theunification of the insurrection and of forming a co-ordinat-ing centre for this insurrection in the shape of a provision-al revolutionary government. 
” Then follows an almost ver-batim repetition of the resolution passed by the Third Con-gress in 1905. 
 These quotations from the draft resolutions of the two sections before the Stockholm Congress enable us to put thequestion of the revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of theproletariat and the peasantry on a concrete historical basis. 
 Anyone who desires to give a clear and straightforward answer to this question must take into account the experience ofthe end of 1905. 
 Those who evade examining this experience will not only be ignoring material of the utmost value to a Russian Marxist. 
 They will furthermore inevitably doom themselves to the “pettifogging” interpretation of formulas, to “slurring over” and “pasting over” (to use Comrade Mar-tov’s apt expression) disagreements on matters of principleand to that very unprincipled floundering on questions ofthe theory and practice of “dictatorship” that is expressedbest of all by the formula: “The movement is everything, the ultimate aim—nothing. 
” 136 The experience of the end of 1905 has undoubtedly proved that “a general revolutionary upsurge in the country”produces special “organisations of popular revolutionarystruggle” (according to the Menshevik formula) or “rudiment-ary organs of a new revolutionary authority” (according to that of the Bolsheviks). 
 It is equally beyond doubt that in the history of the Russian bourgeois revolution theseorgans were created, first, by the proletariat, and second-ly “by other revolutionary-democratic elements”; and a simplereference to the composition of the population of Russiain general, and of Great Russia in particular, will show that the peasantry represent the vast majority of these other elements. 
 Lastly, no less beyond doubt is the histor-ical tendency of these local bodies or organisations toamalgamate. 
 The conclusion that inevitably follows fromthese undoubted facts is that a victorious revolution inpresent-day Russia cannot be anything but the revolution-ary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peas-antry. 
 Nobody can get away from this inevitable conclusion,except by “pettifogging” and “pasting over” disagreements!If fragments of the question are not torn from their context,if town and country and the various localities are not arti-ficially and arbitrarily separated, if the question of the composition of this or that government is not substituted for the question of the dictatorship of classes —in short, if the question is examined as a whole , then nobody can prove by concrete examples taken from the experience of 1905 thata victorious revolution could be anything else than the dicta-torship of the proletariat and the peasantry. 
 But before going any further, let us finish with the Party history of the “formula” we are examining. 
 We have seenhow the two sections precisely formulated their views in 1905 and in 1906. 
 In 1907, on the eve of the London Con-gress, the Mensheviks first proposed one draft resolution on the attitude towards the bourgeois parties ( Narodnaya Duma ,137 1907, No. 
 12, March 24, 1907) and at the Congress itself they proposed another. 
 The first draft talks about“combining” the actions of the proletariat with the actionsof other classes; the second talks about “utilising” the move-ment of other classes “for the aims” of the proletariat, and about “support” by the proletariat of certain “oppositional and revolutionary steps” made by other classes, and aboutSocial-Democrats entering into “agreements” with the liber-al and democratic classes in “certain definite cases”. 
 The Bolshevik draft, like the resolution adopted by the London Congress, says that the Social-Democrats should “compel them [the Narodnik or Trudovik parties “which more or less closely express the interests and the viewpoint ofthe broad mass of the peasants and the town petty bourgeoisie”]to side with the Social-Democrats against the Black Hundredsand the Cadets” and that the “joint actions following fromthis” should “serve only to promote a general onset”. 
 The resolution as adopted by the Congress differs from the Bol-sheviks’ draft in that it contains the additional words, insert-ed on the initiative of a Polish delegate: “in the struggleto carry the revolution through to victory”. 
 This, onceagain, most clearly reaffirmed the idea of the revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry; for such a dictatorship is “joint action” by these classes, which have “ carried , or are carrying, the revolution through to victory”! II We have only to take a general glance at the history of Party opinions on the question of the dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry to see how much damage Com-rade Martov has done himself by his talk about pettifoggingand movements without a goal. 
 Indeed, the first thing thatthis history shows is that the Bolsheviks themselves havenever , either in their drafts or in their resolutions, in-serted the expression or “formula”—”dictatorship of the pro-letariat and the peasantry”. 
 Nevertheless, up till now, no one has ever thought of denying that all the Bolshevik drafts and resolutions between 1905 and 1907 are based entirely on the idea of the dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry. 
 It would be absurd to deny it, for to do so would indeed be pettifoggery and an attempt to obscure the real issue with a mere quibbling over words. 
 The proletariatwhich “ allies to itself ” the mass of the peasantry, said Lenin in Two Tactics (Twelve Years , p. 
 445 *); the proletariat which “ leads ” the mass of the peasantry, says the draft resolution of the Bolsheviks in 1906; “joint actions” of the proletariat and the peasantry “in the struggle to carrythe democratic revolution through to victory”, says theresolution of the London Congress. 
 Is it not obvious thatthe same idea runs through all these formulations, thatthis idea is precisely the idea of the dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry, that the “formula”, the prole-tariat relying upon the peasantry, remains part and parcel of that same dictatorship of the proletariat and the peas-antry? Comrade Martov tries his hardest to confute this latter proposition. 
 He starts a discussion about the word “ and ”. 
 There is no “and”; the formula with “and” in it was reject-ed!—exclaims Comrade Martov. 
 Don’t dare now to put this“and” into unsigned articles in the Central Organ. 
 Too late,too late, dear Comrade Martov: you should have addressedthis demand to all the Bolshevik organs of the press during the whole period of the revolution. 
 All of them, all the time, spoke about the dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry, and did so on the basis of resolutions whichdid not contain this “and ”. 
 Comrade Martov has lost this battle of principle over the word “and”; and he has lost itnot only because it was belated, but also because her majestyLogic has ruled that “allying to” and “leading” and “joint actions” and “relying upon” and “with the help of” (this last expression occurs in the resolution of the Sixth Congressof the Polish Social-Democrats 138) all come within the mean-ing of the offending “and”. 
 But the Bolsheviks objected to “relying upon”, says Comrade Martov, continuing his debate on principles. 
 Yes, they did object; not because it controverted the dictator-*See present edition, Vol. 
 9, p. 
 100. 
— Ed. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR ship of the proletariat and the peasantry, but because in Russian this “formula” does not sound very well. 
 Usually, it is the weak who rely on the strong. 
 The Bolsheviks are quite willing to accept word for word the Polish formula,“the proletariat with the help of the peasantry”—although perhaps it would have been better to say, “the proletariatleading the peasantry”. 
 One may argue about all these for-mulas, but to convert such an argument into a “debate on principles” is simply ridiculous. 
 Comrade Martov’s attempt to deny that “relying upon” is part of the concept of joint action is a model of pettifoggery. 
 Comrade Martov quotesDan, Axelrod and Semyonov as saying that the conquest ofpower “by the proletariat, relying upon the peasantry”,means conquest of power by “the proletariat alone ”; but this can only make the reader smile. 
 If we were to say that Mar-tov and Potresov, relying upon Cherevanin, Prokopovich and Co. 
, have liquidated the idea of the hegemony of the prole-tariat in the revolution, would anyone take that to mean thatMartov and Potresov liquidated this idea alone , without Cherevanin, Prokopovich and Co. 
? No, comrades, a discussion in the Central Organ should not be reduced to pettifoggery. 
 Such methods will not helpyou to wriggle out of admitting the fundamental and undoubt-ed fact that the majority of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, including thePoles and the Bolsheviks, stand firmly for (1) recognition ofthe guiding role of the proletariat, the role of leader, in the revolution, (2) recognition that the aim of the struggle is the conquest of power by the proletariat assisted by otherrevolutionary classes, (3) recognition that the first andperhaps the sole “assistants” in this matter are the peas-ants. 
 Those who want to discuss the real issue should tryto challenge at least one of these three propositions. 
 Com-rade Martov has not examined a single one of them seriously. 
 He forgot to tell his readers that on each of these three formulas the Mensheviks hold a view which the Party hasrejected , and that Menshevism and Menshevism alone is the delusion which the Party has rejected ! And that was what the Mensheviks’ policy was during the revolution—a movement without a goal, and therefore dependent on the vagaries of the Constitutional-Democratic Party. 
 And this was the caseprecisely because the Mensheviks did not know whether the proletariat should aspire to be the leader, whether it should aspire to the conquest of power, and whether in doing so it should rely on the assistance of any other particular class. 
 This ignorance inevitably dooms the Social-Democrats’ policyto uncertainty, error, sacrifice of principle and dependenceon the liberals. 
 The conference did not bury the “dictatorship of the pro-letariat and the peasantry”, and did not authorise its elimi-nation from the Party’s vocabulary. 
 On the contrary, the conference endorsed it, and took another step towards its fuller recognition. 
 The London Congress recognised (1) therole of the proletariat as “leader in the bourgeois-democrat-ic revolution”, and (2) “joint actions” of the proletariat andthe peasantry which were to “serve only for the purpose of a general onset”, actions, too, by the way, for “carrying the revolution through to victory”. 
 All that remained was torecognise that the aim of the struggle in this revolution wasthe conquest of power by the proletariat and the peasantry. 
This the conference did in the formula: “The conquest ofpower by the proletariat, relying on the peasantry. 
” In saying this we do not in the least deny or play down the differences of opinion between the Bolsheviks and thePoles. 
 The Polish Social-Democrats have every opportu-nity to voice these differences in their own publicationsin the Russian language, in the columns of the Bolshevikpress, and in the Central Organ. 
 The Polish Social-Demo-crats have already begun to avail themselves of this opportu-nity. 
 If Comrade Martov achieves his object, and succeedsin bringing the Polish Social-Democrats into our dispute,each and all will see that we are at one with the PolishSocial-Democrats against the Mensheviks on all essentials,and that we disagree only on minor points. 
 III As for Trotsky, whom Comrade Martov has involved in the controversy of third parties which he has organised—a controversy involving everybody except the dissentient— we positively cannot go into a full examination of his views here. 
 A separate article of considerable length wouldbe needed for this. 
 By just touching upon Trotsky’s mis-taken views, and quoting scraps of them, Comrade Martov only sows confusion in the mind of the reader, for scraps of quotations do not explain but confuse matters. 
 Trotsky’s major mistake is that he ignores the bourgeois characterof the revolution and has no clear conception of the transi-tion from this revolution to the socialist revolution. 
 Thismajor mistake leads to those mistakes on side issues whichComrade Martov repeats when he quotes a couple of them with sympathy and approval. 
 Not to leave matters in the confused state to which Comrade Martov has reduced them by his ex-position, we shall at least expose the fallacy of those argu-ments of Trotsky which have won the approval of ComradeMartov. 
 A coalition of the proletariat and the peasantry“presupposes either that the peasantry will come under the sway of one of the existing bourgeois parties, or that it will form a powerful independent party”. 
 This is obviouslyuntrue both from the standpoint of general theory and fromthat of the experience of the Russian revolution. 
 A “coali-tion” of classes does not at all presuppose either the exist-ence of any particular powerful party, or parties in general. 
 This is only confusing classes with parties. 
 A “coalition” of the specified classes does not in the least imply either that one of the existing bourgeois parties will establish itssway over the peasantry or that the peasants should form a powerful independent party! Theoretically this is clear be-cause, first, the peasants do not lend themselves very well to party organisation; and because, secondly, the formation of peasant parties is an extremely difficult and lengthy proc-ess in a bourgeois revolution, so that a “powerful independ-ent” party may emerge only towards the end of the revolution. 
The experience of the Russian revolution shows that “coali-tions” of the proletariat and the peasantry were formed scores and hundreds of times , in the most diverse forms, without any “powerful independent party” of the peasantry. 
 Such a coali-tion was formed when there was “joint action”, between, say,a Soviet of Workers’ Deputies and a Soviet of Soldiers’ Dep-uties, or a Railwaymen’s Strike Committee, or Peasants’Deputies, etc. 
 All these organisations were mainly non-party ; nevertheless, every joint action between them un-doubtedly represented a “coalition” of classes . 
 In the course of this a peasant party took shape as an idea, in germ, com-ing into being in the form of the Peasant Union of 1905,139 or the Trudovik group of 1906—and as such a party grew, developed and constituted itself, the coalition of classes assumed different forms, from the vague and unofficial todefinite and official political agreements. 
 After the disso-lution of the First Duma, for example, the following three calls for insurrection were issued: (1) “To the Army and Na-vy” (2) “To all the Russian Peasants”, (3) “To the Whole People”. 
 The first was signed by the Social-Democratic group in the Duma and the Committee of the Trudovikgroup. 
 Was this “joint action” evidence of a coalition of two classes ? Of course it was. 
 To deny it means to engage in pet-tifoggery, or to transform the broad scientific concept ofa “coalition of classes” into a narrow, juridical concept, almost that—I would say—of a notary. 
 Further, can it be denied that this joint call for insurrection, signed by the Duma deputies of the working class and peasantry, was ac-companied by joint actions of representatives of both classes in the form of partial local insurrections? Can it be de-nied that a joint call for a general insurrection and joint participation in local and partial insurrections necessarily implies the joint formation of a provisional revolutionarygovernment? To deny it would mean to engage in pettifog-gery, to reduce the concept of “government” to somethingcompletely and formally constituted, to forget that the com-plete and formally constituted develop from the incomplete and unconstituted. 
 To proceed. 
 The second call for insurrection was signed by the Central Committee (Menshevik!) of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 and also the Central Committee of the Socialist-Revolution-ary. 
 Party, the All-Russian Peasant Union, the All-RussianRailwaymen’s and the All-Russian Teachers’ Unions, as well as by the Committee of the Trudovik group and the Social-Democratic group in the Duma. 
 The third call forinsurrection bears the signatures of the Polish SocialistParty and the Bund, 140 plus all the foregoing signatures except the three unions. 
 That was a fully constituted political coalition of par-ties and non-party organisations! That was “the dictator-ship of the proletariat and the peasantry” proclaimed in the form of a threat to tsarism, in the form of a call to the whole people, but not yet realised! And today one will hardly find many Social-Democrats who would agree with the Men-shevik Sotsial-Demokrat141 of 1906, No. 
 6, which wrote of these appeals: “In this case our Party concluded with otherrevolutionary parties and groups not a political bloc, buta fighting agreement, which we have always considered expe-dient and necessary” (cf. 
 Proletary , No. 
 1, August 21, 1906 and No. 
 8, November 23, 1906 *). 
 A fighting agreement can-not be contraposed to a political bloc, for the latter concept embraces the former. 
 A political bloc at various historicalmoments takes the form either of “a fighting agreement” inconnection with insurrection, or of a parliamentary agreementfor “joint action against the Black Hundreds and Cadets”,and so on. 
 The idea of the dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry has found its practical expression through-out our revolution in a thousand forms, from the signingof the manifesto calling upon the people to pay no taxesand to withdraw their deposits from the savings-banks(December 1905), or the signing of calls to insurrection(July 1906), to voting in the Second and Third Dumas in 1907 and 1908. 
 Trotsky’s second statement quoted by Comrade Martov is wrong too. 
 It is not true that “the whole question is,who will determine the government’s policy, who will con-stitute a homogeneous majority in it”, and so forth. 
 And itis particularly untrue when Comrade Martov uses it as an argument against the dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry. 
 Trotsky himself, in the course of his argu-ment, concedes that “representatives of the democratic popu-lation will take part” in the “workers’ government”, i. 
e. 
,concedes that there will be a government consisting of rep-resentatives of the proletariat and the peasantry. 
 On what terms the proletariat will take part in the government of the revolution is, quite another question, and it is quitelikely that on this question the Bolsheviks will disagree notonly with Trotsky, but also with the Polish Social-Democrats. 
The question of the dictatorship of the revolutionary classes;however, cannot be reduced to a question of the “majority” in any particular revolutionary government, or of the terms *See present edition, Vol. 
 11, pp. 
 150-66 and 307-19. 
— Ed. 
 on which the participation of the Social-Democrats in such a government is admissible. 
 Lastly, the most fallacious of Trotsky’s opinions that Comrade Martov quotes and considers to be “just” is thethird, viz. 
: “even if they [the peasantry] do this [“sup-port the regime of working-class democracy”] with no morepolitical understanding than they usually support a bour-geois regime. 
” The proletariat cannot count on the ignorance and prejudices of the peasantry as the powers that be under a bourgeois regime count and depend on them, nor can itassume that in time of revolution the peasantry will remainin their usual state of political ignorance and passivity. 
The history of the Russian revolution shows that the veryfirst wave of the upsurge at the end of 1905, at once stim-ulated the peasantry to form a political organisation (the All-Russian Peasant Union) which was undoubtedly the em-bryo of a distinct peasant party. 
 Both in the First and SecondDumas—in spite of the fact that the counter-revolutionhad wined out the first contingents of advanced peasants—the peasantry, now for the first time acting on a nation-wide scale in the Russian general elections, immediately laid the foundations of the Trudovik group, which was un-doubledly the embryo of a distinct peasant party. 
 In theseembryos and rudiments there was much that was unstable,vague and vacillating: that is beyond doubt. 
 But if polit-ical groups like this could spring up at the beginning of the revolution, there cannot be the slightest doubt that a revolution carried to such a “conclusion”, or rather, tosuch a high stage of development as a revolutionary dic-tatorship, will produce a more definitely constituted andstronger revolutionary peasant party. 
 To think otherwisewould be like supposing that some vital organs of an adult can retain the size, shape and development of infancy. 
 In any case, Comrade Martov’s conclusion that the confer-ence agreed with Trotsky, of all people, on the questionof the relations between the proletariat and the peasantryin the struggle for power is an amazing contradiction of thefacts, is an attempt to read into a word a meaning that was never discussed, not mentioned and not even thought of at the conference. 
 IV Comrade Martov touches on Kautsky, and in doing so manages once more to pack so many inaccuracies in so fewwords that to answer him to the point we are obliged totell the reader the whole story practically from the begin-ning. 
 The statement that “many, including Lenin in his pref-ace to Kautsky’s article on Prospects , * emphatically denied the bourgeois character of our revolution” is utterly falseas also is the statement that Kautsky “has declared thatthe Russian revolution is not bourgeois”. 
 The facts are en-tirely different. 
 Plekhanov put questions to a number of representatives of the international Social-Democratic movement. 
 His first question was about the “ general character ” of the Russian revolution, and the second was about “the attitude of theSocial-Democratic Party towards the bourgeois democratswho are fighting in their own way for political liberty”. 
In formulating the questions in this way Comrade Plekhanov committed two errors against Marxism. 
 First, he confused the “general character” of the revolution, its social and economic content , with the question of the motive forces of the revolution. 
 Marxists must not confuse these ques-tions; they must not even directly deduce the answer to the second question from the answer to the first without a special concrete analysis. 
 Secondly, he confused the role of the peasantry in our revolution with the role of thebourgeois democracy in general. 
 Actually both the peasant-ry and the liberals are covered by the scientific term: “bour-geois democracy”; but the attitude of the proletariat towardsthese two varieties of “bourgeois democracy” must of neces-sity differ materially. 
 Kautsky immediately detected Comrade Plekhanov’s er-rors and corrected them in his reply. 
 As regards the social and economic content of the revolution, Kautsky did not denyits bourgeois character—on the contrary, he definitelyrecognised it. 
 Here are Kautsky’s statements relevant to the point as quoted in those same Prospects which have been so utterly garbled by Comrade Martov. 
 *See present edition, Vol. 
 11, pp. 
 408-13. 
— Ed. 
 “The present revolution [in Russia] in its effect on the countryside can lead only to the creation of a strong peas-antry on the basis of private property in land, and there-by create as wide a gulf between the proletariat and theproperty-owning section of the rural population as existsalready in Western Europe. 
 Therefore one cannot imaginethat the present Russian revolution would lead immedi-ately to the introduction of the socialist mode of production, even if it temporarily gave the reins of government to the Social-Democrats” (p. 
 31 of the Russian translation editedby N. 
 Lenin). 
 It was this passage that prompted the following words in Lenin’s preface (p. 
 6, ibid. 
). 
 “Needless to say, Kautskyfully agrees with the fundamental thesis of all Russian Social-Democrats that the peasant movement is non-social-ist, that socialism cannot arise from small peasant produc-tion, etc. 
” (Lenin’s italics in the preface). 
 Comrade Martov’s assertion that Lenin positively denied the bourgeois character of our revolution is positively atvariance with the truth. 
 Lenin says just the opposite. 
 Kaut-sky definitely recognised that in its general character, i. 
e. 
, in its social and economic content, our revolution is bour-geois. 
 Plekhanov’s “first question”—wrote Kautsky in this art-icle—“cannot, it seems to me, be given a simple answer, oneway or the other. 
 The time for bourgeois revolutions, i. 
e. 
, revolutions in which the bourgeoisie is the motive force, has passed; it has passed for Russia too.... 
 The bourgeoisieis not one of the motive forces of the present revolutionarymovement in Russia, and that being the case, this movementcannot be called bourgeois” (p. 
 29). 
 As the reader sees,Kautsky here makes it perfectly clear what he is discussing: he is perfectly clearly speaking of a bourgeois revolution, not in the sense of its social and economic content, but i n the sense of a revolution “of which the bourgeoisie is themotive force”. 
 To proceed. 
 Kautsky corrected Plekhanov’s second mis-take by drawing a clear and definite distinction between “liberal” and peasant bourgeois democracy. 
 Kautsky stated that “the revolutionary strength of Russian Social-Democracylies in the community of interests of the industrial prole-tariat and the peasantry”, that “without the peasants we cannot now gain the victory in Russia” (p. 
 31). 
 Apropos of the dull question of the word “ and” which monopolises Com-rade Martov’s discussion of principle, it is interesting tonote that in this same article, i. 
e. 
, in 1906, Kautsky employson one and the same page the expression “ rely” (“on what class can the Russian proletariat rely?”) and the expres-sion: “ the alliance between the proletariat and other classes in the revolutionary struggle must primarily be based on community of economic interests” (p. 
 30). 
 Perhaps Comrade Martov will accuse Karl Kautsky, will say that in 1906—in anticipation of the December 1908 Con-ference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
—Kautsky set out to “mislead thereaders”, to “slur over” and “paste over” the differences between the Bolsheviks and the Polish Social-Democrats, to “engage in pettifoggery”, and so forth? We may point out that, in advocating the idea of an alliance between the proletariat and the peasantry in theRussian bourgeois revolution, Kautsky is not proposing any-thing “new”, but is entirely following in the footsteps of Marx and Engels. 
 In 1848, Marx wrote in Die Neue Rhei-nische Zeitun g 142: “The big bourgeoisie,” i. 
e. 
, the German bourgeoisie after March 18, 1848—“anti-revolutionary fromthe very outset, concluded a defensive and offensive alliancewith reaction out of fear of the people, that is to say, theworkers and the democratic, bourgeoisie” (see Volume III of Marx’s Collected Works published by Mehring; so far only two volumes have appeared in Russian). 
 “The German revo-lution of 1848,” wrote Marx on July 29, 1848, “is a mere trav-esty of the French Revolution of 1789.... 
 The French bour-geoisie of 1789 did not abandon its allies the peasants for amoment.... 
 The German bourgeoisie of 1848 is betraying the peasants without the slightest compunction.... 
” Here in relation to a bourgeois revolution Marx is clearly contraposing the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie alliedwith reaction to the working class allied with the democra-ic bourgeoisie, i. 
e. 
, primarily the peasantry. 
 And thisview can hardly be put down to the fact that Marx’s socialist world-outlook had not fully crystallised at that time. 
 Forty-four years later, in 1892, in his article, “HistoricalMaterialism” ( Neue Zeit , XI, Vol. 
 I, published in Russian in the symposium Historical Materialism ) Engels wrote the following: “... In all the three great bourgeois risings [the Reformation and Peasant War in the sixteenth century in Germany, the English Revolution of the seventeenth cen-tury and the French in the eighteenth] the peasantry fur-nishes the army that has to do the fighting.... 
 Had it not beenfor that yeomanry [in the English Revolution] and for theplebeian element in the towns, the bourgeoisie alone would never have fought the matter out to the bitter end, and would never have brought Charles I to the scaffold. 
” 143 Consequently, the specific feature of the Russian bour-geois revolution is merely that instead of the plebeianelement of the towns taking second place as it did in thesixteenth, seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, it is the proletariat which is taking first place in the twentieth century. 
 V To conclude. 
 Comrade Martov has touched on an extreme-ly important question that deserves discussing very thorough-ly in the columns of the Party’s Central Organ. 
 But it isnot a question to “touch on”, it must be examined in greatdetail, in the light not only of the teachings of Marx andEngels but also of the experience of the Russian Revolutionof 1905-07. 
 The suggestion that the idea of a revolutionary dicta-torship of the proletariat and the peasantry is the resultof a Narodnik spell cast over the Social-Democrats canonly provoke a smile. 
 If that were true, the quasi-Marxistswho argue in this way should first of all have accused Kaut-sky, Marx and Engels of falling under the Narodnik spell. 
 In all the great bourgeois revolutions decisive victory could be achieved only by the proletariat (more or lessdeveloped) in alliance with the peasantry; and the sameholds true for the bourgeois revolution in Russia. 
 In theexperience of 1905-07 the truth of this was given a practical demonstration by every important turn in events: for in practice all decisive actions, both “combative” and parlia-mentary, were actually “joint actions” of the proletariatand the peasantry. 
 Our Party holds firmly to the view that the role of the proletariat is the role of leader in the bourgeois-democratic revolution; that joint actions of the proletariat and the peas-antry are essential to carry it through to victory; that un-less political power is won by the revolutionary classes, vic-tory is impossible. 
 Rejection of these truths must inevitablydoom Social-Democrats to vacillation, to “movement with-out a goal”, to advocating casual agreements with complete disregard for principle, and in practice means falling captive to the Cadets, i. 
e. 
, making the working class dependentupon the liberal-monarchist, counter-revolutionary bour-geoisie. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat , Nos. 
 3 and 4, Published according March 9 (22) and March 21 to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat (April 3), 1909 Signed: N. 
 Lenin TO THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE GERMAN SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC LABOUR PART Y144 The article headed “The Question of Organisation in the Russian Social-Democratic Party” printed in No. 
 79 ofVorwärts (I. 
 Beilage, d. 
 3. 
 IV. 
 1909) obliges us to address a strong protest to the Executive Committee of the German So-cial-Democratic Labour Party. 
 On behalf of the CentralCommittee of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, which has charged us to look after its affairs abroad, we ask the Executive Committee of the German S. 
D. 
P. 
 to givecareful attention to the extremely abnormal situation whichhas been created. 
 The Central Organ of German Social-Democ-racy persistently ignores our formal statement that a spe-cial representative body of the C. 
C. 
 exists abroad, and does not print the report about this institution and its address, which were sent to the paper a long time ago. 
 At the sametime Vorwärts prints a report “From a Comrade” and sets forth in this report an official Party event, namely the Con-ference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, without giving the official text o f the (two) resolutions of the conference on the question of organisation. 
 By not giving the official Party resolutions the letter published in Vorwärts gives an entirely distorted version of the disputes and differences among the RussianSocial-Democrats; what is more, the letter contains a covertfactional polemic against the decisions of the conference. 
Such a form of polemics is liable more than ever to poison the already abnormal relations between the groups within the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Such a form of polemics arouses particularirritation and resentment, while at the same time making it more difficult to explain to the German comrades the real state of affairs and differences within our Party. 
 Therefore the Bureau Abroad of the C. 
C. 
 of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 requests the Executive Committee of the German Social-Democratic Party to consider the question of reporting Rus-sian differences in Vorwärts , and of the publication in Vor-wärts of articles on Russian affairs, as well as official commu-nications from the C. 
C. 
 of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 and official texts of Party resolutions adopted by the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 The Bureau Abroad of the C. 
C. 
, R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 asks the Executive Committee to adopt a decision as to whether Partylife of the Russian Social-Democrats can be reported inVorwärts without giving official information from their C. 
C. 
 and the official texts of Party resolutions. 
 As regards the substance of the matter, the Bureau Abroad of the C. 
C. 
 thinks it essential to point out—among the bound-less number of distortions of the truth in this article—atleast the following three main untruths; to enumerate all the misstatements would necessitate the writing of a pam-phlet. 
 (1) The first resolution on the question of organisation adopted by the conference records the fact that in theR. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 there are two currents of opinion on the basic questions of organisation. 
 In this resolution the Partycondemns the current which is characterised as “liquidation-ist”, i. 
e. 
, in effect aiming at the destruction of the pres-ent R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Not only all the Bolsheviks and all the members of the Polish Social-Democratic Party voted forthis resolution, but also two delegates from the Bund, out ofthe three Bundist delegates present. 
 (2) In the resolution on the assessment of the present situation, proposed by the Bolsheviks and adopted by the Party, it is pointed out at the very beginning that the old feudal autocracy is decaying, making a further step on theroad of transformation into a bourgeois monarchy. 
 The Men-sheviks did not offer any draft of their own but votedagainst this resolution, moving the solitary amendment thatthe word “bourgeois” should be changed to “plutocratic”. 
 (3) The representatives of the Social-Democrats of the Ukraine did not support and could not support the Menshe-viks, because there were no representatives of the Ukraine at the conference. 
 As for the Polish Socialist Party being in agreement with the Mensheviks, this Party did not partici-pate and could not participate in the conference, since this Party is not a member of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 The proposal ofthe Mensheviks that the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 should amalgamatewith this party was rejected by the conference in the form ofa motion carried to call next business. 
 Written not earlier Published according than March 23 (April 5), 1909 to the manuscript Published for the first time A CARICATURE OF BOLSHEVISM We have already given a general appraisal of “otzovism” and “ultimatumism” in Proletary , No. 
 42. 
 * Concerning the resolution of the St. 
 Petersburg otzovists (reprinted in this issue) which served as their platform during the election of delegates to the December Conference of theR. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 (and unfortunately was not communicated to Proletary till after the conference) we have to repeat much of what was said there. 
 This resolution simply teems with fallacious, un-Marxian arguments. 
 Practically every point in it is evidence of the immaturity of its authors’ ideas or of their oblivion of theABC of Social-Democracy. 
 Point 1: “The first stage of therevolution is concluded.... 
” What does that mean? That astage in social and economic development is concluded?Probably not. 
 The authors have in mind the end of the stage of direct revolutionary struggle of the masses. 
 We must assume that the otzovists mean that, if we are not to imputeto them something totally absurd. 
 If that is the case, thenthey admit that present conditions are unfavourable for thedirect revolutionary struggle of the masses. 
 But althoughcompelled by the force of circumstances to admit this, the otzovists are unable to reason out the conclusions that follow, and cannot, therefore, get their arguments to hangtogether. 
 “Russia ... is moving towards a new revolutionaryupswing”.... 
 Quite right! She is only moving towards a n upswing, i. 
e. 
, there is no upswing yet—that is what thismeans, both in logic and in grammar! It appears, however, that this still non-existing upswing is “characterised by *See pp. 
 356-59 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 a sharp conflict”, etc. 
 The result is utter nonsense. 
 The otzovists are incapable of characterising the present. 
 They “characterise” the future, which we are “moving towards”, in order to cover up failure to understand the present. 
 Forinstance, the “pauperised town petty bourgeoisie” jump intothe picture from God knows where, and the reference to themis not backed by even an attempt at an analysis. 
 Why thefuture upswing should be “characterised” by a sharp conflict of pauperised petty bourgeois is not evident at all. 
 Nor does there appear to be any reason why the pauperised townpetty bourgeoisie should be brought in just at this moment. 
Lumpen-proletarians are sometimes distinguished for their sharp conflicts, and sometimes for their amazing instability and inability to fight. 
 The otzovists’ ideas are utterly con-fused, and we are not surprised that at the conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 only two Bundists voted with the two otzo-vists for the insertion of the reference to the “pauperised townpetty bourgeoisie”. 
 Our opinion that otzovism is opportunismturned inside out has been magnificently borne out. 
 With whom will the sharp conflict take place? “With the ruling bloc of the big bourgeoisie and feudalist land-lords. 
” And not with the autocracy? The otzovists cannotdistinguish absolutism, which is manoeuvring between thesetwo classes, from the direct rule of the two classes; withthe absurd result that the struggle against the autocracydrops out of the picture entirely. 
 “Secret work is going on to organise the forces.... 
” The work of learning the lessons of experience, of digestingnew lessons, of accumulating strength may be, and often is,performed in secret; but the organisation of forces cannotbe performed in secret even when all work is driven under-ground. 
 In 1901-03 the organisation of forces proceeded illegally, but not secretly. 
 The otzovists are merely repeat-ing scraps of parrot-phrases and garbling them in the process. 
 Point 2: “The solution of this conflict, in view of the strongly developed class antagonisms in Russia, will assumethe form of a revolution”.... 
 Class antagonisms in Russiaare less strongly developed than in Europe, which is not faced with the task of fighting autocracy. 
 The otzovists fail to see that in trying to broaden their views they are comingcloser to their antipodes, the opportunists. 
 “... of a revolution which will lead to an armed uprising.... 
” The otzovists have not yet told us anything distinctly about the object of the struggle, or about the present stage of development of the autocracy; but they make haste to tellus about the means of struggle in order to proclaim them-selves “revolutionaries”. 
 This is childish, dear comrades,for you are showing us once again that you have learnt by heart scraps of good phrases, without understanding what they mean. 
 The attitude of the revolutionary Social-Democrats towards insurrection was different in 1897, 1901, and in1905. 
 It was only after January 9, 1905 that they made it akey issue—although Russia, in 1897 and in 1901, was undoubt-edly “moving towards upswing”, towards a “sharp conflict”and towards “revolution”. 
 It is not enough to learn slogans by heart; one must also learn to judge the opportune moment to issue them. 
 To advocate one of the means of struggle at a time when the “upswing” has not begun and “revolution”,in the most strict and direct sense of the term, is still amatter of the future (and the otzovists speak of it in the future : “will assume the form of a revolution”) means only to make oneself into a caricature of a revolutionary Social-Democrat. 
 The resolution adopted by the conference speaksof a developing revolutionary crisis and of the aim of thestruggle (conquest of power by the revolutionary classes);more than this cannot and should not be said at the present time . 
 How the mysterious “municipal reforms” got here, and represented as “radical reforms” at that, God only knows. 
Apparently the otzovists themselves do not know whatthis means. 
 Point 3: “In view of this, Social-Democracy as a consist-ently revolutionary party must put non-parliamentary ac-tion in the forefront. 
”... And yet there are people (the ultimatumists) who are so short-sighted that our disagreements with the otzovistsseem to them differences only about practical matters, dis-agreements over the ways and means of applying a commonline of tactics! In the summer of 1907 the disagreement over boycotting the Third Duma might have been regarded merely as a disagreement over methods, and the mistake ofthe boycottists merely as a mistake in choice of methods in applying tactics with which all Bolsheviks were agreed. 
 Today, in 1909, it is ridiculous even to suggest such a thing. 
 The mistake of the otzovists and ultimatumists has developed into a deviation from the principles of Marxism. 
Just think: “ in view of this ”, i. 
e. 
, in view of the fact that we are “moving towards” an upswing, and that the con-flict “will assume the form of a revolution”, “in view ofthis” let non-parliamentary action be put in the forefront! Why, comrades, this is merely a jumble of words to cover up a monstrous confusion of ideas! Before you have even saida word about the Duma in your resolution, you have alreadyconcocted the conclusion: “in view of this” ... “non-parlia-mentary action”! In view of the fact that we do not under-stand the importance of the Duma and the tasks of the Party at a time when an upswing is maturing, we proclaim that struggle must be outside the Duma—that is the nonsensethat the otzovists’ case amounts to. 
 They have repeated,without understanding them, scraps of arguments which theBolsheviks advanced at a time when non-parliamentary ac-tion was not merely being proclaimed, but carried on by the masses ; and repeated them at a time when they them-selves consider “the first stage of the revolution concluded”,i. 
e. 
, that for the time being the conditions for direct massaction are absent. 
 They have learned by heart the sound proposition that work in the Duma must be subordinated to the interests and direc-tion of the working-class movement outside the Duma, and repeat scraps of what they have learned irrelevantly, and in a garbled, scarcely recognisable form. 
 Instead of emphasising the necessity of continuing— in addition to work in the Duma—to devote maximum effortto persistent, prolonged and painstaking organisation and agitation among the masses outside the Duma—the otzovists, in company with the Socialist-Revolutionaries, raise a “revo-lutionary” yelp about “non-parliamentary action”, makingan onslaught, and so forth. 
 “Direct action is impossible at the present time,” say the otzovists at the end of the resolution (Point 1), although at the beginning of it they proclaimed a non-parliamentary struggle. 
 If this is not a caricature of Bolshevism, whatis? And work to carry the revolution through to complete victory”.... 
 First, the scrap of an idea about the means of struggle, then its object! ... “and for this purpose to organise the proletariat and the broad masses of the peasant-ry”.... 
 At a time like the present, when the first and foremosttask is to strengthen and rebuild the semi-destroyed Partyorganisations, this is a mere phrase, comrades! Point 4 is one of the gems of “otzovism”. 
 “The Party may employ only such forms of organisational and agitational action as do not obscure or weaken the revolutionary strug-gle”.... 
 This, according to the “practical” ultimatumists, is the “practical” way of stating the issue! In 1909 the otzovistsare compelled to search for theoretical justification and the quest inevitably bogs them down. 
 “Only such forms of action as do not obscure...”—this is a broad hint atthe work of the Social-Democrats in the Duma and at theirutilisation of semi-legal and legal organisations. 
 It appears,then, that there are some “forms of action” which obscureand others which do not. 
 In order to save people who are unable to think the trouble of using their brains, let us draw up a list of “forms of action” and cross out those which“obscure”—now that will be real revolutionary tactics! Take legal literature, for instance, dear comrades. 
 Does this “form of organisational and agitational action” ob-scure, or does it not? Of course it does, under the Stolypin regime. 
 Then it must be eliminated according to the otzo-vists, who do not know how to distinguish the conditions in which revolutionary Social-Democrats may resort to themost varied forms of action, and therefore talk nonsense. 
 “The Party must pay special attention to the utilisation andreinforcement of existing organisations and the formation of new illegal, semi-legal and, where possible, legal organisa-tions that could serve as its strongholds,” declares theresolution of the conference, proposed and carried by theBolsheviks. 
 This resolution is as remote from otzovism as heaven is from earth. 
 “Only such forms as do not obscure”— is just a hollow phrase: a mere “yelp”, and not a revolution-ary utterance. 
 The formation of illegal Party “workers’ committees” to utilise “semi-legal and, where possible, legal organisations”—these are the tactics of revolutionary Social-Democrats who take into account what “forms of or-ganisational and agitational action” are prescribed by the present situation, and who are able to display methods o f genuine Social-Democratic activity in the most diverse“forms”. 
 “Down with legal Social-Democratic literature” is a hol-low phrase, impracticable and therefore only to the advan-tage of the opportunists —who are perfectly well aware that it is impracticable. 
 It is difficult to draw a line between Social-Democrats who are ready to answer to the Partyfor their legal writings and non-Party literary hacks; butit is possible, and it provides a real line of activity forthose who want to work with the Party. 
 “Down with the legalDuma group, down with legal organisations”—these are hol-low phrases which are only to the advantage of the opportu-nists who would be glad to rid themselves of Party control. 
 To keep on exercising this control, “utilising” legal organisa-tions, rectifying every mistake and tactical blunder commit-ted by Social-Democrats—this is Party work, which we andall those who wish to-carry out the decisions of the confer-ence will continue to do. 
 The end of Point 4: “strenuously opposing all deals be-tween the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie and the autoc-racy. 
” Ugh! The otzovists will insist on inappropriately repeat-ing scraps of ideas drawn from Bolshevik literature. 
 Really, comrades, you must try to make out what’s what! In the period of the First and Second Dumas, the governmentwas still groping its way towards such deals , while the Cadets were recommending deals to the people as slogans of“struggle” (slogans which misled even the Menshevik Social-Democrats). 
 At that time a resolute struggle against any deals was really the slogan of the day, the task of the mo-ment, the exposure of fraud. 
 Today tsarism has found theway to conclude the deal, and has already done so, withthose classes which the otzovists themselves refer to asa “bloc”; and moreover no one is deceived by the deal whichhas been concluded in the Third Duma. 
 To make the task of “strenuously opposing all deals ” the pivot of our agita-tion today means making oneself a caricature of Bolshe-vism. 
 Point 5: “Our Duma cannot be regarded as a parliament working in an environment of political liberty, and with a measure of freedom for the class struggle of the prole-tariat, but is merely a deal between tsarism and the bigbourgeoisie”.... 
 This contains two mistakes. 
 It is wrongto say “ not a parliament but a deal”, for quite a number of the world’s parliaments are nothing more than a dealbetween the bourgeoisie (at various stages of development) and various survivals of medievalism. 
 We had to, and did, fight to prevent Russia’s first parliament from being aBlack-Hundred and Octobrist parliament, but once it becamesuch in spite of our efforts—and history obliged us to passthrough this stage—it is childish to try to exorcise thisunpleasant reality with exclamations and declamations. 
 Secondly: according to the authors of the resolution, if there is a “measure of freedom” then it is a “parliament”; if not,it is a “fraud”. 
 This is a vulgar-democratic view, worthy ofa Cadet but not of a Marxist. 
 Under the Third Duma thereis much less freedom than there was under the Second;but the Third Duma is a less fictitious parliament, because it more truly reflects the actual relation between the state authority and the present ruling classes. 
 As long as poweris in the hands of the tsar and the feudalist landlords,there can be no other parliament in bourgeois Russia. 
 Itmight befit Cadets to try to brush this bare truth underthe carpet, but not Social-Democrats. 
 Point 6, by way of an exception, is correct. 
 But this is precisely an exception which proves the reverse rule,because ... because on this point the otzovists are expound-ing, not their own ideas, but the ideas of the anti-otzovistswho carried the resolutions at the conference. 
 Conclusions. 
 Point (a) “The Duma being ... a deal ... and a weapon of the counter-revolution”.... 
 Quite right! ...“only serves to bolster up the autocracy”.... 
 This “only”is wrong. 
 The autocracy has staved off its downfall byorganising such a Duma in time: but it has not been strength-ened thereby, rather on the contrary, advanced in itsdecay. 
 The Duma, as a “screen”, is more effective than many an “exposure”, because for the first time, on a thou-sand and one issues, it reveals tsarism’s dependence on thecounter-revolutionary sections of society; it is for the first time demonstrating en grand how close is the alliance be-tween Romanov and Purishkevich, between tsarism and the “Union of the Russian People”, between the autocracy and the Dubrovins, the Iliodors and the Polovnyovs. 
 That the Duma sanctions the crimes of tsarism is beyond doubt; but it is the sanction of particular classes, on be-half of particular class interests, and it is the duty of theSocial-Democrats precisely to use the Duma rostrum to reveal these instructive truths of the class struggle. 
 “The eight months’ proceedings of the Third Duma have shown that the Social-Democrats cannot make use of it. 
” Here is the very essence of otzovism, the error of which our “ultimatumists” are only covering up, confusingthe issue by their ridiculous equivocation—that since we have spent so much energy on creating a Duma group, we must not recall it lightly! There is a straightforward question, and evasions won’t do: have these eight months’ proceedings proved that itis possible to make use of the rostrum of the Duma, or not?The otzovists’ reply is wrong. 
 In spite of the immense dif-ficulties involved in Party guidance of the Duma group, it has beyond question proved the possibility of making use of the Duma as a platform. 
 To be daunted by difficultiesand mistakes is timidity; it is intellectual “yelping”, whereaswhat we want is patient, consistent and persistent prole-tarian effort. 
 Other socialist parties in Europe encountered even greater difficulties at the beginning of their parliamen-tary activity, and made many more mistakes, but they didnot shirk their duty. 
 They succeeded in overcoming the dif-ficulties and in correcting their mistakes. 
 (b) “Our Duma group ... persistently pursuing opportu-nist tactics, could not and cannot be a staunch and consistent representative of the revolutionary proletariat. 
” The grandest truths can be vulgarised, otzovist comrades, the noblest aims can be reduced to mere phrase-mongering — and that is what you are doing. 
 You have degraded the fightagainst opportunism into mere phrase-mongering, andare thereby only playing into the hands of the opportunists. 
 Our Duma group has made and is making mistakes, but by its very work it has proved that it “could and can” staunchlyand consistently represent the proletariat— could and can , when we, the Party, guide it, help it, appoint our best men to lead it, draw up directives, and draft speeches, and ex-plain the harmful and fatal effects of taking advice from the petty-bourgeois intelligentsia who, not only in Russiabut all over the world , always gain easy access to all kinds of institutions on the parliamentary fringe. 
 Have the courage to admit, comrades, that we have as yet done far too little to provide this real guidance of the work of the Duma group, to help it with deeds . 
 Have the courage to admit that we can do ten times as much in this direction, if we succeed in strengthening our organisations,consolidating our Party, bringing it closer to the masses,creating Party media exercising a constant influence on largesections of the proletarians. 
 That is what we are working for, that is what everybody must work for who wants to fight opportunism in deeds and not in words. 
 The otzovists have reduced the struggle against opportu-nism in the Duma group to a mere phrase. 
 They have learnedwords by rote without understanding the difference betweenanarchist and Social-Democratic criticism of opportunism. 
 Take the anarchists. 
 They all pounce on every mistake every Social-Democratic member of parliament makes. 
 They allshout that even Bebel once made a speech in an almost pa-triotic spirit, once took up a wrong stand on the agrarianprogramme, and so on and so forth. 
 True, even Bebel madeopportunist mistakes in his parliamentary career. 
 But what does this prove? The anarchists say that it proves that all the workers’ M. 
P. 
s should be recalled. 
 The anarchists railat the Social-Democratic members of parliament and re-fuse to have anything to do with them, refuse to do anythingto develop a proletarian party, a proletarian policy and pro-letarian members of parliament. 
 And in practice the anarch-ists’ phrase-mongering converts them into the truest accom-plices of opportunism, into the reverse side of opportunism. 
 Social-Democrats draw quite a different conclusion from their mistakes—the conclusion that even Bebel could not become Bebel without prolonged Party work in training upreal Social-Democratic representatives. 
 They need not tell us, “We have no Bebels in our group. 
” Bebels are not born. 
 They have to be made. 
 Bebels don’t spring fully formed likeMinerva from the head of Jupiter, but are created by the Party and the working class. 
 Those who say we have no Bebels don’t know the history of the German Party: they don’t know that there was a time, under the Anti-Socialist Law, when August Bebel made opportunist blunders and that theParty corrected him, the Party guided Bebel. 
 * (c) “The continued presence of the Social-Democratic group in the Duma ... can only do harm to the interests ofthe proletariat ... lower the dignity and influence of the Social-Democrats. 
” To show how “quantity passes into quali-ty” in these preposterous exaggerations, and how anarchistphrases grow out of them (irrespective of whether our otzo-vist comrades desire it or not), we need only refer to Be-lousov’s speech during the 1909 budget debate. 
 If such speeches are considered as “harmful”, and not as proof that the rostrum of the Duma can and must be utilised, then our disagreement ceases to be a mere difference of opinion aboutthe character of a speech, and becomes a disagreement con-cerning the fundamental principles of Social-Democratictactics. 
 (I) “Launch a wide campaign ... for the slogan: ‘Down with the Third Duma’” .... 
 We have already said in Proletary , No. 
 39, that this slogan, which for a time appealed to some anti-otzovistworkers, is wrong . 
 ** It is either a Cadet slogan, calling for franchise reform under the autocracy, or a repetitionof words learned by rote from the period when liberal Dumas were a screen for counter-revolutionary tsarism, designed to prevent the people from seeing clearly who their real enemywas. 
 (II) “Recall ... the Duma group; this will emphasise both ... the character of the Duma and the revolutionarytactics of the Social-Democrats. 
” This is a paraphrase of the proposition advanced by the Moscow otzovists, that the recall of the Duma group willemphasise that the revolution is not dead and buried. 
 Sucha conclusion—we repeat the words of Proletary , No. 
 39, “emphasises” only the burial of those Social-Democrats who *We hope to deal with this illuminating history and with its condemnation of German trends akin to our otzovists in a separatearticle. 
 **See pp. 
 286-302 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 are capable of arguing in this way. 
 They bury themselves thereby as Social-Democrats; they lose all feeling for genu-ine proletarian revolutionary work; and for that reason they are so painfully contorting themselves to “emphasise” theirrevolutionary phrases. 
 (III) “Devote all efforts to organisation and preparation ... for open ... struggle [and therefore renounce open agitationfrom the rostrum of the Duma!] ... and to propaganda”, etc. 
, etc. 
 The otzovists have forgotten that it is unseemly for Social-Democrats to refuse to conduct propaganda from the rostrum of the Duma. 
 At this point they give us the argument repeated by some ultimatumists, that “there is no sense in wasting energy on hopeless work in the Duma, let us use all our forces more productively”. 
 This is not reasoning, but sophistry, which—again irrespective of whether the authors desire it or not—leads to anarchist conclusions. 
 For in all countries the anarchists, pointing to the mistakes committed by Social-Democratic members of parliament, argue that it is “a waste of time to bother with bourgeois parliamentarism” and call for the concentration of “all these forces” on organising “di-rect action”. 
 But this leads to disorganisation and to theshouting of “slogans” which are futile because they areisolated, instead of conducting work in every field on thewidest possible scale. 
 It only seems to the otzovists and ultimatumists that their argument is new, and applies only to the Third Duma. 
 But they are wrong. 
 It is a common argu-ment heard all over Europe, and it is not a Social-Democratic argument. 
 Thus, otzovism and ultimatumism are a caricature of Bolshevism. 
 What gave rise to this caricature? Of course,the fallacies of Bolshevism as a whole, the Menshevik has-tens to declare. 
 Such a conclusion, undoubtedly, is very“profitable” for the Mensheviks. 
 Unfortunately for them,however, objective facts do not corroborate, but refute it. 
 The objective facts are that in the development not only of Bolshevism, but of Russian Marxism in general , there was a period when Marxism was caricatured, and that Russian Marxism grew strong and developed in struggle with these growing pains, pains which accompanied the expansion of its sphere of influence. 
 Russian Marxism was born at the beginning of the eighties of the last century in the worksof a group of political emigrants (the Emancipation of La-bour group). 
 But Marxism did not become a trend of Russian social thought and a constituent part of the working-class movement in Russia until the middle of the nineties of the last century, when a “wave” of Marxian literature and of a Social-Democrat-ic working-class movement arose in Russia. 
 And what hap-pened? This wave carried with it a caricature of Marxism in the shape of Struvism on the one hand and Rabocheye Dyelo -ism and Economism on the other. 
 Marxism grew and matured because it did not conceal the disagreements in its ranks, did not play the diplomat (as the Mensheviks dowith Maslov, Cherevanin, Kuskova, Prokopovich, Valen-tinov, Yermansky and Co. 
), but waged a victorious cam-paign against the caricature, which had been engendered by the deplorable conditions of Russian life and the turning-point in the historical development of socialism in Russia. 
 And Bolshevism will grow up and become strong, makingno attempt to conceal the incipient distortion of its princi-ples by a caricature engendered by the deplorable conditionsof Russian life and the turning-point in the counter-revolu-tionary period, but openly explaining to the masses into what a bog the otzovists and ultimatumists would lead the Duma group and the Party. 
 Supplement to Proletary , No. 
 44, Published according April 4 (17), 1909 to the Supplement THE “LEFTWARD SWING ” OF THE BOURGEOISIE AND THE TASKS OF THE PROLETARIAT The question of the “leftward swing” of the commercial and industrial bourgeoisie has long become a standing fea-ture in the columns of our legal press. 
 It has been noted and acknowledged that the Octobrist press has a regularperiodic grumble against the “agrarian” (read: feudalist-landlord) Duma and against the corresponding policy oftsarism. 
 It has been noted and acknowledged that quite a num-ber of local and national associations of merchants and indus-trialists—from provincial stock exchange committees to the “Board of Congresses of Representatives of Commerce andIndustry”—have in recent years, and particularly of late,been voicing their dissatisfaction with this pro-landlordpolicy. 
 There have been descriptions of the Moscow “frater-nisation of millions with science”, to wit, the private con-ferences of Moscow’s and St. 
 Petersburg’s money-bags— Krestovnikov, Goujon, Volsky and others—with the Cadetprofessors and writers—Manuilov, Struve, Kiesewetter andCo. 
 One need hardly add that the liberal press, includingthe Menshevik publications, seize on every piece of news ofthis kind and blazon forth with a thousand variations the rebirth and renovation of liberalism. 
 This sensational “leftward swing” of the bourgeoisie has been reflected in the “political” steps of the tsaristgovernment and in speeches in the Duma. 
 Mr. 
 Timiryazev,darling of the Russian merchants and at the same time an oldbureaucrat, has been appointed Minister of Commerce and Industry. 
 On March 13 he made a big “programme” speech in the Duma—such ministerial speeches are called programmespeeches in all the arch-reactionary bourgeois and ordinary bourgeois parliaments in the world “just for show”. 
 As a matter of fact the tsarist Minister outlined no programme at all, and merely contented himself, as usual, with meaning-less courtesies to the capitalists and threats to the workingclass, of course combining these threats with stereotypedhypocritical expressions of “sympathy”. 
 On March 19 theseaffectionate exchanges of the Minister with the leaders ofcapital were repeated in Moscow, where Timiryazev and Kres-tovnikov exchanged friendly speeches at a meeting of the Moscow Stock Exchange Association. 
 “Russia is sick, but withproper care her malady is not dangerous, and will soon pass,”said Krestovnikov, welcoming the highly-esteemed Timirya-zev. 
 While Timiryazev, thanking the highly-esteemedKrestovnikov, signified on behalf of the government its be-nevolent consent to “care for” the patient with the tried Stolypin remedies of the “transition period”. 
 The question arises, what are the objective causes of this “leftward swing” of the bougeoisie, and what is itsclass significance? In the periodical Vozrozhdeniye 145 (No. 
 1-2) Comrade Martov, with a clarity and directness not very usual for this writer, answers this question in an article entitled “The ‘Leftward Swing’ of the Bourgeoisie”. 
“Experience has shown,” he writes, “that if economic de-velopment has ripened for a precisely bourgeois reformationand the bourgeoisie is unable to become its driving force,this only means that the social change cannot be completed until the further development of the class in question makes it the driving force. 
” And elsewhere: “Those who assumedthat the Constitution now in force represents a more or lessorganic union of the nobility with the bourgeoisie as equally‘counter-revolutionary factors’ may regard phenomena of thekind indicated above [i. 
e. 
, the “leftward swing” of the bour-geoisie] merely as minor episodes, not necessarily connected with the general trend of social development.... 
 These iso-lated phenomena may have a symptomatic importance only inthe eyes of those who were certain a priori that the course of social development is inexorably leading the Russianbourgeoisie, as a class, into sharp opposition to the re-gime ... of June 3. 
” Compare with this the declaration of Golos Sotsial-De-mokrata , No. 
 12: “We agree also with the proposal of the Caucasians [i. 
e. 
, Dan, Axelrod and Semyonov at the last conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
] to speak to the Russian mon-archy not as ‘bourgeois’ but as ‘plutocratic’, for this amend-ment refutes the fundamentally false assertion of the Bol-shevik resolution that Russian tsarism is beginning to voicethe class interests of the bourgeoisie. 
” Here we have the political theory of Menshevism complete with all its conclusions. 
 If our revolution is bourgeois, it cannot be completed until the bourgeoisie becomes its driv-ing force. 
 The “leftward swing” of the bourgeoisie provesthat it is becoming such a driving force, and there can beno question of calling it counter-revolutionary. 
 Tsarismin Russia is becoming plutocratic, not bourgeois. 
 Obviouslythe logic of this is to advocate the pursuance of opportunist tactics by the workers’ party in our bourgeois revolution, the tactics of support to the liberals by the proletariat,as opposed to the tactics which allot to the proletariatallying to itself the peasantry, the leading role in the bour-geois revolution—which it must play in spite of the vacilla-tions and betrayals of liberalism. 
 The Menshevik tactics stand revealed as a falsification of Marxism, as a camouflaging of anti-Marxist content with“Marxist” phraseology. 
 The method of reasoning underlyingthese tactics is not that of Marxists but of liberals dressedup as Marxists. 
 To be convinced of this we have only tocast a cursory glance at the history and results of the bour-geois revolution in Germany. 
 In Die Neue Rheinische Zei-tung Marx wrote about the causes of the defeat of the revolu-tion in 1848: “The big bourgeoisie, anti-revolutionary fromthe very outset, concluded a defensive and offensive alliancewith reaction out of fear of the people, that is to say, theworkers and the democratic bourgeoisie. 
” 146 This was Marx’s point of view, and it is shared by all the German Marxists in their estimate of 1848 and the subsequent tactics of theGerman bourgeoisie. 
 The counter-revolutionary nature ofthe big bourgeoisie did not prevent it from “going left”, forinstance, in the period of the constitutional conflict ofthe sixties, but inasmuch as the proletariat did not take independent and strong action, the result of this “leftward swing” was not a revolution but only a timid oppositionthat impelled the monarchy to become more and more bourgeois, and did not destroy the alliance of the bour-geoisie with the Junkers, i. 
e. 
, the reactionary landlords. 
 That is how the Marxists look at it. 
 The liberals, on the contrary, take the view that the workers, with theirimmoderate demands, their unreasonable revolutionarinesstheir ill-timed attacks on liberalism, prevented the successof the cause of liberty in Germany by precipitating theirpossible allies into the arms of reaction. 
 It is quite obvious that our Mensheviks are using Marx-ist words to disguise their falsification of Marxism, and todisguise their own defection from Marxism to liberalism. 
 Both in France after 1789 and in Germany after 1848 the monarchy undoubtedly made “a further step towards itstransformation into a bourgeois monarchy”. 
 It is equally certain that the bourgeoisie became counter-revolutionary after both these revolutions. 
 Does this mean that after 1789in France and after 1848 in Germany the basis for a “left-ward swing” of the bourgeoisie, and for a subsequent bourgeoisrevolution, had disappeared? Of course not. 
 The Frenchbourgeoisie, for all its counter-revolutionariness “moved left”, for example, in 1830, and the German in 1863-64. 
 Inasmuch as the proletariat did not take independent action,inasmuch as it did not win political power even for a shorttime with the help of the revolutionary sections of thebourgeoisie, the “leftward swing” of the bourgeoisie didnot lead to revolution (Germany) and led only to further steps in the transformation of the monarchy into a bourgeois monarchy. 
 To the extent that the proletariat did act inde-pendently, and won political power in alliance with the revo-lutionary sections of the bourgeoisie, overthrowing the oldregime (as was the case in France more than once in the nine-teenth century), the “leftward swing” of the bourgeoisie proved to be the prologue to a new bourgeois revolution. 
 This is the ABC of history that our Mensheviks have for-gotten and distorted, adopting the point of view of theliberals: there will be no bourgeois revolution in Russiauntil the bourgeoisie becomes the driving force! This isan abject failure to understand the dialectics of history and the lessons of the nineteenth century. 
 On the contrary, there will be no bourgeois revolution in Russia until theproletariat, in alliance with the revolutionary elements of the bourgeoisie (i. 
e. 
, with the peasantry in our case), becomes an independent driving force, operating in spite of the vacillations and betrayals of the unstable and counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie. 
 It was not it the reign of Nicholas II, dear Menshevik comrades, but in that of Alexander II that Russian tsarismbegan to be transformed into a “plutocratic” monarchy, “ be-gan to voice the class interests of the bourgeoisie”. 
 But it could never have voiced them had there been no independent class organisation of the bourgeoisie. 
 The revolution of 1905 has raised us to a higher stage, and the old struggleis being renewed on a plane of more advanced political re-lations. 
 The Third Duma is the politically constituted,national alliance of the political organisations of the land-lords and the big bourgeoisie. 
 Tsarism is making an at-tempt to solve objectively-necessary historical problemswith the help of the organisations of these two classes. 
 Will it succeed in the attempt? No. 
 It turns out that the solution of such a problem has not only defied a plutocratic tsarism, which had no national representation of the “upper” classes to fall back on, but it defies even a semi-bourgeois tsarism assisted bya Black-Hundred-bourgeois Duma. 
 The Duma is helping itto solve the problem. 
 But this help is proving inadequate. 
 The “leftward swing” of the bourgeoisie is due preciselyto the objective fact that, in spite of Stolypin’s doctoring of tsarism, its bourgeois evolution is not working out . 
 Just as before 1905, in the period when tsarism knew nothingof representative institutions, the “leftward swing” of thelandlords and the marshals of nobility was a symptom of ma-turing crisis, so in 1909, in the period when tsarism hasgiven national representation to the Krestovnikovs, the “leftward swing” of these money-bags is a symptom that “the objective tasks of the bourgeois-democratic revolution inRussia remain unsolved”, and that “the main factors which brought about the Revolution of 1905, continue to operate”(the conference resolution on the present situation). 
 The Mensheviks confine their argument to the fact that the revolution in our country is bourgeois and that our bourgeoisie is “going left”. 
 But stopping there means con-verting Marxism, a “guide to action”, into a dead letter; it means falsifying Marxism and virtually adopting the point of view of liberalism. 
 There can be a bourgeois revolution without a single complete victory of the proletariat, when the result is the gradual conversion of the old monarchyinto a bourgeois and bourgeois-imperialist monarchy (forinstance, Germany). 
 There can be a bourgeois revolutionwith a number of independent actions by the proletariat,producing both complete victories and heavy defeats, when the result is a bourgeois republic (for instance, France). 
 The question arises: has Russian history decided in favour of one path or the other? The Mensheviks do notunderstand this question, they are afraid to raise it, theyavoid it, not realising that by avoiding it they are actuallydragging in their policy at the tail of the liberal bourgeoisie. 
 We are of the opinion that Russian history has not yet answered this question, that it will be answered by thestruggle of the classes in the next few years, that the firstround of our bourgeois revolution (1905-07) has proved beyonddoubt that our bourgeoisie is utterly unstable and counter-revolutionary, proved that our proletariat is capable of being the leader of a victorious revolution, proved the capacity of the democratic masses of the peasantry to help the prole-tariat make this revolution victorious. 
 And here again we come up against the purely liberal point of view of the Mensheviks regarding our Trudovik peas-antry. 
 The Mensheviks say the Trudoviks are full of petty-bourgeois utopias, their fight for the land is a fight in the name of the absurd and reactionary slogans of socialisa-tion of land or equalised land tenure; “consequently” theTrudovik fight for the land weakens the fight for freedom, the victory of the Trudoviks would be a reactionary victoryof countryside over town. 
 That is the gist both of Marty-nov’s reasoning in No. 
 10-11 of Golos Sotsial-Demokrata and of Martov’s arguments in the symposium The Social Move-ment in Russia at the Beginning of the Twentieth Century . 
 Such an estimate of the Trudovik peasantry is just asoutrageous a distortion of Marxism as the discourses on thebourgeois revolution quoted above. 
 It is doctrinairism at its worst when a Marxist is unable to grasp the actual significance of a revolutionary struggle against the wholesystem of contemporary landed proprietorship, under the integument of a Narodnik doctrine which really is absurd, visionary and reactionary when viewed as a socialist doc-trine. 
 The Mensheviks display incredible blindness and ig-norance of the dialectics of Marxism when they fail tosee that, the conditions of life of the Russian peasantrybeing what they are, its bourgeois-democratic revolutionaryspirit could not be ideologically expressed otherwise thanin the form of “belief” in the sovereign virtue of land equal-isation. 
 “What formally may be economically incorrect, may all the same be correct from the point of view of worldhistory. 
” 147 Our Mensheviks have never been able to under-stand these words of Engels. 
 While exposing the falsity of the Narodnik doctrine , they closed their eyes like pedants to the truth of the contemporary struggle in the contemporary bourgeois revolution, which is expressed by these quasi-socialist doctrines. 
 But we say: resolute struggle against the quasi-socialist doctrines of the Trudoviks, the Socialist-Revolutionaries,Popular Socialists and Co. 
, and frank, firm recognition ofthe alliance between the proletariat and the revolutionary peasantry in the bourgeois revolution. 
 The victory of this revolution will dissipate like a puff of smoke the doctrineof the sovereign virtue of land equalisation, but the massesof the peasantry in the present struggle express by this doc-trine the breadth, strength, courage, enthusiasm, sincerityand invincibility of their historic action which heralds a Russia cleansed of each and every survival of feudalism. 
 The bourgeoisie is going left, down with Trudovik utopi-anism, long live support of the bourgeoisie—argue the Men-sheviks. 
 The bourgeoisie is going left, we shall say: thatmeans new powder is accumulating in the powder-magazineof the Russian revolution. 
 If today the Krestovnikovs are saying “Russia is sick”, it means that tomorrow the socialist proletariat will go into action, leading the democraticpeasantry, and will say: “We shall cure her!” Proletary , No. 
 44, Published according April 8 (21), 1909 to the text in Proletary THE ATTITUDE OF THE WORKERS ’ PARTY TO RELIGION Deputy Surkov’s speech in the Duma during the debate on the Synod estimates, and the discussion that arose within our Duma group when it considered the draft of this speech (both printed in this issue) have raised aquestion which is of extreme importance and urgency at thisparticular moment. 
 An interest in everything connected withreligion is undoubtedly being shown today by wide circlesof “society”, and has penetrated into the ranks of intellec-tuals standing close to the working-class movement, as well as into certain circles of the workers. 
 It is the absoluteduty of Social-Democrats to make a public statement oftheir attitude towards religion. 
 Social-Democracy bases its whole world-outlook on scien-tific socialism, i. 
e. 
, Marxism. 
 The philosophical basis of Marxism, as Marx and Engels repeatedly declared, is dialec-tical materialism, which has fully taken over the historicaltraditions of eighteenth-century materialism in France andof Feuerbach (first half of the nineteenth century) in Ger-many—a materialism which is absolutely atheistic and posi-tively hostile to all religion. 
 Let us recall that the whole of Engels’s Anti-Dühring , which Marx read in manuscript, is an indictment of the materialist and atheist Dühring fornot being a consistent materialist and for leaving loopholesfor religion and religious philosophy. 
 Let us recall thatin his essay on Ludwig Feuerbach, Engels reproaches Feuer-bach for combating religion not in order to destroy it, but in order to renovate it, to invent a new, “exalted” religion, and so forth. 
 Religion is the opium of the people—this dic-tum by Marx is the corner-stone of the whole Marxist outlook on religion. 
148 Marxism has always regarded all modern religions and churches, and each and every religious organi-sation, as instruments of bourgeois reaction that serve to defend exploitation and to befuddle the working class. 
 At the same time Engels frequently condemned the efforts of people who desired to be “more left” or “more revolutionary”than the Social-Democrats to introduce into the programmeof the workers’ party an explicit proclamation of atheism, in the sense of declaring war on religion. 
 Commenting in 1874 on the famous manifesto of the Blanquist fugitive Com-munards who were living in exile in London, Engels calledtheir vociferous proclamation of war on religion a piece ofstupidity, and stated that such a declaration of war was thebest way to revive interest in religion and to prevent it from really dying out. 
 Engels blamed the Blanquists for being unable to understand that only the class struggle of theworking masses could, by comprehensively drawing the wideststrata of the proletariat into conscious and revolutionarysocial practice , really free the oppressed masses from the yoke of religion, whereas to proclaim that war on religion was a political task of the workers’ party was just anarchistic phrase-mongering. 
 149 And in 1877, too, in his Anti-Dühring , while ruthlessly attacking the slightest concessions made by Dühring the philosopher to idealism and religion,Engels no less resolutely condemns Dühring’s pseudo-revo-lutionary idea that religion should be prohibited in socialist society. 
 To declare such a war on-religion, Engels says, is to “out-Bismarck Bismarck”, i. 
e. 
, to repeat the folly ofBismarck’s struggle against the clericals (the notorious“Struggle for Culture”, Kulturkampf , i. 
e. 
, the struggle Bismarck waged in the 1870s against the German Catholicparty, the “Centre” party, by means of a police persecution of Catholicism). 
 By this struggle Bismarck only stimulated the militant clericalism of the Catholics, and only injuredthe work of real culture, because he gave prominence to re-ligious divisions rather than political divisions, and divert-ed the attention of some sections of the working class andof the other democratic elements away from the urgent tasks of the class and revolutionary struggle to the most superficial and false bourgeois anti-clericalism. 
 Accusing the would-beultra-revolutionary Dühring of wanting to repeat Bismarck’s folly in another form, Engels insisted that the workers’ party should have the ability to work patiently at the task of organising and educating the proletariat, which would lead to the dying out of religion, and not throw itself into thegamble of a political war on religion. 
 150 This view has be-come part of the very essence of German Social-Democracy,which, for example, advocated freedom for the Jesuits, theiradmission into Germany, and the complete abandonment of police methods of combating any particular religion. 
 “Re-ligion is a private matter”: this celebrated point in the Er-furt Programme (1891) summed up these political tacticsof Social-Democracy. 
 These tactics have by now become a matter of routine; they have managed to give rise to a new distortion of Marxism in the opposite direction, in the direction of opportunism. 
 This point in the Erfurt Programme has come to be inter-preted as meaning that we Social-Democrats, our Party,consider religion to be a private matter, that religion is a private matter for us as Social-Democrats, for us as a party. 
Without entering into a direct controversy with this oppor-tunist view, Engels in the nineties deemed it necessary to oppose it resolutely in a positive, and not a polemical form. 
To wit: Engels did this in the form of a statement, which hedeliberately underlined, that Social-Democrats regard reli-gion as a private matter in relation to the state , but not in relation to themselves, not in relation to Marxism, and not in relation to the workers’ party. 
 151 Such is the external history of the utterances of Marx and Engels on the question of religion. 
 To people with aslapdash attitude towards Marxism, to people who cannot orwill not think, this history is a skein of meaningless Marx-ist contradictions and waverings, a hodge-podge of “con-sistent” atheism and “sops” to religion, “unprincipled” waver-ing between a r-r-revolutionary war on God and a cowardlydesire to “play up to” religious workers, a fear of scaringthem away, etc. 
, etc. 
 The literature of the anarchist phrase-mongers contains plenty of attacks on Marxism in thisvein. 
 But anybody who is able to treat Marxism at all serious-ly, to ponder over its philosophical principles and the ex-perience of international Social-Democracy, will readily see that the Marxist tactics in regard to religion are thoroughly consistent, and were carefully thought out by Marx and Engels; and that what dilettantes or ignoramuses regard as wavering is but a direct and inevitable deduction fromdialectical materialism. 
 It would be a profound mistaketo think that the seeming “moderation” of Marxism in re-gard to religion is due to supposed “tactical” considera-tions, the desire “not to scare away” anybody, and so forth. 
 On the contrary, in this question, too, the political line of Marxism is inseparably bound up with its philosophicalprinciples. 
 Marxism is materialism. 
 As such, it is as relentlessly hostile to religion as was the materialism of the eighteenth-century Encyclopaedists or the materialism of Feuerbach. 
 This is beyond doubt. 
 But the dialectical materialism of Marx and Engels goes further than the Encyclopaedists and Feuer-bach, for it applies the materialist philosophy to the do-main of history, to the domain of the social sciences. 
 Wemust combat religion—that is the ABC of all materialism, and consequently of Marxism. 
 But Marxism is not a material-ism which has stopped at the ABC. 
 Marxism goes further. 
 It says: We must know how to combat religion, and in order to do so we must explain the source of faith and religionamong the masses in a materialist way . 
 The combating of religion cannot be confined to abstract ideological preaching,and it must not be reduced to such preaching. 
 It must be linked up with the concrete practice of the class movement, which aims at eliminating the social roots of religion. 
Why does religion retain its hold on the backward sectionsof the town proletariat, on broad sections of the semi-prole-tariat, and on the mass of the peasantry? Because of theignorance of the people, replies the bourgeois progressist, the radical or the bourgeois materialist. 
 And so: “Down with religion and long live atheism; the dissemination ofatheist views is our chief task!” The Marxist says thatthis is not true, that it is a superficial view, the view ofnarrow bourgeois uplifters. 
 It does not explain the rootsof religion profoundly enough; it explains them, not in a materialist but in an idealist way. 
 In modern capital-ist countries these roots are mainly social . 
 The deepest root of religion today is the socially downtrodden condition of the working masses and their apparently complete helpless-ness in face of the blind forces of capitalism, which every day and every hour inflicts upon ordinary working people the most horrible suffering and the most savage torment,a thousand times more severe than those inflicted by extra-ordinary events, such as wars, earthquakes, etc. 
 “Fear madethe gods. 
” Fear of the blind force of capital—blind becauseit cannot be foreseen by the masses of the people—a force which at every step in the life of the proletariat and small proprietor threatens to inflict, and does inflict “sudden”,“unexpected”, “accidental” ruin, destruction, pauperism,prostitution, death from starvation—such is the root of mod-ern religion which the materialist must bear in mind firstand foremost, if he does not want to remain an infant-school materialist. 
 No educational book can eradicate religion from the minds of masses who are crushed by capi-talist hard labour, and who are at the mercy of the blinddestructive forces of capitalism, until those masses themselveslearn to fight this root of religion, fight the rule of capital in all its forms, in a united, organised, planned and con-scious way. 
 Does this mean that educational books against religion are harmful or unnecessary? No, nothing of the kind. 
 Itmeans that Social-Democracy’s atheist propaganda must besubordinated to its basic task—the development of the class struggle of the exploited masses against the ex-ploiters. 
 This proposition may not be understood (or at least not immediately understood) by one who has not pondered overthe principles of dialectical materialism, i. 
e. 
, the philosophyof Marx and Engels. 
 How is that?—he will say. 
 Is ideologi-cal propaganda, the preaching of definite ideas, the struggle against that enemy of culture and progress which has persis-ed for thousands or years (i. 
e. 
, religion) to be subordinatedto the class struggle, i. 
e. 
, the struggle for definite prac-tical aims in the economic and political field? This is one of those current objections to Marxism which testify to a complete misunderstanding of Marxian dialectics. 
 The contradiction which perplexes these objectors is a real contradiction in real life, i. 
e. 
, a dialectical contradic-tion, and not a verbal or invented one. 
 To draw a hard-and-fast line between the theoretical propaganda of atheism, i. 
e. 
, the destruction of religious beliefs among certain sections of the proletariat, and the success, the progress and the conditions of the class struggle of these sections, is to rea-son undialectically, to transform a shifting and relativeboundary into an absolute boundary; it is forcibly to dis-connect what is indissolubly connected in real life. 
 Let ustake an example. 
 The proletariat in a particular region and in a particular industry is divided, let us assume, into an advanced section of fairly class-conscious Social-Democrats,who are of course atheists, and rather backward workers whoare still connected with the countryside and with the peasant-ry, and who believe in God, go to church, or are even underthe direct influence of the local priest—who, let us suppose, is organising a Christian labour union. 
 Let us assume further-more that the economic struggle in this locality has resultedin a strike. 
 It is the duty of a Marxist to place the successof the strike movement above everything else, vigorouslyto counteract the division of the workers in this struggleinto atheists and Christians, vigorously to oppose any such division. 
 Atheist propaganda in such circumstances may be both unnecessary and harmful—not from the philistine fearof scaring away the backward sections, of losing a seat inthe elections, and so on, but out of consideration for thereal progress of the class struggle, which in the conditionsof modern capitalist society will convert Christian workers to Social-Democracy and to atheism a hundred times better than bald atheist propaganda. 
 To preach atheism at such amoment and in such circumstances would only be playinginto the hands of the priest and the priests, who desire nothing better than that the division of the workers according totheir participation in the strike movement should be replaced by their division according to their belief in God. 
 An anarchist who preached war against God at all costs would ineffect be helping the priests and the bourgeoisie (as theanarchists always do help the bourgeoisie in practice ). 
 A Marxist must be a materialist, i. 
e. 
, an enemy of religion,but a dialectical materialist, i. 
e. 
, one who treats the struggle against religion not in an abstract way, not on the basis of remote, purely theoretical, never varying preach-ing, but in a concrete way, on the basis of the class struggle which is going on in practice and is educating the masses more and better than anything else could. 
 A Marxist must be able to view the concrete situation as a whole, he must always be able to find the boundary between anarchismand opportunism (this boundary is relative, shifting andchangeable, but it exists). 
 And he must not succumb eitherto the abstract, verbal, but in reality empty “revolutionism”of the anarchist, or to the philistinism and opportunism of the petty bourgeois or liberal intellectual, who boggles at the struggle against religion, forgets that this is his duty,reconciles himself to belief in God, and is guided not bythe interests of the class struggle but by the petty andmean consideration of offending nobody, repelling nobodyand scaring nobody—by the sage rule: “live and let live”, etc. 
, etc. 
 It is from this angle that all side issues bearing on the attitude of Social-Democrats to religion should be dealtwith. 
 For example, the question is often brought up whethera priest can be a member of the Social-Democratic Party ornot, and this question is usually answered in an unqualified affirmative, the experience of the European Social-Democrat-ic parties being cited as evidence. 
 But this experience wasthe result, not only of the application of the Marxist doctrineto the workers’ movement, but also of the special histor-ical conditions in Western Europe which are absent inRussia (we will say more about these conditions later), so that an unqualified affirmative answer in this case is incorrect. 
 It cannot be asserted once and for all that priestscannot be members of the Social-Democratic Party; butneither can the reverse rule be laid down. 
 If a priest comesto us to take part in our common political work and con-scientiously performs Party duties, without opposing the programme of the Party, he may be allowed to join the ranks of the Social-Democrats; for the contradiction between thespirit and principles of our programme and the religiousconvictions of the priest would in such circumstances besomething that concerned him alone, his own private con-tradiction; and a political organisation cannot put its members through an examination to see if there is no contradiction between their views and the Party programme. 
 But, of course,such a case might be a rare exception even in Western Europe, while in Russia it is altogether improbable. 
 And if, for example, a priest joined the Social-Democratic Party and made it his chief and almost sole work actively to prop-agate religious views in the Party, it would unquestionablyhave to expel him from its ranks. 
 We must not only admitworkers who preserve their belief in God into the Social-Democratic Party, but must deliberately set out to recruitthem; we are absolutely opposed to giving the slightest offence to their religious convictions, but we recruit them in order to educate them in the spirit of our programme,and not in order to permit an active struggle against it. 
We allow freedom of opinion within the Party, but to cer-tain limits, determined by freedom of grouping; we are notobliged to go hand in hand with active preachers of views that are repudiated by the majority of the Party. 
 Another example. 
 Should members of the Social-Democrat-ic Party be censured all alike under all circumstances fordeclaring “socialism is my religion”, and for advocatingviews in keeping with this declaration? No! The deviationfrom Marxism (and consequently from socialism) is here in-disputable; but the significance of the deviation, its relative importance, so to speak, may vary with circumstances. 
 Itis one thing when an agitator or a person addressing theworkers speaks in this way in order to make himself betterunderstood, as an introduction to his subject, in order topresent his views more vividly in terms to which the back-ward masses are most accustomed. 
 It is another thing when a writer begins to preach “god-building”, or god-buildingsocialism (in the spirit, for example, of our Lunacharskyand Co. 
). 
 While in the first case censure would be merecarping, or even inappropriate restriction of the freedomof the agitator, of his freedom in choosing “pedagogical” methods, in the second case party censure is necessary and essential. 
 For some the statement “socialism is a religion”is a form of transition from religion to socialism; for oth-ers, it is a form of transition from socialism to religion. 
 Let us now pass to the conditions which in the West gave rise to the opportunist interpretation of the thesis: “religion is a private matter”. 
 Of course, a contributing influence are those general factors which give rise to oppor-tunism as a whole, like sacrificing the fundamental interests /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR of the working-class movement for the sake of momentary advantages. 
 The party of the proletariat demands that the state should declare religion a private matter, but does not regard the fight against the opium of the people, thefight against religious superstitions, etc. 
, as a “privatematter”. 
 The opportunists distort the question to meanthat the Social-Democratic Party regards religion as a pri-vate matter! But in addition to the usual opportunist distortion (which was not made clear at all in the discussion withinour Duma group when it was considering the speech on reli-gion), there are special historical conditions which havegiven rise to the present-day, and, if one may so express it,excessive, indifference on the part of the European Social-Democrats to the question of religion. 
 These conditions are of a twofold nature. 
 First, the task of combating religionis historically the task of the revolutionary bourgeoisie,and in the West this task was to a large extent performed(or tackled) by bourgeois democracy, in the epoch of its revolutions or its assaults upon feudalism and medievalism. 
 Both in France and in Germany there is a tradition of bourgeois war on religion, and it began long before social-ism (the Encyclopaedists, Feuerbach). 
 In Russia, becauseof the conditions of our bourgeois-democratic revolution,this task too falls almost entirely on the shoulders of theworking class. 
 Petty-bourgeois (Narodnik) democracy in our country has not done too much in this respect (as the new-fledged Black-Hundred Cadets, or Cadet Black Hundreds, ofVekhi 152 think), but rather too little , in comparison with what has been done in Europe. 
 On the other hand, the tradition of bourgeois war on religion has given rise in Europe to a specifically bour-geois distortion of this war by anarchism—which, as the Marxists have long explained time and again, takes its standon the bourgeois world-outlook, in spite of all the “fury”of its attacks on the bourgeoisie. 
 The anarchists and Blan-quists in the Latin countries, Most (who, incidentally, wasa pupil of Dühring) and his ilk in Germany, the anarchists in Austria in the eighties, all carried revolutionary phrase-mongering in the struggle against religion to a nec plus ultra . 
 It is not surprising that, compared with the anarch-ists, the European Social-Democrats now go to the other ex-treme . 
 This is quite understandable and to a certain extent legitimate, but it would be wrong for us Russian Social-Democrats to forget the special historical conditions ofthe West. 
 Secondly, in the West, after the national bourgeois revo-lutions were over, after more or less complete religious lib-erty had been introduced, the problem of the democratic struggle against religion had been pushed, historically, so far into the background by the struggle of bourgeois democra-cy against socialism that the bourgeois governments delib-erately tried to draw the attention of the masses away from socialism by organising a quasi-liberal “offensive” againstclericalism. 
 Such was the character of the Kulturkampf in Germany and of the struggle of the bourgeois republicans against clericalism in France. 
 Bourgeois anti-clericalism,as a means of drawing the attention of the working-classmasses away from socialism—this is what preceded the spreadof the modern spirit of “indifference” to the struggle againstreligion among the Social-Democrats in the West. 
 And this again is quite understandable and legitimate, because Social-Democrats had to counteract bourgeois and Bismarck-ian anti-clericalism by subordinating the struggle against religion to the struggle for socialism. 
 In Russia conditions are quite different. 
 The proletariat is the leader of our bourgeois-democratic revolution. 
 Its party must be the ideological leader in the struggle against all attributes of medievalism, including the old officialreligion and every attempt to refurbish it or make out a newor different case for it, etc. 
 Therefore, while Engels wascomparatively mild in correcting the opportunism of theGerman Social-Democrats who were substituting, for the demand of the workers’ party that the state should declare religion a private matter, the declaration that religion is a private matter for the Social-Democrats themselves, and forthe Social-Democratic Party, it is clear that the importationof this German distortion by the Russian opportunists wouldhave merited a rebuke a hundred times more severe by Engels. 
 By declaring from the Duma rostrum that religion is the opium of the people, our Duma group acted quite correctly, and thus created a precedent which should serve as a basis for all utterances by Russian Social-Democrats on the ques-tion of religion. 
 Should they have gone further and developed the atheist argument in greater detail? We think not. 
 Thismight have brought the risk of the political party of theproletariat exaggerating the struggle against religion; itmight have resulted in obliterating the distinction betweenthe bourgeois and the socialist struggle against religion. 
 The first duty of the Social-Democratic group in the Black-Hundred Duma has been discharged with honour. 
 The second duty—and perhaps the most important for Social-Democrats—namely, to explain the class role of thechurch and the clergy in supporting the Black-Hundred gov-ernment and the bourgeoisie in its fight against the working class, has also been discharged with honour. 
 Of course, very much more might be said on this subject, and the Social-Democrats in their future utterances will know how to amplifyComrade Surkov’s speech; but still his speech was excel-lent, and its circulation by all Party organisations is thedirect duty of our Party. 
 The third duty was to explain in full detail the correct meaning of the proposition, so often distorted by the Germanopportunists, that “religion is a private matter”. 
 This,unfortunately, Comrade Surkov did not do. 
 It is all themore regrettable because in the earlier activity of the Dumagroup a mistake had been committed on this question by Comrade Belousov, and was pointed out at the time by Proletary . 
 The discussion in the Duma group shows that the dispute about atheism has screened from it the questionof the proper interpretation of the celebrated demand thatreligion should be proclaimed a private matter. 
 We shallnot blame Comrade Surkov alone for this error of the entire Duma group. 
 More, we shall frankly admit that the whole Party is at fault here, for not having sufficiently elucidatedthis question and not having sufficiently prepared the mindsof Social-Democrats to understand Engels’s remark levelledagainst the German opportunists. 
 The discussion in the Dumagroup proves that there was in fact a confused understanding of the question, and not at all any desire to ignore the teach-ings of Marx; and we are sure that the error will be correctedin future utterances of the group. 
 We repeat that on the whole Comrade Surkov’s speech was excellent, and should be circulated by all the organisa-tions. 
 In its discussion of this speech the Duma group demonstrated that it is fulfilling its Social-Democratic dutyconscientiously. 
 It remains to express the wish that reportson discussions within the Duma group should appear moreoften in the Party press so as to bring the group and theParty closer together, to acquaint the Party with the diffi-cult work being done within the group, and to establish ideological unity in the work of the Party and the Dumagroup. 
 Proletary , No. 
 45, Published according April 13 (26), 1909 to the text in Proletary CLASSES AND PARTIES IN THEIR ATTITUDE TO RELIGION AND THE CHURCH The debates in the Duma on the Synod estimates, then on the restoration of rights to persons who have left holy or-ders and, finally, on the Old-Believer communities, have provided very instructive material characterising the atti-tude of the Russian political parties towards religion and theChurch. 
 Let us make a general survey of this material, dwell-ing mainly on the debates on the Synod estimates (we havenot yet received the verbatim reports of the debates on the other questions mentioned above). 
 The first and most obvious conclusion that emerges from the Duma debates is that militant clericalism in Russianot only exists, but is clearly gaining ground and becomingmore organised. 
 On April 16, Bishop Metrophanes stated:‘The first steps in our Duma activities pursued the explicit end that we who have been honoured by the votes of the people, should here in the Duma stand above party divisionsand form a single group of the clergy, which shouldthrow light on all sides from its ethical point of view .... 
 What is the reason why we have failed to achieve this idealsituation? ... The fault for this lies with those who are shar-ing these benches with you [i. 
e. 
, with the Cadets and the “Left”], namely, those clerical deputies who belong to theopposition. 
 They were the first to lift their voice and say thatthis was neither more nor less than the emergence of a cleri-cal party, and that this was extremely undesirable. 
 Ofcourse, there is no such thing as clericalism among the Rus-sian Orthodox clergy—we never had a tendency of that kind, and in seeking to form a separate group we were pursuingpurely ethical and moral ends. 
 But now, gentlemen, when, as a result of this discord introduced in our brotherly midst by the Left deputies, there followed disunity and division, now you [i. 
e. 
, the Cadets] blame it on us. 
” Bishop Metrophanes in his illiterate speech let the cat out of the bag: the Left, don’t you see, are guilty of havingdissuaded some of the Duma priests from forming a special“moral” (this term is obviously more suitable for hoodwink-ing the people than the word “clerical”) group! Almost a month later, on May 13, Bishop Eulogius read in the Duma “the resolution of the Duma clergy”: “The over-whelming majority of the Duma Orthodox clergy considers” ...that in the interests of the “leading and dominant positionof the Orthodox Church” neither freedom of preaching for theOld-Believers, nor the unauthorised functioning of Old-Believer communities, nor the using of the title of priest by Old-Believer clergymen, are permissible. 
 “The purelymoral point of view” of the Russian priests stands fully re-vealed as clericalism pure and simple. 
 “The overwhelmingmajority” of the Duma clergy, in whose name Bishop Eulo-gius spoke, probably consisted of 29 Right and moderately Right priests in the Third Duma, and possibly also included 8 priests belonging to the Octobrists. 
 The opposition hadprobably been joined by 4 priests belonging to the Progressistand Peaceful Renovation groups, and one belonging to thePolish-Lithuanian group. 
 What is then the “purely moral and ethical point of view of the overwhelming majority of the clergy in the Duma” (the June-the-Third Duma, one should add)? Here are a fewexcerpts from the speeches: “All I say is that the initiativefor these [i. 
e. 
, Church] reforms must come from withinthe Church, not from without, not from the state and, ofcourse, not from the Budget Commission. 
 After all, the Church is a divine and eternal institution, its laws are immutable, whereas the ideals of state life, as we know, are subject toconstant modifications” (Bishop Eulogius, April 14). 
 Theorator recalled “a disturbing historical parallel”: the secu-larisation of Church property under Catherine II. 
 “Who canvouch that the Budget Commission, which this year expressed the desire to put them [the Church funds] under state control will not express next year the desire to depositthem in the State Treasury, and then fully to transfer their management from the Church authorities to the civil or state authorities?... The Church statutes say that since a bishop is entrusted with Christian souls, then all the more should Church property be entrusted to him .... 
 Today before you [deputies of the Duma] stands your spiritual mother,the holy Orthodox Church, not merely as before representa-tives of the people, but also as before its spiritual children”(ibid. 
) This is pure clericalism. 
 The Church is above the state as the eternal and divine is above the temporal and earthly. 
The Church cannot forgive the state for secularising Churchproperty. 
 The Church demands a leading and dominantposition. 
 In its eyes the Duma deputies are not only—orrather not so much—representatives of the people as “spirit-ual children”. 
 These are not officials in cassocks, as the Social-Democrat Surkov called them, but feudalists in cassocks. 
 Defence of the Church’s feudal privileges, outspoken support ofmedievalism—that is the essence of the policy pursued by themajority of the Third Duma clergy. 
 Bishop Eulogius is by no means an exception. 
 Gepetsky also vociferates against “secularisation” which he calls an intolerable “wrong”(April 14). 
 The priest Mashkevich fulminates against the Octo-brist report for seeking “to undermine the historic and ca-nonical foundations on which our Church life has rested andmust rest ... to push the life and activities of the Russian Orthodox Church off the canonical path on to the path where ... the true princes of the Church—the bishops—will beobliged to give up almost all their rights, inherited-from theapostles, to secular princes .... 
 This is nothing but ... an en-croachment on somebody else’s property and on the rightsand possessions of the Church .... 
 The speaker is leading us towards the destruction of the canonical order of Church life; he seeks to subordinate the Orthodox Church and allits economic functions to the Duma, an institution composedof the most diverse elements in our country, of religiouscreeds both tolerated and not tolerated” (April 14). 
 The Russian Narodniks and liberals have long been com-forting themselves, or rather deceiving themselves, with the theory” that in Russia there is no basis for militant cleri-calism, for a struggle of “the princes of the Church” with the temporal power, and so forth. 
 Our revolution has dis-pelled this illusion, as it did a number of other Narodnik and liberal illusions. 
 Clericalism existed in a hidden form, so long as autocracy existed intact and inviolate. 
 The all-powerful police and bureaucracy concealed from the gaze of“society” and the people the class struggle in general, andthe struggle waged by the “feudalists in cassocks” againstthe “base rabble” in particular. 
 But the first breach which the revolutionary proletariat and peasantry made in the feudal-ist autocratic regime laid bare what had been hidden. 
As soon as the proletariat and the advanced elements of thedemocratic bourgeoisie began to make use of the politicalliberty, the freedom to organise the masses, which they hadwon at the end of 1905, the reactionary classes, too, reached out for independent and open organisations. 
 Under abso-lute autocracy they did not organise, and did not come outtoo much in the open, not because they were weak, but be-cause they were strong; not because they were incapable oforganisation and political struggle, but because at that timethey did not yet feel any real need for independent class organisation. 
 They did not believe in the possibility of a mass movement against the autocracy and the feudalistsin Russia. 
 They fully relied on the knout being sufficientto keep the rabble down. 
 But the first wounds inflictedon autocracy compelled the social elements which supportedit and needed it to come out into the open. 
 It was no longer possible to use only the old knout in fighting masses that had been capable of causing the events of January 9, thestrike movement in 1905, and the October-December revo-lution. 
 It became necessary to build up independent politi-cal organisations; it became necessary for the Council of theUnited Nobility to organise Black Hundreds and engage in the most irresponsible demagogy; it became necessary for “the princes of the Church—the bishops”—to organise thereactionary clergy into an independent force. 
 A typical feature of the Third Duma, and of the Third-Duma period of the Russian counter-revolution is, indeed,that this organisation of the reactionary forces has come out into the open, has begun to develop on a nation-wide scale and has demanded a special Black-Hundred bourgeois“parliament”. 
 Militant clericalism has shown its true colours; and from now on Russian Social-Democracy will have to act again and again as an observer of, and participant in, the clashes between the clerical and the anti-clerical bour-geoisie. 
 If our general task is to assist the proletariat to uniteinto a special class, capable of separating from bourgeoisdemocracy, one component of this task is the use of everymeans of propaganda and agitation, including the rostrumof the Duma, to explain to the masses the distinctions between socialist and bourgeois anti-clericalism. 
 The Octobrists and Cadets who have come out in the Third Duma against the extreme Right, the clericals, and the gov-ernment, have eased this task for us immensely by provid-ing an object-lesson of the attitude of the bourgeoisie to-wards the Church and religion. 
 The legal press of the Cadets and the so-called Progressists is at present devoting special attention to the question of the Old-Believers, to the factthat the Octobrists as well as the Cadets have taken a standagainst the government, and to the fact that they have,albeit in a small way, “adopted the course of reform” promisedon October 17. 
 What interests us most is the principle in-volved in this question, i. 
e. 
, the attitude of the bourgeoisie in general, including the elements who claim the title of Dem-ocratic Cadets, towards religion and the Church. 
 We mustnot allow a relatively minor question—the Old-Believers’conflict with the dominant Church, and the conduct of theOctobrists who are tied up with the Old-Believers, and are partly even dependent on them financially ( Golos Moskvy 153 is said to be financed by the Old-Believers)—make us lose sight of the root question, that of the interests andpolicy of the bourgeoisie as a class. 
 Take a look at the speech delivered by Count Uvarov, an Octobrist in his general views, but who has left the Oc-tobrist group. 
 Speaking after the Social-Democrat Surkov, he started by refusing to deal with this question from thestandpoint of principle, as the workers’ deputy had done. 
Uvarov merely attacks the Synod and the Procurator-Gen-eral for their unwillingness to give the Duma any infor-mation on certain Church revenues and on the expenditure of parish funds. 
 Kamensky, the official spokesman of the Octobrists, approaches the question from the same stand-point (April 16), and demands that parishes should be revived “for the purpose of strengthening the Orthodox faith”. 
 Kapustin, the so-called “Left-wing Octobrist”, elaborates on this idea. 
 “If we turn to the life of the people,” he ex-claims, “to the life of the rural population, we observe today,here and now, a sad fact: religious life is tottering, the great-est and sole foundation of the people’s moral principles istottering.... 
 What can replace the concept of sin, what canreplace the dictates of conscience? Surely, they cannot be replaced by the concept of class struggle and the rights of this or that class. 
 That is a tragic concept which has takenroot in our everyday life. 
 Therefore, if religion is to surviveas a foundation of morality, if it is to be within reach of thewhole population, it is necessary that the bearers of thisreligion should enjoy the proper authority.... 
” The spokesman of the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie wishes to strengthen religion, he wishes to enhance the in-fluence of religion on the masses, realising that it is inade-quate and out of date, realising even the harm caused to theruling classes by “officials in cassocks”, who are lowering the authority of the Church. 
 The Octobrist is fighting against the excesses of clericalism and of police tutelage in order to strengthen the influence of the Church on the masses, in order to replace at least some means of addling the wits of the people, which are too crude, too out of date, toothreadbare to achieve their object, by more refined and im-proved means. 
 Police religion is no longer adequate for be-fuddling the masses: give us a more cultured, more up-to-date, more skilful religion, one that will be effective in aself-governing parish—that is what capital is demandingof the autocracy. 
 And the Cadet Karaulov fully subscribes to this same point of view. 
 This “liberal” renegade (who gradually “evolved” from the Narodnaya Volya * to the Right-wing Cadets) screams his protest against the “denationalisation of the Church, understanding this to mean the exclusion of the massesof the people, of the laity, from the building of the Church”. 
He finds it “ shocking ” (literally so!) that the masses are “losing faith”. 
 He raises an outcry, quite in the style of Menshikov, 154 because the “immense intrinsic value of the *See Note 99. 
— Ed. 
 Church is being depreciated ... to the great detriment not only of the cause of the Church, but of that of the state as well. 
 He qualifies as “words of gold” the loathsome hypoc-risy of the zealot Eulogius on the theme that “the task ofthe Church is eternal, immutable, hence, it is not possibleto link up the Church with politics”. 
 He protests against thealliance of the Church with the Black Hundreds for the sole reason that the Church may, “with greater might and glory than today, fulfil its grand and holy mission in a Christian spirit of love and freedom”. 
 Comrade Belousov did well to have a good laugh at these “lyrical words” of Karaulov’s from the Duma rostrum. 
 How-ever, such ridicule is very far from being adequate. 
 It hadto be made clear—and at the first convenient opportunity this should be done from the Duma rostrum—that the stand-point of the Cadets is absolutely identical with that of theOctobrists, and merely expresses the efforts of “cultured”capital to bamboozle the people with religious narcotics bymore refined methods of Church deception than the onesnow practised by the rank-and-file Russian priests who are still living in the past. 
 To keep the people in spiritual bondage, there must be the closest possible alliance of the Church and the Black Hun-dreds, said the “wild landlord” and the old Derzhimorda 155 through their spokesman Purishkevich. 
 You are wronggentlemen, retorts the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie through their spokesman Karaulov: with such methods you will only make the people turn away from religion forgood. 
 Now let us go about it in a more clever, more artfulmore ingenious way: let us remove the too stupid andcrude agent of the Black Hundreds, declare war on “dena-tionalisation of the Church”, and inscribe on our banner Bishop Eulogius’s “words of gold” to the effect that the Church is above politics. 
 Only in this way shall we beable to fool at least some of the backward workers, and es-pecially of the petty bourgeoisie and the peasantry, and beable to help the renovated Church to fulfil its “grand andholy mission of retaining the masses of the people in spirit-ual bondage. 
 Our liberal press, not excluding the newspaper Rech , has concentrated of late on censuring Struve and Co. 
 for their authorship of the symposium Vekhi . 
 But Karaulov, the of-ficial spokesman of the Cadets in the Duma, has done a superlative job of exposing all the vile hypocrisy of these remonstrances, and these repudiations of Struve and Co. 
What Karaulov and Milyukov conceal, Struve reveals. 
The liberals blame Struve only for having imprudently blurted out the truth, for showing his hand too openly. 
 Theliberals, who censure Vekhi and go on supporting the Cadet Party, are most shamelessly deceiving the people—con-demning imprudently outspoken words , and going on doing the very things that go with those words. 
 There is little to say about the conduct of the Trudoviks in the Duma during the debate on the questions under re-view. 
 As always, a noticeable difference was revealed be-tween the peasant Trudoviks and the intellectual Trudo-viks to the disadvantage of the latter, because of their ex-cessive readiness to follow the Cadets. 
 True, Rozhkov, apeasant, revealed in his speech his complete lack of politicalconsciousness; he, too, repeated the Cadet platitudes aboutthe Union of the Russian People helping not to reinforce but to destroy faith. 
 He was unable to suggest any programme. 
 On the other hand, when he began in his artless mannerto tell the naked, unvarnished truth about the levies collectedby the clergy, about the extortions of the priests, about how,in addition to charging money for conducting a marriageceremony, they demand “a bottle of vodka, snacks, and a pound of tea, and sometimes things that I am even afraid to talk about from this rostrum ” (April 16, verbatim report, p. 
 2259)—this was more than the Black-Hundred Duma couldstand. 
 A wild howl arose from the benches of the right. 
“This is scandalous, this is outrageous!” shouted the BlackHundreds, realising that this simple peasant’s speech about extortions, listing the scale of “fees” charged for religious rites, was more likely to revolutionise the masses than anyamount of theoretical or tactical anti-religious and anti-Church declarations. 
 Thereupon the band of diehard de-fenders of autocracy in the Third Duma intimidated theirflunkey—the Duma Chairman Meyendorff—and compelled him to rule that Rozhkov must sit down (the Social-Demo-crats, joined by some Trudoviks, Cadets and others, handedin a protest against this action of the Chairman). 
 Although the speech delivered by the peasant Trudovik Rozhkov was extremely unsophisticated, it provided an excellent demonstration of the abyss dividing the hypocrit-ical, deliberately reactionary defence of religion by theCadets, and the primitive, unconscious, matter-of-fact re-ligiousness of the peasant, whose living conditions giverise—against his will and unconsciously—to a truly revolu-tionary resentment against extortions, and to readiness for a resolute fight against medievalism. 
 The Cadets are the rep-resentatives of the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie, whichis intent on renovating and strengthening religion againstthe people. 
 The Rozhkovs are the representatives of revolu-tionary bourgeois democracy, a democracy that is undevel-oped, lacking political consciousness, downtrodden, lacking independence, disunited—yet fraught with an all but inex-haustible reservoir of revolutionary energy in the fightagainst the landlords, the priests, and the autocracy. 
 Rozanov, a Trudovik intellectual, came close to the Ca-dets far less unconsciously than Rozhkov. 
 Rozanov couldmention disestablishment of the Church as a demand of the “Left”, but could not refrain from reactionary, petty-bour-geois phrases about “amending the electoral law in the sensethat the clergy should be excluded from participation inthe political struggle”. 
 The revolutionary spirit, which findsa spontaneous outlet in a typical, average peasant when hebegins to tell the truth about how he lives, vanishes in the case of a Trudovik intellectual, to be replaced by hazy and sometimes actually vile phrases. 
 For the hundredth andthousandth time we see the truth confirmed that only ifthey follow the proletariat’s lead will the Russian peasantmasses be able to overthrow the oppressive and killing yokeof the feudal-minded landlords, the feudalists in cassocks, the feudal-minded supporters of the autocracy. 
 The Social-Democrat Surkov, representing the workers’ party and the working class, was the only person in the Dumato raise the debates to the truly high level of principle, andsaid without beating about the bush what the attitudeof the proletariat is towards the Church and religion, and what should be the attitude in this matter of all consistent and vigorous democrats. 
 “Religion is the opium of the peo-ple.... 
 Not a farthing of the people’s money to these mur-derous enemies of the people who are drugging the people’s minds”—this straightforward, bold and outspoken battle-cry of a socialist resounded like a challenge to the Black-Hundred Duma, and met with the response of millions ofproletarians, who will spread it among the masses and whowill know how to translate it into revolutionary actionwhen the time comes. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat , No. 
 6, Published according June (4) 17, 1909 to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat CONFERENCE OF THE EXTENDED EDITORIAL BOARD OF PROLETARY 156 JUNE 8-17 (21-30) , 1909 CONFERENCE OF THE EXTENDED EDITORIAL BOARD OF PROLETARY 156 JUNE 8-17 (21-30) , 1909 REPORT ON THE CONFERENCE OF THE EXTENDED EDITORIAL BOARD OF PROLETARY Elsewhere in this issue the reader will find the text of the resolutions adopted at the recent conference of the extended Editorial Board of Proletary . 
 The conference was consti-tuted as follows: four members of the Proletary Editorial Board, three representatives of the Bolsheviks working inlocal organisations—St. 
 Petersburg. 
 Moscow regional (Cen-tral Russia) and the Urals—and five Bolshevik membersof the Central Committee. 
 The debates which developed at the conference are un-questionably of great importance to the whole Party. 
 Theydefined more exactly and, to some extent, more completely,that line of policy which the leading organ of the Bolsheviksection of the Party has been systematically pursuing inrecent times and which, of late, has aroused a number of attacks by some of our comrades who consider themselves Bolsheviks. 
 The necessary explanation took place at theconference, at which the opposition was represented by twocomrades. 
 In view of all this the editors of Proletary will make every effort to prepare and publish the fullest possible min-utes of the conference. 
 In the present report however we simply want to deal briefly with those points which, ifinterpreted in a certain way, might give rise—and are al-ready giving rise among comrades abroad—to misapprehen-sions. 
 The comprehensive and explicitly formulated resolu-tions of the conference really speak for themselves; the min-utes of the conference will provide enough material for a thorough understanding of the resolutions as a whole. 
 Thepurpose of this report is chiefly to point out the implications of the decisions and resolutions for members of the Bol-shevik section . 
 We shall start with the resolution “On Otzovism and Ultimatumism”. 
 That part of the resolution which is directed expressly against otzovism encountered no serious objections on thepart of the representatives of the opposition at the conference. 
Both these representatives admitted that otzovism, inas-much as it was shaping into a definite trend, was deviating further and further from Social-Democracy, that some rep-resentatives of otzovism, notably its recognised leaderComrade St. 
, 157 have even managed to acquire a “certain tinge of anarchism”. 
 The conference unanimously recognised that a persistent and systematic struggle against otzovism as a trend was imperative With ultimatumism matters were different. 
 Both representatives of the opposition at the conference called themselves ultimatumists. 
 And both of them, in awritten statement submitted when the resolution was beingvoted on, declared that they were ultimatumists, that the resolution proposed to repudiate ultimatumism, that this would mean repudiating themselves, which was somethingthey could not subscribe to. 
 Later, when several otherresolutions were adopted against the votes of the opposition,the two representatives of the opposition stated in writingthat they considered the resolutions of the conference ir-regular, that, in adopting them, the conference was declar-ing a split in the Bolshevik section, and that they wouldnot submit to these resolutions or put them into practice. 
Later we shall dwell in greater detail on this incident, be-cause it formally completed the breakaway of one of the rep-resentatives of the opposition, Comrade Maximov, from the extended editorial board of Proletary . 
 Here we want to approach it from another angle. 
 In assessing ultimatumism, just as, incidentally, in as-sessing that consistent ultimatumism which goes by the nameof otzovism, we have unfortunately to deal not so muchwith writings as with legend. 
 Neither ultimatumism nor otzovism have yet found expression in any more or less integ-ral “platform”. 
 So ultimatumism must be considered in itsonly concrete expression—the demand that the Social-Democratic group in the Duma be presented with an ulti-matum to act in a strict Party spirit and obey all the instruc-tions of the Party centres, or else give up their mandates. 
 To maintain, however, that such a description of ultimatumismis quite correct and accurate is, apparently, wrong. 
 And for the following reason. 
 Comrade Marat, one of the twoultimatumists who attended the conference, stated thatthis description did not apply to him. 
 He, Comrade Marat, admitted that there had been a great improvement lately in the work of the Social-Democratic group in the Duma,and that he did not intend to present an ultimatum to itnow, immediately. 
 He merely thought that the Partyshould bring pressure to bear on the Duma group by everypossible means, the afore-mentioned ultimatum being one of them. 
 It is of course possible to get along with ultimatumists like this within one and the same wing of the Party. 
 Such an ultimatumist is bound to reduce his ultimatumism tozero as the work of the Duma group improves. 
 Such ultima-tumism does not preclude but, on the contrary, implies prolonged work of the Party with and on the Duma group, prolonged and persistent work of the Party in the sense ofskilfully making use of activity in the Duma for the purposeof agitation and organisation. 
 Since there are clear signs ofan improvement in the activities of the Duma group, workmust be continued perseveringly and persistently in the same direction. 
 Ultimatumism will thereby gradually lose its objective meaning. 
 In the case of such Bolshevik ultima-tumists a split is out of the question. 
 In their case it is scarce-ly justifiable even to draw the line of demarcation pre-scribed in the resolution “On Otzovism and Ultimatumism”and in the resolution “The Tasks of the Bolsheviks in the Party”. 
 Such ultimatumism is nothing more than a shade of opinion in formulating and settling one definite practicalquestion; there is no marked difference of principle here. 
 The ultimatumism which the resolution describes as an ideological trend in the Party which Bolshevism must dis-own, is a different thing. 
 This ultimatumism—and it undoubtedly exists—rules out prolonged work on the Duma group by the Party and its central bodies, it rulesout prolonged, patient Party activity among the work-ers in the sense of skilfully utilising the wealth of agita-tional material provided by the Third Duma. 
 This ultimatum-ism rules out constructive , creative Party work on the Duma group. 
 This ultimatumism has only one weapon—the ul-timatum which the Party must hang over the head of its Duma group like the sword of Damocles, and which theR. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 must accept as a substitute for all that expe-rience in the genuinely revolutionary use of parliamentarism which the Social-Democrats in Western Europe have accu-mulated by dint of long persistent practice . 
 To draw a line between that ultimatumism and otzovism is impossible. 
 They are linked inseverably by their common spirit of ad-venturism . 
 And Bolshevism, as the revolutionary trend in Russian Social-Democracy, must dissociate itself from one and the other alike. 
 But what do we mean, what did the conference mean by this “dissociation”? Are there any grounds for asserting thatthe conference proclaimed a split in the Bolshevik section , as some representatives of the opposition would have usbelieve? There are no such grounds. 
 The conference stated in its resolutions that tendencies were beginning to appear within the Bolshevik section which run counter to Bolshe-vism with its specific tactical principles. 
 In our Party Bol-shevism is represented by the Bolshevik section . 
 But a sec-tion is not a party. 
 A party can contain a whole gamut ofopinions and shades of opinion, the extremes of which may be sharply contradictory. 
 In the German party, side by side with the pronouncedly revolutionary wing of Kautsky, wesee the ultra-revisionist wing of Bernstein. 
 That is not thecase within a section. 
 A section in a party is a group oflike-minded persons formed for the purpose primarily of influencing the party in a definite direction, for the purpose of securing acceptance for their principles in the party in the purest possible form. 
 For this, real unanimity of opinion is necessary. 
 The different standards we set for party unity and sectional unity must be grasped by everyone who wants to know how the question of the internal discord in the Bol-shevik section really stands. 
 The conference did not declare a split in the section . 
 It would be a profound mistake for any local functionary to understand the resolutions of the confer-ence as an instruction to expel otzovist-minded workers, let alone bring about an immediate split in organisations where there are otzovist elements. 
 We warn local functionaries in all seriousness against such actions. 
 Otzovism, as a coherent, independent trend does not exist among the mass of the work-ers. 
 The attempts of the otzovists at self-determination anda complete statement of their views lead inevitably to syndi-calism and anarchism. 
 Persons who advocate these trendswith any persistence exclude themselves automatically from section and Party alike. 
 To put otzovist-minded workers ’ groups in this category, however large these groups may be, would be absurd. 
 This kind of otzovism is largely a resultof being uninformed about the work of the Duma group. 
 Thebest way to combat this kind of otzovism is, first, wide publicity among the workers to keep them fully informed on the work of the Duma group and, secondly, to afford the workers opportunities to come into regular contact withthe group and influence it. 
 Otzovist sentiment in St. 
 Peters-burg, for instance, could be counteracted to a large extentby arranging a number of talks between our comrades inthe Duma and the workers of St. 
 Petersburg. 
 Thus all efforts should be concentrated on avoiding an organisational split with the otzovists. 
 Any ideological campaign against otzo-vism and its kindred doctrine syndicalism, conducted moreor less persistently and consistently, would soon make alltalk of an organisational split absolutely superfluous or, atworst, result in a few otzovists or groups of otzovists break-ing away from the Bolshevik section and the Party. 
 That, incidentally, was how matters stood at the confer-ence of the extended editorial board of Proletary . 
 Comrade Maximov’s ultimatumism proved to be utterly irreconci-lable with the Bolshevik line, which was formulated onceagain by the conference. 
 After the resolutions on key issues were adopted he declared that he considered them irregular, although they had been carried by ten votes to two, some ofthem against a single dissentient vote (Maximov’s) withone abstention (for example, the resolution “On Otzovismand Ultimatumism” as a whole). 
 At this the conference passeda resolution disclaiming all responsibility for the politi-cal actions of Comrade Maximov. 
 The thing was clear: once Comrade Maximov flatly rejected all the resolutionson key issues adopted by such a large majority of the confer-ence, he had to realise that there was not between the con-ference and himself that unanimity of opinion which is an elementary condition for the existence of a section within a party . 
 But Comrade Maximov did not stop there: he em-phatically declared not only that he had no intention ofcarrying out these resolutions, but that he would not submit to them . 
 The conference had no choice but to disclaim all responsibility for the political activities of Comrade Maximov. 
 In doing so, however, it declared (see the statement of the St. 
 Petersburg delegate M. 
 T. 
 158 and others) “that the ques-tion here is not of a split in the section but of ComradeMaximov’s breakaway from the extended editorial board ofProletary ”. 
 * We also find it necessary to draw all the attention of Party comrades to other resolutions of the conference: “The Tasks of the Bolsheviks in the Party”, and “The Attitudeto Duma Activities Among the Other Fields of Party Work”. 
The important thing here is correctly to understand the for-mulation of the question of the “Party line” of the Bolshe-viks, and of the attitude to legal opportunities in general and to the Duma as a platform in particular. 
 Our immediate task is to preserve and consolidate the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party. 
 The very fulfil-ment of this great task involves one extremely importantelement: the combating of both varieties of liquidationism — liquidationism on the right and liquidationism on the left. 
 The liquidators on the right say that no illegal R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 is needed, that Social-Democratic activities should be cen-tred exclusively or almost exclusively on legal opportuni-ties. 
 The liquidators on the left go to the other extreme: *Comrade Marat also made a statement to the effect that he would not carry out the resolutions of the conference, but would submit to them . 
 In a special statement, Comrade Marat made the reservation that, while he recognised the necessity of a comradelyideological struggle against otzovism, he did not believe that the struggle should take organisational forms or that it involved a split in the Bolshevik section. 
 As to the question in general of an organi-sational split, it is evident from the conference resolution (“On the Party School Set up Abroad at X— ”159) that a step towards a split was made in this case by the otzovists and the adherents of god-build-ing, 160 because this school is undoubtedly an attempt to form a new ideological and organisational centre for a new section of the Party. 
 legal avenues of Party work do not exist for them, illegality at any price is their “be all and end all”. 
 Both, in approxi-mately equal degree, are liquidators of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, for without methodical judicious combination of legal andillegal work in the present situation that history hasimposed upon us, the “preservation and consolidation of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
” is inconceivable. 
 Liquidationism on the right, aswe know, is rampant particularly in the Menshevik section, and partly in the Bund. 
 But among the Mensheviks there have lately been significant signs of a return to partyism,which must be welcomed: “the minority of the [Menshevik]section”, 161 to quote the conference resolution, “after running the full gauntlet of liquidationism, are now voicing theirprotest against it, and seeking anew solid party ground for their activities. 
” * What then are the tasks of the Bolsheviks in relation to this as yet small section of the Mensheviks who are fightingagainst liquidationism on the right? The Bolsheviks mustundoubtedly seek rapprochement with this section of the membership, those who are Marxists and partyists. 
 There is no question whatever of sinking our tactical differences with the Mensheviks. 
 We are fighting and shall continue tofight most strenuously against Menshevik deviations fromthe policy of revolutionary Social-Democracy. 
 Nor, need-less to say, is there any question of the Bolshevik sectiondissolving its identity in the Party. 
 The Bolsheviks have done a good deal to entrench their positions in the Party, but much remains to be done in the same direction. 
 TheBolshevik section as a definite ideological trend in the Partymust exist as before. 
 But one thing must be borne firmly inmind: the responsibility of “preserving and consolidating”the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, of which the resolution of the conference speaks, now rests primarily, if not entirely, on the Bolshevik section. 
 All, or practically all, the Party work in progress, particularly in the localities, is now being shouldered by *By the “split in the Editorial Board” of Golos Sotsial-Demokrata the resolution has in mind Comrade Plekhanov’s resignation from thatbody, to which Plekhanov himself says he was driven by nothingmore nor less than the liquidationist tendencies of the Editorial Board. 
 the Bolsheviks. 
 And to them, as firm and consistent guard-ians of Party principle, now falls a highly important task. 
 They must enlist in the cause of building up the Party all elements who are fitted to serve it. 
 And in this hour of adver-sity it would be truly a crime on our part not to extend ourhand to pro-Party people in other groups, who are comingout in defence of Marxism and partyism against liquidation-ism. 
 This stand was recognised by the great majority at the conference, including all the representatives of the Bolshe-viks from the local organisations. 
 The opposition wavered,hesitating to take a definite stand, either for or against us. 
Yet it was for this line that Comrade Maximov accused the con-ference of “betraying Bolshevism”, of adopting the Menshe-vik point of view, etc. 
 We had only one reply to make to this: “Say that publicly in the press, before the whole Partymembership and the whole Bolshevik section, and the soonerthe better; that will enable us once again to expose the truevalue of your ‘revolutionariness’, the true nature of your‘protection’ of Bolshevism. 
” We ask comrades to take note of the conference resolution on “The Attitude to Duma Activities, etc. 
” We have al-ready indicated above how intimately the question of “legalopportunities” is bound up with liquidationism of variousshades. 
 To fight liquidationism on the left is just as impera-tive now as to fight liquidationism on the right. 
 The parlia-mentary cretinism, which would reduce the whole Party organisation to a congregation of workers at the shrine of“legal opportunities”, and of Duma activities in particular,is as profoundly alien to the principles of revolutionarySocial-Democracy as the otzovism that cannot understandthe value of legal opportunities to the Party , in the interests of the Party . 
 In the conference resolutions the use of legal opportunities for the benefit of the Party is regarded as being of immense importance. 
 But nowhere in these resolutionsare legal opportunities and their use treated as an end initself. 
 They are everywhere placed in direct association with the aims and methods of illegal activity. 
 And this associa-tion deserves particular attention at the present time. 
 Cer-tain practical suggestions are given on this score in the resolution. 
 But they are only suggestions . 
 Broadly speaking, it is not so much now a question of what place “legal oppor-tunities” should occupy among other fields of Party work, but of how to utilise them with greatest benefit to the Party. 
 During its long years of work underground, the Party hasaccumulated enormous experience in illegal work. 
 Thiscannot be said of the other sphere—the use of legal opportu-nities. 
 Here the Party, and the Bolsheviks in particular , have not been active enough. 
 More attention, more initiative and more effort must be turned to making use of this field than has hitherto been the case. 
 We must learn to utilise legal opportunities, learn just as zealously as we have beenlearning to use illegal methods of work. 
 And it is for the pur-pose of using the legal opportunities for the benefit of theParty that the conference calls upon all to whom the inter-ests of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 are dear to put their shoulder to the wheel . 
 Our attitude to illegal Party work remains unchanged, as of course it must. 
 Our main task is to preserve and consoli-date the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, andeverything else must be subordinated to it. 
 Only after this consolidation has been achieved shall we be able to utilise these same legal opportunities in the interests of the Party. 
The utmost attention must be paid to those workers’ groupswhich are being formed in the industrial centres, which musttake over, and are gradually taking over, the general direc-tion of Party work. 
 All our efforts in all fields of our activi-ty should be aimed at making real Social-Democratic Party cadres out of these groups. 
 Only on this basis is it reallypossible to preserve and consolidate the Russian Social-Democratic-Labour Party. 
 Supplement to Proletary , No. 
 46, Published according July 3 (16), 1909 to the Supplement SPEECH ON THE QUESTION OF THE TASKS OF THE BOLSHEVIKS IN THE PARTY, JUNE 11 (24) I think it unnecessary to reply for the hundredth and thousandth time to Comrade Maximov on the question atissue, i. 
e. 
, to repeat that in breaking away from us he iscreating a faction of caricature Bolsheviks or godly otzovists. 
All this has already been said, printed, chewed over and emphasised in Proletary . 
 And I only say: speak out, say in print what you have been saying here within four walls— and then, and only then, shall we get an ideological struggleinstead of the unseemly bickering that has been going onhere for more than three days. 
 Say in print that we are “neo-Bolsheviks”, “neo-Proletary -ists” “in the new Iskra sense”, i. 
e. 
, virtually, Mensheviks, that we “have made two steps back”, that we “are destroying the most precious heritageof the Russian revolution—Bolshevism”. 
 Say these things,which I have taken down from your speech, in print , and we shall show the public yet once more that you do answerto the type of a caricature Bolshevik. 
 Say in print that we—I quote your words again—“will die a political death as prisoners of Plekhanov in the event of a new upsurge”, thatwe “will win in the event of a protracted period of reaction”,say this in print , and we shall, for the benefit of the Party, elucidate once more the difference between Bolshevism and“godly otzovism”. 
 But since you refuse (in spite of our di-rect challenges, beginning from August 1908, when you were formally requested at a meeting of the editorial board tocome forward with a pamphlet, to express your views in a pamphlet), since you refuse to fight openly , but continue your intrigue within the Party, we must get an open state-ment from you by directly removing you from our section (not from the Party but from our section of it), removingyou for the sake of an ideological struggle which willteach the Party a great deal. 
 First published in 1934 Published according in the book Minutes to the manuscript of the Conference Extended Editorial Board of “Proletary ” SPEECH AND DRAFT RESOLUTION OF THE TASKS OF THE BOLSHEVIKS IN RELATION TO DUMA ACTIVITY We are coming to the end of the debate, and I don’t think there is any need to fix it in a special resolution, because we need to be careful with that. 
 The thing was after all tothrash the matter out among ourselves. 
 In reply to Vlasov 162 on the use of legal opportunities, I will read a draft resolu-tion: “The Bolshevik Centre resolves: in order in practice t o achieve—and to achieve in a revolutionary Social-Democrat-ic spirit and direction—the objects now recognised by allBolsheviks of making use of all ‘legal opportunities’, alllegal and semi-legal organisations of the working class ingeneral and the Duma rostrum in particular, the Bolsheviksection must definitely and clearly put before itself the aim of securing at any cost the training up of a body of experi-enced Bolsheviks, specialised in their job and firmly estab-lished in their particular legal post (trade unions; clubs; Duma committees, etc. 
, etc. 
). 
” Vlasov stated that this refers to the leaders. 
 This is not the case. 
 The trouble is that in our Bolshevik section the view prevails that such specialists are not required. 
 Our forces are few: they must be utilised and allotted to the legalfunctions, and made responsible for carrying out these func-tions in the name of the section. 
 If we speak of setting upParty cells, we must know how to do it. 
 I have drafted aresolution on agitation by leaflets: “Having discussed the question of the Bolsheviks’ tasks in relation to Duma activity, the Bolshevik Centre resolvesto draw the attention of all local organisations to the im-portance of agitation by leaflets (in addition to the local and regional press) which spread among the masses informa-tion about the Duma work of the Social-Democrats and give direction to this work. 
 Subjects for such leaflets might beindications of questions to be highlighted from the Dumarostrum, the summing up of the Social-Democrats’ activityin the Duma and the grouping of the different parties, out-lines of propagandist speeches on these questions, analysis of the political significance of particularly important So-cial-Democratic speeches in the Duma, pointing out omis-sions or inaccuracies in Social-Democratic Duma speeches,and extracts from these speeches giving practical conclusionsimportant for propaganda and agitation, etc. 
, etc. 
” And I have also roughed-out in the form of a resolution the points on the question of our attitude to Duma activity which were discussed at the private meeting 163: “II. 
 The difference between the revolutionary Social-Democratic use of the Duma and the reformist (or morebroadly, opportunist) use can be described by the followingindications, which do not pretend to be complete. 
 “From the standpoint of the external relations, so to speak, of the Duma Social-Democratic group, the difference betweenthe revolutionary Social-Democratic use of the Duma andopportunist use consists in the following: the necessity tocombat the tendency on the part of deputies and very oftenof the bourgeois intellectuals surrounding them—a tendency natural in all bourgeois society (and in Russia during a pe-riod of reaction especially)—to make parliamentary activitythe basic, most important thing of all, an end in itself. 
In particular it is essential to make every effort that thegroup should carry on its work as one of the functionssubordinated to the interests of the working-class movement as a whole, and also that the group should be in constant con-tact with the Party, not drawing apart from it but implement-ing Party views, the directives of Party congresses and thecentral institutions of the Party. 
 “From the standpoint of the internal content of the group’s activity, it is essential to bear the following in mind. 
 The aim of the activity of the parliamentary Social-Demo-cratic group differs in principle from that of all other politi-cal parties. 
 The aim of the proletarian party is not to do deals or haggle with the powers that be, not to engage in the hopeless patching-up of the regime of the feudalist-bour-geois dictatorship of counter-revolution, but to develop in every way the class-consciousness, the socialist clarity ofthought, the revolutionary determination and all-roundorganisation of the mass of the workers. 
 Every step in theactivity of the Duma group must serve this fundamentalaim. 
 Therefore more attention must be paid to promoting the aims of socialist revolution from the Duma rostrum. 
 Efforts must he made to ensure that speeches should moreoften be heard from the Duma rostrum propagandising thefundamental conceptions and aims of socialism, namely, ofscientific socialism. 
 Then, in the conditions of continuingbourgeois-democratic revolution, it is extremely important that the Duma group should systematically combat the torrent of counter-revolutionary attacks on the ‘liberationmovement’, and the prevalent tendency (both on the part ofthe outright reactionaries and of the liberals, especiallythe Cadets) to condemn the revolution and discredit it, itsaims, its methods, etc. 
 The Social-Democratic group in the Duma must bear high the banner of the revolution, the banner of the advanced class, leader of the bourgeois-democraticrevolution in Russia. 
 “Furthermore it is essential to point out a task of the Duma Social-Democratic group, which is exceptionally im-portant at the present time, namely, that of participating energetically in all discussions of labour legislation. 
 The group must utilise the rich parliamentary experience of theWest-European Social-Democrats, taking special care toavoid the opportunist distortion of this aspect of its activity. 
The group must not whittle down its slogans and the demandsof our Party’s minimum programme, but draft and introduce its Social-Democratic Bills (and also amendments to Bills of the government and the other parties), in order to unmaskto the masses the hypocrisy and falseness of social-reformism,in order to draw the masses into independent economic andpolitical mass struggle, which alone can bring real gains tothe workers or transform half-hearted and hypocritical ‘reforms’ under the existing system into strong-points for an advancing working-class movement towards the completeemancipation of the proletariat. 
 “The Duma Social-Democratic group and the whole So-cial-Democratic Party should take the same stand towards reformism within Social-Democracy, which is the latest product of opportunist vacillation. 
 “Finally, revolutionary Social-Democratic use of the Duma should differ from opportunist use in that the Social-Demo-cratic group and the Party are bound to explain to the massesin every possible way the class character of all bourgeois political parties, not confining themselves to attacks on the government and outright reactionaries, but exposing boththe counter-revolutionary nature of liberalism and thewaverings of petty-bourgeois peasant democracy. 
” Written June 12-13 (25-26), 1909 Text of the speech First published in 1934 in the book published according Minutes of the Conference to the book; of the Extended Editorial text of the draft resolution Board of “Proletary ” according to the manuscript RESOLUTIONS OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE EXTENDED EDITORIAL BOARD OF PROLETARY 1 ON OTZOVISM AND ULTIMATUMISM The slogan of boycott of the Bulygin Duma and the First Duma issued by the revolutionary wing of our Party playeda great revolutionary role at the time, and was taken upwith enthusiasm by all the most active and most revolu-tionary sections of the working class. 
 The direct revolutionary struggle of the broad masses was then followed by a severe period of counter-revolution. 
 It became essential for Social-Democrats to adapt their revo-lutionary tactics to this new political situation, and, inconnection with this, one of the exceptionally importanttasks became the use of the Duma as an open platform forthe purpose of assisting Social-Democratic agitation and or-ganisation. 
 In this rapid turn of events, however, a section of the workers who had participated in the direct revolutionarystruggle was unable to proceed at once to apply revolutionarySocial-Democratic tactics in the new conditions of the coun-ter-revolution, and continued simply to repeat slogans which had been revolutionary in the period of open civil war, but which now, if merely repeated, might retard the process ofclosing the ranks of the proletariat in the new conditionsof struggle. 
 On the other hand, in the conditions of this painful crisis, in an atmosphere of decline in the revolutionary strug-gle, of apathy and dejection even among a section of the workers, at a time when the workers’ organisations werebeing suppressed and when the strength of their resistance to disintegrating influences was inadequate, there has devel-oped among a section of the working class an attitude of indifference towards the political struggle in general, and of a particularly marked lack of interest in the work ofSocial-Democrats in the Duma. 
 It is in such conditions that so-called otzovism and ulti-matumism may meet with temporary success among thesesections of the proletariat. 
 The proceedings of the Third Duma, which openly flouts the needs of the workers, work up an otzovist mood amongthese strata of the workers, who, owing to their inadequateSocial-Democratic training, are as yet unable to understandthat these proceedings of the Third Duma enable the Social-Democrats to make use of that representative assembly of the exploiting classes in a revolutionary manner, in order to expose to the broadest sections of the people the real na-ture of the autocracy and of all the counter-revolutionaryforces, as well as the need for revolutionary struggle. 
 Another contributing factor to this otzovist mood among this stratum of the workers has been the exceedingly grave errors committed by the Duma Social-Democratic group, especially during the first year of its activity. 
 Recognising that this otzovist mood has a detrimental effect on the socialist and revolutionary training of the work-ing class, the Bolshevik wing of the Party considers itnecessary: (a)in regard to these strata of the workers : to persevere in the work of Social-Democratic training and organisation,to explain systematically and persistently the utter politi-cal futility of otzovism and ultimatumism, the real sig-nificance of Social-Democratic parliamentarism and the roleof the Duma as a platform for the Social-Democrats during a period of counter-revolution; (b)in regard to the Duma Social-Democratic group and Duma work in general : to establish close connections between the Duma group and the advanced workers; to render itevery assistance; to see that the whole Party supervises andbrings pressure upon it, inter alia , by openly explaining its mistakes; to ensure in practice that the Party guides its activities as a Party organ; and in general that the Bolshe-viks carry out the decisions of the recent Party conference on this matter; for only the increased attention of working-class circles to the activities of the Duma Social-Democratic group, and their organised participation in the Duma activ-ities of the Social-Democrats, will be effective in straight-ening out the tactics of our Duma group; (c)in regard to the Right wing of the Party , which is dragging the Duma group on to an anti-Party road and there-by tearing it away from the workers’ vanguard to wage a systematic, irreconcilable struggle against it, and to expose these tactics as fatal to the Party. 
 * * * In the course of the bourgeois-democratic revolution a number of elements joined our Party, attracted not by its purely proletarian programme, but chiefly by its gallant and energetic fight for democracy; these elements adoptedthe revolutionary-democratic slogans of the proletarianparty, but without connecting them with the entire struggleof the socialist proletariat as a whole. 
 Such elements, not sufficiently imbued with the proletar-ian point of view, have also been found in the ranks of our Bolshevik wing of the Party. 
 In this period of social stag-nation such elements more and more reveal their lack ofSocial-Democratic consistency. 
 Coming as they do intoever sharper contradiction with the fundamentals of revo-lutionary Social-Democratic tactics, they have been creat-ing, during the past year, a trend that seeks to give shape to a theory of otzovism and ultimatumism, but in realityonly elevates to a principle and intensifies false notionsabout Social-Democratic parliamentarism and the work ofSocial-Democracy in the Duma. 
 These attempts to create a complete system of otzovist policy out of an otzovist mood lead to a theory which in substance expresses the ideology of political indifferenceon the one hand, and of anarchist vagaries on the other. 
For all its revolutionary phraseology, the theory of otzo-vism and ultimatumism in practice represents, to a consider-able extent, the reverse side of constitutional illusions based on the hope that the Duma itself can satisfy certain urgent needs of the people. 
 In essence, it substitutes petty-bour-geois tendencies for proletarian ideology. 
 No less harmful to the Social-Democratic cause than open otzovism is so-called ultimatumism (i. 
e. 
, that tendency which on principle renounces the utilisation of the Third Duma rostrum, or which tries to justify its failure to carryout this duty by considerations of expediency, and in striv-ing for the recall of the Social-Democratic group from theDuma, abandons the prolonged work of training the Dumagroup and straightening its line in favour of presenting to it an immediate ultimatum). 
 Politically, ultimatumism at the present time is indistinguishable from otzovism, andonly introduces still greater confusion and disunity by thedisguised character of its otzovism. 
 The attempts of ulti-matumism to assert its direct connection with the tactics ofboycott practised by our wing of the Party during a particu-lar stage of the revolution, merely distort the true meaning and character of the boycott of the Bulygin Duma and theFirst Duma, which was quite correctly applied by the over -whelming majority of our Party. 
 By their attempt to deduce,from the particular cases in which the boycott of representa-tive institutions was applied at this or that moment of the revolution, that the policy of boycott is the distinguishing feature of Bolshevik tactics, even in a period of counter-revolution, ultimatumism and otzovism demonstrate thatthese trends are in essence the reverse side of Menshevism,which preaches indiscriminate participation in all represen-tative institutions, irrespective of the particular stage of development of the revolution, irrespective of whether a revolutionary upsurge exists or not. 
 All the attempts made so far by otzovism and ultimatumism to lay down principles on which to base their theory haveinevitably led to denial of the fundamentals of revolutionaryMarxism. 
 The tactics proposed by them inevitably lead to a complete break with the tactics of the Left wing of in-ternational Social-Democracy as applied to present-dayRussian conditions, and result in anarchist deviations. 
 Otzovist-ultimatumist agitation has already begun to cause unquestionable harm to the working-class movementand to Social-Democratic work. 
 If it continues, it may be-come a threat to Party unity, for this agitation has already given rise to such ugly phenomena as the alliance betweenotzovists and Socialist-Revolutionaries (in St. 
 Petersburg) for the purpose of preventing help for our Party representa-tives in the Duma; likewise to public speeches at workers’ meetings jointly with avowed syndicalists. 
 In view of all this, the extended editorial board of Pro-letary declares that Bolshevism as a definite trend with-in the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party has nothingin common with otzovism and ultimatumism, and that theBolshevik wing of the Party must most resolutely combat these deviations from the path of revolutionary Marxism. 
 2 THE TASKS OF THE BOLSHEVIKS IN THE PARTY In the period of decisive triumph of counter-revolution which followed the dissolution of the Second Duma, force ofcircumstances dictated that all Party activities should beconcentrated on the following task: to preserve the Partyorganisation built up in the years of the high tide of the pro-letarian struggle, despite all the efforts of reaction, and notwithstanding the great depression in the proletarian class struggle, i. 
e. 
, to preserve it as an organisation whichconsciously takes its stand on the basis of orthodox Marx-ism, and which unites all the “national” Social-Democrat-ic organisations for the purpose of carrying out a singlerevolutionary Social-Democratic line of tactics. 
 In the course of this two years’ struggle for the Party and partyism, it became quite clear that, on the one hand, theParty had dissociated itself from the elements that hadpenetrated it as a result of the specific conditions of thebourgeois-democratic revolution, and that, on the otherhand, the revolutionary Social-Democrats had been further consolidated. 
 On the one hand, the former fellow-travellers of Social-Democracy took quite definite shape—those fel-low-travellers, who, on leaving the Party, transferred alltheir activities into various legal organisations (co-opera-tives, trade unions, educational societies, advisory commit-tees for the Duma group), where they not only did not carry out the policy of the Party but, on the contrary, fought the Party and strove to wrest these organisations away from itand pit them against the Party. 
 Making a fetish of legality, and elevating to a principle the narrow forms of activity imposed by the temporary decline of and state of disunity in the working-class movement, these elements—avowed liquidators of the Party—quite obviously took their standupon the ground of theoretical and tactical revisionism. 
That the closest connection exists between liquidationismin organisation (the struggle against Party institutions)and the ideological struggle against Marxist theory and the fundamental principles of the programme of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, has now most clearly beenrevealed and proved by the entire history of the efforts toforce an opportunist policy on our Duma group by its in-tellectual advisers, as well as by the entire course of the strug-gle between the liquidators and the partyists within the legal workers’ organisations and in the workers’ groups of the four congresses: of the People’s Universities, 164 o f the co-operatives,165 of women166 and of factory medical officers. 
167 On the other hand, the Left wing of the Party, to whose lot it fell to lead the Party during this period of the decisive triumph of the counter-revolution, theoretically recognised and in practice applied the tactics of expediently combiningillegal with legal Party work. 
 This applies to all the Partywork with the Duma group and all the Party work in thelegal and semi-legal proletarian organisations. 
 It is pre-cisely these forms of work—forms enabling the illegal Party to influence more or less broad masses—that have been brought to the fore by the peculiar conditions of the pres-ent historical situation, in addition to the main forms ofParty work. 
 It is in these forms of activity that the Partyin practice comes into conflict with liquidationism and dealsit heavy blows. 
 It is on this ground also that Social-Demo-crats belonging to various groups of the Party have been and are being drawn together. 
 * And here, finally, on the very same questions of Party tactics and organisation in the con-*The resolutions on the trade unions and the co-operatives, and a number of resolutions on Duma activities, carried unanimously by the Central Committee. 
 Support for the Party line by the over-whelming majority at the recent All-Russian Conference. 
 The experience of conducting the Central Organ, the workers’ groups of the said con-gresses, etc. 
 ditions of the Third Duma period, the Bolshevik section openly disavows the pseudo-revolutionary, unstable, non-Marxist elements, which, under cover of so-called otzovism, have been opposing the new forms of Partyactivity. 
 At the present time, outlining the basic tasks of the Bolsheviks, the extended editorial board of Proletary states: (1) that in the further struggle for the Party and party-ism, the task of the Bolshevik section, which must remainthe foremost champion of partyism and of the revolutionarySocial-Democratic line in the Party, is to give active andall-round support to the Central Committee and the CentralOrgan of the Party. 
 In the present period of the re-grouping of Party forces, only the central institutions of the Party can serve as the strong and authoritative representaive of the Party line, around which all genuinely partyistand genuinely Social-Democratic elements can berallied; (2) that in the Menshevik camp of the Party, whose of-ficial organ, Golos Sotsial-Demokrata , is fully controlled by the Menshevik liquidators, the minority of this faction,having explored the path of liquidationism to the very end,is already raising its voice in protest against that path andis again seeking a party basis for its activities (the letterof the “Vyborg ” Mensheviks * in St. 
 Petersburg, the split among the Mensheviks in Moscow, the split in the editorial board of Golos Sotsial-Demokrata , the corresponding divi-sion in the Bund, etc. 
); (3) that in such circumstances the task of the Bolsheviks, who will remain the solid vanguard of the Party, is not onlyto continue the struggle against liquidationism and all the varieties of revisionism, but also to establish closer contact with the Marxist and partyist elements of the other groups,dictated by common aims in the struggle for the preserva-tion and consolidation of the Russian Social-DemocraticLabour Party. 
 *The Mensheviks in Vyborg District of St. 
 Petersburg. 
— Ed. 
 3 AGITATION FOR A BOLSHEVIK CONGRESS OR BOLSHEVIK CONFERENCE SEPARATE THE PARTY Considering: that the Bolshevik wing, ever since Party unity was re-stored, has always aligned and rallied the adherents of itspolitical line on issues which have already become the sub-ject of a general Party discussion, and always on the basis of an ideological campaign fought on the general Partyarena for its own particular solution of such questions—parallel platforms, discussion in the Party cells, and atgeneral Party congresses; that this is the only sure way both to rally really like-minded members and to draw into the wing all really kin-dred elements; that for the attainment of our main object, to exert such an influence on the Party that the policy of revolutionarySocial-Democracy shall triumph once and for all in theParty, the alignment of the Bolshevik, solely on the general Party arena is the only right and proper procedure; that any other procedure, the procedure of calling special Bolshevik conferences and congresses, would inevitablysplit the Party from top to bottom and would deal an irre-parable blow to the section which took the initiative in bring-ing about such a total split in the Russian Social-Democrat-ic Labour Party, the extended editorial board of Proletary resolves: (1) To warn all its supporters against agitating for a special Bolshevik congress, as such agitation would leadobjectively to a Party split and might radically impair theposition which revolutionary Social-Democracy has won in the Party. 
 (2) To hold the next conference of Bolsheviks at the same time as the regular Party conference, the supreme assemblyof the wing as a whole to be an assembly of its supportersat the next Party congress. 
 (3) In view of the urgent outstanding issues agitating the Party and members of its Bolshevik wing, the Bolsheviks on the Central Committee are instructed to press for a speed-iest possible general Party conference (to be called in two or 4 THE PARTY SCHOOL BEING SET UP ABROAD AT X-— After considering the question of the school at X—, the extended editorial board of Proletary is of the opinion that the organisation of this school by the promotion group(which includes Comrade Maximov, a member of the extend-ed editorial board) has from the outset been proceeded with over the heads of the editorial board of Proletary and been accompanied by agitation against the latter. 
 The steps sofar taken by the promotion group make it perfectly clearthat under the guise of this school a new centre is beingformed for a faction breaking away from the Bolsheviks. 
 Thesponsors of this school, acting over the heads of the general centres, have contacted numerous committees in Russia, organised an independent fund and collections, and areappointing their own organisers, without even informingthe editorial board of Proletary or the general Party centre. 
 While it recognises that with the present dearth of experi-enced Party workers a properly constituted and genuinely Party school, even if located abroad, might be of some help;to local organisations in training up useful Party functiona-ries from among the workers, and while it considers for itspart that everything must be done to render such assistanceto local organisations as the condition of our organisation will allow, the extended editorial board, on the evidence of the whole line of conduct of the initiators of the schoolat X—, declares that the aims pursued by these initiatorsare not aims common to the Bolshevik wing as a whole, asan ideological trend in the Party, but are the private aimsof a group with a separate ideology and policy. 
 In view of the dissensions revealed within our ranks on the subject of otzovism, ultimatumism, the attitude to the propagandaof god-building and the internal Party tasks of the Bolshe-viks in general; and in view of the fact that the initiatorsand organisers of the school at X— are one and all repre-sentatives of otzovism, ultimatumism and god-building, the extended editorial board of Proletary declares that the ideological and political physiognomy of this new centre isquite clearly defined. 
 In view of this, the extended editorial board of Prole-tary declares that the Bolshevik wing can bear no responsi-bility for this school. 
 5 THE BREAKAWAY OF COMRADE MAXIMOV Considering: that unanimity on principles and tactics between ten members of the extended editorial board of Proletary , on the one hand, and Comrade Maximov, on the other, hasmanifestly proved to be absent on all points of the agenda;that, furthermore, there have lately been actions on Comrade Maximov’s part tending also to violate the organisational unity of the Bolshevik wing; that, lastly, Comrade Maximovgave a negative answer to the question whether he wouldabide by the decisions of the extended editorial board ofProletary and carry them out, the extended editorial board of Proletary henceforth dis-claims any responsibility for the political actions of Comrade Maximov. 
 Supplement to Published according Proletary , No. 
 46,t o the Supplement July 3 (16), 1909 THE LIQUIDATION OF LIQUIDATIONISM In a special supplement to the present issue of Proletary the reader will find a report on the conference of the Bol-sheviks and the text of the resolutions adopted there. 
 * Our purpose in the present article is to assess the importanceof this conference and the breakaway of a small group of theBolsheviks which took place there, from the standpoint bothof our wing and of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 as a whole. 
 The last two years, roughly from the coup d’état of June 3, 1907, up to the present time, have been a period of drastic change, of grave crisis in the history of the Russian revolu-tion and in the development of the working-class movementin Russia and of the Russian Social-Democratic LabourParty. 
 The All-Russian Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
held in December 1908 reviewed the present political situa-tion, the condition and prospects of the revolutionary move-ment and the tasks of the party of the working class in thepresent period. 
 The resolutions passed by the conferenceare a permanent asset to the Party, and the Menshevik oppor-tunists who sought to criticise them at all costs, only succeededin betraying the glaring futility of their “criticism” which was unable to offer any intelligent, integral and sys-tematic solution of the problems as an alternative to theone given in the resolutions. 
 But that was not all. 
 The conference played an important roll in the life of our Party by indicating the existence ofnew ideological groupings in both wings—the Mensheviks and the Bolsheviks. 
 The struggle between these sections *See pp. 
 425-51 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR can be said without exaggeration to have filled the whole history of the Party, both on the eve of the revolution and during the revolution. 
 Therefore the new ideological group-ings are an event of great importance in the life of the Party,an event whose lessons all Social-Democrats shouldstudy, understand and digest, if they are to take an intel-ligent stand on the new issues which this new situationraises. 
 These new ideological groupings may be briefly described as the appearance of liquidationism on both the extremeflanks of the Party and as the struggle being waged againstit. 
 By December 1908 liquidationism stood fully revealedamong the Mensheviks, but at that time the fight againstit was conducted almost exclusively by others (the Bol-sheviks, the Polish and Lettish Social-Democrats, a section of the Bundists). 
 The pro-Party Mensheviks, Mensheviks whowere opposed to liquidationism, had barely begun to emergeas a trend at that time, and were not at all united or openin their criticism. 
 Among the Bolsheviks both sections wereclearly defined and acted openly, namely, the overwhelming majority of orthodox Bolsheviks, who were firmly opposed to otzovism and secured the adoption of their point of viewin all the resolutions of the conference, and the otzovistminority who advocated their views as a separate group,and received frequent support from the ultimatumists whowavered between them and the orthodox Bolsheviks. 
 That the otzovists (and the ultimatumists, too, insofar as they are coming round to the otzovist viewpoint) are Mensheviksinside out, liquidators of a new type, has been repeatedlyasserted and demonstrated in Proletary (see especially issues Nos. 
 39, 42, and 44 *). 
 Thus among the Mensheviks the overwhelming majority were liquidators, and the protest and struggle of the pro-Party men against them were barely beginning to manifest themselves; while among the Bolshe-viks the orthodox elements were completely dominant, butan otzovist minority were acting openly. 
 Such was the situ-ation within the Party at the December All-Russian Confer-ence of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 *See pp. 
 286-302, 356-59 and 383-94 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 What is this liquidationism, then? What brought it into being? Why is it that the otzovists (and the god-builders of whom we shall say a few words later) are also liquidators, Mensheviks inside out? In a word, what is the social meaningand the social significance of the new ideological groupingwithin our Party? Liquidationism in the narrow sense of the word, the liquidationism of the Mensheviks, consists ideologically in negation of the revolutionary class struggle of the social-ist proletariat in general, and denial of the hegemony ofthe proletariat in our bourgeois-democratic revolutionin particular. 
 This denial of course takes various forms, andoccurs more or less consciously, sharply and consistently. 
As an example we might mention Cherevanin and Potresov. 
 The former gave such an assessment of the role of the prole-tariat in the revolution that the whole editorial board of Golos Sotsial-Demokrata , even before the split that took place in it (i. 
e. 
, both Plekhanov and Martov-Dan-Axelrod-Martynov) had to repudiate Cherevanin, although it didso in a very discreditable form. 
 It repudiated the consistent liquidator in Vorwärts to the Germans without publishing its statement in “Golos Sotsial-Demokrata ” for the benefit of Russian readers ! In the article which he contributed to the Social Movement in Russia at the Beginning of the Twentieth Century , Potresov liquidated the idea of the hegemony of the proletariat in the Russian revolution so successfully that Plekhanov left the liquidationist editorial board. 
 In respect of organisation, liquidationism means denying the necessity for an illegal Social-Democratic Party, andconsequently renouncing the Russian Social-DemocraticLabour Party, leaving its ranks. 
 It means fighting the Party in the columns of the legal press, in legal workers’ organisa-tions, in the trade unions and co-operative societies, atcongresses attended by working-class delegates, etc. 
 Thehistory of any Party organisation in Russia during the lasttwo years teems with examples of liquidationism on the partof the Mensheviks. 
 As a particularly glaring example of liquidationism, we have already referred ( Proletary , No. 
 42, reprinted in the pamphlet The All-Russian Conference of the R. 
 S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in December 1908 ) to the case where the Menshevik members of the Central Committee made a delib-erate attempt to wreck the Central Committee of the Par-ty, and stop the functioning of this institution. 
 The almost complete breakdown of the illegal Menshevik organisationsin Russia is borne out by the fact that the “Caucasian dele-gation” at the recent Party conference consisted entirely ofresidents abroad, while the editorial board of “ Golos Sotsial-Demokrata ” was confirmed (at the beginning of 1908) by the Central Committee of the Party as a separate literary group, totally unconnected with any organisation functioning inRussia. 
 The Mensheviks do not weigh up the implications of all these manifestations of liquidationism. 
 They either concealthem or are baffled by them, at a loss to understand the significance of certain facts, floundering in minutiae, va-garies and personalities, unable to draw general conclusions,unable to grasp the meaning of what is going on. 
 And the meaning of it is that, in a period of bourgeois revolution, the opportunist wing of the workers’ party,at times of crisis, disintegration and collapse, is bound to be either out-and-out liquidationist or liquidator-ridden. 
 In a period of bourgeois revolution the proletarian partyis bound to have a following of petty-bourgeois fellow-travel-lers (what is known as Mitläufer in German) who are least capable of digesting proletarian theory and tactics, leastcapable of holding their own in time of collapse, most likely to carry opportunism to its extreme. 
 Disintegration has set in—and the mass of Menshevik intellectuals, Menshevikwriters, have virtually turned liberal. 
 The intelligentsiahas swung away from the Party—and consequently disintegra-tion has been most complete in the Menshevik organisations. 
Those Mensheviks who sincerely sympathised with the pro-letariat and the proletarian class struggle, with proletarian revolutionary theory (and there have always been such Men-sheviks who justify their opportunism in the revolution onthe grounds that they are anxious to miss no changes in thesituation, no convolutions in the complex historical process)found themselves “in the minority once more”, in a minority among the Mensheviks, without the determination to fight the liquidators and without the strength to succeed if theytried. 
 But the opportunist fellow-travellers move further and further to liberalism. 
 Plekhanov becomes exasperated with Potresov, Golos Sotsial-Demokrata with Cherevanin, the Moscow Menshevik workingmen with the Menshevik intellectuals, and so forth . 
 The pro-Party Mensheviks, the orthodox Marxists among the Mensheviks, are beginning tobreak away and, by the logic of things, by becoming pro-Party , they draw nearer to the Bolsheviks. 
 And it is our duty to understand this situation, everywhere and in every way to separate the liquidators from the pro-Party Menshe-viks, to make closer contact with the latter, not by glossingover differences in principle, but by building up a reallyunited workers’ party in which differences of opinion shouldnot stand in the way of the common effort, the common drive,the common struggle. 
 But are petty-bourgeois fellow-travellers of the proletar-iat the exclusive property of the Menshevik wing? No. 
We have already pointed out in Proletary , No. 
 39, * that they are to be found also among the Bolsheviks, as testifiedby the entire mode of argument of the consistent otzovists,the whole character of their attempts to justify “new” tac-tics. 
 No sizable section of a mass workers’ party could, by the nature of things, avoid during a time of bourgeois revo-lution taking on a certain number of “fellow-travellers”of diverse shadings. 
 This is inevitable even in the most high-ly developed capitalist countries, after the completion of abourgeois revolution, for the proletariat is ever in contact with the most varied sections of the petty bourgeoisie and is constantly being recruited and replenished from them. 
There is nothing abnormal or terrible in this, if the proletar-ian party is able thoroughly to absorb these foreign bodies,to control and not be controlled by them, and is able to seein good time that some of these elements really are foreign bodies, and that in certain conditions one must clearly and openly dissociate oneself from them. 
 In this respect thedifference between the two wings of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 is thatthe Mensheviks turned out to be in thrall to the liquidators(i. 
e. 
, the “fellow-travellers”), proof of which is to be foundamong the Mensheviks themselves, being supplied both *See pp. 
 286-302 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 by their Moscow adherents in Russia, and abroad by Ple-khanov’s repudiation of Potresov and Golos Sotsial-Demo-krata ; while in the case of the Bolsheviks the liquidationist elements—the otzovists and god-builders—proved to be asmall minority from the outset, were rendered harmlessfrom the outset, and were ultimately pushed aside. 
 That otzovism is Menshevism inside out, that it also leads inevitably to liquidationism, only of a slightly different kind, there can be no doubt. 
 It is not, of course, a matter of personalities or particular groups, but of an objectivegeneral tendency—to the extent that otzovism ceases to bea mere state of mind and seeks to evolve into a separatetrend. 
 The Bolsheviks stated quite definitely before therevolution, first, that their aim was not to create a separate trend in socialism but to apply to the new conditions of our revolution the basic principles of international revolutionaryorthodox Marxist Social-Democracy; secondly, they woulddo their duty even should it consist in an onerous, slow,humdrum daily grind, if history, after the issue of the strug-gle and after all opportunities for revolutionary action were exhausted, should condemn us to plod along the by-paths of an “autocratic constitution”. 
 The least attentive readerwill find these statements in the Social-Democratic litera-ture of 1905. 
 They are of immense importance as a solemnobligation of the whole Bolshevik wing of the Party, a delib-erate choice of path. 
 In order to fulfil this obligation to the proletariat, it was necessary to take patiently in hand and re-educate those who had been attracted to Social-Democracyby the days of liberty (there even appeared a type of “So-cial-Democrat of the days of liberty”), who were attractedchiefly by the vehemence, revolutionary spirit and “vivid-ness” of our slogans, but, who, though militant enough to fight on revolutionary holidays, lacked the stamina for worka-day struggle under the reign of counter-revolution. 
 Someof these elements were gradually drawn into proletarian activ-ities and assimilated the Marxist world-outlook. 
 The oth-ers only memorised a few slogans without grasping theirmeaning, could only repeat old phrases and were unable to adapt the old principles of revolutionary Social-Democratic tactics to the changed conditions. 
 Their several destiniesare graphically illustrated by the evolution of those who wanted to boycott the Third Duma. 
 In June 1907 they were the majority among the Bolsheviks. 
 But Proletary cam-paigned continuously against the boycott. 
 Events verified this policy and a year later the otzovists were in the minority among the Bolsheviks (14 votes against 18 in the summer of1908) in the Moscow organisation, which had been the strong-hold of “boycottism”. 
 A year later, when the error of otzo-vism had been abundantly and repeatedly demonstrated, the Bolshevik wing—and here lies the significance of the recent Bolshevik conference—finally liquidated otzovismand ultimatumism, the thin end of otzovism, finally liqui-dated this peculiar form of liquidationism. 
 So let none accuse us of causing a “new split”. 
 In the Re-port on our conference we explain our aims and our attitude in detail. 
 We did everything possible, we left nothing un-tried, to persuade the dissenting comrades: we were at it forover eighteen months. 
 But as a wing, i. 
e. 
, a union of like-minded people in the Party, we cannot work without una-nimity on fundamental issues. 
 To break away from a wingis not the same as breaking away from the Party. 
 The people who have broken away from our wing in no way lose the possibility of working in the Party. 
 Either they will remain“free lances”, i. 
e. 
, outside any wing, and the general en-vironment of Party work will draw them in. 
 Or they will tryto form a new group—as is their legitimate right, if theywish to advocate and develop their own special shade of opinion and tactics—in which case the whole Party will very soon see the practical manifestation of those tendencies , the ideological implications of which we have tried toassess above. 
 The Bolsheviks have to lead the Party. 
 To do so they must know their course, they must stop hesitating, they must stop wasting time on persuading waverers, and fighting dis-sentients in their own ranks. 
 Otzovism and ultimatumism,the thin end of otzovism, are incompatible with the workwhich the present circumstances require of revolutionarySocial-Democrats. 
 During the revolution we learned to “speakFrench”, i. 
e. 
, to introduce into the movement the great-est number of rousing slogans, to raise the energy of the direct struggle of the masses and extend its scope. 
 Now,in this time of stagnation, reaction and disintegration, we must learn to “speak German”, i. 
e. 
, to work slowly (there is nothing else for it, until things revive), systematically, steadily, advancing step by step, winning inch by inch. 
 Whoever finds this work tedious, whoever does not under-stand the need for preserving and developing the revolution-ary principles of Social-Democratic tactics in this phase too , on this bend of the road , is taking the name of Marxist in vain. 
 Our Party can make no headway unless it decisively liquidates liquidationism. 
 And liquidationism does notonly mean the direct liquidationism of the Mensheviks andtheir opportunist tactics. 
 It also includes Menshevism insideout. 
 It includes otzovism and ultimatumism, that are imped-ing the Party in the fulfilment of its immediate task, in which lie all the unique peculiarities of the present time, the task of utilising the Duma rostrum and turning all thesemi-legal and legal organisations of the working class intocoigns of vantage. 
 The same goes for god-building and thedefence of god-building tendencies which are radically atvariance with the principles of Marxism. 
 And the same ap-plies to incomprehension of the Party tasks of the Bolshe-viks, which in 1906 and 1907 consisted in overthrowing the Menshevik Central Committee, as a body which lacked the support of the majority of the Party (not only the Poles and Letts, but even the Bundists were against the CentralCommittee, which was purely Menshevik at the time)— and which now consist in patiently training up partyist elements and knitting them together, in building up a reallyunited and strong proletarian party. 
 The Bolsheviks pre-pared the ground for partyism by their implacablestruggle against the anti-Party elements in 1903-05 andin 1906-07. 
 Now the Bolsheviks must build the Party , build the Party out of their wing, build up the Party by utilising the vantage-ground gained in the inner-Partystruggle. 
 Such are the tasks of our wing of the Party in the present political situation and the general position of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
as a whole. 
 They are set forth once more and developed in particular detail in the resolutions of the recent Bolshe-vik Conference. 
 The ranks have been re-formed for a newstruggle. 
 The changed conditions have been taken into ac-count. 
 The road has been chosen. 
 Let us go forward along it and the revolutionary Social-Democratic Labour Party of Russia will begin rapidly to build up into a force which no reaction will shake, and which will stand at the head ofall the fighting classes of the people in the next round ofour revolution. 
 * Proletary , No. 
 46, Published according July 11 (24), 1909 to the text in Proletary *Golos Sotsial-Demokrata , No. 
 15, and Otkliki Bunda , No. 
 2168 have recently appeared. 
 In these publications there is once again piled up a heap of choice specimens of liquidationism, which will need analysing and evaluating in a separate article in the next issue of Proletary . 
 THE TSAR VISITS EUROPE AND MEMBERS OF THE BLACK-HUNDRED DUMA VISIT ENGLAND Half a century ago Russia’s reputation as an international gendarme was firmly established. 
 In the course of the last century our autocracy rendered no small support to various reactionary causes in Europe even to the point of crushingby downright military force the revolutionary movementsin neighbouring countries. 
 One has only to recall the Hun-garian campaign of Nicholas I, and the repeated repressionsof Poland, to understand why the leaders of the internation-al socialist proletariat from the forties onward denounced tsarism so often to the European workers and Europeandemocrats as the chief mainstay of reaction in the wholecivilised world. 
 Beginning with the last three decades or so of the nine-teenth century, the revolutionary movement in Russia grad-ually altered this state of affairs. 
 The more tsarism was shaken by the blows of the growing revolutionary movementat home, the weaker it became as the enemy of freedom inEurope. 
 But in the meantime another international reaction-ary force had taken definite shape in Europe—the bour-geois governments, which had witnessed insurrections by the proletariat, had realised that a life-and-death struggle be-tween labour and capital was inevitable, and would welcomeany adventurer or brigand on the throne for the sake ofjoining forces against the proletariat. 
 And when, at the be-ginning of the century, the war with Japan and the Revo-lution of 1905 dealt powerful body-blows to tsarism, the in-ternational bourgeoisie rushed to the rescue, supporting it with milliards in loans and moving heaven and earth tolocalise the revolutionary conflagration and restore “order” in Russia. 
 One good turn deserves another. 
 Tsarism had helped the counter-revolutionary bourgeois governments of Europe more than once in their struggle against democra-cy. 
 Now the bourgeoisie of Europe, which had become coun-ter-revolutionary in relation to the proletariat, helpedtsarism in its fight against the revolution. 
 The allies are celebrating victory. 
 Nicholas the Bloody is going to Europe to pay his respects to the monarchs there and to the President of the French Republic. 
 The monarchs and the President are excitedly preparing to do the honoursto the leader of the Black-Hundred counter-revolution inRussia. 
 But victory fell to these noble knights of Black-Hun-dred and bourgeois reaction not because their enemy wasdestroyed, but because its forces were split, because the proletariat does not mature simultaneously in all countries. 
 The victory fell to the united enemies of the working classat the cost of postponing the decisive battle, at the cost ofwidening and deepening the source which—more slowlyperhaps than we would wish, but nonetheless surely—ismultiplying the numbers of the proletarians, increasing their solidarity, steeling them in struggle, schooling them in operations against the united enemy. 
 This source is capital-ism, which awakened the quondam patriarchal “patrimony”of the aristocratic Romanovs, and which is now awakeningthe Asian states, one after another. 
 The allies are celebrating victory. 
 Yet every celebration of Nicholas the Bloody and the leaders of the bourgeois European governments is accompanied, echo-like, by thevoice of the revolutionary masses of the workers. 
 “We havecrushed the revolution,” cry Nicholas and Wilhelm,Edward and Fallières, shaking hands with each otherunder the protection of a bristling shield of bayonets or a long line of warships. 
 “We shall overthrow you all together,” replies the revolution like an echo, through the lips of theleaders of the class-conscious proletariat of all countries. 
 Nicholas the Bloody leaves Russia. 
 He is accompanied by the words of a Social-Democratic member of the Black-Hundred Duma, who voices the republican convictions of all the class-conscious workers of Russia and reminds him of the inevitable downfall of the monarchy. 
 Nicholas arrivesin Sweden. 
 He is feted in the royal palace. 
 He is greeted by soldiers and spies. 
 He is met by the speech of the leader of the Swedish workers, the Social-Democrat Branting, who protests against the dishonouring of his country by the visit of this butcher. 
 Nicholas goes to England, to France, toItaly. 
 Kings and courtiers, ministers and policemen makeready to do him honour. 
 Labour makes ready to meet him—by a meeting of protest in England, a demonstration of pop-ular indignation in France, a general strike on the day which is darkened by his arrival in Italy. 
 Socialist members of parliament in all three countries—Thorne in England,Jaurès in France, Morgari in Italy—have already respondedto the call of the International Socialist Bureau, and havedeclared to the whole world the hatred and contempt whichthe working class entertains for Nicholas the Pogromist, Nicholas the Hangman, the Nicholas who is now crushing the people of Persia and flooding France with Russian spiesand agents provocateurs . 
 The “respectable” bourgeois press in all these countries is in a frenzy of rage, not knowing what of abuse touse next for the actions of the socialists, what to do next to support the ministers and presidents who have ruled social-ists out of order for their speeches. 
 But their frenzy isin vain. 
 The parliamentary representatives of the proletar-iat cannot be gagged; meetings cannot be stopped in reallyconstitutional countries; the fact cannot be concealed, eith-er by self-deception or by the deception of others, that the Russian tsar dare not appear in public whether in London, Paris or Rome. 
 The grand celebration of the leaders of international re-action, their celebration of the suppression of the revolutionin Russia and Persia, has been ruined by the unanimous and courageous protest of the socialist proletariat of all the European countries. 
 And on the background of this protest by the socialists from St. 
 Petersburg to Paris, from Stockholm to Rome, thisprotest against the tsarist autocracy in the name of therevolution and its principles, all the more glaring does thedespicable servility to tsarism on the part of our Russian liberals stand out. 
 Several members of the Black-Hundred Duma, ranging from the moderate Rights to the Constitu-tional-Democrats, headed by the Chairman of the Duma, are visiting England. 
 They pride themselves on the fact that they represent the majority in the Duma, its real Centre, without the extreme Right or the extreme Left. 
 They are posing as the representatives of a “constitutional” Russia,singing the praises of the “renovated” order and the adoredmonarch who has “granted the people” a Duma. 
 There theyare, like the swelling frog in Krylov’s fable , puffing themselves up as victors over the Black-Hundred reaction which, to hear them talk, wants to abolish the “constitu-tion” in Russia. 
 At a luncheon, given by the Lord Mayor, Mr. 
Milyukov, leader of the “Constitutional-Democratic ” (no joke!) Party declared in his speech: “So long as there is alegislative chamber in Russia controlling the budget, theRussian opposition will remain His Majesty’s Opposition, and not an opposition to His Majesty” (St. 
 Petersburg News Agency telegram of June 19, old style). 
 In its leading article Renovated Russia”, Golos Moskvy , mouthpiece of the Oc-leader, declaring that his “moderately constitutional” speech “marks perhaps a turning-point in Cadet policy, a renuncia-tion of the abortive tactics of creating opposition for the sakeof opposition”. 
 The police rag Rossiya (June 23) devotes a leading article to Milyukov’s speech, in which it quotes the “famous” phraseabout His Majesty’s Opposition, and declares: “Mr. 
 Milyu-kov in England has undertaken certain responsibilities on behalf of the Russian opposition. 
 If he fulfils hispledge he will render a service to his country for whichhe will be forgiven no small number of his former transgres-sions. 
” Your services are rewarded, gentlemen of the CadetParty. 
 Vekhi in general, and Struve in particular, have been commended by Antonius of Volhynia, the “Lord Bishop”of the Black-Hundred zealots; Milyukov, the leader of yourparty, has been commended by a venal police rag of a news-paper. 
 Your services are rewarded! It remains for us to remind the reader that we have been exposing the Cadets as Octobrists at heart ever since 1906, when gimcrack “victories” in the Duma turned the heads of many a selfishly-naïve and disinterestedly-naïve per-son. 
tobrist Party, warmly applauds the utterances of the Cadet 169 of June 21 bearing the Khlestakovia n170 title “Europe and We have also to remind the reader that the purpose o f tsarism’s game, now being played so conspicuously in the Third Duma, was exposed by us over twenty months ago in Proletary , Nos. 
 19 and 20 (November 1907) when we re-viewed the results of the elections to the Third Duma. 
 In theThird Duma as we said, and as was said in the resolution ofthe All-Russian Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in November1907 two majorities are possible: the one consisting of Black-Hundred deputies and Octobrists, the other consisting of Cadets and Octobrists—and both of them are counter-revo-lutionary. 
 “Such a situation in the Duma,” states the reso-lution adopted at that time by the St. 
 Petersburg Social-Democrats (published in Proletary , No. 
 19) and the resolu-tion of the Third All-Russian Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 (Proletary , No. 
 20), “is exceedingly favourable for a double political game being played by both the government andthe Cadets. 
” * This analysis of the situation has now been fully corro-borated, showing the short-sightedness of those who wereready again and again to proclaim Social-Democratic “sup-port” for the Cadets. 
 The Cadets are fighting the Octobrists not as opponents of their principles, but as competitors . 
 The voter must be “won”—we declare ourselves the party of “the people’sfreedom”. 
 Our “respectability” must be proved—we boostthe Maklakovs in the Third Duma, we tell Europe through Milyukov that we are “His Majesty’s Opposition”. 
 And that is all that Stolypin, the faithful servant of Black-Hundredtsarism needs. 
 Let the Black-Hundred tsarist gang run thecountry, let them and only them actually decide all the real-ly important questions of policy. 
 But “we” need the Octobrist-Cadet majority for play-acting, to “represent” us in Europe, to facilitate the raising of loans, to “correct” the excesses of the Black Hundreds, to dupe simpletons with “reforms”...that are corrected by the Council of State. 
 His Majesty knows his Opposition. 
 The Cadet Opposition know their Stolypin and their Nicholas. 
 The simple tech-nique of European parliamentary hypocrisy and chicanery has come easily to both our liberals and our ministers. 
 Both *See present edition, Vol. 
 13, pp. 
 138 and 144. 
— Ed. 
 are apt students of the methods used by the bourgeois reac-tionaries of Europe. 
 On both of them the socialist proletariat of Russia, in growing unity with the socialist proletariat of the wholeworld, declares unremitting revolutionary war. 
 Proletary , No. 
 46, Published according July 11 (24), 1909 to the text in Proletary M. 
 LYADO V’S LETTE R TO PROLETAR Y171 We gladly give space to Comrade Lyadov’s public state-ment, and have only the following to say to him: To observe the traditions of Bolshevism—the orthodox Marxist trend in the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
—is of course splendid, Comrade Lyadov. 
 But to observe this tradition means, forone thing, protecting Bolshevism from its caricature. 
 Butthe contortions of otzovism and god-building—as we haveproved at length in a number of articles, and as has now beenofficially recognised by the Bolshevik section—are nothing more than a caricature of Bolshevism. 
 As regards the “revolutionary ethics” to which Comrade Lyadov appeals, we may calmly leave him to square this account with his own conscience—but as for his “standpointin principle”, it is high time that Comrade Lyadov and thosewho share his views should state it openly to the whole Par-ty, because, so far, we have only their word for it that they have something more to offer than otzovism and god-build-ing. 
 In conclusion we express the confident hope that Comrade Lyadov, who has worked for so many years in the ranks ofrevolutionary Social-Democracy, will not stay very long with the new faction of god-building otzovists, or, as they are called for short, “the godly otzovists”, but will returnto the Bolshevik ranks. 
 Proletary , No. 
 46, Published according July 11 (24), 1909 to the text in Proletary A LETTER TO THE ORGANISERS OF THE PARTY SCHOOL ON CAPRI August 18, 1909 Dear Comrades! I have just received your invitation. 
 The curriculum of the school, which (curriculum) you say you enclose, I have notreceived. 
 My attitude to the school on the Island of Capri is expressed in the resolution of the extended editorial board of Pro-letary (Proletary , No. 
 46, and supplement *). 
 If you have not seen Proletary and the supplements to Proletary , and the special letter on the school circulated to Bolshevikmembers of the Party in the form of a printed leaflet, theeditorial board will be pleased to send you all these materials. 
On the point in question, I must inform you that my opinion of the school on Capri, as the enterprise of a new faction in our Party—a faction with which I do not sympathise—doesnot, of course, imply any refusal to deliver lectures to com-rades who have been sent from Russia by local organisa-tions. 
 Whatever the views of these comrades, I shall alwaysbe glad to give them a series of lectures on questions of interest to Social-Democrats. 
 Of course I shall not go to Capri to lecture, but shall willingly do so in Paris. 
 If onlyfrom the financial point of view it would be cheaper for thenine comrades from Russia (I take the figure communicatedby Comrade Leva, whose name is not unknown to you) tocome to Paris than for three lecturers (I have heard about your proposal to Leva and Innokenty 172) to travel from *See pp. 
 450-51 and 452-60 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 Paris to Capri. 
 Apart from financial considerations there are quite a number of reasons incomparably more important, which you undoubtedly understand, why Paris is the place for a real Party school abroad. 
 In any case, I can assure youthat the editorial board of Proletary would do everything in its power to organise the lectures you desire in Paris. 
 With Social-Democratic greetings, N. 
 Lenin P. 
 S. 
 You forgot to send the official address of the school. 
 Published in 1909 in the leaflet Published according “The Question of the Party School” to the manuscript DRAFT LETTER OF THE BOLSHEVIK CENTRE TO THE COUNCI L OF THE SCHOO L ON CAP RI173 The Executive Commission of the Bolshevik Centre is extremely glad to receive the statement of the “ Council o f the Party School on Capri” of August 16, 1909, that it has no objection to “ ideological control ” by the B. 
C. 
 But in order to decide whether the B. 
C. 
 can undertake this control and make it effective, whether it can give helpto the school in the form of lecturers and funds as the Coun-cil writes, it is necessary to know in detail all about the school. 
 But the B. 
C. 
 knows nothing in detail about it. 
 While the Council of the school could discuss (as it writes) the attitude of the school to the B. 
C. 
, knowing the B. 
C. 
’s views from printed resolutions and from Proletary , knowing the composition of the B. 
C. 
 from its former members, theB. 
C. 
 itself is not in a position to discuss the question of its attitude to the request from the Council of the school:for the B. 
C. 
 knows nothing about (1) the Council of the school, (2) the executive commission of the school, (3) the school’s curriculum (the executive commission of the school promised to send it, but did not do so), (4) the presentcomposition of the lecturers at the school and (5) students at the school, (6) the present funds of the school, (7) how long the course is expected to last, (8) to what extent the students are tied down to the particular place in which theschool is being held, i. 
e. 
, the Island of Capri, (9) whetherthe students of the school could come to Paris (about whichthree members of the B. 
C. 
 wrote to them in their own name), for what period, etc. 
 Without possessing such information, the B. 
C. 
 at the pres-ent stage can only say one thing: the B. 
C. 
 is ready to give every help in the form of literature and lectures to all members of Social-Democratic organisations functioning in Russia, as well as to all comrades delegated by those organisations, in acquiring a Social-Democratic outlook on the world;and it does not refuse financial aid within the limits of itspossibilities, and after discussion of this question in connec-tion with aid to local organisations. 
 The B. 
C. 
 herewith officially forwards to the Council of the school (1) a file of Proletary , Nos. 
 39-46, (2) the B. 
C. 
’s letter about the school (printed), (3) the resolutions of theB. 
C. 
 With Social-Democratic greetings,The Executive Commission of theExtended Editorial Board of “Proletary ” Written between August 5 and 17 (18 and 30), 1909 First published in 1933 Published according in Lenin Miscellany XXV to the manuscript A LETTER TO COMRADES JULIUS , VANYA , SAVELY , IVAN , VLADIMIR , STANISLAV AND FOMA , STUDENTS AT THE CAPRI PARTY SCHOOL August 30, New Style, 1909 Dear Comrades, After receiving the curriculum of the school and two let-ters, in the last of which you ask my reasons for declaringthe school to be a new faction, I consider it my duty to ex-plain my view to you once more. 
 “That there is anything fac-tional behind this school is the purest fiction,” you write. 
“A hegemony over the school is inconceivable, for we are themajority on the Council. 
” I maintain that this is a clear case of self-deception on your part. 
 Whether or not you are being accused of “downright factionalism” is quite beside the point; so is the question of who has the majority on the Council. 
 The point is thatthe school has been organised (1) on the initiative of thenew faction, (2) exclusively with the funds of the new fac-tion, (3) in a place where only lecturers from the new faction are present, (4) in a place where lecturers from other sections of the Party, with very rare exceptions, cannot be present . 
 These conditions are not of your making. 
 You are power-less to change them. 
 But these conditions predetermine the character of the school, so much so that no good intentionson your part, no decisions of your Council, can make a jotof difference. 
 In any school, the most important thing is the ideological and political trend of the lectures. 
 What determines thetrend? The lecturing personnel , entirely and exclusively. 
 You understand perfectly well, comrades, that “control”, “leadership”, “curricula”, “rules”, etc. 
, as applied to the lec-turing personnel are just so many meaningless words. 
 No control, no curricula, nor anything of that sort, can make thestudies take any other trend than that determined by thelecturing personnel. 
 And no self-respecting organisation in the world, no section or group will undertake to share re-sponsibility for a school whose trend is already predetermined by the lecturing personnel, if that trend is hostile. 
 Now look at the lecturing personnel, the factor that has determined the character of the school and its trend. 
 Youcomrades signed your names in the letter which you sent tome, but the one that you sent to the Central Committee(I received a copy, together with the curriculum of the school) on behalf of the pupils and lecturers is not signed by any of the lecturers. 
 Hence I cannot claim to know exactly who thelecturers are. 
 But I know enough to form an opinion aboutthem as a body. 
 The local organisations in the Central Industrial Region have written us from Russia that the most energetic, if not the only agitator for the Capri school, was Comrade Sta-nislav, who had already been chosen as one of the lecturersby certain Social-Democratic groups who had heard himread a paper. 
 This Comrade Stanislav is a most ardent otzo-vist and “critic” of Marxism in philosophy. 
 I need only re-mind you (1) how he lambasted Kautsky in his well-known booklet on philosophy, (2) how at the Party Conference in December 1908 he formed an otzovist faction with the St. 
Petersburg otzovist Vs. 
, (3) how the article by “Worker”—an otzovist—edited by him and published in Rabocheye Zna-mya , No. 
 5, was, on the admission of Rabocheye Znamya it-self, imbued with anarchistic ideas. 
 Next, look at the lecturers you now have over there in Capri. 
 There are no Bolsheviks among them, while all theadherents of the new faction (the faction of the advocatesof otzovism and god-building) are represented almost infull. 
 I will not be very far wrong if I say that you see Com-rades Maximov, Lunacharsky, Lyadov and Alexinsky among the lecturers at Capri. 
 That is the identical group of com-rades who have formed an opposition to Proletary ever since the spring of 1908, agitated against it in Russia and abroad displayed (or supported) tendencies to form a separate fac-tion at the Party Conference in December 1908, and ultimate-ly broke away completely as a separate faction. 
 To deny that this entire group of comrades are agitating against Proletary , supporting and defending the otzovists, would be flouting facts which are known to every member ofthe Party. 
 To deny that the Island of Capri has found fameeven in general Russian literary circles as the literary cen-tre of god-building, would be deriding facts. 
 The whole Rus-sian press reported long ago that Lunacharsky was preachingthe word of god-building from the Island of Capri; Bazarovhelped him in Russia. 
 Bogdanov has advocated similar phil-osophical views in a dozen books and articles published bythe legal press in Russia, and a dozen papers read abroad. 
 I was on Capri in April 1908 and told all these three comrade that my views on philosophy were unconditionally opposedto theirs (I proposed at the time that our common re-sources and energies should be used on counterblasting theMenshevik-liquidationist version of the history of the revo-lution with a Bolshevik history of the revolution , but these Capriotes turned down my proposition, preferring to dis-seminate their own special philosophical views rather than towork for the common cause of the Bolsheviks). 
 The majorityof your lecturers on Capri are writers, yet not one of them has made a single attack in the press on the god-building propa-ganda of Lunacharsky and Bazarov. 
 If, in spite of all this, you comrades write that it is a “mis-apprehension” and a “gross” one on my part to think thatthe school has any association with god-building and otzo-vism, because “such aims were never contemplated here inthis school, and were even out of the question”, I can onlywonder at your extraordinary naïveté. 
 I repeat: the real character and trend of the school is determined not by the good intentions of the local organisations, not by decisionsof the “Council” of students, not by “curricula” and so forth,but by the lecturing personnel . 
 And since the lecturing per-sonnel is and has been determined entirely by membershipof the new faction, it is simply ridiculous to deny the fac-tional character of the school. 
 To finish with the question of the lecturing personnel, I shall draw your attention to one more fact communicated to me by Comrade Innokenty, which shows how obvious to everyone in the Party is the thing you are trying to deny, namely: the separatist factional character of the Capri school. 
 Shortly before the last meeting of the extendededitorial board of Proletary , Comrade Maximov in Paris approached Trotsky and invited him to become a lecturer at the school on Capri. 
 Trotsky told this to Comrade Inno-kenty, saying: “If this is a Party affair I shall be glad to take part in it; if it is a private concern run by the Capri litera-ti—Maximov, Lunacharsky and Co. 
—I shall have nothingto do with it. 
” Innokenty replied: “Wait for the decisionsof the editorial board of Proletary , I’ll see that you get them. 
” Thus, even a man like Trotsky, who does not belongto our group, understood immediately (as any Party func-tionary would, with any experience) that to organise a school on Capri is tantamount to hiding it away from the Party , to connecting the school beforehand with a special faction—the new one. 
 Now I shall go on to the question of Paris. 
 I told you in my letter that if you are really interested in having lectures from myself and my comrades-in-idea you should come to Paris. 
 You reply: “Considering the expense, travelling toParis is quite unreasonable. 
” Let us see which of us is really being unreasonable. 
You went to Capri via Vienna. 
 If you go back the same way you will have to make a detour to Paris from Northern Italy, then straight on to Vienna. 
 This will involve in all probability an additional expense of 60 francs per person(I am judging by the fact that a ticket to Paris from Geneva,where I lived for a long time, costs 30 francs). 
 Your letteris signed by eight persons, one of whom declares that he“will have no further correspondence”, which obviously means that he is not even interested in hearing my talks. 
 That leaves seven comrades. 
 Expenses =7/FL005960=420 francs. 
 You invited four lecturers from Paris (Leva, myself, Gri-gori and Innokenty). 
 Travelling expenses from Paristo Capri and back—about 140 francs. 
 Total 4/FL0059140=560 francs. 
 It will be cheaper for the eight students to come to Paris than to send the four lecturers to Capri. 
 But the financial aspect, as I have already told you in my last letter, * is not by any means the most important. 
 Think: for whom is it easier to choose a place—the visiting students, or the local lecturers? You went abroad speciallyto attend the school. 
 That means there can be nothing toprevent you from going where there is a large number oflecturers, where it is possible to organise things on real Partylines. 
 But the lecturers cannot leave the Party centre to go to the Island of Capri. 
 I shall speak for myself. 
 I cannot leave myeditorial work on Proletary . 
 I cannot leave my editorial work on the Central Organ. 
 I cannot leave my work on thePromotion Commission for the Duma Social-Democraticgroup, which has its headquarters in Paris. 
 I have to speak at the Proletary club in the working-class districts of Paris, where hundreds and thousands of Russian workers are liv-ing, and so on. 
 It is absolutely impossible for Party writersto leave Paris to go to Capri. 
 But for the school, as a Party concern, Bolshevik lecturers are not the only important factor. 
 Paris is the largest emigr-ant centre, where papers are regularly read in public under the auspices of all Party trends, where debates are held and all kinds of study circles are conducted, where there are twoor three quite decent Russian libraries, where there arescores of Social-Democratic organisers with long experienceof activity in the Party, and so on and so forth. 
 Three Rus-sian Social-Democratic newspapers are published in Paris. 
 In a word, it is clear, as clear as daylight, to anyone whoknows anything at all about life abroad, that anyone whogoes to Paris to study Social-Democracy is going where hecan learn it properly. 
 Anyone who goes to Capri is goingthere to study a separatist factional “ science ”. 
 Whoever holds a school in Paris is holding a real Party school. 
 Whoever holds a school on the Island of Capri ishiding the school away from the Party . 
 The school on Capri is a school deliberately hidden away from the Party . 
 Absolutely no control, no “ideological leadership” of the Capri school is possible either by the Central Committee *See pp. 
 468-69 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 to which you appeal today, or by the editorial board of Proletary to which you appealed yesterday. 
 To speak of con-trol and ideological leadership here is idle talk. 
 No one would think of doing such an absurd thing as to send Party “inspec-tors” to Capri to superintend the school; to send real Partylecturers to Capri (with the rarest exceptions) is out of the question at any time. 
 The local organisations in Russia may not have known this, but the organisers of the school knew it perfectly well . 
 That was just why they organised the school on Capri—to mask its factional character and to hide it away from the Party. 
 Take the Russian Social-Democrats, eminent for their knowledge of the labour movement abroad, who do not be-long to any factions: Parvus and Rosa Luxemburg (Germany), Ch. 
 Rappoport (France), Rothstein (England). 
 Take unat-tached Social-Democratic writers like Ryazanov, and youwill see at once (unless you deliberately close your eyes inorder not to see) that they could in the majority of cases,with a bit of effort from the Party, read lectures in Paris;while to go to Capri is absolutely out of the question for them. 
 The money which the organisers of the school have thrown away in sending people to study and lecture in sucha remote foreign spot as Capri would have been quite suffi-cient to organise readings by at least some of these lecturers in Paris. 
 Further, take the new groupings among the Social-Demo-crats, groupings which it is so important that the Russian comrades should know about (the struggle between the pro-Party element and the liquid1ationists in the Bund; the strug-gle between the Bolshevik section of the Letts and the Men-shevik; between the Polish Social-Democratic Party and theLeft wing of the P. 
S. 
P. 
; the split in Menshevism, Plekha-nov’s publication of his Dnevnik , exposing the liquidationism of Potresov and the official Mensheviks; the attempts tocreate a “revolutionary Menshevism”, and so on). 
 It is im-possible to study these important Party events properly in Capri. 
 In Paris there is every possibility of learning the stateof affairs at first hand, and not by mere hearsay. 
 Take finally the syllabus of the Capri school. 
 Of the four sections, one (the third) is headed: “The Philosophy of theProletarian Struggle”. 
 In the international Social-Democrat-ic movement there are tens and hundreds (if not thousands) of syllabuses for propaganda classes of the same type. 
 But nowhere will you find: “The Philosophy of the Proletarian Struggle”. 
 There is the philosophical materialism of Marxand Engels, but nowhere is there the “Philosophy of theProletarian Struggle”. 
 And no Social-Democrat in Europewill understand what it is all about. 
 The only people whowill understand are those who are conversant with the works of the philosophers Stanislav (A. 
 Volsky), Bogdanov, Lu-nacharsky and Bazarov. 
 Before teaching the “Philosophy ofthe Proletarian Struggle”, such a philosophy must be invent-ed. 
 To invent this special philosophy, which swears more and more often by the word “proletarian” the further awayit is from the proletarian world-outlook, has been and is the occupation only of the above-mentioned group of members of the new faction. 
 To conclude. 
 If you comrades insist on your unwillingness, to come to Paris (assuring me at the same time that youwant to hear my lectures), this will be conclusive proofthat not only the lecturers but some of the students at the Capri school have been infected with the sectarianism of the new god-building-otzovist faction. 
 With Social-Democratic greetings, N. 
 Lenin First published in 1926 in the Published according journal Proletarskaya Revolutsia to the manuscript No. 
 2 (49) NOTES 1 2 3The article “ On to the Straight Road ” was published as an editorial in the newspaper Proletary , No. 
 26. 
 Proletary (The Proletarian )—an illegal newspaper founded by the Bolsheviks after the Fourth (Unity) Congress of the Party; it was published from August 21 (September 3), 1906 to November 28 (December 11), 1909 under the editorship of Lenin. 
 Proletary was published as the organ of the Moscow and St. 
 Petersburg com-mittees of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, and, for a time, as that of the Moscow Area, the Perm, Kursk and Kazan committees. 
 The paper was vir-tually the Central Organ of the Bolsheviks. 
 Altogether fifty issues were put out—the first twenty in Finland, the rest abroad, in Ge-neva and Paris. 
 The newspaper published over a hundred articles and other items by Lenin. 
 During the Stolypin reaction Proletary played an important role in preserving and strengthening the Bolshevik organisations. 
 At the plenary meeting of the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in January 1910 the conciliators succeeded in obtaining a decision to close down the newspaper. 
 p. 
 15 The Duma —a representative body, which the tsarist government was compelled to convene as a result of the revolutionary events of 1905. 
 Formally the Duma was a legislative body, but actually it had no real power. 
 Elections to the Duma were non-direct, un-equal and non-universal. 
 The electoral system was rigged against the working classes and the non-Russian nationalities inhabiting Russia, while considerable numbers of workers and peasants had no vote at all. 
 Under the electoral law of December 11 (24), 1905, the vote of a landlord was equivalent to 3 votes of representatives of the town bourgeoisie, to 15 votes of the peasants, and to 45 votes of the workers. 
 The First Duma (April-July 1906) and the Second Duma (February-June 1907) were dissolved by the tsarist govern-ment. 
 After carrying out the coup d’état of June 3, 1907, the govern-ment issued a new electoral law which still further curtailed the rights of the workers, peasants and petty bourgeoisie of the towns and ensured the complete domination of the reactionary bloc of the landlords and big capitalists in the Third (1907-12) and Fourth (1912-17) Dumas. 
 p. 
 17 Coup d’état of June 3 (16), 1907 —a reactionary act by which the government dissolved the Second Duma and altered the electoral law. 
 The new law greatly increased representation of the land-lords and the commercial and industrial bourgeoisie in the Duma and considerably reduced the already meagre representation of the workers and peasants. 
 The law deprived most of the indigenous population of Asian Russia of the franchise and reduced by half the number of deputies returned by Poland and the Caucasus. 
 The Third Duma, which was elected on the basis of this law and which assembled in November, 1907, was a Duma of Black Hun-dreds and Cadets. 
 The coup d’état of June 3 ushered in the Stolypin reaction, which became known as “the Third-of-June regime”. 
 p. 
 17 Central Organ of the R. 
 S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 —the illegal newspaper So-tsial-Demokrat , published from February 1908 to January 1917. 
 Fifty-eight issues appeared. 
 Issue No. 
 1 came out in Russia, but thereafter the paper was published abroad, first in Paris, then in Geneva. 
 The editorial board of the Central Organ, in accordance with a decision of the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, was made up of representatives of the Bolsheviks, Mensheviks and Polish Social-Democrats. 
 Over eighty articles and other items by Lenin were published in Sotsial-Demokrat . 
 On the editorial board Lenin carried on a struggle for a consistent Bolshevik policy. 
 Some of the board members (Kamenev and Zinoviev) adopted a con-ciliatory attitude towards the liquidators and tried to side-track Lenin’s line. 
 The Menshevik editors, Martov and Dan, sabotaged the work of the editorial board while at the same time openly de-fending the liquidators in Golos Sotsial-Demokrata . 
 Lenin’s uncom-promising fight against the liquidators led to Martov and Dan retiring from Sotsial-Demokrat in June 1911. 
 From December 1911 onwards Sotsial-Demokrat was edited by Lenin. 
 p. 
 17 Bezzaglavtsi —from the title of the journal Bez Zaglaviya (With-out a Title )—were organisers of, and contributors to, the journal published in St. 
 Petersburg in 1906 by S. 
 N. 
 Prokopovich, Y. 
 D. 
 Kuskova, V. 
 Y. 
 Bogucharsky, and others. 
 The journal openly advo-cated revisionism, supported the Mensheviks and liberals, and op-posed an independent proletarian policy. 
 Lenin called the group “pro-Menshevik Cadets or pro-Cadet Mensheviks”. 
 p. 
 19 Zemstvo —the name given to the local government bodies formed in the central provinces of tsarist Russia in 1864. 
 They were domi-nated by the nobility and their powers were limited to purely local economic problems (hospital and road building, statistics, insurance, etc. 
). 
 Their activities were controlled by the Provincial Gov-ernors and by the Ministry of the Interior, which could rescind any decisions of which the government disapproved. 
 p. 
 20 Rabocheye Znamya (Worker ’s Banner )—an illegal Bolshevik newspa-per, organ of the Regional Bureau of the Central Industrial Region, of the Moscow and Moscow Area Committees of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Appeared in Moscow from March to December 1908. 
 Seven issues were published. 
 p. 
 204 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12Anti-Socialist Law was introduced in Germany in 1878. 
 Under this law all organisations of the Social-Democratic Party, the masslabour organisations and the labour press were banned, socialistliterature was confiscated and the Social-Democrats were persecut-ed. 
 Under pressure of the mass labour movement this law was repealed in 1890. 
 p. 
 21 The Black Hundreds —monarchist gangs formed by the tsarist po-lice to fight against the revolutionary movement. 
 They assassinatedrevolutionaries, organised attacks on progressive intellectuals, and carried out anti-Jewish pogroms. 
 p. 
 21 Rech (Speech )—a daily newspaper, central organ of the Constitu-tional-Democratic Party, published in St. 
 Petersburg from Feb-ruary 1906. 
 It was closed down by the Military RevolutionaryCommittee of the Petrograd Soviet on October 26 (November 8), 1917. 
 p. 
 22 Russkoye Gosudarstvo (The Russian State )—a government newspa-per founded by S. 
 Witte published in St. 
 Petersburg from February1 (14) to May 15 (28), 1906. 
 p. 
 22 The Stockholm Congress —the Fourth (Unity) Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, was held in Stockholm on April 10-25 (April 23-May 8) 1906. 
 It was attended by 112 voting delegates representing57 local organisations of the Party, and 22 delegates with a consul-tative voice. 
 In addition there were representatives from the na-tional Social-Democratic parties of Poland and Lithuania, Latvia and the Bund. 
 Many Bolshevik organisations had been smashed up by the government after the armed uprising of December 1905and were unable to send their delegates to the Congress. 
 The Men-sheviks had a majority (albeit a small one) at the Congress. 
 Lenin spoke at the Congress on the agrarian question, the current situation, the tactics in regard to the elections to the Duma, the armed uprising and other issues. 
 The preponderance of Mensheviks at the Congress determined the character of its decisions. 
 On a number of questions the Congressadopted Menshevik resolutions (the agrarian programme, the atti-tude towards the Duma, etc. 
). 
 The Congress adopted Lenin’s formulation of Clause 1 of the Party Rules dealing with Party membership It admitted to membership of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 the non-Russian Social-Democratic organisa-tion of Poland and Lithuania and the Lettish S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, and laiddown the conditions on which the Bund could join the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 The Central Committee elected at the Congress consisted of three Bolsheviks and seven Mensheviks. 
 The editorial board of the Cen-tral Organ was formed entirely of Mensheviks. 
 The work of this Congress was analysed by Lenin in his Report on the Unity Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 (see present edition,Vol. 
 10, pp. 
 317-82). 
 p. 
 22 13 14 15 16Cadets —members of the Constitutional-Democratic Party, the chief party of the Russian liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie. 
 TheCadet Party was founded in October 1905, its membership con-sisting of representatives of the bourgeoisie, Zemstvo functionaries from among the landlords, and bourgeois intellectuals. 
 Among the more prominent Cadet leaders were P. 
 N. 
 Milyukov, S. 
 A. 
 Mu-romtsev, V. 
 A. 
 Maklakov, A. 
 I. 
 Shingaryov, P. 
 B. 
 Struve andF. 
 I. 
 Rodichev. 
 The Cadets called themselves the “party of thepeople’s freedom” in order to mislead the working masses. 
 In realitythey never went beyond the demand for a constitutional monarchy. 
 Their main task they considered to be the fight against the revolu-tionary movement, and they aimed at sharing the power with thetsar and the feudalist landlords. 
 During the First World War the Cadets actively supported the tsarist government’s foreign policy of conquest. 
 During the bour-geois-democratic revolution of February 1917 they tried to save the monarchy. 
 In the bourgeois Provisional Government, where they held key positions, they pursued a counter-revolutionary policyopposed to the interests of the people but favourable to the U. 
 S. 
,British and French imperialists. 
 After the victory of the OctoberSocialist Revolution the Cadets were the sworn enemies of the So-viet power and participated in all armed counter-revolutionary ac-tions and the campaigns of the interventionists. 
 When the inter-ventionists and whiteguards were defeated the Cadets fled the coun-try and continued their anti-Soviet counter-revolutionary activityfrom abroad. 
 p. 
 22 Trudovik politics (from the word trud —“labour”)—this refers to the Trudovik group of petty-bourgeois democrats formed from peas-ant deputies to the First Duma in April 1906. 
 At the start of the Duma proceedings this group united 107 deputies. 
 In the Second Duma the Trudoviks had 104, in the Third 14 and in the Fourth10 deputies. 
 The Trudoviks demanded the abolition of all classand national restrictions, the democratisation of the Zemstvo andurban self-governing bodies, and the introduction of universalsuffrage in the elections to the Duma. 
 Their agrarian programme was based on the Narodnik principles of equalised land tenure—the establishment of a distributable land fund consisting of state,crown, and monastery lands as well as privately-owned landswhere they exceeded an established trudovoy , or labour, norm; compensation was envisaged for alienated land under privateownership. 
 The implementation of the agrarian reform was to be entrusted to the local peasant committees. 
 p. 
 22 Gurko , V. 
 I. 
 —Deputy Minister of the Interior. 
 p. 
 26 Lenin quotes from K. 
 Marx’s afterword to the second edition of Volume One of Capital (see K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 456). 
 p. 
 33 17 18 19 20 21 22Böhm-Bawerk , E. 
—an Austrian bourgeois economist. 
 p. 
 34 “Revolutionary syndicalism ”—a petty-bourgeois semi-anarchist trend that made its appearance in the labour movement of a number of West-European countries at the close of the nineteenth century. 
 The syndicalists saw no need for the working class to engage in political struggle, they repudiated the leading role of the Party and the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 They believed that by or-ganising a general strike of the workers the trade unions (in France—syndicats) could, without a revolution, overthrow capital-ism and take over control of production. 
 p. 
 38 Golos Sotsial-Demokrata (Voice of the Social-Democrat )—a news-paper, organ of the Menshevik liquidators, published from Febru-ary 1908 to December 1911, first in Geneva and later in Paris. 
 p. 
 40 Die Neue Zeit —the theoretical journal of the German Social-Demo-cratic Party, published in Stuttgart from 1883 to 1923. 
 Up to Oc-tober 1917 it was edited by Karl Kautsky, and subsequently by Heinrich Cunow. 
 Several works by Karl Marx and Frederick En-gels were published in this journal for the first time, among them Marx’s Critique of the Gotha Programme and Engels’s Contribu-tion to the Critique of the Draft Social-Democratic Programme of 1891 . 
 Engels often gave pointers to the editors of Die Neue Zeit and criticised the journal for its deviations from Marxism. 
 Promi-nent leaders of the German and international labour movement of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries contributed to the journal, among them August Bebel, Wilhelm Liebknecht, Rosa Luxemburg, Franz Mehring, Clara Zetkin, Paul Lafargue, and G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov. 
 Beginning with the middle nineties after the death of Engels, the journal regularly published articles by revisionists, including a series of articles by Eduard Bernstein “Problems of Socialism”, inaugurating a revisionists’ crusade against Marxism. 
 During the First World War (1914-18) the journal took a Centrist stand and virtually supported the social-chauvinists. 
 p. 
 45 Dumbadze , I. 
 A . 
—a Black-Hundred general of the tsarist army. 
 As military chief of the town of Yalta he was conspicuous for his brutal treatment of the peaceful population. 
 The Riga Museum —torture-chamber of the Riga Police Investi-gation Department where prisoners under examination were cruelly tortured. 
 When the practices of the police were exposed in the press the tsarist government tried to deny the charges by de-claring that the instruments of torture kept by the police had been collected “for museum purposes”. 
 As a result of this “explanation” the torture-chamber became known as “the Riga museum”. 
 p. 
 46 The law of December 11 (24), 1905 —an electoral law for elections to the First Duma. 
 Under this law the electorate was divided into four curias, namely, agricultural (landlords), urban (bourgeoisie), 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32peasant and worker curias. 
 The vote of a landlord was equivalent to 3 votes cast by the urban bourgeoisie, to 15 peasant votes, and to 45 workers’ votes. 
 The electoral law gave to a handful of landlords and capitalists an overwhelming preponderance in the Duma. 
 p. 
 46 This refers to Engels’s introduction to Marx’s pamphlet The Class Struggles in France (see K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 118-38). 
 p. 
 47 Streltsov , R. 
 Y. 
 —a Social-Democrat, a revisionist. 
 p. 
 47 Frankfurter Zeitung —a German bourgeois newspaper, published in Frankfort-on-Main from 1856. 
 p. 
 48 Octobrists —members of the League of October Seventeenth, a party formed in Russia after the promulgation of the tsar’s manifesto of October 17, 1905. 
 It was a counter-revolutionary party represent-ing the interests of the big bourgeoisie and landlords who engaged in capitalist farming. 
 Its leaders were the well-known industrialist and Moscow house owner A. 
 I. 
 Guchkov and the big landowner M. 
 V. 
 Rodzyanko. 
 The Octobrists unreservedly supported the tsarist government’s home and foreign policies. 
 p. 
 48 The Party of Peaceful Renovation —a bourgeois-landlord counter-revolutionary organisation. 
 Founded in 1906 by amalgamation of the Left Octobrists with the Right Cadets. 
 Lenin called the Party of Peaceful Renovation “the Party of Peaceful Plunder”. 
 p. 
 48 This refers to the talks between the Cadets and Trepov, Deputy Minister of the Interior, concerning the possibility of setting up a Cadet Ministry. 
 p. 
 48 This article was written by Lenin to acquaint the Polish Social-Democrats with the differences that existed within the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 and was published in their journal Przegl Zd Socjaldemokratyczny , No. 
 2, in April 1908. 
 Przegl Zd Socjaldemokratyczny —a journal published in Cracow from 1902 to 1904 and from 1908 to 1910 by the Polish Social-Democrats with the close participation of R. 
 Luxemburg. 
 p. 
 50 Stolichnaya Pochta (Metropolitan Post )—a daily newspaper, published in St. 
 Petersburg from October 1906 to February 1908. 
 At first the organ of the Left Cadets, it became, after February 1907, the mouthpiece of the Trudovik group. 
 It was banned by the tsarist government. 
 p. 
 50 Cf. 
 Marx, Engels, Lenin, Zur deutschen Geschichte , Bd. 
 II, Hlb. 
 I, S. 
 625-28. 
 “Mai bis October”. 
 Dietz Verlag, Berlin, 1954. 
 p. 
 51 Socialist-Revolutionaries (S. 
R. 
s)—a petty-bourgeois party in Rus-sia, which arose at the end of 1901 and the beginning of 1902 as a result of the amalgamation of various Narodnik groups and cir-cles (Union of Socialist-Revolutionaries, Party of Socialist-Revo-lutionaries, etc. 
). 
 The newspaper Revolutsionnaya Rossiya (Revo-lutionary Russia ) (1900-05) and the journal Vestnik Russkoi Revo-lutsii (Herald of the Russian Revolution ) (1901-05) became its of-ficial organs. 
 The S. 
R. 
s did not see the class distinctions between the proletarian and the small proprietor. 
 They glossed over the class differentiation and antagonisms within the peasantry, and repu-diated the leading role of the proletariat in the revolution. 
 Their views were an eclectic mixture of the ideas of Narodism and revi-sionism; they tried as Lenin put it, to “patch up the rents in the Narodnik ideas with bits of fashionable opportunist ‘criticism’ of Marxism” (see present edition, Vol. 
 9, p. 
 310). 
 The tactics of individual terrorism, which the S. 
R. 
s advocated as the basic meth-od of struggle against the autocracy, caused great harm to the revolutionary movement and made it difficult to organise the masses for the revolutionary struggle. 
 The agrarian programme of the S. 
R. 
s envisaged the abolition of private landownership and the transfer of the land to the village communes on the basis of the “labour principle”, “equalised” land tenure, and the development of co-operatives. 
 There was nothing socialist in this programme, which the S. 
R. 
s described as a pro-gramme for “socialising the land”. 
 In analysing this programme, Lenin showed that if commodity production and private farming on commonly-owned land were preserved, the rule of capital could not be eliminated nor the labouring peasantry delivered from ex-ploitation and ruin. 
 He also showed that co-operatives functioning under the capitalist system could not save the small peasant, since they only served to enrich the rural bourgeoisie. 
 At the same time Lenin pointed out that the demand for equalised land tenure, though not socialist, was historically progressive, revolutionary-democratic in character, inasmuch as it was aimed against reaction-ary landlordism. 
 The Bolshevik Party exposed the S. 
R. 
s’ attempts to pose as so-cialists; it waged a hard fight against the S. 
R. 
s for influence over the peasantry, and revealed the harmful effect which their tactics of individual terrorism had on the working-class movement. 
 At the same time, on definite conditions, the Bolsheviks entered into temporary agreements with the S. 
R. 
s in the struggle against tsarism. 
 The fact that the peasantry did not constitute a homogeneous class accounted for the political and ideological disunity and organ-isational confusion among the S. 
R. 
s, and for their constant wav-ering between the liberal bourgeoisie and the proletariat. 
 Al-ready during the first Russian revolution the Right wing of the S. 
R. 
s split away from the Party and formed the legal Labour Popular Socialist Party, which held views close to those of the Ca-dets; the Left wing became the semi-anarchist league of “Maximal-ists”. 
 During the Stolypin reaction the Socialist-Revolutionary Party experienced a complete ideological and organizational break-up, and the First World War saw most S. 
R. 
s adopt social-chauvinist views. 
 33After the victory of the February bourgeois-democratic revolu-tion in 1917 the S. 
R. 
s, together with the Mensheviks and Cadets, formed the mainstay of the counter-revolutionary bourgeois-land-lord Provisional Government, and the leaders of this party (Ke-rensky, Avxentyev and Chernov) were members of this government. 
 The S. 
R. 
 Party refused to support the peasants’ demand for the abolition of landlordism, and indeed, stood for its maintenance. 
 Socialist-Revolutionary ministers in the Provisional Government sent punitive expeditions against the peasants who had seized land-ed estates. 
 At the end of November 1917 the Left wing of the S. 
R. 
s founded an independent party. 
 To retain their influence among the peasant masses, they recognised the Soviet power formally and entered into an agreement with the Bolsheviks, but soon turned against the Soviets. 
 During the years of foreign military intervention and civil war the S. 
R. 
s carried on counter-revolutionary subversive activities, vigorously supported the interventionists and whiteguard generals, took part in counter-revolutionary plots, and organised terrorist acts against Soviet statesmen and Communist Party leaders. 
 After the Civil War they continued their activities against the Soviet state within the country and among the whiteguard émigrés. 
 p. 
 52 The Third Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 was held in London be-tween April 12 and 27 (April 20 and May 10), 1905. 
 The Congress was organised and convened by the Bolsheviks under the direction of Lenin. 
 It was the first Bolshevik Congress. 
 The agenda, drawn up by Lenin, was as follows: (I) Report of the Organising Committee . 
 (II) Questions of Tactics : (1) the armed uprising; (2) the attitude towards the government’s policy on the eve of and during the revolution (this point was devoted to two questions: a. 
 attitude towards the government’s policy on the eve of the revolution; b. 
 the provisional revolutionary government); (3) the attitude towards the peasant movement. 
 (III) Questions of Organisation : (4) the relations between the workers and the intellectuals within the Party organisations; (5) the Party Rules. 
 (IV) Attitude Towards Other Parties and Trends : (6) attitude to-wards the breakaway group of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
; (7) attitude to-wards the non-Russian Social-Democratic organisations; (8) atti-tude towards the liberals; (9) practical agreements with the So-cialist-Revolutionaries. 
 (V) Internal Questions of Party Life : (10) propaganda and agitation. 
 (VI) Delegates’ Reports : (11) report of the Central Committee; (12) reports of delegates from the local committees. 
 (VII) Elections : (13) elections; (14) standing order for publication of the proceedings and decisions of the Congress, and for the assumption of office by the newly elected functionaries. 
 On all the basic issues dealt with by the Third Congress Lenin had written the draft resolutions, which he substantiated in arti-cles published in the newspaper Vperyod prior to the Congress. 
 Lenin spoke at the Congress on the question of the armed uprising, on the participation of Social-Democrats in the provisional revolutionary 34 35government, on the attitude towards the peasant movement, on the Party Rules, and on a number of other questions. 
 The proceed-ings of the Congress record 138 speeches and motions made by Lenin. 
 The Congress amended the Party Rules: (a) it adopted Lenin’s wording of Clause I; (b) it defined precisely the rights of the Cen-tral Committee and its relations with the local committees; (c) it modified the organisational structure of the Party’s central bodies: in place of the three centres (the Central Committee, the Central Organ, and the Council of the Party) the Congress established a single competent Party centre—the Central Committee. 
 On the work and the significance of the Third Party Congress see Lenin’s article “The Third Congress” (present edition, Vol. 
 8, pp. 
 442-49) and his book Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution (see present edition Vol. 
 9, pp. 
 15-140). 
 p. 
 56 The Fifth Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 was held in London between April 30 and May 19 (May 13 and June 1), 1907. 
 It was attended by 336 delegates having a vote and consultative voice, of whom 105 were Bolsheviks, 97 Mensheviks, 57 Bundists, 44 Polish Social-Dem-ocrats, 29 Lettish Social-Democrats and 4 “non-factionals”. 
 The Bolsheviks were backed by the Poles and the Letts and had a stable majority at the Congress. 
 The Bolshevik delegates included Lenin, Voroshilov, Dubrovinsky, Stalin, Shahumyan and Yaroslavsky. 
 The Congress discussed the following questions: (1) Report of the Central Committee. 
 (2) Report of the Duma group and its organ-isation. 
 (3) Attitude towards the bourgeois parties. 
 (4) The Duma. 
 (5) The “labour congress” and the non-party workers’ organisations. 
 (6) The trade unions and the Party. 
 (7) Guerrilla actions. 
 (8) Unemployment, economic crisis, and lock-outs. 
 (9) Organisa-tional questions. 
 (10) The International Congress in Stuttgart (First of May, militarism). 
 (11) Work in the army. 
 (12) Miscellanea. 
 One of the basic questions dealt with at the Congress was that of the policy to be adopted towards the bourgeois parties. 
 Lenin deliv-ered the report on this question. 
 The Congress adopted Bolshevik resolutions on all fundamental issues. 
 It elected a Central Commit-tee consisting of 5 Bolsheviks, 4 Mensheviks, 2 Polish and 1 Lettish Social-Democrats. 
 Alternate members elected to the Central Com-mittee consisted of 10 Bolsheviks, 7 Mensheviks, 3 Polish and 2 Lettish Social-Democrats. 
 The Congress was a big victory of Bolshevism over the oppor-tunist wing of the Party—the Mensheviks. 
 On the Fifth Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 see Lenin’s article “The Attitude Towards Bourgeois Parties” (present edition, Vol. 
 12, pp. 
 489-509). 
 p. 
 56 Boyevism —from the Russian word boyevik , a member of the revo-lutionary fighting squads, who, during the revolutionary struggle, used the tactics of armed action, helped political prisoners to escape, expropriated state-owned funds for the needs of the revolution, 36 37 38 39 40 41 42removed spies and agents provocateurs , etc. 
 During the Revolution of 1905-07 the Bolsheviks had special fighting squads. 
 See presentedition, Vol. 
 12, pp. 
 409-18. 
 p. 
 57 See K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 104-05 and 107. 
 p. 
 59 Polish Socialist Party (Polska Partia Socjalistyczna )—a reformist nationalist party founded in 1892. 
 In 1906 the Party split intothe P. 
S. 
P. 
 Left wing and P. 
S. 
P. 
 chauvinist Right wing. 
 p. 
 61 The Zemstvo campaign was conducted by bourgeois liberals, mem-bers of the Zemstvos, between the autumn of 1904 and January1905. 
 The campaign consisted of a series of conferences, publicmeetings and banquets at which speeches were made and resolu-tions passed in support of moderate constitutional demands. 
 p. 
 63 Dubasov , F. 
 V. 
 —Governor-General of Moscow who crushed the armed uprising of December 1905. 
 p. 
 64 The Vyborg Manifesto or “the Vyborg Appeal” was issued by members of the First Duma “To the people from the people’s representatives”. 
 It was adopted on July 9-10 (22-23), 1908, at a meeting in Vyborgat which about 200 deputies, most of them Cadets, assembled afterthe dissolution of the First Duma. 
 The appeal called upon thepeople to offer “passive resistance” to the government by refusingto pay taxes and furnish recruits until the tsar had announced new elections to the Duma. 
 In September 1906 the Congress of the Cadet Party openly admitted that the use of “passive resistance”was “impracticable”. 
 p. 
 64 Osvobozhdeniye League —a liberal-monarchist organisation founded abroad by P. 
 Struve in 1904. 
 The Osvobozhdeniye people were supporters of a constitutional monarchy and endeavoured to strike a bargain with the tsarist government, concealing their struggleagainst the revolution under the false guise of democracy. 
 Even-tually they formed the core of the Cadet Party. 
 p. 
 65 The rising in the Sveaborg fortress (near Helsingfors), which started during the night of July 17-18 (30-31),1906 broke out spontaneously and prematurely, being largely provoked by the Socialist-Revolu-tionaries. 
 On receiving information about the situation in Sveaborgand the possibility of an armed uprising, the St. 
 Petersburg Commit-tee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 decided on the urgent dispatch of a dele-gation to Sveaborg authorised to secure a postponement of the action or, if this could not be achieved, to take the most active part in leading the uprising. 
 The text of the decision was writtenby V. 
 I. 
 Lenin. 
 Finding it impossible to prevent spontaneous ac-tion, the Bolsheviks headed the uprising. 
 Its leaders were lieuten-43 44ants A. 
 P. 
 Yemelyanov and Y. 
 L. 
 Kohansky, members of the military organisation of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Seven of the ten artil-lery companies took an active part in the uprising. 
 The insurgentsput forward the slogans of overthrow of the autocracy, freedom for the people, and the transfer of the land to the peasants. 
 The working class in Finland gave active support to the insurgents. 
 On July18 (31) a general strike was declared in Helsingfors, which eventu-ally spread to other towns. 
 The uprising lasted three days, butthe general lack of preparation had its effect, and on July 20 (August2), after the fortress had been subjected to a naval bombardment, the Sveaborg rising was crushed. 
 Its participants were court-mar-tialled, forty-three men being executed and some hundreds sentencedto penal servitude or imprisonment. 
 p. 
 65 The Land Bill of the 104 members of the Duma was introduced by the Trudoviks at the 13th session of the Duma on May 23 (June 5) 1906. 
 The Bill made it the object of land legislation “to work towards the establishment of a system under which all the land withits mineral wealth and waters would belong to the whole people,the land needed for agriculture to be given over only to the useof those who cultivate it with their own labour” ( The Duma in Rus-ia. 
 Documents & Materials , Russ. 
 ed. 
, Moscow, 1957 p. 
 172). 
 For this purpose the demand was put forward for creating ‘a nation-al distributable land fund’ consisting of all state, crown, monas-tery and church lands. 
 Landed estates and other privately-ownedlands were to be forcibly alienated to this fund where the size ofthe respective holdings exceeded the labour standard establishedfor the given locality. 
 Certain compensation was allowed for alie-nated privately-owned lands. 
 Allotment lands and small private holdings were to be retained for a time by their owners. 
 The Billalso provided for the eventual gradual transfer of these lands to thenational fund. 
 The agrarian reform was to be carried out by localcommittees elected by democratic vote. 
 These demands expressedthe interests of the well-to-do peasants, who feared immediate and complete abolition of private ownership of the land and stood for compensation for alienated lands. 
 Lenin remarked that theBill of the 104 “is permeated with the small proprietor’s fear ofbeing too radical, of drawing too large a mass of poor people intothe movement” (see present edition, Vol. 
 11, p. 
 469). 
 Despite itsinconsistent and utopian character, the “Bill of the 104”, as Lenin pointed out, was a platform of struggle for converting the well-to-do section of the enslaved peasantry into free farmers. 
 p. 
 66 Lenin has in mind the “ Draft of the Fundamental Land Law ” signed by 33 deputies (mostly Trudoviks) of the First Duma. 
 This Billwas drafted with the help of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and ex-pressed their views on the agrarian question. 
 The “Bill of the 33” demanded the immediate and complete abolition of private land-ownership and proclaimed the equal right of all citizens to use theland and the principle of communal land tenure with equalised 45 46 47 48 49 50reallotment on the basis of subsistence and labour norms. 
 In com-parison with other Bills of the Trudoviks, the “Bill of the 33” was more drastic in that it demanded the immediate abolition of private landownership and confiscation of the landed estates with-out compensation. 
 Introduced into the Duma on June 6 (19), 1906, the “Bill of the 33” met with furious resistance on the part of the Cadets and was rejected by 140 votes to 78. 
 p. 
 66 The Agrarian Question in Russia Towards the Close of the Nine-teenth Century was written by Lenin in 1908 for an encyclopaedic dictionary issued by Granat Bros. 
 Ltd. 
, but was not published for censorship reasons. 
 This work first appeared in Moscow in 1918 as a separate booklet issued by Zhizn i Znaniye Publishers. 
 In writing this booklet Lenin made use of statistical returns and tables on the agrarian question contained in his works The De-velopment of Capitalism in Russia and The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution , 1905-07 (see present edition, Vol. 
 3, p. 
 21-607 and Vol. 
 13, pp. 
 217-429). 
 p. 
 69 This refers to the book Statistics of Landownership for 1905 . 
 Re-turns for 50 Gubernias of European Russia . 
 Published by the Cen-tral Statistical Committee of the Ministry of the Interior, St. 
 Petersburg, 1907. 
 p. 
 71 This refers to N. 
 A. 
 Rubakin’s article “Our Ruling Bureaucracy in Figures”, published in the newspaper Syn Otechestva (Son of the Fatherland ) No. 
 54, April 20 (May 3), 1905. 
 p. 
 75 The categories of peasants here listed by Lenin existed in tsarist Russia as survivals of feudal and semi-feudal relations. 
 Chinsh peasants —peasants who enjoyed the right of chinsh — the right of perpetual inheritance of the land—and paid almost invariable quit-rent, called chinsh . 
 This form of relations existed mainly in Poland, Lithuania, Byelorussia, and parts of the Ukraine bordering on the Black Sea. 
 Rezeshi —small land proprietors in Moldavia and Bessarabia. 
 Teptyars —neo-Bashkirs, settlers from the Urals and the Volga region. 
 p. 
 77 This refers to The Collection of Statistical Data for Saratov Guber-nia. 
 Vol. 
 I , Saratov Uyezd . 
 Saratov, published by the Saratov Gubernia Zemstvo, 1883. 
 p. 
 77 Gift-land peasants —former serfs who, at the time of the Reform of 1861, received from their landlords as a gift (without having to pay redemption money) miserable allotments amounting to a quar-ter of the “top” or “statutory” allotment established by law for the given locality. 
 All the rest of the lands that had constituted the peasant allotments before the Reform were seized by the landlord, 51 52 53who kept his “gift-land peagants”, forcibly dispossessed of their land in a state of economic bondage even after serfdom was abol-ished. 
 Full owners —former landlords’ peasants who had redeemed their allotments before the specified date and had the right to own the land as private property. 
 These were a comparatively small catego-ry of the most well-to-do element in the countryside. 
 State peasants with communal holdings had no private property rights on the land, which they used on the basis of communal landownership. 
 State peasants with quarter holdings —descendants of former service-men (children of the boyars, Cossacks, streltsi, dragoons, soldiers, etc. 
) who guarded the southern and south-eastern borderlands of Muscovy. 
 The Tsar of Muscovy rewarded them for their services with an endowment of a quarter lot (half a dessiatine) of land on which they settled in “single households” (hence their name odno-dvortsi ). 
 They enjoyed the right of communal landownership as well as their quarter holdings. 
 These odnodvortsi , being freemen, for a long time held an in-termediate position between the nobles and the peasants, and had the right to acquire serfs. 
 Under Peter the Great they were turned into state peasants and their land became the property of the state. 
 Actually, however, the state peasants with quarter holdings dis-posed of their lands as their own private property. 
 In this they differed from the state peasants with communal holdings, who had no right to buy, sell or bequeath their land. 
 State peasants who formerly were landlords ’ serfs —a category of peasants purchased by the state from private owners or presented to the state, etc. 
 Although regarded as state peasants, they en-joyed fewer rights. 
 They were given equal rights in 1859, on the eve of the Reform of 1861, but certain distinctions still remained. 
 Free tillers —a category of peasants freed from serfdom under the law of February 20, 1803 which allowed landlords to give the peas-ants their freedom with land on the landlords’ own terms. 
 p. 
 77 The village commune in Russia was the communal form of peasant use of the land, characterised by compulsory crop rotation, and undivided woods and pastures. 
 Its principal features were collec-tive liability (compulsory collective responsibility of the peasants for making their payments in full and on time, and the performance of various services to the state and the landlords), the regular real-lotment of the land with no right to refuse the allotment given, the prohibition of its purchase and sale. 
 The landlords and the tsarist government used the village com-mune to intensify feudal oppression and to squeeze redemption payments and taxes out of the people. 
 p. 
 78 This refers to the abolition of serfdom in Russia in 1861. 
 p. 
 78This refers to the book: Beiträge zur Kenntniss des Russischen Reiches und der angränzenden Länder Asiens . 
 Auf Kosten der Kai-54 55 56 57 58 59serl. 
 Akademie der Wissenschaften herausgegeben von K. 
 E. 
 Ba-er und Helmersen, St. 
 Petersburg, 1845. 
 p. 
 82 The full title of the book is Freely Hired Labour on Private Land-owner Farms and the Movement of Workers According to a Sta-tistical and Economic Survey of Agriculture and Industry in Euro-pean Russia . 
 Compiled by S. 
 A. 
 Korolenko, St. 
 Petersburg, 1892 (Agricultural and Statistical Information Based on Material Ob-tained from Farmers , Issue V). 
 p. 
 85 Skopshchina —the name given in the southern parts of Russia to a type of rent in kind on terms of bondage, the tenant paying thelandlord a share of the crop s kopny (per corn-shock), and usually fulfilling miscellaneous labour services in addition. 
 p. 
 88 Wild landlord —a type of landlord described by Saltykov-Shched-rin in his satirical fairy-tale published in English under the titleof “Wild Gentleman”. 
 p. 
 90 Lenin refers to the following books: 1) V. 
 Orlov, Forms of Peasant Landownership in Moscow Guber-nia, Moscow, published by Moscow Gubernia Zemstvo, 1879 ( Sta-tistical Returns for Moscow Gubernia , Vol. 
 4, Issue I); 2) V. 
 Trirogov, The Village Commune and the Poll-Tax (Collect-ed Investigations ), St. 
 Petersburg, 1882; 3) Johannes Keussler, Zur Geschichte und Kritik des bäuerlichen Gemeindebesitzes in Russland , Teil 1-3, 1876-87; 4) V. 
 V. 
, The Peasant Commune (cf. 
 Results of Economic Inves-tigation of Russia According to Zemstvo Statistical Data , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1892). 
 V. 
 V. 
 —pseudonym of V. 
 P. 
 Vorontsov, an ideologue of liberal Narodism of the eighties and nineties of the nineteenth century. 
 p. 
 93 Registered souls —the male population of feudal Russia who were subject to the poll-tax (chiefly peasants and urban petty bour-geois), for which purpose special censuses (“registrations”) were held beginning from 1718. 
 The last, tenth, “registration” was made in 1857-59. 
 Redistribution of the land within the village communestook place in a number of districts on the basis of these registrationlists. 
 p. 
 93 Severny Vestnik (Northern Herald )—a literary, scientific, and polit-ical journal of a liberal trend, published in St. 
 Petersburg from1885 to 1898. 
 In its early years the journal published articles by theNarodniks N. 
 K. 
 Mikhailovsky, S. 
 N. 
 Yuzhakov, V. 
 P. 
 Voron-tsov, S. 
 N. 
 Krivenko, and others. 
 From 1891 the journal virtually became the organ of the Russian symbolists and decadents andpreached idealism and mysticism. 
 p. 
 94 60 61 6263 64 65 66 67 68 69 70This refers to N. 
 Karyshev’s book Peasant Rentings of Non-Allot-ment Land (cf. 
 Results of the Economic Investigation of Russia Ac-cording to Zemstvo Statistical Data , Vol. 
 II, Dorpat, 1892). 
 p. 
 97 Nik. 
—on —pseudonym of N. 
 F. 
 Danielson, an ideologue of liberal Narodism of the eighties and nineties of the nineteenth century. 
 p. 
 99 Winter hiring —the hiring of peasants for summer work by landlords and kulaks in the winter, when the peasants were badly in need of money and forced to accept extortionate terms. 
 p. 
 100 This refers to Evaluation Returns on Peasant Landownership in Zemlyansk , Zadonsk , Korotoyak and Nizhnedevitsk Uyezds . 
 Supplement to vols. 
 III, IV, V and VI of Statistical Returns for Voronezh Gubernia , Voronezh, published by the Voronezh Guber-nia Zemstvo, 1889. 
 p. 
 109 D. 
 N. 
 Zhbankov’s sketch “Women’s Country” was published in the book Data for Statistics of Kostroma Gubernia , Issue 8, Kost-roma, published by the Kostroma Gubernia Statistical Committee, 1891. 
 p. 
 111 Vestnik Yevropy (European Messenger )—a monthly journal pub-lished in St. 
 Petersburg from 1866 to the summer of 1918. 
 It presented the views of the Russian liberal bourgeoisie, and begin-ning with the nineties waged a systematic struggle against Marx-ism. 
 p. 
 116 These data are given in the book Combined Returns for Samara Gubernia , Vol. 
 8, Issue 1, Samara, published by the Samara Gu-bernia Zemstvo, 1892. 
 p. 
 121 This refers to M. 
 S. 
 Uvarov’s article “The Influence of Industry Employing Migratory Workers on the Sanitary Conditions of Rus-sia” published in Vestnik Obshchestvennoi Gigieny, Sudebnoi i Prakti-cheskoi Meditsiny (Journal of Public Hygiene and Forensic and Practical Medicine ) in July 1896. 
 p. 
 122 Lenin is quoting figures from the article “Peasant Industries in European Russia” by N. 
 F. 
 Rudnev, published in Symposium of the Saratov Zemstvo , Nos. 
 6 and 11, 1894. 
 p. 
 123 This refers to the book Agricultural Labourers and the Organisa-tion of Sanitary Supervision over Them in Kherson Gubernia , by N. 
 I. 
 Tezyakov, Kherson, published by the Kherson Gubernia Zemstvo Board, 1896. 
 p. 
 125 Lenin quotes figures from N. 
 A. 
 Blagoveshchensky’s book Com-bined Zemstvo House-to-House Census Economic Returns. 
 Vol. 
 I. 
 Peasant Farming , Moscow, 1898. 
 p. 
 134 71 72 73 74 75Cf. 
 K. 
 Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy , Moscow, pp. 
 173-87. 
 p. 
 138 Gesindeordnung —“Regulation for Servants”, 1854. 
 One of numerous laws in Prussia depriving farm labourers of all civil rights. 
 Under this law the mere attempt of labourers to organise a strike was punishable with imprisonment. 
 p. 
 140 This refers to the uprisings in Sveaborg (see present edition, Note 42) and Kronstadt. 
 The uprising of sailors and soldiers in Kron-stadt started on July 19 (August 1), 1906, after news had been re-ceived of the uprising in Sveaborg. 
 In the spring and summer of 1906, under the leadership of the Bolsheviks, preparations had gone forward for an armed uprising of workers, soldiers and sailors in Kronstadt. 
 These preparations, however, were considerably complicated by the arrest on July 9 (22) of most of the members of the military and workers’ organisation of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Never-theless, with the support of the St. 
 Petersburg Committee and its representative, D. 
 Z. 
 Manuilsky, the Bolsheviks went forward with their preparations for an armed uprising, while at the same time rebuffing the Socialist-Revolutionaries, who had been provoking a premature uprising. 
 When the spontaneous Sveaborg rising broke out the preparations for an armed uprising in Kronstadt had not been completed, but in view of the events in Sveaborg the uprising in Kronstadt had to be begun prematurely. 
 The Bolsheviks took the lead in order to make the action as organised as possible. 
 At a pre-arranged signal the struggle was started almost simultaneously by minemen, sappers, soldiers of the electric-mine company, and sailors of the First and Second Naval Divisions, who were joined by some of the armed workers. 
 The government, however, had re-ceived information from agents provocateurs of the time fixed for the uprising, and had prepared in advance for the fight. 
 Another factor that worked against the uprising was the disruptive activities of the Socialist-Revolutionaries. 
 By the morning of July 20 (August 2) the uprising was suppressed. 
 The St. 
 Petersburg Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 passed a decision on July 20 (August 2) to carry out a political general strike in support of the Kronstadt and Sveaborg risings, but on news being received the next day that the uprising had been suppressed this decision was revoked. 
 The tsarist Government took savage reprisals against the insur-gents. 
 More than 2,500 participants in the Kronstadt uprising were arrested. 
 Sentenced by courts martial, 36 men were executed, 130 were sent to penal servitude, 316 were imprisoned and 935 trans-ferred to corrective battalions. 
 p. 
 148 Revolutsionnaya Mysl (Revolutionary Thought )—the organ of a group of S. 
R. 
s, published abroad from April 1908 to December 1909. 
 Six issues appeared. 
 p. 
 149 Znamya Truda (Banner of Labour )—central organ of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, published in Paris from July 1907 to April 1914. 
 p. 
 149 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85Iskra (Spark )—the first all-Russian illegal Marxist newspaper, founded by Lenin in 1900. 
 After the Second Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 the Mensheviks seized control of Iskra . 
 From November 1903, beginning with issue No. 
 52, Iskra became the mouthpiece of the Mensheviks. 
 From then on the “old” Iskra was referred to in the Party as the Lenin, Bolshevik Iskra , and the “new” Iskra as the Menshevik, opportunist Iskra . 
 p. 
 153 January 9, 1905 —the day on which, by order of the tsar, the troops fired on a peaceful procession of St. 
 Petersburg workers headed by the priest Gapon, who marched to the Winter Palace to present a petition to the tsar. 
 This massacre of unarmed workers started a wave of mass political strikes and demonstrations all over Russia under the slogan “Down with the autocracy!” The events of Jan-uary the Ninth marked the beginning of the 1905-07 Revolu-tion. 
 p. 
 153 The Plehve regime —the harsh political regime introduced in Rus-sia in 1902 by the Minister of the Interior, V. 
 K. 
 Plehve, with the object of combating the revolutionary movement. 
 p. 
 154 The Autoabstract The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the Russian Revolution is a brief summary of the book The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution , 1905-07 (see present edition, Vol. 
 13, pp. 
 217-431). 
 Lenin wrote the Autoabstract in order to acquaint the Polish So-cial-Democrats with the differences of opinion existing in the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 on the agrarian question. 
 It was published in the jour-nal Przegl Zd Socjaldemokratyczny , No. 
 6, August 1908. 
 p. 
 158 John —the Menshevik P. 
 P. 
 Maslov. 
 p. 
 162 Vendée —a department in western France where the backward peasantry began a counter-revolutionary uprising against the republic at the close of the eighteenth century, during the French bourgeois revolution. 
 The uprising was led by the Catholic clergy, the nobility and émigré royalists, and had the support of England. 
 Vendée became a synonym for reactionary rebellion and hot-beds of counter-revolution. 
 p. 
 162 Kostrov —leader of the Caucasian Mensheviks N. 
 N. 
 Zhordania. 
 p. 
 162 Obrazovaniye (Education )—a literary, popular-scientific, and socio-political monthly published in St. 
 Petersburg from 1892 to 1909. 
 There were Social-Democrats among its contributors between 1902 and 1908. 
 p. 
 163 See K. 
 Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 III, Moscow, 1959, pp. 
 803-04. 
 p. 
 164 Zarya (Dawn )—a Marxist scientific and political journal published in Stuttgart in 1901-02 by the Iskra editorial board. 
 Four issues appeared in all. 
 86 87 88 8990 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98Zarya published Lenin’s writings: “Casual Notes”, “The Per-secutors of the Zemstvo and the Hannibals of Liberalism”, the first four chapters of “The Agrarian Question and the Critics of Marx’” (under the title “Messrs. 
 the ‘Critics’ on the Agrarian Question”), “Review of Home Affairs”, and “The Agrarian Pro-gramme of Russian Social-Democracy”. 
 p. 
 169 Zhizn (Life )—a monthly journal published in St. 
 Petersburg from 1897 to 1901 and abroad in 1902. 
 From 1899 the journal was the organ of the “legal Marxists”. 
 p. 
 169 See K. 
 Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 III, Moscow, 1959, pp. 
 792-93, 788-91, 787-88. 
 p. 
 170 Ibid. 
, pp. 
 777-82. 
 p. 
 171See K. 
 Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy , Moscow, pp. 
 173-87. 
 p. 
 171 Lenin is quoting from a letter of K. 
 Marx to L. 
 Kugelmann dated April 12, 1871 (see K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Correspond-ence , Moscow, 1955, p. 
 319). 
 p. 
 178 Przegl Zd—see Note 29. 
 p. 
 178 Lyakhov , V. 
 P. 
 — a colonel in the tsarist army, commander of the Russian troops who crushed the national-revolutionary movement in Persia in 1908. 
 p. 
 183 L’Humanité —a daily newspaper founded by Jean Jaurès in 1904 as the organ of the French Socialist Party. 
 Shortly after the split in the Party at the December 1920 Congress and the formation of the French Communist Party the newspaper became the Central Organ of the Communists. 
 The newspaper is being published in Paris to this day. 
 p. 
 186 This note was published in the newspaper Proletary as an after-word to the article “Pyotr Maslov Corrects Karl Marx’s Rough Notes” (see The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution , 1905-07 , present edition, Vol. 
 13, pp. 
 300-07. 
 p. 
 189 Famusov —a character from Griboyedov’s comedy Wit Works Woe . 
 p. 
 190 See Lenin’s article “The International Socialist Congress in Stutt-gart” (present edition, Vol. 
 13, pp. 
 75-81 and 82-93). 
 p. 
 192 Balalaikin —a character in Saltykov-Shchedrin’s A Modern Idyll ; a liberal windbag, adventurer and liar. 
 p. 
 202 From the poem by N. 
 A. 
 Nekrasov “Who Can Be Happy and Free in Russia”. 
 p. 
 205 99 100 101 102 103 104 105 106Narodnaya Volya (The People ’s Will )—an illegal organisation of the revolutionary-minded Narodnik intellectuals founded in 1879 with the object of fighting the autocracy. 
 It existed up to the second half of the eighties. 
 p. 
 208 This article was written by Lenin in connection with a workers’ meeting held in Berlin on September 7 (20),1908, to protest against the growing menace of war. 
 The article was intended for issue No. 
 36 of the newspaper Proletary , but was not published. 
 p. 
 210 Vorwärts —the central organ of the German Social-Democrats. 
 It began to appear in 1876 and was edited, among others, by Wil-helm Liebknecht. 
 Engels made use of its columns for fighting all manifestations of opportunism. 
 From the middle of the nineties after the death of Engels, Vorwärts began regularly to carry articles of the opportunists, who predominated in German Social-Democ-racy and in the Second International. 
 p. 
 212 This refers to the decision of the St. 
 Petersburg Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 published in “From the Party” column of the news-paper Proletary , No. 
 36, October 3 (16), 1908. 
 The St. 
 Petersburg Committee called upon the Social-Democratic students’ groups to dissociate themselves from the appeal of the Joint Students’ Council and subordinate the student movement to the aims of Social-Democracy in the nation-wide struggle against tsarism. 
 p. 
 217 The Berlin Treaty —an agreement endorsed on July 13, 1878, by the Congress of representatives of the governments of Russia, Britain, Austro-Hungary, Germany, France, Italy and Turkey after the Russo-Turkish War of 1877-78. 
 p. 
 223 Novoye Vremya (New Times )—a daily newspaper published in St. 
 Petersburg from 1868 to October 1917. 
 At first moderately liberal, it became in 1876 the mouthpiece of reactionary circles among the aristocracy and bureaucracy. 
 It was opposed to the bourgeois-liberal as well as the revolutionary movement. 
 From 1905 onwards it was an organ of the Black Hundreds. 
 Lenin called it a specimen of the venal press. 
 p. 
 225 Pugachov , Yemelyan —leader of the peasant war in Russia in 1773-75. 
 p. 
 225 The International Socialist Bureau —the executive body of the Second International, consisting of representatives of the social-ist parties of all countries and established by decision of the Paris Congress of the Second International in September 1900. 
 The representatives of the Russian Social-Democrats elected to the I. 
S. 
B. 
 were G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov and B. 
 N. 
 Krichevsky. 
 From 1905 onwards Lenin was a member of the Bureau as a representative of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 He waged a determined fight within the Bureau 107 108 109 110 111 112 113 114against the opportunism of the leaders of the Second International. 
 The I. 
S. 
B. 
 ceased to function in 1914. 
 p. 
 231 The foreign publications referred to are: La Tribune Russe —the bulletin of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, published in Paris in French from January 1904 to De-cember 1909, and from October 1912 to July 1913. 
 In 1904 it appeared as a fortnightly, and after that as a monthly. 
 Russisches Bulletin —published in Berlin by a group of Men-sheviks from 1907 to 1916. 
 p. 
 231 The Bureau Abroad of the Central Committee was set up by the plenary meeting of the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in August 1908 in the capacity of the Party’s agency abroad, subordinated to the Russian Bureau of the Central Committee. 
 Soon after the Central Committee plenary meeting in January 1910 the Bureau Abroad came under the control of a liquidation-ist majority and became a rallying centre for anti-Party forces. 
 The liquidationist tactics of the Bureau Abroad compelled the Bolsheviks in May 1911 to recall their representative (Alexandrov— N. 
 A. 
 Semashko). 
 Later the representatives of the Polish and Let-tish Social-Democrats were recalled. 
 In January 1912 the B. 
A. 
C. 
C. 
 discontinued its activities. 
 p. 
 232 See K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1955, pp. 
 409-73, 490-91. 
 p. 
 236 Zionist Socialists (Zionist Socialist Workers ’ Party )—a petty-bourgeois Jewish national organisation formed in 1904. 
 The Zio-nist socialists sought to isolate the Jewish workers from the revo-lutionary struggle of the international proletariat and advocated an agreement with the bourgeoisie in working for the creation of a Jewish state. 
 p. 
 242 The Socialist Jewish Labour Party —a petty-bourgeois nationalist organisation founded in 1900. 
 The programme of the S. 
J. 
L. 
P. 
 was based on a demand for national autonomy for the Jews—the establishment of extraterritorial Jewish parliaments with powers to decide questions relating to the political organisation of the Jews in Russia. 
 The S. 
J. 
L. 
P. 
 stood close to the S. 
R. 
s and together with them fought against the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 p. 
 242 Skvortsov , A. 
 I. 
 — a bourgeois-economist, author of a number of works on agriculture. 
 Lenin criticised Skvortsov’s views repeat-edly in his writings (see present edition, Vol. 
 1, pp. 
 198, 474-77 and Vol. 
 3, p. 
 54. 
 p. 
 247 See K. 
 Marx, Capital, Vol. 
 III, Moscow, 1959, p. 
 746. 
 p. 
 248 This article was written in reply to P. 
 Maslov’s article published in September 1908 in issue No. 
 7 of Przegl Zd Socjaldemokratyczny , 115 116 117 118the journal of the Polish Social-Democrats, under the heading “On the Question of the Agrarian Programme. 
 (An Answer to Lenin. 
)” Maslov attacked the Bolshevik programme expounded by Lenin in his Autoabstract, The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democ-racy in the Russian Revolution (see pp. 
 158-80 of this volume) and defended the agrarian programme of the Mensheviks. 
 p. 
 255 See K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, “Der Gesetzentwurf über die Aufhe-bung der Feudallasten” and “The Anti-Kriege Circular”. 
 p. 
 261 See K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1955, pp. 
 438-39. 
 p. 
 272 Otzovists (from the Russian word otozvat —recall)—the name given to a group of the Bolsheviks (Bogdanov, Pokrovsky, Lu-nacharsky, Bubnov and others), who demanded that the Social-Democratic deputies in the Third Duma should be recalled and that work in the legal organisations should be stopped. 
 In 1908 the otzovists formed a group of their own and waged a struggle against Lenin. 
 They emphatically refused to sit in the Duma and work in the trade unions, co-operative societies and other mass legal and semi-legal organisations of the workers. 
 They strove to shut themselves up within the framework of the illegal organi-sation, to tear the Party away from the non-Party masses and ex-pose it to the attacks of reaction. 
 Lenin called the otzovists “liquidators of a new type” and “Mensheviks inside out”. 
 A variety of otzovism was ultimatumism. 
 The ultimatumists differed only in form from the otzovists. 
 They proposed that an ultimatum should first be presented to the Social-Democratic group in the Duma and if it was not complied with, the Social-Democratic deputies should be recalled from the Duma. 
 Ultimatumism was virtually otzovism in disguise. 
 Lenin called the ultimatumists “shams-faced otzovists”. 
 In the spring of 1909 the otzovists, ultimatumists and the god-builders formed a promotion group to organise an anti-Party school on the Island of Capri (Bogdanov, Alexinsky, Lunacharsky and others). 
 Actually this group was the centre of the anti-Party fac-tion of otzovists, ultimatumists, and god-builders. 
 A meeting of the extended editorial board of Proletary held in June 1909 adopted a decision that “Bolshevism, as a definite tendency in the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, has nothing in common with otzovism or ultimatumism” and called upon the Bolsheviks to resolutely combat this defection from revolutionary Marxism. 
 Bogdanov (Maximov), the guiding spirit of otzovism, was expelled from the ranks of the Bolsheviks. 
 p. 
 286 Boulangism —a reactionary chauvinist movement in France in the late nineteenth century, so named after General Boulanger who headed it. 
 By criticising the policy of the ruling party of moderate Re-publicans and pretending to oppose the Monarchists, Boulanger 119 120 121 122123sought to win popularity among the petty bourgeoisie and the proletariat and to use their dissatisfaction with the government for his own careerist purposes. 
 Boulanger was in secret contact with the Monarchists, from whom he received subsidies. 
 The Boulangist movement was not supported by the masses and broke up. 
 p. 
 295 The elections to the Duma were indirect and had several stages. 
 They were conducted separately for various groups of the popu-lation known as curias—they were the landowner, urban, peasant and worker curias. 
 At the final stage of the election campaign the electors of all the curia gathered at a Gubernia Election Meeting where the elec-tion of deputies to the Duma took place. 
 The number of deputies from each curia was fixed beforehand. 
 Thus, if all the electors of a worker curia nominated a Social-Democrat, the rest of the par-ticipants in the Gubernia Election Meeting, were obliged to vote for him. 
 p. 
 297 “Well-informed persons ”—a group of intellectuals who acted as advisers to the Social-Democratic group in the Third Duma. 
 Most of them were liquidators and revisionists, such as A. 
 N. 
 Potresov and S. 
 N. 
 Prokopovich. 
 Taking advantage of the fact that the lead-ers of the Bolshevik Party were working underground and were unable to take a legal part in the activities of the Duma group, the “well-informed persons” tried to direct the group’s activities into anti-Party channels, as a result of which arose the question of dispensing with their services. 
 p. 
 297 Rossiya (Russia )—a Black-Hundred police-ridden daily, pub-lished in St. 
 Petersburg from 1905 to 1914. 
 In 1906 it became the official organ of the Ministry of the Interior. 
 p. 
 299 Ugryum-Burcheyev —a type of dull narrow-minded dignitary de-scribed by Saltykov-Shchedrin in his story History of a Town . 
 p. 
 305 Council of the United Nobility —a counter-revolutionary organisa-tion of feudalist landlords. 
 It was established in May 1906 at the First Congress of Delegates of Gubernia Assemblies of the Nobil-ity, and existed up to October 1917. 
 The chief aim of this organ-isation was to defend the autocratic regime, the big landed es-tates and the privileges of the nobility. 
 The Council was headed by Count A. 
 A. 
 Bobrinsky, Prince N. 
 F. 
 Kasatkin-Rostovsky, Count D. 
 A. 
 Olsufyev, V. 
 M. 
 Purishkevich and others. 
 Lenin called it a “council of united feudalists”. 
 The Council of the United No-bility was really a semi-governmental body that dictated to the government legislative measures for protecting the interests of the feudalists. 
 A great many of the Council’s members belonged to the Council of State and the leading centres of the Black Hun-dreds. 
 p. 
 306 124 125 126 127 128 129Rural superintendent (zemsky nachalnik )—an administrative office instituted by the tsarist government in 1889 to strengthen the au-thority of the landlords over the peasants. 
 The rural superintend-ents were appointed from among the local landed nobility and were granted very great powers—not merely administrative, but also judicial—with regard to the peasants. 
 p. 
 311 Henry George —an American bourgeois economist and publicist, whose views were criticised by K. 
 Marx in his letter of June 20, 1881 to F. 
 Sorge, and by F. 
 Engels in his preface to the American edition of his book The Condition of the Working Class in England (see K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1955, pp. 
 414-17). 
 p. 
 312 This refers to Plekhanov’s speech at the Fourth (Unity) Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 where he was co-reporter on the question of revision of the agrarian programme. 
 Speaking against nationalisa-tion of the land, Plekhanov said: “To make nationalisation harm-less we must find a guarantee against restoration; and there is not, nor can there be, any such guarantee. 
 Recall the history of France; recall the history of England; in each of these countries, the wide sweep of the revolution was followed by restoration. 
 The same may happen in our country; and our programme must be such that in the event of its application, the harm that may be caused by re-storation may be reduced to a minimum. 
” (Minutes of the Fourth [Unity] Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, Moscow, 1959, Russ. 
 ed. 
, pp. 
 59-60. 
) p. 
 313 Razin , Stepan —outstanding leader of the peasant revolt in Russia in 1667-71 against feudal oppression and serfdom. 
 p. 
 313 The draft of Belousov’s speech on the agrarian question was writ-ten by Lenin. 
 The statistical comparisons and figures quoted by Belousov were taken from Lenin’s books, not yet published at the time, namely, The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution , 1905-07 (see present edition, Vol. 
 13, pp. 
 217-429) and The Agrarian Question in Russia Towards the Close of the Nineteenth Century (see pp. 
 69-147 of this vo-lume). 
 p. 
 315 The Fifth (All-Russian ) Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 was held in Paris on December 21-27, 1908 (January 3-9, 1909) and was attend-ed by delegates from such major Party organisations as those of St. 
 Petersburg, the Urals, the Caucasus, Moscow and the Central Industrial Region, as well as from the Polish Social-Democratic Party and the Bund. 
 There were sixteen voting delegates, of whom 5 were Bolsheviks, 3 Mensheviks, 5 Polish Social-Democrats and 3 Bundists. 
 The Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 was repre-sented by Lenin. 
 The Conference discussed the following questions: (1) The reports of the C. 
C. 
 of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, of the C. 
C. 
 of the Polish 130 131 132 133 134 135Social-Democratic Party, of the C. 
C. 
 of the Bund, and of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 organisations of St. 
 Petersburg, Moscow, the Central Industrial Region, the Urals and the Caucasus; (2) The present political situation and the tasks of the Party; (3) The Social-Dem-ocratic group in the Duma; (4) Questions of organisation in con-nection with the changed political conditions; (5) Affiliation in the local areas with the non-Russian organisations; (6) Affairs abroad; and Miscellanea. 
 Lenin made a report at the Conference “On the Present Moment and the Tasks of the Party” and speeches on the Duma group, on the organisational and other questions. 
 The Bolsheviks at the Conference waged a struggle against two forms of opportunism with-in the Party, namely, “against the liquidators , the direct oppo-rtunists of the Party, and against the otzovists , the disguised enemies of the Party”. 
 On Lenin’s motion the Conference condemned liqui-dationism and called upon all Party organisations to resolutely combat attempts to liquidate the Party. 
 The Conference is dealt with also in Lenin’s article “On the Road” (see pp. 
 345-55 of this volume). 
 p. 
 319 This heading has been given by the Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the Central Committee of the C. 
P. 
S. 
U. 
 p. 
 329 See K. 
 Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 III, Moscow, 1959, pp. 
 763-93. 
 p. 
 334 The Erfurt Programme —the-programme of German Social-Democ-racy adopted at the Congress in Erfurt in October 1891. 
 p. 
 334 This alludes to Plekhanov’s statement announcing his resignation from the editorial board of the liquidators’ newspaper Golos Sotsial-Demokrata . 
 It was printed in No. 
 10-11 of this newspaper, which was being prepared for release. 
 After further talks with Plekhanov the statement was withdrawn and the mention of it in the “con-tents” was pasted over. 
 This did not put an end to the conflict, however. 
 In May 1909 (issue No. 
 14), Golos Sotsial-Demokrata published a letter from Plekhanov informing readers that he had officially resigned from the editorial board. 
 p. 
 358 Vperyod (Forward )—an illegal Bolshevik weekly, published in Geneva from December 22, 1904 (January 4, 1905) to May 5 (18), 1905. 
 Eighteen issues were put out. 
 The newspaper’s organiser, manager, and ideological guide was Lenin. 
 Other members of the editorial board were V. 
 V. 
 Vorovsky, M. 
 S. 
 Olminsky and A. 
 V. 
 Lu-nacharsky. 
 The outstanding role which the newspaper played in combating Menshevism, restoring partyism, and formulating and elucidating the tactical issues posed by the rising revolution was acknowledged in a special resolution of the Third Party Congress, which recorded a vote of thanks to the editorial board. 
 p. 
 360 Partiiniye Izvestia (Party News )—a newspaper, the organ of the United Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, published illegally in St. 
 Petersburg on the eve of the Fourth (Unity) Congress of the Party. 
 Two issues were put out: on February 7 (20) and March 20 (April 2), 1906. 
 The editorial board was set up on a parity basis comprising editors from the Bolshevik newspaper Proletary and from the Menshevik newspaper the new Iskra . 
 Bolshevik members of the editorial board, among others, were Lenin and Lunacharsky. 
 After the Fourth Congress of the Party Partiiniye Izvestia closed down. 
 p. 
 363 “The movement is everything, the ultimate aim—nothing”—the formula advanced by E. 
 Bernstein, leader of the extreme oppor-tunist wing of the German Social-Democrats and the Second In-ternational, and the theoretician of revisionism and reformism. 
 p. 
 363 Narodnaya Duma (People ’s Duma )—a Menshevik daily published in St. 
 Petersburg in March-April 1907. 
 p. 
 367 This refers to the resolution on the political situation within the country and the tasks of the Party, adopted at the Sixth Con-gress of the Social-Democrats of Poland and Lithuania, held in Praga (a suburb of Warsaw) in December 1908. 
 The Congress repelled liquidationist tendencies and confirmed that the chief task of Social-Democracy was to fight for the con-quest of political power by the proletariat with the help of the revolutionary peasantry. 
 p. 
 368 All-Russian Peasant Union —a revolutionary-democratic organi-sation founded in 1905. 
 Its programme and tactics were elaborated at its first and second congresses held in Moscow in August and November 1900. 
 The Union demanded political liberty and the immediate convocation of a constituent assembly. 
 It adopted the tactics of boycott of the First Duma. 
 Its agrarian programme called for the abolition of private landownership and for the transfer of monastery, church, crown and state lands to the peas-ants without compensation. 
 The Union pursued a vacillating middle-of-the-road policy. 
 While demanding abolition of the landed estates, it agreed to partial compensation for the landlords. 
 The Peasant Union was subjected to police persecutions from the moment it came into existence. 
 It finally broke up at the beginning of 1907. 
 p. 
 372 The Bund (The General Jewish Workers Union of Lithuania, Poland, and Russia ) was formed by a founding congress of Jewish Social-Democratic groups held in Vilna in 1897; it was an association mainly of semi-proletarian Jewish artisans in the western regions of Russia. 
 The Bund joined the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 at the First Congress (1898) “as an autonomous organisation, independent only in re-spect of questions affecting the Jewish proletariat specifically”. 
 (The C. 
P. 
S. 
U. 
 in Resolutions and Decisions of Its Congresses , Conferences , and Plenary Meetings of the Central Committee , Mos-cow, 1954, Part I, p. 
 14, Russ. 
 ed. 
)136 137 138 139 140 The Bund brought nationalism and separatism into the working-class movement of Russia. 
 Its Fourth Congress, held in April 1901, resolved to alter the organisational relations with the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 established by the latter’s First Congress. 
 The resolution said that the Congress regarded the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 as a federation of national organisations and that the Bund should be treated as a member of that federation. 
 After the Second Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 had rejected its demand that it be recognised as the sole representative of the Jewish proletariat, the Bund left the Party. 
 In 1906 the Bund re-entered the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 on the basis of a resolution of the Fourth (Unity) Congress. 
 Within the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 the Bundists persistently supported the opportunist wing of the Party (the Economists, Mensheviks and liquidators) and opposed the Bolsheviks and Bolshevism. 
 The Bund countered the Bolsheviks’ programmatic demand for the right of nations to self-determination by a demand for cultural-national autonomy. 
 During the period of the Stolypin reaction (1907-10), it adopted a liquidationist stand and was active in forming the August anti-Party bloc. 
 During the First World War (1914-18) it adopted the position of the social-chauvinists. 
 In 1917 it supported the bour-geois Provisional Government and fought on the side of the enemies of the October Socialist Revolution. 
 In the years of foreign mili-tary intervention and civil war the Bund leadership joined forces with the counter-revolution. 
 At the same time a change was taking place among the rank and file of the Bund in favour of collabora-tion with the Soviet power. 
 In March 1921 the Bund decided to dissolve itself, and some of its members joined the Russian Com-munist Party (Bolsheviks) according to general procedure. 
 p. 
 372 Sotsial-Demokrat (Social-Democrat )—an illegal newspaper, organ of the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, published in St. 
 Petersburg from September 17 (30) to November 18 (December 1), 1906. 
 Seven issues were put out. 
 The editorial board was con-trolled by the Mensheviks. 
 p. 
 373 Die Neue Rheinische Zeitung was published in Cologne from June 1 1848 to May 19, 1849 under the management of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. 
 The Editor-in-Chief was Marx. 
 Under the blows of reaction the newspaper closed down after issue No. 
 301. 
 Here Lenin quotes from the articles by K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels “Die Berliner Debatte über die Revolution” and “Der Gesetzenwurf über die Aufhebung der Feudallasten” published in Die Neue Rhei-nische Zeitung on June 14 and July 30, 1848. 
 p. 
 377 See K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 104-05. 
 p. 
 378 The manuscript has no heading. 
 This heading has been supplied by the Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the Central Committee of the C. 
P. 
S. 
U. 
 p. 
 380141 142 143 144 Vozrozhdeniye (Revival )—a journal of the Menshevik liquidators published in Moscow from December 1908 to July 1910. 
 p. 
 394 See K. 
 Marx und F. 
 Engels, “Die Berliner Debatte über die Revo-lution”. 
 p. 
 397 Lenin is quoting from Engels’s “Preface to the First German Edition” of K. 
 Marx’s work The Poverty of Philosophy (see K. 
 Marx The Poverty of Philosophy , Moscow, pp. 
 12-13). 
 p. 
 401 See K. 
 Marx, Contribution to the Critique of the Hegelian Philos-ophy of Right . 
 Introduction. 
 (K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, On Religion , Moscow, 1957, p. 
 42. 
) p. 
 403 See F. 
 Engels, “Flüchtlings-Literatur. 
 II. 
 Das Programme der Blanquisten”. 
 p. 
 403 See F. 
 Engels, Anti-Dühring , Moscow, 1959, pp. 
 434-37. 
 p. 
 404 This refers to F. 
 Engels’s preface to K. 
 Marx’s pamphlet The Civil War in France (see K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 479). 
 p. 
 404 Vekhi (Landmarks )—a Cadet collection of articles by N. 
 Berdayev, S. 
 Bulgakov, P. 
 Struve, M. 
 Herschensohn and other representa-tives of the counter-revolutionary liberal bourgeoisie, published in Moscow in 1909. 
 In their articles on the Russian intelligentsia these writers tried to discredit the revolutionary-democratic tra-ditions of the best representatives of the Russian people, including Belinsky and Chernyshevsky, they vilified the revolutionary move-ment of 1905 and thanked the tsarist government for having, “with its bayonets and jails”, saved the bourgeoisie from “the popular wrath”. 
 The writers called upon the intelligentsia to serve the autocracy. 
 Lenin compared the programme of the Vekhi symposi-um in point of both philosophy and journalism with that of the Black-Hundred newspaper Moskovskiye Vedomosti , calling the sym-posium “ an encyclopaedia of liberal renegacy ”, “nothing but a flood of reactionary mud poured on democracy”. 
 p. 
 410 Golos Moskvy (Voice of Moscow )—a daily newspaper, organ of the Octobrists—a counter-revolutionary party of the big industrial bourgeoisie and big landlords. 
 Published in Moscow from 1905 to 1915. 
 p. 
 418 Menshikov , M. 
 O. 
 (1859-1919)—a reactionary journalist, one of the editors of the Black-Hundred newspaper Novoye Vremya (New Times ). 
—Ed. 
 p. 
 419 Derzhimorda —the name of a policeman in Gogol’s comedy The Inspector-General typifying an insolent, brutal bully and oppressor. 
 p. 
 420145 146 147 148149 150 151 152 153 154 155 Conference of the Extended Editorial Board of “Proletary ” was held in Paris on June 8-17 (21-30), 1909 and was attended by ninemembers of the Bolshevik Centre (elected by the Bolshevik sec-tion of the Fifth [London] Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in 1907) headed by Lenin, and representatives of the St. 
 Petersburg, Moscow Regional and Urals organisations. 
 The Conference was called to discuss the conduct of the otzo-vists and ultimatumists. 
 It dealt with the following questions:(1) otzovism and ultimatumism; (2) god-building tendencies amongthe Social-Democrats, (3) the attitude to Duma activities among the other fields of Party work; (4) the tasks of the Bolsheviks in the Party; (5) the Party school being set up abroad (on Capri);(6) agitation for a Bolshevik congress or a Bolshevik conferenceseparate from the Party; (7) the breakaway of Comrade Maximov;and other questions. 
 The Conference was guided by Lenin, who delivered speeches on all the principal questions of the agenda. 
 Otzovism and ulti-matumism were represented and defended at the Conference byA. 
 Bogdanov (Maximov) and V. 
 Shantser (Marat). 
 Kamenev, Zi-noviev, Rykov, and Tomsky took a conciliatory stand. 
 The Conference condemned otzovism and ultimatumism, which were qualified as “liquidationism from the left”. 
 Bogdanov, the guiding spirit of otzovism and ultimatumism, was expelled from the ranks of the Bolsheviks. 
 The Conference also condemnedgod-building and decided to combat it vigorously and expose itsanti-Marxist nature. 
 The headings to Lenin’s speeches published in this volume have been given by the Institute of Marxism-Leninism. 
 p. 
 425 St. 
—Stanislav Volsky —A. 
 V. 
 Sokolov, leader of the Moscow ot-zovists. 
 p. 
 428 M. 
 T. 
 —M. 
 P. 
 Tomsky. 
 p. 
 432 On the Party School Set Up Abroad —an anti-Party school set up by Bogdanov (Maximov), Alexinsky and Lunacharsky on Capri (Ita-ly) in 1909 with the assistance of Maxim Gorky. 
 The school was thefactional centre of the otzovists, ultimatumists and god-builders,who united to fight Bolshevism. 
 Under the guise of pro-Party activities the Bogdanovites got some of the local Social-Democratic organisations to send thirteen students to attend the school. 
 The school existed about four months (August-December). 
 In November 1909 some of the students headed by the workerN. 
 Y. 
 Vilonov emphatically dissociated themselves from theBogdanovites when the factional nature of this school became clear to them. 
 They sent to the editors of Proletary a protest against the anti-Party activities of the lecturers, for which they wereexpelled from the school. 
 On Lenin’s invitation they came to Paris,where they attended a cycle of lectures including lectures by Lenin:156 157 158 159 “The Present Moment and Our Tasks” and “The Agrarian Policy of Stolypin”. 
 In December 1909 the group of students who remainedon Capri formed, together with the lecturers, the anti-Party group“Vperyod”. 
 The conference of the extended editorial board of Proletary condemned the Capri school, which it qualified as “the new centreof a faction that was breaking away from the Bolsheviks”. 
 p. 
 432 God-building —a religious-philosophical literary trend, hostile to Marxism, which in the period of Stolypin reaction arose among a section of the Party intellectuals who had moved away from Marx-ism after the defeat of the Revolution of 1905-07. 
 The god-builders (Lunacharsky, Bazarov and others) advocated the creation of a new “socialist” religion and tried to reconcileMarxism with religion. 
 At one time Maxim Gorky supportedthem. 
 An extended meeting of the editorial board of Proletary condemned god-building and declared in a special resolution that the Bolshevik group in the Party had nothing in common with“such a distortion of scientific socialism”. 
 The reactionary nature of god-building was exposed by Lenin in his book Materialism and Empirio-criticism (see present edition, Vol. 
 14) and in his letters to Gorky in February-April 1908 and November-December 1913. 
 p. 
 432 This refers to the pro-Party Mensheviks , headed by Plekhanov, who came out against the liquidators during the years of reaction. 
In December 1908 Plekhanov resigned from the editorial boardof the liquidators’ newspaper Golos Sotsial-Demokrata , and in 1909 he resumed publication of Dnevnik Sotsial-Demokrata (So-cial-Democrat’s Diary ) for the purpose of fighting liquidationism. 
 While adhering to Menshevism, the Plekhanovites at the same timestood for preserving and strengthening the illegal Party organisa-tion, and consented to form a bloc with the Bolsheviks for thatpurpose. 
 In 1909 groups of pro-Party Mensheviks were formed in Paris, Geneva, San Remo, Nice and other cities. 
 In St. 
 Petersburg, Moscow, Ekaterinoslav, Kharkov, Kiev and Baku many Menshe-vik workers came out against the liquidators in favour of a revivalof the illegal R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Lenin called on the Bolsheviks to seek closer alignment with the pro-Party Mensheviks, saying that an agreement with them was possible on the basis of a struggle for the Party against liqui-dationism, “without any ideological compromises, without anyglossing over of tactical and other differences of opinion within the limits of the Party line” (see present edition, Vol. 
 16, p. 
 101). 
 The pro-Party Mensheviks participated with the Bolsheviks in thelocal Party committees, and contributed to the Bolshevik publi-cations: Rabochaya Gazeta (Workers ’ Gazette ), Zvezda (Star ), and the Central Organ of the Party Sotsial-Demokrat . 
 Lenin’s tactics of alignment with the Plekhanovites, which were supportedby the majority of the Menshevik workers in Russia, helped to ex-160 161 tend the influence of the Bolsheviks in the legal organisations of the workers and oust the liquidators from them. 
 At the end of 1911 Plekhanov broke the bloc with the Bolshe-viks. 
 On the pretext of combating “factionalism” and a split in the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 he tried to reconcile the Bolsheviks with the op-portunists. 
 In 1912 the Plekhanovites, together with the Trotsky-ists, the Bundists and the liquidators, came out against the deci-sions of the Prague Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 p. 
 433 Vlasov —A. 
 I. 
 Rykov. 
 p. 
 438 The private meeting—a meeting of Leninist Bolsheviks called by Lenin on the eve of the conference of the extended editorial board of Proletary . 
 Lenin gave the meeting full information con-cerning the state of affairs in the Bolshevik section and the struggle against the otzovists, the ultimatumists and the god-builders. 
 The theses contained in Lenin’s report formed the basis for the resolu-tions adopted by the conference of the extended editorial board. 
 p. 
 439 The First All-Russian Congress of Members of People ’s Universities ’ Associations was held in St. 
 Petersburg on January 3-6 (16-19), 1908. 
 During the debate on the question of the activities and organisation of the people’s universities the workers’ group of the congress, headed by the Bolsheviks, introduced motions de-manding that the workers’ organisations be represented on the boards of the people’s universities with the right to take part in arranging the curricula, choosing desirable lecturers on the social sciences, and recognition of the right of every nationality to give tuition in the native language. 
 The congress rejected these de-mands as being outside the competence of the congress, after which the workers’ representatives walked out. 
 p. 
 447 The First All-Russian Congress of Representatives of Co-opera-tive Societies was held in Moscow on April 16-21 (April 29-May 4), 1908. 
 It was attended by 824 delegates, about fifty of whom were Social-Democrats (Bolsheviks and Mensheviks). 
 Reports were de-livered at the congress on the international co-operative movement, on the role and tasks of the co-operative movement, on the legal status of the consumer societies in Russia and other matters. 
 Despite the resistance of the Mensheviks, the Bolsheviks formed a Social-Democratic group at the congress and headed the fight of the representatives from the trade unions and workers’ co-oper-atives against the bourgeois co-operators, who were in the major-ity at the congress. 
 After a number of speeches by spokesmen of the workers, the police imposed a ban on speeches that touched on questions of the class struggle, the trade unions, aid to workers during strikes and lock-outs, the co-operative press and propaganda, and even the election of a congress bureau and the periodicity of congresses, the police officer attending the proceedings being in-structed to arrest immediately anyone “who made socialist speeches162 163 164 165 or motions”. 
 As a demonstration of protest against this the con-gress was closed. 
 p. 
 447 The First All-Russian Women ’s Congress was held in St. 
 Petersburg on December 10-16 (23-29), 1908. 
 Among its delegates were many women workers. 
 Under pressure of the latter the congress adopted resolutions on combating alcoholism, on the position of the peasant woman, on labour protection for women and children, on producers’ co-operatives, and on equal rights for Jews. 
 On the main issue— that of the political and civic status of women in the modern com-munity—the women workers submitted a motion demanding uni-versal, direct, and equal suffrage by secret ballot without distinc-tion of sex, race and religion. 
 The presiding committee of the congress refused to read out the motion and replaced it by one drafted in a liberal-bourgeois spirit. 
 The women workers walked out as a demonstration of protest. 
 p. 
 447 The First All-Russian Congress of Factory Medical Officers and Representatives of Manufacturing Industry convened on the ini-tiative of the Moscow Society of Factory Medical Officers was held in Moscow on April 1-6 (14-19), 1909. 
 Among its delegates were 52 workers elected by the trade unions chiefly of the big industrial centres (St. 
 Petersburg, Moscow, Kiev, Ekaterinoslav, Baku, Ivanovo-Voznesensk, etc. 
). 
 According to its sponsors, the congress was to have been a “fes-tival of reconciliation” between workers and capitalists. 
 The Bol-sheviks, however who formed a majority of the working-class delegates, succeeded in getting the workers at the congress to take a class, proletarian line, despite the opposition of the liquidation-ist elements. 
 Speaking on the concrete questions of sanitary and medical arrangements at the factories, the worker delegates exposed the ideas of “class peace” and social reform, and put for-ward demands based on the programme of the Marxist party. 
 These speeches were of great political significance and had reper-cussions throughout the country. 
 Especially lively were the debates on the questions of sanitary inspection arrangements (the Bolshe-viks’ draft resolution on this point was carried) and of the elec-tion of the factory inspection by the workers. 
 The congress was unable to finish its work. 
 After the police had demanded that no questions liable “to excite class struggle” should be touched on in the debates, and after they had forbidden the motion on the housing question to be put to the vote (since “it mentioned socialism and socialisation of the land”) and for-bidden some of the worker delegates including the Duma Deputy I. 
 P. 
 Pokrovsky, from continuity their speeches, all the workers and some of the doctors walked out of the congress hall. 
 In view of this the presiding committee decided to close the congress. 
 p. 
 447 Otkliki Bunda (Echoes of the Bund )—a non-periodical organ of the Bund’s Committee Abroad, published in Geneva from March 1909 to February 1911. 
 Five issues were put out. 
 p. 
 460166 167 168 The reference is to Krylov’s fable “The Frog and the Ox”. 
 p. 
 464 Khlestakov —the chief character in Gogol’s comedy The Inspector-General , typifying the unrestrained braggart and liar. 
 p. 
 464 This comment was published in the form of a note to M. 
 N. 
 Lya-dov’s letter to Proletary in which he expressed disagreement with the decisions of the conference of the extended editorial board of Proletary . 
 p. 
 467 Leva —M. 
 K. 
 Vladimirov; Innokenty —I. 
 F. 
 Dubrovinsky. 
 p. 
 468 Lenin wrote this draft letter in reply to that of the Council of the otzovist-ultimatumist school on Capri addressed to the Bolshevik Centre (the extended editorial board of Proletary ) soliciting aid for the school in the form of lecturers and funds. 
 The manuscript has no heading. 
 The present heading has been given by the Institute of Marxism-Leninism. 
 p. 
 470169 170 171 172 173 THE LIFE AND WORK OF V. 
 I. 
 LENIN Outstanding Dates (March 1908 -August 1909 ) March 19 (April 1 ) March 26 (April 8 ) Not later than April 3 (16) Between April 6 and 18 (April 19 and May 1 ) April 16 (29) April 24 (May 7 ) April May 1 Beginning of May1909 Lenin’s article “On to the Straight Road” is pub-lished as a leader in Proletary , No. 
 26. 
 Lenin’s article “On the ‘Nature’ of the Russian Revolution” is published as a leader in Proletary , No. 
 27. 
 Lenin finishes his article “Marxism and Revision-ism” for the symposium Karl Marx ( 1818-1883 ). 
 Lenin at the request of Gorky visits him on the Island of Capri where he tells Bogdanov and Lunacharsky of his difference with them on ques-tions of philosophy. 
 Lenin’s articles “On the Beaten Track!” and “A Bloc of the Cadets and the Octobrists?” are pub-lished in Proletary , No. 
 29. 
 Lenin gives a lecture in Geneva on the subject of “The Assessment of the Russian Revolution and Its Probable Future”. 
 Lenin’s article “The Assessment of the Russian Revolution” is published in the Polish journal Przegl Zd Socjaldemokratyczny , No. 
 2. 
 Lenin delivers a lecture in Paris on the character of the Russian revolution at a meeting organised by the Bureau of the Paris Social-Democratic group. 
 Lenin takes part in the session of the Bureau of the Paris Social-Democratic group at which it is decided to help the Social-Democrats arrested in Switzerland in connection with the expropriation at Tiflis. 
 May 10 (23) May May-first half of June June 18 (July 1) June July 2 (15) July 5 (18) July 23 (August 5 ) August 11-13 (24-26 ) AugustProletary , No. 
 30, publishes Lenin’s articles “Cadets of the Second Generation” (leading article) and “The Assessment of the Russian Revolution” (reprinted from the Polish journal Przegl Zd So-cjaldemokratyczny , No. 
 2). 
 Lenin works at the British Museum on his book Materialism and Empirio-criticism . 
 Lenin writes “Ten Questions to a Lecturer” as points for the speech of I. 
 F. 
 Dubrovinsky (Inno-kenty) at the lecture by A. 
 Bogdanov in Geneva. 
 Lenin finishes his work The Agrarian Question in Russia Towards the Close of the Nineteenth Century for the Encyclopaedic Dictionary being published by Granat Brothers. 
 Owing to the cen-sorship, the work was not published at the time, and appeared as a separate booklet only in 1918. 
 Lenin writes to V. 
 V. 
 Vorovsky in Odessa on the sharpening of philosophical differences and the maturing of a split with the Bogdanov group. 
 On Lenin’s suggestion, a discussion on otzovism is started in Proletary . 
 Lenin’s article “Some Features of the Present Col-lapse” is published as a leading article in Prole-tary, No. 
 32. 
 Lenin finishes the Autoabstract of his book: The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the Russian Revolution (printed in the Polish jour-nal Przegl Zd Socjaldemokratyczny , No. 
 6, August 1908). 
 Lenin’s articles “Inflammable Material in World Politics” (leader), “Bellicose Militarism and the Anti-Militarist Tactics of Social-Democracy” and “How Pyotr Maslov Corrects the Rough Drafts of Karl Marx” are published in Proletary , No. 
 33. 
 Lenin takes part in the plenary meeting of the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in Geneva; exposes the attempt of the Mensheviks to liquidate the C. 
C. 
 and replace it by an information bureau; is elected on behalf of the Bolsheviks to the edi-torial board of the Party’s Central Organ. 
 At a meeting of the editorial board of Proletary Lenin challenges Bogdanov to set forth his views openly in the press. 
 September 11 (24) Between September 25 and October 2 (October 8 and 15) September 27 (October 10 ) September 28 (October 11 ) September 29 (October 12 ) September Before October 3 (16) October 3 (16) October 14 (27) October 16 (29) October 28 (November 10 ) October-Novem-berLenin’s article “Leo Tolstoy as the Mirror of the Russian Revolution” is published as a leader in Proletary , No. 
 35. 
 Lenin’s article “Marxism and Revisionism” is published in the symposium Karl Marx (1818 -1883 ), put out in St. 
 Petersburg. 
 Lenin participates in the work of the conference of socialist journalists in Brussels. 
 Lenin attends the international meeting devoted to the struggle of the proletariat to preserve peace held at the Maison du Peuple in Brussels. 
 Lenin takes part in the meeting of the International Socialist Bureau in Brussels, criticises Kautsky’s resolution on the admission to the International of the British Labour Party, and opposes the ad-mission of the Zionist socialists to the Russian subsection of the International. 
 Lenin attends the meeting of the international con-ference of socialist M. 
 P. 
s in Brussels. 
 Lenin writes the preface to his book Materialism and Empirio-criticism . 
 Lenin writes his article “British and German Work-ers Demonstrate for Peace” for Proletary , No. 
 36. 
 Lenin’s article “The Student Movement and the Present Political Situation” is published as a leader in Proletary , No. 
 36. 
 In a letter to A. 
 I. 
 Yelizarova Lenin tells her that he has finished his work on the book Mate-rialism and Empirio-criticism , and asks her to provide a reliable address where he can send the manuscript. 
 Lenin’s articles “Events in the Balkans and in Persia”, “Meeting of the International Social-ist Bureau” and “P. 
 Maslov in Hysterics” are published in Proletary , No. 
 37. 
 Lenin rejects the Mensheviks’ offer to contribute to the proposed Menshevik symposium. 
 Lenin’s article “Some Remarks on the ‘Reply’ by P. 
 Maslov” is published in the Polish journal Przegl Zd Socjaldemokratyczny , No. 
 8-9. 
 October-Decem-ber November 1 (14) Before November 4 (17) November 13 (26) Between Novem-ber 29 and De-cember 1 (De-cember 12 and 14) December 1 (14) December 21 (January 3, 1909 ) December 21-27 (January 3-9, 1909 ) December 27-29 (January 9-11, 1909 ) December Beginning of the year January 7 (20)Lenin directs preparations for the Fifth (All-Russian) Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Lenin’s article “The Assessment of the Present Situation” is published in Proletary , No. 
 38. 
 Lenin sends the manuscript of his book Materia-lism and Empirio-criticism to a secret address for legal publication in Moscow. 
 Lenin’s articles “How Plekhanov and Co. 
 Defend Revisionism” and “Two Letters” are published in Proletary , No. 
 39. 
 Lenin and Krupskaya move from Geneva to Paris where Proletary is now to be published. 
 Lenin’s article “The Agrarian Debates in the Third Duma” is published in Proletary , No. 
 40. 
 Lenin takes part in the plenary meeting of the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in Paris. 
 Lenin takes part in the work of the Fifth (All-Russian) Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in Paris reports on “The Present Moment and the Tasks of the Party”, moves a draft resolution on this question and proposes amendments to draft reso-lutions on other questions. 
 Lenin takes part in the plenary meeting of the C. 
C. 
 of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 at which the resolutions of the Fifth (All-Russian) Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 are confirmed. 
 Lenin gives a lecture in Paris on the present situa-tion in Russia. 
 1909 Lenin gives lectures on philosophy at a Bolshevikstudy group in Paris. 
 Lenin’s article “How the Socialist-Revolutiona-ries Sum Up the Revolution and How the Revo-lution Has Summed Them Up” is published in Proletary , No. 
 41. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR January 22 (February 4 ) January 28 (February 10 ) February 1 (14) February 12 (25) February 17-23 (March 2-8 ) March 5 (18) March 9 and 21 (March 22, and April 3 ) March 10 or 11 (23 or 24 ) Not earlier than March 23 (April 5) April 4 (17) April 8 (21) Between April 29 and May 4 (May 12 and 17 ) End of April-first half of JuneLenin speaks in Paris on the political situation in Russia. 
 Lenin’s article “On the Road” is published as a leader in the newspaper Sotsial-Demokrat , No. 
 2. 
 At a meeting of the editorial board of Proletary Lenin demands an open attack by the board on the god-building preached by Lunacharsky. 
 Lenin’s comment on the article “Questions of the Day”, directed against otzovism, is published in Proletary , No. 
 42. 
 Lenin is on holiday at Nice. 
 Lenin speaks in Paris at a meeting of political emigrants on the Paris Commune of 1871. 
 Lenin’s article “The Aim of the Proletarian Strug-gle in Our Revolution” is published in Nos. 
 3 and 4 of Sotsial-Demokrat . 
 Lenin sends a “Supplement to Chapter Four. 
 Section 1. 
 From What Angle did N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky Criticise Kantianism?” to Moscow for his book Materialism and Empirio-criticism . 
 On behalf of the C. 
C. 
 of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Lenin sends a protest to the Executive Committee of the German Social-Democratic Workers’ Party against the distortion by Vorwärts of the essence of the differences among the Russian Social-Dem-ocrats. 
 Lenin’s article “A Caricature of Bolshevism” is published in the Supplement to Proletary , No. 
 44. 
 Lenin’s article “The ‘Leftward Swing’ of the Bour-geoisie and the Tasks of the Proletariat” is pub-lished in Proletary , No. 
 44. 
 Lenin’s book Materialism and Empirio-criticism. 
 Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy is published in Moscow. 
 Lenin makes preparations for the conference of the extended editorial board of Proletary . 
 May 8 (21) May 13 (26) June 4 (17) Not later than June 7 (20) June 8-17 (21-30) July 3 (16) July 11 (24) July End of July-Au-gust August 5 (18)Lenin speaks in Paris at the Proletary club on the subject of “Religion and the Workers’ Party”. 
 Lenin’s article “The Attitude of the Workers’ Party to Religion” is published as a leader in Proletary , No. 
 45. 
 Lenin’s article “Classes and Parties in Their At-titude to Religion and the Church” is published in Sotsial-Demokrat , No. 
 6. 
 Lenin holds a private meeting of members of the editorial board of Proletary with representatives from local Social-Democratic organisations, in which he reports on the state of affairs in the Party. 
 Lenin presides over the conference of the extended editorial board of Proletary , takes part in the dis-cussion, moves amendments to the resolutions and submits draft resolutions on particular ques-tions. 
 On the main questions the conference adopted Lenin’s resolutions. 
 “Report on the Conference of the Extended Edi-torial Board of Proletary ”, written by Lenin, is published in a Supplement to Proletary , No. 
 46. 
 Lenin’s articles “The Tsar Visits Europe and Mem-bers of the Black-Hundred Duma Visit England” (leader) and “The Liquidation of Liquidationism” are published in Proletary , No. 
 46. 
 In a talk with the Secretary of the Russian section of the Central Committee Lenin gives instructions on the struggle against provocateurs who worm their way into Party organisations. 
 Lenin goes away on holiday with his family (N. 
 K. 
 Krupskaya, her mother and M. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova) to the village of Bonbon (department of Seine-et-Marne) near Paris. 
 In a letter to the organisers of the Capri school Lenin declines to give lectures at the school, and invites the students to come to Paris to attend lectures by Bolshevik lecturers. 
 In a letter to the Business Commission of the Bolshevik Centre Lenin objects to any aid being given to Trotsky for the publication of his newspa-per Pravda in Vienna. 
 Middle of Au-gust August 17 (30) August SummerLenin sends to the Bureau Abroad of the Central Committee a secret circular he has received from the International Socialist Bureau regarding organisation of meetings of protest against the imperialist aggressive policy of the Spanish Gov-ernment in Morocco. 
 In a reply to the students at the Capri school, Lenin explains the anti-Party character of the school, repeats his refusal to deliver lectures in it and invites them to come to Paris. 
 Lenin takes part in the work of the Promotion Commission for the Social-Democratic group in the Third Duma. 
 Lenin visits Paul Lafargue and discusses his book Materialism and Empirio-criticism with him. 
 Printed in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics B. 
 n. 
 leHnH coЧnHeHnr TOM 1/FL0102 На английскот языке