L E N I N COLLECTED WORKS 14 A IN ACCORDANCE WITH A DECISION OF THE NINTH CONGRESS OF THE R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) AND THE SECOND CONGRESS OF SOVIETS OF THE U. 
S. 
S. 
R. 
 B. 
 n. 
 l d H n H С О Ч И Н E Н И Я И з д a н u е ч е m в е p m o e ГОСУДАРСТВ ЕНН ОЕ ИЗ ДАТ ЕЛЬ СТВО ПОЛИТИЧЕ СКОЙ ЛИ ТЕРАТУ РЫ M О С К В А V. 
 I. 
 L E N I N cOLLEcTED WORKS VOLUME 14 190] PROGRESS PUBLISHERS MOSCOW TRANSLATED THE RUSSIAN BY THE LATE A B R A H A M F I N E B E R G EDITED BY C L E M E N S D U T T First printing 1962 Second printing 1968 Third printing 1972 Fourth printing 1977 Printed in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics From Marx to Mao M L © Digital Reprints 2010 www. 
marx 2mao. 
com 11 13 17 19 21 2240 40 53 67 75 8694 98 98 107C O N T E N T S Preface ........................ 1908 TEN QUESTIONS TO A LECTURER ............. 
. 
 MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO -CRITICISM. 
 Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy ............. 
. 
 Preface to the First Edition ............... Preface to the Second Edition ............. 
. 
 In Lieu of an Introduction . 
 How Certain “Marxists” in 1908 and Certain Idealists in 1710 Refuted Materialism .... 
 Chapter One . 
 The Theory of Knowledge of Empirio-criticism and of Dialectical Materialism. 
 I ............ 1. 
 Sensations and Complexes of Sensations ...... 2. 
 “The Discovery of the World-Elements” ....... 
 3. 
 The Principal Co-ordination and “Naïve Realism” ... 4. 
 Did Nature Exist Prior to Man? ......... 5. 
 Does Man Think with the Help of the Brain? .... 
 6. 
 The Solipsism of Mach and Avenarius ....... 
 Chapter Two . 
 The Theory of Knowledge of Empirio-criticism and of Dialectical Materialism. 
 II ............ 1. 
 The “Thing-in-Itself”, or V. 
 Chernov Refutes Frederick Engels ................... 
. 
 2. 
 “Transcendence”, or V. 
 Bazarov “Revises” Engels .... 
 3. 
 L. 
 Feuerbach and J. 
 Dietzgen on the Thing-in-Itself . 
 4. 
Does Objective Truth Exist? .......... 
. 
 5. 
 Absolute and Relative Truth, or the Eclecticism of Engels as Discovered by A. 
 Bogdanov ....... 
. 
 6. 
 The Criterion of Practice in the Theory of Knowledge Chapter Three . 
 The Theory of Knowledge of Dialectical Materialism and of Empirio-criticism. 
 III ....... 
 1. 
What Is Matter? What Is Experience? ....... 
 2. 
 Plekhanov’s Error Concerning the Concept “Experience”3. 
 Causality and Necessity in Nature ......... 4. 
 The “Principle of Economy of Thought” and the Prob-lem of the “Unity of the World” ......... 5. 
 Space and Time ................ 
 6. 
 Freedom and Necessity ............. 
. 
 Chapter Four . 
 The Philosophical Idealists as Comrades-in-Arms and Successors of Empirio-criticism ......... 1. 
 The Criticism of Kantianism from the Left and from the Right ................... 
 2. 
 How the “Empirio-Symbolist” Yushkevich Ridiculed the “Empirio-Criticist” Chernov ............ 3. 
 The Immanentists as Comrades-in-Arms of Mach and Avenarius ................... 
 4. 
 In What Direction Is Empirio-criticism Developing? . 
. 
 5. 
 A. 
 Bogdanov’s “Empirio-monism” ......... 6. 
 The “Theory of Symbols” (or Hieroglyphs) and the Crit-icism of Helmholtz ............... 7. 
Two Kinds of Criticism of Dühring ....... 
. 
 8. 
 How Could J. 
 Dietzgen Have Found Favour with the Reactionary Philosophers? ............ Chapter Five . 
 The Recent Revolution in Natural Science, and Philosophical Idealism ............... 1. 
 The Crisis in Modern Physics .......... 
 2. 
 “Matter Has Disappeared” ............ 3. 
 Is Motion Without Matter Conceivable? ...... 4. 
 The Two Trends in Modern Physics, and English Spirit-ualism ................... 
. 
 5. 
 The Two Trends in Modern Physics, and German Ideal-ism...................... 
117 122 131 138 144 144 151 153 169 175 187 194 194 205 209 217 226 232 238 243 250 252 258 266 274 282 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR 6. 
 The Two Trends in Modern Physics, and French Fideism 7. 
A Russian “Idealist Physicist” .......... 
 8. 
 The Essence and Significance of “Physical” Idealism . 
 Chapter Six. 
 Empirio-criticism and Historical Materialism ... 1. 
 The Excursions of the German Empirio-criticists Into the Field of the Social Sciences .......... 
 2. 
 How Bogdanov Corrects and “Develops” Marx .... 
 3. 
 Suvorov’s “Foundations of Social Philosophy” .... 
 4. 
Parties in Philosophy and Philosophical Blockheads . 
 5. 
 Ernst Haeckel and Ernst Mach .......... 
 Conclusion ...................... 
. 
 Supplement to Chapter Four, Section 1. 
 From What Angle Did N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky Criticise Kantianism? ...... Notes . 
 . 
 ...................... 
. 
 The Life and Work of V. 
 I. 
 Lenin (Chronology) ....... 
. 
 Name Index ...................... 
 ILLUSTRATION Cover of the first edition of V. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s Materialism and Em-pirio-criticism , 1909 ................... 
290 299 302 314 314 322330 335 346 357 359 363 389 399 16-17 P R E F A C E Volume 14 contains V. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s extremely important philosophical work Materialism and Empirio-criticism , written in 1908 and published in 1909, which was the theo-retical preparation for the Bolshevik Party. 
 In this work Lenin gave an all-round criticism of the anti-Marxist views of the Russian Machists and their foreignphilosophical teachers. 
 At the same time Lenin’s work wasa defence of the theoretical basis of Marxism—dialectical and historical materialism—and a materialist generalisa-tion of all that was valuable and essential in the achieve-ments of science, and especially natural science, duringthe period from the death of Engels to the appearance ofLenin’s book Materialism and Empirio-criticism . 
 This work has become a model of irreconcilable, party struggle against the enemies of dialectical and historical materialism. 
 The volume includes also Lenin’s “Ten Questions to a Lecturer”, written in the spring of 1908, which furnishedthe basis for the public dissociation of the Bolshevik groupfrom the philosophical views of the Machist Bogdanov and his supporters, who had joined the Bolsheviks in 1905. 
 Lenin’s work Materialism and Empirio-criticism i s printed in the present volume in accordance with the firstedition of the book (1909) collated with the second edition(1920). 
 In preparing the text account has been taken ofthe instructions given by Lenin in letters to relatives dur-ing the preparation of the book for the press in 1908-09 and in correcting the proofs of the first edition. 
 TEN QUESTIONS TO A LECTURER1 Written in May, before 15 (28), 1908 Published according to First published in 1925 in the manuscript Lenin Miscellany III 1. 
 Does the lecturer acknowledge that the philosophy of Marxism is dialectical materialism ? If he does not, why has he not ever analysed Engels’countless statements on this subject?If he does, why do the Machists call their “revision” of dialectical materialism “the philosophy of Marxism”? 2. 
 Does the lecturer acknowledge Engels’ fundamental division of philosophical systems into idealism and mate-rialism , 2 Engels regarding those intermediate between these two, wavering between them, as the line of Hume in modern philosophy, calling this line “agnosticism” and declaring Kantianism to be a variety of agnosticism? 3. 
 Does the lecturer acknowledge that recognition of the external world and the reflection of it in the humanmind form the basis of the theory of knowledge of dialecti-cal materialism? 4. 
 Does the lecturer acknowledge as correct Engels’ argument concerning the conversion of “things-in-them-selves” into “things-for-us”? 3 5. 
 Does the lecturer acknowledge as correct Engels’ assertion that the “real unity of the world consists in itsmateriality”? ( Anti-Dühring , 2nd ed. 
, 1886, p. 
 28, section 1, par. 
 IV on world schematism. 
) 4 6. 
 Does the lecturer acknowledge as correct Engels’ as-sertion that “matter without motion is as inconceivableas motion without matter”? ( Anti-Dühring , 1886, 2nd ed. 
, p. 
 45, in par. 
 6 on natural philosophy, cosmogony, physicsand chemistry. 
) 5 7. 
 Does the lecturer acknowledge that the ideas of cau-sality, necessity, law, etc. 
, are a reflection in the human mind of laws of nature, of the real world? Or was Engelswrong in saying so? ( Anti-Dühring , S. 
 20-21, in par. 
 III on apriorism, and S. 
 103-04, in par. 
 XI on freedom and neces-sity. 
)6 8. 
 Does the lecturer know that Mach expressed his agree-ment with the head of the immanentist school, Schuppe, andeven dedicated his last and chief philosophical work 7 t o him? How does the lecturer explain this adherence of Machto the obviously idealist philosophy of Schuppe, a defenderof clericalism and in general a downright reactionary in philosophy? 9. 
 Why did the lecturer keep silent about “adventure” with his comrade of yesterday (according to the Studies ), the Menshevik Yushkevich, who has today declared Bogdanov(following in the wake of Rakhmetov) an idealist ? 8 Is the lecturer aware that Petzoldt in his latest book has classed a number of Mach’s disciples among the idealists ?9 10. 
 Does the lecturer confirm the fact that Machism has nothing in common with Bolshevism? And that Leninhas repeatedly protested against Machism? 10 And that the Mensheviks Yushkevich and Valentinov are “pure” empirio-criticists? MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM CRITICAL COMMENTS ON A REACTIONARY PHILOSOPHY11 Written in February-October 1908 ; Supplement to Chapter IV, Section I—in March 1909 Published according to the text Published in May 1909 in Moscow of the 1909 edition checked as a separate book by Zveno Publishers with the 1920 edition PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION A number of writers, would-be Marxists, have this year undertaken a veritable campaign against the philosophy ofMarxism. 
 In the course of less than half a year four booksdevoted mainly and almost exclusively to attacks on dia-lectical materialism have made their appearance. 
 Theseinclude first and foremost Studies in (?—it should have said “against”) the Philosophy of Marxism (St. 
 Petersburg, 1908), a symposium by Bazarov, Bogdanov, Lunacharsky, Berman,Helfond, Yushkevich and Suvorov; Yushkevich’s Mate-rialism and Critical Realism ; Berman’s Dialectics in the Light of the Modern Theory of Knowledge and Valentinov’s The Philosophical Constructions of Marxism . 
 All these people could not have been ignorant of the fact that Marx and Engels scores of times termed their phil-osophical views dialectical materialism. 
 Yet all these peo-ple, who, despite the sharp divergence of their politicalviews, are united in their hostility toward dialectical ma-terialism, at the same time claim to be Marxists in philos-ophy! Engels’ dialectics is “mysticism”, says Berman. 
 En-gels’ views have become “antiquated”, remarks Bazarov ca-sually, as though it were a self-evident fact. 
 Materialism thusappears to be refuted by our bold warriors, who proudlyallude to the “modern theory of knowledge”, “recent philos-ophy” (or “recent positivism”), the “philosophy of modern natural science”, or even the “philosophy of natural science of the twentieth century”. 
 Supported by all these supposedlyrecent doctrines, our destroyers of dialectical materialismproceed fearlessly to downright fideism *12 (clearest of all in the case of Lunacharsky, but by no means in his casealone! 13). 
 Yet when it comes to an explicit definition of their attitude towards Marx and Engels, all their courage and *Fideism is a doctrine which substitutes faith for knowledge, or which generally attaches significance to faith. 
 all their respect for their own convictions at once disappear. 
 In deed—a complete renunciation of dialectical materialism, i. 
e. 
, of Marxism; in word—endless subterfuges, attempts to evade the essence of the question, to cover their retreat,to put some materialist or other in place of materialism ingeneral, and a determined refusal to make a direct analysis,of the innumerable materialist declarations of Marx andEngels. 
 This is truly “mutiny on one’s knees”, as it was justly characterised by one Marxist. 
 This is typical philo-sophical revisionism, for it was only the revisionists whogained a sad notoriety for themselves by their departurefrom the fundamental views of Marxism and by their fear,or inability, to “settle accounts” openly, explicitly, resolute-ly and clearly with the views they had abandoned. 
 When orthodox Marxists had occasion to pronounce against some antiquated views of Marx (for instance, Mehring when heopposed certain historical propositions), it was always donewith such precision and thoroughness that no one has everfound anything ambiguous in such literary utterances. 
 For the rest, there is in the Studies “in” the Philosophy of Marxism one phrase which resembles the truth. 
 This is Lunacharsky’s phrase: “Perhaps we [i. 
e. 
, all the collab-orators of the Studies evidently] * have gone astray, but we are seeking” (p. 
 161). 
 That the first half of this phrase con-tains an absolute and the second a relative truth, I shallendeavour to demonstrate circumstantially in the present book. 
 At the moment I would only remark that if our phi-losophers had spoken not in the name of Marxism but inthe name of a few “seeking” Marxists, they would haveshown more respect for themselves and for Marxism. 
 As for myself, I too am a “seeker” in philosophy. 
 Namely, the task I have set myself in these comments is to find out what was the stumbling-block to these people who under the guise of Marxism are offering something incrediblymuddled, confused and reactionary. 
 The Author September 1908 *Interpolations in square brackets (within passages quoted by Lenin) have been introduced by Lenin, unless otherwise indicated. 
— Ed. 
 PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION With the exception of a few corrections in the text, the present edition does not differ from the previous one. 
 I hopethat, irrespective of the dispute with the Russian “Machists”, it will prove useful as an aid to an acquaintance with the philosophy of Marxism, dialectical materialism, as well aswith the philosophical conclusions from the recent discov-eries in natural science. 
 As for A. 
 A. 
 Bogdanov’s latestworks, which I have had no opportunity to examine, theappended article by Comrade V. 
 I. 
 Nevsky gives the neces-sary information. 
 14 Comrade V. 
 I. 
 Nevsky, not only in his work as a propagandist in general, but also as an activeworker in the Party school in particular, has had ampleopportunity to convince himself that under the guise of“proletarian culture” 15 A. 
 A. 
 Bogdanov is imparting bour-geois and reactionary views. 
 N. 
 Lenin September 2, 1920 I N L I E U O F A N I N T R O D U C T I O N HOW CERTAIN “ISTS” IN 1908 AND CERTAIN IDEALISTS IN 1710 REFUTED MATERIALISM Anyone in the least acquainted with philosophical lit-erature must know that scarcely a single contemporary pro-fessor of philosophy (or of theology) can be found who is not directly or indirectly engaged in refuting materialism. 
They have declared materialism refuted a thousand times,yet are continuing to refute it for the thousand and firsttime. 
 All our revisionists are engaged in refuting material-ism, pretending, however, that actually they are only refut-ing the materialist Plekhanov, and not the materialist En-gels, nor the materialist Feuerbach, nor the materialistviews of J. 
 Dietzgen—and, moreover, that they are refutingmaterialism from the standpoint of “recent” and “modern”positivism, natural science, and so forth. 
 Without citingquotations, which anyone desiring to do so could cull by the hundred from the books above mentioned, I shall refer to those arguments by which materialism is being combatedby Bazarov, Bogdanov, Yushkevich, Valentinov, Chernov * and other Machists. 
 I shall use this latter term throughout asa synonym for “empirio-criticists” because it is shorter andsimpler and has already acquired rights of citizenship in Russian literature. 
 That Ernst Mach is the most popular representative of empirio-criticism today is universally ac-*V. 
 Chernov, Philosophical and Sociological Studies , Moscow, 1907. 
 The author is as ardent an adherent of Avenarius and enemy ofdialectical materialism as Bazarov and Co. 
 knowledged in philosophical literature, * while Bogdanov’s and Yushkevich’s departures from “pure” Machism are of absolutely secondary importance, as will be shown later. 
 The materialists, we are told, recognise something un-thinkable and unknowable—“things-in-themselves”—matter“outside of experience” and outside of our knowledge. 
 Theylapse into genuine mysticism by admitting the existence ofsomething beyond, something transcending the bounds of “experience” and knowledge. 
 When they say that matter, by acting upon our sense-organs, produces sensations, thematerialists take as their basis the “unknown”, nothingness;for do they not themselves declare our sensations to be theonly source of knowledge? The materialists lapse into“Kantianism” (Plekhanov, by recognising the existence of “things-in-themselves”, i. 
e. 
, things outside of our conscious-ness); they “double” the world and preach “dualism”, for thematerialists hold that beyond the appearance there is thething-in-itself; beyond the immediate sense data there issomething else, some fetish, an “idol”, an absolute, a sourceof “metaphysics”, a double of religion (“holy matter”, as Bazarov says). 
 Such are the arguments levelled by the Machists against materialism, as repeated and retold in varying keys by theabove-mentioned writers. 
 In order to test whether these arguments are new, and whether they are really directed against only one Russian materialist who “lapsed into Kantianism”, we shall give some detailed quotations from the works of an old idealist,George Berkeley. 
 This historical inquiry is all the morenecessary in the introduction to our comments since weshall have frequent occasion to refer to Berkeley and histrend in philosophy, for the Machists misrepresent both the relation of Mach to Berkeley and the essence of Berkeley’s philosophical line. 
 The work of Bishop George Berkeley, published in 1710 under the title Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge **, begins with the following argument: “It is *See, for instance, Dr. 
 Richard Hönigswald, Ueber die Lehre Hume ’s von der Realität der Außendinge , Berlin, 1904, S. 
 26. 
 **Vol. 
 I of Works of George Berkeley , edited by A. 
 Fraser, Oxford, 1871. 
 There is a Russian translation. 
 evident to anyone who takes a survey of the objects of human knowledge, that they are either ideas actually imprinted on the senses; or else such as are perceived by attending to the passions and operations of the mind; or lastly, ideasformed by help of memory and imagination.... 
 By sight Ihave the ideas of light and colours, with their several de-grees and variations. 
 By touch I perceive hard and soft,heat and cold, motion and resistance.... 
 Smelling furnishes me with odours; the palate with tastes; and hearing con-veys sounds.... 
 And as several of these are observed to ac-company each other, they come to be marked by one name,and so to be reputed as one thing. 
 Thus, for example, a cer-tain colour, taste, smell, figure and consistence having beenobserved to go together, are accounted one distinct thing signified by the name apple ; other collections of ideas con-stitute a stone, a tree, a book, and the like sensible things...”(§ 1). 
 Such is the content of the first section of Berkeley’s work. 
 We must remember that Berkeley takes as the basis ofhis philosophy “hard, soft, heat, cold, colours, tastes, odours”, etc. 
 For Berkeley, things are “collections of ideas”, this last word designating the aforesaid, let us say, quali-ties or sensations, and not abstract thoughts. 
 Berkeley goes on to say that besides these “ideas or ob-jects of knowledge” there exists something that perceivesthem—“mind, spirit, soul or myself ” (§ 2). 
 It is self-evi-dent, the philosopher concludes, that “ideas” cannot exist outside of the mind that perceives them. 
 In order to con-vince ourselves of this it is enough to consider the meaningof the word “exist”. 
 “The table I write on I say exists, thatis, I see and feel it; and if I were out of my study I shouldsay it existed; meaning thereby that if I was in my study I might perceive it.... 
” That is what Berkeley says in § 3 of his work and thereupon he begins a polemic against thepeople whom he calls materialists (§§18, 19, etc. 
). 
 “For asto what is said of the absolute existence of unthinking things,without any relation to their being perceived,” he says,that is to me perfectly unintelligible. 
” To exist means to be perceived (“Their esse is percipi ,” § 3—a dictum of Berkeley’s frequently quoted in textbooks on the histo-ry of philosophy). 
 “It is indeed an opinion strange-ly prevailing amongst men, that houses, mountains, riv-ers, and in a word all sensible objects have an existence, natural or real, distinct from their being perceived by the understanding” (§ 4). 
 This opinion is a “manifest contradic-tion”, says Berkeley. 
 “For, what are the afore-mentionedobjects but the things we perceive by sense? and what do weperceive besides our own ideas or sensations? and is it notplainly repugnant that any one of these, or any combination of them, should exist unperceived?” (§ 4). 
 The expression “collection of ideas” Berkeley now re-places by what to him is an equivalent expression, combina-tion of sensations , and accuses the materialists of a “re-pugnant” tendency to go still further, of seeking some sourceof this complex—that is, of this combination of sensations. 
 In § 5 the materialists are accused of trifling with an ab-straction, for to divorce the sensation from the object,according to Berkeley, is an empty abstraction. 
 “In truth,”he says at the end of § 5, omitted in the second edition,“the object and the sensation are the same thing, and cannottherefore be abstracted from each other. 
” Berkeley goes on: “But, say you, though the ideas themselves do not exist without the mind, yet there may be things like them, where-of they are copies or resemblances; which things existwithout the mind, in an unthinking substance. 
 I answer, anidea can be like nothing but an idea; a colour or figure canbe like nothing but another colour or figure.... 
 I ask wheth-er those supposed originals, or external things, of which our ideas are the pictures or representations, be them-selves perceivable or not? If they are, then they are ideasand we have gained our point; but if you say they are not,I appeal to anyone whether it be sense to assert a colouris like something which is invisible; hard or soft, like something which is intangible; and so of the rest” (§ 8). 
 As the reader sees, Bazarov’s “arguments” against Ple-khanov concerning the problem of whether things can existoutside of us apart from their action on us do not differ inthe least from Berkeley’s arguments against the materialistswhom he does not mention by name. 
 Berkeley considers the notion of the existence of “matter or corporeal substance” (§ 9) such a “contradiction”, such an “absurdity” that it isreally not worth wasting time exposing it. 
 He says: “But because the tenet of the existence of Matter seems to have taken so deep a root in the minds of philosophers, and draws after it so many ill consequences, I choose rather to be thought prolix and tedious than omit anything that mightconduce to the full discovery and extirpation of that preju-dice” (§ 9). 
 We shall presently see to what ill consequences Berkeley is referring. 
 Let us first finish with his theoretical argu-ments against the materialists. 
 Denying the “absolute” existence of objects, that is, the existence of things out-side human knowledge, Berkeley bluntly defines the view-point of his opponents as being that they recognise thething-in-itself. 
 In § 24 Berkeley writes in italics that theopinion which he is refuting recognises “ the absolute existence of sensible objects in themselves, or without the mind ” (op. 
 cit. 
, pp. 
 167-68). 
 The two fundamental lines of philosophi-cal outlook are here depicted with the straightforwardness,clarity and precision that distinguish the classical philos-ophers from the inventors of “new” systems in our day. 
Materialism is the recognition of “objects in themselves”, or outside the mind; ideas and sensations are copies or images of those objects. 
 The opposite doctrine (idealism)claims that objects do not exist “without the mind”; objectsare “combinations of sensations”. 
 This was written in 1710, fourteen years before the birth of Immanuel Kant, yet our Machists, supposedly on the basis of “recent” philosophy, have made the discovery that the recognition of “things-in-themselves” is a result of theinfection or distortion of materialism by Kantianism! The“new” discoveries of the Machists are the product of an as-tounding ignorance of the history of the basic philosophicaltrends. 
 Their next “new” thought consists in this: that the con-cepts “matter” or “substance” are remnants of old uncriticalviews. 
 Mach and Avenarius, you see, have advanced philo-sophical thought, deepened analysis and eliminated theseabsolutes”, “unchangeable entities”, etc. 
 If you wish tocheck such assertions with the original sources, go to Berke-ley and you will see that they are pretentious fictions. 
 Ber-keley says quite definitely that matter is a “nonentity”(§ 68), that matter is nothing (§ 80). 
 “You may,” thus Berke-ley ridicules the materialists, “if so it shall seem good, use the word ‘matter’ in the same sense as other men use ‘noth-ing’” (op. 
 cit. 
, pp. 
 196-97). 
 At the beginning, says Berke-ley, it was believed that colours, odours, etc. 
, “really exist,but subsequently such views were renounced, and it wasseen that they only exist in dependence on our sensa-tions. 
 But this elimination of old erroneous concepts wasnot completed; a remnant is the concept “substance” (§ 73), which is also a “prejudice” (p. 
 195), and which was finally exposed by Bishop Berkeley in 1710! In 1908 there arestill humorists who seriously believe Avenarius, Petzoldt,Mach and Co. 
, when they maintain that it is only “recentpositivism” and “recent natural science” which have atlast succeeded in eliminating these “metaphysical” con-cepts. 
 These same humorists (Bogdanov among them) assure their readers that it was the new philosophy that explainedthe error of the “duplication of the world” in the doctrine ofthe eternally refuted materialists, who speak of some sortof a “reflection” by the human consciousness of things exist-ing outside the consciousness. 
 A mass of sentimental ver-biage has been written by the above-named authors aboutthis “duplication”. 
 Owing to forgetfulness or ignorance,they failed to add that these new discoveries had alreadybeen discovered in 1710. 
 Berkeley says: “Our knowledge of these [i. 
e. 
, ideas or things] has been very much obscured and confounded, and we have been led into very dangerous errors by supposing a twofold existenceof the objects of sense—the one intelligible or in the mind, the other real and without the mind” (i. 
e. 
, outside conscious-ness). 
 And Berkeley ridicules this “absurd” notion, whichadmits the possibility of thinking the unthinkable! The source of the “absurdity”, of course, follows from our sup-posing a difference between “things” and “ideas” (§ 87),“the supposition of external objects”. 
 This same source—asdiscovered by Berkeley in 1710 and rediscovered by Bogda-nov in 1908—engenders belief in fetishes and idols. 
 Theexistence of Matter”, says Berkeley, “or bodies unperceived, has not only been the main support of Atheists and Fatal-ists, but on the same principle doth Idolatry likewise in allits various forms depend” (§ 94). 
 Here we arrive at those “ill consequences” derived from the “absurd” doctrine of the existence of an external world which compelled Bishop Berkeley not only to refute this doctrine theoretically, but passionately to persecute itsadherents as enemies. 
 “For as we have shown the doctrine ofMatter or corporeal Substance to have been the main pillarand support of Scepticism, so likewise upon the same foun-dation have been raised all the impious schemes of Atheism and Irreligion.... 
 How great a friend material substance has been to Atheists in all ages were needless to relate. 
 Alltheir monstrous systems have so visible and necessary a de-pendence on it, that when this corner-stone is once removedthe whole fabric cannot choose but fall to the ground, inso-much that it is no longer worth while to bestow a particular consideration on the absurdities of every wretched sect of Atheists” (§ 92, op. 
 cit. 
, pp. 
 203-04). 
 “Matter being once expelled out of nature drags with it so many sceptical and impious notions, such an incrediblenumber of disputes and puzzling questions [“the principleof economy of thought”, discovered by Mach in the sev-enties, philosophy as a conception of the world accord-ing to the principle of minimum expenditure of effort”—Ave-narius in 1876!] which have been thorns in the sides of di-vines as well as philosophers, and made so much fruitlesswork for mankind, that if the arguments we have producedagainst it are not found equal to demonstration (as to me they evidently seem), yet I am sure all friends to knowledge peace, and religion have reason to wish they were” (§ 96). 
 Frankly and bluntly did Bishop Berkeley argue! In our time these very same thoughts on the “economical” elimina-tion of “matter” from philosophy are enveloped in a muchmore artful form, and confused by the use of a “new” termi-nology, so that these thoughts may be taken by naïve peo-ple for “recent” philosophy! But Berkeley was not only candid as to the tendencies of his philosophy, he also endeavoured to cover its idealis-tic nakedness, to represent it as being free from absurdi-ties and acceptable to “common sense”. 
 Instinctively defend-ing himself against the accusation of what would nowadays be called subjective idealism and solipsism, he says thatby our philosophy “we are not deprived of any one thing in nature” (§ 34). 
 Nature remains, and the distinction between realities and chimeras remains, only “they both equally ex-ist in the mind”. 
 “I do not argue against the existence of any one thing that we can apprehend, either by sense or re-flection. 
 That the things I see with my eyes and touch withmy hands do exist, really exist, I make not the least ques-tion. 
 The only thing whose existence we deny is that whichphilosophers [Berkeley’s italics] call Matter or corporeal substance. 
 And in doing this there is no damage done to the-rest of mankind, who, I dare say, will never miss it.... 
The Atheist indeed will want the colour of an empty nameto support his impiety.... 
” This thought is made still clearer in § 37, where Berke-ley replies to the charge that his philosophy destroys cor-poreal substance: “...if the word substance be taken in the vulgar sense, for a combination of sensible qualities, such as extension, solidity, weight, and the like—this we cannotbe accused of taking away; but if it be taken in a philo-sophic sense, for the support of accidents or qualities with-out the mind—then indeed I acknowledge that we take it away, if one may be said to take away that which never had any existence, not even in the imagination”. 
 Not without good cause did the English philosopher, Fraser, an idealist and adherent of Berkeleianism, who pub-lished Berkeley’s works and supplied them with his own an-notations, designate Berkeley’s doctrine by the term “nat-ural realism” (op. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 x). 
 This amusing terminology must by all means be noted, for it in fact expresses Berke-ley’s intention to counterfeit realism. 
 In our further exposi-tion we shall frequently find “recent” “positivists” repeatingthe same stratagem or counterfeit in a different form and in adifferent verbal wrapping. 
 Berkeley does not deny the exist-ence of real things! Berkeley does not go counter to the opinion of all humanity! Berkeley denies “only” the teach-ing of the philosophers, viz. 
, the theory of knowledge, whichseriously and resolutely takes as the foundation of all itsreasoning the recognition of the external world and the re-flection thereof in the minds of men. 
 Berkeley does not deny natural science, which has always adhered (mostly uncon-sciously) to this, i. 
e. 
, the materialist, theory of knowledge. 
We read in § 59: “We may, from the experience [Berkeley—a philosophy of “pure experience”] * we have had of the train and succession of ideas in our minds ... be enabled to pass a right judgement of what would have appeared to us, in case we were placed in circumstances very different from those weare in at present. 
 Herein consists the knowledge of nature,which [mark this!] may preserve its use and certainty veryconsistently with what hath been said. 
” Let us regard the external world, nature, as “a combina-tion of sensations” evoked in our mind by a deity. 
 Acknowl-edge this and give up searching for the “ground” of thesesensations outside the mind, outside man, and I will ac-knowledge within the framework of my idealist theory ofknowledge all natural science and all the use and certainty of its deductions. 
 It is precisely this framework, and only this framework, that I need for my deductions in favour of “peace and religion”. 
 Such is Berkeley’s train of thought. 
It correctly expresses the essence of idealist philosophy andits social significance, and we shall encounter it later whenwe come to speak of the relation of Machism to naturalscience. 
 Let us now consider another recent discovery that was borrowed from Bishop Berkeley in the twentieth century bythe recent positivist and critical realist, P. 
 Yushkevich. 
This discovery is “empirio-symbolism”. 
 “Berkeley,” saysFraser, “thus reverts to his favourite theory of a UniversalNatural Symbolism” (op. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 190). 
 Did these words not occur in an edition of 1871, one might have suspected the English fideist philosopher Fraser of plagiarising both themodern mathematician and physicist Poincaré and the Rus-sian “Marxist” Yushkevich! This theory of Berkeley’s, which threw Fraser into rap-tures, is set forth by the Bishop as follows: “The connexion of ideas [do not forget that for Berke-ley ideas and things are identical] does not imply the re-lation of cause and effect , but only of a mark or sign with the thing signified ” (§ 65). 
 “Hence, it is evident that those things which, under the notion of a cause co-operatingor concurring to the production of effects, are altogether *In his preface Fraser insists that both Berkeley and Locke “ap-peal exclusively to experience” (p. 
 117). 
 inexplicable, and run us into great absurdities, may be very naturally explained ... when they are considered only as marks or signs for our information” (§ 66). 
 Of course, in the opinion of Berkeley and Fraser, it is no other than the deitywho informs us by means of these “empirio-symbols”. 
 Theepistemological significance of symbolism in Berkeley’s the-ory, however, consists in this, that it is to replace “thedoctrine” which “pretends to explain things by corporeal causes” ( § 66). 
 We have before us two philosophical trends in the ques-tion of causality. 
 One “pretends to explain things by corpo-real causes”. 
 It is clear that it is connected with the “doc-trine of matter” refuted as an “absurdity” by Bishop Berke-ley. 
 The other reduces the “notion of cause” to the notion of a “mark or sign” which serves for “our information” (sup-plied by God). 
 We shall meet these two trends in a twen-tieth-century garb when we analyse the attitudes of Machismand dialectical materialism to this question. 
 Further, as regards the question of reality, it ought also to be remarked that Berkeley, refusing as he does to recognise the existence of things outside the mind, tries to find a criterion for distinguishing between the real and thefictitious. 
 In § 36 he says that those “ideas” which the mindsof men evoke at pleasure “are faint, weak, and unsteadyin respect to others they perceive by sense; which, beingimpressed upon them according to certain rules or laws of nature, speak themselves about the effects of a Mind more powerful and wise than human spirits. 
 These latter are saidto have more reality in them than the former; by which is meant that they are more affecting, orderly and distinct, andthat they are not fictions of the mind perceiving them.... 
”Elsewhere (§ 84) Berkeley tries to connect the notion of real-ity with the simultaneous perception of the same sensations by many people. 
 For instance, how shall we resolve the ques-tion as to the reality of the transformation of water intowine, of which, let us say, we are being told. 
 “If at tableall who were present should see, and smell, and taste, anddrink wine, and find the effects of it, with me there could be no doubt of its reality. 
” And Fraser explains: “Simul-taneous perception of the ‘same’ ... sense -ideas, by dif-ferent persons, as distinguished from purely individual consciousness of feelings and fancies , is here taken as a test of the ... realit y of the former. 
” From this it is evident that Berkeley’s subjective ideal-ism is not to be interpreted as though it ignored the distinc-tion between individual and collective perception. 
 On thecontrary, he attempts on the basis of this distinction to con-struct a criterion of reality. 
 Deriving “ideas” from theaction of a deity upon the human mind, Berkeley thus ap-proaches objective idealism: the world proves to be not my idea but the product of a single supreme spiritual cause thatcreates both the “laws of nature” and the laws distinguish-ing “more real” ideas from less real, and so forth. 
 In another work, Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous (1713), where he endeavours to present his views in an especially popular form, Berkeley sets forth the oppo-sition between his doctrine and the materialist doctrine inthe following way: “I assert as well as you [materialists] that, since we are affected from without, we must allow Powers to be with-out, in a Being distinct from ourselves.... 
 But then we differ as to the kind of this powerful being. 
 I will have it to be Spirit, you Matter, or I know not what (I may addtoo, you know not what) third nature...” (op. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 335). 
 Fraser comments: this is the gist of the whole question; according to the materialists, sensible phenomena are dueto material substance , or to some unknown “third nature”; according to Berkeley, to Rational Will; according to Hume and the Positivists, their origin is absolutely unknown,and we can only generalise them inductively, through cus-tom, as facts. 
 Here the English Berkeleian, Fraser, approaches from his consistent idealist standpoint the same fundamental “lines” in philosophy which were so clearly characterised by the materialist Engels. 
 In his work Ludwig Feuerbach Engels divides philosophers into “two great camps”—mate-rialists and idealists. 
 Engels—dealing with theories of thetwo trends much more developed, varied and rich in contentthan Fraser dealt with—sees the fundamental distinction between them in the fact that while for the materialists na-ture is primary and spirit secondary, for the idealists thereverse is the case. 
 In between these two camps Engels places the adherents of Hume and Kant, who deny the possi-bility of knowing the world, or at least of knowing it fully, and calls them agnostics . 
16 In his Ludwig Feuerbach Engels applies this term only to the adherents of Hume (those peo-ple whom Fraser calls, and who like to call themselves,“positivists”). 
 But in his article “On Historical Material-ism”, Engels explicitly speaks of the standpoint of “ the neo-Kantian agnostic ”, 17 regarding neo-Kantianism18 as a variety of agnosticism. 
 * We cannot dwell here on this remarkably correct and pro-found judgement of Engels’ (a judgement which is shame-lessly ignored by the Machists). 
 We shall discuss it in detaillater on. 
 For the present we shall confine ourselves to point-ing to this Marxist terminology and to this meeting of extremes: the views of a consistent materialist and of a consistent idealist on the fundamental philosophical trends. 
In order to illustrate these trends (with which we shallconstantly have to deal in our further exposition) let usbriefly note the views of outstanding philosophers of theeighteenth century who pursued a different path from Berkeley. 
 Here are Hume’s arguments. 
 In his An Enquiry Concern-ing Human Understanding , in the chapter XII) on scepti-cal philosophy, he says: “It seems evident, that men arecarried, by a natural instinct or prepossession, to reposefaith in their senses; and that, without any reasoning, or even almost before the use of reason, we always suppose an external universe, which depends not on our perception,but would exist though we and every sensible creature wereabsent or annihilated. 
 Even the animal creations are gov-erned by a like opinion, and preserve this belief of externalobjects, in all their thoughts, designs, and actions.... 
 But this universal and primary opinion of all men is soon destroyed by the slightest philosophy, which teaches us that noth-ing can ever be present to the mind but an image or percep-tion, and that the senses are only the inlets, through whichthese images are conveyed, without being able to produce *Fr. 
 Engels, “Ueber historischen Materialismus”, Neue Zeit ,19 XI. 
 Jg. 
, Bd. 
 I (1892-93), Nr. 
 1, S. 
 18. 
 Translated from the English by Engels himself. 
 The Russian translation in Historical Materialism (St. 
 Petersburg, 1908, p. 
 167) is inaccurate. 
 any immediate intercourse between the mind and the object. 
 The table, which we see, seems to diminish, as we remove farther from it: But the real table, which exists independent of us, suffers no alteration: It was, therefore, nothing but itsimage, which was present to the mind. 
 These are the obviousdictates of reason; and no man, who reflects, ever doubted,that the existences, which we consider, when we say, ‘thishouse’, and ‘that tree’ are nothing but perceptions in the mind.... 
 By what argument can it be proved, that the per-ceptions of the mind must be caused by external objects,entirely different from them, though resembling them (ifthat be possible), and could not arise either from the ener-gy of the mind itself, or from the suggestion of some invis-ible and unknown spirit, or from some other cause still more unknown to us?... How shall this question be determined? By experience surely; as all other questions of a like na-ture. 
 But here experience is, and must be entirely silent. 
The mind has never anything present to it but the percep-tions, and cannot possibly reach any experience of their con-nection with objects. 
 The supposition of such a connection is, therefore, without any foundation in reasoning. 
 To have recourse to the veracity of the Supreme Being, in order toprove the veracity of our senses, is surely making a veryunexpected circuit ... if the external world be once calledin question, we shall be at a loss to find arguments, bywhich we may prove the existence of that Being, or any of his attributes. 
” * He says the same thing in his Treatise of Human Nature (Part IV, Sect. 
 II, “On Scepticism Towards Sensations”):“Our perceptions are our only objects. 
” (P. 
 281 of the Frenchtranslation by Renouvier and Pillon, 1878. 
) By scepticismHume means refusal to explain sensations as the effects of objects, spirit, etc. 
, refusal to reduce perceptions to the external world, on the one hand, and to a deity or to an un-known spirit, on the other. 
 And the author of the introduc-tion to the French translation of Hume, F. 
 Pillon—a phi-losopher of a trend akin to Mach (as we shall see below)—justly remarks that for Hume subject and object are re-*David Hume, An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. 
 Essays and Treatises , London, 1882, Vol. 
 II, pp. 
 124-26. 
 duced to “groups of various perceptions”, to “elements of consciousness, to impressions, ideas, etc. 
”; that the only concern should be with the “groupings and combinations of these elements”. 
 * The English Humean, Huxley, who coined the apt and correct term “agnosticism”, in his book on Humealso emphasises the fact that the latter, regarding “sensa-tions” as the “primary and irreducible states of conscious-ness”, is not entirely consistent on the question how the origin of sensations is to be explained, whether by the effect of objects on man or by the creative power of the mind. 
“Realism and idealism are equally probable hypotheses”(i. 
e. 
, for Hume). 
 ** Hume does not go beyond sensations. 
 “Thus the colours red and blue, and the odour of a rose, aresimple impressions.... 
 A red rose gives us a complex impres-sion, capable of resolution into the simple impressions of red colour, rose-scent, and numerous others” (op. 
 cit. 
, pp. 
 64-65). 
 Hume admits both the “materialist position” and the“idealist position” (p. 
 82); the “collection of perceptions”may be generated by the Fichtean “ego” or may be a “signif-ication” and even a “symbol” of a “real something”. 
 This is how Huxley interprets Hume. 
 As for the materialists, here is an opinion of Berkeley given by Diderot, the leader of the Encyclopaedists 20: “Those philosophers are called idealists who, being conscious only of their existence and of the sensations which succeedeach other within themselves, do not admit anything else. 
 An extravagant system which, to my thinking, only the blind could have originated; a system which, to the shameof human intelligence and philosophy, is the most difficultto combat, although the most absurd of all. 
” *** And Diderot, who came very close to the standpoint of contemporary ma-terialism (that arguments and syllogisms alone do not suf-fice to refute idealism, and that here it is not a question for theoretical argument), notes the similarity of the prem-ises both of the idealist Berkeley, and the sensationalistCondillac. 
 In his opinion, Condillac should have undertaken *Psychologie de Hume. 
 Traité de la nature humaine , etc. 
 Trad. 
 par Ch. 
 Renouvier et F. 
 Pillon, Paris, 1878. 
 Introduction, p. 
 x. 
 **Th. 
 Huxley, Hume , London, 1879, p. 
 74. 
 ***Œuvres complètes de Diderot , éd. 
 par J. 
 Assézat, Paris, 1875, Vol. 
 I, p. 
 304. 
 a refutation of Berkeley in order to avoid such absurd con-clusions being drawn from the treatment of sensations as the only source of our knowledge. 
 In the “Conversation Between d’Alembert and Diderot”, Diderot states his philosophical position thus: “...Sup-pose a piano to be endowed with the faculty of sensation andmemory, tell me, would it not of its own accord repeat thoseairs which you have played on its keys? We are instruments endowed with sensation and memory. 
 Our senses are so many keys upon which surrounding nature strikes and which oftenstrike upon themselves. 
 And this is all, in my opinion,that occurs in a piano organised like you and me. 
” D’Alem-bert retorts that such an instrument would have to possessthe faculty of finding food for itself and of reproducing little pianos. 
 Undoubtedly, contends Diderot. 
—But take an egg. 
 “This is what refutes all the schools of theology andall the temples on earth. 
 What is this egg? A mass that isinsensible until the embryo is introduced into it, and whenthis embryo is introduced, what is it then? An insensiblemass, for in its turn, this embryo is only an inert and crude liquid. 
 How does this mass arrive at a different organ-isation, arrive at sensibility and life? By means of heat. 
 Andwhat produces heat? Motion.... 
” The animal that is hatchedfrom the egg is endowed with all your sensations; it per-forms all your actions. 
 “Would you maintain with Descartesthat this is a simple imitating machine? Little children will laugh at you, and the philosophers will reply that if this be a machine then you too are a machine. 
 If you admitthat the difference between these animals and you is onlyone of organisation, you will prove your common sense andsagacity, you will be right. 
 But from this will follow aconclusion against you; namely, that from inert matter or-ganised in a certain way, impregnated with another bit of inert matter, by heat and motion—sensibility, life, memory,consciousness, emotion, and thought are generated. 
” One ofthe two, continues Diderot, either admit some “hidden ele-ment” in the egg, that penetrates to it in an unknown way ata certain stage of development, an element about which it is unknown whether it occupies space, whether it is material or whether it is created for the purpose—which is contradic-tory to common sense, and leads to inconsistencies and ab-surdities; or we must make “a simple supposition which explains everything, namely, that the faculty of sensation is a general property of matter, or a product of its organ-isation”. 
 To d’Alembert’s objection that such a suppositionimplies a quality which in its essence is incompatible withmatter, Diderot retorts: “And how do you know that the faculty of sensation is essentially incompatible with matter, since you do not know the essence of any thing at all, either of matter, or of sen-sation? Do you understand the nature of motion any better,its existence in a body, its communication from one bodyto another?” D’Alembert: “Without knowing the natureof sensation, or that of matter, I see that the faculty ofsensation is a simple quality, single, indivisible, and in-compatible with a divisible subject or substratum ( sup-pôt). 
” Diderot: “Metaphysico-theological nonsense! What, do you not see that all qualities of matter, that all its formsaccessible to our senses are in their essence indivisible?There cannot be a larger or a smaller degree of impenetra-bility. 
 There may be half of a round body, but there is no half of roundness.... 
 Be a physicist and admit the produc-tion of an effect when you see it produced, though youmay be unable to explain the relation between the causeand the effect. 
 Be logical and do not replace a cause thatexists and explains everything by some other cause whichit is impossible to conceive, and the connection of which with the effect is even more difficult to conceive, and which engenders an infinite number of difficulties without solv-ing a single one of them. 
” D’Alembert: “And what if Iabandon this cause?” Diderot: “There is only one sub-stance in the universe, in men and in animals. 
 A hand-organ is of wood, man of flesh. 
 A finch is of flesh, and a musician is of flesh, but differently organised; but both are of the same origin, of the same formation, have thesame functions and the same purpose. 
” D’Alembert: “Andwhat establishes the similarity of sounds between your twopianos?” Diderot: “...The instrument endowed with thefaculty of sensation, or the animal, has learned by experi-ence that after a certain sound certain consequences follow outside of it; that other sentient instruments, like itself,or similar animals, approach, recede, demand, offer, wound, /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR caress;—and all these consequences are associated in its memory and in the memory of other animals with the for-mation of these sounds. 
 Mark, in intercourse between peoplethere is nothing besides sounds and actions. 
 And to appre-ciate all the power of my system, mark again that it is faced with that same insurmountable difficulty which Berke-ley adduced against the existence of bodies. 
 There was a moment of insanity when the sentient piano imagined that it was the only piano in the world, and that the wholeharmony of the universe took place within it. 
” * That was written in 1769. 
 And with it we shall conclude our brief historical enquiry. 
 We shall have more than oneoccasion to meet “the insane piano” and the harmony of the universe occurring within man when we come to analyse “recent positivism”. 
 For the present we shall confine ourselves to one con-clusion: the “recent” Machists have not adduced a single argument against the materialists that had not been ad-duced by Bishop Berkeley. 
 Let us mention as a curiosity that one of these Machists, Valentinov, vaguely sensing the falsity of his position, hastried to “cover up the traces” of his kinship with Berkeley and has done so in a rather amusing manner. 
 On page 150 of his book we read: “...When those who, speaking of Mach,are hinting at Berkeley, we ask, which Berkeley do they mean? Do they mean the Berkeley who traditionally regards himself [Valentinov wishes to say who is regarded] as a so-lipsist, the Berkeley who defends the immediate presence and providence of the deity? Generally speaking [?], do they mean Berkeley, the philosophising bishop, the destroy-er of atheism, or Berkeley, the thoughtful analyser? With Berkeley the solipsist and preacher of religious metaphysics Mach indeed has nothing in common. 
” Valentinov is mud-dled; he was unable to make clear to himself why he was obliged to defend Berkeley the “thoughtful analyser” and idealist against the materialist Diderot. 
 Diderot drew aclear distinction between the fundamental philosophical trends. 
 Valentinov confuses them, and while doing so very *Œuvres complètes de Diderot , éd. 
 par J. 
 Assézat, Paris, 1875, Vol. 
 II, pp. 
 114-18. 
 amusingly tries to console us: “We would not consider the ‘kinship’ of Mach to the idealist views of Berkeley a philosophical crime,” he says, “even if this actually werethe case” (149). 
 To confuse two irreconcilable fundamental trends in philosophy—really, what “crime” is that? But that is what the whole wisdom of Mach and Avenariusamounts to. 
 We shall now proceed to an examination of this wisdom. 
 C H A P T E R O N E THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE OF EMPIRIO-CRITICISM AND OF DIALECTICAL MATERIALISM. 
 I 1. 
 SENSATIONS AND COMPLEXES OF SENSATIONS The fundamental premises of the theory of knowledge of Mach and Avenarius are frankly, simply and clearly ex-pounded by them in their first philosophical works. 
 To these works we shall now turn, postponing for later treat-ment an examination of the corrections and emendationssubsequently made by these writers. 
 “The task of science,” Mach wrote in 1872, “can only be: 1. 
 To determine the laws of connection of ideas (Psychol-ogy). 
 2. 
 To discover the laws of connection of sensations (Physics). 
 3. 
 To explain the laws of connection between sensations and ideas (Psycho-physics). 
” * This is quite clear. 
 The subject-matter of physics is the connection between sensations and not between things or bodies, of which oursensations are the image. 
 And in 1883, in his Mechanics Mach repeats the same thought: “Sensations are not ‘sym-bols of things’. 
 The ‘thing’ is rather a mental symbol for a complex of sensations of relative stability. 
 Not the things(bodies) but colours, sounds, pressures, spaces, times (whatwe usually call sensations) are the real elements of the world. 
” ** *E. 
 Mach, Die Geschichte und die Wurzel des Satzes von der Erhal-tung der Arbeit . 
 Vortrag, gehalten in der K. 
 Böhm. 
 Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften am 15. 
 Nov. 
 1871, Prag, 1872, S. 
 57-58. 
 **E. 
 Mach, Die Mechanik in ihrer Entwicklung historisch-kritisch dargestellt , 3. 
 Auflage, Leipzig, 1897, S. 
 473. 
 About this word “elements”, the fruit of twelve years of “reflection”, we shall speak later. 
 At present let us note that Mach explicitly states here that things or bodies are complexes of sensations, and that he quite clearly setsup his own philosophical point of view against the oppositetheory which holds that sensations are “symbols” of things(it would be more accurate to say images or reflections ofthings). 
 The latter theory is philosophical materialism . 
 For instance, the materialist Frederick Engels—the not un-known collaborator of Marx and a founder of Marxism—con-stantly and without exception speaks in his works of thingsand their mental pictures or images ( Gedanken-Abbilder ), and it is obvious that these mental images arise exclusivelyfrom sensations. 
 It would seem that this fundamental stand-point of the “philosophy of Marxism” ought to be known to everyone who speaks of it, and especially to anyone whocomes out in print in the name of this philosophy. 
 But be-cause of the extraordinary confusion which our Machistshave introduced, it becomes necessary to repeat what is gen-erally known. 
 We turn to the first section of Anti-Dühring and read: “...things and their mental images...” *; or to the first section of the philosophical part, which reads:“But whence does thought obtain these principles [i. 
e. 
,the fundamental principles of all knowledge]? From itself?No ... these forms can never be created and derived bythought out of itself, but only from the external world... the principles are not the starting-point of the investiga-tion [as Dühring who would be a materialist, but cannotconsistently adhere to materialism, holds], but its finalresult; they are not applied to nature and human history,but abstracted from them; it is not nature and the realmof humanity which conform to these principles, but the prin-ciples are only valid insofar as they are in conformity with nature and history. 
 That is the only materialistic concep-tion of the matter, and Herr Dühring’s contrary conceptionis idealistic, makes things stand completely on their heads,and fashions the real world out of ideas” (ibid. 
, S. 
 21). 
 21 Engels, we repeat, applies this “only materialistic concep-*Fr. 
 Engels, Herrn Eugen Dührings Umwälzung der Wissenschaft , 5. 
 Auflage, Stuttgart? 1904, S. 
 6. 
 tion” everywhere and without exception, relentlessly attack-ing Dühring for the least deviation from materialism to idealism. 
 Anybody who reads Anti-Dühring and Ludwig Feuerbach with the slightest care will find scores of instances when Engels speaks of things and their reflections in thehuman brain, in our consciousness, thought, etc. 
 Engels doesnot say that sensations or ideas are “symbols” of things, forconsistent materialism must here use “image”, picture, or reflection instead of “symbol”, as we shall show in detail in the proper place. 
 But the question here is not of thisor that formulation of materialism, but of the antithesisbetween materialism and idealism, of the difference betweenthe two fundamental lines in philosophy. 
 Are we to proceed from things to sensation and thought? Or are we to proceed from thought and sensation to things? The first line, i. 
e. 
, the materialist line, is adopted by Engels. 
 The secondline, i. 
e. 
, the idealist line, is adopted by Mach. 
 No eva-sions, no sophisms (a multitude of which we shall yet en-counter) can remove the clear and indisputable fact thatErnst Mach’s doctrine that things are complexes of sensa-tions is subjective idealism and a simple rehash of Berke-leianism. 
 If bodies are “complexes of sensations”, as Machsays, or “combinations of sensations”, as Berkeley said, itinevitably follows that the whole world is but my idea. 
Starting from such a premise it is impossible to arrive atthe existence of other people besides oneself: it is the pur-est solipsism. 
 Much as Mach, Avenarius, Petzoldt and Co. 
 may abjure solipsism, they cannot in fact escape solip-sism without falling into howling logical absurdities. 
 Tomake this fundamental element of the philosophy of Machismstill clearer, we shall give a few additional quotationsfrom Mach’s works. 
 Here is a sample from the Analysis of Sensations *; (I quote from Kotlyar’s Russian translation, published by Skirmunt, Moscow, 1907): “We see a body with a point S. 
 If we touch S, that is, bring it into contact with our body, we receive a prick. 
 Wecan see S without feeling the prick. 
 But as soon as we feelthe prick we find S on the skin. 
 Thus, the visible point is a permanent nucleus, to which, according to circumstances, *E. 
 Mach, Analyse der Empfindungen , 1885. 
— Ed. 
 the prick is attached as something accidental. 
 By frequent repetitions of analogous occurrences we finally habituate ourselves to regard all properties of bodies as ‘effects’ which proceed from permanent nuclei and are conveyedto the self through the medium of the body; which effects we call sensations ...” (p. 
 20). 
 In other words, people “habituate” themselves to adopt the standpoint of materialism, to regard sensations as the result of the action of bodies, things, nature on our sense-organs. 
 This “habit”, so noxious to the philosophical ideal-ists (a habit acquired by all mankind and all natural sci-ence!), is not at all to the liking of Mach, and he proceedsto destroy it: “...Thereby, however, these nuclei are deprived of their entire sensible content and are converted into naked ab-stract symbols.... 
” An old song, most worthy Professor! This is a literal repetition of Berkeley who said that matter is a naked ab-stract symbol. 
 But it is Ernst Mach, in fact, who goes naked,for if he does not admit that the “sensible content” is an objective reality, existing independently of us, there re-mains only a “naked abstract” I, an I infallibly written with a capital letter and italicised, equal to “the insane piano,which imagined that it was the sole existing thing in thisworld”. 
 If the “sensible content” of our sensations is notthe external world, then nothing exists save this naked I engaged in empty “philosophical” fancies. 
 A stupid and fruitless occupation! “...It is then correct that the world consists only of our sensations. 
 In which case we have knowledge only of sensa-tions, and the assumption of those nuclei, and of theirinteraction, from which alone sensations proceed, turns out to be quite idle and superfluous. 
 Such a view can only appeal to half-hearted realism or half-hearted criticism. 
” We have quoted the sixth paragraph of Mach’s “anti-metaphysical observations” in full. 
 It is a sheer plagiar-ism of Berkeley. 
 Not a single idea, not a glimmer of thought,except that “we sense only our sensations”. 
 From which there is only one possible inference, namely, that the “world consists only of my sensations”. 
 The word “our” employed by Mach instead of “my” is employed illegitimately. 
 By this word alone Mach betrays that “half-heartedness” of which he accuses others. 
 For if the “assumption” of the existence of the external world is “idle”, if the assumption that the needle exists independently of me and that an interactiontakes place between my body and the point of the needle isreally “idle and superfluous”, then primarily the “assump-tion” of the existence of other people is idle and super-fluous. 
 Only I exist, and all other people, as well as the ex-ternal world, come under the category of idle “nuclei”. 
 Holding this point of view one cannot speak of “ our” sensa-tions; and when Mach does speak of them, it is only a be-trayal of his own manifest half-heartedness. 
 It only provesthat his philosophy is a jumble of idle and empty words inwhich their author himself does not believe. 
 Here is a particularly graphic example of Mach’s half-heartedness and confusion. 
 In § 6 of Chapter XI of theAnalysis of Sensations we read: “If I imagine that while I am experiencing sensations, I or someone else could observemy brain with all possible physical and chemical means, itwould be possible to ascertain with what processes of the organism particular sensations are connected...” (197). 
 Very good! This means, then, that our sensations are connected with definite processes which take place in theorganism in general, and in our brain in particular? Yes,Mach very definitely makes this “assumption”—it would bequite a task not to make it from the standpoint of natural science! But is not this the very “assumption” of those very same “nuclei and their interaction” which our philos-opher declared to be idle and superfluous? We are told thatbodies are complexes of sensations; to go beyond that, Machassures us, to regard sensations as a product of the actionof bodies upon our sense-organs, is metaphysics, an idle and superfluous assumption, etc. 
, à la Berkeley. 
 But the brain is a body. 
 Consequently, the brain also is no more than acomplex of sensations. 
 It follows, then, that with the helpof a complex of sensations I (and I also am nothing but a complex of sensations) sense complexes of sensations. 
 Adelightful philosophy! First sensations are declared to be “the real elements of the world”; on this an “original” Berkeleianism is erected—and then the very opposite viewis smuggled in, viz. 
, that sensations are connected with definite processes in the organism. 
 Are not these “processes” connected with metabolic exchange between the “organism” and the external world? Could this metabolism take place if the sensations of the particular organism did not give itan objectively correct idea of this external world? Mach does not ask himself such embarrassing questions when he mechanically jumbles fragments of Berkeleianismwith the views of natural science, which instinctively ad-heres to the materialist theory of knowledge.... 
 In the same paragraph Mach writes: “It is sometimes also asked whether(inorganic) ‘matter’ experiences sensation.... 
” This meansthat there is no doubt that organic matter experiences sen-sation? This means that sensation is not something primarybut that it is one of the properties of matter? Mach skips over all the absurdities of Berkeleianism!... “The ques-tion,” he avers, “is natural enough, if we proceed from thecurrent widespread physical notions, according to which mat-ter is the immediate and indisputably given reality , out of which everything, inorganic and organic, is constructed.... 
”Let us bear in mind this truly valuable admission of Mach’s that the current widespread physical notions regard matter as the immediate reality, and that only one variety of thisreality (organic matter) possesses the well-defined propertyof sensation.... 
 Mach continues: “Then, indeed, sensationmust suddenly arise somewhere in this structure consistingof matter, or else have previously been present in the foun-dation. 
 From our standpoint the question is a false one. 
 For us matter is not what is primarily given. 
 Rather, whatis primarily given are the elements (which in a certain fa-miliar relation are designated as sensations).... 
” What is primarily given, then, are sensations, although they are “connected” only with definite processes in organic matter! And while uttering such absurdities Mach wants to blame materialism (“the current widespread physical no-tion”) for leaving unanswered the question whence sensation“arises”. 
 This is a sample of the “refutation” of materialismby the fideists and their hangers-on. 
 Does any other philosoph-ical standpoint “solve” a problem before enough data for its solution has been collected? Does not Mach himself say in the very same paragraph: “So long as this problem (how farsensation extends in the organic world) has not been solved even in a single special case, no answer to the question is possible. 
” The difference between materialism and “Machism” in this particular question thus consists in the following. 
Materialism, in full agreement with natural science, takesmatter as primary and regards consciousness, thought, sen-sation as secondary, because in its well-defined form sensa-tion is associated only with the higher forms of matter (organic matter), while “in the foundation of the structure of matter” one can only surmise the existence of a facultyakin to sensation. 
 Such, for example, is the supposition ofthe well-known German scientist Ernst Haeckel, the Englishbiologist Lloyd Morgan and others, not to speak of Diderot’sconjecture mentioned above. 
 Machism holds to the opposite, the idealist point of view, and at once lands into an absur-dity: since, in the first place, sensation is taken as pri-mary, in spite of the fact that it is associated only withdefinite processes in matter organised in a definite way;and since, in the second place, the basic premise that bod-ies are complexes of sensations is violated by the assump-tion of the existence of other living beings and, in general, of other “complexes” besides the given great I. 
 The word “element”, which many naïve people (as we shall see) take to be some sort of a new discovery, in re-ality only obscures the question, for it is a meaninglessterm which creates the false impression that a solution or a step forward has been achieved. 
 This impression is a false one, because there still remains to be investigatedand reinvestigated how matter, apparently entirely devoid ofsensation, is related to matter which, though composed ofthe same atoms (or electrons), is yet endowed with a well-defined faculty of sensation. 
 Materialism clearly formu-lates the as yet unsolved problem and thereby stimulates the attempt to solve it, to undertake further experimental in-vestigation. 
 Machism, which is a species of muddled ideal-ism, befogs the issue and side-tracks it by means of the fu-tile verbal trick, “element”. 
 Here is a passage from Mach’s latest, comprehensive and concluding philosophical work that clearly betrays the fal-sity of this idealist artifice. 
 In his Knowledge and Error we read: “While there is no difficulty in constructing ( auf-zubauen ) every physical experience out of sensations, i. 
e. 
, psychical elements, it is impossible to imagine ( ist keine Möglichkeit abzusehen ) how to represent ( darstellen ) any psychical experience out of the elements employed in modern physics, i. 
e. 
, mass and motion (in their rigidity— Starrheit —which is serviceable only for this special science). 
” * Of the rigidity of the conceptions of many modern scien-tists and of their metaphysical (in the Marxist sense of the term, i. 
e. 
, anti-dialectical) views, Engels speaks repeatedlyand very precisely. 
 We shall see later that it was just onthis point that Mach went astray, because he did not under-stand or did not know the relation between relativism anddialectics. 
 But this is not what concerns us here. 
 It is im-portant for us here to note how glaringly Mach’s idealism emerges, in spite of the confused—ostensibly new—termi-nology. 
 There is no difficulty, you see, in constructing anyphysical element out of sensations, i. 
e. 
, psychical elements!Oh yes, such constructions, of course, are not difficult, forthey are purely verbal constructions, empty scholasticism, serving as a loophole for fideism. 
 It is not surprising after this that Mach dedicates his works to the immanentists;it is not surprising that the immanentists, who profess themost reactionary kind of philosophical idealism, welcomeMach with open arms. 
 The “recent positivism” of Ernst Machwas only about two hundred years too late. 
 Berkeley had already sufficiently shown that “out of sensations, i. 
e. 
, psychical elements”, nothing can be “built” except solipsism . 
 As regards materialism, to which Mach here, too, counter-poses his own views, without frankly and explicitly namingthe “enemy”, we have already seen in the case of Diderotwhat the real views of the materialists are. 
 These views do not consist in deriving sensation from the movement of mat-ter or in reducing sensation to the movement of matter, butin recognising sensation as one of the properties of matter inmotion. 
 On this question Engels shared the standpoint ofDiderot. 
 Engels dissociated himself from the “vulgar” mate-rialists, Vogt, Büchner and Moleschott, for the very reason, among others, that they erred in believing that the brain *E. 
 Mach, Erkenntnis und Irrtum , 2. 
 Auflage, 1906, S. 
 12, Anmer-kung. 
 secretes thought in the same way as the liver secretes bile. 
 But Mach, who constantly counterposes his views to materialism, ignores, of course, all the great materialists—Diderot, Feuerbach, Marx and Engels—just as all other official pro-fessors of official philosophy do. 
 In order to characterise Avenarius’ earliest and basic view, let us take his first independent philosophical work,Philosophie als Denken der Welt gemäss dem Prinzip des kleinsten Kraftmasses. 
 Prolegomena zu einer Kritik der reinen Erfahrung , which appeared in 1876. 
 Bogdanov in his Empirio-monism (Bk. 
 1, 2nd ed. 
, 1905, p. 
 9, note) says that “in the development of Mach’s views, the starting-pointwas philosophical idealism, while a realistic tinge was cha-racteristic of Avenarius from the very beginning”. 
 Bogdanov said so because he believed what Mach said (see Analysis of Sensations , Russian translation, p. 
 288). 
 Bogdanov should not have believed Mach, and his assertion is diametricallyopposed to the truth. 
 On the contrary, Avenarius’ idealismemerges so clearly in his work of 1876 that Avenarius himselfin 1891 was obliged to admit it. 
 In the introduction to The Human Concept of the World Avenarius says: “He who has read my first systematic work, Philosophie , etc. 
, will at once presume that I would have attempted to treat the problemsof a criticism of pure experience from the ‘idealist’ stand-point” ( Der menschliche Weltbegriff , 1891, Vorwort, S. 
 ix), but “the sterility of philosophical idealism compelled me to doubt the correctness of my previous path” (S. 
 x). 
 This idealist starting-point of Avenarius’ is universally acknowl-edged in philosophical literature. 
 Of the French writersI shall refer to Cauwelaert, who says that Avenarius’ phil-osophical standpoint in the Prolegomena is “monistic ideal-ism”. 
 * Of the German writers, I shall name Rudolf Willy, Avenarius’ disciple, who says that “Avenarius in his youth— and particularly in his work of 1876—was totally under thespell ( ganz im Banne ) of so-called epistemological ideal-ism”. 
 ** *F. 
 Van Cauwelaert, “L’empiriocriticisme”, Revue néo-scolasti-que,22 1907, Feb. 
, p. 
 51. 
 **Rudolf Willy, Gegen die Schulweisheit. 
 Eine Kritik der Phi-losophie , München, 1905, S. 
 170. 
 And, indeed, it would be ridiculous to deny the ideal-ism in Avenarius’ Prolegomena , where he explicitly states that “ only sensation can be thought of as the existing ” (pp. 
 10 and 65 of the second German edition; all italics in quo-tations are ours). 
 This is how Avenarius himself presentsthe contents of § 116 of his work. 
 Here is the paragraph infull: “We have recognised that the existing ( das Seiende ) is substance endowed with sensation; substance falls away [it is “more economical”, don’t you see, there is “a lesser ex-penditure of effort” in thinking that there is no “substance”and that no external world exists!], sensation remains; wemust then regard the existing as sensation, at the basis ofwhich there is nothing which does not possess sensation(nichts Empfindungsloses ). 
” Sensation, then, exists without “substance”, i. 
e. 
, thought exists without the brain! Are there really philosophers ca-pable of defending this brainless philosophy? There are. 
Professor Richard Avenarius is one of them. 
 And we mustpause for a while to consider this defence, difficult thoughit be for a normal person to take it seriously. 
 Here, in §§89 and 90 of this same work, is Avenarius’ argument: “...The proposition that motion produces sensation is based on apparent experience only. 
 This experience, whichincludes the act of perception, is supposed to consist inthe fact that sensation is generated in a certain kind ofsubstance (brain) as a result of transmitted motion (excita-tion) and with the help of other material conditions (e. 
g. 
, blood). 
 However—apart from the fact that such generationhas never itself ( selbst ) been observed—in order to con-struct the supposed experience, as an experience which is realin all its parts, empirical proof, at least, is required toshow that the sensation, which assumedly is caused in a sub-stance by transmitted motion, did not already exist in that substance in one way or another; so that the appearance ofsensation cannot be conceived of in any other way than as acreative act on the part of the transmitted motion. 
 Thusonly by proving that where a sensation now appears there wasnone previously, not even a minimal one, would it be possible to establish a fact which, denoting as it does some act of creation, contradicts all the rest of experience and whichwould radically change all the rest of our conception of nature ( Naturanschauung ). 
 But such proof is not furnished by any experience, and cannot be furnished by any experience; on the contrary, the notion of a state of a substance totally devoid of sensation which subsequently begins to experiencesensation is only a hypothesis. 
 But this hypothesis merelycomplicates and obscures our understanding instead ofsimplifying and clarifying it. 
 “Should the so-called experience, viz. 
, that the sensation arises owing to transmitted motion in a substance that begins to perceive from this moment, prove upon closer ex-amination to be only apparent, there is still sufficientmaterial in the remaining content of the experience to denoteat least the relative origin of sensation from conditionsof motion, namely, to denote that the sensation which is present, although latent or minimal, or for some other rea-son not manifest to the consciousness, becomes, owing totransmitted motion, released or enhanced or made manifestto the consciousness. 
 However, even this bit of the remain-ing content of experience is only an appearance. 
 Were weeven by an ideal observation to trace the motion proceeding from the moving substance A, transmitted through a series of intermediate centres until it reaches the substance B, whichis endowed with sensation, we should at best find that sen-sation in substance B is developed or becomes enhanced si-multaneously with the reception of the incoming motion—but we should not find that this occurred as a consequence o f the motion.... 
” We have purposely quoted this refutation of materialism by Avenarius in full, in order that the reader may see towhat truly pitiful sophistries “recent” empirio-criticalphilosophy resorts. 
 We shall compare with the argument ofthe idealist Avenarius the materialist argument of—Bogdanov, if only to punish Bogdanov for his betrayal of materialism! In long bygone days, fully nine years ago, when Bogda-nov was half “a natural-scientific materialist” (that is, anadherent of the materialist theory of knowledge, which theoverwhelming majority of contemporary scientists instinc-tively hold), when he was only half led astray by the mud-dled Ostwald, he wrote: “From ancient times to the present day, descriptive psychology has adhered to the classificationof the facts of consciousness into three categories: the do-main of sensations and ideas, the domain of emotions and the domain of impulses.... 
 To the first category belong the images of phenomena of the outer or inner world, as taken by themselves in consciousness.... 
 Such an image is called a‘sensation’ if it is directly produced through the externalsense-organs by its corresponding external phenomenon. 
” * And a little farther on he says: “Sensation ... arises in con-sciousness as a result of a certain impulse from the external environment transmitted by the external sense-organs” (222). 
 And further: “Sensation is the foundation of mentallife; it is its immediate connection with the external world”(240). 
 “At each step in the process of sensation a transform-ation of the energy of external excitation into the factof consciousness takes place” (133). 
 And even in 1905, when with the gracious assistance of Ostwald and Mach Bogdanov had already abandoned the materialist standpoint in phi-losophy for the idealist standpoint, he wrote (from forget-fulness!) in his Empirio-monism : “As is known, the energy of external excitation, transformed at the nerve-ends intoa ‘telegraphic’ form of nerve current (still insufficiently investigated but devoid of all mysticism), first reaches the neurons that are located in the so-called ‘lower’ centres—ganglial, cerebro-spinal, subcortical, etc. 
” (Bk. 
 1, 2nd ed. 
,1905, p. 
 118). 
 For every scientist who has not been led astray by pro-fessorial philosophy, as well as for every materialist, sen-sation is indeed the direct connection between consciousness and the external world; it is the transformation of theenergy of external excitation into the fact of conscious-ness. 
 This transformation has been, and is, observed byeach of us a million times on every hand. 
 The sophism ofidealist philosophy consists in the fact that it regards sen-sation as being not the connection between consciousness and the external world, but a fence, a wall, separating conscious-ness from the external world—not an image of the externalphenomenon corresponding to the sensation, but as the “soleentity”. 
 Avenarius gave but a slightly changed form to thisold sophism, which had been already worn threadbare by Bi-*A. 
 Bogdanov, The Fundamental Elements of the Historical Out-look on Nature , St. 
 Petersburg, 1899, p. 
 216. 
 shop Berkeley. 
 Since we do not yet know all the conditions of the connection we are constantly observing between sen-sation and matter organised in a definite way, let us there-fore acknowledge the existence of sensation alone—that iswhat the sophism of Avenarius amounts to. 
 To conclude our description of the fundamental ideal-ist premises of empirio-criticism, we shall briefly referto the English and French representatives of this philosoph-ical trend. 
 Mach explicitly says of Karl Pearson, the English-man, that he (Mach) is “in agreement with his epistemologi-cal ( erkenntniskritischen ) views on all essential points” ( Me-chanics , ed. 
 previously cited, p. 
 ix). 
 Pearson in turn agrees with Mach. 
 * For Pearson “real things” are “sense-impres-sions”. 
 He declares any recognition of things outside the boundaries of sense-impressions to be metaphysics. 
 Pearson fights materialism with great determination (without know-ing either Feuerbach, or Marx and Engels); his argumentsdo not differ from those analysed above. 
 However, thedesire to masquerade as a materialist is so foreign to Pear-son (that is a specialty of the Russian Machists), Pear-son is so—incautious, that he invents no “new” names for his philosophy and simply declares that his views and thoseof Mach are “ idealist ” (ibid. 
, p. 
 326)! He traces his genealogy directly to Berkeley and Hume. 
 The philosophy of Pearson,as we shall repeatedly find, is distinguished from that ofMach by its far greater integrity and consistency. 
 Mach explicitly declares his solidarity with the French physicists, Pierre Duhem and Henri Poincaré **. 
 We shall have occasion to deal with the particularly confused and in-consistent philosophical views of these writers in the chapteron the new physics. 
 Here we shall content ourselves withnoting that for Poincaré things are “groups of sensations” *** and that a similar view is casually expressed by Duhem. 
 **** *Karl Pearson, The Grammar of Science , 2nd ed. 
, London, 1900, p. 
 326. 
 **Analysis of Sensations , p. 
 4. 
 Cf. 
 Preface to Erkenntnis und Irr-tum , 2nd ed. 
 *** Henri Poincaré, La valeur de la science , Paris, 1905 (there is a Russian translation), passim. 
 **** P. 
 Duhem, La théorie physique , son objet et sa structure , Paris, 1906. 
 Cf. 
 pp. 
 6, 10. 
 We shall now proceed to examine how Mach and Avenarius, having admitted the idealist character of their original views, corrected them in their subsequent works. 
 2. 
 “THE DISCOVERY OF THE WORLD -ELEMENTS” Such is the title under which Friedrich Adler, lecturer at the University of Zurich, probably the only German au-thor also anxious to supplement Marx with Machism, writes of Mach. 
 * And this naïve university lecturer must be given his due: in his simplicity of heart he does Machism moreharm than good. 
 At least, he puts the question point-blank—did Mach really “discover the world-elements”? If so, then,only very backward and ignorant people, of course, can still remain materialists. 
 Or is this discovery a return on the part of Mach to the old philosophical errors? We saw that Mach in 1872 and Avenarius in 1876 held a purely idealist view; for them the world is our sensation. 
In 1883 Mach’s Mechanics appeared, and in the preface to the first edition Mach refers to Avenarius’ Prolegomena , and greets his ideas as being “very close” ( sehr verwandte ) to his own philosophy. 
 Here are the arguments in the Me-chanics concerning the elements: “All natural science can only picture and represent ( nachbilden und vorbilden ) com-plexes of those elements which we ordinarily call sensations . 
 It is a matter of the connection of these elements.... 
 The con-nection of A (heat) with B (flame) is a problem of physics , that of A and N (nerves) a problem of physiology. 
 Neitherexists separately ; both exist in conjunction. 
 Only temporar-ily can we neglect either. 
 Even processes that are ap-parently purely mechanical, are thus always physiological”(op. 
 cit. 
, German ed. 
, S. 
 499). 
 We find the same in the Analysis of Sensations : “Wherever ... the terms ‘sensation’, ‘complex of sensations’, are used alongside of or in placeof the terms ‘element’, ‘complex of elements’, it must beborne in mind that it is only in this connection [namely, *Friedrich W. 
 Adler, “Die Entdeckung der Weltelemente (zu E. 
 Machs 70. 
 Geburtstag)”, Der Kampf ,23 1908, Nr. 
 5 (Februar). 
 Trans-lated in The International Socialist Review ,24 1908, No. 
 10 (April). 
 One of Adler’s articles has been translated into Russian in the sympo-sium Historical Materialism . 
 in the connection of A, B, C with K, L, M, that is, in the connection of “complexes which we ordinarily call bodies” with “the complex which we call our body”] and relation, only in this functional dependence that the elements aresensations . 
 In another functional dependence they are at the same time physical objects” (Russian translation, pp. 
23 and 17). 
 “A colour is a physical object when we considerits dependence, for instance, upon the source of illumi-nation (other colours, temperatures, spaces and so forth). 
 When we, however, consider its dependence upon the retina (the elements K, L, M), it is a psychological object, a sen-sation ” (ibid. 
, p. 
 24). 
 Thus the discovery of the world-elements amounts to this: 1) all that exists is declared to be sensation, 2) sensations are called elements,3) elements are divided into the physical and the psy-chical; the latter is that which depends on the humannerves and the human organism generally; the former doesnot depend on them; 4) the connection of physical elements and the connec-tion of psychical elements, it is declared, do not existseparately from each other; they exist only in conjunc-tion; 5) it is possible only temporarily to leave one or the other connection out of account; 6) the “new” theory is declared to be free from “one-sided-ness. 
” * Indeed, it is not one-sidedness we have here, but an in-coherent jumble of antithetical philosophical points ofview. 
 Since you base yourself only on sensations you do not correct the “one-sidedness” of your idealism by the term “element”, but only confuse the issue and cravenly hide from your own theory. 
 In words, you eliminate the antithesisbetween the physical and psychical, ** between materialism *Mach says in the Analysis of Sensations : “These elements are usu-ally called sensations. 
 But as that term already implies a one-sided theory, we prefer to speak simply of elements” (pp. 
 27-28). 
 **“The antithesis between the self and the world, sensation or appearance and the thing, then vanishes, and it is solely a matter ofthe connection of the elements” (ibid. 
, p. 
 21). 
 (which regards nature, matter, as primary) and idealism (which regards spirit, mind, sensation as primary); in fact, you promptly restore this antithesis; you restore it surrep-titiously, retreating from your own fundamental premise!For, if elements are sensations, you have no right even fora moment to accept the existence of “elements” independent-ly of my nerves and my mind. 
 But if you do admit physical objects that are independent of my nerves and my sensa-tions and that cause sensation only by acting upon my re-tina—you are disgracefully abandoning your “one-sided”idealism and adopting the standpoint of “one-sided” ma-terialism! If colour is a sensation only depending upon theretina (as natural science compels you to admit), then lightrays, falling upon the retina, produce the sensation of colour. 
 This means that outside us, independently of us and of our minds, there exists a movement of matter, let us say ofether waves of a definite length and of a definite velocity,which, acting upon the retina, produce in man the sensationof a particular colour. 
 This is precisely how natural sci-ence regards it. 
 It explains the sensations of various col-ours by the various lengths of light-waves existing out-side the human retina, outside man and independently ofhim. 
 This is materialism: matter acting upon our sense-organsproduces sensation. 
 Sensation depends on the brain, nerves,retina, etc. 
, i. 
e. 
, on matter organised in a definite way. 
The existence of matter does not depend on sensation. 
 Mat-ter is primary. 
 Sensation, thought, consciousness are the supreme product of matter organised in a particular way. 
Such are the views of materialism in general, and of Marxand Engels in particular. 
 Mach and Avenarius secretly smuggle in materialism by means of the word “element”,which supposedly frees their theory of the “one-sidedness” of subjective idealism, supposedly permits the assumption that the mental is dependent on the retina, nerves and soforth, and the assumption that the physical is independentof the human organism. 
 In fact, of course, the trick withthe word “element” is wretched sophistry, for a materialistwho reads Mach and Avenarius will immediately ask: what are the “elements”? It would, indeed, be childish to think that one can dispose of the fundamental philosophical trendsby inventing a new word. 
 Either the “element” is a sensation , as all empirio-criticists, Mach, Avenarius, Petzoldt, * etc. 
, maintain—in which case your philosophy, gentlemen, is idealism vainly seeking to hide the nakedness of its solip-sism under the cloak of a more “objective” terminology; or the “element” is not a sensation—in which case absolutely no thought whatever is attached to the “new” term; it is merely high-sounding trifling. 
 Take Petzoldt, for instance, the last word in empirio-criticism, as V. 
 Lesevich, the first and most outstandingRussian empirio-criticist, describes him. 
 ** Having defined elements as sensations, he says in the second volume of the work mentioned: “In the statement that ‘sensations arethe elements of the world’ one must guard against taking the term ‘sensation’ as denoting something only subjective and therefore ethereal; transforming the ordinary pictureof the world into an illusion ( Verflüchtigendes ). 
” *** One cannot help harping on a sore point! Petzoldt feels that the world “evaporates” ( verflüchtigt sich ), or becomes transformed into an illusion, when sensations are regarded as world-elements. 
 And the good Petzoldt imagines that he helps matters by the reservation that sensation mustnot be taken as something only subjective! Is this not ridiculous sophistry? Does it make any difference wheth-er we “take” sensation as sensation or whether we try tostretch the meaning of the term? Does this do away with the fact that sensations in man are connected with normally functioning nerves, retina, brain, etc. 
, that the externalworld exists independently of our sensations? If you are not trying to evade the issue by a subterfuge, if you are really in earnest in wanting to “guard” against subjectiv-ism and solipsism, you must above all guard against the fun-damental idealist premises of your philosophy; you must replace the idealist line of your philosophy (from sensa-tions to the external world) by the materialist line (from *Joseph Petzoldt, Einführung in die Philosophie der reinen Erfah-rung , Bd. 
 I, Leipzig, 1900, S. 
 113: “Elements are sensations in the ordinary sense of simple, irreducible perceptions ( Wahrnehmungen ). 
” **V. 
 Lesevich, What Is Scientific [read: fashionable, professorial, eclectic] Philosophy ?, St. 
 Petersburg, 1891, pp. 
 229, 247. 
 *** Petzoldt, Bd. 
 II, Leipzig, 1904, S. 
 329. 
 the external world to sensations), you must abandon that empty and muddled verbal embellishment, “element”, and simply say that colour is the result of the action of a physicalobject on the retina, which is the same as saying that sen-sation is a result of the action of matter on our sense-organs. 
 Let us take Avenarius again. 
 The most valuable ma-terial on the question of the “elements” is to be found in his last work (and, it might be said, the most important for the comprehension of his philosophy), Notes on the Con-cept of the Subject of Psychology . 
* The author, by the way, here gives a very “graphic” table (Vol. 
 XVIII, p. 
 410), the main part of which we reproduce below: Elements complexes of elements: I. 
 Things, or the substantial Corporeal things II. 
 Thoughts, or the mental Incorporeal things, recollections (Gedankenhaftes ) and fantasies Compare this with what Mach says after all his elucida-tion of the “elements” ( Analysis of Sensations , p. 
 33): “It is not bodies that produce sensations, but complexes ofelements (complexes of sensations) that make up bodies. 
” There you have the “discovery of the world-elements” that overcomes the one-sidedness of idealism and materialism!At first we are assured that “elements” =something new, both physical and psychical at the same time; then a little correction is surreptitiously inserted: instead of the crude,materialist differentiation of matter (bodies, things) and the psychical (sensations, recollections, fantasies) we are presented with the doctrine of “recent positivism” regardingelements substantial and elements mental. 
 Adler (Fritz) did not gain very much from “the discovery of the world-elements”! Bogdanov, arguing against Plekhanov in 1906, wrote: “... I cannot own myself a Machist in philosophy. 
 In the general philosophical conception there is only one thing Iborrowed from Mach—the idea of the neutrality of the ele-*R. 
 Avenarius, “Bemerkungen zum Begriff des Gegenstandes der Psychologie”, Vierteljahrsschrift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie ,25 Bd. 
 XVIII (1894) und Bd. 
 XIX (1895). 
 ments of experience in relation to the ‘physical’ and ‘psy-chical’, and the dependence of these characteristics solely on the connection of experience. 
” ( Empirio-monism , Bk. 
 III, St. 
 Petersburg, 1906, p. 
 xli. 
) This is as though a religiousman were to say—I cannot own myself a believer in re-ligion, for there is “only one thing” I have borrowed fromthe believers—the belief in God. 
 This “only one thing”which Bogdanov borrowed from Mach is the basic error o f Machism, the basic falsity of its entire philosophy. 
 Those deviations of Bogdanov’s from empirio-criticism to whichhe himself attaches great significance are in fact of entire-ly secondary importance and amount to nothing more thaninconsiderable private and individual differences betweenthe various empirio-criticists who are approved by Mach and who approve Mach (we shall speak of this in greater detail later). 
 Hence when Bogdanov was annoyed at being confusedwith the Machists he only revealed his failure to understandwhat radically distinguishes materialism from what is com-mon to Bogdanov and to all other Machists. 
 How Bogdanovdeveloped, improved or worsened Machism is not important. 
 What is important is that he has abandoned the materialist standpoint and has thereby inevitably condemned himselfto confusion and idealist aberrations. 
 In 1899, as we saw, Bogdanov had the correct standpoint when he wrote: “The image of a man standing before me,directly given to me by vision, is a sensation. 
” * Bogdanov did not trouble to give a criticism of this earlier position of his. 
 He blindly believed Mach and began to repeat afterhim that the “elements” of experience are neutral in rela-tion to the physical and psychical. 
 “As has been establishedby recent positivist philosophy,” wrote Bogdanov in BookI of Empirio-monism (2nd ed. 
, p. 
 90), “the elements of psychical experience are identical with the elements of experience in general, as they are identical with the ele-ments of physical experience. 
” Or in 1906 (Bk. 
 III, p. 
 xx)“as to ‘idealism’, can it be called idealism merely on thegrounds that the elements of ‘physical experience’ are re-garded as identical with the elements of ‘psychical experi-*The Fundamental Elements , etc. 
, p. 
 216; cf. 
 the quotations cited above. 
 ence’, or with elementary sensations—when this is simply an indubitable fact?” Here we have the true source of all Bogdanov’s philo-sophical misadventures, a source which he shares with therest of the Machists. 
 We can and must call it idealismwhen “the elements of physical experience” (i. 
e. 
, the phys-ical, the external world, matter) are regarded as identi-cal with sensations, for this is sheer Berkeleianism. 
 There is not a trace here of recent philosophy, or positivist phi-losophy, or of indubitable fact. 
 It is merely an old, oldidealist sophism. 
 And were one to ask Bogdanov how hewould prove the “indubitable fact” that the physical isidentical with sensations, one would get no other argumentsave the eternal refrain of the idealists: I am aware only of my sensations; the “testimony of self-consciousness” (die Aussage des Selbstbewusstseins of Avenarius in his Prolegomena , 2nd German edition, § 93, p. 
 56); or: “in our experience [which testifies that “we are sentient substance”]sensation is given us with more certainty than is substan-tiality” (ibid. 
, § 91, p. 
 55), and so on and so forth. 
 Bogda-nov (trusting Mach) accepted a reactionary philosophical trick as an “indubitable fact”. 
 For, indeed, not a single factwas or could be cited which would refute the view thatsensation is an image of the external world—a view whichwas shared by Bogdanov in 1899 and which is shared by nat-ural science to this day. 
 In his philosophical aberrations the physicist Mach has completely strayed from the path of “modern science”. 
 Regarding this important circumstance,which Bogdanov overlooked, we shall have much to say later. 
 One of the circumstances which helped Bogdanov to jump so quickly from the materialism of the natural scientiststo the muddled idealism of Mach was (apart from the influ-ence of Ostwald) Avenarius’ doctrine of the dependent and independent series of experience. 
 Bogdanov himself expoundsthe matter in Book I of his Empirio-monism thus: “Inso-far as the data of experience appear in dependence upon the state of a particular nervous system , they form the psychi-cal world of that particular person; insofar as the data of experience are taken outside of such a dependence , we have before us the physical world . 
 Avenarius therefore char-acterises these two realms of experience respectively as the dependent series and the independent series of experi-ence” (p. 
 18). 
 That is just the whole trouble. 
 This doctrine of the in-dependent (i. 
e. 
, independent of human sensation) “series” is a surreptitious importation of materialism, which isillegitimate, arbitrary, and eclectic from the standpointof a philosophy that maintains that bodies are complexesof sensations, that sensations are “identical” with physical “elements”. 
 For once you have recognised that the source of light and the light-waves exist independently of man and the human consciousness, that colour is dependent on the ac-tion of these waves upon the retina, you have in fact adopt-ed the materialist standpoint and have completely destroyed all the “indubitable facts” of idealism, together with all “the complexes of sensations”, the elements discovered by recent positivism, and similar nonsense. 
 That is just the whole trouble. 
 Bogdanov (like the rest of the Russian Machists) has never seen far into the idealistviews originally held by Mach and Avenarius, has neverunderstood their fundamental idealist premises, and has therefore failed to discover the illegitimacy and eclec-ticism of their subsequent attempts to smuggle in material-ism surreptitiously. 
 Yet, just as the initial idealism ofMach and Avenarius is generally acknowledged in philosoph-ical literature, so is it generally acknowledged that sub-sequently empirio-criticism endeavoured to swing towards materialism. 
 Cauwelaert, the French writer quoted above, as-serts that Avenarius’ Prolegomena is “monistic idealism”, The Critique of Pure Experience * (1888-90) is “absolute realism”, while The Human Concept of the World (1891) is an attempt “to explain” the change. 
 Let us note that theterm realism is here employed as the antithesis of idealism. 
 Following Engels, I use only the term materialism in this sense, and consider it the sole correct terminology, especial-ly since the term “realism “ has been bedraggled by the posi-tivists and the other muddleheads who oscillate betweenmaterialism and idealism. 
 For the present it will suffice tonote that Cauwelaert had the indisputable fact in mind that in the Prolegomena (1876) sensation, according to Avenarius, *Kritik der reinen Erfahrung . 
—Ed. 
 is the only entity, while “substance”—in accordance with the principle of “the economy of thought”!—is eliminated, and that in The Critique of Pure Experience the physical is taken as the independent series , while the psychical and, consequently, sensations, are taken as the dependent series. 
 Avenarius’ disciple Rudolf Willy likewise admits that Avenarius, who was a “complete” idealist in 1876, subse-quently “reconciled” ( Ausgleich ) “naïve realism” (i. 
e. 
, the in-stinctive, unconscious materialist standpoint adopted by humanity, which regards the external world as existing in-dependently of our minds) with this teaching (loc. 
 cit. 
). 
 Oskar Ewald, the author of the book Avenarius as the Founder of Empirio-criticism , says that this philosophy com-bines contradictory idealist and “realist” (he should have said materialist) elements (not in Mach’s sense, but in the human sense of the term element). 
 For example, “the ab-solute [method of consideration] would perpetuate naïverealism, the relative would declare exclusive idealism aspermanent. 
” * Avenarius calls the absolute method of consid-eration that which corresponds to Mach’s connection of “elements” outside our body, and the relative that which corresponds to Mach’s connection of “elements” dependenton our body. 
 But of particular interest to us in this respect is the opin-ion of Wundt, who himself, like the majority of the above-mentioned writers, adheres to the confused idealist stand-point, but who has analysed empirio-criticism perhaps more attentively than all the others. 
 P. 
 Yushkevich hasthe following to say in this connection: “It is interestingto note that Wundt regards empirio-criticism as the mostscientific form of the latest type of materialism,” ** i. 
e. 
, the type of those materialists who regard the spiritual as a function of corporeal processes (and whom—we would add Wundt defines as standing midway between Spino-zism 26 and absolute materialism ***). 
 *Oskar Ewald, Richard Avenarius als Begründer des Empirio-kritizismus , Berlin, 1905, S. 
 66. 
 **P. 
 Yushkevich, Materialism and Critical Realism , St. 
 Peters-burg, 1908, p. 
 15. 
 *** W. 
 Wundt, “Ueber naiven und kritischen Realismus”, Philo-sophische Studien ,27 Bd. 
 XIII, 1897, S. 
 334. 
 True, this opinion of Wundt’s is extremely interesting. 
 But what is even more “interesting” is Mr. 
 Yushkevich’s attitude towards the books and articles on philosophy of which he treats. 
 This is a typical example of the attitudeof our Machists to such matters. 
 Gogol’s Petrushka 28 used to read and find it interesting that letters always combinedto make words. 
 Mr. 
 Yushkevich read Wundt and found it“interesting” that Wundt accused Avenarius of materialism. 
 If Wundt is wrong, why not refute him? If he is right, why not explain the antithesis between materialism and empirio-criticism? Mr. 
 Yushkevich finds what the idealist Wundtsays “interesting”, but this Machist regards it as a wasteof effort to endeavour to go to the root of the matter (prob-ably on the principle of “economy of thought”).... 
 The point is that by informing the reader that Wundt accuses Avenarius of materialism, and by not informinghim that Wundt regards some aspects of empirio-criticism asmaterialism and others as idealism and holds that the con-nection between the two is artificial, Yushkevich entirely distorted the matter . 
 Either this gentleman absolutely does not understand what he reads, or he was prompted by a desire to indulge in false self-praise with the help of Wundt,as if to say: you see, the official professors regard us, too,as materialists, and not at all as muddleheads. 
 The above-mentioned article by Wundt constitutes a large book (more than 300 pages), devoted to a detailed analysis first of the immanentist school, and then of the empirio-criticists. 
 Why did Wundt connect these twoschools? Because he considers them closely akin ; and this opinion, which is shared by Mach, Avenarius, Petzoldt andthe immanentists, is, as we shall see later, entirely cor-rect. 
 Wundt shows in the first part of this article that the immanentists are idealists, subjectivists and adherents of fideism. 
 This, too, as we shall see later, is a perfectlycorrect opinion, although Wundt expounds it with a super-fluous ballast of professorial erudition, with superfluous ni-ceties and reservations, which is to be explained by thefact that Wundt himself is an idealist and fideist. 
 He re-proaches the immanentists not because they are idealists and adherents of fideism, but because, in his opinion, theyarrive at these great principles by incorrect methods. 
 Fur-ther, the second and third parts of Wundt’s article are devoted to empirio-criticism. 
 There he quite definitely points out that very important theoretical propositions of empirio-criticism (e. 
g. 
, the interpretation of “experience”and the “principal co-ordination”, of which we shall speaklater) are identical with those held by the immanentists (die empiriokritische in Uebereinstimmung mit der immanenten Philosophie annimmt , S. 
 382). 
 Other theoretical proposi-tions Avenarius borrowed from materialism, and in general empirio-criticism is a “ motley ” (bunte Mischung , ibid. 
, S. 
 57), in which the “various component elements are entirely heter-ogeneous ” (an sich einander völlig heterogen sind , S. 
 56). 
 Among the materialist morsels of the Avenarius-Mach hotchpotch Wundt includes primarily Avenarius’ doctrine of the “ independent vital series ”. 
 If you start from the “sys-tem C” (that is how Avenarius—who was very fond of mak-ing erudite play with new terms—designates the humanbrain or the nervous system in general), and if the mentalis for you a function of the brain, then this “system C” isa “metaphysical substance”—says Wundt (ibid. 
, p. 
 64), and your doctrine is materialism. 
 It should be said that many idealists and all agnostics (Kantians and Humeans included)call the materialists metaphysicians, because it seems tothem that to recognise the existence of an external worldindependent of the human mind is to transcend the boundsof experience. 
 Of this terminology and its utter incorrect-ness from the point of view of Marxism, we shall speak in its proper place. 
 Here it is important to note that the rec-ognition of the “independent” series by Avenarius (andalso by Mach, who expresses the same idea in different words)is, according to the general opinion of philosophers of var-ious parties, i. 
e. 
, of various trends in philosophy, an ap-propriation from materialism . 
 If you assume that every-thing that exists is sensation, or that bodies are complexesof sensations, you cannot, without violating all your funda-mental premises, all “your” philosophy, arrive at the con-clusion that the physical exists independently of our minds, and that sensation is a function of matter organised in a definite way. 
 Mach and Avenarius, in their philosophy, com-bine fundamental idealist premises with individual material-ist deductions for the very reason that their theory is an example of that “pauper’s broth of eclecticism”29 of which Engels speaks with just contempt. 
 * This eclecticism is particularly marked in Mach’s latest philosophical work, Knowledge and Error , 2nd edition, 1906. 
 We have already seen that Mach there declared that“there is no difficulty in constructing every physical ele-ment out of sensation, i. 
e. 
, out of psychical elements”, andin the same book we read: “Dependencies outside the bound-ary U [ =Umgrenzung , i. 
e. 
, “the spatial boundary of our body”, S. 
 8] are physics in the broadest sense” (S. 
 323,§ 4). 
 “To obtain those dependencies in a pure state ( rein erhalten ) it is necessary as much as possible to eliminate the influence of the observer of the elements that lie with-in U” (loc. 
 cit. 
). 
 Well, well, the titmouse first promised to set the sea on fire ... i. 
e. 
, to construct physical elements from psychical elements, and then it turns out that physicalelements lie beyond the boundary of psychical elements,“which lie within our body”! A remarkable philosophy! Another example: “A perfect ( vollkommenes ) gas, a per-fect liquid, a perfect elastic body, does not exist; the phys-icist knows that his fictions only approximate to the facts and arbitrarily simplify them; he is aware of the divergence,which cannot be eliminated” (S. 
 418, § 30). 
 What divergence ( Abweichung ) is meant here? The di-vergence of what from what? Of thought (physical theory)from the facts. 
 And what are thoughts, ideas? Ideas are the “tracks of sensations” (S. 
 9). 
 And what are facts? Facts are “complexes of sensations”. 
 And so, the divergence ofthe tracks of sensations from complexes of sensations cannotbe eliminated. 
 *The foreword to Ludwig Feuerbach , dated February 1888. 
 These words of Engels’ refer to German professorial philosophy in general. 
The Machists who would like to be Marxists, being unable to grasp thesignificance and meaning of this thought of Engels’, sometimes take refuge in a wretched evasion: “Engels did not yet know Mach” (Fritz Adler in Historical Materialism , p. 
 370) . 
 On what is this opinion based? On the fact that Engels does not cite Mach and Avenarius? There are noother grounds, and these grounds are worthless, for Engels does notmention any of the eclectics by name, and it is hardly likely that Engels did not know Avenarius, who had been editing a quarterly of “scientific” philosophy ever since 1876. 
 What does this mean? It means that Mach forgets his own theory and, when treating of various problems of phys-ics, speaks plainly, without idealist twists, i. 
e. 
, materi-alistically. 
 All the “complexes of sensations” and the en-tire stock of Berkeleian wisdom vanish. 
 The physicists’theory proves to be a reflection of bodies, liquids, gasesexisting outside us and independently of us, a reflectionwhich is, of course, approximate; but to call this approx-imation or simplification “arbitrary” is wrong. 
 In fact , sensation is here regarded by Mach just as it is regardedby all science which has not been “purified” by the disci-ples of Berkeley and Hume, viz. 
, as an image of the external world . 
 Mach’s own theory is subjective idealism; but when the factor of objectivity is required, Mach unceremoniously inserts into his arguments the premises of the opposite, i. 
e. 
, the materialist, theory of knowledge. 
 Eduard vonHartmann, a consistent idealist and consistent reactionaryin philosophy, who sympathises with the Machists ’ fight against materialism , comes very close to the truth when he says that Mach’s philosophical position is a “mixture (Nichtunterscheidung ) of naïve realism and absolute illu-sionism”. 
 * That is true. 
 The doctrine that bodies are com-plexes of sensations, etc. 
, is absolute illusionism, i. 
e. 
. 
,solipsism; for from this standpoint the world is nothingbut my illusion. 
 On the other hand, Mach’s above-men-tioned argument, as well as many other of his fragmentary arguments, is what is known as “naïve realism”, i. 
e. 
, the materialist theory of knowledge unconsciously and instinc-tively taken over from the scientists. 
 Avenarius and the professors who follow in his foot-steps attempt to disguise this mixture by the theory of the“principal co-ordination”. 
 We shall proceed to examine this theory presently, but let us first finish with the charge that Avenarius is a materialist. 
 Mr. 
 Yushkevich, to whomWundt’s opinion which he failed to understand seemedso interesting, was either himself not enough interested tolearn, or else did not condescend to inform the reader, howAvenarius’ nearest disciples and successors reacted to this *Eduard von Hartmann, Die Weltanschauung der modernen Phy-ik, Leipzig, 1902, S. 
 219. 
 charge. 
 Yet this is necessary to clarify the matter if we are interested in the relation of Marx’s philosophy, i. 
e. 
, materialism, to the philosophy of empirio-criticism. 
 More-over, if Machism is a muddle, a mixture of materialism andidealism, it is important to know whither this currentturned—if we may so express it—after the official ideal-ists began to disown it because of its concessions to ma-terialism. 
 Wundt was answered, among others, by two of Avenarius’ purest and most orthodox disciples, J. 
 Petzoldt and Fr. 
Carstanjen. 
 Petzoldt, with haughty resentment, repudiatedthe charge of materialism, which is so degrading to a Ger-man professor, and in support referred to—what do youthink?—Avenarius’ Prolegomena , where the concept of substance is supposed to have been annihilated! A convenient theory, indeed, that can be made to embrace both purelyidealist works and arbitrarily assumed materialist premises!Avenarius’ Critique of Pure Experience , of course, does not contradict this teaching, i. 
e. 
, materialism, writesPetzoldt, but neither does it contradict the directly opposite spiritualist doctrine. 
 * An excellent defence! This is exactly what Engels called “a pauper’s broth of eclecticism”. 
 Bog-danov, who refuses to own himself a Machist and who wantsto be considered a Marxist ( in philosophy ), follows Petzoldt. 
 He asserts that “empirio-criticism is not ... concerned withmaterialism, or with spiritualism, or with metaphysics in general”, ** that “truth ... does not lie in the ‘golden mean’ between the conflicting trends [materialism and spiritual-ism], but lies outside of both”. 
 *** What appeared to Bog-danov to be truth is, as a matter of fact, confusion, a waver-ing between materialism and idealism. 
 Carstanjen, rebutting Wundt, said that he absolutely repudiated this “importation ( Unterschiebung ) of a mate-rialist element” “which is utterly foreign to the critiqueof pure experience”. 
 **** “Empirio-criticism is scepticism * J. 
 Petzoldt, Einführung in die Philosophie der reinen Erfahrung , Bd. 
 I, S. 
 351, 352. 
 ** Empirio-monism , Bk. 
 I, 2nd ed. 
, p. 
 21. 
 *** Ibid. 
, p. 
 93 **** Fr. 
 Carstanjen, “Der Empiriokritizismus, zugleich eine Erwi-derung auf W. 
 Wundts Aufsätze”, Vierteljahrsschrift für wissenschaft-και’ /FL0140ξοχÅν (pre-eminently) in relation to the content of the concepts. 
” There is a grain of truth in this insistent emphasis on the neutrality of Machism; the amendment made by Mach and Avenarius to their original idealism amountsto making partial concessions to materialism. 
 Instead ofthe consistent standpoint of Berkeley—the external worldis my sensation—we sometimes get the Humean standpoint—I exclude the question whether or not there is anything beyond my sensations. 
 And this agnostic standpoint inevita-bly condemns one to vacillate between materialism and ide-alism. 
 3. 
 THE PRINCIPAL CO-ORDINATION AND “NAÏVE REALISM” Avenarius expounded his doctrine of the principal co-ordination in The Human Concept of the World and in the Notes . 
 The second was written later, and in it Avenarius emphasises that he is expounding, it is true in a somewhataltered form, something that is not different from The Cri-tique of Pure Experience and The Human Concept of the World , but exactly the same (Notes , 1894, p. 
 137 in the jour-nal quoted above). 
 The essence of this doctrine is the thesisof “the indissoluble (unauflösliche ) co-ordination [i. 
e. 
, the correlative connection] of the self (des Ich ) and the envi-ronment ” (p. 
 146). 
 “Expressed philosophically,” Avenarius says here, one can say the “ self and not-self ”. 
 We “ always find together” ( immer ein Zusammen-vorgefundenes ) the one and the other, the self and the environment. 
 “No full de-scription of what we find ( des Vorgefundenem ) can contain an ‘environment’ without some self (ohne ein Ich ) whose envi-ronment it is, even though it be only the self that is de-scribing what is found ( das Vorgefundene )” (S. 
 146). 
 The self is called the central term of the co-ordination, the environ-ment the counter-term (Gegenglied ). 
 (See Der menschliche Weltbegriff , 2. 
 Auflage, 1905, S. 
 83-84, § 148 ff. 
) Avenarius claims that by this doctrine he recognises the full value of what is known as naïve realism , that is, the ordinary, non-philosophical, naïve view which is enter-tained by all people who do not trouble themselves as towhether they themselves exist and whether the environment, Avenarius, Mach also tries to represent himself as a defend-er of “naïve realism” ( Analysis of Sensations , p. 
 39). 
 The Russian Machists, without exception, believed Mach’s and Avenarius’ claim that this was indeed a defence of “naïverealism”: the self is acknowledged, the environment is acknowledged—what more do you want? In order to decide who actually possesses the greatest degree of naïveté , let us proceed from a somewhat remote starting-point. 
 Here is a popular dialogue between a cer-tain philosopher and his reader: “Reader : The existence of a system of things [accord-ing to ordinary philosophy] is required and from them onlyis consciousness to be derived. 
 “Author : Now you are speaking in the spirit of a pro-fessional philosopher ... and not according to human com-mon sense and actual consciousness.... 
 “Tell me, and reflect well before you answer: Does a thing appear in you and become present in you and for youotherwise than simultaneously with and through your con-sciousness of the thing?... “Reader : Upon sufficient reflection, I must grant you this. 
 “Author : Now you are speaking from yourself, from your heart. 
 Take care, therefore, not to jump out of your-self and to apprehend anything otherwise than you are ableto apprehend it, as consciousness and [philosopher’s italics] the thing, as the thing and consciousness; or, more precisely, neither the one nor the other, but that which only subsequent-ly becomes resolved into the two, that which is the absolutesubjective-objective and objective-subjective. 
” Here you have the whole essence of the empirio-critical principal co-ordination, the latest defence of “naïve real-ism” by the latest positivism! The idea of “indissoluble” co-ordination is here stated very clearly and as though it were a genuine defence of the point of view of the commonman, undistorted by the subtleties of “the professionalphilosophers”. 
 But, as a matter of fact, this dialogue istaken from the work of a classical representative of sub-jective idealism , Johann Gottlieb Fichte , published in 1801 . 
 * *Johann Gottlieb Fichte, Sonnenklarer Bericht an das grössere Publikum über das eigentliche Wesen der neuesten Philosophie. 
 EinVersuch , die Leser zum Verstehen zu zwingen , Berlin, 1801, S. 
 178-80. 
 There is nothing but a paraphrase of subjective ideal-ism in the teachings of Mach and Avenarius we are examin-ing. 
 Their claim to have risen above materialism and ideal-ism, to have eliminated the opposition between the point ofview that proceeds from the thing to consciousness and the contrary point of view—is but the empty claim of a renovat-ed Fichteanism. 
 Fichte too imagined that he has “indisso-lubly” connected the “self” and the “environment”, the con-sciousness and the thing; that he had “solved” the problem by the assertion that a man cannot jump out of himself. 
 Inother words, the Berkeleian argument is repeated: I per-ceive only my sensations, I have no right to assume “objectsin themselves” outside of my sensation. 
 The different meth-ods of expression used by Berkeley in 1710, by Fichte in 1801, and by Avenarius in 1891-94 do not in the least change the essence of the matter, viz. 
, the fundamentalphilosophical line of subjective idealism. 
 The world ismy sensation; the non-self is “postulated” (is created, pro-duced) by the self; the thing is indissolubly connected with the consciousness; the indissoluble co-ordination of the self and the environment is the empirio-critical principal co-ordination;—this is all one and the same proposition,the same old trash with a slightly refurbished, or repainted,signboard. 
 The reference to “naïve realism”, supposedly defended by this philosophy, is sophistry of the cheapest kind. 
 The “naïve realism” of any healthy person who has not been an inmate of a lunatic asylum or a pupil of the idealist phi-losophers consists in the view that things, the environ-ment, the world, exist independently of our sensation, of our consciousness, of our self and of man in general. 
 The same experience (not in the Machist sense, but in the human sense of the term) that has produced in us the firm convic-tion that independently of us there exist other people, and not mere complexes of my sensations of high, short, yellow,hard, etc. 
—this same experience produces in us the convic-tion that things, the world, the environment exist independ-ently of us. 
 Our sensation, our consciousness is only an image of the external world, and it is obvious that an image cannot exist without the thing imaged, and that the latterexists independently of that which images it. 
 Materialism deliberately makes the “naïve” belief of mankind the foun-dation of its theory of knowledge. 
 Is not the foregoing evaluation of the “principal co-ordination” a product of the materialist prejudice againstMachism? Not at all. 
 Specialists in philosophy who cannotbe accused of partiality towards materialism, who even de-test it and who accept one or other of the idealist systems,agree that the principal co-ordination of Avenarius and Co. 
 is subjective idealism. 
 Wundt, for instance, whose inter-esting opinion was not understood by Mr. 
 Yushkevich, ex-plicitly states that Avenarius’ theory, according to which afull description of the given or the found is impossiblewithout some self, an observer or describer, is “a false confusion of the content of real experience with reflections about it”. 
 Natural science, says Wundt, completely ab-stracts from every observer. 
 “Such abstraction is possibleonly because the attribution ( Hinzudenken ) of an experienc-ing individual to every content of experience, which theempirio-critical philosophy, in agreement with the imman-entist philosophy, assumes, is in general an empirically unfounded presumption arising from a false confusion of the content of real experience with reflections about it”(loc. 
 cit. 
, S. 
 382). 
 For the immanentists (Schuppe, Rehmke,Leclair, Schubert-Soldern), who themselves voice—as weshall see later—their hearty sympathy with Avenarius,proceed from this very idea of the “indissoluble” connec-tion between subject and object. 
 And W. 
 Wundt, before ana-lysing Avenarius, demonstrated in detail that the immanent-ist philosophy is only a “modification” of Berkeleianism,that however much the immanentists may deny their kinshipwith Berkeley we should not allow verbal differences toconceal from us the “deeper content of these philosophical doctrines”, viz. 
, Berkeleianism or Fichteanism. 
 * The English writer Norman Smith, analysing Avenarius’ Philosophy of Pure Experience , states this conclusion in an even more straightforward and emphatic form: “Most readers of Avenarius’ The Human Concept of the World will probably agree that, however convincing as criti-*Loc. 
 cit. 
, §C: “The Immanentist Philosophy and Berkeleian Idealism”, S. 
 373 and 375; cf. 
 386 and 407. 
 “The Unavoidability ofSolipsism from This Standpoint”, S. 
 381. 
 cism [of idealism], it is tantalisingly illusive in its pos-itive teaching. 
 So long as we seek to interpret his theory of experience in the form in which it is avowedly presented, namely, as genuinely realistic, it eludes all clear compre-hension: its whole meaning seems to be exhausted in negationof the subjectivism which it overthrows. 
 It is only whenwe translate Avenarius’ technical terms into more familiarlanguage that we discover where the real source of the mys-tification lies. 
 Avenarius has diverted attention from the defects of his position by directing his main attack againstthe very weakness [i. 
e. 
, of the idealist position] which isfatal to his own theory. 
 ” * “Throughout the whole discussion the vagueness of the term experience stands him in goodstead. 
 Sometimes it means experiencing and at other times the experienced, the latter meaning being emphasised when the nature of the self is in question. 
 These two meanings of the term experience practically coincide with his importantdistinction between the absolute and the relative standpoints[I have examined above what significance this distinctionhas for Avenarius]; and these two points of view are not in his philosophy really reconciled. 
 For when he allows as legitimate the demand that experience be ideally completedin thought [the full description of the environment is ideal-ly completed by thinking of an observing self], he makes an admission which he cannot successfully combine with hisassertion that nothing exists save in relation to the self. 
 The ideal completion of given reality which results from the analysis of material bodies into elements which no humansenses can apprehend [here are meant the material elementsdiscovered by natural science, the atoms, electrons, etc. 
,and not the fictitious elements invented by Mach and Ave-narius], or from following the earth back to a time when no human being existed upon it, is, strictly, not a completion of experience but only of what is experienced. 
 It completesonly one of the two aspects which Avenarius has asserted tobe inseparable. 
 It leads us not only to what has not beanexperienced but to what can never by any possibility beexperienced by beings like ourselves. 
 But here again the *Norman Smith, “Avenarius’ Philosophy of Pure Experience”, Mind ,30 Vol. 
 XV, 1906, pp. 
 27-28. 
 ambiguities of the term experience come to Avenarius’ rescue. 
 He argues that thought is as genuine a form of ex-perience as sense-perception, and so in the end falls back on the time-worn argument of subjective idealism, that thoughtand reality are inseparable, because reality can only be con-ceived in thought, and thought involves the presence ofthe thinker. 
 Not, therefore, any original and profound re-establishment of realism, but only the restatement in its crudest form of the familiar position of subjective idealism is the final outcome of Avenarius’ positive speculations”(p. 
 29). 
 The mystification wrought by Avenarius, who completely duplicates Fichte’s error, is here excellently exposed. 
The much-vaunted elimination of the antithesis between ma-terialism (Norman Smith wrongly calls it realism) and idealism by means of the term “experience” instantly provesto be a myth as soon as we proceed to definite and concreteproblems. 
 Such, for instance, is the problem of the exist-ence of the earth prior to man, prior to any sentient being. 
 We shall presently speak of this point in detail. 
 Here we will note that not only Norman Smith, an opponent of his theory, but also W. 
 Schuppe, the immanentist, who warmlygreeted the appearance of The Human Concept of the World as a confirmation of naïve realism , * unmasks Avenarius and his fictitious “realism”. 
 The fact of the matter is thatSchuppe fully agrees with such “realism”, i. 
e. 
, the mystif-ication of materialism dished out by Avenarius. 
 Such “realism”, he wrote to Avenarius, I, the immanentist phi-losopher, who have been slandered as a subjective idealist,have always claimed with as much right as yourself, hoch-verehrter Herr Kollege . 
 “My conception of thought ... ex-cellently harmonises ( verträgt sich vortrefflich ) with your ‘theory of pure experience’” (p. 
 384). 
 “The connection and inseparability of the two terms of the co-ordination” are infact provided only by the self (das Ich , the abstract, Fich-tean self-consciousness, thought divorced from the brain). 
“That which you desired to eliminate you have tacitly as-sumed”—so Schuppe wrote to Avenarius (p. 
 388). 
 And it *See W. 
 Schuppe’s open letter to R. 
 Avenarius in Vierteljahrs-schrift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie , Bd. 
 XVII, 1893, S. 
 364-88. 
 is difficult to say who more caustically unmasks Avenarius the mystifier—Smith by his straightforward and clear re-futation, or Schuppe by his enthusiastic opinion of Avena-rius’ crowning work. 
 The kiss of Wilhelm Schuppe in phi-losophy is no better than the kiss of Peter Struve or Men-shikov 31 in politics. 
 O. 
 Ewald, who praises Mach for not succumbing to ma-terialism, speaks of the principal co-ordination in a simi-lar manner: “If one declares the correlation of central term and counter-term to be an epistemological necessity whichcannot be avoided, then, even though the word ‘empirio-criticism’ be inscribed on the signboard in shrieking let-ters, one is adopting a standpoint that differs in no wayfrom absolute idealism. 
 [The term is incorrect; he should have said subjective idealism, for Hegel’s absolute ideal-ism is reconcilable with the existence of the earth, nature,and the physical universe without man, since nature is re-garded as the “other being” of the absolute idea. 
] On theother hand, if we do not hold fast to this co-ordinationand if we grant the counter-terms their independence, then the way is at once opened for every metaphysical possibili-ty, especially in the direction of transcendental realism”(op. 
 cit. 
, pp. 
 56-57). 
 By metaphysics and transcendental realism, Herr Fried-lander, who is disguised under the pseudonym Ewald, meansmaterialism . 
 Himself professing one of the varieties of idealism, he fully agrees with the Machists and the Kant-ians that materialism is metaphysics—“from beginning toend the wildest metaphysics” (p. 
 134). 
 On the question ofthe “transcendence” and the metaphysical character of ma-terialism he is in agreement with Bazarov and all our Mach-ists, and of this we shall have more to say later. 
 Here again it is important to note how in fact the empty, pseudo-scien-tific claim to have transcended idealism and materialismvanishes, and how the question arises inexorably and irre-concilably. 
 “To grant the counter-terms their independence”means (if one translates the pretentious language of theaffected Avenarius into common parlance) to regard nature, the external world as independent of human consciousness and sensation. 
 And that is materialism. 
 To build a theoryof knowledge on the postulate of the indissoluble connection between the object and human sensation (“complexes of sensations” as identical with bodies; “world-elements” that are identical both psychically and physically; Avenarius’ co-ordination, and so forth) is to land inevitably into ideal-ism. 
 Such is the simple and unavoidable truth that witha little attention may be easily detected beneath the pilesof affected quasi-erudite terminology of Avenarius, Schuppe,Ewald and the others, which deliberately obscures matters and frightens the general public away from philosophy. 
 The “reconciliation” of Avenarius’ theory with “naïve realism” in the end aroused misgivings even among his owndisciples. 
 For instance, R. 
 Willy says that the commonassertion that Avenarius came to adopt “naïve realism”should be taken cum grano salis . 
 “As a dogma, naïve realism would be nothing but the belief in things-in-themselves existing outside man ( ausserpersönliche ) in their percep-tible form. 
” * In other words, the only theory of knowledge that is really created by an actual and not fictitious agree-ment with “naïve realism” is, according to Willy, ma-terialism! And Willy, of course, rejects materialism. 
 But he is compelled to admit that Avenarius in The Human Concept of the World restores the unity of “experience”, the unity of the “self” and the environment “by means of aseries of complicated and in part extremely artificial auxil-iary and intermediary conceptions” (171). 
 The Human Concept of the World , being a reaction against the origi-nal idealism of Avenarius, “entirely bears the character of a reconciliation (eines Ausgleiches ) between the naïve real-ism of common sense and the epistemological idealism ofschool philosophy. 
 But that such a reconciliation couldrestore the unity and integrity of experience [Willy callsit Grunderfahrung , that is, basic experience—another new word!], I would not assert” (170). 
 A valuable admission! Avenarius’ “experience” failed to reconcile idealism and materialism. 
 Willy, it seems,repudiates the school philosophy of experience in order to replace it by a philosophy of “basic” experience, which isconfusion thrice confounded.... 
 *R. 
 Willy, Gegen die Schulweisheit , S. 
 170. 
 4. 
 DID NATURE EXIST PRIOR TO MAN? We have already seen that this question is a particu-larly annoying one for the philosophy of Mach and Avenarius. 
Natural science positively asserts that the earth once ex-isted in such a state that no man or any other creature ex-isted or could have existed on it. 
 Organic matter is a lat-er phenomenon, the fruit of a long evolution. 
 It follows that there was no sentient matter, no “complexes of sensa-tions”, no self that was supposedly “indissolubly” con-nected with the environment in accordance with Avenarius’doctrine. 
 Matter is primary, and thought, consciousness,sensation are products of a very high development. 
 Suchis the materialist theory of knowledge, to which natural science instinctively subscribes. 
 The question arises, have the eminent representatives of empirio-criticism observed this contradiction betweentheir theory and natural science? They have observed it,and they have definitely asked themselves by what argumentsthis contradiction can be removed. 
 Three attitudes to this question are of particular interest from the point of view of materialism, that of Avenarius himself and those of hisdisciples J. 
 Petzoldt and R. 
 Willy. 
 Avenarius tries to eliminate the contradiction to nat-ural science by means of the theory of the “potential”central term in the co-ordination. 
 As we know, co-ordina-tion is the “indissoluble” connection between the self and the environment. 
 In order to eliminate the obvious absur-dity of this theory the concept of the “potential” centralterm is introduced. 
 For instance, what about man’s devel-opment from the embryo? Does the environment ( =the “coun-ter-term”) exist if the “central term” is represented by an embryo? The embryonic system C—Avenarius replies—is the “potential central term in relation to the future individ-ual environment” ( Notes on the Concept of the Subject of Psychology , p. 
 140). 
 The potential central term is never equal to zero, even when there are as yet no parents ( elter-liche Bestandteile ), but only “integral parts of the envi-ronment” capable of becoming parents (S. 
 141). 
 The co-ordination then is indissoluble. 
 It is essential for the empirio-criticist to assert this in order to save the fundamentals of his philosophy—sensations and their complexes. 
 Man is the central term of this co-ordination. 
 But when there is no man, when he has not yet been born, the central term is nevertheless not equal to zero; it hasonly become a potential central term! It is astonishing that there are people who can take seriously a philosopherwho advances such arguments! Even Wundt, who stipulatesthat he is not an enemy of every form of metaphysics (i. 
e. 
, of fideism), was compelled to admit “the mystical obscura-tion of the concept experience” by the word “potential”,which destroys co-ordination entirely (op. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 379). 
 And, indeed, how can one seriously speak of a co-or-dination the indissolubility of which consists in one of itsterms being potential? Is this not mysticism, the very antechamber of fide-ism? If it is possible to think of a potential central termin relation to a future environment, why not think of itin relation to a past environment, that is, after man’s death ? You will say that Avenarius did not draw this con-clusion from his theory? Granted, but that absurd and re-actionary theory became the more cowardly but not any the better for that. 
 Avenarius, in 1894, did not carry this theoryto its logical conclusion, or perhaps feared to do so. 
 ButR. 
 Schubert-Soldern, as we shall see, resorted in 1896 tothis very theory to arrive at theological conclusions, which in 1906 earned the approval of Mach, who said that Schu-bert-Soldern was following “ very close paths ” (to Machism) (Analysis of Sensations , p. 
 4). 
 Engels was quite right in attacking Dühring, an avowed atheist, for inconsistentlyleaving loopholes for fideism in his philosophy. 
 Engels sev-eral times, and very justly, brought this accusation againstthe materialist Dühring, although the latter had not drawn any theological conclusions, in the seventies at least. 
 Among us, however, there are people who desire to be regarded asMarxists, yet who bring to the masses a philosophy whichcomes very close to fideism. 
 “... It might seem,” Avenarius wrote in the Notes , “that from the empirio-critical standpoint natural science is not entitled to enquire about periods of our present environment which in time preceded the existence of man” (S. 
 144). 
 Ave-narius answers: “The enquirer cannot avoid mentally pro-jecting himself” ( sich hinzuzudenken , i. 
e. 
, imagining one-self to be present). 
 “For”—Avenarius continues—“what the scientist wants (although he may not be clearly aware of it) is essentially only this: how is the earth to be de-fined prior to the appearance of living beings or man ifI were mentally to project myself in the role of an observer—in much the same way as though it were thinkable that wecould from our earth follow the history of another star or even of another solar system with the help of perfected instruments. 
” An object cannot exist independently of our conscious-ness. 
 “We always mentally project ourselves as the intel-ligence endeavouring to apprehend the object. 
” This theory of the necessity of “mentally projecting” the human mind to every object and to nature prior to man is given by me in the first paragraph in the words of the“recent positivist”, R. 
 Avenarius, and in the second, inthe words of the subjective idealist, J. 
 G. 
 Fichte. 
 * The sophistry of this theory is so manifest that it is embarrass-ing to analyse it. 
 If we “mentally project” ourselves, our presence will be imaginary —but the existence of the earth prior to man is real . 
 Man could not in practice be an ob-server, for instance, of the earth in an incandescent state,and to “imagine” his being present at the time is obscuran-tism , exactly as though I were to endeavour to prove the existence of hell by the argument that if I “mentally pro-jected” myself thither as an observer I could observe hell. 
 The “reconciliation” of empirio-criticism and natural sci-ence amounts to this, that Avenarius graciously consentsto “mentally project” something the possibility of admittingwhich is excluded by natural science. 
 No man at all educat-ed or sound-minded doubts that the earth existed at a time when there could not have been any life on it, any sensa-tion or any “central term”, and consequently the whole the-ory of Mach and Avenarius, from which it follows that theearth is a complex of sensations (“bodies are complexes ofsensations”) or “complexes of elements in which the psychi-cal and physical are identical”, or “a counter-term of which *J. 
 G. 
 Fichte, Rezension des Aenesidemus , 1794, Sämtliche Werke , Bd. 
 I, S. 
 19. 
 the central term can never be equal to zero”, is philosoph-ical obscurantism , the carrying of subjective idealism to absurdity. 
 J. 
 Petzoldt perceived the absurdity of the position into which Avenarius had fallen and felt ashamed. 
 In his In-troduction to the Philosophy of Pure Experience (Vol. 
 II) he devotes a whole paragraph (§ 65) “to the question of thereality of earlier ( frühere ) periods of the earth”. 
 “In the teaching of Avenarius,” says Petzoldt, “the self (das Ich ) plays a role different from that which it plays with Schuppe [let us note that Petzoldt openly and repeat-edly declares: our philosophy was founded by three men— Avenarius, Mach and Schuppe], yet it is a role which,perhaps, possesses too much importance for his theory. 
” (Petzoldt was evidently influenced by the fact that Schuppe had unmasked Avenarius by showing that with him too every-thing rests entirely on the self; and Petzoldt wishes to make a correction. 
) “Avenarius said on one occasion,” Pet-zoldt continues, “that we can think of a region where nohuman foot has yet trodden, but to be able to think [Ave-narius’ italics] of such an environment there is required what we designate by the term self (Ich-Bezeichnetes ), whose [Avenarius’ italics] thought it is” ( Vierteljahrsschrift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie , 18. 
 Bd. 
, 1894, S. 
 146, An-merkung). 
 Petzoldt replies: “The epistemologically important question, however, is not whether we can think of such a region at all,but whether we are entitled to think of it as existing,or as having existed, independently of any individualmind. 
” What is true, is true. 
 People can think and “mentally project” for themselves any kind of hell and all sorts of dev-ils. 
 Lunacharsky even “mentally projected” for himself—well, to use a mild expression—religious conceptions. 
 32 But it is precisely the purpose of the theory of knowledgeto show the unreal, fantastic and reactionary character ofsuch projections. 
 “... For that the system C [i. 
e. 
, the brain] is necessary for thought is obvious both for Avenarius and for the phi-losophy which is here presented.... 
” That is not true. 
 Avenarius’ theory of 1876 is a theory of thought without brain. 
 And in his theory of 1891-94, as we shall presently see, there is a similar element of ideal-ist nonsense. 
 “... But is this system C a condition of existence [Petzoldt’s italics] of, say, the Mesozoic period ( Sekundärzeit ) of the earth?” And Petzoldt, presenting the argument of AvenariusI have already cited, on the subject of what science actually wants and how we can “mentally project” the observer, objects: “No, we wish to know whether I have the right to think that the earth at that remote epoch existed in the sameway as I think of it as having existed yesterday or a minuteago. 
 Or must the existence of the earth be made conditional, as Willy claimed, on our right at least to assume that at the given period there coexisted some system C, even thoughat the lowest stage of its development?” (Of this idea ofWilly’s we shall speak presently. 
) “Avenarius evades Willy’s strange conclusion by the argument that the person who puts the question cannot men-tally remove himself ( sich wegdenken , i. 
e. 
, think himself as absent), nor can he avoid mentally projecting himself(sich hinzuzudenken , see Avenarius, The Human Concept of the World , 1st German edition, p. 
 130). 
 But then Avenarius makes the individual self of the person who puts the ques-tion, or the thought of such a self, the condition not only of the act of thought regarding the uninhabitable earth, but also of the justification for believing in the existence ofthe earth at that time. 
 “These false paths are easily avoided if we do not as-cribe so much theoretical importance to the self. 
 The only thing the theory of knowledge should demand of any concep-tions of that which is remote in space or time is that it be conceivable and can be uniquely ( eindeutig ) determined; all the rest is a matter for the special sciences” (Vol. 
 II,p. 
 325). 
 Petzoldt rechristened the law of causality the law of unique determination and imported into his theory, as we shall see later, the apriority of this law. 
 This means that Petzoldt saves himself from Avenarius’ subjective idealismand solipsism (“he attributes an exaggerated importance to the self”, as the professorial jargon has it) with the help of Kantian ideas. 
 The absence of the objective factor in Avenarius’ doctrine, the impossibility of reconciling it with the demands of natural science, which declares theearth (object) to have existed long before the appearanceof living beings (subject), compelled Petzoldt to resort tocausality (unique determination). 
 The earth existed, forits existence prior to man is causally connected with the present existence of the earth. 
 Firstly, where does causal-ity come from? A priori , says Petzoldt. 
 Secondly, are not the ideas of hell, devils, and Lunacharsky’s “mental pro-jections” also connected by causality? Thirdly, the theoryof “complexes of sensations” in any case turns out to bedestroyed by Petzoldt. 
 Petzoldt failed to resolve the con-tradiction he observed in Avenarius, and only entangled him-self still more, for only one solution is possible, viz. 
, therecognition that the external world reflected by our mindexists independently of our mind. 
 This materialist solutionalone is really compatible with natural science, and it aloneeliminates both Petzoldt’s and Mach’s idealist solution of the question of causality, which we shall speak of separately. 
 The third empirio-criticist, R. 
 Willy, first raised the question of this difficulty for Avenarius’ philosophy in1896, in an article entitled “Der Empiriokritizismus alseinzig wissenschaftlicher Standpunkt” (“Empirio-criticismas the Only Scientific Standpoint”). 
 What about the world prior to man?—Willy asks here, * and at first answers ac-cording to Avenarius: “we project ourselves mentally into the past. 
” But then he goes on to say that we are not nec-essarily obliged to regard experience as human experience . 
 “For we must simply regard the animal kingdom—be it themost insignificant worm—as primitive fellow-men ( Mitmen-schen ) if we regard animal life only in connection with gener-al experience” (73-74). 
 Thus, prior to man the earth wasthe “experience” of a worm, which fulfilled the function ofthe “central term” in order to save Avenarius’ “co-ordina-tion” and Avenarius’ philosophy! No wonder Petzoldt triedto dissociate himself from an argument which is not only *Vierteljahrsschrift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie , Band XX, 1896, S. 
 72. 
 the height of absurdity (ideas of the earth corresponding to the theories of geologists are attributed to a worm), but which does not in any way help our philosopher, for the earth existed not only before man but before any livingbeing at all. 
 Willy returned to the question in 1905. 
 The worm was now set aside. 
 * But Petzoldt’s “law of unique determina-tion” could not, of course, satisfy Willy, who regarded it as merely “logical formalism”. 
 The author says—will not the question of the world prior to man, as Petzoldt putsit, lead us “back again to the things-in-themselves of com-mon sense?” (i. 
e. 
, to materialism! How terrible indeed!). 
What does millions of years without life mean? “Is timeperhaps a thing-in-itself? of course not! ** Well, that means that things outside men are only impressions, bits of fantasy fabricated by men with the help of a few frag-ments we find around us. 
 And why not? Need the philoso-pher fear the stream of life?... And so I say to myself: aban-don all erudite system-making and grasp the moment ( ergrei-fe den Augenblick ), the moment you are living in, the mo-ment which alone brings happiness” (177-78). 
 Well, well! Either materialism or solipsism—this, in spite of his vociferous phrases, is what Willy arrives atwhen he analyses the question of the existence of naturebefore man. 
 To summarise. 
 Three augurs of empirio-criticism have appeared before us and have laboured in the sweat of their brow to reconcile their philosophy with natural science, topatch up the holes of solipsism. 
 Avenarius repeated Fichte’sargument and substituted an imaginary world for the realworld. 
 Petzoldt withdrew from Fichtean idealism and movedtowards Kantian idealism. 
 Willy, having suffered a fiasco with the “worm”, threw up the sponge and inadvertently blurted out the truth: either materialism or solipsism,or even the recognition of nothing but the present mo-ment. 
 It only remains for us to show the reader how this problem was understood and treated by our own native Machists. 
 *R. 
 Willy, Gegen die Schulweisheit , 1905, S. 
 173-78. 
 **We shall discuss this point with the Machists later. 
 Here is Bazarov in the Studies “in” the Philosophy of Marx-ism (p. 
 11): “It remains for us now, under the guidance of our faith-ful vademecum [i. 
e. 
, Plekhanov], to descend into the last and most horrible circle of the solipsist inferno, intothat circle where, as Plekhanov assures us, every sub-jective idealism is menaced with the necessity of conceivingthe world as it was contemplated by the ichthyosauruses and archaeopteryxes. 
 ‘Let us mentally transport ourselves,’ writes Plekhanov, ‘to that epoch when only very remoteancestors of man existed on the earth, for instance, to theMesozoic period. 
 The question arises, what was the statusof space, time and causality then? Whose subjective formswere they then? Were they the subjective forms of the ichthyosauruses? And whose intelligence at that time dictated its laws to nature? The intelligence of thearchaeopteryx? To these queries the Kantian philosophy cangive no answer. 
 And it must be rejected as absolutelyincompatible with modern science’ ( L. 
 Feuerbach , p. 
 117). 
” Here Bazarov breaks off the quotation from Plekhanov just before a very important passage—as we shall soon see— namely: “Idealism says that without subject there is noobject. 
 The history of the earth shows that the object ex-isted long before the subject appeared, i. 
e. 
, long beforethe appearance of organisms possessing a perceptible degreeof consciousness.... 
 The history of development reveals the truth of materialism. 
” Let us continue the quotation from Bazarov:“... But does Plekhanov’s thing-in-itself provide the de-sired solution? Let us remember that even according toPlekhanov we can have no idea of things as they are inthemselves; we know only their manifestations, only the results of their action on our sense-organs. 
 ‘Apart from this action they possess no aspect’ ( L. 
 Feuerbach , p. 
 112). 
 What sense-organs existed in the period of the ichthyo-sauruses? Evidently, only the sense-organs of the ichthyo-sauruses and their like. 
 Only the ideas of the ichthyosau-ruses were then the actual, the real manifestations of things-in-themselves. 
 Hence, according to Plekhanov also, if the paleontologist desires to remain on ‘real’ ground hemust write the story of the Mesozoic period in the light of the contemplations of the ichthyosaurus. 
 And here, consequently, not a single step forward is made in com-parison with solipsism. 
” Such is the complete argument (the reader must pardon the lengthy quotation—we could not avoid it) of a Machist,an argument worthy of perpetuation as a first-class exampleof muddle-headedness. 
 Bazarov imagines that he has caught Plekhanov out. 
 If things-in-themselves, apart from their action on our sense-organs, have no aspect of their own, then in the Mesozoicperiod they did not exist except as the “aspect” of the sense-organs of the ichthyosaurus. 
 And this is the argumentof a materialist! If an “aspect” is the result of the action of“things-in-themselves” on sense-organs, does it follow from this that things do not exist independently of sense-organs of one kind or another?? Let us assume for a moment that Bazarov indeed “mis-understood” Plekhanov’s words (improbable as such an as-sumption may seem), that they did appear obscure to him. 
Be it so. 
 We ask: is Bazarov engaged in a fencing bout with Plekhanov (whom the Machists themselves exalt to the posi-tion of the only representative of materialism!), or is heendeavouring to elucidate the problem of materialism ? If Plekhanov seemed to you obscure or contradictory, and soforth, why did you not turn to other materialists? Is it be-cause you do not know them? But ignorance is no argument. 
 If Bazarov indeed does not know that the fundamental premise of materialism is the recognition of the externalworld, of the existence of things outside and independent of our mind, this is truly a striking case of crass ignorance. 
We would remind the reader of Berkeley, who in 1710rebuked the materialists for their recognition of “objects in themselves” existing independently of our mind and re-flected by our mind. 
 Of course, everybody is free to sidewith Berkeley or anyone else against the materialists; that is unquestionable. 
 But it is equally unquestionable that tospeak of the materialists and distort or ignore the funda-mental premise of all materialism is to import preposterous confusion into the problem. 
 Was Plekhanov right when he said that for idealism there is no object without a subject, while for materialism the object exists independently of the subject and is reflect-ed more or less adequately in the subject’s mind? If this is wrong , then any man who has the slightest respect for Marxism should have pointed out this error of Plekhanov’s, and should have dealt not with him, but with someone else, with Marx, Engels, or Feuerbach, on the question ofmaterialism and the existence of nature prior to man. 
 Butif this is right, or, at least, if you are unable to find an error here, then your attempt to shuffle the cards and to confuse in the reader’s mind the most elementary concep-tion of materialism, as distinguished from idealism, is aliterary indecency. 
 As for the Marxists who are interested in the question independently of every little word uttered by Plekhanov, we shall quote the opinion of L. 
 Feuerbach, who, as is known (perhaps not to Bazarov?), was a materialist, and through whom Marx and Engels, as is well known, came fromthe idealism of Hegel to their materialist philosophy. 
 Inhis rejoinder to R. 
 Haym, Feuerbach wrote: “Nature, which is not an object of man or mind, is for speculative philosophy, or at least for idealism, a Kantian thing-in-itself [we shall speak later in detail of the factthat our Machists confuse the Kantian thing-in-itself withthe materialist thing-in-itself], an abstraction withoutreality, but it is nature that causes the downfall of ideal-ism. 
 Natural science, at least in its present state, necessar-ily leads us back to a point when the conditions for human existence were still absent, when nature, i. 
e. 
, the earth,was not yet an object of the human eye and mind, when,consequently, nature was an absolutely non-human entity(absolut unmenschliches Wesen ). 
 Idealism may retort: but this nature also is something thought of by you ( von dir gedachte ). 
 Certainly, but from this it does not follow that this nature did not at one time actually exist, just as fromthe fact that Socrates and Plato do not exist for me if I donot think of them, it does not follow that Socrates and Platodid not actually at one time exist without me. 
” * *L. 
 Feuerbach, Sämtliche Werke , herausgegeben von Bolin und Jodl, Band VII, Stuttgart, 1903, S. 
 510; or Karl Grün, L. 
 Feuerbach in seinem Briefwechsel und Nachlass , sowie in seiner philosophischen Charakterentwicklung , I. 
 Band, Leipzig, 1874, S. 
 423-35. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR That is how Feuerbach regarded materialism and ideal-ism from the standpoint of the existence of nature prior to the appearance of man. 
 Avenarius’ sophistry (the “mental projection of the observer”) was refuted by Feuerbach, whodid not know the “recent positivism” but who thoroughlyknew the old idealist sophistries. 
 And Bazarov offers us ab-solutely nothing new, but merely repeats this sophistry ofthe idealists: “Had I been there [on earth, prior to man], I would have seen the world so-and-so” ( Studies “in” the Philosophy of Marxism , p. 
 29). 
 In other words: if I make an assumption that is obviously absurd and contrary to naturalscience (that man can be an observer in an epoch before manexisted), I shall be able to patch up the breach in my phi-losophy! This gives us an idea of the extent of Bazarov’s knowl-edge of the subject or of his literary methods. 
 Bazarov didnot even hint at the “difficulty” with which Avenarius,Petzoldt and Willy wrestled; and, moreover, he made sucha hash of the whole subject, placed before the reader suchan incredible hotchpotch, that there ultimately appears to be no difference between materialism and solipsism! Ideal-ism is represented as “realism”, and to materialism is as-cribed denial of the existence of things outside of theiraction on the sense-organs! Truly, either Feuerbach didnot know the elementary difference between materialism andidealism, or else Bazarov and Co. 
 have completely altered the elementary truths of philosophy. 
 Or let us take Valentinov, a philosopher who, natural-ly, is delighted with Bazarov: 1) “Berkeley is the founderof the correlativist theory of the relativity of subject andobject” (148). 
 But this is not Berkeleian idealism, oh, no!This is a “profound analysis”. 
 2) “In the most realistic as-pect, irrespective of the forms [!] of their usual idealist in-terpretation [only interpretation!], the fundamental prem-ises of the theory are formulated by Avenarius” (148). 
 In-fants, as we see, are taken in by mystification! 3) “Avenari-us’ conception of the starting-point of knowledge is thateach individual finds himself in a definite environment, in other words, the individual and the environment are given as connected and inseparable [!] terms of one and the sameco-ordination” (148). 
 Delightful! This is not idealism—Baza-rov and Valentinov have risen above materialism and ideal-ism—this “inseparability” of the subject and object is the most “realist” of all. 
 4) “Is the reverse assertion correct, namely, that there is no counter-term to which there would beno corresponding central term—an individual? Naturally [!]it is not correct.... 
 In the Archean period the woods were ver-dant ... yet there was no man” (148). 
 That means that theinseparable can be separated! Is that not “natural”? 5) “Yet from the standpoint of the theory of knowledge, the ques-tion of the object in itself is absurd” (148). 
 Of course! Whenthere were no sentient organisms objects were neverthe-less “complexes of elements” identical with sensations! 6) “The immanentist school, in the person of Schubert-Sol-dern and Schuppe, clad these [!] thoughts in an unsuitable form and found itself in the cul-de-sac of solipsism” (149). 
 But “these thoughts” themselves, of course, contain nosolipsism, and empirio-criticism is not a paraphrase of thereactionary theory of the immanentists, who lie whenthey declare themselves to be in sympathy with Avena-rius! This, Machist gentlemen, is not philosophy, but an in-coherent jumble of words. 
 5. 
 DOES MAN THINK WITH THE HELP OF THE BRAIN? Bazarov emphatically answers this question in the affirmative. 
 He writes: “If Plekhanov’s thesis that ‘con-sciousness is an internal [?Bazarov] state of matter’ begiven a more satisfactory form, e. 
g. 
, that ‘every mental proc-ess is a function of the cerebral process’, then neitherMach nor Avenarius would dispute it” ( Studies “in” the Philosophy of Marxism , 29). 
 To the mouse no beast is stronger than the cat. 
 To the Russian Machists there is no materialist stronger thanPlekhanov. 
 Was Plekhanov really the only one, or the first, to advance the materialist thesis that consciousness is aninternal state of matter? And if Bazarov did not like Plekha-nov’s formulation of materialism, why did he take Ple-khanov and not Engels or Feuerbach? Because the Machists are afraid to admit the truth. 
 They are fighting materialism, but pretend that it is only Plekhanov they are fighting. 
 A cowardly and unprincipled method. 
 But let us turn to empirio-criticism. 
 Avenarius “would not dispute” the statement that thought is a function ofthe brain. 
 These words of Bazarov’s contain a direct un-truth. 
 Not only does Avenarius dispute the materialist thesis, but invents a whole “theory” in order to refute it. 
“The brain,” says Avenarius in The Human Concept of the World , “is not the habitation, the seat, the creator, it is not the instrument or organ, the supporter or substratum, etc. 
, ofthought” (S. 
 76—approvingly quoted by Mach in the Analy-sis of Sensations , p. 
 32). 
 “Thought is not an inhabitant or commander, or the other half or side, etc. 
, nor is it a prod-uct or even a physiological function, or a state in general of the brain” (ibid. 
). 
 And Avenarius expresses himself no less emphatically in his Notes : “presentations” are “not func-tions (physiological, psychical, or psycho-physical) of thebrain” (op. 
 cit. 
, § 115, S. 
 419). 
 Sensations are not “psychicalfunctions of the brain” (§ 116). 
 Thus, according to Avenarius, the brain is not the or-gan of thought, and thought is not a function of the brain. 
 Take Engels, and we immediately find directly contrary,frankly materialist formulations. 
 “Thought and conscious-ness,” says Engels in Anti-Dühring , “are products of the hu-man brain” (5th German edition, p. 
 22). 
 33 This idea is often repeated in that work. 
 In Ludwig Feuerbach we have the following exposition of the views of Feuerbach and Engels: “...the material ( stofflich ), sensuously perceptible world to which we ourselves belong is the only reality”, “ourconsciousness and thinking, however suprasensuous they mayseem, are the product ( Erzeugnis ) of a material, bodily organ, the brain. 
 Matter is not a product of mind, but mind itself is merely the highest product of matter. 
 This is, of course, pure materialism” (4th German edi-tion, p. 
 18). 
 Or p. 
 4, where he speaks of the reflectionof the processes of nature in “the thinking brain”, 34 etc. 
, etc. 
 Avenarius rejects this materialist standpoint and says that “the thinking brain” is a “ fetish of natural science ” (The Human Concept of the World , 2nd German edition, p. 
 70). 
 Hence, Avenarius cherishes no illusions concerning his absolute disagreement with natural science on this point. 
 He admits, as do Mach and all the immanentists, that nat-ural science holds an instinctive and unconscious material-ist point of view. 
 He admits and explicitly declares thathe absolutely differs from the “prevailing psychology ” (Notes , p. 
 150, etc. 
). 
 This prevailing psychology is guilty of an inad-missible “introjection”—such is the new term contrived byour philosopher—i. 
e. 
, the insertion of thought into the brain, or of sensations into us. 
 These “two words” (into us— in uns), Avenarius goes on to say, contain the assumption (Annahme ) that empirio-criticism disputes. 
 “This insertion (Hineinverlegung ) of the visible, etc. 
, into man is what we call introjection ” (§ 45, S. 
 153). 
 Introjection deviates “in principle” from the “natural conception of the world” ( natürlicher Weltbegriff ) by sub-stituting “in me” for “before me” ( vor mir , S. 
 154), “by turn-ing a component part of the (real) environment into acomponent part of (ideal) thought” (ibid. 
). 
 “Out of theamechanical [a new word in place of “mental”] which mani-fests itself freely and clearly in the given [or, in what is found— im Vorgefundenen ], introjection makes something which mysteriously hides itself [ Latitierendes , says Ave-narius—another new word] in the central nervous system”(ibid. 
) Here we have the same mystification that we encountered in the famous defence of “naïve realism” by the empirio-criticists and immanentists. 
 Avenarius here acts on the advice of Turgenev’s charlatan 35: denounce most of all those vices which you yourself possess. 
 Avenarius tries topretend that he is combating idealism: philosophicalidealism, you see, is usually deduced from introjection,the external world is converted into sensation, into idea, and so forth, while I defend “naïve realism”, the equal reality of everything given, both “ self” and environ-ment, without inserting the external world into the humanbrain. 
 The sophistry here is exactly the same as that which we observed in the case of the famous co-ordination. 
 While distracting the attention of the reader by attacking ideal-ism, Avenarius is in fact defending idealism, albeit inslightly different words: thought is not a function of the brain; the brain is not the organ of thought; sensations are not a function of the nervous system; oh, no! sensa-tions are—“elements”, psychical only in one connection, while in another connection (although the elements are “ iden-tical ”) they are physical. 
 With his new and muddled terminology, with his new and pretentious epithets, sup-posedly expressing a new “theory”, Avenarius merely markedtime and then returned to his fundamental idealist premise. 
 And if our Russian Machists (e. 
g. 
, Bogdanov) failed to notice the “mystification” and discerned a refutation ofidealism in the “new” defence of it, we find in the analysisof empirio-criticism given by the professional philosophersa sober estimate of the true nature of Avenarius’ ideas,which is laid bare when stripped of its pretentious terminol-ogy. 
 In 1903 Bogdanov wrote (“Authoritative Thinking”, an article in the symposium From the Psychology of Society , p. 
 119, et seq. 
): “Richard Avenarius presented a most harmonious and complete philosophical picture of the development of the dualism of mind and body. 
 The gist of his ‘doctrine of introjection’ is the following: [we observe only physicalbodies directly, and we infer the experiences of others,i. 
e. 
, the mind of another person, only by hypothesis].... 
The hypothesis is complicated by the fact that the ex-periences of the other person are assumed to be located in his body, are inserted (introjected) into his organism. 
 This is already a superfluous hypothesis and even givesrise to numerous contradictions. 
 Avenarius systematicallydraws attention to these contradictions by unfolding aseries of successive historical factors in the developmentof dualism and of philosophical idealism. 
 But here we need not follow Avenarius. 
” ... “Introjection serves as an ex-planation of the dualism of mind and body. 
” Bogdanov swallowed the bait of professorial philosophy in believing that “introjection” was aimed against ideal-ism. 
 He accepted the evaluation of introjection given byAvenarius himself at its face value and failed to notice the barb directed against materialism. 
 Introjection denies that thought is a function of the brain, that sensationsare a function of man’s central nervous system, that is, it denies the most elementary truth of physiology in order to crush materialism. 
 “Dualism”, it turns out, is refuted idealistically (notwithstanding all Avenarius’ diplomatic rage against idealism), for sensation and thought prove tobe not secondary, not a product of matter, but primary . 
 Dualism is here refuted by Avenarius only insofar as he“refutes” the existence of the object without the subject,matter without thought, the external world independent of our sensations; that is, it is refuted idealistically . 
 The absurd denial of the fact that the visual image of a treeis a function of the retina, the nerves and the brain, wasrequired by Avenarius in order to bolster up his theory ofthe “indissoluble” connection of the “complete” experiencewhich includes not only the self but also the tree, i. 
e. 
, the environment. 
 The doctrine of introjection is a muddle; it smuggles in idealistic rubbish and is contradictory to natural science,which inflexibly holds that thought is a function of thebrain, that sensations, i. 
e. 
, the images of the external world , exist within us , produced by the action of things on our sense-organs. 
 The materialist elimination of the “dualism of mind and body” (i. 
e. 
, materialist monism)consists in the assertion that the mind does not exist in-dependently of the body, that mind is secondary, a functionof the brain, a reflection of the external world. 
 The ideal-ist elimination of the “dualism of mind and body” (i. 
e. 
, idealist monism) consists in the assertion that mind is not a function of the body, that, consequently, mind is pri-mary, that the “environment” and the “ self” exist only in an inseparable connection of one and the same “complexesof elements”. 
 Apart from these two diametrically opposedmethods of eliminating “the dualism of mind and body”, there can be no third method, not counting eclecticism, which is a senseless jumble of materialism and idealism. 
And it was this jumble of Avenarius’ that seemed to Bogda-nov and Co. 
 “the truth transcending materialism and ideal-ism”. 
 But the professional philosophers are not as naïve and credulous as the Russian Machists. 
 True, each of these professors-in-ordinary advocates his “ own ” system of re-futing materialism, or, at any rate, of “reconciling” ma-terialism and idealism. 
 But when it comes to a competi-tor they unceremoniously expose the unconnected fragments of materialism and idealism that are contained in all the various “recent” and “original” systems. 
 And if a few youngintellectuals swallowed Avenarius’ bait, that old birdWundt was not to be enticed so easily. 
 The idealist Wundttore the mask from the poseur Avenarius very unceremoni-ously when he praised him for the anti-materialist tendency of the theory of introjection . 
 “If empirio-criticism,” Wundt wrote, “reproaches vulgar materialism because by such expressions as the brain ‘has’thought, or the brain ‘produces’ thought, it expresses arelation which cannot be established at all by factual ob-servation and description [evidently, for Wundt it is a “fact” that a person thinks without the help of the brain!] ... this reproach, of course, is well founded” (op. 
 cit. 
,S. 
 47-48). 
 Well, of course! The idealists will always join the half-hearted Avenarius and Mach in attacking materialism!It is only a pity, Wundt adds, that this theory of introjec-tion “does not stand in any relation to the doctrine of the independent vital series, and was, to all appearances, onlytacked on to it as an afterthought and in a rather artifi-cial fashion” (S. 
 365). 
 Introjection, says O. 
 Ewald, “is to be regarded as noth-ing but a fiction of empirio-criticism, which required it in order to shield its own fallacies” (op. 
 cit. 
, 44). 
 “We ob-serve a strange contradiction: on the one hand, the elimi-nation of introjection and the restoration of the naturalconception of the world is intended to restore to the worldthe character of living reality; on the other hand, in theprincipal co-ordination empirio-criticism leads to a purely idealist theory of an absolute correlation of the counter-term and the central term. 
 Avenarius is thus moving in a circle. 
He set out to do battle against idealism but laid down hisarms before it came to an open fight against it. 
 He wantedto liberate the world of objects from the yoke of the subject,but again bound that world to the subject. 
 What he has actually destroyed by his criticism is a caricature of ideal-ism rather than its genuine epistemological expression”(ibid. 
, 64-65). 
 “In his [Avenarius’] frequently quoted statement,” Norman Smith says, “that the brain is not the seat, organ or supporter of thought, he rejects the only terms which we possess for defining their connection” (op. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 30). 
 Nor is it surprising that the theory of introjection ap-proved by Wundt excites the sympathy of the outspokenspiritualist, James Ward, * who wages systematic war on “naturalism and agnosticism”, and especially on T. 
 H. 
 Hux-ley (not because he was an insufficiently outspoken and deter-mined materialist, for which Engels reproached him, but)because his agnosticism served in fact to conceal materialism. 
 Let us note that Karl Pearson, the English Machist, who avoids all philosophical artifices, and who recognisesneither introjection nor co-ordination, nor yet “the dis-covery of the world-elements”, arrives at the inevitable outcome of Machism when it is stripped of such “disguises”,namely, pure subjective idealism. 
 Pearson knows no “ele-ments”; “sense-impressions” are his alpha and omega. 
 Henever doubts that man thinks with the help of the brain. 
And the contradiction between this thesis (which alone con-forms with science) and the basis of his philosophy remains naked and obvious. 
 Pearson spares no effort in combatingthe concept of matter as something existing independentlyof our sense-impressions ( The Grammar of Science , Chap. 
 VII). 
 Repeating all Berkeley’s arguments, Pearson declares thatmatter is a nonentity. 
 But when he comes to speak of the relation of the brain to thought, Pearson emphatically declares: “From will and consciousness associated withmaterial machinery we can infer nothing whatever as to willand consciousness without that machinery. 
” ** He even ad-vances the following thesis as a summary of his investiga-tions in this field: “Consciousness has no meaning beyond nervous systems akin to our own; it is illogical to assert that all matter is conscious [but it is logical to assert thatall matter possesses a property which is essentially akinto sensation, the property of reflection], still more thatconsciousness or will can exist outside matter” (ibid. 
, p. 
 75, *James Ward, Naturalism and Agnosticism , 3rd ed. 
, London, 1906, Vol. 
 II, pp. 
 171-72. 
 **The Grammar of Science , 2nd ed. 
, London, 1900, p. 
 58. 
 2nd thesis). 
 Pearson’s muddle is glaring! Matter is nothing but groups of sense-impressions. 
 That is his premise, that is his philosophy. 
 Hence, sensation and thought are primary; matter, secondary. 
 No, consciousness without matter doesnot exist, and apparently not even without a nervous sys-tem! That is, consciousness and sensation are secondary. 
The waters rest on the earth, the earth rests on a whale, andthe whale rests on the waters. 
 Mach’s “elements” and Avena-rius’ co-ordination and introjection do not clear up this muddle, all they do is to obscure the matter, to cover up thetraces with the help of an erudite philosophical gibberish. 
 Just such gibberish, and of this a word or two will suffice, is the special terminology of Avenarius, who coineda plenitude of diverse “notals”, “securals”, “fidentials”, etc. 
, etc. 
 Our Russian Machists for the most part shame-facedly avoid this professorial rigmarole, and only now andagain bombard the reader (in order to stun him) with an“existential” and such like. 
 But if naïve people take thesewords for a species of bio-mechanics, the German philoso-phers, who are themselves lovers of “erudite” words, laugh at Avenarius. 
 To say “notal” ( notus =known), or to say that this or the other thing is known to me, is absolutely oneand the same, says Wundt in the section entitled “ScholasticCharacter of the Empirio-critical System”. 
 And, indeed, itis the purest and most dreary scholasticism. 
 One of Ave-narius’ most faithful disciples, R. 
 Willy, had the courage to admit it frankly. 
 “Avenarius dreamed of a bio-mechanics, says he, “but an understanding of the life of the brain canbe arrived at only by actual discoveries, and is impossibleby the way in which Avenarius attempted to arrive at it. 
Avenarius’ bio-mechanics is not based on any new observa-tions whatever; its characteristic feature is purely sche-matic constructions of concepts, and, indeed, constructions that do not even have the nature of hypotheses that openup new vistas, but rather of mere stereotyped speculations(blosse Spekulierschablonen ), which, like a wall, conceal our view. 
” * *R. 
 Willy, Gegen die Schulweisheit , S. 
 169. 
 Of course, the pedant Petzoldt will not make any such admissions. 
 With the smug satisfac-tion of the philistine he chews the cud of Avenarius’ “biological” scho-lasticism (Vol. 
 I, Chap. 
 II). 
 The Russian Machists will soon be like fashion-lovers who are moved to ecstasy over a hat which has already been discarded by the bourgeois philosophers of Europe. 
 6. 
 THE SOLIPSISM OF MACH AND AVENARIUS We have seen that the starting-point and the fundamental premise of the philosophy of empirio-criticism is subjec-tive idealism. 
 The world is our sensation—this is the fun-damental premise, which is obscured but in no wise alteredby the word “element” and by the theories of the “inde-pendent series”, “co-ordination”, and “introjection”. 
 Theabsurdity of this philosophy lies in the fact that it leadsto solipsism, to admitting only the existence of the philos-ophising individual. 
 But our Russian Machists assure their readers that to “charge” Mach “with idealism and evensolipsism” is “extreme subjectivism”. 
 So says Bogdanov inthe introduction to the Russian translation of Analysis of Sensations (p. 
 xi), and the whole Machist troop repeat it in a great variety of keys. 
 Having examined the methods used by Mach and Avena-rius to disguise their solipsism, we have now to add onlyone thing: the “extreme subjectivism” of assertion liesentirely with Bogdanov and Co. 
; for in philosophical lit-erature writers of the most varied trends have long sincedisclosed the fundamental sin of Machism beneath all its disguises. 
 We shall confine ourselves to a mere summary o f opinions which sufficiently indicate the “subjective” ignor-ance of our Machists. 
 Let us note in this connection that nearly every professional philosopher sympathises with oneor another brand of idealism: in their eyes idealism is notat all a reproach, as it is with us Marxists; but they point out Mach’s actual philosophical trend and oppose one sys-tem of idealism by another system, also idealist, but whichseems to them more consistent. 
 O. 
 Ewald, in the book devoted to an analysis of Avena-rius’ teachings, writes: “The creator of empirio-criticismcondemns himself volens nolens to solipsism” (loc. 
 cit. 
, pp. 
 61-62). 
 Hans Kleinpeter, a disciple of Mach, with whom Mach in his preface to Knowledge and Error explicitly declares his solidarity, says: “It is precisely Mach who is an example of the compatibility of epistemological idealism with the demands of natural science [for the eclectic everything is “compatible”!], and of the fact that the latter can verywell start from solipsism without stopping there” ( Archiv für systematische Philosophie , 36 Bd. 
 VI, 1900, S. 
 87). 
 E. 
 Lucka, analysing Mach’s Analysis of Sensations , says: “Apart from this ... misunderstanding ( Missverständ-nis) Mach adopts the ground of pure idealism.... 
 It is in-comprehensible that Mach denies that he is a Berkeleian”(Kantstudien , 37 Bd. 
 VIII, 1903, S. 
 416-17). 
 W. 
 Jerusalem, a most reactionary Kantian with whom Mach in the above-mentioned preface expresses his solidarity(“a closer kinship” of thought than Mach had previously imagined— Vorwort zu “Erkenntnis und Irrtum ”, S. 
 x, 1906), says: “Consistent phenomenalism leads to solipsism. 
” Andtherefore one must borrow a little from Kant! (See Der kritische Idealismus und die reine Logik , 1905, S. 
 26. 
) R. 
 Hönigswald says: “...the immanentists and the em-pirio-criticists face the alternative of solipsism or meta-physics in the spirit of Fichte, Schelling, or Hegel!” ( Ueber die Lehre Hume ’s von der Realität der Aussendinge , 1904, S. 
 68). 
 The English physicist Oliver Lodge, in his book denounc-ing the materialist Haeckel, speaks in passing, as of some-thing generally known, of “solipsists such as Mach and Karl Pearson” (Sir Oliver Lodge, La vie et la matière , Paris, 1907, p. 
 15). 
 Nature , 38 the organ of the English scientists, through the mouth of the geometrician E. 
 T. 
 Dixon, pronounced avery definite opinion of the Machist Pearson, one worthquoting, not because it is new, but because the Russian Mach-ists have naïvely accepted Mach’s philosophical muddle as the “philosophy of natural science” (A. 
 Bogdanov, introduc-tion to Analysis of Sensations , p. 
 xii, et seq. 
). 
 “The foundation of the whole book,” Dixon wrote, “is the proposition that since we cannot directly apprehendanything but sense-impressions, therefore the things we commonly speak of as objective, or external to ourselves, and their variations, are nothing but groups of sense-impres-sions and sequences of such groups. 
 But Professor Pearson admits the existence of other consciousness than his own, not only by implication in addressing his book to them, but explicitly in many passages. 
” Pearson infers the existence of the consciousness of others by analogy, by observing thebodily motions of other people; but since the consciousnessof others is real, the existence of people outside myselfmust be granted! “Of course it would be impossible thus torefute a consistent idealist, who maintained that not only external things but all other consciousness were unreal and existed only in his imagination; but to recognise the reali-ty of other consciousness is to recognise the reality of themeans by which we become aware of them, which ... is theexternal aspect of men’s bodies. 
” The way out of the diffi-culty is to recognise the “hypothesis” that to our sense-impressions there corresponds an objective reality outside of us. 
 This hypothesis satisfactorily explains our sense-impressions. 
 “I cannot seriously doubt that ProfessorPearson himself believes in them as much as anyone else. 
Only, if he were to acknowledge it explicitly, he wouldhave to rewrite almost every page of The Grammar of Sci-ence. 
” * Ridicule—that is the response of the thinking scientists to the idealist philosophy over which Mach waxes so enthu-siastic. 
 And here, finally, is the opinion of a German physicist, L. 
 Boltzmann. 
 The Machists will perhaps say, as Friedrich Adler said, that he is a physicist of the old school. 
 But we are concerned now not with theories of physics but with a fundamental philosophical problem. 
 Writing against peoplewho “have been carried away by the new epistemologicaldogmas,” Boltzmann says: “Mistrust of conceptions which wecan derive only from immediate sense-impressions has led to an extreme which is the direct opposite of former naïve belief. 
 Only sense-impressions are given us, and, there-fore, it is said, we have no right to go a step beyond. 
 Butto be consistent, one must further ask: are our sense-impres-sions of yesterday also given? What is immediately givenis only the one sense-impression, or only the one thought, namely, the one we are thinking at the present moment. 
 *Nature , July 21, 1892, p. 
 269. 
 Hence, to be consistent, one would have to deny not only the existence of other people outside one’s self, but also all conceptions we ever had in the past. 
” * This physicist rightly ridicules the supposedly “new” “phenomenalist” standpoint of Mach and Co. 
 as the old ab-surdity of philosophical subjective idealism. 
 No, it is those who “failed to note” that solipsism is Mach’s fundamental error who are stricken with “subjec-tive” blindness. 
 *Ludwig Boltzmann, Populäre Schriften , Leipzig, 1905, S. 
 132. 
 Cf. 
 S. 
 168, 177, 187, etc. 
 C H A P T E R T W O THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE OF EMPIRIO-CRITICISM AND OF DIALECTICAL MATERIALISM. 
 II 1. 
 THE “THING -IN-ITSELF”, OR V. 
 CHERNOV REFUTES FREDERICK ENGELS Our Machists have written so much about the “thing-in-itself” that if all their writings were to be collected it wouldresult in mountains of printed matter. 
 The “thing-in-itself” is a veritable bête noire for Bogdanov and Valentinov, Ba-zarov and Chernov, Berman and Yushkevich. 
 There is noabuse they have not hurled at it, there is no ridicule theyhave not showered on it. 
 And against whom are they break-ing lances because of this luckless “thing-in-itself”? Herea division of the philosophers of Russian Machism according to political parties begins. 
 All the would-be Marxists among the Machists are combating Plekhanov ’s “thing-in-itself”; they accuse Plekhanov of having become entangled andstraying into Kantianism, and of having forsaken Engels. 
(We shall discuss the first accusation in the fourth chapter;the second accusation we shall deal with now. 
) The Machist Mr. 
 Victor Chernov, a Narodnik and a sworn enemy of Marx-ism, opens a direct campaign against Engels because of the “thing-in-itself”. 
 One is ashamed to confess it, but it would be a sin to conceal the fact that on this occasion open enmity towardsMarxism has made Mr. 
 Victor Chernov a more principled literary antagonist than our comrades in party and opponents in philosophy. 
 39 For only a guilty conscience (and in ad-dition, perhaps, ignorance of materialism?) could have been responsible for the fact that the Machist would-be Marxists have diplomatically set Engels aside, have completely ignored Feuerbach and are circling exclusively around Plekhanov. 
 It is indeed circling around one spot, tedious and pettypecking and cavilling at a disciple of Engels, while a frankexamination of the views of the teacher himself is cravenlyavoided. 
 And since the purpose of the present cursory com-ments is to disclose the reactionary character of Machism and the correctness of the materialism of Marx and Engels, we shall leave aside the fuss made by the Machist would-beMarxists about Plekhanov and turn directly to Engels, whomthe empirio-criticist Mr. 
 V. 
 Chernov refuted. 
 In his Philo-sophical and Sociological Studies (Moscow, 1907—a collec-tion of articles written, with few exceptions, before 1900) the article “Marxism and Transcendental Philosophy” begins straight away with an attempt to counterpose Marx to En-gels, accusing the latter of “naïve dogmatic materialism”,of “the crudest materialist dogmatism” (pp. 
 29 and 32). 
Mr. 
 V. 
 Chernov states that a “sufficient” example of thisis Engels’ argument against the Kantian thing-in-itself and Hume’s philosophical line. 
 We shall begin with this argu-ment. 
 In his Ludwig Feuerbach , Engels declares that the fun-damental philosophical trends are materialism and idealism. 
Materialism regards nature as primary and spirit as second-ary; it places being first and thought second. 
 Idealism holds the contrary view. 
 This root distinction between the “two great camps” into which the philosophers of the “var-ious schools” of idealism and materialism are divided En-gels takes as the corner-stone, and he directly charges with“confusion” those who use the terms idealism and material-ism in any other way. 
 “The great basic question of all philosophy,” Engels says, “especially of modern philosophy, is that concerningthe relation of thinking and being”, of “spirit and nature”. 
Having divided the philosophers into “two great camps” onthis basic question, Engels shows that there is “yet anotherside” to this basic philosophical question, viz. 
, “in what relation do our thoughts about the world surrounding us stand to this world itself? Is our thinking capable of thecognition of the real world? Are we able in our ideas and notions of the real world to produce a correct reflection of reality? * “The overwhelming majority of philosophers give an affirmative answer to this question,” says Engels, includingunder this head not only all materialists but also the mostconsistent idealists, as, for example, the absolute idealistHegel, who considered the real world to be the realisationof some eternally existing “absolute idea”, while the human spirit, correctly apprehending the real world, apprehends in it and through it the “absolute idea”. 
 “In addition [i. 
e. 
, to the materialists and the consist-ent idealists] there is yet a set of different philosophers—those who question the possibility of any cognition, or atleast of an exhaustive cognition, of the world. 
 To them, among the more modern ones, belong Hume and Kant, and they have played a very important role in philosophicaldevelopment.... 
” 40 Mr. 
 V. 
 Chernov, quoting these words of Engels’, launched into the fray. 
 To the word “Kant” he makes the followingannotation: “In 1888 it was rather strange to term such philosophers as Kant and especially Hume as ‘modern’. 
 At that time it wasmore natural to hear mentioned such names as Cohen, Lange,Riehl, Laas, Liebmann, Göring, etc. 
 But Engels, evident-ly, was not well versed in ‘modern’ philosophy” (op. 
 cit. 
,p. 
 33. 
 note 2). 
 Mr. 
 V. 
 Chernov is true to himself. 
 In economic and phil-osophical questions alike he reminds one of Turgenev’sVoroshilov 41 in annihilating now the ignorant Kautsky, ** now the ignorant Engels by merely referring to “scholarly”names! The only trouble is that all the authorities mentionedby Mr. 
 Chernov are the very neo-Kantians whom Engels re-fers to on this very same page of his Ludwig Feuerbach a s *Fr. 
 Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach , etc. 
, 4th Germ. 
 ed. 
, S. 
 15. 
 Russian translation, Geneva ed. 
, 1905, pp. 
 12-13. 
 Mr. 
 V. 
 Chernov translates the word Spiegelbild literally (a mirror reflection) accusing Plekhanov of presenting the theory of Engels “ in a very weakened form ” by speaking in Russian simply of a “reflection” instead of a “mirror reflection”. 
This is mere cavilling. 
 Spiegelbild in German is also used simply in the sense of Abbild (reflection, image. 
— Ed. 
). 
 **V. 
 Ilyin, The Agrarian Question , Part I, St. 
 Petersburg, 1908, p. 
 195. 
 (See Lenin, Collected Works , Vol. 
 5, p. 
 151. 
— Ed. 
) theoretical reactionaries , who were endeavouring to resurrect the corpse of the long since refuted doctrines of Kant and Hume. 
 The good Chernov did not understand that it is just these authoritative (for Machism) muddled professors whomEngels is refuting in his argument! Having pointed out that Hegel had already presented the “decisive” arguments against Hume and Kant, and thatthe additions made by Feuerbach are more ingenious than profound, Engels continues: “The most telling refutation of this as of all other phil-osophical crotchets ( Schrullen ) is practice, namely, exper-iment and industry. 
 If we are able to prove the correctnessof our conception of a natural process by making it our-selves, bringing it into being out of its conditions and making it serve our own purposes into the bargain, then there is an end to the Kantian incomprehensible [or un-graspable, unfassbaren —this important word is omitted both in Plekhanov’s translation and in Mr. 
 V. 
 Chernov’s trans-lation] ‘thing-in-itself’. 
 The chemical substances producedin the bodies of plants and animals remained just such ‘things-in-themselves’ until organic chemistry began to produce them one after another, whereupon the ‘thing-in-it-self’ became a ‘thing-for-us’, as, for instance, alizarin,the colouring matter of the madder, which we no longertrouble to grow in the madder roots in the field, but pro-duce much more cheaply and simply from coal tar” (op. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 16). 
 42 Mr. 
 V. 
 Chernov, quoting this argument, loses his temper altogether and completely annihilates poor Engels. 
 Listento this: “No neo-Kantian, of course, will be surprised thatfrom coal tar we can produce alizarin ‘more cheaply and sim-ply’. 
 But that together with alizarin it is possible to pro-duce from this coal tar just as cheaply a refutation of the ‘thing-in-itself’—this will indeed seem a wonderful andunprecedented discovery, and not to the neo-Kantians alone. 
 “Engels, apparently, having learned that according to Kant the ‘thing-in-itself’ is unknowable, turned this theo-rem into its converse and concluded that everything unknown is a thing-in-itself” (p. 
 33). 
 Listen, Mr. 
 Machist: lie, but don’t overdo it! Why, before the very eyes of the public you are misrepresenting the very quotation from Engels you have set out to “tear to pieces”, without even having grasped the point under dis-cussion! In the first place, it is not true that Engels “is produc-ing a refutation of the thing-in-itself”. 
 Engels said explic-itly and clearly that he was refuting the Kantian ungrasp-able (or unknowable) thing-in-itself. 
 Mr. 
 Chernov confuses Engels’ materialist view of the existence of things independ-ently of our consciousness. 
 In the second place, if Kant’s theorem reads that the thing-in-itself is unknowable, the“converse ” theorem would be: the unknowable is the thing-in-itself. 
 Mr. 
 Chernov replaces the unknowable by the unknown , without realising that by such a substitution he has againconfused and distorted the materialist view of Engels! Mr. 
 V. 
 Chernov is so bewildered by the reactionaries of official philosophy whom he has taken as his mentors thathe raises an outcry against Engels without in the least com-prehending the meaning of the example quoted. 
 Let us try to explain to this representative of Machism what it is allabout. 
 Engels clearly and explicitly states that he is contest-ing both Hume and Kant. 
 Yet there is no mention whateverin Hume of “unknowable things-in-themselves”. 
 What then isthere in common between these two philosophers? It is thatthey both in principle fence off the “appearance” from that which appears, the perception from that which is perceived, the thing-for-us from the “thing-in-itself”. 
 Furthermore, Hume does not want to hear of the “thing-in-itself”, heregards the very thought of it as philosophically inadmis-sible, as “metaphysics” (as the Humeans and Kantians callit); whereas Kant grants the existence of the “thing-in-itself”, but declares it to be “unknowable”, fundamentally different from the appearance, belonging to a fundamentally different realm, the realm of the “beyond” ( Jenseits ), inac-cessible to knowledge, but revealed to faith. 
 What is the kernel of Engels’ objection? Yesterday we did not know that coal tar contains alizarin. 
 Today wehave learned that it does. 
 The question is, did coal tar con-tain alizarin yesterday? Of course it did. 
 To doubt it would be to make a mockery of modern science. 
 And if that is so, three important epistemological con-clusions follow: 1) Things exist independently of our consciousness, independently of our sensations, outside of us, for it isbeyond doubt that alizarin existed in coal tar yesterdayand it is equally beyond doubt that yesterday we knew noth-ing of the existence of this alizarin and received no sen-sations from it. 
 2) There is definitely no difference in principle be-tween the phenomenon and the thing-in-itself, and there can-not be any such difference. 
 The only difference is betweenwhat is known and what is not yet known. 
 And philosophicalinventions of specific boundaries between the one and theother, inventions to the effect that the thing-in-itself is “beyond” phenomena (Kant), or that we can and must fence ourselves off by some philosophical partition from the prob-lem of a world which in one part or another is still unknownbut which exists outside us (Hume)—all this is the sheerestnonsense, Schrulle , crotchet, fantasy. 
 3) In the theory of knowledge, as in every other sphere of science, we must think dialectically, that is, we must not regard our knowledge as ready-made and unalterable, butmust determine how knowledge emerges from ignorance , how incomplete, inexact knowledge becomes more completeand more exact. 
 Once we accept the point of view that human knowledge develops from ignorance, we shall find millions of examples of it just as simple as the discovery of alizarin in coal tar,millions of observations not only in the history of scienceand technology but in the everyday life of each and everyone of us that illustrate the transformation of “things-in-themselves” into “things-for-us”, the appearance of “phe-nomena” when our sense-organs experience an impact from external objects, the disappearance of “phenomena”when some obstacle prevents the action upon our sense-organs of an object which we know to exist. 
 The sole and una-voidable deduction to be made from this—a deduction whichall of us make in everyday practice and which materialism de-liberately places at the foundation of its epistemology—is that outside us and independently of us, there exist ob-jects, things, bodies and that our perceptions are images of the external world. 
 Mach’s converse theory (that bodies are complexes of sensations) is pitiful idealist nonsense. 
 And Mr. 
 Chernov, in his “analysis” of Engels, once more re-vealed his Voroshilov qualities; Engels’ simple exampleseemed to him “strange and naïve”! He regards only gelehrte fictions as genuine philosophy and is unable to distinguishprofessorial eclecticism from the consistent materialisttheory of knowledge. 
 It is both impossible and unnecessary to analyse Mr. 
 Chernov’s other arguments; they all amount to the same pre-tentious nonsense (like the assertion that for the material-ists the atom is the thing-in-itself!). 
 We shall note onlythe argument which is relevant to our discussion (an argu-ment which has apparently led certain people astray), viz. 
, that Marx supposedly differed from Engels. 
 The question at issue is Marx’s second Thesis on Feuerbach and Plekhanov’s translation of the word Diesseitigkeit . 
 Here is the second Thesis:“The question whether objective truth can be attributed to human thinking is not a question of theory, but is a practical question. 
 In practice man must prove the truth, i. 
e. 
, the reality and power, the ‘this-sidedness’ of histhinking. 
 The dispute over the reality or non-reality ofthinking which is isolated from practice is a purely scho-lastic question. 
” 43 Instead of “prove the this-sidedness of thinking” (a lit-eral translation), Plekhanov has: prove that thinking “does not stop at this side of phenomena”. 
 And Mr. 
 V. 
 Cher-nov cries: “The contradiction between Marx and Engels hasbeen eliminated very simply.... 
 It appears as though Marx,like Engels, asserted the knowability of things-in-themselvesand the ‘other-sidedness’ of thinking” (loc. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 34, note). 
 What can be done with a Voroshilov whose every phrase makes confusion worse confounded! It is sheer ignorance,Mr. 
 Victor Chernov, not to know that all materialists assertthe knowability of things-in-themselves. 
 It is ignorance,Mr. 
 Victor Chernov, or infinite slovenliness, to skip the very first phrase of the Thesis and not to realise that the “objective truth” ( gegenständliche Wahrheit ) of thinking means nothing else than the existence of objects (“things-in-themselves”) trul y reflected by thinking. 
 It is sheer il-literacy, Mr. 
 Victor Chernov, to assert that from Plekhanov’s paraphrase (Plekhanov gave a paraphrase and not a transla-tion) “it appears as though” Marx defended the other-sided-ness of thought. 
 Because only the Humeans and the Kantians confine thought to “this side of phenomena”. 
 But for allmaterialists, including those of the seventeenth centurywhom Bishop Berkeley demolished (see Introduction), “phenomena” are “things-for-us” or copies of the “objects in themselves”. 
 Of course, Plekhanov’s free paraphrase is notobligatory for those who desire to know Marx himself, butit is obligatory to try to understand what Marx meant andnot to prance about like a Voroshilov. 
 It is interesting to note that while among people who call themselves socialists we encounter an unwillingness or inability to grasp the meaning of Marx’s “Theses”, bourgeoiswriters, specialists in philosophy, sometimes manifest great-er scrupulousness. 
 I know of one such writer who studiedthe philosophy of Feuerbach and in connection with it Marx’s“Theses”. 
 That writer is Albert Lévy, who devoted the third chapter of the second part of his book on Feuerbach to an examination of the influence of Feuerbach on Marx. 
 * Without going into the question whether Lévy always in-terprets Feuerbach correctly, or how he criticises Marx fromthe ordinary bourgeois standpoint, we shall only quote hisopinion of the philosophical content of Marx’s famous “Theses”. 
 Regarding the first Thesis, Lévy says: “Marx, on the one hand, together with all earlier materialism andwith Feuerbach, recognises that there are real and distinctobjects outside us corresponding to our ideas of things.... 
” As the reader sees, it was immediately clear to Albert Lévy that the basic position not only of Marxian material-ism but of every materialism, of “ all earlier ” materialism, is the recognition of real objects outside us, to which ob-jects our ideas “correspond”. 
 This elementary truth, whichholds good for all materialism in general, is unknown only to the Russian Machists. 
 Lévy continues: *Albert Lévy, La philosophie de Feuerbach et son influence sur la littérature allemande , Paris, 1904, pp. 
 249-338, on the influence of Feuer-bach on Marx, and pp. 
 290-98, an examination of the “Theses”. 
 “...On the other hand, Marx expresses regret that ma-terialism had left it to idealism to appreciate the impor-tance of the active forces [i. 
e. 
, human practice]. 
 It is these active forces which, according to Marx, must be wrest-ed from idealism in order to integrate them into the mater-ialist system; but it will of course be necessary to givethese active forces the real and sensible character whichidealism cannot grant them. 
 Marx’s idea, then, is the fol-lowing: just as to our ideas there correspond real objects outside us, so to our phenomenal activity there correspondsa real activity outside us, an activity of things. 
 In thissense humanity partakes of the absolute, not only throughtheoretical knowledge but also through practical activity;thus all human activity acquires a dignity, a nobility, that permits it to advance hand in hand with theory. 
 Revo-lutionary activity henceforth acquires a metaphysical sig-nificance.... 
” Albert Lévy is a professor. 
 And a proper professor can-not avoid abusing the materialists as being metaphysi-cians. 
 For the professorial idealists, Humeans and Kantians every kind of materialism is “metaphysics”, because beyond the phenomenon (appearance, the thing-for-us) it discerns areality outside us. 
 A. 
 Lévy is therefore essentially rightwhen he says that in Marx’s opinion there corresponds toman’s “phenomenal activity” “an activity of things”, thatis to say, human practice has not only a phenomenal (in the Humean and Kantian sense of the term), but an objec-tively real significance. 
 The criterion of practice—as weshall show in detail in its proper place (§ 6)—has entirelydifferent meanings for Mach and Marx. 
 “Humanitypartakes of the absolute” means that human knowledgereflects absolute truth (see below, § 5); the practice of humanity, by verifying our ideas, corroborates what in those ideas corresponds to absolute truth. 
 A. 
 Lévy con-tinues: “... Having reached this point, Marx naturally encoun-ters the objections of the critics. 
 He has admitted the ex-istence of things-in-themselves, of which our theory is the human translation; he cannot evade the usual objection: what assurance have you of the accuracy of the translation?What proof have you that the human mind gives you an objective truth? To this objection Marx replies in his second Thesis” (p. 
 291). 
 The reader sees that Lévy does not for a moment doubt that Marx recognised the existence of things-in-themselves! 2. 
 “TRANSCENDENCE”, OR V. 
 BAZAROV “REVISES” ENGELS But while the Russian Machist would-be Marxists diplo-matically evaded one of the most decisive and definite statements of Engels, they “revised” another statement of his in quite the Chernov manner. 
 However tedious and labo-rious the task of correcting distortions and perversions ofthe meaning of quotations may be, he who wishes to speak of the Russian Machists cannot avoid it. 
 Here is Bazarov’s revision of Engels. 
In the article “On Historical Materialism”, * Engels speaks of the English agnostics (philosophers of Hume’strend of thought) as follows: “...Our agnostic admits that all our knowledge is based upon the information ( Mitteilungen ) imparted to us by our senses.... 
” Let us note for the benefit of our Machists that the ag-nostic (Humean) also starts from sensations and recognises no other source of knowledge. 
 The agnostic is a pure “ posi-tivist ”, be it said for the benefit of the adherents of the “latest positivism”! “...But, he [the agnostic] adds, how do we know that our senses give us correct representations ( Abbilder ) of the objects we perceive through them? And he proceeds to in-form us that, whenever he speaks of objects or their quali-ties, he does in reality not mean these objects and quali-ties, of which he cannot know anything for certain, but merely the impressions which they have produced on hissenses.... 
” 44 *This article forms the Introduction to the English edition of Engels’ Socialism : Utopian and Scientific , and was translated by Engels himself into German in the Neue Zeit , XI, 1 (1892-93, No. 
 1), S. 
 15, et seq. 
 The only Russian translation, if I am not mistaken, is to be found in the symposium Historical Materialism , p. 
 162, et seq. 
 Bazarov quotes the passage in the Studies “in” the Philosophy of Marxism , p. 
 64. 
 What two lines of philosophical tendency does Engels contrast here? One line is that the senses give us faithful images of things, that we know the things themselves , that the outer world acts on our sense-organs. 
 This is material-ism—with which the agnostic is not in agreement. 
 What thenis the essence of the agnostic’s line? It is that he does not go beyond sensations, that he stops on this side of phenom-ena, refusing to see anything “certain” beyond the boun-dary of sensations. 
 About these things themselves (i. 
e. 
, about the things-in-themselves, the “objects in themselves”,as the materialists whom Berkeley opposed called them), wecan know nothing certain—so the agnostic categorically in-sists. 
 Hence, in the controversy of which Engels speaksthe materialist affirms the existence and knowability of things-in-themselves. 
 The agnostic does not even admit the thought of things-in-themselves and insists that we can know nothing certain about them. 
 It may be asked in what way the position of the agnos-tic as outlined by Engels differs from the position of Mach?In the “new” term “element”? But it is sheer childishness to believe that a nomenclature can change a philosophical line, that sensations when called “elements” cease to besensations! Or does the difference lie in the “new” ideathat the very same elements constitute the physical in oneconnection and the psychical in another? But did you notobserve that Engels’ agnostic also puts “impressions” in place of the “things themselves”? That means that in es-sence the agnostic too differentiates between physical and psychical “impressions”! Here again the difference is ex-clusively one of nomenclature. 
 When Mach says that objects are complexes of sensations, Mach is a Berkeleian; when Mach “corrects” himself, and says that “elements” (sensa-tions) can be physical in one connection and psychical in another, Mach is an agnostic, a Humean. 
 Mach does not gobeyond these two lines in his philosophy, and it requires extreme naïveté to take this muddlehead at his word and be-lieve that he has actually “transcended” both materialismand idealism. 
 Engels deliberately mentions no names in his exposi-tion, and criticises not individual representatives of Hum-ism (professional philosophers are very prone to call orig-inal systems the petty variations one or another of them makes in terminology or argument), but the whole Humean line. 
 Engels criticises not particulars but the essence; he examines the fundamental wherein all Humeans deviate from materialism, and his criticism therefore embraces Mill,Huxley and Mach alike. 
 Whether we say (with J. 
 S. 
 Mill)that matter is the permanent possibility of sensation, or(with Ernst Mach) that matter is more or less stable com-plexes of “elements”—sensations—we remain within the bounds of agnosticism, or Humism. 
 Both standpoints, or more correctly both formulations, are covered by Engels’ exposi-tion of agnosticism: the agnostic does not go beyond sen-sations and asserts that he cannot know anything certain about their source, about their original, etc. 
 And if Mach attributes great importance to his disagreement with Mill on this question, it is because Mach comes underEngels’ characterisation of a professor-in-ordinary: Floh-knacker . 
 Ay, gentlemen, you have only cracked a flea by making petty corrections and by altering terminolo-gy instead of abandoning the basic, half-hearted stand-point. 
 And how does the materialist Engels—at the beginning of the article Engels explicitly and emphatically contrastshis materialism to agnosticism—refute the foregoing argu-ments? “... Now, this line of reasoning seems undoubtedly hard to beat by mere argumentation. 
 But before there was argu-mentation there was action. 
 Im Anfang war die That . 
 And human action had solved the difficulty long before humaningenuity invented it. 
 The proof of the pudding is in theeating. 
 From the moment we turn to our own use these ob-jects, according to the qualities we perceive in them, we put to an infallible test the correctness or otherwise of our sense-perceptions. 
 If these perceptions have been wrong,then our estimate of the use to which an object can be turnedmust also be wrong, and our attempt must fail. 
 But ifwe succeed in accomplishing our aim, if we find that theobject does agree with our idea of it, and does answer the purpose we intended it for, then that is positive proof that our perceptions of it and of its qualities, so far, agreewith reality outside ourselves.... 
” Thus, the materialist theory, the theory of the reflection of objects by our mind, is here presented with absolute clarity: things exist outside us. 
 Our perceptions and ideas are their images. 
 Verification of these images, differentiationbetween true and false images, is given by practice. 
 But letus listen to a little more of Engels (Bazarov at this pointends his quotation from Engels, or rather from Plekhanov,for he deems it unnecessary to deal with Engels himself): “... And whenever we find ourselves face to face with a failure, then we generally are not long in making outthe cause that made us fail; we find that the perceptionupon which we acted was either incomplete and superficial,or combined with the results of other perceptions in a waynot warranted by them” (the Russian translation in On His-torical Materialism is incorrect). 
 “So long as we take care to train and to use our senses properly, and to keep ouraction within the limits prescribed by perceptions properlymade and properly used, so long we shall find that theresult of our action proves the conformity ( Uebereinstim-mung ) of our perceptions with the objective ( gegenständ-lich ) nature of the things perceived. 
 Not in one single in-stance, so far, have we been led to the conclusion thatour sense-perceptions, scientifically controlled, induce inour minds ideas respecting the outer world that are, bytheir very nature, at variance with reality, or that thereis an inherent incompatibility between the outer world and our sense-perceptions of it. 
 “But then come the neo-Kantian agnostics and say.... 
” 45 We shall leave to another time the examination of the arguments of the neo-Kantians. 
 Let us remark here that any-body in the least acquainted with the subject, or evenmerely attentive, cannot fail to understand that Engels is here expounding the very same materialism against which the Machists are always and everywhere doing battle. 
 And nowjust watch the methods by which Bazarov revises Engels: “Here,” writes Bazarov in connection with the frag-ment of the quotation we have given, “Engels is actuallyattacking Kantian idealism.... 
” It is not true. 
 Bazarov is muddling things. 
 In the frag-ment which he quoted, and which is quoted by us morefully, there is not a syllable either about Kantianism or about idealism. 
 Had Bazarov really read the whole of En-gels’ article, he could not have avoided seeing that Engels speaks of neo-Kantianism, and of Kant’s whole line, only in the next paragraph, just where we broke off our quotation. 
 And had Bazarov attentively read and reflected on the frag-ment he himself quotes, he could not have avoided seeingthat in the arguments of the agnostic which Engels here re-futes there is not a trace of either idealism or Kantianism; for idealism begins only when the philosopher says that things are our sensations, while Kantianism begins when the phi-losopher says that the thing-in-itself exists but is unknow-able. 
 Bazarov confuses Kantianism with Humism; and he con-fuses them because, being himself a semi-Berkeleian, semi-Humean of the Machist sect, he does not understand (as will be shown in detail below) the distinction between the Hu-mean and the materialist opposition to Kantianism. 
 “...But, alas!” continues Bazarov, “his argument is aimed against Plekhanov’s philosophy just as much as it isagainst Kantian philosophy. 
 In the school of Plekhanov-Orthodox, as Bogdanov has already pointed out, there is a fatal misunderstanding regarding consciousness. 
 To Plekha-nov, as to all idealists, it seems that everything percep-tually given, i. 
e. 
, cognised, is ‘subjective’; that to pro-ceed only from what is factually given means being a solip-sist; that real being can be found only beyond the bounda-ries of everything that is immediately given...” This is entirely in the spirit of Chernov and his assur-ances that Liebknecht was a true-Russian Narodnik! IfPlekhanov is an idealist who has deserted Engels, then whyis it that you, who are supposedly an adherent of Engels,are not a materialist? This is nothing but wretched mys-tification, Comrade Bazarov! By means of the Machist ex-pression “ immediately given ” you begin to confuse the differ-ence between agnosticism, idealism and materialism. 
You ought to realise that such expressions as the “imme-diately given” and the “factually given” are a piece ofconfusion of the Machists, the immanentists, and the otherreactionaries in philosophy, a masquerade, whereby the ag-nostic (and sometimes, as in Mach’s case, the idealist too) disguises himself in the cloak of the materialist. 
 For thematerialist the “factually given” is the outer world, the image of which is our sensations. 
 For the idealist the “fac-tually given” is sensation, and the outer world is declared to be a “complex of sensations”. 
 For the agnostic the “im-mediately given” is also sensation, but the agnostic does not go on either to the materialist recognition of the reality of the outer world, or to the idealist recognition of theworld as our sensation. 
 Therefore your statement that “realbeing [according to Plekhanov] can be found only beyond the boundaries of everything that is immediately given ” is sheer nonsense and inevitably follows from your Machistposition. 
 But while you have a perfect right to adopt anyposition you choose, including a Machist one, you have noright to falsify Engels once you have undertaken to speak ofhim. 
 And from Engels’ words it is perfectly clear that for the materialist real being lies beyond the bounds of the “sense-perceptions”, impressions and ideas of man, while for theagnostic it is impossible to go beyond the bounds of those per-ceptions. 
 Bazarov believed Mach, Avenarius, and Schuppewhen they said that the “immediately” (or factually) givenconnects the perceiving self with the perceived environment in the famous “indissoluble” co-ordination, and endeavours, unobserved by the reader, to impute this nonsense to thematerialist Engels! “... It is as though the foregoing passage from Engels was deliberately written by him in the most popular andaccessible form in order to dissipate this idealist misunder-standing.... 
” Not for nothing was Bazarov a pupil of Avenarius! He continues his mystification: under the guise of combatingidealism (of which Engels is not speaking here), he smugglesin the idealist “co-ordination”. 
 Not bad, Comrade Bazarov! “... The agnostic asks, how do we know that our subjec-tive senses give us a correct presentation of objects?...” You are muddling things, Comrade Bazarov! Such non-sense as “ subjective ” senses Engels himself does not speak of, and does not even ascribe to his enemy the agnostic. 
There are no other senses except human, i. 
e. 
, “subjective”,senses, for we are speaking from the standpoint of man and not of a hobgoblin. 
 You are again starting to impute Mach-ism to Engels, to imply that he says: the agnostic regardssenses, or, to be more precise, sensations, as only subjective (which the agnostic does not do!), while Avenarius and I have “co-ordinated” the object into an indissoluble connection with the subject. 
 Not bad, Comrade Bazarov! “...But what do you term ‘correct’?—Engels rejoins. 
— Correct is that which is confirmed by our practice; andconsequently, since our sense-perceptions are confirmed byexperience, they are not ‘subjective’, that is, they arenot arbitrary, or illusory, but correct and real as such.... 
” You are muddling things, Comrade Bazarov! You have substituted for the question of the existence of things out-side our sensations, perceptions, ideas, the question of thecriterion of the correctness of our ideas of “these thingsthemselves”, or, more precisely, you are blocking the former question by means of the latter. 
 But Engels says explicit-ly and clearly that what distinguishes him from the agnostic is not only the agnostic’s doubt as to whether our imagesare “correct”, but also the agnostic’s doubt as to whetherwe may speak of the things themselves , as to whether we may have “certain” knowledge of their existence. 
 Why did Baza-rov resort to this juggling? In order to obscure and con-fuse what is the basic question for materialism (and for Engels, as a materialist), the question of the existence ofthings outside our mind, which by acting on our sense-organsevoke sensations. 
 It is impossible to be a materialist with-out answering this question in the affirmative; but one canbe a materialist and still differ on what constitutes the cri-terion of the correctness of the images presented by our senses. 
 And again Bazarov muddles matters when he attributes to Engels, in the dispute with the agnostic, the absurd andignorant expression that our sense-perceptions are confirmedby “ experience ”. 
 Engels did not use and could not have used this word here , for Engels was well aware that the idealist Berkeley, the agnostic Hume and the materialist Diderot all had recourse to experience. 
 “... Inside the limits within which we have to do with objects in practice, perceptions of the object and of its prop-erties coincide with the reality existing outside us . 
 ‘To coincide’ is somewhat different from being a ‘hieroglyphic’ ‘They coincide’ means that, within the given limits, the sense-perception is [Bazarov’s italics] the reality existing outside us.... 
” The end crowns the work. 
 Engels has been treated à la Mach, fried and served with a Machist sauce. 
 But take care you do not choke, worthy cooks! “Sense-perception is the reality existing outside us”! This is just the fundamental absurdity, the fundamental muddle and falsity of Machism, from which flows all therest of the balderdash of this philosophy and for which Machand Avenarius have been embraced by those arrant reaction-aries and preachers of priestlore, the immanentists. 
 How-ever much V. 
 Bazarov wriggled, however cunning and diplo-matic he was in evading ticklish points, in the end he gavehimself away and betrayed his true Machist character! Tosay that “sense-perception is the reality existing outside us” is to return to Humism , or even Berkeleianism , conceal-ing itself in the fog of “co-ordination”. 
 This is either an idealist lie or the subterfuge of the agnostic, ComradeBazarov, for sense-perception is not the reality existing outside us, it is only the image of that reality. 
 Are you trying to make capital of the ambiguous Russian wordsovpadat ? * Are you trying to lead the unsophisticated reader to believe that “ to coincide ” here means “to be iden-tical”, and not “to correspond”? That means basing one’sfalsification of Engels à la Mach on a perversion of the mean-ing of a quotation, and nothing more. 
 Take the German original and you will find there the words stimmen mit , which means to correspond with, “to voice with”—the latter translation is literal, for Stimme means voice. 
 The words “ stimmen mit ” cannot mean “to coin-cide” in the sense of “ to be identical”. 
 And even for the reader who does not know German but who reads Engels withthe least bit of attention, it is perfectly clear, it cannotbe otherwise than clear, that Engels throughout his whole argument treats the expression “sense-perception” as the image (Abbild ) of the reality existing outside us, and that therefore the word “coincide” can be used in Russian ex-clusively in the sense of “correspondence”, “concurrence”,etc. 
 To attribute to Engels the thought that “sense-per-ception is the reality existing outside us” is such a gem of Machist distortion, such a flagrant attempt to palm off *Sovpadat —to coincide. 
— Tr. 
 agnosticism and idealism as materialism, that one must ad-mit that Bazarov has broken all records! One asks, how can sane people having a sound mind and good memory assert that “sense-perception [within whatlimits is not important] is the reality existing outsideus”? The earth is a reality existing outside us. 
 It cannot“coincide” (in the sense of being identical) with our sense-perception, or be in indissoluble co-ordination with it, or be a “complex of elements” in another connection identi-cal with sensation; for the earth existed at a time whenthere were no men, no sense-organs, no matter organised inthat higher form in which the property of matter to possesssensation would be in any way clearly noticeable. 
 That is just the point, that the tortuous theories of “co-ordination”, “introjection”, and the newly-discovered world-elements which we analysed in Chapter One serve to coverup this idealist absurdity. 
 Bazarov’s formulation, so in-advertently and incautiously thrown off by him, is excellentin that it patently reveals that crying absurdity, whichotherwise it would have been necessary to excavate from the piles of erudite, pseudo-scientific, professorial rigma-role. 
 All praise to you, Comrade Bazarov! We shall erect a monument to you in your lifetime. 
 On one side we shallengrave your dictum, and on the other: “To the RussianMachist who dug the grave of Machism among the Russian Marxists!” We shall speak separately of two points touched on by Bazarov in the above-mentioned quotation, viz. 
, the criteriaof practice of the agnostics (Machists included) and the materialists, and the difference between the theory of reflec-tion (or images) and the theory of symbols (or hieroglyphs). 
For the present we shall continue to quote a little morefrom Bazarov: “... But what is beyond these boundaries? Of this En-gels does not say a word. 
 He nowhere manifests a desire to perform that ‘transcendence’, that stepping beyond the bound-aries of the perceptually-given world, which lies at thefoundation of Plekhanov’s theory of knowledge.... 
” Beyond what “boundaries”? Does he mean the boundaries of the “co-ordination” of Mach and Avenarius, which suppo-sedly indissolubly merges the self with the environment, the subject with the object? The very question put by Bazarov isdevoid of meaning. 
 But if he had put the question in an in-telligible way, he would have clearly seen that the externalworld lies “beyond the boundaries” of man’s sensations, per-ceptions and ideas. 
 But the word “transcendence” once more betrays Bazarov. 
 It is a specifically Kantian and Humean “fancy” to erect in principle a boundary between the appear-ance and the thing-in-itself . 
 To pass from the appearance, or, if you like, from our sensation, perception, etc. 
, to thething existing outside of perception is a transcendence , Kant says; and this transcendence is permissible not to knowl-edge but to faith. 
 Transcendence is not permissible at all, Hume objects. 
 And the Kantians, like the Humeans, callthe materialists transcendental realists, “metaphysicians”, who effect an illegitimate passage (in Latin, transcensus ) from one region to another, fundamentally different, region. 
In the works of modern professors of philosophy who follow the reactionary line of Kant and Hume you may encounter (take only the names enumerated by Voroshilov-Chernov)endless repetitions made in a thousand keys of these accusa-tions that materialism is “metaphysical” and “transcendent”. 
Bazarov borrowed from the reactionary professors both the-word and the line of thought, and flourishes them in the name of “recent positivism”! But the whole point is that the very idea of “transcendence”, i. 
e. 
, of a boundary in principle between the appearance and the thing-in-itself, is a nonsen-sical idea of the agnostics (Humeans and Kantians included)and the idealists. 
 We have already explained this in connec-tion with Engels’ example of alizarin, and we shall explain it again in the words of Feuerbach and Joseph Dietzgen. 
 But let us first finish with Bazarov’s “revision” of Engels: “... In one place in his Anti-Dühring , Engels says that ‘being’ outside the realm of perception is an offene Frage , i. 
e. 
, a question, for the answer to which, or even for theasking of which, we have no data. 
” Bazarov repeats this argument after the German Machist, Friedrich Adler. 
 This last example is perhaps even worsethan the “sense-perception” which “is the reality existing outside us”. 
 In his Anti-Dühring , p. 
 31 (5th German edi-tion), Engels says: “The unity of the world does not consist in its being, although its being is a pre-condition of its unity, as it mustcertainly first be, before it can be one. 
 Being, indeed, is always an open question ( offene Frage ) beyond the point where our sphere of observation ( Gesichtskreis ) ends. 
 The real unity of the world consists in its materiality, and this is proved not by a few juggled phrases, but by a long and weari-some development of philosophy and natural science. 
” 46 Behold the new hash our cook has prepared. 
 Engels is speaking of being beyond the point where our sphere of ob-servation ends, for instance, of the existence of men on Mars. 
Obviously, such being is indeed an open question. 
 But Ba-zarov, as though deliberately refraining from giving the full quotation, paraphrases Engels as saying that “ being out-side the realm of perception ” is an open question!! This is the sheerest nonsense and Engels is here being saddledwith the views of those professors of philosophy whom Ba-zarov is accustomed to take at their word and whom Dietz-gen justly called the graduated flunkeys of clericalism or fideism. 
 Indeed, fideism positively asserts that somethingdoes exist “outside the realm of perception”. 
 The material-ists, in agreement with natural science, emphaticallydeny this. 
 An intermediate position is held by those pro-fessors, Kantians, Humeans (including the Machists), etc. 
, “who have found the truth outside materialism and idealism” and who “compromise”, saying: it is an openquestion. 
 Had Engels ever said anything like this, it wouldbe a shame and disgrace to call oneself a Marxist. 
 But enough! Half a page of quotation from Bazarov presents such a complete tangle that we are obliged to con-tent ourselves with what has already been said and not to continue following all the waverings of Machist thought. 
 3. 
 L. 
 FEUERBACH AND J. 
 DIETZGEN ON THE THING -IN-ITSELF To show how absurd are the assertions of our Machists that the materialists Marx and Engels denied the existenceof things-in-themselves (i. 
e. 
, things outside our sensa-tions, perceptions, and so forth) and the possibility of their cognition, and that they admitted the existence of a fundamental boundary between the appearance and the thing-in-itself, we shall add a few quotations from Feuerbach. 
The whole trouble with our Machists is that they set aboutparroting the words of the reactionary professors on dia-lectical materialism without knowing anything either o f dialectics or of materialism. 
 “Modern philosophical spiritualism,” says Feuerbach, which calls itself idealism, utters the annihilating, in itsown opinion, stricture against materialism that it is dogma-tism, viz. 
, that it starts from the sensuous ( sinnlichen ) world as an undisputed ( ausgemacht ) objective truth, and as-sumes that it is a world in itself ( an sich ), i. 
e. 
, as existing without us, while in reality the world is only a product of spirit” ( Sämtliche Werke , X. 
 Band, 1866, S. 
 185). 
 That seems clear enough. 
 The world in itself is a world that exists without us . 
 This materialism of Feuerbach’s, like the materialism of the seventeenth century contested byBishop Berkeley, consisted in the recognition that “objects in themselves” exist outside our mind. 
 The an sich ( of i t -self, or “in itself”) of Feuerbach is the direct opposite ofthe an sich of Kant. 
 Let us recall the excerpt from Feuer-bach already quoted, where he rebukes Kant because for thelatter the “thing-in-itself” is an “abstraction without real-ity”. 
 For Feuerbach the “thing-in-itself” is an “abstraction with reality”, that is, a world existing outside us, completely knowable and fundamentally not different from “ap-pearance”. 
 Feuerbach very ingeniously and clearly explains how ridiculous it is to postulate a “transcendence” from the worldof phenomena to the world in itself, a sort of impassable gulf created by the priests and taken over from them by the professors of philosophy. 
 Here is one of his explanations: “Of course, the products of fantasy are also products of nature, for the force of fantasy, like all other humanforces, is in the last analysis ( zuletzt ) both in its basis and in its origin a force of nature; nevertheless, a human being is a being distinguished from the sun, moon and stars, from stones, animals and plants, in a word, from those be-ings ( Wesen ) which he designates by the general name: ‘na-ture’; and, consequently, man’s ideas ( Bilder ) of the sun, moon and stars and the other beings of nature ( Naturwesen ), although these ideas are products of nature, are yet prod-ucts distinct from their objects in nature” ( Werke , Band VII, Stuttgart, 1903, S. 
 516). 
 The objects of our ideas are distinct from our ideas, the thing-in-itself is distinct from the thing-for-us, forthe latter is only a part, or only one aspect, of the former, just as man himself is only a fragment of the nature reflect-ed in his ideas. 
 “... The taste-nerve is just as much a product of nature as salt is, but it does not follow from this that the tasteof salt is directly as such an objective property of salt,that what salt is merely as an object of sensation it also is in itself ( an und für sich ), hence that the sensation of salt on the tongue is a property of salt thought of withoutsensation ( des ohne Empfindung gedachten Salzes ).... 
” And several pages earlier: “Saltiness, as a taste, is the subjectiveexpression of an objective property of salt” (ibid. 
, 514). 
 Sensation is the result of the action of a thing-in-itself, existing objectively outside us, upon our sense-organs—such is Feuerbach’s theory. 
 Sensation is a subjective image ofthe objective world, of the world an und für sich . 
 “... So is man also a being of nature ( Naturwesen ), like sun, star, plant, animal, stone, nevertheless, he is dis-tinct from nature, and, consequently, nature in the head and heart of man is distinct from nature outside the human head and heart. 
” “... However, this object, viz. 
, man, is the only object in which, according to the statement of the idealists them-selves, the requirement of the ‘identity of object and sub-ject’ is realised; for man is an object whose equality and unity with my being are beyond all possible doubt.... 
 And is not one man for another, even the most intimate, an ob-ject of fantasy, of the imagination? Does not each man com-prehend another in his own way, after his own mind ( in und nach seinem Sinne )?... And if even between man and man, between mind and mind, there is a very considerable differ-ence which it is impossible to ignore, how much greater must be the difference between an unthinking, non-humanbeing in itself ( Wesen an sich ), not identical with us, and the same being as we think of it, perceive it and apprehend it?” (ibid. 
, p. 
 518). 
 All the mysterious, sage and subtle distinctions between the appearance and the thing-in-itself are sheer philosoph-ical balderdash. 
 In practice each one of us has observedtime without number the simple and obvious transformationof the “thing-in-itself” into phenomenon, into the “thing-for-us”. 
 It is precisely this transformation that is cognition. 
 The “doctrine” of Machism that since we know only sensa-tions, we cannot know of the existence of anything beyond the bounds of sensation, is an old sophistry of idealist andagnostic philosophy served up with a new sauce. 
 Joseph Dietzgen is a dialectical materialist. 
 We shall show below that his mode of expression is often inexact, that he is often not free from confusion, a fact which has been seized upon by various foolish people (Eugen Dietzgenamong them) and of course by our Machists. 
 But they did nottake the trouble or were unable to analyse the dominant lineof his philosophy and to disengage his materialism from alienelements. 
 “Let us take the world as the ‘thing-in-itself’,” says Dietzgen in his The Nature of the Working of the Human Mind . 
 * “We shall easily see that the ‘world in itself ’ and the world as it appears to us, the phenomena of the world, differ from each other only as the whole differs from its parts”(Germ. 
 ed. 
, 1903, p. 
 65). 
 “A phenomenon differs no more and no less from the thing which produces it than the ten-mile stretch of a road differs from the road itself” (71-72). 
There is not, nor can there be, any essential differencehere, any “transcendence”, any “innate disagreement”. 
 But adifference there is, to be sure, viz. 
, the passage beyond the bounds of sense-perceptions to the existence of things outside us. 
 “We learn by experience ( wir erfahren ),” says Dietzgen in his Streifzügen eines Sozialisten in das Gebiet der Er-kenntnistheorie , “that each experience is only a part of that which, in the words of Kant, passes beyond the bounds ofall experience.... 
 For a consciousness that has become con-scious of its own nature, each particle, be it of dust, or of *J. 
 Dietzgen, Das Wesen der menschlichen Kopfarbeit , 1903. 
— Ed. 
 stone, or of wood, is something unknowable in its full ex-tent (Unauskenntliches ), i. 
e. 
, each particle is inexhaustible material for the human faculty of cognition and, consequent-ly, something which passes beyond the bounds of experience”(Kleinere philosophische Schriften , 1903, S. 
 199). 
 You see: in the words of Kant , i. 
e. 
, adopting—exclusive-ly for purposes of popularisation, for purposes of con-trast—Kant’s erroneous , confusing terminology, Dietzgen recognises the passage “beyond the bounds of experience”. 
 This is a good example of what the Machists are grasping atwhen they pass from materialism to agnosticism: you see,they say, we do not wish to go “beyond the bounds of ex-perience”; for us “sense-perception is the reality existing outside us”. 
 “Unhealthy mysticism [Dietzgen says, objecting pre-cisely to such a philosophy] unscientifically separates theabsolute truth from the relative truth. 
 It makes of thething as it appears and the ‘thing-in-itself’, that is, ofthe appearance and the verity, two categories which differtoto coelo [completely, fundamentally] from each other and are not contained in any common category” (S. 
 200). 
 We can now judge the knowledge and ingenuity of the Russian Machist Bogdanov, who does not wish to acknowledgehimself a Machist and wishes to be regarded as a Marxist inphilosophy. 
 “A golden mean [between “panpsychism and panmaterial-ism”] has been adopted by materialists of a more critical shade who have rejected the absolute unknowability of the ‘thing-in-itself’, but at the same time regard it as beingfundamentally [Bogdanov’s italics] different from the ‘phe-nomenon’ and, therefore, always only ‘dimly discernible’in the phenomenon, outside of experience as far as its con-tent is concerned [that is, presumably, as far as the “ele-ments” are concerned, which are not the same as elements ofexperience], but yet lying within the bounds of what iscalled the forms of experience, i. 
e. 
, time, space and causal-ity. 
 Such is approximately the standpoint of the Frenchmaterialists of the eighteenth century and among the modern philosophers—Engels and his Russian follower, Beltov 47” (Empirio-monism , Bk. 
 II, 2nd ed. 
, 1907, pp. 
 40-41). 
 This is a complete muddle. 
 1) The materialists of the seventeenth century , against whom Berkeley argues, hold that “objects in themselves” are absolutely knowable, for our presentations, ideas, are only copies or reflections ofthose objects, which exist “outside the mind” (see Introduc-tion). 
 2) Feuerbach , and J. 
 Dietzgen after him, vigorously dispute any “fundamental” difference between the thing-in-itself and the phenomenon, and Engels disposes of this view by his brief example of the transformation of the “thing-in-itself” into the “thing-for-us”. 
 3) Finally, to maintainthat the materialists regard things-in-themselves as “alwaysonly dimly discernible in the phenomenon” is sheer nonsense,as we have seen from Engels’ refutation of the agnostic. 
The reason for Bogdanov’s distortion of materialism lies in his failure to understand the relation of absolute truth to relative truth (of which we shall speak later). 
 As regardsthe “outside-of-experience” thing-in-itself and the “elementsof experience”, these are already the beginnings of the Mach-ist muddle of which we have already said enough. 
 Parroting the incredible nonsense uttered by the reac-tionary professors about the materialists, disavowing Engels in 1907, and attempting to “revise” Engels into agnosticismin 1908—such is the philosophy of the “recent positivism”of the Russian Machists! 4. 
 DOES OBJECTIVE TRUTH EXIST? Bogdanov declares: “As I understand it, Marxism con-tains a denial of the unconditional objectivity of any truthwhatsoever, the denial of all eternal truths” ( Empirio-monism , Bk. 
 III, pp. 
 iv-v). 
 What is meant by “ unconditional objec-tivity”? “Truth for all eternity” is “objective truth in theabsolute meaning of the word,” says Bogdanov in the same passage, and agrees to recognise “objective truth only within the limits of a given epoch”. 
 Two questions are obviously confused here: 1) Is there such a thing as objective truth, that is, can human ideashave a content that does not depend on a subject, that doesnot depend either on a human being or on humanity? 2) If so, can human ideas, which give expression to objective truth, express it all at one time, as a whole, unconditional-ly, absolutely, or only approximately, relatively? This sec-ond question is a question of the relation of absolute truth to relative truth. 
 Bogdanov replies to the second question clearly, explicitly and definitely by rejecting even the slight-est admission of absolute truth and by accusing Engels ofeclecticism for making such an admission. 
 Of this discovery of eclecticism in Engels by A. 
 Bogdanov we shall speak sepa-rately later on. 
 For the present we shall confine ourselves tothe first question, which Bogdanov, without saying so expli-citly, likewise answers in the negative—for although it is possible to deny the element of relativity * in one or another human idea without denying the existence of objective truth,it is impossible to deny absolute truth without denying theexistence of objective truth. 
 “...The criterion of objectivetruth,” writes Bogdanov a little further on (p. 
 ix), “in Bel-tov’s sense, does not exist; truth is an ideological form, an or-ganising form of human experience.... 
” Neither “Beltov’ssense”—for it is a question of one of the fundamental philo-sophical problems and not of Beltov—nor the criterion o f truth—which must be treated separately, without confusingit with the question of whether objective truth exists —has anything to do with the case here. 
 Bogdanov’s negative an-swer to the latter question is clear: if truth is only an ideologi-cal form, then there can be no truth independent of the sub-ject, of humanity, for neither Bogdanov nor we know anyother ideology but human ideology. 
 And Bogdanov’s nega-tive answer emerges still more clearly from the second half of his statement: if truth is a form of human experience, then there can be no truth independent of humanity; therecan be no objective truth. 
 Bogdanov’s denial of objective truth is agnosticism and subjectivism. 
 The absurdity of this denial is evident evenfrom the single example of a scientific truth quoted above. 
 Natural science leaves no room for doubt that its assertion that the earth existed prior to man is a truth. 
 This is en-tirely compatible with the materialist theory of knowl-edge: the existence of the thing reflected independent ofthe reflector (the independence of the external world fromthe mind) is the fundamental tenet of materialism. 
 The *This is probably a slip. 
 Here sense requires the word “absolute”. 
 —Ed. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR assertion made by science that the earth existed prior to man is an objective truth. 
 This proposition of natural science is incompatible with the philosophy of the Machists and with their doctrine of truth: if truth is an organising formof human experience, then the assertion that the earth existsoutside any human experience cannot be true. 
 But that is not all. 
 If truth is only an organising form of human experience, then the teachings, say, of Cathol-icism are also true. 
 For there is not the slightest doubt that Catholicism is an “organising form of human experience”. 
Bogdanov himself senses the crying falsity of his theory andit is extremely interesting to watch how he attempts toextricate himself from the swamp into which he has fallen. 
 “The basis of objectivity,” we read in Book I of Em-pirio-monism , “must lie in the sphere of collective experi-ence. 
 We term those data of experience objective which havethe same vital meaning for us and for other people, thosedata upon which not only we construct our activities withoutcontradiction, but upon which, we are convinced, otherpeople must also base themselves in order to avoid contradic-tion. 
 The objective character of the physical world con-sists in the fact that it exists not for me personally, butfor everybody [that is not true! It exists independently of “everybody”!], and has a definite meaning for everybody,the same, I am convinced, as for me. 
 The objectivity ofthe physical series is its universal significance ” (p. 
 25, Bog-danov’s italics). 
 “The objectivity of the physical bodies we encounter in our experience is in the last analysis estab-lished by the mutual verification and co-ordination of theutterances of various people. 
 In general, the physical worldis socially-co-ordinated, socially-harmonised, in a word,socially-organised experience ” (p. 
 36, Bogdanov’s italics) We shall not repeat that this is a fundamentally untrue, idealist definition, that the physical world exists independ-ently of humanity and of human experience, that the physicalworld existed at a time when no “sociality” and no “organisa-tion” of human experience was possible, and so forth. 
 Weshall dwell now on an exposure of the Machist philosophy from another aspect, namely, that objectivity is so defined that religious doctrines, which undoubtedly possess a “uni-versal significance”, and so forth, come under the defini-tion. 
 But listen to Bogdanov again: “We remind the reader once more that ‘objective’ experience is by no means the same as ‘social’ experience.... 
 Social experience is far from being altogether socially organised and always containsvarious contradictions, so that certain of its parts do notagree with others. 
 Sprites and hobgoblins may exist in thesphere of social experience of a given people or of a givengroup of people—for example, the peasantry; but they need not therefore be included under socially-organised or ob-jective experience, for they do not harmonise with the restof collective experience and do not fit in with its organisingforms, for example, with the chain of causality” (45). 
 Of course it is very gratifying that Bogdanov himself “does not include” social experience in regard to sprites and hobgoblins under objective experience. 
 But this well-meant amendment in the spirit of anti-fideism by no meanscorrects the fundamental error of Bogdanov’s whole position. 
Bogdanov’s definition of objectivity and of the physicalworld completely falls to the ground, since the religiousdoctrine has “universal significance” to a greater degree than the scientific doctrine; the greater part of mankind cling to the former doctrine to this day. 
 Catholicism hasbeen “socially organised, harmonised and co-ordinated” bycenturies of development; it “ fits in ” with the “chain of causality” in the most indisputable manner; for religionsdid not originate without cause, it is not by accident that they retain their hold over the masses under modern condi-tions, and it is quite “in the order of things” that pro-fessors of philosophy should adapt themselves to them. 
 Ifthis undoubtedly universally significant and undoubtedlyhighly-organised religious social experience does “not har-monise” with the “experience” of science, it is because there is a radical and fundamental difference between the two, which Bogdanov obliterated when he rejected objectivetruth. 
 And however much Bogdanov tries to “correct” him-self by saying that fideism or clericalism does not harmonisewith science, the undeniable fact remains that Bogdanov’sdenial of objective truth completely “harmonises” with fide-ism. 
 Contemporary fideism does not at all reject science; all it rejects is the “exaggerated claims” of science, to wit,its claim to objective truth. 
 If objective truth exists (as the materialists think), if natural science, reflecting the outer world in human “experience”, is alone capable of giving us objective truth, then all fideism is absolutely refuted. 
 But if there is no objective truth, if truth (includ-ing scientific truth) is only an organising form of humanexperience, then this in itself is an admission of the funda-mental premise of clericalism, the door is thrown open forit, and a place is cleared for the “organising forms” of religious experience. 
 The question arises, does this denial of objective truthbelong personally to Bogdanov, who refuses to own himself aMachist, or does it follow from the fundamental teachingsof Mach and Avenarius? The latter is the only possible answerto the question. 
 If only sensation exists in the world (Ave-narius, in 1876), if bodies are complexes of sensations (Mach, in the Analysis of Sensations ), then we are obviously con-fronted with a philosophical subjectivism which inevitablyleads to the denial of objective truth. 
 And if sensationsare called “elements” which in one connection give rise tothe physical and in another to the psychical, this, as we have seen, only confuses but does not reject the fundamental point of departure of empirio-criticism. 
 Avenarius and Machrecognise sensations as the source of our knowledge. 
 Conse-quently, they adopt the standpoint of empiricism (all knowl-edge derives from experience) or sensationalism (all knowl-edge derives from sensations). 
 But this standpoint gives rise to the difference between the fundamental philosophical trends, idealism and materialism, and does not eliminate thatdifference, no matter in what “new” verbal garb (“elements”)the standpoint is clothed. 
 Both the solipsist, that is, thesubjective idealist, and the materialist may regard sensa-tions as the source of our knowledge. 
 Both Berkeley and Diderot started from Locke. 
 The first premise of the theory of knowledge undoubtedly is that the sole source of ourknowledge is sensation. 
 Having recognised the first premise,Mach confuses the second important premise, i. 
e. 
, regardingthe objective reality that is given to man in his sensations,or that forms the source of man’s sensations. 
 Starting from sensations, one may follow the line of subjectivism, which leads to solipsism (“bodies are complexes or combinationsof sensations”), or the line of objectivism, which leads to materialism (sensations are images of objects, of the ex-ternal world). 
 For the first point of view, i. 
e. 
, agnosti-cism, or, pushed a little further, subjective idealism, there can be no objective truth. 
 For the second point of view,i. 
e. 
, materialism, the recognition of objective truth is es-sential. 
 This old philosophical question of the two trends,or rather, of the two possible deductions from the premisesof empiricism and sensationalism, is not solved by Mach, it is not eliminated or overcome by him, but is muddled b y verbal trickery with the word “element”, and the like. 
 Bog-danov’s denial of objective truth is an inevitable conse-quence of Machism as a whole, and not a deviation from it. 
 Engels in his Ludwig Feuerbach calls Hume and Kant phi-losophers “who question the possibility of any cognition, or at least of an exhaustive cognition, of the world”. 
 En-gels, therefore, lays stress on what is common both to Humeand Kant, and not on what divides them. 
 Engels statesfurther that “what is decisive in the refutation of this [Hu-mean and Kantian] view has already been said by Hegel”(4th German edition, pp. 
 15-16). 
 48 In this connection it seems to me not uninteresting to note that Hegel, declaring materialism to be “a consistent system of empiricism”, wrote: “For empiricism the external ( das Äusserliche ) in general is the truth, and if then a supersensible too be admitted, never-theless knowledge of it cannot occur ( soll doch eine Erkenntnis desselben [d. 
 h. 
 des Uebersinnlichen ] nicht stattfinden können ) and one must keep exclusively to what belongs to perception ( das der Wahrnehmung Angehörige ). 
 However, this principle in its realisation ( Durchführung ) produced what was subsequently termed materialism . 
 This material-ism regards matter, as such, as the truly objective ( das wahrhaft Objektive ). 
 * All knowledge comes from experience, from sensation, from perception. 
 That is true. 
 But the question arises,does objective reality “belong to perception”, i. 
e. 
, is it the source of perception? If you answer yes, you are a ma-terialist. 
 If you answer no, you are inconsistent and willinevitably arrive at subjectivism, or agnosticism, irrespec-*Hegel, “Enzyklopädie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse”, Werke , VI. 
 Band (1843), S. 
 83. 
 Cf, S. 
 122. 
 tive of whether you deny the knowability of the thing-in-itself, or the objectivity of time, space and causality (with Kant), or whether you do not even permit the thought of a thing-in-itself (with Hume). 
 The inconsistency of yourempiricism, of your philosophy of experience, will in thatcase lie in the fact that you deny the objective content ofexperience, the objective truth of knowledge through ex-perience. 
 Those who hold to the line of Kant or Hume (Mach and Avenarius are among the latter, insofar as they are notpure Berkeleians) call us, the materialists, “metaphysicians”because we recognise objective reality which is given us inexperience, because we recognise an objective source of oursensations independent of man. 
 We materialists follow En-gels in calling the Kantians and Humeans agnostics because they deny objective reality as the source of our sensations. 
Agnostic is a Greek word: a in Greek means “no”, gnosis “knowledge”. 
 The agnostic says: I do not know if there is an objective reality which is reflected, imaged by our sen-sations; I declare there is no way of knowing this (see the words of Engels above quoted setting forth the position of the agnostic). 
 Hence the denial of objective truth bythe agnostic, and the tolerance—the philistine, cowardlytolerance—of the dogmas regarding sprites, hobgoblins,Catholic saints, and the like. 
 Mach and Avenarius, preten-tiously advancing a “new” terminology, a supposedly “new” point of view, repeat, in fact, although in a confused and muddled way, the reply of the agnostic: on the one hand,bodies are complexes of sensations (pure subjectivism, pureBerkeleianism); on the other hand, if we rechristen oursensations “elements”, we may think of them as existing in-dependently of our sense-organs! The Machists love to declaim that they are philosophers who completely trust the evidence of our sense-organs, whoregard the world as actually being what it seems to us to be,full of sounds, colours, etc. 
, whereas to the materialists,they say, the world is dead, devoid of sound and colour, andin its reality different from what it seems to be, and so forth. 
 Such declamations, for example, are indulged in by J. 
 Petzoldt, both in his Introduction to the Philosophy of Pure Experience and in his World Problem from the Positiv -ist Standpoint (Weltproblem von positivistischen Stand-punkte aus ), 1906. 
 Petzoldt is parroted by Mr. 
 Victor Cher-nov, who waxes enthusiastic over the “new” idea. 
 But, in fact, the Machists are subjectivists and agnostics, forthey do not sufficiently trust the evidence of our sense-organs and are inconsistent in their sensationalism. 
 Theydo not recognise objective reality, independent of man, asthe source of our sensations. 
 They do not regard sensations as a true copy of this objective reality, thereby coming into direct conflict with natural science and throwing the dooropen for fideism. 
 On the contrary, for the materialist theworld is richer, livelier, more varied than it seems, forwith each step in the development of science new aspects arediscovered. 
 For the materialist, our sensations are images of the sole and ultimate objective reality, ultimate not in the sense that it has already been cognised to the end, butin the sense that there is not and cannot be any other. 
 Thisview irrevocably closes the door not only to every spe-cies of fideism, but also to that professorial scholasticismwhich, while not recognising an objective reality as the source of our sensations, “deduces” the concept of the ob-jective by means of such artificial verbal constructions asuniversal significance, socially-organised, and so on and soforth, and which is unable, and frequently unwilling, toseparate objective truth from belief in sprites and hobgob-lins. 
 The Machists contemptuously shrug their shoulders at the “antiquated” views of the “dogmatists”, the material-ists, who still cling to the concept matter , which supposedly has been refuted by “recent science” and “recent positiv-ism”. 
 We shall speak separately of the new theories of phys-ics on the structure of matter. 
 But it is absolutely unpardon-able to confuse, as the Machists do, any particular theory of the structure of matter with the epistemological category, toconfuse the problem of the new properties of new aspects ofmatter (electrons, for example) with the old problem of thetheory of knowledge, with the problem of the sources of ourknowledge, the existence of objective truth, etc. 
 Mach “discovered the world-elements”: red, green, hard, soft, loud, long, etc. 
 We ask, is a man given objective realitywhen he sees something red or feels something hard, etc. 
, or not? This hoary philosophical query is confused by Mach. 
 If you hold that it is not given, you, together with Mach, inevitably sink to subjectivism and agnosticism and deserv-edly fall into the embrace of the immanentists, i. 
e. 
, thephilosophical Menshikovs. 
 If you hold that it is given, a phil-osophical concept is needed for this objective reality, andthis concept has been worked out long, long ago. 
 This con-cept is matter . 
 Matter is a philosophical category denoting the objective reality which is given to man by his sensations, and which is copied, photographed and reflected by oursensations, while existing independently of them. 
 Therefore,to say that such a concept can become “antiquated” ischildish talk , a senseless repetition of the arguments of fashionable reactionary philosophy. 
 Could the struggle between materialism and idealism, the struggle between the tendencies or lines of Plato and Democritus in philoso-phy, the struggle between religion and science, the denialof objective truth and its assertion, the struggle betweenthe adherents of supersensible knowledge and its adversaries,have become antiquated during the two thousand years of the development of philosophy? Acceptance or rejection of the concept matter is a ques-tion of the confidence man places in the evidence of hissense-organs, a question of the source of our knowledge, a question which has been asked and debated from the very in-ception of philosophy, which may be disguised in a thousand different garbs by professorial clowns, but which can no more become antiquated than the question whether the source of human knowledge is sight and touch, hearing and smell. 
 To regard our sensations as images of the external world, to recognise objective truth, to hold the materialist theory of knowledge—these are all one and the same thing. 
 To illustrate this, I shall only quote from Feuerbach and from two textbooks of philosophy, in order that the reader may judge how elementary this question is. 
 “How banal,” wrote Feuerbach, “to deny that sensation is the evangel, the gospel ( Verkündung ) of an objective saviour. 
” * A strange, a preposterous terminology, as you see, but a perfectly clear philosophical line: sensation reveals *Feuerbach, Sämtliche Werke , X. 
 Band, 1866, S. 
 194-95. 
 objective truth to man. 
 “My sensation is subjective, but its foundation or cause ( Grund ) is objective” (S. 
 195). 
 Com-pare this with the quotation given above where Feuerbach says that materialism starts from the sensuous world as anultimate ( ausgemachte ) objective truth. 
 Sensationalism, we read in Frank’s dictionary of phi-losophy *, is a doctrine which deduces all our ideas “from the experience of the senses, reducing knowledge to sensa-tions”. 
 There is subjective sensationalism (scepticism and Berkeleianism), moral sensationalism (Epicureanism),49 a nd objective sensationalism. 
 “Objective sensationalism is mate-rialism, for matter or bodies are, in the opinion of the ma-terialists, the only objects that can affect our senses ( at-teindre nos sens ). 
” “If sensationalism,” says Schwegler in his history of philosophy, ** “asserted that truth or being can be appre-hended exclusively by means of the senses, one had only[Schwegler is speaking of philosophy at the end of the eight-eenth century in France] to formulate this proposition ob-jectvely and one had the thesis of materialism: only the sensuous exists; there is no other being than material being. 
” These elementary truths, which have managed to find their way even into the textbooks, have been forgotten byour Machists. 
 5. 
 ABSOLUTE AND RELATIVE TRUTH, OR THE ECLECTICISM OF ENGELS AS DISCOVERED BY A. 
 BOGDANOV Bogdanov made his discovery in 1906, in the preface to Book III of his Empirio-monism . 
 “Engels in Anti-Dühring ,” writes Bogdanov, “expresses himself almost in the same sense in which I have just described the relativity of truth” (p. 
 v)—that is, in the sense of denying all eternal truth, “denying the unconditional objectivity of all truth what-soever”. 
 “Engels is wrong in his indecision, in the fact that in spite of his irony he recognises certain ‘eternal truths’, wretched though they may be...” (p. 
 viii). 
 “Only inconsist-*Dictionnaire des sciences philosophiques , Paris, 1875. 
 **Dr. 
 Albert Schwegler, Geschichte der Philosophie im Umriss , 15-te Aufl. 
, S. 
 194. 
 ency can here permit such eclectic reservations as those of Engels...” (p. 
 ix). 
 Let us cite one instance of Bogdanov’s refutation of Engels’ eclecticism. 
 “Napoleon died on May 5, 1821,” says Engels in Anti-Dühring , in the chapter “Eternal Truths”, explaining to Dühring what one who claims to dis-cover eternal truths in the historical sciences has to confinehimself to, what “platitudes” ( Plattheiten ) he has to be sat-isfied with. 
 Bogdanov answers Engels as follows: “What sort of ‘truth’ is that? And what is there ‘eternal’ about it? The recording of a single correlation, which perhaps even hasno longer any real significance for our generation, cannotserve as the starting-point for any activity, and leads no-where” (p. 
 ix). 
 And on page viii: “Can Plattheiten be called Wahrheiten ? Are ‘platitudes’ truths? Truth is a vital organ-ising form of experience; it leads us somewhere in our activ-ity and provides a point of support in the struggle of life. 
” It is clear enough from these two quotations that Bog-danov, instead of refuting Engels, makes a mere declamation . 
 If you cannot assert that the proposition “Napoleon died onMay 5, 1821” is false or inexact, you acknowledge that it is true. 
 If you do not assert that it may be refuted in the fu-ture, you acknowledge this truth to be eternal. 
 But to callphrases such as truth is a “vital organising form of expe-rience” an answer, is to palm off a mere jumble of words as philosophy. 
 Did the earth have the history which is ex-pounded in geology, or was the earth created in seven days? Is one to be allowed to dodge this question by talking about “vital” (what does that mean?) truth which “leads” some-where, and the like? Can it be that knowledge of the historyof the earth and of the history of humanity “has no realsignificance”? This is just turgid nonsense, used by Bog-danov to cover his retreat . 
 For it is a retreat, when, hav-ing taken it upon himself to prove that the admission of eternal truths by Engels is eclecticism, he dodges the issueby a mere noise and clash of words and leaves unrefuted thefact that Napoleon did die on May 5, 1821, and that to re-gard this truth as refutable in the future is absurd. 
 The example given by Engels is elementary, and anybody without the slightest difficulty can think of scores of sim-ilar truth that are eternal and absolute and that only in-sane people can doubt (as Engels says, citing another ex-ample: “Paris is in France”). 
 Why does Engels speak here of “platitudes”? Because he refutes and ridicules the dogmatic, metaphysical materialist Dühring, who was incapable of applying dialectics to the relation between absolute and rel-ative truth. 
 To be a materialist is to acknowledge objec-tive truth, which is revealed to us by our sense-organs. 
 Toacknowledge objective truth, i. 
e. 
, truth not dependent uponman and mankind, is, in one way or another, to recognise absolute truth. 
 And it is this “one way or another” which distinguishes the metaphysical materialist Dühring from thedialectical materialist Engels. 
 On the most complex ques-tions of science in general, and of historical science inparticular, Dühring scattered words right and left: ultimate,final and eternal truth. 
 Engels jeered at him. 
 Of course there are eternal truths, Engels said, but it is unwise to use high-sounding words ( gewaltige Worte ) in connection with simple things. 
 If we want to advance materialism,we must drop this trivial play with the words “eternaltruth”; we must learn to put, and answer, the question ofthe relation between absolute and relative truth dialecti-cally. 
 It was on this issue that the fight between Dühring and Engels was waged thirty years ago. 
 And Bogdanov, who hascontrived “ not to notice ” Engels’ explanation of the prob-lem of absolute and relative truth given in this very same chapter , and who has contrived to accuse Engels of “eclec-ticism” for his admission of a proposition which is a truism for all forms of materialism, only betrays once again his utter ignorance of both materialism and dialectics. 
 “Now we come to the question,” Engels writes in Anti-Dühring , in the beginning of the chapter mentioned (Part I, Chap. 
 IX), “whether any, and if so which, products of humanknowledge ever can have sovereign validity and an uncondi-tional claim ( Anspruch ) to truth” (5th German edition, p. 
 79). 
 And Engels answers the question thus: “The sovereignty of thought is realised in a series of extremely unsovereignly-thinking human beings; the knowl-edge which has an unconditional claim to truth is realisedin a series of relative errors; neither the one nor the other [i. 
e. 
, neither absolutely true knowledge, nor sovereign thought] can be fully realised except through an unendingduration of human existence. 
 “Here once again we find the same contradiction as we found above, between the character of human thought, necessarily conceived as absolute, and its reality in indi-vidual human beings, all of whom think only limitedly. 
This is a contradiction which can be resolved only in thecourse of infinite progress, in what is—at least practicallyfor us—an endless succession of generations of mankind. 
In this sense human thought is only as much sovereign as not sovereign, and its capacity for knowledge just as much unlimited as limited. 
 It is sovereign and unlimited in itsdisposition ( Anlage ), its vocation, its possibilities and its historical ultimate goal; it is not sovereign and it is limitedin its individual realisation and in reality at each particularmoment” (81). 
 * “It is just the same,” Engels continues, “with eternal truths. 
 ”50 This argument is extremely important for the question of relativism , i. 
e. 
, the principle of the relativity of our knowledge, which is stressed by all Machists. 
 The Machistsall insist that they are relativists, but the Russian Machists, while repeating the words of the Germans, are afraid, or unable to propound the question of the relation of relativismto dialectics clearly and straightforwardly. 
 For Bogdanov(as for all the Machists) recognition of the relativity of ourknowledge excludes even the least admission of absolute truth. 
 For Engels absolute truth is compounded from relative truths. 
 Bogdanov is a relativist; Engels is a dialectician. 
 Here is another, no less important, argument of Engels fromthe chapter of Anti-Dühring already quoted: “Truth and error, like all thought-concepts which move in polar opposites, have absolute validity only in an ex-tremely limited field, as we have just seen, and as even Herr Dühring would realise if he had any acquaintance with the first elements of dialectics, which deal precisely withthe inadequacy of all polar opposites. 
 As soon as we apply *Cf. 
 V. 
 Chernov, loc cit. 
, p. 
 64, et seq. 
 The Machist Mr. 
 Chernov fully shares the position of Bogdanov, who does not wish to own him-self a Machist. 
 The difference is that Bogdanov tries to gloss over his disagreement with Engels, to present it as a casual matter, etc. 
, while Chernov feels that it is a question of a struggle against both material-ism and dialectics. 
 the antithesis between truth and error outside of that nar-row field which has been referred to above it becomes rel-ative and therefore unserviceable for exact scientific modes of expression; and if we attempt to apply it as absolutelyvalid outside that field we really find ourselves altogetherbeaten: both poles of the antithesis become transformedinto their opposites, truth becomes error and error truth”(p. 
 86). 
 51 Here follows the example of Boyle’s law (the volume of a gas is inversely proportional to its pressure). 
 The “grain of truth” contained in this law is only absolutetruth within certain limits. 
 The law, it appears, is a truth“only approximately”. 
 Human thought then by its nature is capable of giving, and does give, absolute truth, which is compounded of a sum-total of relative truths. 
 Each step in the development of science adds new grains to the sum of absolute truth,but the limits of the truth of each scientific propositionare relative, now expanding, now shrinking with the growthof knowledge. 
 “Absolute truth,” says J. 
 Dietzgen in his Streifzügen , “can be seen, heard, smelt, touched and, of course, also be known ; but it is not entirely absorbed ( geht nicht auf ) in knowledge” (S. 
 195). 
 “It goes without saying that a picture does not exhaust its object and the artistremains behind his model.... 
 How can a picture ‘coincide’with its model? Approximately it can,” (197). 
 “Hence, wecan know nature and her parts only relatively; since even a part, though only a relation of nature, possesses never-theless the nature of the absolute, the nature of nature as awhole ( des Naturganzen an sich ) which cannot be exhausted by knowledge.... 
 How, then, do we know that behind thephenomena of nature, behind the relative truths, there isa universal, unlimited, absolute nature which does not re-veal itself to man completely?... Whence this knowledge? It is innate; it is given us with consciousness” (198). 
 Thislast statement is one of the inexactitudes of Dietzgen’swhich led Marx, in a letter to Kugelmann, to speak of theconfusion in Dietzgen’s views. 
 52 Only by seizing upon such incorrect passages can one speak of a specific philosophy of Dietzgen differing from dialectical materialism. 
 But Di-etzgen corrects himself on the same page : “When I say that the consciousness of eternal, absolute truth is innate in us, that it is the one and only a priori knowledge, experience nevertheless also confirms this innate consciousness” (198). 
 From all these statements by Engels and Dietzgen it is clearly seen that for dialectical materialism there is noimpassable boundary between relative and absolute truth. 
Bogdanov entirely failed to grasp this if he could write:“It [the world outlook of the old materialism] sets itselfup as the absolute objective knowledge of the essence of things [Bogdanov’s italics] and is incompatible with the histori-cally conditional nature of all ideologies” ( Empirio-monism , Bk. 
 III, p. 
 iv). 
 From the standpoint of modern materialism,i. 
e. 
, Marxism, the limits of approximation of our knowledge to objective, absolute truth are historically conditional,but the existence of such truth is unconditional , and the fact that we are approaching nearer to it is also unconditional. 
 The contours of the picture are historically conditional,but the fact that this picture depicts an objectively existingmodel is unconditional. 
 When and under what circumstanceswe reached, in our knowledge of the essential nature ofthings, the discovery of alizarin in coal tar or the discovery of electrons in the atom is historically conditional; but that every such discovery is an advance of “absolutely objectiveknowledge” is unconditional. 
 In a word, every ideology ishistorically conditional, but it is unconditionally true thatto every scientific ideology (as distinct, for instance, fromreligious ideology) there corresponds an objective truth, absolute nature. 
 You will say that this distinction between relative and absolute truth is indefinite. 
 And I shall reply:it is sufficiently “indefinite” to prevent science from becom-ing a dogma in the bad sense of the term, from becomingsomething dead, frozen, ossified; but at the same time it issufficiently “definite” to enable us to dissociate ourselves in the most emphatic and irrevocable manner from fideism and agnosticism, from philosophical idealism and the soph-istry of the followers of Hume and Kant. 
 Here is a bound-ary which you have not noticed, and not having noticed it,you have fallen into the swamp of reactionary philosophy. 
It is the boundary between dialectical materialism and relativism. 
 We are relativists, proclaim Mach, Avenarius, Petzoldt. 
 We are relativists, echo Mr. 
 Chernov and certain Russian Machists, would-be Marxists. 
 Yes, Mr. 
 Chernov and Machist comrades—and therein lies your error. 
 For to make relativ-ism the basis of the theory of knowledge is inevitably to con-demn oneself either to absolute scepticism, agnosticism andsophistry, or to subjectivism. 
 Relativism as a basis of thetheory of knowledge is not only recognition of the relativityof our knowledge, but also a denial of any objective measureor model existing independently of mankind to which our relative knowledge approximates. 
 From the standpoint of naked relativism one can justify any sophistry; one may re-gard it as “conditional” whether Napoleon died on May 5,1821, or not; one may declare the admission, alongsidescientific ideology (“convenient” in one respect), of re-ligious ideology (very “convenient” in another respect) to be a mere “convenience” for man or mankind, and so forth. 
 Dialectics—as Hegel in his time explained— contains an element of relativism, of negation, of scepticism, butis not reducible to relativism. 
 The materialist dialectics of Marx and Engels certainly does contain relativism, but isnot reducible to relativism, that is, it recognises the rela-tivity of all our knowledge, not in the sense of denying ob-jective truth, but in the sense that the limits of approximationof our knowledge to this truth are historically conditional. 
 Bogdanov writes in italics: “ Consistent Marxism does not admit such dogmatism and such static concepts ” as eter-nal truths. 
 ( Empirio-monism , Bk. 
 III, p. 
 ix. 
) This is a mud-dle. 
 If the world is eternally moving and developing matter (as the Marxists think), reflected by the developing humanconsciousness, what is there “static” here? The point at is-sue is not the immutable essence of things, or an immutableconsciousness, but the correspondence between the conscious-ness which reflects nature and the nature which is reflected by consciousness. 
 In connection with this question, and this question alone, the term “dogmatism” has a specific,characteristic philosophical flavour: it is a favourite wordused by the idealists and the agnostics against the material-ists, as we have already seen in the case of the fairly “old”materialist, Feuerbach. 
 The objections brought against materialism from the standpoint of the celebrated “recent positivism” are just ancient trash. 
 6: THE CRITERION OF PRACTICE IN THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE We have seen that Marx in 1845 and Engels in 1888 and 1892 placed the criterion of practice at the basis of thematerialist theory of knowledge. 
 53 “The dispute over the reality or non-reality of thinking which is isolated frompractice is a purely scholastic question,” says Marx in his second Thesis on Feuerbach. 
 The best refutation of Kantian and Humean agnosticism as well as of other philosophicalcrotchets ( Schrullen ) is practice, repeats Engels. 
 “The success of our action proves the conformity ( Uebereinstim-mung ) of our perceptions with the objective nature of the things perceived,” he says in reply to the agnostics. 
54 Compare this with Mach’s argument about the criterion of practice: “In the common way of thinking and speakingappearance , illusion , is usually contrasted with reality . 
 A pencil held in front of us in the air is seen as straight;when we dip it slantwise into water we see it as crooked. 
 Inthe latter case we say that the pencil a ppears crooked but in reality it is straight. 
 But what entitles us to declare one fact to be the reality, and to degrade the other to an appearance?... Our expectation, of course, is deceived whenwe fall into the natural error of expecting what we areaccustomed to although the case is unusual. 
 The factsare not to blame for that. 
 In these cases, to speak of ap-pearance may have a practical significance, but not a scien-tific significance. 
 Similarly, the question which is oftenasked, whether the world is real or whether we merely dreamit, is devoid of all scientific significance. 
 Even the wildestdream is a fact as much as any other” ( Analysis of Sensa-tions , pp. 
 18-19). 
 It is true that not only is the wildest dream a fact, but also the wildest philosophy. 
 It is impossible to doubt thisafter an acquaintance with the philosophy of Ernst Mach. 
As the very latest sophist, he confounds the scientific-historical and psychological investigation of human errors,of every “wild dream” of humanity, such as belief in sprites, hobgoblins, and so forth, with the epistemological distinc-tion between truth and “wildness”. 
 It is as if an economistwere to say that Senior’s theory that the whole profit of the capitalist is obtained from the “last hour” of the work-er’s labour and Marx’s theory are both facts, and that from the standpoint of science there is no point in asking which theory expresses objective truth and which—the prejudiceof the bourgeoisie and the venality of its professors. 
 Thetanner Joseph Dietzgen regarded the scientific, i. 
e. 
, the ma-terialist, theory of knowledge as a “universal weapon againstreligious belief” ( Kleinere philosophische Schriften , S. 
 55), but for the professor-in-ordinary Ernst Mach the distinction between the materialist and the subjective-idealist theoriesof knowledge “is devoid of all scientific significance”!That science is non-partisan in the struggle of materialismagainst idealism and religion is a favourite idea not onlyof Mach but of all modern bourgeois professors, who are, as Dietzgen justly expresses it, “graduated flunkeys who stupefy the people by a twisted idealism” (op. 
 cit. 
, S. 
 53). 
 And a twisted professorial idealism it is, indeed, when the criterion of practice, which for every one of us dis-tinguishes illusion from reality, is removed by Mach fromthe realm of science, from the realm of the theory of knowl-edge. 
 Human practice proves the correctness of the ma-terialist theory of knowledge, said Marx and Engels, whodubbed attempts to solve the fundamental question of epis-temology without the aid of practice “scholastic” and “phi-losophical crotchets”. 
 But for Mach practice is one thingand the theory of knowledge something quite different; they can be placed side by side without making the latter conditional on the former. 
 In his last work, Knowledge and Error , Mach says: “Knowledge is always a biologically useful ( förderndes ) mental experience” (2nd German edition, p. 
 115). 
 “Only success can separate knowledge from error”(116). 
 “The concept is a physical working hypothesis” (143). 
 With astonishing naïveté our Russian Machist would-be Marxists regard such phrases of Mach’s as proof that hecomes close to Marxism. 
 But Mach here comes just as close to Marxism as Bismarck to the labour movement, or BishopEulogius 55 to democracy. 
 With Mach such propositions stand side by side with his idealist theory of knowledge and do not determine the choice of one or another definite line of epistemology. 
 Knowledge can be useful biologically,useful in human practice, useful for the preservation of life, for the preservation of the species, only when it reflects objective truth, truth which is independent of man. 
 For the materialist the “success” of human practice proves the correspondence between our ideas and the objective natureof the things we perceive. 
 For the solipsist “success” is ev-erything needed by me in practice , which can be regarded sep-arately from the theory of knowledge. 
 If we include thecriterion of practice in the foundation of the theory of knowl-edge we inevitably arrive at materialism, says the Marxist. 
 Let practice be materialist, says Mach, but theory is anothermatter. 
 “In practice,” Mach writes in the Analysis of Sensations , “we can as little do without the idea of the self when we per-form any act, as we can do without the idea of a body when we grasp at a thing. 
 Physiologically we remain egoists and materialists with the same constancy as we forever see thesun rising again. 
 But theoretically this view cannot be ad-hered to” (284-85). 
 Egoism is beside the point here, for egoism is not an epistemological category. 
 The question of the apparent move-ment of the sun around the earth is also beside the point, for in practice, which serves us as a criterion in the theoryof knowledge, we must include also the practice of astro-nomical observations, discoveries, etc. 
 There remains onlyMach ‘s valuable admission that in their practical lifemen are entirely and exclusively guided by the materialist theory of knowledge; the attempt to obviate it “theoreti-cally” is characteristic of Mach’s gelehrte scholastic and twisted idealistic endeavours. 
 How little of a novelty are these efforts to eliminate practice—as something unsusceptible to epistemologicaltreatment—in order to make room for agnosticism and ideal-ism is shown by the following example from the history of German classical philosophy. 
 Between Kant and Fichtestands G. 
 E. 
 Schulze (known in the history of philosophy asSchulze-Aenesidemus). 
 He openly advocates the scepticaltrend in philosophy and calls himself a follower of Hume(and of the ancients Pyrrho and Sextus). 
 He emphatically rejects every thing-in-itself and the possibility of objective knowledge, and emphatically insists that we should not gobeyond “experience”, beyond sensations, in which connec-tion he anticipates the following objection from the other camp: “Since the sceptic when he takes part in the affairs of life assumes as indubitable the reality of objective things, behaves accordingly, and thus admits a criterion of truth,his own behaviour is the best and clearest refutation ofhis scepticism. 
” * “Such proofs,” Schulze indignantly re-torts, “are only valid for the mob ( Pöbel ). 
” For “my sceptic-ism does not concern the requirements of practical life, but remains within the bounds of philosophy” (S. 
 254, 255). 
 In similar manner, the subjective idealist Fichte alsohopes to find room within the bounds of idealistic philoso-phy for that “realism which is inevitable ( sich aufdringt ) for all of us, and even for the most determined idealist,when it comes to action, i. 
e. 
, the assumption that objects exist quite independently of us and outside us” ( Werke , I, 455). 
 Mach’s recent positivism has not travelled far from Schulze and Fichte! Let us note as a curiosity that on thisquestion too for Bazarov there is no one but Plekhanov—there is no beast stronger than the cat. 
 Bazarov ridicules the “ salto vitale philosophy of Plekhanov” ( Studies , etc. 
, p. 
 69), who indeed made the absurd remark that “belief”in the existence of the outer world “is an inevitable salto vitale ” [vital leap] of philosophy” ( Notes on Ludwig Feuer-bach , p. 
 111). 
 The word “belief” (taken from Hume), al-though put in quotation marks, discloses a confusion of terms on Plekhanov’s part. 
 There can be no question about that. 
 But what has Plekhanov got to do with it? Why did not Ba-zarov take some other materialist, Feuerbach, for instance?Is it only because he does not know him? But ignorance is noargument. 
 Feuerbach also, like Marx and Engels, makes animpermissible—from the point of view of Schulze, Fichte and Mach—“leap” to practice in the fundamental problems of epistemology. 
 Criticising idealism, Feuerbach explains itsessential nature by the following striking quotation fromFichte, which superbly demolishes Machism: “‘You assume,’writes Fichte, ‘that things are real, that they exist outside *G. 
 E. 
 Schulze, Aenesidemus oder über die Fundamente der von dem Herrn Professor Reinhold in Jena gelieferten Elementarphilosophie , 1792, S. 
 253. 
 of you, only because you see them, hear them and touch them. 
 But vision, touch and hearing are only sensations.... 
 You perceive, not the objects, but only your sensations,’” (Feuerbach, Werke , X. 
 Band, S. 
 185). 
 To which Feuerbach replies that a human being is not an abstract I, but either a man or woman, and the question whether the world is sensa-tion can be compared to the question: is another humanbeing my sensation, or do our relations in practical life prove the contrary? “The fundamental defect of idealism is precisely that it asks and answers the question of objectiv-ity and subjectivity, of the reality or unreality of the world,only from the standpoint of theory” (ibid. 
, 189). 
 Feuerbachmakes the sum-total of human practice the basis of the theo-ry of knowledge. 
 He says that idealists of course also recog-nise the reality of the I and the Thou in practical life. 
 For the idealists “this point of view is valid only for practicallife and not for speculation. 
 But a speculation which con-tradicts life, which makes the standpoint of death, of asoul separated from the body, the standpoint of truth, is adead and false speculation” (192). 
 Before we perceive , we breathe; we cannot exist without air, food and drink. 
 “Does this mean then that we must deal with questions of food and drink when examining the problem of the ideal-ity or reality of the world?—exclaims the indignant ideal-ist. 
 How vile! What an offence against good manners sound-ly to trounce materialism in the scientific sense from the chair of philosophy and the pulpit of theology, only to prac-tise materialism with all one’s heart and soul in the crudestform at the table d’hôte” (195). 
 And Feuerbach exclaimsthat to identify subjective sensation with the objectiveworld “is to identify pollution with procreation” (198). 
 A comment not of the politest order, but it hits the mark in the case of those philosophers who teach that sense-per-ception is the reality existing outside us. 
 The standpoint of life, of practice, should be first and fundamental in the theory of knowledge. 
 And it inevi-tably leads to materialism, sweeping aside the endless fab-rications of professorial scholasticism. 
 Of course, we must not forget that the criterion of practice can never, in the nature of things, either confirm or refute any human ideacompletely . 
 This criterion too is sufficiently “indefinite” not to allow human knowledge to become “absolute”, but at the same time it is sufficiently definite to wage a ruthless fight on all varieties of idealism and agnosticism. 
 If what our practice confirms is the sole, ultimate and objectivetruth, then from this must follow the recognition that theonly path to this truth is the path of science, which holdsthe materialist point of view. 
 For instance, Bogdanov isprepared to recognise Marx’s theory of the circulation of money as an objective truth only for “our time”, and calls it “dogmatism” to attribute to this theory a “super-histor-ically objective” truth ( Empirio-monism , Bk. 
 III, p. 
 vii). 
 This is again a muddle. 
 The correspondence of this theoryto practice cannot be altered by any future circumstances,for the same simple reason that makes it an eternal truth that Napoleon died on May 5, 1821. 
 But inasmuch as the cri-terion of practice, i. 
e. 
, the course of development of all capitalist countries in the last few decades, proves onlythe objective truth of Marx’s whole social and economic theory in general, and not merely of one or other of itsparts, formulations, etc. 
, it is clear that to talk here of the “dogmatism” of the Marxists is to make an unpardonable concession to bourgeois economics. 
 The sole conclusion to bedrawn from the opinion held by Marxists that Marx’s theo-ry is an objective truth is that by following the path of Marx-ian theory we shall draw closer and closer to objective truth(without ever exhausting it); but by following any other path we shall arrive at nothing but confusion and lies. 
 C H A P T E R T H R E E THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE OF DIALECTICAL MATERIALISM AND OF EMPIRIO-CRITICISM. 
 III 1. 
 WHAT IS MATTER? WHAT IS EXPERIENCE? The first of these questions is constantly being hurled by the idealists and agnostics, including the Machists, atthe materialists; the second question by the materialists at the Machists. 
 Let us try to make the point at issue clear. 
 Avenarius says on the subject of matter:“Within the purified, ‘complete experience’ there is nothing ‘physical’—‘matter’ in the metaphysical absoluteconception—for ‘matter’ according to this conception is onlyan abstraction; it would be the total of the counter-terms while abstracting from every central term. 
 Just as in the principal co-ordination, that is, ‘complete experience’, acounter-term is inconceivable ( undenkbar ) without a central term, so ‘matter’ in the metaphysical absolute conception isa complete chimera ( Unding )” (Notes , p. 
 2, in the journal cited, § 119). 
 In all this gibberish one thing is evident, namely, that Avenarius calls the physical or matter absolute and meta-physics, for, according to his theory of the principal co-ordi-nation (or, in the new way, “complete experience”), thecounter-term is inseparable from the central term, the en-vironment from the self; the non-self is inseparable from the self (as J. 
 G. 
 Fichte said). 
 That this theory is disguised subjective idealism we have already shown, and the natureof Avenarius’ attacks on “matter” is quite obvious: theidealist denies physical being that is independent of the mind and therefore rejects the concept elaborated by phi-losophy for such being. 
 That matter is “physical” (i. 
e. 
, that which is most familiar and immediately given to man, and the existence of which no one save an inmate of a luna-tic asylum can doubt) is not denied by Avenarius; he onlyinsists on the acceptance of “ his” theory of the indissoluble connection between the environment and the self. 
 Mach expresses the same thought more simply, without philosophical flourishes: “What we call matter is a certain systematic combination of the elements (sensations)” ( Anal-ysis of Sensations , p. 
 265). 
 Mach thinks that by this asser-tion he is effecting a “radical change” in the usual worldoutlook. 
 In reality this is the old, old subjective idealism,the nakedness of which is concealed by the word “element”. 
 And lastly, the English Machist, Pearson, a rabid an-tagonist of materialism, says: “Now there can be no scientificobjection to our clarifying certain more or less permanentgroups of sense-impressions together and terming them mat-ter,—to do so indeed leads us very near to John StuartMill’s definition of matter as a ‘permanent possibility of sensation’,—but this definition of matter then leads us entirely away from matter as the thing which moves” ( The Grammar of Science , 2nd ed. 
, 1900, p. 
 249). 
 Here there is not even the fig-leaf of the “elements”, and the idealistopenly stretches out a hand to the agnostic. 
 As the reader sees, all these arguments of the founders of empirio-criticism entirely and exclusively revolve around the old epistemological question of the relation of thinkingto being, of sensation to the physical. 
 It required the ex-treme naïveté of the Russian Machists to discern anythinghere that is even remotely related to “recent science”, or“recent positivism”. 
 All the philosophers mentioned by us, some frankly, others guardedly, replace the fundamental philosophical line of materialism (from being to thinking,from matter to sensation) by the reverse line of idealism. 
Their denial of matter is the old familiar answer to episte-mological problems, which consists in denying the existenceof an external, objective source of our sensations, of an objective reality corresponding to our sensations. 
 On the other hand, the recognition of the philosophical line deniedby the idealists and agnostics is expressed in the defini-tions: matter is that which, acting upon our sense-organs, produces sensation; matter is the objective reality given to us in sensation, and so forth. 
 Bogdanov, pretending to argue only against Beltov and cravenly ignoring Engels, is indignant at such definitions,which, don’t you see, “prove to be simple repetitions”(Empirio-monism , Bk. 
 III, p. 
 xvi) of the “formula” ( of Engels , our “Marxist” forgets to add) that for one trend in philosophy matter is primary and spirit secondary, while for the other trend the reverse is the case. 
 All the RussianMachists exultantly echo Bogdanov’s “refutation”! But theslightest reflection could have shown these people that itis impossible, in the very nature of the case, to give anydefinition of these two ultimate concepts of epistemology, except an indication which of them is taken as primary. 
 What is meant by giving a “definition”? It means essential-ly to bring a given concept within a more comprehensive con-cept. 
 For example, when I give the definition “an ass isan animal”, I am bringing the concept “ass” within a morecomprehensive concept. 
 The question then is, are there more comprehensive concepts with which the theory of knowledge could operate than those of being and thinking,matter and sensation, physical and mental? No. 
 These arethe ultimate, most comprehensive concepts, which epistemol-ogy has in point of fact so far not surpassed (apart fromchanges in nomenclature , which are always possible). 
 One must be a charlatan or an utter blockhead to demand a “definition” of these two “series” of concepts of ultimate com-prehensiveness which would not be a “mere repetition”: oneor the other must be taken as primary. 
 Take the three above-mentioned arguments on matter. 
 What do they all amountto? To this, that these philosophers proceed from the mental, or the self, to the physical, or environment, as from the central term to the counter-term—or from sensation to mat-ter, or from sense-perception to matter. 
 Could Avenarius,Mach and Pearson in fact have given any other “definition”of these fundamental concepts, save by indicating the trend of their philosophical line? Could they have defined in any other way, in any specific way, what the self is, what sensation is, what sense-perception is? One has only toformulate the question clearly to realise what sheer non-sense the Machists talk when they demand that the material-ists give a definition of matter which would not amount to a repetition of the proposition that matter, nature, being, the physical—is primary, and spirit, consciousness, sensa-tion, the psychical—is secondary. 
 One expression of the genius of Marx and Engels was that they despised pedantic playing with new words, eruditeterms, and subtle “isms”, and said simply and plainly: there is a materialist line and an idealist line in philoso-phy, and between them there are various shades of agnosti-cism. 
 The vain attempts to find a “new” point of view inphilosophy betray the same poverty of mind that is revealedin similar efforts to create a “new” theory of value, a “new”theory of rent, and so forth. 
 Of Avenarius, his disciple Carstanjen says that he once expressed himself in private conversation as follows: “Iknow neither the physical nor the mental, but only somethird. 
” To the remark of one writer that the concept ofthis third was not given by Avenarius, Petzoldt replied:“We know why he could not advance such a concept. 
 The third lacks a counter-concept ( Gegenbegriff ).... 
 The question, what is the third? is illogically put” ( Einführung in die Philosophie der reinen Erfahrung , II, 329). 
 Petzoldt un-derstands that an ultimate concept cannot be defined. 
 Buthe does not understand that the resort to a “third” is a meresubterfuge, for every one of us knows what is physical and what is mental, but none of us knows at present what that “third” is. 
 Avenarius was merely covering up his tracksby this subterfuge, while in fact declaring that the self is the primary (central term) and nature (environment)the secondary (counter-term). 
 Of course, even the antithesis of matter and mind has absolute significance only within the bounds of a very limit-ed field—in this case exclusively within the bounds ofthe fundamental epistemological problem of what is to beregarded as primary and what as secondary. 
 Beyond thesebounds the relative character of this antithesis is indubi-table. 
 Let us now examine how the word “experience” is used in empirio-critical philosophy. 
 The first paragraph of The Critique of Pure Experience expounds the following “assump-tion”: “Any part of our environment stands in relation to human individuals in such a way that, the former having been given, the latter speak of their experience as follows: ‘this is experienced’, ‘this is an experience’; or ‘it arosefrom experience’, or ‘it depends upon experience’. 
” (Rus-sian translation, p. 
 1. 
) Thus experience is defined in termsof these same concepts: the self and the environment; while the “doctrine” of their “indissoluble” connection is for the time being tucked out of the way. 
 Further: “The synthetic concept of pure experience”—“namely, experience asdeclaration which in all its components has only partsof the environment as a premise” (1-2). 
 If we assume thatthe environment exists independently of “declarations” and“predications” of man, then it becomes possible to interpret experience in a materialist way! “The analytical concept of pure experience”—“namely, as a declaration to whichnothing is admixed that would not be in its turn expe-rience and which, therefore, in itself is nothing but ex-perience” (2). 
 Experience is experience. 
 And there arepeople who take this quasi-erudite rigmarole for true wis-dom! It is essential to add that in the second volume of The Critique of Pure Experience Avenarius regards “experience” as a “special case” of the mental ; that he divides experience into sachhafte Werte (thing-values) and gedankenhafte Wer-te (thought-values); that “experience in the broad sense” includes the latter; that “complete experience” is identi-fied with the principal co-ordination ( Bemerkungen ). 
 In short, you pay your money and take your choice. 
 “Experi-ence” embraces both the materialist and the idealist linein philosophy and sanctifies the muddling of them. 
 Butwhile our Machists trustingly accept “pure experience” as pure coin of the realm, in philosophical literature the rep-resentatives of the various trends are alike in pointing toAvenarius’ abuse of this concept. 
 “What pure experience is,”A. 
 Riehl writes, “remains vague with Avenarius, and his ex-planation that ‘pure experience is experience to which noth-ing is admixed that is not in its turn experience’ obviously revolves in a circle” ( Systematische Philosophie , Leipzig 1907, S. 
 102). 
 Pure experience for Avenarius, writes Wundt,is at times any kind of fantasy, and at others, a predica-tion with the character of “corporeality” ( Philosophische Studien , XIII. 
 Band, S. 
 92-93). 
 Avenarius stretches the concept experience (S. 
 382). 
 “On the precise definition of the terms experience and pure experience,” writes Cauwela-ert, “depends the meaning of the whole of this philosophy. 
Avenarius does not give a precise definition” ( Revue néo-sco-lastique , février 1907, p. 
 61). 
 “The vagueness of the term ‘experience’ stands him in good stead, and so in the end Avenarius falls back on the time-worn argument of subjec-tive idealism” (under the pretence of combating it), saysNorman Smith ( Mind , Vol. 
 XV, p. 
 29). 
 “I openly declare that the inner sense, the soul of my philosophy consists in this that a human being possessesnothing save experience; a human being comes to everything to which he comes only through experience.... 
” A zealous philosopher of pure experience, is he not? The author ofthese words is the subjective idealist Fichte ( Sonnenklarer Bericht , usw . 
, S. 
 12). 
 We know from the history of philos-ophy that the interpretation of the concept “experience” di-vided the classical materialists from the idealists. 
 Today professorial philosophy of all shades disguises its reaction-ary nature by declaiming on the subject of “experience”. 
All the immanentists fall back on experience. 
 In the prefaceto the second edition of his Knowledge and Error , Mach praises a book by Professor Wilhelm Jerusalem in which weread: “The acceptance of a divine original being is not contradictory to experience” ( Der kritische Idealismus und die reine Logik , S. 
 222). 
 One can only be sorry for people who believed Avenarius and Co. 
 that the “obsolete” distinction between materialismand idealism can be surmounted by the word “experience”. 
When Valentinov and Yushkevich accuse Bogdanov, who departed somewhat from pure Machism, of abusing the word “experience”, these gentlemen are only betraying their ignor-ance. 
 Bogdanov is “not guilty” in this case; he only slavishly borrowed the muddle of Mach and Avenarius. 
 When Bogda-nov says that “consciousness and immediate mental expe-rience are identical concepts” ( Empirio-monism , Bk. 
 II, p. 
 53) while matter is “not experience” but “the unknown which evokes everything known” ( Empirio-monism , Bk. 
 III, p. 
 xiii), he is interpreting experience idealistically . 
 And, of course, he is not the first * nor the last to build petty idealist systems on the word “experience”. 
 When he replies to the reactionary philosophers by declaring that attempts to transcend the boundaries of experience lead in fact “onlyto empty abstractions and contradictory images, all theelements of which have nevertheless been taken from ex-perience” (Bk. 
 I, p. 
 48), he is drawing a contrast betweenthe empty abstractions of the human mind and that which exists outside of man and independently of his mind, in other words, he is interpreting experience in a materialistway. 
 Similarly, even Mach, although he makes idealism his starting-point (bodies are complexes of sensations or “ele-ments”), frequently strays into a materialist interpretation of the word “experience”. 
 “We must not philosophise out of ourselves ( nicht aus uns herausphilosophieren ), but must take from experience,” he says in the Mechanics (3rd German edition, 1897, S. 
 14). 
 Here a contrast is drawn betweenexperience and philosophising out of ourselves, in otherwords, experience is interpreted as something objective, something given to man from the outside; it is interpreted materialistically. 
 Here is another example: “What we ob-serve in nature is imprinted, although uncomprehended andunanalysed, upon our ideas, which, then, in their mostgeneral and strongest ( stärksten ) features imitate ( nachah-men ) the processes of nature. 
 In these experiences we possess a treasure-store ( Schatz ) which is ever to hand...” (op. 
 cit. 
, S. 
 27). 
 Here nature is taken as primary and sensation andexperience as products. 
 Had Mach consistently adhered tothis point of view in the fundamental questions of episte-mology, he would have spared humanity many foolish ideal-ist “complexes”. 
 A third example: “The close connection of thought and experience creates modern natural science. 
 Experience gives rise to a thought. 
 The latter is furtherelaborated and is again compared with experience”, and soon (Erkenntnis und Irrtum , S. 
 200). 
 Mach’s special “philos-*In England Comrade Belfort Bax has been exercising himself in this way for a long time. 
 A French reviewer of his book, The Roots of Reality , rather bitingly remarked not so long ago: “Experience is only another word for consciousness”; come out then openly as an idealist!(Revue de philosophie , 56 1907, No. 
 10, p. 
 399. 
) ophy” is here thrown overboard, and the author instinctive-ly accepts the customary standpoint of natural scientists, who regard experience materialistically. 
 To summarise: the word “experience”, on which the Machists build their systems, has long served as a shieldfor idealist systems, and now serves Avenarius and Co. 
 foreclectically passing from the idealist position to the ma-terialist position and vice versa. 
 The various “definitions” of this concept are only expressions of those two funda-mental lines in philosophy which were so strikingly revealedby Engels. 
 2. 
 PLEKHANOV’S ERROR CONCERNING THE CONCEPT “EXPERIENCE” On pages x-xi of his introduction to L. 
 Feuerbach (1905 ed. 
) Plekhanov says: “A German writer has remarked that for empirio-criti-cism experience is only an object of investigation, and not a means of knowledge. 
 If that is so, then the contrasting of empirio-criticism and materialism loses all meaning, and discussion of the question whether or not empirio-criticismis destined to replace materialism is absolutely vain andidle. 
 “ This is one complete muddle. 
Fr. 
 Carstanjen, one of the most “orthodox” followers of Avenarius, says in his article on empirio-criticism (a reply to Wundt), that “for The Critique of Pure Experience ex-perience is not a means of knowledge but only an objectof investigation”. 
 * It follows according to Plekhanov that any contrasting of the views of Fr. 
 Carstanjen and material-ism is meaningless! Fr. 
 Carstanjen is almost literally quoting Avenarius, who in his Notes emphatically contrasts his conception of experience as that which is given us, that which we find(das Vorgefundene ), with the conception of experience as a “means of knowledge” in “the sense of the prevailing theo-ries of knowledge, which essentially are fully metaphysical” (op. 
 cit. 
, S. 
 401). 
 Petzoldt, following Avenarius, says the *Vierteljahrsschrift für Wissenschaftliche Philosophie , Jahrg. 
 22, 1898, S. 
 45. 
 same thing in his Introduction to the Philosophy of Pure Experience (Bd. 
 I, S. 
 170). 
 Thus, according to Plekhanov, the contrasting of the views of Carstanjen, Avenarius and Petzoldt to materialism is meaningless! Either Plekhanovhas not read Carstanjen and Co. 
 as thoroughly as he should,or he has taken his reference to “a German writer” at fifthhand. 
 What then does this statement, uttered by some of the most prominent empirio-criticists and not understood by Plekhanov, mean? Carstanjen wishes to say that Avenariusin his Critique of Pure Experience takes experience, i. 
e. 
, all “human predications”, as the object of investigation. 
 Ave-narius does not investigate here, says Carstanjen (op. 
 cit. 
,S. 
 50), whether these predications are real, or whether they relate, for example, to ghosts ; he merely arranges, systema-tises, formally classifies all possible human predications,both idealist and materialist (S. 
 53), without going into the essence of the question. 
 Carstanjen is absolutely right whenhe characterises this point of view as “scepticism par ex-cellence” (S. 
 213). 
 In this article, by the way, Carstan-jen defends his beloved master from the ignominious (for a German professor) charge of materialism levelled againsthim by Wundt. 
 How can we be materialists, pray?—such isthe burden of Carstanjen’s objections—when we speak of“experience” we do not mean it in the ordinary current sense,which leads or might lead to materialism, but in the sense that we investigate everything that people “predicate” as experience. 
 Carstanjen and Avenarius regard the view thatexperience is a means of knowledge as materialist (that,perhaps, is the most common opinion, but nevertheless,untrue, as we have seen in the case of Fichte). 
 Avenariusentrenches himself against the “prevailing” “metaphysics” which persists in regarding the brain as the organ of thought and which ignores the theories of introjection and co-ordina-tion. 
 By the given or the found ( das Vorgefundene ), Avena-rius means the indissoluble connection between the self and the environment, which leads to a confused idealistinterpretation of “experience”. 
 Hence there is no doubt that both the materialist and the idealist, as well as the Humean and the Kantian linesin philosophy may be concealed beneath the word “experi-ence”; but neither the definition of experience as an object of investigation, * nor its definition as a means of knowledge is decisive in this respect. 
 As for Carstanjen’s remarks against Wundt, they have no relation whatever to the question ofcontrasting empirio-criticism and materialism. 
 As a curiosity let us note that on this point Bogdanov and Valentinov, in their reply to Plekhanov, revealed nogreater knowledge of the subject. 
 Bogdanov declared: “It is not quite clear” (Bk. 
 III, p. 
 xi). 
—“It is the task of empi-rio-criticists to examine this formulation and to accept orreject the condition. 
” A very convenient position: I, indeed,am not a Machist and am not therefore obliged to find outin what sense a certain Avenarius or Carstanjen speaks ofexperience! Bogdanov wants to make use of Machism (and of the Machist confusion regarding “experience”), but he does not want to be held responsible for it. 
 The “pure” empirio-criticist Valentinov transcribed Ple-khanov’s remark and publicly danced the cancan; he sneeredat Plekhanov for not naming the author and for not explain-ing what the matter was all about (op. 
 cit. 
, pp. 
 108-09). 
 But at the same time this empirio-critical philosopher in his answer said not a single word on the substance of the mat-ter, although acknowledging that he had read Plekhanov’sremark “three times, if not more” (and had apparently notunderstood anything). 
 Oh, those Machists! 3. 
 CAUSALITY AND NECESSITY IN NATURE The question of causality is particularly important in determining the philosophical line of any of the recent“isms”, and we must therefore dwell on it in some detail. 
 Let us begin with an exposition of the materialist theo-ry of knowledge on this point. 
 Feuerbach’s views are ex-pounded with particular clarity in his reply to R. 
 Haymalready referred to. 
 *Plekhanov perhaps thought that Carstanjen had said, “an object of knowledge independent of knowledge”, and not an “object of investi-gation”? This would indeed be materialism. 
 But neither Carstanjen, nor anybody else acquainted with empirio-criticism, said or could havesaid any such thing. 
 “‘Nature and human reason,’ says Haym, ‘are for him (Feuerbach) completely divorced, and between them a gulf is formed which cannot be spanned from one side or the other. 
’ Haym bases this reproach mainly on § 48 of myEssence of Religion where it is said that ‘nature may be conceived only through nature itself, that its necessity isneither human nor logical, neither metaphysical nor mathe-matical, that nature alone is that being to which it is impos-sible to apply any human measure, although we compare and give names to its phenomena, in order to make them compre-hensible to us, and in general apply human expressions andconceptions to them, as for example: order, purpose, law;and are obliged to do so because of the character of ourlanguage’. 
 What does this mean? Does it mean that there is no order in nature, so that, for example, autumn may be suc-ceeded by summer, spring by winter, winter by autumn?That there is no purpose, so that, for example, there is noco-ordination between the lungs and the air, between lightand the eye, between sound and the ear? That there is nolaw, so that, for example, the earth may move now in an el-lipse, now in a circle, that it may revolve around the sun now in a year, now in a quarter of an hour? What nonsense!What then is meant by this passage? Nothing more than todistinguish between that which belongs to nature and thatwhich belongs to man; it does not assert that there is actuallynothing in nature corresponding to the words or ideas of order, purpose, law. 
 All that it does is to deny the iden-tity between thought and being; it denies that they exist innature exactly as they do in the head or mind of man. 
 Order,purpose, law are words used by man to translate the acts ofnature into his own language in order that he may understand them. 
 These words are not devoid of meaning or of objective content ( nicht sinn-, d. 
 h. 
 gegenstandlose Worte ); neverthe-less, a distinction must be made between the original andthe translation. 
 Order, purpose, law in the human sense ex-press something arbitrary. 
 “From the contingency of order, purpose and law in nature, theism expressly infers their arbitrary origin; it infers the existence of a being distinct from nature which brings order, purpose, law into a nature that is in itself(an sich ) chaotic ( dissolute ) and indifferent to all determi-nation. 
 The reason of the theists ... is reason contradictory to nature, reason absolutely devoid of understanding of the essence of nature. 
 The reason of the theists splits nature into two beings—one material, and the other formal or spirit-ual” ( Werke , VII. 
 Band, 1903, S. 
 518-20). 
 Thus Feuerbach recognises objective law in nature and objective causality, which are reflected only with approxi-mate fidelity by human ideas of order, law and so forth. 
 With Feuerbach the recognition of objective law in nature is inseparably connected with the recognition of the objec-tive reality of the external world, of objects, bodies, things,reflected by our mind. 
 Feuerbach’s views are consistentlymaterialist. 
 All other views, or rather, any other philo-sophical line on the question of causality, the denial of objective law, causality and necessity in nature, are justly regarded by Feuerbach as belonging to the fideist trend. 
For it is, indeed, clear that the subjectivist line on thequestion of causality, the deduction of the order and neces-sity of nature not from the external objective world, butfrom consciousness, reason, logic, and so forth, not only cuts human reason off from nature, not only opposes the former to the latter, but makes nature a part of reason, instead of regarding reason as a part of nature. 
 The subjectivist lineon the question of causality is philosophical idealism (va-rieties of which are the theories of causality of both Humeand Kant), i. 
e. 
, fideism, more or less weakened and diluted. 
 The recognition of objective law in nature and the recogni-tion that this law is reflected with approximate fidelity in themind of man is materialism. 
 As regards Engels, he had, if I am not mistaken, no occasion to contrast his materialist view with other trendson the particular question of causality. 
 He had no need to do so, since he had definitely dissociated himself from all the agnostics on the more fundamental question of the objec-tive reality of the external world in general. 
 But to anyonewho has read his philosophical works at all attentively itmust be clear that Engels does not admit even a shadow ofdoubt as to the existence of objective law, causality and necessity in nature. 
 We shall confine ourselves to a few examples. 
 In the first section of Anti-Dühring Engels says: “In order to understand these details [of the general pic-ture of the world phenomena], we must detach them from their natural ( natürlich ) or historical connection and exam-ine each one separately, its nature, special causes, effects, etc. 
” (5-6). 
 That this natural connection, the connectionbetween natural phenomena, exists objectively, is obvious. 
Engels particularly emphasises the dialectical view ofcause and effect: “And we find, in like manner, that causeand effect are conceptions which only hold good in their application to individual cases; but as soon as we consider the individual cases in their general connection with theuniverse as a whole, they run into each other, and they be-come confounded when we contemplate that universal actionand reaction in which causes and effects are eternally chang-ing places, so that what is effect here and now will be cause there and then, and vice versa” (8). 
 Hence, the human conception of cause and effect always somewhat simplifiesthe objective connection of the phenomena of nature, reflect-ing it only approximately, artificially isolating one oranother aspect of a single world process. 
 If we find thatthe laws of thought correspond with the laws of nature, says Engels, this becomes quite conceivable when we take into account that reason and consciousness are “products ofthe human brain and that man himself is a product of nature”Of course, “the products of the human brain, being in thelast analysis also products of nature, do not contradictthe rest of nature’s interconnections ( Naturzusammenhang ) but are in correspondence with them” (22). 
 57 There is no doubt that there exists a natural, objective interconnec-tion between the phenomena of the world. 
 Engels constantlyspeaks of the “laws of nature”, of the “necessities of nature”(Naturnotwendigkeiten ), without considering it necessary to explain the generally known propositions of materialism. 
 In Ludwig Feuerbach also we read that “the general laws of motion—both of the external world and of human thought—[are] two sets of laws which are identical in substance butdiffer in their expression insofar as the human mind canapply them consciously, while in nature and also up to nowfor the most part in human history, these laws assert them-selves unconsciously in the form of external necessity in the midst of an endless series of seeming accidents” (38). 
 AndEngels reproaches the old natural philosophy for having replaced “the real but as yet unknown interconnections” (of the phenomena of nature) by “ideal and imaginary ones” (42). 
58 Engels’ recognition of objective law, causality and necessity in nature is absolutely clear, as is his emphasison the relative character of our, i. 
e. 
, man’s, approximatereflections of this law in various concepts. 
 Passing to Joseph Dietzgen, we must first note one of the innumerable distortions committed by our Machists. 
 One of the authors of the Studies “in” the Philosophy of Marxism , Mr. 
 Helfond, tells us: “The basic points of Dietzgen’s worldoutlook may be summarised in the following propositions:‘... (9) The causal dependence which we ascribe to thingsis in reality not contained in the things themselves’” (248). 
This is sheer nonsense . 
 Mr. 
 Helfond, whose own views rep-resent a veritable hash of materialism and agnosticism, has outrageously falsified J. 
 Dietzgen. 
 Of course, we can find plenty of confusion, inexactnesses and errors in Dietz-gen, such as gladden the hearts of the Machists and obligematerialists to regard Dietzgen as a philosopher who is notentirely consistent. 
 But to attribute to the materialist J. 
 Dietzgen a direct denial of the materialist view of cau-sality—only a Helfond, only the Russian Machists are capa-ble of that. 
 “Objective scientific knowledge,” says Dietzgen in his The Nature of the Workings of the Human Mind (German edition, 1903), “seeks for causes not by faith or speculation, but by experience and induction, not a priori , but a posterio-ri. 
 Natural science looks for causes not outside or behind phe-nomena, but within or by means of them” (S. 
 94-95). 
 “Causesare the products of the faculty of thought. 
 They are how-ever, not its pure products, but are produced by it in con-junction with sense material. 
 This sense material gives the causes thus produced their objective existence. 
 Just as we demand that a truth should be the truth of an objective phe-nomenon, so we demand that a cause should be real, that itshould be the cause of an objectively given effect” (S. 
 98-99). 
“The cause of a thing is its connection” (S. 
 100). 
 It is clear from this that Mr. 
 Helfond has made a state-ment which is directly contrary to fact . 
 The world outlook of materialism expounded by J. 
 Dietzgen recognises that“the causal dependence” is contained “in the things them-selves”. 
 It was necessary for the Machist hash that Mr. 
 Hel-fond should confuse the materialist line with the idealist line on the question of causality. 
 Let us now proceed to this latter line. 
A clear statement of the starting-point of Avenarius’ philosophy on this question is to be found in his first work,Philosophie als Denken der Welt gemäss dem Prinzip deskleinsten Kraftmasses . 
 In § 81 we read: “Just as we do not experience ( erfahren ) force as causing motion, so we do not experience the necessity for any motion.... 
 All we experi-ence ( erfahren ) is that the one follows the other. 
” This is the Humean standpoint in its purest form: sensation,experience tell us nothing of any necessity. 
 A philosopherwho asserts (on the principle of “the economy of thought”) that only sensation exists could not come to any other con-clusion. 
 “Since the idea of causality ,” we read further, “demands force and necessity or constraint as integral partsof the effect, so it falls together with these latter” (§ 82). 
“Necessity therefore expresses a particular degree of proba-bility with which the effect is, or may be, expected” (§ 83, thesis). 
 This is outspoken subjectivism on the question of causal-ity. 
 And if one is to remain at all consistent when not rec-ognising objective reality as the source of our sensationsone cannot come to any other conclusion. 
 Let us turn to Mach. 
 In a special chapter, “Causality and Explanation” ( Wärmelehre , 2. 
 Auflage, 1900, S. 
 432-39), we read: “The Humean criticism (of the conception of causal-ity) nevertheless remains valid. 
” Kant and Hume (Mach doesnot even take account of other philosophers!) solve theproblem of causality differently. 
 “We prefer” Hume’s solu-tion. 
 “Apart from logical necessity [Mach’s italics] no other necessity, for instance physical necessity, exists. 
” This is exactly the view which was so vigorously combatedby Feuerbach. 
 It never even occurs to Mach to deny hiskinship with Hume. 
 Only the Russian Machists could go sofar as to assert that Hume’s agnosticism could be “combined”with Marx’s and Engels’ materialism. 
 In Mach’s Mechan-ics, we read: “In nature there is neither cause nor effect” (S. 
 474, 3. 
 Auflage, 1897). 
 “I have repeatedly demonstratedthat all forms of the law of causality spring from subjective motives ( Trieben ) and that there is no necessity for nature to correspond with them” (495). 
 We must here note that our Russian Machists with amaz-ing naïveté replace the question of the materialist or ideal-ist trend of all arguments of the law of causality by thequestion of one or another formulation of this law. 
 They be-lieved the German empirio-critical professors that merely tosay “functional correlation” was to make a discovery in “re-cent positivism” and to release one from the “fetishism” of expressions like “necessity”, “law”, and so forth. 
 Thisof course is utterly absurd, and Wundt was fully justifiedin ridiculing such a change of words (in the article, quoted above, in Philosophische Studien , S. 
 383, 388), which in fact changes nothing. 
 Mach himself speaks of “all forms” of the law of causality and in his Knowledge and Error (2. 
 Auflage, S. 
 278) makes the self-evident reservationthat the concept function can express the “dependenceof elements” more precisely only when the possibility isachieved of expressing the results of investigation in meas-urable quantities, which even in sciences like chemistry has only partly been achieved. 
 Apparently, in the opinion of our Machists, who are so credulous as to professorialdiscoveries, Feuerbach (not to mention Engels) did not knowthat the concepts order, law, and so forth, can under certainconditions be expressed as a mathematically defined func-tional relation! The really important epistemological question that di-vides the philosophical trends is not the degree of preci-sion attained by our descriptions of causal connections, orwhether these descriptions can be expressed in exact mathe-matical formulas, but whether the source of our knowledgeof these connections is objective natural law or properties of our mind, its innate faculty of apprehending certain a priori truths, and so forth. 
 This is what irrevocably divides the materialists Feuerbach, Marx and Engels from theagnostics (Humeans) Avenarius and Mach. 
 In certain parts of his works, Mach, whom it would be a sin to accuse of consistency, frequently “forgets” his agreement with Hume and his own subjectivist theory of causality and argues “simply” as a natural scientist, i. 
e. 
,from the instinctive materialist standpoint. 
 For instance, in his Mechanics , we read of “the uniformity which nature teaches us to find in its phenomena” (French edition, p. 
 182). 
 But if we do find uniformity in the phenomena of nature this means, does it not, that uniformity exists objectivelyoutside our mind? No. 
 On the question of the uniformityof nature Mach also delivers himself thus: “The power thatprompts us to complete in thought facts only partially ob-served is the power of association. 
 It is greatly strengthened by repetition. 
 It then appears to us to be a power which is independent of our will and of individual facts, a powerwhich directs thoughts and [Mach’s italics] facts, which keeps them in accord with each other as a law governing both. 
 That we consider ourselves capable of making predictionswith the help of such a law only [!] proves that there is suf-ficient uniformity in our environment, but it does not at all prove the necessity of the success of our predictions” ( Wärme-lehre , S. 
 383). 
 It follows that we may and ought to look for a necessity apart from the uniformity of our environment, i. 
e. 
, of na-ture! Where to look for it is the secret of idealist philos-ophy which is afraid to recognise man’s perceptive faculty as a simple reflection of nature. 
 In his last work, Knowl-edge and Error , Mach even defines a law of nature as a “limi-tation of expectation” (2. 
 Auflage, S. 
 450 ff. 
)! Solipsismcomes into its own. 
 Let us look at the position of other writers of the same philosophical trend. 
 The Englishman, Karl Pearson, expresses himself with characteristic precision ( The Grammar of Science , 2nd ed. 
): “The laws of science are products of the human mind rather than factors of the external world”(p. 
 36). 
 “Those, whether poets or materialists, who do hom-age to nature, as the sovereign of man, too often forget that the order and complexity they admire are at least as much a product of man’s perceptive and reasoning facultiesas are their own memories and thoughts” (185). 
 “The compre-hensive character of natural law is due to the ingenuity of thehuman mind” (ibid. 
). 
 “ Man is the maker of natural law ,” it is stated in Chapter III, § 4. 
 “There is more meaning in the statement that man gives laws to nature than in its converse that nature gives laws to man”, although—theworthy professor regretfully admits—the latter (materialist) view is “unfortunately far too common today” (p. 
 87). 
 In the fourth chapter, which is devoted to the question of cau-sality, Pearson formulates the following thesis (§ 11): “ The necessity lies in the world of conceptions and not in the worldof perceptions . 
” It should be noted that for Pearson per-ceptions or sense-impressions are the reality existing outside us. 
 “In the uniformity with which sequences of perceptionare repeated (the routine of perceptions) there is also no inherent necessity, but it is a necessary condition for the existence of thinking beings that there should be a routinein the perceptions. 
 The necessity thus lies in the natureof the thinking being and not in the perceptions them-selves; thus it is conceivably a product of the perceptivefaculty” (p. 
 139). 
 Our Machist, with whom Mach “himself” frequently ex-presses complete solidarity, thus arrives safely and soundlyat pure Kantian idealism: it is man who dictates laws to na-ture and not nature that dictates laws to man! The importantthing is not the repetition of Kant’s doctrine of apriorism—which does not define the idealist line in philosophy as such, but only a particular formulation of this line—but the fact that reason, mind, consciousness are here primary, and na-ture secondary. 
 It is not reason that is a part of nature, oneof its highest products, the reflection of its processes, butnature that is a part of reason, which thereby is stretchedfrom the ordinary, simple human reason known to us all to an “immoderate”, as Dietzgen puts it, mysterious, divine reason. 
 The Kantian-Machist formula, that “man gives lawsto nature”, is a fideist formula. 
 If our Machists stare wide-eyed on reading Engels’ statement that the fundamental char-acteristic of materialism is the acceptance of nature andnot spirit as primary, it only shows how incapable they are of distinguishing the really important philosophical trends from the mock erudition and sage jargon of the professors. 
 J. 
 Petzoldt, who in his two-volume work analysed and developed Avenarius, may serve as an excellent example ofreactionary Machist scholasticism. 
 “Even to this day,” sayshe, “one hundred and fifty years after Hume, substantiality and causality paralyse boldness of thought” ( Einführung in die Philosophie der reinen Erfahrung , Bd. 
 1, S. 
 31). 
 It goes without saying that the “boldest” of all are the solip-sists who discovered sensation without organic matter, thought without brain, nature without objective law! “And the last formulation of causality, which we have not yet men-tioned, necessity of occurrence, or necessity in nature , contains something vague and mystical”—(the idea of “fetish-ism”, “anthropomorphism”, etc. 
) (32, 34). 
 Oh, the poormystics, Feuerbach, Marx and Engels! They have been talkingall the time of necessity in nature, and have even been calling those who hold the Humean position theoretical reac-tionaries! Petzoldt rises above all “anthropomorphism”. 
 Hehas discovered the great “ law of unique determination ”, which eliminates every obscurity, every trace of “fetishism”,etc. 
, etc. 
, etc. 
 For example, the parallelogram of forces(S. 
 35). 
 This cannot be “proven”; it must be accepted as a “fact of experience”. 
 It cannot be conceded that a body under identical impulses will move in different ways. 
 “Wecannot concede nature such indefiniteness and arbitrariness;we must demand from it definiteness and law” (35). 
 Well,well! We demand of nature obedience to law. 
 The bourgeoisiedemands reaction of its professors. 
 “Our thought demands definiteness from nature, and nature always accedes to this demand; we shall even see that in a certain sense it is com-pelled to accede to it” (36). 
 Why, having received an impulsein the direction of the line AB, does a body move towardsC and not towards D or F, etc. 
? “Why does nature not choose any of the countless other directions?” (37). 
 Because that would be “multiple de-termination”, and the great empirio-critical discovery ofJoseph Petzoldt demands unique determination . 
 The “empirio-criticists” fill scores of pages with such unspeakable nonsense! “...We have repeatedly indicated that our thesis does not derive its force from a sum of separate experiences, but D CF B A that, on the contrary, we demand that nature should recog-nise its validity ( seine Geltung ). 
 Indeed, even before it becomes a law it is already for us a principle with which we approach reality, a postulate. 
 It is valid, so to speak,a priori , independently of all separate experiences. 
 It would, indeed, be unbefitting for a philosophy of pure expe-rience to preach a priori truths and thus relapse into the most sterile metaphysics. 
 Its apriorism can only be a logical one, never a psychological or metaphysical one” (40). 
 Well, of course, if we call apriorism logical, then the reactionarynature of the idea disappears and it becomes elevated to thelevel of “recent positivism”! There can be no unique determination of psychical phenom-ena, Petzoldt further teaches us; the role of imagination, the significance of great inventions, etc. 
, here create ex-ceptions, while a law of nature, or a law of spirit, toler-ates “no exceptions” (65). 
 We have before us a pure met-aphysician, who has not the slightest inkling of the relativ-ity of the difference between the accidental and the nec-essary. 
 I may, perhaps, be reminded—continues Petzoldt—of the motivation of historical events or of the developmentof character in poetry. 
 “If we examine the matter carefullywe shall find that there is no such unique determination. 
There is not a single historical event or a single drama inwhich we could not imagine the participants acting different-ly under similar psychical conditions...” (73). 
 “Unique determination is not only absent in the realm of the psychi-cal, but we are also entitled to demand its absence from real-ity [Petzoldt’s italics]. 
 Our doctrine is thus elevated tothe rank of a postulate , i. 
e. 
, to the rank of a fact which we recognise as a necessary condition of a much earlier experi-ence, as its logical a priori ” (Petzoldt’s italics, S. 
 76). 
 And Petzoldt continues to operate with this “logical a priori ” in both volumes of his Introduction , and in the booklet issued in 1906, The World Problem from the Positiv-ist Standpoint . 
* Here is a second instance of a noted empi-*J. 
 Petzoldt, Das Weltproblem von positivistischen Standpunkte aus, Leipzig, 1906, S. 
 130: “Also from the empirical standpoint there can be a logical a priori ; causality is the logical a priori of the experi-enced ( erfahrungsmässige ) constancy of our environment. 
” rio-criticist who has imperceptibly slipped into Kantianism and who serves up the most reactionary doctrines with a slightly different sauce. 
 And this is not fortuitous; for at the very foundations of Mach’s and Avenarius’ teachings oncausality there lies an idealist falsehood, which no high-flown talk of “positivism” can cover up. 
 The distinctionbetween the Humean and the Kantian theories of causality isonly a secondary difference of opinion between agnostics who are basically at one, viz. 
, in their denial of objective law in nature, and who thus inevitably condemn themselves toidealist conclusions of one kind or another. 
 A rather more“scrupulous” empirio-criticist than J. 
 Petzoldt, RudolfWilly, who is ashamed of his kinship with the immanentists,rejects, for example, Petzoldt’s whole theory of “unique de-termination” as leading to nothing but “logical formalism”. 
 But does Willy improve his position by disavowing Petzoldt?Not in the least, for he disavows Kantian agnosticism solelyfor the sake of Humean agnosticism. 
 “We have long known,from the time of Hume,” he writes, “that ‘necessity’ is apurely logical (not a ‘transcendental’) characteristic ( Merk-mal ), or, as I would rather say and have already said, a purely verbal ( sprachlich ) characteristic” (R. 
 Willy, Gegen die Schulweisheit , München, 1905, S. 
 91; cf. 
 S. 
 173, 175). 
 The agnostic calls our materialist view of necessity “transcendental”, for from the standpoint of Kantian and Humean “school wisdom”, which Willy does not reject but only furbishes up, any recognition of objective reality givenus in experience is an illegitimate “transcendence”. 
 Among the French writers of the philosophical trend we are analysing, we find Henri Poincaré constantly strayinginto this same path of agnosticism. 
 Henri Poincaré is an eminent physicist but a poor philosopher, whose errors Yushkevich, of course, declared to be the last word of re-cent positivism, so “recent” indeed that it even requireda new “ism”, viz. 
, empirio-symbolism. 
 For Poincaré (withwhose views as a whole we shall deal in the chapter on thenew physics), the laws of nature are symbols, conventions, which man creates for the sake of “ convenience ”. 
 “The only true objective reality is the internal harmony of the world. 
”By “objective”, Poincaré means that which is generally /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR valid, that which is accepted by the majority of men, or by all*; that is to say, in a purely subjectivist manner he de-stroys objective truth, as do all the Machists. 
 And as regards “harmony”, he categorically declares in answer to the ques-tion whether it exists outside of us —“undoubtedly, no ”. 
 It is perfectly obvious that the new terms do not in the leastchange the ancient philosophical position of agnosticism,for the essence of Poincaré’s “original” theory amounts to a denial (although he is far from consistent) of objective reality and of objective law in nature. 
 It is, therefore,perfectly natural that in contradistinction to the RussianMachists, who accept new formulations of old errors as thelatest discoveries, the German Kantians greeted such viewsas a conversion to their own views, i. 
e. 
, to agnosticism, on a fundamental question of philosophy. 
 “The French ma-thematician Henri Poincaré,” we read in the work of the Kan-tian, Philipp Frank, “holds the point of view that manyof the most general laws of theoretical natural science (e. 
g. 
,the law of inertia, the law of the conservation of energy,etc. 
), of which it is often difficult to say whether they are of empirical or of a priori origin, are, in fact, neither one nor the other, but are purely conventional propositions de-pending upon human discretion.... 
” “Thus [exults the Kan-tian] the latest Naturphilosophie unexpectedly renews the fundamental idea of critical idealism, namely, that experi-ence merely fills in a framework which man brings with him by his very nature.... 
” ** We quote this example in order to give the reader a clear idea of the degree of naïveté of our Yushkeviches andCo. 
, who take a “theory of symbolism” for something genu-inely new , whereas philosophers in the least versed in their subject say plainly and explicitly: he has become converted to the standpoint of critical idealism! For the essence of this point of view does not necessarily lie in the repeti-tion of Kant’s formulations, but in the recognition of thefundamental idea common to both Hume and Kant, viz. 
, the denial of objective law in nature and the deduction of par-*Henri Poincaré, La valeur de la science , Paris, 1905, pp. 
 7, 9. 
 There is a Russian translation. 
 **Annalen der Naturphilosophie ,59 VI. 
 B. 
, 1907, S. 
 443, 447. 
 ticular “conditions of experience”, particular principles, postulates and propositions from the subject , from human consciousness, and not from nature. 
 Engels was right when he said that the essential thing is not which of the numerous schools of materialism or idealism a particular philosopher belongs to, but whether he takes nature, the external world, matter in motion, or spirit, reason, consciousness, etc. 
, as primary. 
 Another characterisation of Machism on this question, in contrast to the other philosophical lines, is given by the expert Kantian, E. 
 Lucka. 
 On the question of causality “Mach entirely agrees with Hume”. 
 * “P. 
 Volkmann derives the necessity of thought from the necessity of the processes of nature—a standpoint that, in contradistinction to Mach and in agreement with Kant, recognises the fact of necessity; but contrary to Kant, it seeks the source of necessity not in thought, but in the processes of nature” (424). 
 Volkmann is a physicist who writes fairly extensively on epistemological questions, and who tends, as do the vast majority of natural scientists, to materialism, albeit aninconsistent, timid and incoherent materialism. 
 The recogni-tion of necessity in nature and the derivation from it of necessity in thought is materialism. 
 The derivation of necessity, causality, law, etc. 
, from thought is idealism. 
 The only inaccuracy in the passage quoted is that a total de-nial of all necessity is attributed to Mach. 
 We have already seen that this is not true either of Mach or of the empirio-critical trend generally, which, having definitely departed from materialism, inevitably slides into idealism. 
 It remains for us to say a few words about the Russian Machists in particular. 
 They would like to be Marxists; they have all “read” Engels’ decisive demarcation of materi-alism from the Humean trend; they could not have failed to learn both from Mach himself and from anyone in the least acquainted with his philosophy that Mach and Avenarius follow the line of Hume. 
 Yet they are all careful not to say a single word about Humism and materialism on the question *E. 
 Lucka, “Das Erkenntnisproblem und Machs Analyse der Em-pfindungen ”, Kantstudien , VIII. 
 Bd. 
, S. 
 409. 
 of causality! Their confusion is utter. 
 Let us give a few examples. 
 Mr. 
 P. 
 Yushkevich preaches the “new” empirio-symbolism. 
 The “sensations of blue, hard, etc. 
—these sup-posed data of pure experience” and “the creations supposedly of pure reason, such as a chimera or a chess game”—all these are “empirio-symbols”. 
 ( Studies , etc. 
, p. 
 170. 
) “Knowl-edge is empirio-symbolic, and as it develops, leads to empi-rio-symbols of an ever greater degree of symbolisation.... 
 The so-called laws of nature ... are such empirio-symbols...” (ibid. 
). 
 “The so-called true reality, being in itself, is that infinite [a terribly learned fellow, this Mr. 
 Yushkevich] * ultimate system of symbols to which our knowledge isstriving” (188). 
 “The stream of experience ... which lies at the foundation of our knowledge is ... irrational ... il-logical” (187, 194). 
 Energy “is just as little a thing, a sub-stance, as time, space, mass and the other fundamental concepts of science: energy is a constancy, an empirio-sym-bol, like other empirio-symbols that for a time satisfy the fundamental human need of introducing reason, Logos, into the irrational stream of experience” (209). 
 Clad like a harlequin in a garish motley of shreds of the “latest” terminology, there stands before us a subjec-tive idealist, for whom the external world, nature and its laws are all symbols of our knowledge. 
 The stream of experi-ence is devoid of reason, order and law: our knowledge brings reason into it. 
 The celestial bodies are symbols of human knowledge, and so is the earth. 
 If science teaches us that the earth existed long before it was possible for man and organic matter to have appeared, we, you see, have changed all that! We introduce order in the motion of the planets, it is a product of our knowledge. 
 And sensing that human reason is being inflated by such a philosophy into the author and founder of nature, Mr. 
 Yushkevich puts alongside reason the word Logos , that is, reason in the abstract, not reason, but Reason, not a function of the human brain, but some-thing existing prior to any brain, something divine. 
 The last word of “recent positivism” is that old formula of fideism which Feuerbach had already exposed. 
 *The exclamation is provoked by the fact that Yushkevich here uses the foreign word infinite with a Russian ending. 
— Tr. 
 Let us take A. 
 Bogdanov. 
 In 1899, when he was still a semi-materialist and had only just begun to go astray under the influence of a very great chemist and very muddled phi-losopher, Wilhelm Ostwald, he wrote: “The universal causalconnection of phenomena is the last and best child of humanknowledge; it is the universal law, the highest of thoselaws which, to express it in the words of a philosopher, hu-man reason dictates to nature” ( Fundamental Elements , etc. 
, p. 
 41). 
 Allah alone knows from what source Bogdanov took this reference. 
 But the fact is that “the words of a philoso-pher” trustingly repeated by the “Marxist”—are the words ofKant . 
 An unpleasant event! And all the more unpleasant in that it cannot even be explained by the “mere” influence of Ostwald. 
 In 1904, having already managed to discard both natur-al-scientific materialism and Ostwald, Bogdanov wrote:“... Modern positivism regards the law of causality only as ameans of cognitively connecting phenomena into a continuousseries, only as a form of co-ordinating experience” ( From the Psychology of Society , p. 
 207). 
 Bogdanov either did not know, or would not admit, that this modern positivism isagnosticism and that it denies the objective necessity ofnature, which existed prior to, and apart from, all “knowl-edge” and all human beings. 
 He accepted on faith from theGerman professors what they called “modern positivism”. 
 Finally, in 1905, having passed through all the previous stages and the stage of empirio-criticism, and being alreadyin the stage of “empirio-monism”, Bogdanov wrote: “Lawsdo not belong to the sphere of experience ... they are not giv-en in it, but are created by thought as a means of organ-ising experience, of harmoniously co-ordinating it into a symmetrical whole” ( Empirio-monism , I, 40). 
 “Laws are abstractions of knowledge; and physical laws possess physi-cal properties just as little as psychological laws possesspsychical properties” (ibid. 
). 
 And so, the law that winter succeeds autumn and the spring winter is not given us in experience but is created by thought as a means of organising, harmo-nising, co-ordinating ... what with what, Comrade Bog-danov? “Empirio-monism is possible only because knowledge actively harmonises experience, eliminating its infinite contradictions, creating for it universal organising forms, replacing the primeval chaotic world of elements by a deriv-ative, ordered world of relations” (57). 
 That is not true. 
The idea that knowledge can “create” universal forms,replace the primeval chaos by order, etc. 
, is the idea ofidealist philosophy. 
 The world is matter moving in conform-ity to law, and our knowledge, being the highest product of nature, is in a position only to reflect this conformity to law. 
 To sum up, our Machists, blindly believing the “recent” reactionary professors; repeat the mistakes of Kantian andHumean agnosticism on the question of causality and fail to notice that these doctrines are in absolute contradiction to Marxism, i. 
e. 
, materialism, and that they themselves arerolling down an inclined plane towards idealism. 
 4. 
 THE “PRINCIPLE OF ECONOMY OF THOUGHT” AND THE PROBLEM OF THE “UNITY OF THE WORLD” “The principle of ‘the least expenditure of energy’, which Mach, Avenarius and many others made the basis of thetheory of knowledge, is ... unquestionably a ‘Marxist’ ten-dency in epistemology. 
” So Bazarov asserts in the Studies , etc. 
, page 69. 
 There is “economy” in Marx, there is “economy” in Mach. 
 But is it indeed “unquestionable” that there is even a shad-ow of resemblance between the two? Avenarius’ work, Philosophie als Denken der Welt Gemäss dem Prinzip des kleinsten Kraftmasses (1876), as we have seen, applies this “principle” in such a way that in the name of “economy of thought” sensation alone is declared to exist. 
 Both causality and “substance” (a word which the profes-sorial gentlemen, “for the sake of importance”, prefer to theclearer and more exact word: matter) are declared “eliminat-ed” on the same plea of economy. 
 Thus we get sensationwithout matter and thought without brain. 
 This utter non-sense is an attempt to smuggle in subjective idealism under a new guise. 
 That such precisely is the character of this basic work on the celebrated “economy of thought” is, as we have seen, generally acknowledged in philosophical litera-ture. 
 That our Machists did not notice the subjective ideal-ism under the “new” flag is a fact belonging to the realm of curiosities. 
 In the Analysis of Sensations (Russ. 
 trans. 
, p. 
 49), Mach refers incidentally to his work of 1872 on this ques-tion. 
 And this work, as we have seen, propounds the stand-point of pure subjectivism and reduces the world to sensa-tions. 
 Thus, both the fundamental works which introduced this famous “principle” into philosophy expound idealism!What is the reason for this? The reason is that if the prin-ciple of economy of thought is really made “ the basis of the theory of knowledge”, it can lead to nothing but sub-jective idealism. 
 That it is more “economical” to “think” that only I and my sensations exist is unquestionable, pro-vided we want to introduce such an absurd conception intoepistemology. 
 Is it “more economical” to “think” of the atom as in-divisible, or as composed of positive and negative electrons?Is it “more economical” to think of the Russian bourgeois revolution as being conducted by the liberals or as being conducted against the liberals? One has only to put thequestion in order to see the absurdity, the subjectivism ofapplying the category of “economy of thought” here . 
 Human thought is “economical” when it correctly reflects objec-tive truth, and the criterion of this correctness is prac-tice, experiment and industry. 
 Only by denying objective reality, i. 
e. 
, by denying the foundations of Marxism, can one seriously speak of economy of thought in the theory ofknowledge. 
 If we turn to Mach’s later works, we shall find in them an interpretation of the celebrated principle which fre-quently amounts to its complete denial. 
 For instance, in the Wärmelehre Mach returns to his favourite idea of “the economical nature” of science (2nd German edition, S. 
 366). 
But he at once adds that we engage in an activity not forthe sake of the activity (366; repeated on 391): “the pur-pose of scientific activity is the fullest ... most tranquil ... picture possible of the world” (366). 
 If this is the case, the “principle of economy” is banished not only from thebasis of epistemology, but virtually from epistemology generally. 
 To say that the purpose of science is to present a true picture of the world (tranquillity is entirely beside the point here) means to repeat the materialist point of view. 
 By saying so, one is admitting the objective realityof the world in relation to our knowledge, of the modelin relation to the picture. 
 To talk of economy of thought in such a connection is merely to use a clumsy and ridiculously pretentious word in place of the word “correctness”. 
 Mach is muddled here, as usual, and the Machists behold the mud-dle and worship it! In Knowledge and Error , in the chapter entitled “Exam-ples of Methods of Investigation”, we read the following: “The ‘complete and simplest description’ (Kirchhoff, 1874), the ‘economical presentation of the factual’ (Mach, 1872), the ‘concordance of thinking and being and the mutu-al concordance of the processes of thought’ (Grassmann, 1844)—all these, with slight variations, express one and the samethought. 
” Is this not a model of confusion? “Economy of thought”, from which Mach in 1872 inferred that sensations alone exist (a point of view which he himself subsequently was obliged to acknowledge an idealist one), is declared to be equivalent to the purely materialist dictum of the mathematician Grass-mann regarding the necessity of co-ordinating thinking andbeing , equivalent to the simplest description (of an objec-tive reality , the existence of which it never occurred to Kirchhoff to doubt!). 
 Such an application of the principle of “economy of thought” is simply an example of Mach’s curious philosophi-cal waverings. 
 And if such passages are set aside as curiosi-ties or lapses, the idealist character of “the principle of theeconomy of thought” becomes unquestionable. 
 For example, the Kantian Hönigswald, controverting the philosophy of Mach, greets his “principle of economy” as an approach to the “Kantian circle of ideas” (Dr. 
 Richard Hönigswald, Zur Kritik der Machschen Philosophie , Berlin, 1903, S. 
 27). 
 And, indeed, if we do not recognise the objective reality givenus in our sensations, whence are we to derive the “principle of economy” if not from the subject? Sensations, of course, do not contain any “economy”. 
 Hence, thought gives ussomething which is not contained in sensations! Hence, the “principle of economy” is not taken from experience ( =sen-sations), but precedes all experience and, like a Kantian category, constitutes a logical condition of experience. 
 Hönigswald quotes the following passage from the Analysis of Sensations : “We can from our bodily and spiritual stabili-ty infer the stability, the uniqueness of determination andthe homogeneity of the processes of nature” (Russian trans-lation, p. 
 281). 
 And, indeed, the subjective-idealist charac-ter of such propositions and the kinship of Mach to Petzoldt, who has gone to the length of apriorism, cannotbe doubted. 
 In connection with the “principle of the economy of thought”, the idealist Wundt very aptly characterised Machas “Kant turned inside out” ( Systematische Philosophie , Leipzig, 1907, S. 
 128). 
 Kant has a priori and experience, Mach has experience and a priori , for Mach’s principle of the economy of thought is essentially apriorist (130). 
 Theconnection ( Verknüpfung ) is either in things, as an “objec-tive law of nature [and this Mach emphatically rejects],or else it is a subjective principle of description” (130). 
 The principle of economy with Mach is subjective and kommt wie aus der Pistole geschossen —appears nobody knows whence—as a teleological principle which may have a diver-sity of meanings (131). 
 As you see, experts in philosoph-ical terminology are not as naïve as our Machists, who areblindly prepared to believe that a “new” term can eliminate the contrast between subjectivism and objectivism, between idealism and materialism. 
 Finally, let us turn to the English philosopher James Ward, who without circumlocution calls himself a spiritual-ist monist. 
 He does not controvert Mach, but instead, aswe shall see later, utilises the entire Machist trend in phys-ics in his fight against materialism. 
 And he definitely declares that with Mach “the criterion of simplicity ... is inthe main subjective, not objective” ( Naturalism and Agno-sticism , Vol. 
 I, 3rd ed. 
, p. 
 82). 
 That the principle of economy of thought as the basis of epistemology could please the German Kantians and Eng-lish spiritualists will not seem strange after all that has been said above. 
 That people who are desirous of being Marxistsshould link the political economy of the materialist Marx with the epistemological economy of Mach is simply ludi-crous. 
 It is appropriate here to say a few words about “the unity of the world”. 
 On this question Mr. 
 P. 
 Yushkevichstrikingly exemplifies—for the thousandth time perhaps—the abysmal confusion created by our Machists. 
 Engels, inhis Anti-Dühring , replies to Dühring, who had deduced the unity of the world from the unity of thought, as follows: “The real unity of the world consists in its materiality, and this is proved not by a few juggled phrases, but by a longand wearisome development of philosophy and naturalscience” (S. 
 31). 
 60 Mr. 
 Yushkevich cites this passage and retorts: “First of all it is not clear what is meant here by theassertion that ‘the unity of the world consists in its mate-riality’” (op. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 52). 
 Charming, is it not? This individual undertakes public-ly to prate about the philosophy of Marxism, and then de-clares that the most elementary propositions of materialismare “not clear” to him! Engels showed, using Dühring as anexample, that any philosophy that claims to be consistent can deduce the unity of the world either from thought—in which case it is helpless against spiritualism and fideism(Anti-Dühring , S. 
 30), and its arguments inevitably become mere phrase-juggling—or from the objective reality whichexists outside us, which in the theory of knowledge haslong gone under the name of matter, and which is studied by natural science. 
 It is useless to speak seriously to all in-dividual to whom such a thing is “not clear”, for he saysit is “not clear” in order fraudulently to evade giving agenuine answer to Engels’ clear materialist proposition. 
And, doing so, he talks pure Dühringian nonsense about “thecardinal postulate of the fundamental homogeneity and con-nection of being” (Yushkevich, op. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 51), about pos-tulates as “propositions” of which “it would not be exactto say that they have been deduced from experience, sincescientific experience is possible only because they are madethe basis of investigation” (ibid. 
). 
 This is nothing buttwaddle, for if this individual had the slightest respect for the printed word he would detect the idealist character in general, and the Kantian character in particular of the idea that there can be postulates which are not taken from expe-rience and without which experience is impossible. 
 A jumble of words culled from diverse books and coupled with the ob-vious errors of the materialist Dietzgen—such is the “phi-losophy” of Mr. 
 Yushkevich and his like. 
 Let us rather examine the arguments on the unity of the world expounded by a serious empirio-criticist, Joseph Pet-zoldt. 
 Section 29, Vol. 
 II, of his Introduction is entitled: “The Tendency to a Uniform ( einheitlich ) Conception of the Realm of Knowledge. 
 The Postulate of the Unique Determi-nation of All That Happens. 
” Here are a few samples of hisline of reasoning: “... Only in unity can one find that natural end beyond which no thought can go and in which, conse-quently, thought, if it takes into consideration all the facts ofthe given sphere, can reach quiescence” (79). 
 “...It is beyond doubt that nature by no means always responds to the de-mand for unity , but it is equally beyond doubt that in many cases it today already satisfies the demand for quiescence and it must be held, in accordance with all our previousinvestigations, that nature in all probability will satisfy thisdemand in the future in all cases. 
 Hence, it would be more correct to describe the actual soul behaviour as a striving for states of stability rather than as a striving for unity.... 
The principle of states of stability goes farther and deeper.... 
Haeckel’s proposal to put the kingdom of the protista along-side the plant and animal kingdom is an untenable solutionfor it creates two new difficulties in place of the former one: while formerly only the boundary between plants and ani-mals was doubtful, now it becomes impossible to demarcatethe protista from both plants and animals.... 
 Obviously, sucha state is not final ( endgültig ). 
 Such ambiguity of concepts must in one way or another be eliminated, if only, shouldthere be no other means, by that of an agreement between the specialists, by a majority vote” (80-81). 
 Enough, I think? It is evident that the empirio-criticist Petzoldt is not one whit better than Dühring. 
 But we must be fair even to an adversary; Petzoldt at least has sufficientscientific integrity to reject materialism as a philosophicaltrend decisively and irrevocably in all his works. 
 At least, he does not humiliate himself to the extent of posing as a materialist and declaring that the most elementary distinctionbetween the fundamental philosophical trends is “not clear”. 
 5. 
 SPACE AND TIME Recognising the existence of objective reality, i. 
e. 
, matter in motion, independently of our mind, materialismmust also inevitably recognise the objective reality of timeand space, in contrast above all to Kantianism, which inthis question sides with idealism and regards time and spacenot as objective realities but as forms of human understand-ing. 
 The basic difference between the two fundamental phil-osophical lines on this question too is quite clearly recog-nised by writers of the most diverse trends who are atall consistent thinkers. 
 Let us begin with the materialists. 
 “Space and time,” says Feuerbach, “are not mere forms of phenomena but essential conditions ( Wesensbedingungen ) ... of being” ( Werke , II, 332). 
 Regarding the sensible world we know through sensations as objective reality, Feuerbachnaturally also rejects the phenomenalist (as Mach wouldcall his own conception) or the agnostic (as Engels callsit) conception of space and time. 
 Just as things or bodiesare not mere phenomena, not complexes of sensations, but objective realities acting on our senses, so space and time are not mere forms of phenomena, but objectively realforms of being. 
 There is nothing in the world but matterin motion, and matter in motion cannot move otherwise thanin space and time. 
 Human conceptions of space and time arerelative, but these relative conceptions go to compound absolute truth. 
 These relative conceptions, in their de-velopment, move towards absolute truth and approach nearerand nearer to it. 
 The mutability of human conceptions ofspace and time no more refutes the objective reality of spaceand time than the mutability of scientific knowledge of thestructure and forms of matter in motion refutes the objective reality of the external world. 
 Engels, exposing the inconsistent and muddled material-ist Dühring, catches him on the very point where he speaksof the change in the idea of time (a question beyond con-troversy for contemporary philosophers of any importanceeven of the most diverse philosophical trends) but evades a d i -rect answer to the question: are space and time real or ideal, and are our relative ideas of space and time approximations to objectively real forms of being; or are they only products of the developing, organising, harmonising, etc. 
, human mind? This and this alone is the basic epistemological prob-lem on which the truly fundamental philosophical trends are divided. 
 Engels, in Anti-Dühring , says: “We are here not in the least concerned with what ideas change in HerrDühring’s head. 
 The subject at issue is not the idea of time, but real time, which Herr Dühring cannot rid himself of so cheaply [i. 
e. 
, by the use of such phrases as the muta-bility of our conceptions]” ( Anti-Dühring , 5th German edition, S. 
 41). 
 61 This would seem so clear that even the Yushkeviches should be able to grasp the essence of the matter. 
 Engelssets up against; Dühring the proposition of the reality , i. 
e. 
, objective reality, of time which is generally accepted by and obvious to every materialist, and says that one cannot escape a direct affirmation of denial of this proposition merely bytalking of the change in the ideas of time and space. 
 The point is not that Engels denies the necessity and scientificvalue of investigations into the change and development ofour ideas of time and space, but that we should give a con-sistent answer to the epistemological question, viz. 
, the question of the source and significance of all human knowl-edge. 
 Any at all intelligent philosophical idealist—andEngels when he speaks of idealists has in mind the great con-sistent idealists of classical philosophy—will readily admitthe development of our ideas of time and space; he would not cease to be an idealist for thinking, for example, that our developing ideas of time and space are approachingtowards the absolute idea of time and space, and so forth. 
 Itis impossible to hold consistently to a standpoint in philoso-phy which is hostile to all forms of fideism and idealism ifwe do not definitely and resolutely recognise that our devel-oping notions of time and space reflect an objectively real time and space; that here, too, as in general, they are ap-proaching objective truth. 
 “The basic forms of all being,” Engels admonishes Dühr-ing, “are space and time, and being out of time is just asgross an absurdity as being out of space” (op. 
 cit. 
). 
 Why was it necessary for Engels, in the first half of the quotation, to repeat Feuerbach almost literally and, inthe second, to recall the struggle which Feuerbach fought so successfully against the gross absurdities of theism? Because Dühring, as one sees from this same chapter of Engels’, could not make his philosophy hang together with-out resorting now to the “final cause” of the world, nowto the “initial impulse” (which is another expression for theconcept; “God”, Engels says). 
 Dühring no doubt wanted tobe a materialist and atheist no less sincerely than our Mach-ists want to be Marxists, but he was unable consistently to develop the philosophical point of view that would really cut the ground from under idealist and theist nonsense. 
Since he did not recognise, or at least did not recogniseclearly and distinctly (for he wavered and was muddled onthis question), the objective reality of time and space, it wasnot accidental but inevitable that Dühring should slide down an inclined plane to “final causes” and “initial im-pulses”, for he had deprived himself of the objective criterionwhich prevents one going beyond the bounds of time andspace. 
 If time and space are only concepts, man, who created them, is justified in going beyond their bounds , and bourgeois professors are justified in receiving salaries from reaction-ary governments for defending the legitimacy of going beyond these bounds, for directly or indirectly defendingmedieval “nonsense”. 
 Engels showed Dühring that denial of the objective real-ity of time and space is theoretically philosophical con-fusion, while practically it is capitulation to, or impotence in face of, fideism. 
 Let us now take a look at the “teachings” of “recent pos-itivism” on this subject. 
 We read in Mach: “Space andtime are well-ordered ( wohlgeordnete ) systems of series of sensations” ( Mechanics , 3rd German edition, p. 
 498). 
 This is obvious idealist nonsense, such as inevitably follows from the doctrine that bodies are complexes of sensations. 
 Accord-ing to Mach, it is not man with his sensations that existsin space and time, but space and time that exist in man,that depend upon man and are generated by man. 
 He feelsthat he is falling into idealism, and “resists” by making ahost of reservations and, like Dühring, burying the question under lengthy disquisitions (see especially Knowledge and Error ) on the mutability of our conceptions of space and time, their relativity, and so forth. 
 But this does not save him, and cannot save him, for one can really overcome the idealist position on this question only by recognising the objective reality of space and time. 
 And this Mach will not do at any price. 
 He constructs his epistemological theoryof time and space on the principle of relativism, and thatis all. 
 In actual fact, such a construction can lead to nothingbut subjective idealism, as we have already made clear whenspeaking of absolute and relative truth. 
 Resisting the idealist conclusions which inevitably fol-low from his premises, Mach argues against Kant and insiststhat our notion of space is derived from experience ( Knowledge and Error , 2nd German edition, pp. 
 350, 385). 
 But if ob-jective reality is not given us in experience (as Mach teaches), such an objection to Kant does not in the least destroy the general position of agnosticism in the case both of Kant and of Mach. 
 If our notion of space is taken from experiencewithout being a reflection of objective reality outside us, Mach’s theory remains idealistic. 
 The existence of naturein time , measured in millions of years, prior to the appear-ance of man and human experience, shows how absurd this idealist theory is. 
 “In the physiological respect,” writes Mach, “time and space are systems of sensations of orientation which togeth-er with sense-perceptions determine the discharge ( Aus-lösung ) of biologically purposive reactions of adaptation. 
 In the physical respect, time and space are interdepend-encies of physical elements” (ibid. 
, p. 
 434). 
 The relativist Mach confines himself to an examination of the concept of time in various relations! And like Dühr-ing he gets nowhere. 
 If “elements” are sensations, thenthe dependence of physical elements upon one another cannotexist outside of man, and could not have existed prior to man and prior to organic matter. 
 If the sensations of time and space can give man a biologically purposive orientation,this can only be so on the condition that these sensationsreflect an objective reality outside man: man could never have adapted himself biologically to the environment if hissensations had not given him an objectively correct idea of it. 
 The theory of space and time is inseparably connected with the answer to the fundamental question of epistemology:are our sensations images of bodies and things, or are bodies complexes of our sensations? Mach merely blunders about between the two answers. 
 In modern physics, he says, Newton’s idea of absolute time and space prevails (pp. 
 442-44), of time and space assuch. 
 This idea seems “to us” senseless, Mach continues—apparently not suspecting the existence of materialists andof a materialist theory of knowledge. 
 But in practice , he claims, this view was harmless (unschädlich , S. 
 442) and therefore for a long time escaped criticism. 
 This naïve remark regarding the harmlessness of the materialist view betrays Mach completely. 
 Firstly, it isnot true that for a “long time” the idealists did not criti-cise this view. 
 Mach simply ignores the struggle betweenthe idealist and materialist theories of knowledge on this question; he evades giving a plain and direct statement of these two views. 
 Secondly, by recognising “the harmless-ness” of the materialist views he contests, Mach thereby infact admits their correctness. 
 For if they were incorrect,how could they have remained harmless throughout the courseof centuries? What has become of the criterion of practice with which Mach attempted to flirt? The materialist view of the objective reality of time and space can be “harmless”only because natural science does not transcend the bounds of time and space, the bounds of the material world, leavingthis occupation to the professors of reactionary philosophy. 
Such “harmlessness” is equivalent to correctness. 
 It is Mach’s idealist view of space and time that is “harm-ful”, for, in the first place, it opens the door for fideism and,in the second place, it seduces Mach himself into drawing reactionary conclusions. 
 For instance, in 1872 Mach wrotethat “one does not have to conceive of the chemical elementsin a space of three dimensions” ( Erhaltung der Arbeit , S. 
 29, repeated on S. 
 55). 
 To do so would be “to impose an unnec-essary restriction upon ourselves. 
 There is no more ne-cessity to think of what is mere thought ( das bloss Gedachte ) spatially, that is to say, in relation to the visible and tan-gible, than there is to think of it in a definite pitch” (27). 
“The reason why a satisfactory theory of electricity has not yet been established is perhaps because we have invar-iably wanted to explain electrical phenomena in termsof molecular processes in a three-dimensional space” (30). 
 The argument from the standpoint of the straightforward and unmuddled Machism which Mach openly advocated in 1872 is quite indisputable: if molecules, atoms, in a word, chemical elements, cannot be perceived, they are “merethought” ( das bloss Gedachte ). 
 If so, and if space and time have no objective reality, it is clear that it is not essentialto think of atoms spatially! Let physics and chemistry “re-strict themselves” to a three-dimensional space in which mat-ter moves; for the explanation of electricity, however, we may seek its elements in a space which is not three-dimen-sional! That our Machists should circumspectly avoid all refer-ence to this absurdity of Mach’s, although he repeats itin 1906 ( Knowledge and Error , 2nd ed. 
, p. 
 418), is under-standable, for otherwise they would have to raise the ques-tion of the idealist and materialist views of space point-blank, without evasions and attempts to “reconcile” theseantagonistic positions. 
 It is likewise understandable thatat that time, in the seventies, when Mach was still entirelyunknown and when “orthodox physicists” even refused to publish his articles, one of the chiefs of the immanentist school, Anton von Leclair, should eagerly have seized upon precisely this argument of Mach’s as a noteworthy renuncia-tion of materialism and recognition of idealism! For at thattime Leclair had not yet invented, or had not yet borrowedfrom Schuppe and Schubert-Soldern, or J. 
 Rehmke, the “new” sobriquet, “immanentist school”, but plainly called himself a critical idealist . 
 * This unequivocal advocate of fideism, who openly preached it in his philosophical works,immediately proclaimed Mach a great philosopher because ofthese statements, a “revolutionary in the best sense of theword” (S. 
 252); and he was absolutely right. 
 Mach’s argu-ment amounts to deserting natural science for fideism. 
 Natural science was seeking, both in 1872 and in 1906, isnow seeking, and is discovering—at least it is groping its way towards —the atom of electricity, the electron, in three-dimensional space. 
 Science does not doubt that the sub-*Anton von Leclair, Der Realismus der modernen Naturwissenschaft im Lichte der von Berkeley und Kant angebahnten Erkenntniskritik , Prag, 1879. 
 stance it is investigating exists in three-dimensional space and, hence, that the particles of that substance, although they be so small that we cannot see them, must also “neces-sarily” exist in this three dimensional space. 
 Since 1872,during the course of three decades of immense, dazzlingscientific successes in the problem of the structure of mat-ter, the materialist view of space and time has remained“harmless”, i. 
e. 
, compatible, as heretofore, with natural science, while the contrary view of Mach and Co. 
 was a “harmful” capitulation to the position of fideism. 
 In his Mechanics , Mach defends the mathematicians who are investigating the problem of conceivable spaces with n dimensions; he defends them against the charge of drawing“preposterous” conclusions from their investigations. 
 The defence is absolutely and undoubtedly just, but see the epistemological position Mach takes up in this defence. 
 Re-cent mathematics, Mach says, has raised the very importantand useful question of a space of n dimensions as a conceiv-able space; nevertheless, only three-dimensional space re-mains the “real case” ( ein wirklicher Fall ) (3rd German edi-tion, pp. 
 483-85). 
 In vain, therefore, “many theologians, who experience difficulty in deciding where to place hell”,as well as the spiritualists, have sought to take advantageof the fourth dimension (ibid. 
). 
 Very good! Mach refuses to join company with the the-ologians and the spiritualists. 
 But how does he dissociate himself from them in his theory of knowledge ? By stating that three-dimensional space alone is real ! But what sort of defence is this against the theologians and their likewhen you deny objective reality to space and time? Why, itcomes to this, that when you have to dissociate yourselffrom the spiritualists you resort to tacit borrowings from the materialists. 
 For the materialists, by recognising the real world, the matter we perceive, as an objective reality, have the right to conclude from this that all human concepts,whatever their purpose, that go beyond the bounds of timeand space are unreal . 
 But you Machist gentlemen deny the objective validity of “reality” when you combat material-ism, yet secretly introduce it again when you have to combat an idealism that is consistent, fearless and frank throughout!If in the relative conception of time and space there is nothing but relativity, if there is no objective reality (i. 
e. 
, reality independent of man and mankind) reflected by these relative concepts, why should mankind, why should the majority of mankind, not be entitled to conceive of beingsoutside time and space? If Mach is entitled to seek atomsof electricity, or atoms in general, outside three-dimensional space, why should the majority of mankind not be entitledto seek the atoms, or foundations of morality, outside three-dimensional space? “There has never been an accoucheur who has helped a delivery by means of the fourth dimension,” Mach goes onto say. 
 An excellent argument—but only for those who regard the criterion of practice as a confirmation of the objective truth and objective reality of our perceptual world. 
 If our sensations give us an objectively true image of the exter-nal world, existing independently of us, the argument basedon the accoucheur, on human practice generally, is valid. 
But if so, Machism as a philosophical trend is notvalid. 
 “I hope, however,” Mach continues, referring to his work of 1872, “that nobody will defend ghost-stories ( die Kosten einer Spukgeschichte bestreiten ) with the help of what I have said and written on this subject. 
” One cannot hope that Napoleon did not die on May 5, 1821. 
 One cannot hope that Machism will not be used in the service of “ghost-stories” when it has already served and continues to serve the immanentists! And not only the immanentists, as we shall see later. 
 Philosophical idealism is nothing but a disguised and embel-lished ghost-story. 
 Look at the French and English represent-atives of empirio-criticism, who are less pretentious than the German representatives of this philosophical trend. 
 Poincaré says that the concepts space and time are relativeand that it follows (for non-materialists “it follows” in-deed) that “nature does not impose them upon us, but we im-pose them upon nature, for we find them convenient” (op. 
 cit. 
,p. 
 6). 
 Does this not justify the exultation of the German Kantians? Does this not confirm Engels’ statement that con-sistent philosophical doctrines must take either nature orhuman thought as primary? The views of the English Machist Karl Pearson are quite definite. 
 He says: “Of time as of space we cannot assert a real existence: it is not in things but in our mode of per-ceiving them” (op. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 184). 
 This is idealism, pureand simple. 
 “Like space, it [time] appears to us as one ofthe plans on which that great sorting-machine, the humanperceptive faculty, arranges its material” (ibid. 
). 
 Pear-son’s final conclusion, expounded as usual in clear and pre-cise theses, is as follows: “Space and time are not reali-ties of the phenomenal world, but the modes under which weperceive things apart. 
 They are not infinitely large norinfinitely divisible, but are essentially limited by the con-tents of our perception” (p. 
 191, summary of Chapter V onSpace and Time). 
 This conscientious and honest opponent of materialism, with whom, we repeat, Mach frequently expresses his completeagreement and who in his turn speaks openly of his agree-ment with Mach, invents no special signboard for his philos-ophy, and without the least ambiguity names Hume andKant as the classics from whom he derives his philosophical trend! (P. 
 192. 
) And while in Russia there are naïve people who believe that Machism has provided a “new” solution of the problemof space and time, in English writings we find that naturalscientists, on the one hand, and idealist philosophers, onthe other, at once took up a definite position in regard to the Machist Karl Pearson. 
 Here, for example, is the opinion of Lloyd Morgan, a biologist: “Physics as such accepts the phe-nomenal world as external to, and for its purposes independ-ent of, the mind of the investigator.... 
 He [Professor Pearson]is forced to a position which is largely idealistic.... 
” * “Physics, as a science, is wise, I take it, in dealing with space and time in frankly objective terms, and I think the biologist may still discuss the distribution of organismsin space, and the geologist their distribution in time, with-out pausing to remind their readers that after all theyare only dealing with sense-impressions, and stored sense-impressions, and certain forms of perception.... 
 All this may be true enough, but it is out of place either in physics *Natural Science ,62 Vol. 
 I, 1892, p. 
 300. 
 or biology” (p. 
 304) Lloyd Morgan is a representative of the kind of agnosticism that Engels called “shamefaced material-ism”, and however “conciliatory” the tendencies of such a philosophy are, nevertheless it proved impossible to recon-cile Pearson’s views with natural science. 
 With Pearson “themind is first in space, and then space in it,” says anothercritic. 
 * “There can be no doubt,” retorted a defender of Pearson, R. 
 J. 
 Ryle, “that the doctrine as to the nature of space and time which is associated with the name of Kant is the most important positive addition which has beenmade to the idealistic theory of human knowledge since thedays of Bishop Berkeley; and it is one of the noteworthyfeatures of the Grammar of Science that here, perhaps for the first time in the writings of English men of science, we find at once a full recognition of the general truth of Kant’s doctrine, a short but clear exposition of it.... 
” ** Thus we find that in England the Machists themselves, their opponents among the natural scientists, and their ad-herents among the professional philosophers have not even a shadow of doubt as to the idealistic character of Mach’s doctrine of time and space. 
 Only some Russian writers, would -be Marxists, “failed to notice” it. 
 “Many of Engels’ particular views,” V. 
 Bazarov, for instance, writes in the Studies (p. 
 67), “as for example, his conception of ‘pure’ space and time, are now obsolete. 
” Indeed! The views of the materialist Engels are now ob-solete, but the views of the idealist Pearson and the muddled idealist Mach are very modern! The most curious thingof all is that Bazarov does not even doubt that views ofspace and time, viz. 
, the recognition or denial of theirobjective reality, can be classed among “ particular views ”, in contradistinction to the “ starting-point of the world out-look ” spoken of by this author in his next sentence. 
 Here you have a glaring example of that “eclectic pauper’sbroth” of which Engels used to speak in reference to Ger-man philosophy of the eighties. 
 For to contrast the “start-ing-point” of Marx’s and Engels’ materialist world outlook *J. 
 M. 
 Bentley, The Philosophical Review ,63 Vol. 
 VI, 5, Sept. 
 1897, p. 
 523. 
 **R. 
 J. 
 Ryle, Natural Science , Aug. 
 1892, p. 
 454. 
 with their “particular view” of the objective reality of time and space is as utterly nonsensical as if you were to contrast the “starting-point” of Marx’s economic theory with his “particular view” of surplus-value. 
 To sever Engels’ doc-trine of the objective reality of time and space from his doc-trine of the transformation of “things-in-themselves” into“things-for-us”, from his recognition of objective and abso-lute truth: the objective reality given us in our sensations, and from his recognition of objective law, causality and necessity in nature—is to reduce an integral philosophy toa hotchpotch. 
 Like all the Machists, Bazarov erred in con-fusing the mutability of human conceptions of time andspace, their exclusively relative character, with the immu-tability of the fact that man and nature exist only in time and space, and that beings outside time and space, as invented by the priests and maintained by the imagination of the ignorantand downtrodden mass of humanity, are disordered fantasies,the artifices of philosophical idealism, rotten products ofa rotten social system. 
 The teachings of science on thestructure of matter, on the chemical composition of food, on the atom and the electron, may and constantly do become ob-solete, but the truth that man is unable to subsist on ideasand to beget children by Platonic love alone never becomesobsolete. 
 And a philosophy that denies the objective realityof time and space is as absurd, as intrinsically rotten andfalse as is the denial of these latter truths. 
 The artifices of the idealists and the agnostics are, taken as a whole, as hypocritical as the Pharisees’ sermons on Platonic love! In order to illustrate this distinction between the rela-tivity of our concepts of time and space and the absolute opposition, within the bounds of epistemology, between thematerialist and idealist lines on this question, I shall fur-ther quote a characteristic passage from a very old and very pure “empirio-criticist”, namely, the Humean Schulze-Aene-sidemus, who wrote in 1792: “If we infer ‘things outside us’ from ideas and thoughts within us, [then] space and time are something real and actu-ally existing outside us, for the existence of bodies can be conceived only in an existing ( vorhandenen ) space, and the existence of changes only in an existing time” (op. 
 cit. 
,S. 
 100). 
 Exactly! While firmly rejecting materialism, and even the slightest concession to materialism, Schulze, a follower of Hume, described in 1792 the relation between the question of space and time and the question of an objective realityoutside us just as the materialist Engels described it in1894 (Engels’ last preface to Anti-Dühring is dated May 23, 1894). 
 This does not mean that during these hundred yearsour ideas of time and space have undergone no change, or that a vast amount of new material has not been gathered on the development of these ideas (material to which both Voro-shilov-Chernov and Voroshilov-Valentinov refer as supposed-ly refuting Engels). 
 It does mean that the relation between materialism and agnosticism, as the fundamental lines inphilosophy, could not have changed, in spite of all the “new” names paraded by our Machists. 
 And Bogdanov too contributes absolutely nothing but “new” names to the old philosophy of idealism and agnosti-cism. 
 When he repeats the arguments of Hering and Mach onthe difference between physiological and geometrical space,or between perceptual and abstract space ( Empirio-monism , Bk. 
 I, p. 
 26), he is repeating in full the mistake of Düh-ring. 
 It is one thing how, with the help of various sense-organs, man perceives space, and how, in the course of along historical development, abstract ideas of space are de-rived from these perceptions; it is an entirely differentthing whether there is an objective reality independent of mankind which corresponds to these perceptions and concep-tions of mankind. 
 This latter question, although it is theonly philosophical question, Bogdanov “did not notice” be-neath the mass of detailed investigations on the former ques-tion, and he was therefore unable clearly to counterposeEngels’ materialism to Mach’s confusion. 
 Time, like space, is “a form of social co-ordination of the experiences of different people”, the “objectivity” ofboth lies in their “general significance” (ibid. 
, p. 
 34). 
 This is absolutely false. 
 Religion also has general sig-nificance as expressing the social co-ordination of the ex-perience of the greater part of humanity. 
 But there is no objective reality that corresponds to the teachings of re-ligion, for example, on the past of the earth and the creationof the world. 
 There is an objective reality that corresponds to the teaching of science (although the latter is as relative at every stage in the development of science as every stage in the development of religion is relative) that the earth existed prior to any society, prior to man, prior to organic matter, and that it has existed for a definite time and in a definite space in relation to the other planets. 
 According to Bogdanov, the various forms of space and time adapt them-selves to man’s experience and his perceptive faculty. 
 As a matter of fact, just the reverse is true: our “experience” and our knowledge adapt themselves more and more to objective space and time, and reflect them ever more correctly and profoundly. 
 6. 
 FREEDOM AND NECESSITY On pages 140-41 of the Studies , A. 
 Lunacharsky quotes the argument given by Engels in Anti-Dühring on this ques-tion and fully endorses the “remarkably precise and apt”statement of the problem made by Engels in that “wonderfulpage” * of the work mentioned. 
 There is, indeed, much that is wonderful here. 
 And even more “wonderful” is the fact that neither Lunacharsky,nor the whole crowd of other Machist would-be Marxists,“noticed” the epistemological significance of Engels’ discus-sion of freedom and necessity. 
 They read it and they copiedit, but they could not make head or tail of it. 
 Engels says: “Hegel was the first to state correctly the relation between freedom and necessity. 
 To him, freedomis the appreciation of necessity. 
 ‘Necessity is blind only insofar as it is not understood . 
’ Freedom does not consist in an imaginary independence from natural laws, but inthe knowledge of these laws, and in the possibility this gives of systematically making them work towards definite ends. 
 This holds good in relation both to the laws of ex-ternal nature and to those which govern the bodily and men-tal existence of men themselves—two classes of laws whichwe can separate from each other at most only in thought but *Lunacharsky says: “... a wonderful page of religious economics. 
 I say this at the risk of provoking a smile from the non-religious reader”. 
 However good your intentions may be, Comrade Lunacharsky, it is not a smile, but disgust that your flirtation with religion pro-vokes. 
 64 not in reality. 
 Freedom of the will therefore means nothing but the capacity to make decisions with knowledge of the subject. 
 Therefore the freer a man’s judgement is in rela-tion to a definite question, the greater is the necessity with which the content of this judgement will be determined.... 
Freedom therefore consists in the control over ourselvesand over external nature, a control founded on knowledgeof natural necessity ( Naturnotwendigkeiten ). 
” (5th German edition, pp. 
 112-13. 
) 65 Let us examine the epistemological promises upon which this argument is based. 
 Firstly, Engels at the very outset of his argument rec-ognises laws of nature, laws of external nature, the ne-cessity of nature—i. 
e. 
, all that Mach, Avenarius, Petzoldt and Co. 
 characterise as “metaphysics”. 
 If Lunacharsky had really wanted to reflect on Engels’ “wonderful” argumenthe could not have helped noticing the fundamental differ-ence between the materialist theory of knowledge and agnos-ticism and idealism, which deny law in nature or declare itto be only “logical”, etc. 
, etc. 
 Secondly, Engels does not attempt to contrive “defini-tions” of freedom and necessity, the kind of scholastic defi-nitions with which the reactionary professors (like Avena-rius) and their disciples (like Bogdanov) are most concerned. 
Engels takes the knowledge and will of man, on the one hand,and the necessity of nature, on the other, and instead of giving any definitions, simply says that the necessity of nature is primary, and human will and mind secondary. 
 Thelatter must necessarily and inevitably adapt themselves tothe former. 
 Engels regards this as so obvious that he doesnot waste words explaining his view. 
 It needed the RussianMachists to complain of Engels ’ general definition of mate-rialism (that nature is primary and mind secondary; remem-ber Bogdanov’s “perplexity” on this point!), and at the sametime to regard one of the particular applications by Engels of this general and fundamental definition as “wonderful”and “remarkably apt”! Thirdly, Engels does not doubt the existence of “blind necessity”. 
 He admits the existence of a necessity unknown to man. 
 This is quite obvious from the passage just quoted. 
But how, from the standpoint of the Machists, can man know of the existence of something that he does not know ? How can he know of the existence of an unknown necessity? Is this not “mysticism”, “metaphysics”, the admission of “fetishes” and “idols”, is it not the “Kantian unknowable thing-in-it-self”? Had the Machists given the matter any thought theycould not have failed to observe the complete identity be-tween Engels’ argument on the knowability of the objectivenature of things and on the transformation of “things-in-themselves” into “things-for-us”, on the one hand, and his argument on a blind, unknown necessity, on the other. 
 Thedevelopment of consciousness in each human individualand the development of the collective knowledge of humanityas a whole presents us at every step with examples of thetransformation of the unknown “thing-in-itself” into the known “thing-for-us”, of the transformation of blind, un-known necessity, “necessity-in-itself”, into the known “ne-cessity-for-us”. 
 Epistemologically, there is no differencewhatover between these two transformations, for the basicpoint of view in both cases is the same, viz. 
, materialistic,the recognition of the objective reality of the external world and of the laws of external nature, and of the fact that both this world and these laws are fully knowable to man butcan never be known to him with finality . 
 We do not know the necessity of nature in the phenomena of the weather, andto that extent we are inevitably slaves of the weather. 
 Butwhile we do not know this necessity, we know that it exists. 
 Whence this knowledge? From the very source whence comes the knowledge that thinks exist outside our mind andindependently of it, namely, from the development of ourknowledge, which provides millions of examples to everyindividual of knowledge replacing ignorance when an objectacts upon our sense-organs, and conversely of ignorance re-placing knowledge when the possibility of such action is eliminated. 
 Fourthly, in the above-mentioned argument Engels plain-ly employs the salto vitale method in philosophy, that is to say, he makes a leap from theory to practice. 
 Not a single one of the learned (and stupid) professors of philosophy, in whose footsteps our Machists follow, would even permit him-self to make such a leap, for this would be a disgracefulthing for a devotee of “pure science” to do. 
 For them the theory of knowledge, which demands the cunning concoction of “definitions”, is one thing, while practice is another. 
 For Engels all living human practice permeates the theory of knowledge itself and provides an objective criterion of truth. 
 For until we know a law of nature, it, existing andacting independently of and outside our mind, makes usslaves of “blind necessity”. 
 But once we come to know thislaw, which acts (as Marx repeated a thousand times) in-dependently of our will and our mind, we become the mas-ters of nature. 
 The mastery of nature manifested in humanpractice is a result of an objectively correct reflection with-in the human head of the phenomena and processes of na-ture, and is proof of the fact that this reflection (withinthe limits of what is revealed by practice) is objective, ab-solute, eternal truth. 
 What is the result? Every step in Engels’ argument, literally almost every phrase, every proposition, is con-structed entirely and exclusively upon the epistemology ofdialectical materialism, upon premises which stand out instriking contrast to the Machist nonsense about bodies being complexes of sensations, about “elements”, “the coincidence of sense-perceptions with the reality that exists outsideus”, etc. 
, etc. 
, etc. 
 Without being in the least perturbedby this, the Machists abandon materialism and repeat ( à la Berman) threadbare banalities about dialectics, and at thesame time welcome with open arms one of the applications of dialectical materialism! They have taken their philosophy from an eclectic pauper’s broth and are continuing to offerthis hotchpotch to the reader. 
 They take a bit of agnosti-cism and a morsel of idealism from Mach, add to it a bit ofdialectical materialism from Marx, and call this hash adevelopment of Marxism. 
 They imagine that if Mach, Ave-narius, Petzoldt, and all the other authorities of theirs have not the slightest inkling of how Hegel and Marx solved theproblem (of freedom and necessity), this is purely accidental:why, it was simply because they overlooked a certain pagein a certain book, and not because these “authorities” were and are utter ignoramuses on the subject of the real progress made by philosophy in the nineteenth century, andbecause they were and are philosophical obscurant-ists. 
 Here is the argument of one such obscurantist, the phi-losophy professor-in-ordinary at the University of Vienna, Ernst Mach: “The correctness of the position of determinism or in-determinism cannot be demonstrated. 
 Only a perfect scienceor a demonstrably impossible science could decide this ques-tion. 
 It is a matter of the presuppositions which we bring(man heranbringt ) to the consideration of things, depending upon whether we ascribe to previous successes or failures of the investigation a greater or lesser subjective weight(subjektives Gewicht ). 
 But during the investigation every thinker is of necessity a theoretical determinist ” (Knowledge and Error , 2nd German edition, pp. 
 282-83). 
 Is this not obscurantism, when pure theory is carefully partitioned off from practice; when determinism is confined to the field of “investigation”, while in the field of morality,social activity and all fields other than “investigation”the question is left to a “subjective” estimate? In my work-room, says the learned pedant, I am a determinist; butthat the philosopher should seek to obtain an integral conception of the world based on determinism, embracing both theory and practice—of that there is no mention. 
 Machutters banalities because on the theoretical problem offreedom and necessity he is entirely at sea. 
 “... Every new discovery discloses the defects of our knowledge, reveals a residue of dependencies hitherto un-heeded...” (283). 
 Excellent! And is this “residue” the “thing-in-itself”, which our knowledge reflects ever more deeply?Not at all: “... Thus, he also who in theory defends extremedeterminism, must nevertheless in practice remain an in-determinist...” (283). 
 And so things have been amicablydivided *: theory for the professors, practice for the theo-logians! Or: objectivism (i. 
e. 
, “shamefaced” materialism) in theory and the “subjective method in sociology”66 in prac-tice. 
 No wonder the Russian ideologists of philistinism,the Narodniks, from Lesevich to Chernov, sympathise withthis banal philosophy. 
 But it is very sad that would-be Marx-*Mach in the Mechanics says: “Religious opinions are people’s strictly private affair as long as they do not try to impose them on others and do not apply them to things which belong to another sphere”(French translation, p. 
 434). 
 ists have been captivated by such nonsense and are embar-rassedly covering up the more absurd of Mach’s conclusions. 
 But on the question of the will Mach is not content with confusion and half-hearted agnosticism: he goes muchfurther. 
 “... Our sensation of hunger,” we read in the Me-chanics , “is not so essentially different from the affinity of sulphuric acid for zinc, and our will is not so very differentfrom the pressure of the stone on its support.... 
 We shall thus find ourselves [that is, if we hold such a view[ nearer to nature without it being necessary to resolve ourselvesinto an incomprehensible nebula of atoms, or to resolvenature into a system of phantoms” (French translation,p. 
 434). 
 Thus there is no need for materialism (“nebula ofatoms” or electrons, i. 
e. 
, the recognition of the objective reality of the material world), there is no need for an ideal-ism which would recognise the world as “the other being” ofspirit; but there is possible an idealism which recognisesthe world as will ! We are superior not only to materialism, but also to the idealism of a Hegel; but we are not averseto coquetting with an idealism like Schopenhauer’s! Our Machists, who assume an air of injured innocence at every reminder of Mach’s kinship to philosophical idealism, pre-ferred to keep silent on this delicate question too. 
 Yetit is difficult to find in philosophical writings an exposi-tion of Mach’s views which does not mention his tendencytowards Willensmetaphysik , i. 
e. 
, voluntaristic idealism. 
 This was pointed out by J. 
 Baumann, * and in replying to him the Machist Kleinpeter does not take exception to thispoint, but declares that Mach is, of course, “nearer to Kantand Berkeley than to the metaphysical empiricism prevail-ing in science” (i. 
e. 
, instinctive materialism; ibid. 
, Bd. 
 6,S. 
 87). 
 This is also pointed out by E. 
 Becher, who remarks that if Mach in some places advocates voluntaristic metaphy-sics, and in others renounces it, it only testifies to the arbit-rariness of his terminology; in fact, Mach’s kinship to volun-tarist metaphysics is beyond doubt. 
 ** Lucka, too, admits *Archiv für systematische Philosophie , 1898, II, Bd. 
 IV, S. 
 63, article on Mach’s philosophical views. 
 **Erich Becher, “The Philosophical Views of Ernst Mach”, The Philosophical Review , Vol. 
 XIV, 5, 1905, pp. 
 536, 546, 547, 548. 
 the admixture of this metaphysics (i. 
e. 
, idealism) to “phe-nominalism” (i. 
e. 
, agnosticism). 
 * W. 
 Wundt also points this out. 
 ** That Mach is a phenomenalist who is “not averse to voluntaristic idealism” is noted also in Ueberweg-Heinze’stextbook on the history of modern philosophy. 
 *** In short, Mach’s eclecticism and his tendency to idealism are clear to everyone except perhaps the Russian Machists. 
 *E. 
 Lucka, “Das Erkenntnisproblem und Machs Analyse der Empfindungen ”, Kantstudien , Bd. 
 VIII, 1903, S. 
 400. 
 **Systematische Philosophie , Leipzig, 1907, S. 
 131. 
 ***Grundriss der Geschichte der Philosophie , Bd. 
 IV, 9. 
 Aufl. 
, Ber-lin, 1903, S. 
 250. 
 C H A P T E R F O U R THE PHILOSOPHICAL IDEALISTS AS COMRADES -IN-ARMS AND SUCCESSORS OF EMPIRIO -CRITICISM So far we have examined empirio-criticism taken by it-self. 
 We must now examine it in its historical developmentand in its connection and relation with other philosophicaltrends. 
 First comes the question of the relation of Mach and Avenarius to Kant. 
 1. 
 THE CRITICISM OF KANTIANISM THE LEFT AND THE RIGHT Both Mach and Avenarius began their philosophical careers in the seventies, when the fashionable cry in Ger-man professorial circles was “Back to Kant!” And, indeed,both founders of empirio-criticism in their philosophical development started from Kant. 
 “His [Kant’s] critical idealism,” says Mach, “was, as I acknowledge with the deep-est gratitude, the starting-point of all my critical thought. 
But I found it impossible to remain faithful to it. 
 Verysoon I began to return to the views of Berkeley ... [and then Iarrived at views akin to those of Hume.... 
 And even today I cannot help regarding Berkeley and Hume as far more consistent thinkers than Kant” ( Analysis of Sensations , p. 
 292). 
 Thus Mach quite definitely admits that having begun with Kant he soon followed the line of Berkeley and Hume. 
Let us turn to Avenarius. 
 In his Prolegomena zu einer “Kritik der reinen Erfahrung ” (1876), Avenarius already in the foreword states that the words “Critique of Pure Experience” are indicative of his attitude towards Kant’s “Critique of Pure Reason”, and “ofcourse, of an antagonistic attitude” towards Kant (1876 ed. 
,p. 
 iv). 
 In what does Avenarius’ antagonism to Kant con-sist? In the fact that Kant, in Avenarius’ opinion, hadnot sufficiently “purified experience”. 
 It is with this “pu-rification of experience” that Avenarius deals in his Pro-legomena (§ § 56, 72 and many other places). 
 Of what does Avenarius “purify” the Kantian doctrine of experience?In the first place, of apriorism. 
 In § 56 he says: “The questionas to whether the superfluous ‘ a priori conceptions of reason’ should and could be eliminated from the content of expe-rience and thereby pure experience par excellence established is, as far as I know, raised here, as such, for the first time. 
”We have already seen that Avenarius in this way “purified”Kantianism of the recognition of necessity and causality. 
 Secondly, he purifies Kantianism of the assumption of substance (§ 95), i. 
e. 
, the thing-in-itself, which, in Ave-narius’ opinion, “is not given in the stuff of actual experience but is imported into it by thought”. 
 We shall presently see that Avenarius’ definition of his philosophical line entirely coincides with that of Mach,differing only in pretentiousness of formulation. 
 But wemust first note that Avenarius is telling a plain untruth when he asserts that it was he who in 1876 for the first time raised the question of “purifying experience”, i. 
e. 
, of pu-rifying the Kantian doctrine of apriorism and the assump-tion of the thing-in-itself. 
 As a matter of fact, the develop-ment of German classical philosophy immediately after Kantgave rise to a criticism of Kantianism exactly along the very line followed by Avenarius. 
 This line is represented in Ger-man classical philosophy by Schulze-Aenesidemus, an ad-herent of Humean agnosticism, and by J. 
 G. 
 Fichte, an adher-ent of Berkeleianism, i. 
e. 
, of subjective idealism. 
 In 1792Schulze-Aenesidemus criticised Kant for this very recogni-tion of apriorism (op. 
 cit. 
, S. 
 56, 141, etc. 
) and of the thing-in-itself. 
 We sceptics, or followers of Hume, says Schulze, reject the thing-in-itself as being “beyond the bounds ofall experience” (S. 
 57). 
 We reject objective knowledge (25); we deny that space and time really exist outside us (100); we reject the presence in our experience of necessity (112), causality, force, etc. 
 (113). 
 One cannot attribute to them any “reality outside our conceptions” (114). 
 Kant proves aprior-ity “dogmatically”, saying that since we cannot think inany other way there is therefore an a priori law of thought. 
 “This argument,” Schulze replies to Kant, “has long beenutilised in philosophy to prove the objective nature of what lies outside our ideas” (141). 
 Arguing thus, we may attribute causality to things-in-themselves (142). 
 “Experience nevertells us ( wir erfahren niemals ) that the action on us of ob-jective things produces ideas”, and Kant by no means provedthat “this something (which lies outside our reason) must beregarded as a thing-in-itself, distinct from our sensation (Gemüt ). 
 But sensation also may be thought of as the sole basis of all our knowledge” (265). 
 The Kantian critique ofpure reason “bases its argument on the proposition thatevery act of cognition begins with the action of objectivethings on our organs of sensation ( Gemüt ), but it after-wards disputes the truth and reality of this proposition” (266). 
 Kant in no way refuted the idealist Berkeley (268-72). 
 It is evident from this that the Humean Schulze rejects Kant’s doctrine of the thing-in-itself as an inconsistentconcession to materialism, i. 
e. 
, to the “dogmatic” assertionthat in our sensations we are given objective reality, or, in other words, that our ideas are caused by the action of objective things (independent of our mind) on our sense-organs. 
 The agnostic Schulze reproaches the agnostic Kanton the grounds that the latter’s assumption of the thing-in-itself contradicts agnosticism and leads to materialism. 
In the same way, but even more vigorously, Kant is criti-cised by the subjective idealist Fichte, who maintains that Kant’s assumption of the thing-in-itself independent ofthe self is “ realism ” (Werke , I, S. 
 483), and that Kant makes “no clear” distinction between “realism” and “idealism”. 
Fichte sees a crying inconsistency of Kant and the Kantiansin the fact that they admit the thing-in-itself as the “basis of objective reality” (480), thus coming into contradiction with critical idealism. 
 “With you,” exclaims Fichte, address-ing the realist expositors of Kant, “the earth rests on the great elephant, and the great elephant rests on the earth. 
 Your thing-in-itself, which is only thought, acts on the self!” (483). 
 Thus Avenarius was profoundly mistaken in imagining that he “for the first time” undertook a “purification ofthe experience” of Kant from apriorism and from the thing-in-itself and that he was thereby giving rise to a “new”trend in philosophy. 
 In reality he was continuing the old line of Hume and Berkeley, Schulze-Aenesidemus and J. 
 G. 
 Fichte. 
 Avenarius imagined that he was “purifying experi-ence” in general. 
 In reality he was only purifying agnos-ticism of Kantianism . 
 He fought not against the agnosticism of Kant (agnosticism is a denial of the objective realitygiven in sensation), but for a purer agnosticism , for the elimination of Kant’s assumption, which is contradictory to agnosticism, that there is a thing-in-itself, albeit unknow-able, noumenal and other-sided, that there is necessityand causality, albeit a priori , given in our understanding, and not in objective reality. 
 He fought Kant not from theleft, as the materialists fought Kant, but from the right , as the sceptics and idealists fought Kant. 
 He imagined that he was advancing, but in fact he was retreating tothe programme of criticising Kant which Kuno Fischer,speaking of Schulze-Aenesidemus, aptly characterised in thefollowing words: “The critique of pure reason with purereason [i. 
e. 
, apriorism] left out is scepticism. 
 The cri-tique of pure reason with the thing-in-itself left out is Berkeleian idealism” ( Geschichte der neueren Philosophie , 1869, Bd. 
 V, S. 
 115). 
 This brings us to one of the most curious episodes in our whole “Machiad”, in the whole campaign of the RussianMachists against Engels and Marx. 
 The latest discovery by Bogdanov and Bazarov, Yushkevich and Valentinov, trum-peted by them in a thousand different keys, is that Plekhanovmakes a “luckless attempt to reconcile Engels with Kant bythe aid of a compromise—a thing-in-itself which is just awee bit knowable” ( Studies , etc. 
, p. 
 67 and many other places). 
 This discovery of our Machists discloses a veritable bottomless pit of utter confusion and monstrous misunder-standing both of Kant and of the whole course of develop-ment of German classical philosophy. 
 The principal feature of Kant’s philosophy is the re-conciliation of materialism with idealism, a compromise be-tween the two, the combination within one system of hetero-geneous and contrary philosophical trends. 
 When Kantassumes that something outside us, a thing-in-itself, cor-responds to our ideas, he is a materialist. 
 When he de-clares this thing-in-itself to be unknowable, transcendental,other-sided, he is an idealist. 
 Recognising experience, sensations, as the only source of our knowledge, Kant is directing his philosophy towards sensationalism, and viasensationalism, under certain conditions, towards material-ism. 
 Recognising the apriority of space, time, causality,etc. 
, Kant is directing his philosophy towards idealism. 
Both consistent materialists and consistent idealists (as well as the “pure” agnostics, the Humeans) have mercilessly criticised Kant for this inconsistency. 
 The materialistsblamed Kant for his idealism, rejected the idealist fea-tures of his system, demonstrated the knowability, the this-sidedness of the thing-in-itself, the absence of a fundamentaldifference between the thing-in-itself and the phenomenon, the need of deducing causality, etc. 
, not from a priori laws of thought, but from objective reality. 
 The agnostics andidealists blamed Kant for his assumption of the thing-in-itself as a concession to materialism, “realism” or “naïverealism”. 
 The agnostics, moreover, rejected not only thething-in-itself, but apriorism as well; while the idealists demanded the consistent deduction from pure thought not only of the a priori forms of perception, but of the world as a whole (by magnifying human thought to an abstract Self, or to an “Absolute Idea”, or to a “Universal Will ”, etc. 
, etc. 
). 
 And here our Machists, “without noticing” thatthey had taken as their teachers people who had criticised Kant from the standpoint of scepticism and idealism, began to rend their clothes and to cover their heads with ashesat the sight of monstrous people who criticised Kant froma diametrically opposite point of view , who rejected the slightest element of agnosticism (scepticism) and idealismin his system, who demonstrated that the thing-in-itself is objectively real, fully knowable and this-sided, that it does not differ fundamentally from appearance, that itbecome~ transformed into appearance at every step in the development of the individual consciousness of man and the collective consciousness of mankind. 
 Help!—they cried—this is an illegitimate mixture of materialism and Kantianism! When I read the assurances of our Machists that they criticise Kant far more consistently and thoroughly thanany of the antiquated materialists, it always seems to meas though Purishkevich had joined our company and was shouting: I criticised the Constitutional-Democrats 67 far more consistently and thoroughly than you Marxist gentle-men! There is no question about it, Mr. 
 Purishkevich, polit-ically consistent people can and always will criticise theConstitutional-Democrats from diametrically oppositepoints of view, but after all it must not be forgotten that you criticised the Constitutional-Democrats for being excessive-ly democratic, while we criticised them for being insuffici-ently democratic. 
 The Machists criticise Kant for being too much of a materialist, while we criticise him for notbeing enough of a materialist. 
 The Machists criticise Kantfrom the right, we from the left. 
 The Humean Schulze and the subjective idealist Fichte are examples of the former category of critics in the historyof classical German philosophy. 
 As we have already seen,they try to obliterate the “realistic” elements of Kantian-ism. 
 Just as Schulze and Fichte criticised Kant himself,so the Humean empirio-criticists and the subjective idealist-immanentists criticised the German neo-Kantians of the second half of the nineteenth century. 
 The line of Hume andBerkeley reappeared in a slightly renovated verbal garb. 
Mach and Avenarius reproached Kant not because his con-ception of the thing-in-itself is not sufficiently realistic, notsufficiently materialistic, but because he admits its existence; not because he refuses to deduce causality and necessity in nature from objective reality, but because he admits anycausality and necessity at all (except perhaps purely “logi-cal” necessity). 
 The immanentists were at one with theempirio-criticists, also criticising Kant from the Humeanand Berkeleian standpoint. 
 For instance, Leclair in 1879, in the work in which he praised Mach as a remarkable philos-opher, reproached Kant for his “inconsistency and connivanceat realism” as expressed in the concept of the “ thing-in- /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR itself ”—that “nominal residuum of vulgar realism” ( Der Realismus der modernen Naturwissenschaft , usw . 
, S. 
 9). 
 Leclair calls materialism “vulgar realism ”—“in order to put it more strongly”. 
 “In our opinion,” writes Leclair, “allthose parts of the Kantian theory which gravitate towardsrealismus vulgaris should be vanquished and eliminated as being inconsistencies and bastard ( zwitterhaft ) products from the idealist point of view” (41). 
 “The inconsistencies and contradictions in the Kantian theory of knowledge [arise from] the amalgamation ( Verquickung ) of idealist criticism with still unvanquished remnants of realisticdogmatism” (170). 
 By realistic dogmatism Leclair meansmaterialism. 
 Another immanentist, Johannes Rehmke, reproached Kant because he realistically walled himself off from Berkeley with the thing-in-itself (Johannes Rehmke, Die Welt als Wahrnehmung und Begriff , Berlin, 1880, S. 
 9). 
 “The philo-sophical activity of Kant bore an essentially polemical char-acter: with the thing-in-itself he turned against German ra-tionalism [i. 
e. 
, the old fideism of the eighteenth century], and with pure contemplation against English empiricism” (25). 
 “I would compare the Kantian thing-in-itself witha movable lid placed over a pit: the thing looks so innocentand safe; one steps on it and suddenly falls into ... the ‘ world-in-itself ’” (27). 
 That is why Kant is not liked by the com-rades-in-arms of Mach and Avenarius, the immanentists; they do not like him because in some respects he approaches the “pit” of materialism! And here are some examples of the criticism of Kant from the left. 
 Feuerbach reproaches Kant not for his “real-ism”, but for his idealism , and describes his system as “idealism based on empiricism” ( Werke , II, 296). 
 Here is a particularly important remark on Kant by Feuerbach. 
 “Kant says: If we regard—as we should—the ob-jects of our perceptions as mere appearances, we therebyadmit that at the bottom of appearances is a thing-in-itself,although we do not know how it is actually constructed, butonly know its appearance, i. 
e. 
, the manner in which our senses are affected ( affiziert ) by this unknown something. 
 Hence, our reason, by the very fact that it accepts appear-ances, also admits the existence of things-in-themselves; and to that extent we can say that to entertain an idea of such entities which lie at the base of appearances, and con-sequently are but thought entities, is not only permissible, but unavoidable.... 
” Having selected a passage from Kantwhere the thing-in-itself is regarded merely as a mentalthing, a thought entity, and not a real thing, Feuerbachdirects his whole criticism against it. 
 “... Therefore,” hesays, “the objects of the senses [the objects of experience] are for the mind only appearances, and not truth.... 
 Yet the thought entities are not actual objects for the mind! TheKantian philosophy is a contradiction between subject andobject, between entity and existence, thinking and being. 
Entity is left to the mind, existence to the senses. 
 Existencewithout entity [i. 
e. 
, the existence of appearances without objective reality] is mere appearance—the sensible things— while entity without existence is mere thought—the thoughtentities, the noumena ; they are thought of, but they lack existence—at least for us—and objectivity; they are thethings-in-themselves, the true things, but they are not realthings.... 
 But what a contradiction, to sever truth from real-ity, reality from truth!” ( Werke , II, S. 
 302-03). 
 Feuerbach reproaches Kant not because he assumes things-in-them-selves, but because he does not grant them reality, i. 
e. 
, objec-tive reality, because he regards them as mere thought,“thought entities”, and not as “entities possessing existence”,i. 
e. 
, real and actually existing. 
 Feuerbach rebukes Kant for deviating from materialism. 
 “The Kantian philosophy is a contradiction,” Feuerbachwrote to Bolin on March 26, 1858, “it inevitably leadseither to Fichtean idealism or to sensationalism. 
” The for-mer conclusion “belongs to the past”, the latter “to thepresent and the future” (Grün, op. 
 cit. 
, II, 49). 
 We have already seen that Feuerbach advocates objective sensational-ism, i. 
e. 
, materialism. 
 The new turn from Kant to agnosti-cism and idealism, to Hume and Berkeley, is undoubtedlyreactionary , even from Feuerbach’s standpoint. 
 And his ar-dent follower, Albrecht Rau, who together with the meritsof Feuerbach also adopted his faults, which were overcome by Marx and Engels, criticised Kant wholly in the spirit of his teacher: “The Kantian philosophy is an amphibole [ambi-guity]; it is both materialism and idealism, and the key to its essence lies in its dual nature. 
 As a materialist or an empiricist, Kant cannot help conceding things an exist-ence ( Wesenheit ) outside us. 
 But as an idealist he could not rid himself of the prejudice that the soul is an entitytotally different from sensible things. 
 Hence there arereal things and a human mind which apprehends those things. 
But how can the mind approach things totally different fromitself? The way out adopted by Kant is as follows: the mind possesses certain a priori knowledge, in virtue of which things must appear to it as they do. 
 Hence, the fact thatwe understand things as we do is a fact of our creation. 
For the mind which lives within us is nothing but the divinemind, and just as God created the world out of nothing, sothe human mind creates out of things something which they are not in themselves. 
 Thus Kant guarantees real things their existence as ‘things-in-themselves’. 
 Kant, however,needed the soul, because immortality was for him a moralpostulate. 
 The ‘thing-in-itself’, gentlemen [says Rau,addressing the neo-Kantians in general and the muddle-headed A. 
 Lange in particular, who falsified the History of Materialism ], is what separates the idealism of Kant from the idealism of Berkeley; it forms a bridge between material-ism and idealism. 
 Such is my criticism of the Kantian philos-ophy, and let those who can refute it.... 
” “For the mate-rialist a distinction between a priori knowledge and the ‘thing-in-itself’ is absolutely superfluous, for since he no-where breaks the continuity of nature, since he does not regard matter and mind as two fundamentally differentthings, but as two aspects of one and the same thing, hehas no need of any special artifices in order to bring the mindand the thing into conjunction. 
” * Further, Engels, as we have seen, rebuked Kant for being an agnostic, but not for deviating from consistent agnos-ticism. 
 Lafargue, Engels’ disciple, argued in 1900 againstthe Kantians (amongst whom at that time was CharlesRappoport) as follows: “... At the beginning of the nineteenth century our bour-*Albrecht Rau, Ludwig Feuerbachs Philosophie , die Naturfor-schung und die philosophische Kritik der Gegenwart , Leipzig, 1882, S. 
 87-89. 
 geoisie, having completed its task of revolutionary de-struction, began to repudiate its Voltairean and free-thinking philosophy. 
 Catholicism, which the master decorator Cha-teaubriand painted in romantic colours ( peinturlurait ), was restored to fashion, and Sebastian Mercier imported theidealism of Kant in order to give the coup de grâce to the materialism of the Encyclopaedists, the propagandists ofwhich had been guillotined by Robespierre. 
 “At the end of the nineteenth century, which will go down in history as the bourgeois century, the intellectuals attempt-ed to crush the materialism of Marx and Engels beneaththe philosophy of Kant. 
 The reactionary movement start-ed in Germany—without offence to the socialist integral-istes who would like to ascribe the honour to their chief, Malon. 
 But Malon himself had been to the school of Höch-berg, Bernstein and the other disciples of Dühring, who werereforming Marxism in Zurich. 
 [Lafargue is referring to theideological movement in German socialism in the later sev-enties. 
 68] It is to be expected that Jaurès, Fournière and our intellectuals will also treat us to Kant as soon as they have mastered his terminology.... 
 Rappoport is mistaken when he assures us that for Marx the ‘ideal and the real areidentical’. 
 In the first place we never employ such metaphys-ical phraseology. 
 An idea is as real as the object of whichit is the reflection in the brain.... 
 To provide a little recrea-tion for the comrades who have to acquaint themselves with bourgeois philosophy, I shall explain the substance of this famous problem which has so much exercised spi-ritualist minds. 
 “The workingman who eats sausage and receives a hundred sous a day knows very well that he is robbed by the employerand is nourished by pork meat, that the employer is a rob-ber and that the sausage is pleasant to the taste and nourish-ing to the body. 
 Not at all, say the bourgeois sophists,whether they are called Pyrrho, Hume or Kant. 
 His opinionis personal, an entirely subjective opinion; he might withequal reason maintain that the employer is his benefactorand that the sausage consists of chopped leather, for he can-not know things-in-themselves . 
 “The question is not properly put, that is the whole trouble.... 
 In order to know an object, man must first verify whether his senses deceive him or not.... 
 The chemists have gone deeper—they have penetrated into bodies, they have analysed them, decomposed them into their elements, and then performed the reverse procedure, they have recomposedthem from their elements. 
 And from the moment that manis able to produce things for his own use from these elements,he may, as Engels says, assert that he knows the things-in-themselves . 
 The God of the Christians, if he existed and if he had created the world, could do no more. 
” * We have taken the liberty of making this long quotation in order to show how Lafargue understood Engels and howhe criticised Kant from the left, not for those aspects ofKantianism which distinguish it from Humism, but for thosewhich are common to both Kant and Hume; not for his assumption of the thing-in-itself, but for his inadequately materialist view of it. 
 And lastly, Karl Kautsky in his Ethics also criticises Kant from a standpoint diametrically opposed to that ofHumism and Berkeleianism. 
 “That I see green, red and white,”he writes, arguing against Kant’s epistemology, “is ground-ed in my faculty of sight. 
 But that green is something different from red testifies to something that lies outsideof me, to real differences between things.... 
 The relationsand differences between the things themselves revealed tome by the individual space and time concepts ... are realrelations and differences of the external world, not condi-tioned by the nature of my perceptive faculty.... 
 If this were really so [if Kant’s doctrine of the ideality of time andspace were true], we could know nothing about the worldoutside us, not even that it exists. 
” (Russian translation,pp. 
 33-34. 
) Thus the entire school of Feuerbach, Marx and Engels turned from Kant to the left, to a complete rejection of all idealism and of all agnosticism. 
 But our Machists followedthe reactionary trend in philosophy, Mach and Avenarius, who criticised Kant from the standpoint of Hume and Berke-ley. 
 Of course, it is the sacred right of every citizen, andparticularly of every intellectual, to follow any ideologi-*Paul Lafargue, “Le matérialisme de Marx et l’idéalisme de Kant”, Le Socialiste ,69 February 25, 1900. 
 cal reactionary he likes. 
 But when people who have radically severed relations with the very foundations of Marxism in philosophy begin to dodge, confuse matters, hedge and assure us that they “too” are Marxists in philosophy; thatthey are “almost” in agreement with Marx, and have onlyslightly “supplemented” him—the spectacle is a far frompleasant one. 
 2. 
 HOW THE “EMPIRIO -SYMBOLIST” YUSHKEVICH RIDICULED THE “EMPIRIO -CRITICIST” CHERNOV “It is, of course, amusing,” writes Mr. 
 P. 
 Yushkevich, “to see how Mr. 
 Chernov tries to make the agnostic posi-tivist-Comtean and Spencerian, Mikhailovsky, a forerunnerof Mach and Avenarius” (op. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 73). 
 First of all, what is amusing here is Mr. 
 Yushkevich’s astonishing ignorance. 
 Like all Voroshilovs, he concealsthis ignorance under a display of erudite words and names. 
 The passage quoted is from a paragraph devoted to the rela-tion between Machism and Marxism. 
 And although he under-takes to treat of this subject, Mr. 
 Yushkevich does not knowthat for Engels (as for every materialist) the adherents ofthe Humean line and the adherents of the Kantian line areequally agnostics. 
 Therefore, to contrast agnosticism gener-ally with Machism, when even Mach himself confesses to being a follower of Hume, is simply to prove oneself anignoramus in philosophy. 
 The phrase “agnostic positivism”is also absurd, for the adherents of Hume in fact call them-selves positivists. 
 Mr. 
 Yushkevich; who has taken Petzoldtas his teacher, should have known that Petzoldt definitely regards empirio-criticism as positivism. 
 And finally, to drag in the names of Auguste Comte and Herbert Spenceris again absurd, for Marxism rejects not what distinguishesone positivist from another, but what they have in commonand what makes a philosopher a positivist instead of a ma-terialist. 
 Our Voroshilov needed this display of words so as to “mes-merise” his reader, to stun him with resounding words,to distract his attention from the essence of the matter t o empty trifles. 
 And the essence of the matter is the radicaldifference between materialism and the broad current ofpositivism, which includes Auguste Comte, Herbert Spen-cer, Mikhailovsky, a number of neo-Kantians, and Mach and Avenarius. 
 The essence of the matter has been very ac-curately expressed by Engels in his Ludwig Feuerbach , where he places all the Kantians and Humeans of that period (i. 
e. 
 the eighties of the last century) in the camp of wretchedeclectics, pettifoggers ( Flohknacker : literally, flea-crackers) and so on. 
 70 To whom this characterisation can and must apply is a question on which our Voroshilovs did not wish to reflect. 
 And since they are incapable of reflecting, we shall cite one illuminating comparison. 
 Engels, speaking bothin 1888 and 1892 of the Kantians and Humeans in general,mentions no names. 
 71 The only reference Engels makes to a book is his reference to the work of Starcke on Feuerbach,which Engels analysed. 
 “Starcke,” says Engels, “takes great pains to defend Feuerbach against the attacks and doctrines of the vociferous lecturers who today go by the name ofphilosophers in Germany. 
 For people who are interested inthis afterbirth of German classical philosophy this is a mat-ter of importance; for Starcke himself it may have appearednecessary. 
 We, however, will spare the reader this ” (Lud-wig Feuerbach , S. 
 25). 
 72 Engels wanted to “spare the reader”, that is, to save the Social-Democrats from a pleasant acquaintance with thedegenerate chatterboxes who call themselves philosophers. 
And who are the representatives of this “afterbirth”? We open Starcke’s book (C. 
 N. 
 Starcke, Ludwig Feuer-bach , Stuttgart, 1885), and find constant references to the adherents of Hume and Kant . 
 Starcke dissociates Feuerbach from these two trends. 
 Starcke quotes in this connectionA. 
 Riehl , Windelband and A. 
 Lange (pp. 
 3, 18-19, 127 et seq. 
, in Starcke). 
 We open Avenarius’ The Human Concept of the World , which appeared in 1891, and on page 120 of the first German edition we read: “The final result of our analysis concurs—although not absolutely ( durchgehend ), depending on the various points of view—with that reached by other investi-gators, for example, E. 
 Laas , E. 
 Mach , A. 
 Riehl , W. 
 Wundt . 
 See also Schopenhauer . 
” Whom was our Voroshilov-Yushkevich jeering at? Avenarius has not the slightest doubt as to his kinship in principle—not in regard to any particular question, but in regard to the “final result” of empirio-criticism—with the Kantians Riehl and Laas and with the idealist Wundt. 
 He mentions Mach between the two Kantians. 
 And, indeed, are they not all one company, since Riehl and Laas purifiedKant à la Hume, and Mach and Avenarius purified Hume à la Berkeley? Is it surprising that Engels wished to “spare” the German workers, to save them from a close acquaintance with this whole company of “flea-cracking” university lecturers? Engels could spare the German workers, but the Voroshi-lovs do not spare the Russian reader. 
 It should be noted that an essentially eclectic combina-tion of Kant and Hume, or Hume and Berkeley, is possi-ble, so to speak, in varying proportions, by laying principal stress now on one, now on another element of the mixture. 
 We saw above, for instance, that only one Machist, H. 
 Klein-peter, openly admits that he and Mach are solipsists (i. 
e. 
,consistent Berkeleians). 
 On the other hand, the Humeantrend in the views of Mach and Avenarius is emphasised bymany of their disciples and followers: Petzoldt, Willy, Pear-son, the Russian empirio-criticist Lesevich, the Frenchman Henri Delacroix, * and others. 
 We shall cite one example—an especially eminent scientist who in philosophy also combinedHume with Berkeley, but who emphasised the materialistelements of this mixture. 
 He is T. 
 H. 
 Huxley, the famousEnglish scientist, who gave currency to the term “agnostic” and whom Engels undoubtedly had chiefly and primarily in mind when he spoke of English agnosticism. 
 Engels in 1892called this type of agnostics “shamefaced materialists”. 
 73 James Ward, the English spiritualist, in his book Natural-ism and Agnosticism , in which he chiefly attacks the “scien-tific champion of agnosticism”, Huxley (Vol. 
 II, p. 
 229), bears out Engels’ opinion when he says: “In Huxley’s case indeed the leaning towards the primacy of the physical side[“series of elements” Mach calls it] is often so pronouncedthat it can hardly be called parallelism at all. 
 In spite *Bibliothèque du congrès international de la philosophie , Vol. 
 IV. 
 Henri Delacroix, David Hume et la philosophie critique . 
 Among the followers of Hume the author includes Avenarius and the Immanent-ists in Germany, Ch. 
 Renouvier and his school (the “neo-criticists”)in France. 
 of his vehement repudiation of the title of materialist as an affront to his untarnished agnosticism, I know of few recent writers who on occasion better deserve the title” (Vol. 
 II, pp. 
 30-31). 
 And James Ward quotes the followingstatements by Huxley in confirmation of his opinion: “‘Any-one who is acquainted with the history of science will admit,that its progress has, in all ages, meant, and now more thanever means, the extension of the province of what we call matter and causation, and the concomitant gradual banish-ment from all regions of human thought of what we callspirit and spontaneity. 
’” Or: “‘It is in itself of littlemoment whether we express the phenomena of matter interms of spirit, or the phenomena of spirit in terms of mat-ter—each statement has a certain relative truth [“relatively stable complexes of elements,” according to Mach]. 
 But with a view to the progress of science, the materialistic ter-minology is in every way to be preferred. 
 For it connectsthought with the other phenomena of the universe ... whereasthe alternative, or spiritualistic, terminology is utterlybarren, and leads to nothing but obscurity and confusion of ideas.... 
 Thus there can be little doubt that the further science advances, the more extensively and consistentlywill all the phenomena of Nature be represented by materi-alistic formulae and symbols’” (Vol. 
 I, pp. 
 17-19). 
 So argued the “shamefaced materialist” Huxley, who re-fused to accept materialism, regarding it as “metaphysics” that illegitimately goes beyond “groups of sensations”. 
 And this same Huxley wrote: “‘If I were obliged to choosebetween absolute materialism and absolute idealism I shouldfeel compelled to accept the latter alternative.... 
 Our onecertainty is the existence of the mental world’” (J. 
 Ward,Vol. 
 II, p. 
 216). 
 Huxley’s philosophy is as much a mixture of Hume and Berkeley as is Mach’s philosophy. 
 But in Huxley’s case theBerkeleian streaks are incidental, and agnosticism servesas a fig-leaf for materialism. 
 With Mach the “colouring”of the mixture is a different one, and Ward, the spiritualist,while fiercely combating Huxley, pats Avenarius and Mach affectionately on the back. 
 3. 
 THE IMMANENTISTS AS COMRADES -IN-ARMS OF MACH AND AVENARIUS In speaking of empirio-criticism we could not avoid re-peatedly mentioning the philosophers of the so-called imma-nentist school, the principal representatives of which areSchuppe, Leclair, Rehmke, and Schubert-Soldern. 
 It is nownecessary to examine the relation of empirio-criticism tothe immanentists and the nature of the philosophy preached by the latter. 
 In 1902 Mach wrote: “... Today I see that a host of philos-ophers—positivists, empirio-criticists, adherents of theimmanentist philosophy—as well as a very few naturalscientists, have all, without knowing anything of each other,entered on new paths which, in spite of their individual differences, converge almost towards one point” ( Analysis of Sensations , p. 
 9). 
 Here we must first note Mach’s unusual-ly frank admission that very few natural scientists are fol-lowers of the supposedly “new”, but in truth very old, Hu-mean-Berkeleian philosophy. 
 Secondly, extremely impor-tant is Mach’s opinion that this “new” philosophy is a broad current in which the immanentists are on the same footing as the empirio-criticists and the positivists. 
 “Thus”—repeatsMach in the introduction to the Russian translation of theAnalysis of Sensations (1906)—“there begins to be a com-mon movement...” (p. 
 4). 
 “My position [Mach says in anoth-er place] is very close to that of the representatives of the immanentist philosophy as well.... 
 I found hardly anything in this book [i. 
e. 
, Schuppe, Grundriss der Erkenntnistheo-rie und Logik ] with which, with perhaps a slight modifica-tion, I would not gladly agree” (46). 
 Mach considers thatSchubert-Soldern is also “following very close paths” (4),and as to Wilhelm Schuppe, Mach even dedicates to him his latest work, the summary so to speak of his philosophical labours, Knowledge and Error . 
 Avenarius, the other founder of empirio-criticism, wrote in 1894 that he was “gladdened” and “encouraged” by Schuppe’ssympathy for empirio-criticism, and that the “differences”between him and Schuppe “exist, perhaps, only tempo-rarily” ( vielleicht nur einstweilen noch bestehend ). 
 * And, *Vierteljahrsschrift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie , 1894, 18. 
 Jahrg. 
, Heft I, S. 
 29. 
 finally, J. 
 Petzoldt, whose teachings Lesevich regards as the last word in empirio-criticism, openly acclaims the trio — Schuppe, Mach and Avenarius— as the leaders of the “new ” trend (Einführung in die Philosophie der reinen Erfahrung , Bd. 
 II, 1904, S. 
 295; Das Weltproblem , 1906, S. 
 v und 146). 
 On this point Petzoldt is definitely opposed to Willy ( Ein-führung in die Philosophie der reinen Erfahrung , II, 321), probably the only outstanding Machist who felt ashamed of such a kinship as Schuppe’s and who tried to dissociate himself from him fundamentally, for which this disciplewas reprimanded by his beloved teacher Avenarius. 
 Avena-rius wrote the above-quoted words about Schuppe in acomment on Willy’s article against Schuppe, adding thatWilly’s criticism perhaps “was put more strongly than was really necessary” ( Vierteljahrsschrift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie , 18. 
 Jahrg. 
, 1894, S. 
 29; which also contains Willy’s article against Schuppe). 
 Having acquainted ourselves with the empirio-criticists’ appraisal of the immanentists, let us examine the immanent-ists’ appraisal of the empirio-criticists. 
 We have already mentioned the opinion uttered by Leclair in 1879. 
 Schubert-Soldern in 1882 explicitly expressed his “agreement” “inpart with the elder Fichte” (i. 
e. 
, the distinguished repre-sentative of subjective idealism, Johann Gottlieb Fichte,whose son was as inept in philosophy as was the son of Jo-seph Dietzgen), and “with Schuppe, Leclair, Avenarius and partly with Rehmke”, while Mach (Erhaltung der Arbeit ) is cited with particular gusto in opposition to “natural-histor-ical metaphysics” *—the term given to natural-histori-cal materialism by all the reactionary university lecturersand professors in Germany. 
 In 1893, after the appearanceof Avenarius’ The Human Concept of the World , W. 
 Schuppe hailed this work in An Open Letter to Professor Avenarius as a “confirmation of the naïve realism” which he (Schuppe)himself advocated. 
 “My conception of thought,” Schuppewrote, “excellently harmonises with your [Avenarius’] pure *Dr. 
 Richard von Schubert-Soldern, Ueber Transcendenz des Ob-jekts und Subjekts , 1882, S. 
 37 and §5. 
 Cf. 
 also his Grundlagen einer Erkenntnistheorie , 1884, S. 
 3. 
 experience. 
” * Then, in 1896, Schubert-Soldern, summaris-ing the “methodological trend in philosophy” on which he “bases himself”, traces his genealogy from Berkeley and Hume down through F. 
 A. 
 Lange (“the real beginning of our trend in Germany dates from Lange”), and then throughLaas, Schuppe and Co. 
, Avenarius and Mach , Riehl (among the neo-Kantians), Ch. 
 Renouvier (among the Frenchmen),etc. 
 ** Finally, in their programmatic “Introduction” printed in the first issue of the philosophical organ of the immanent-ists, alongside a declaration of war on materialism and anexpression of sympathy with Charles Renouvier, we read:“Even in the camp of the natural scientists themselves voicesof individual thinkers are being raised preaching againstthe growing arrogance of their colleagues, against the un-philosophical spirit which has taken possession of the natural sciences. 
 Thus the physicist Mach.... 
 On all hands fresh forcesare stirring and are working to destroy the blind faithin the infallibility of the natural sciences, and once againpeople are beginning to seek for other paths into the profun-dities of the mysterious, a better entrance to the house of truth. 
” *** A word or two about Ch. 
 Renouvier. 
 He is the head of the influential and widespread school in France known asthe neo-criticists. 
 His theoretical philosophy is a combina-tion of the phenomenalism of Hume and the apriorism ofKant. 
 The thing-in-itself is absolutely rejected. 
 The connec-tion of phenomena, order and law is declared to be a priori ; law is written with a capital letter and is converted intothe basis of religion. 
 The Catholic priests go into rapturesover this philosophy. 
 The Machist Willy scornfully refersto Renouvier as a “second apostle Paul”, as “an obscurantistof the first water” and as a “casuistic preacher of free will” (Gegen die Schulweisheit , S. 
 129). 
 And it is such co-thinkers of the immanentists who warmly greet Mach’s philosophy. 
 When his Mechanics appeared in a French translation, the *Vierteljahrsschrift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie , 17. 
 Jahrg. 
, 1893, S. 
 384. 
 **Dr. 
 Richard von Schubert-Soldern, Das menschliche Glück und die soziale Frage , 1896, S. 
 v, vi. 
 ***Zeitschrift für immanente Philosophie ,74 Bd. 
 I, Berlin, 1896, S. 
 6, 9. 
 organ of the neo-criticists— L’Année philosophique75—edited by Pillon, a collaborator and disciple of Renouvier, wrote: “It is unnecessary to speak of the extent to which, in this criticism of substance, the thing, the thing-in-itself, Mach’spositive science agrees with neo-critical idealism” (Vol. 
 XV,1904, p. 
 179). 
 As for the Russian Machists, they are all ashamed of their kinship with the immanentists, and one of course could not expect anything else of people who did not deliberately adopt the path of Struve, Menshikov, and the like. 
 Bazarovalone refers to “certain representatives of the immanentistschool” as “realists”. 
 * Bogdanov briefly ( and in fact false-ly) declares that “the immanentist school is only an inter-mediate form between Kantianism and empirio-criticism” (Empirio-monism , Bk. 
 III, p. 
 xxii). 
 V. 
 Chernov writes: “Generally speaking, the immanentists approach positivismin only one aspect of their theory, in other aspects they gofar beyond it” ( Philosophical and Sociological Studies , 37). 
 Valentinov says that “the immanentist school clothed these[Machist] ideas in an unsuitable form and found itself in the blind alley of solipsism” (op. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 149). 
 As you see, you pay your money and take your choice: constitution andsalmon mayonnaise, realism and solipsism. 
 Our Machistsare afraid to tell the plain and clear truth about the imma-nentists. 
 The fact is that the immanentists are rank reactionaries, open advocates of fideism, unadulterated in their obscurant-ism. 
 There is not one of them who has not frankly made his more theoretical works on epistemology lead to a defenceof religion and a justification of medievalism of one kindor another. 
 Leclair, in 1879, advocated his philosophy asone that satisfies “all the needs of a religiously inclined mind” (Der Realismus , etc. 
, S. 
 73). 
 J. 
 Rehmke, in 1880, dedicated his “theory of knowledge” to the Protestant pastor Bieder-mann and closed his book by preaching not a supersensibleGod, but God as a “real concept” (it was for this reason, pre-*“Realist” in modern philosophy—certain representatives of the immanentist school which has arisen from Kantianism, the school ofMach-Avenarius, and many other kindred movements—find that thereare absolutely no grounds for rejecting the basis of naïve realism”( Studies , etc. 
, p. 
 26). 
 sumably, that Bazarov ranked “certain” immanentists among the “realists”?), and moreover the “objectivisation of this real concept is left to practical life”, while Biedermann’s “Christian dogmatism” is declared to be a model of “scien-tific theology” (J. 
 Rehmke, Die Welt als Wahrnehmung und Begriff , Berlin, 1880, S. 
 312). 
 Schuppe in the Zeitschrift für immanente Philosophie assures us that though the imma-nentists deny the transcendental, God and the future life do not come under this concept ( Zeitschrift für immanente Philosophie , II. 
 Band, S. 
 52). 
 In his Ethics he insists on the “connection of the moral law ... with a metaphysical worldconception” and condemns the separation of the church fromthe state as a “senseless phrase” (Dr. 
 Wilhelm Schuppe,Grundzüge der Ethik und Rechtsphilosophie , Breslau, 1881, S. 
 181, 325). 
 Schubert-Soldern in his Foundations of the Theory of Cognition * deduces both the pre-existence of the self before the body and the after-existence of the self after the body, i. 
e. 
, the immortality of the soul (op. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 82),etc. 
 In his Social Question ,** arguing against Bebel, he de-fends, together with “social reforms”, suffrage based on so-cial-estates, and says that the “Social-Democrats ignore the fact that without the divine gift of unhappiness there couldbe no happiness” (S. 
 330), and moreover laments the factthat materialism “prevails” (S. 
 242): “he who in our time be-lieves in a life beyond, or even in its possibility, is consid-ered a fool” (ibid. 
). 
 And German Menshikovs like these, no less obscurantists of the first water than Renouvier, live in lasting concubin-age with the empirio-criticists. 
 Their theoretical kinshipis incontestable. 
 There is no more Kantianism in the imma-nentists than in Petzoldt or Pearson. 
 We saw above thatthey themselves regard themselves as disciples of Hume and Berkeley, an opinion of the immanentists that is generally recognised in philosophical literature. 
 In order to show clear-ly what epistemological premises these comrades-in-armsof Mach and Avenarius proceed from, we shall quote somefundamental theoretical propositions from the works of theimmanentists. 
 *Schubert-Soldern, Grundlagen einer Erkenntnistheorie . 
—Ed. 
 **Die soziale Frage . 
—Ed. 
 Leclair in 1879 had not yet invented the term “immanent” which really signifies “experiential”, “given in experience”, and which is just as spurious a label for concealing corrup-tion as the labels of the European bourgeois parties. 
 In hisfirst work, Leclair frankly and explicitly calls himself a“critical idealist ” (Der Realismus , etc. 
, S. 
 11, 21, 206, etc. 
). 
 In this work he criticises Kant, as we have already seen,for his concessions to materialism, and clearly indicates his own path away from Kant to Fichte and Berkeley. 
 Le-clair fights materialism in general and the tendency towards materialism displayed by the majority of natural scientistsin particular as mercilessly as Schuppe, Schubert-Soldernand Rehmke. 
 “If we return,” Leclair says, “to the standpoint of critical idealism, if we do not attribute a transcendental existence [i. 
e. 
, an existence outside human consciousness] to natureand the processes of nature, then for the subject theaggregate of bodies and his own body, insofar ashe can see and feel it, together with all its changes,will be a directly given phenomenon of spatially con-nected coexistences and successions in time, and the whole explanation of nature will reduce itself tostating the laws of these coexistences and successions”(21). 
 Back to Kant!—said the reactionary neo-Kantians. 
 Back to Fichte and Berkeley!—is essentially what the reactionary immanentists are saying. 
 For Leclair, all that exists con-sists of “ complexes of sensations ” (S. 
 38), while certain classes of properties ( Eigenschaften ), which act upon our sense-organs, he designates, for example, by the letter M, and otherclasses, which act upon other objects of nature, by the let-ter N (S. 
 150, etc. 
). 
 Moreover, Leclair speaks of nature as a “phenomenon of the consciousness” ( Bewusstseinsphäno-men ) not of a single person, but of “mankind” (S. 
 55-56). 
 If we remember that Leclair published his book in Prague,where Mach was professor of physics, and that Leclair citeswith rapture only Mach’s Erhaltung der Arbeit , which ap-peared in 1872, the question involuntarily arises: ought we not to regard the advocate of fideism and frank idealist Leclair as the true progenitor of the “original” philosophy ofMach. 
 As for Schuppe, who, according to Leclair, * arrived at the “same results”, he, as we have seen, really claims to defend “naïve realism”, and in his Open Letter to Professor Avenarius bitterly complains of the “current distortion of my [Schuppe’s] theory of knowledge into subjective ideal-ism”. 
 The true nature of the crude forgery which the imma-nentist Schuppe calls a defence of realism is quite clearfrom his rejoinder to Wundt, who did not hesitate to class the immanentists with the Fichteans, the subjective ideal-ists ( Philosophische Studien , loc. 
 cit. 
, S. 
 386, 397, 407). 
 “With me,” Schuppe retorts to Wundt, “the proposition ‘being is consciousness’ means that consciousness withoutthe external world is inconceivable, that the latter belongsto the former, i. 
e. 
, the absolute connection ( Zusammenge-hörigkeit ) of the one with the other, which I have so often asserted and explained and in which the two constitute theprimary whole of being. 
” ** One must be extremely naïve not to discern pure subjec-tive idealism in such “realism”! Just think: the externalworld “belongs to consciousness” and is in absolute connec-tion with it! The poor professor was indeed slandered by the “current” practice of ranking him with the subjective ideal-ists! Such a philosophy completely coincides with Avena-rius’ “principal co-ordination”; no reservations and protestson the part of Chernov and Valentinov can sunder them;both philosophies will be consigned together to the museum of reactionary fabrications of German professordom. 
 As a curiosity once more testifying to Valentinov’s lack of judge-ment, let us note that he calls Schuppe a solipsist (it goeswithout saying that Schuppe vowed and swore that he wasnot a solipsist—and wrote special articles to this effect—justas vehemently as did Mach, Petzoldt and Co. 
), yet is highly delighted with Bazarov’s article in the Studies ! I should like to translate into German Bazarov’s dictum that “sense-perception is the reality existing outside us” and forward it to some more or less intelligent immanentist. 
 He wouldembrace and kiss Bazarov as heartily as the Schuppes, Le-*Beiträge zu einer monistischen Erkenntnistheorie , Breslau, 1882, S. 
 10. 
 **Wilhelm Schuppe, “Die immanente Philosophie und Wilhelm Wundt”, Zeitschrift für immanente Philosophie , Band II, S. 
 195. 
 clairs and Schubert-Solderns embraced Mach and Avenarius. 
 For Bazarov’s dictum is the alpha and omega of the doc-trines of the immanentist school. 
 And here, lastly, is Schubert-Soldern. 
 “The materialism of natural science”, the “metaphysics” of recognising theobjective reality of the external world, is the chief enemyof this philosopher ( Grundlagen einer Erkenntnistheorie , 1884, p. 
 31 and the whole of Chapter II: “The Metaphysics of Natural Science”). 
 “Natural science abstracts from all relations of consciousness” (S. 
 52)—that is the chief evil(and that is just what constitutes materialism!). 
 For theindividual cannot escape from “sensations and, hence, froma state of consciousness” (S. 
 33-34). 
 Of course, Schubert-Soldern admitted in 1896, my standpoint is epistemological solipsism (Die soziale Frage , S. 
 x), but not “metaphysical”, not “practical” solipsism. 
 “What is given us immediatelyis sensations, complexes of constantly changing sensations”(Ueber Transcendenz des Objekts und Subjekts , S. 
 73). 
 “Marx took the material process of production,” says Schu-bert-Soldern, “as the cause of inner processes and motives, in the same way (and just as falsely) as natural science re-gards the common [to humanity] external world as the causeof the individual inner worlds” ( Die soziale Frage , S. 
 xviii). 
 That Marx’s historical materialism is connected with nat-ural-scientific materialism and philosophical materialismin general, it does not even occur to this comrade-in-arms of Mach to doubt. 
 “Many, perhaps the majority, will be of the opinion that from the standpoint of epistemological solipsism no meta-physics is possible, i. 
e. 
, that metaphysics is always trans-cendental. 
 Upon more mature reflection I cannot concurwith this opinion. 
 Here are my reasons.... 
 The immediate foundation of all that is given is the spiritual (solipsist) connection, the central point of which is the individualself (the individual realm of thought) with its body. 
 The rest of the world is inconceivable without this self, just as this self is inconceivable without the rest of the world With the destruction of the individual self the world is also annihilated, which appears impossible—and with the de-struction of the rest of the world, nothing remains for my indi-vidual self, for the latter can be separated from the world only conceptually, but not in time and space. 
 Therefore my individual self must continue to exist after my death also, if the entire world is not to be annihilated with it...” (ibid. 
, p. 
 xxiii). 
 The “principal co-ordination”, “complexes of sensations” and the rest of the Machist banalities render faithful serviceto the proper people! “... What is the hereafter ( das Jenseits ) from the solipsist point of view? It is only a possible future experience for me...” (ibid. 
). 
 “Spiritualism ... would be obliged to provethe existence of the Jenseits . 
 But at any rate the material-ism of natural science cannot be brought into the field againstspiritualism, for this materialism, as we have seen, isonly one aspect of the world process within the all-embracing spiritual connection” ( =the “principal co-ordination”) (S. 
 xxiv). 
 All this is said in that same philosophical introduction to the Social Question (1896) in which Schubert-Soldern all the time appears arm in arm with Mach and Avenarius. 
 Only among the handful of Russian Machists does Machism serve exclusively for intellectualist chattering. 
 In its native country its role as a flunkey to fideism is openly proclaimed! 4. 
 IN WHAT DIRECTION IS EMPIRIO -CRITICISM DEVELOPING? Let us now cast a glance at the development of Machism after Mach and Avenarius. 
 We have seen that their philoso-phy is a hash, a pot-pourri of contradictory and disconnect-ed epistemological propositions. 
 We must now examinehow and whither, i. 
e. 
, in what direction, this philosophyis developing, for this will help us to settle certain “dispu-table” questions by referring to indisputable historical facts. 
 And indeed, in view of the eclecticism and incoherence of the initial philosophical premises of the trend we are examin-ing, varying interpretations of it and sterile disputes overparticulars and trifles are absolutely inevitable. 
 But empi-rio-criticism, like every ideological current, is a living thing,which grows and develops, and the fact that it is growing in one direction or another will help us more than long ar-guments to settle the basic question as to what the real es-sence of this philosophy is. 
 We judge a person not by what he says or thinks of himself but by his actions. 
 And we must judge philosophers not by the labels they give themselves (“positivism”, the philosophy of “pure experience”, “monism” or “empirio-monism”, the “philosophy of naturalscience”, etc. 
) but by how they actually settle fundamentaltheoretical questions, by their associates, by what they areteaching and by what they have taught their disciples andfollowers. 
 It is this last question that interests us now. 
 Everything essential was said by Mach and Avenarius more than twentyyears ago. 
 It was bound to become clear in the intervalhow these “leaders” were understood by those who wanted to understand them, and whom they themselves (at leastMach, who has outlived his colleague) regard as their suc-cessors. 
 To be specific, let us take those who themselves claim to be disciples of Mach and Avenarius (or to be theiradherents) and whom Mach himself ranks as such. 
 We shallthus obtain a picture of empirio-criticism as a philosophicalcurrent , and not as a collection of literary oddities. 
 In Mach’s Introduction to the Russian translation of the Analysis of Sensations , Hans Cornelius is recommended as a “young investigator” who is following “if not quite thesame, at least very close paths” (p. 
 4). 
 In the text of theAnalysis of Sensations Mach once again “mentions with pleas-ure the works” of Cornelius and others, “who have disclosedthe kernel of Avenarius’ ideas and have developed them fur-ther” (p. 
 48). 
 Let us take Cornelius’ Introduction to the Philosophy * (German edition, 1903) and we find that its author also speaks of his endeavour to follow in the foot-steps of Mach and Avenarius (S. 
 viii, 32). 
 We have beforeus then a disciple acknowledged by the teacher . 
 This disciple also begins with sensation’s-elements (17, 24), categorically declares that he confines himself to experience (S. 
 vi), calls his views “consistent or epistemological empiricism” (335),emphatically condemns the “one-sidedness” of idealism andthe “dogmatism” of both the idealists and the materialists(S. 
 129), vehemently denies the possible “misconception”(123) that his philosophy implies recognition of the world as existing in the mind of man, flirts with naïve realism no *Cornelius, Einleitung in die Philosophie . 
—Ed. 
 less skilfully than Avenarius, Schuppe or Bazarov (“Every visual, as well as every other sense-perception, is located where we find it, and only where we find it, that is to say, where the naïve mind, untouched by a false philosophy, loc-alises it”—S. 
 125)—and this disciple, acknowledged assuch by his teacher, arrives at immortality and God . 
 Mate-rialism—thunders this police sergeant in a professorial chair,I beg your pardon, this disciple of the “recent positivists”— converts man into an automaton. 
 “It need hardly be said that together with the belief in the freedom of our decisionsit destroys all considerations of the moral value of our ac-tions and our responsibility for them. 
 Just as little room isleft for the idea of the continuation of our life after death”(S. 
 116). 
 The final note of the book is: Education (of the youth stultified by this man of science, presumably) is neces-sary not only for action but “above all ... to inculcate vene-ration ( Ehrfurcht ) not for the transitory values of a fortuitous tradition, but for the imperishable values of duty and beauty,for the divine ( dem Göttlichen ) within us and outside us” (357). 
 Compare with this Bogdanov’s assertion that “there is absolutely no room ” (Bogdanov’s italics) and “there cannot be any room” for the idea of God, freedom of the will andimmortality of the soul in Mach’s philosophy in view of hisdenial of every “thing-in-itself” ( Analysis of Sensations , p. 
 xii). 
 While Mach in this same book (p. 
 293) declares that “there is no Machist philosophy”, and recommends not only the immanentists, but also Cornelius, who had disclosedthe kernel of Avenarius’ ideas! Thus, in the first place,Bogdanov absolutely does not know the “Machist philosophy” as a current which not only nestles under the wing of fideism,but which itself goes to the length of fideism. 
 In the sec-ond place, Bogdanov absolutely does not know the history of philosophy; for to associate a denial of the ideas mentionedabove with a denial of every kind of thing-in-itself is tomock at the history of philosophy. 
 Will Bogdanov take itinto his head to deny that all consistent followers of Hume,by rejecting every kind of thing-in-itself, do leave room for these ideas? Has Bogdanov never heard of the subjective idealists, who reject every kind of thing-in-itself and there-by make room for these ideas? “There can be no room” for these ideas solely in a philosophy that teaches that nothing exists but perceptual being, that the world is matter in motion, that the external world, the physical world famil-iar to all, is the sole objective reality—i. 
e. 
, in the philos-ophy of materialism. 
 And it is for this, precisely for this,that materialism is combated by the immanentists recom-mended by Mach, by Mach’s disciple Cornelius, and bymodern professorial philosophy in general. 
 Our Machists began to repudiate Cornelius only after this indecency had been pointed out to them. 
 Such repudia-tions are not worth much. 
 Friedrich Adler evidently has notbeen “warned”, and therefore recommends this Corneliusin a socialist journal ( Der Kampf , 1908, 5, S. 
 235: “a work that is easy to read and highly to be commended”). 
 Through the medium of Machism, downright philosophical reaction-aries and preachers of fideism are palmed off on the workersas teachers! Petzoldt, without having been warned, detected the fal-sity in Cornelius: but his method of combating this falsityis a gem. 
 Listen to this: “To assert that the world is idea [as is asserted by the idealists—whom we are combating, no joke!] has sense only when it implies that it is the ideaof the predicator, or, if you like, of all predicators, i. 
e. 
,that its existence depends exclusively upon the thought ofthat individual or of those individuals; it exists only inas-much as he thinks about it, and what he does not think of does not exist. 
 We, on the contrary, make the world depend-ent not upon the thought of an individual or individuals,or, to put it better and clearer, not upon the act of thinking, or upon any actual thought, but—and exclusively in the logical sense—upon thought in general. 
 The idealist confusesone with the other, and the result is agnostic semi-solip-sism, as we observe it in Cornelius” ( Einführung , II, 317). 
 Stolypin denied the existence of the cabinets noirs ! 76 Pet-zoldt annihilates the idealists! It is astonishing only howmuch this annihilation of idealism resembles a recommen-dation to the idealists to exercise more skill in concealingtheir idealism. 
 To say that the world depends upon man’s thought is idealist falsity. 
 To say that the world depends upon thought in general is recent positivism, critical real-ism—in a word, thoroughgoing bourgeois charlatanism! If Cornelius is an agnostic semi-solipsist, Petzoldt is a solipsist semi-agnostic. 
 You are cracking a flea, gen-tlemen! Let us proceed. 
 In the second edition of his Knowledge and Error , Mach says: “A systematic exposition [of Mach’s views], one to which in all its essentials I can subscribe,is given by Professor Dr. 
 Hans Kleinpeter” ( Die Erkenntnis-theorie der Naturforschung der Gegenwart , Leipzig, 1905: The Theory of Knowledge of Modern Natural Science ). 
 Let us take Hans Number Two. 
 This professor is an accrediteddisseminator of Machism: a pile of articles on Mach’s viewsin philosophical journals, both in German and in English,translations of works recommended by Mach with intro-ductions by Mach—in a word, the right hand of the “teach-er”. 
 Here are his views: “... All my (outer and inner) expe-rience, all my thoughts and aspirations are given me as apsychical process, as a part of my consciousness” (op. 
 cit. 
,p. 
 18). 
 “That which we call physical is a construction ofpsychical elements” (144). 
 “ Subjective conviction, not objec-tive certainty (Gewisskeit ) is the only attainable goal of any science ” (9). 
 (The italics are Kleinpeter’s, who adds the fol-lowing remark: “Something similar was already said byKant in the Critique of Practical Reason . 
”) “The assump-tion that there are other minds is one which can never beconfirmed by experience” (42). 
 “I do not know ... whether,in general, there exist other selves outside of myself”(43). 
 In § 5, entitled “Activity (Spontaneity) in Consciousness”, we read that in an animal as an automaton the successionof ideas is purely mechanical. 
 The same is true of us when wedream. 
 “The quality of our consciousness in its normal stateessentially differs from this. 
 It possesses a property whichthese [the automata] entirely lack, and which it would be very difficult, to say the least, to explain mechanically or automatically: the so-called self-activity of the self. 
 Every person can dissever himself from his states of consciousness,he can manipulate them, can make them stand out moreclearly or force them into the background, can analyse them,compare various parts, etc. 
 All this is a fact of (immediate) experience. 
 Our self is therefore essentially different from the sum-total of the states of consciousness and cannot beput as equivalent to it. 
 Sugar consists of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen; were we to attribute a soul to it, then by anal-ogy it would have to possess the faculty of directing the movement of the hydrogen, oxygen and carbon particles at will” (29-30). 
 § 4 of the following chapter is headed: “TheAct of Cognition—an Act of Will ( Willenshandlung ). 
” “It must be regarded as definitely established that all mypsychical experiences are divisible into two large maingroups: compulsory acts and voluntary acts. 
 To the former belong all impressions of the external world” (47). 
 “That it is possible to advance several theories regarding one andthe same realm of facts ... is as well known to physicistsas it is incompatible with the premises of an absolute theoryof knowledge. 
 And this fact is also linked with the volition-al character of our thought; it also implies that our voli-tion is not bound by external circumstances” (50). 
 Now judge how bold Bogdanov was in asserting that in Mach’s philosophy “there is absolutely no room for freewill”, when Mach himself recommends such a person asKleinpeter! We have already seen that the latter does notattempt to conceal either his own idealism or Mach’s. 
 In 1898-99 Kleinpeter wrote: “Hertz proclaims the same sub-jectivist view [i. 
e. 
, as Mach] of the nature of our concepts.... 
If Mach and Hertz [with what justice Kleinpeter here im-plicates the famous physicist we shall soon see] deserve cred-it from the standpoint of idealism for having emphasisedthe subjective origin of all our concepts and of the connec-tions between them—and not only of certain individual ones —from the standpoint of empiricism they deserve no less cred-it for having acknowledged that experience alone, as acourt entirely independent of thought, can solve the ques-tion of their correctness” ( Archiv für systematische Philos-ophie , Bd. 
 V, 1898-99, S. 
 169-70). 
 In 1900 he wrote that in spite of all the points on which Mach differs from Kant and Berkeley, “they at any rate are more akin to him thanthe metaphysical empiricism prevailing in natural science[i. 
e. 
, materialism! The Herr professor avoids calling thedevil by name] which is indeed the main target of Mach’sattacks” (op. 
 cit. 
, Bd. 
 VI, S. 
 87). 
 In 1903 he wrote: “The starting-point of Berkeley and Mach is irrefutable.... 
 Mach completed what Kant began” ( Kantstudien , Bd. 
 VIII, 1903, S. 
 314, 274). 
 In the preface to the Russian translation of the Analysis of Sensations Mach also mentions T. 
 Ziehen, “who is follow-ing, if not the same, at least very close paths”. 
 We take Professor Theodor Ziehen’s book The Psychophysiological Theory of Knowledge (Psychophysiologische Erkenntnis-theorie , Jena, 1898) and find that the author refers to Mach, Avenarius, Schuppe, and so forth in the very introduction. 
Here therefore we again have a case of a disciple acknowl-edged by the teacher. 
 Ziehen’s “recent” theory is that only the “mob” is capable of believing that “real objects evokeour sensations” (S. 
 3), and that “over the portals of the the-ory of knowledge there can be no other inscription than thewords of Berkeley: ‘The external objects subsist not by them-selves, but exist in our mindst’” (S. 
 5). 
 “What is given us is sensations and ideas. 
 Both are embraced by the word psychi-cal. 
 Non-psychical is a word devoid of meaning” (S. 
 100). 
The laws of nature are relations not of material bodies but of“reduced sensations” (S. 
 104. 
 This “new” concept—“reducedsensations”—contains all that is original in Ziehen’s Berke-leianism!). 
 Petzoldt repudiated Ziehen as an idealist as far back as 1904 in the second volume of his Introduction (pp. 
 298-301). 
 By 1906 he had already included Cornelius, Kleinpeter,Ziehen and Verworn ( Das Weltproblem , etc. 
, S. 
 137, Fuss-note) in the list of idealists or psychomonists . 
 In the case of all these Herren professors, you see, there is a “misconception” in their interpretation “of the views of Mach and Avenarius” (ibid. 
). 
 Poor Mach and Avenarius! Not only were they slandered by their enemies for idealism and “even” (as Bogdanov ex-presses it) solipsism, but their very friends, disciples andfollowers, expert professors, also understood their teachers wrongly, in an idealist sense. 
 If empirio-criticism is develop-ing into idealism, that by no means demonstrates the radi-cal falsity of its muddled Berkeleian basic premises. 
 Godforbid! It is only a slight “misconception”, in the Nozdrev-Petzoldt 77 sense of the term. 
 The funniest thing of all perhaps is that Petzoldt himself, the guardian of purity and innocence, firstly, “supplemented” Mach and Avenarius with a “logical a priori ” and, secondly, coupled them with Wilhelm Schuppe, the vehicle of fideism. 
 Had Petzoldt been acquainted with Mach’s English adher-ents he would have had very considerably to extend the list of Machists who had lapsed (because of a “misconcep-tion”) into idealism. 
 We have already referred to Karl Pear-son, whom Mach praised, as an unadulterated idealist. 
 Hereare the opinions of two other “slanderers” who say the samething of Pearson: “Professor Pearson is merely echoing adoctrine first given clear utterance by the truly great Berkeley” (Howard V. 
 Knox, Mind , Vol. 
 VI, 1897, p. 
 205). 
 “There can be no doubt that Mr. 
 Pearson is an idealist inthe strictest sense of the word” (Georges Rodier, Revue philosophique , 78 1888, II, Vol. 
 26, p. 
 200). 
 The English idealist, William Clifford, whom Mach regards as “comingvery close” to his philosophy ( Analysis of Sensations , p. 
 8), must be considered a teacher rather than a disciple of Mach, for Clifford’s philosophical works appeared in the seventiesof the last century. 
 Here the “misconception” is due to Machhimself, who in 1901 “failed to notice” the idealism in Clif-ford’s doctrine that the world is “mind-stuff”, a “socialobject”, “highly-organised experience”, and so forth. 
 * For a characterisation of the charlatanism of the German Mach-ists, it is sufficient to note that Kleinpeter in 1905 elevatedthis idealist to the rank of founder of the “epistemologyof modern science”! On page 284 of the Analysis of Sensations , Mach men-tions the “kindred” (to Buddhism and Machism) American philosopher, Paul Carus. 
 Carus, who calls himself an “ad-mirer and personal friend” of Mach, edits in Chicago The Monist , a journal devoted to philosophy, and The Open Court ,79 a journal devoted to the propagation of religion. 
 “Science is divine revelation,” say the editors of this popularlittle journal, and they express the opinion that science can bring about a reform of the church that will retain “all that is true and good in religion”. 
 Mach is a regular contributorto The Monist and publishes in it individual chapters from his latest works. 
 Carus corrects Mach “ever so little” à la Kant, and declares that Mach “is an idealist or, as we would *William Kingdon Clifford, Lectures and Essays , 3rd ed. 
, London, 1901, Vol. 
 II, pp. 
 55, 65, 69: “On this point I agree entirely with Berke-ley and not with Mr. 
 Spencer” (p. 
 58), “The object, then, is a set ofchanges in my consciousness, and not anything out of it” (p. 
 52). 
 say, a subjectivist”. 
 “There are, no doubt, differences be-tween Mach’s views and mine”, although “I at once recog-nised in him a kindred spirit”. 
 * “Our monism,” says Carus, “is not materialistic, not spiritualistic, not agnostic; itmerely means consistency ... it takes experience as its basisand employs as method the systematic forms of the rela-tions of experience” (evidently a plagiarism from Bogda-nov’s Empirio-monism !). 
 Carus’ motto is: “Not agnosticism, but positive science, not mysticism, but clear thinking, not super-naturalism, not materialism, but a monistic view ofthe world, not a dogma, but religion, not creed, but faith. 
”And in conformity with this motto Carus preaches a “newtheology”, a “scientific theology”, or theonomy, which de-nies the literalness of the bible but insists that “all truth is divine and God reveals himself in science as he does in his-tory. 
” ** It should be remarked that Kleinpeter, in his book on the theory of knowledge of modern science already re-ferred to, recommends Carus, together with Ostwald, Ave-narius and the immanentists (S. 
 151-52). 
 When Haeckelissued his theses for a Monistic Alliance, Carus vigorously opposed him on the ground, firstly, that Haeckel wrongfully attempts to refute apriorism, which is “quite in keepingwith scientific philosophy”; secondly, that Haeckel’s doc-trine of determinism “excludes the possibility of free will”;thirdly, that Haeckel is mistaken “in emphasising the one-sided view of the naturalist against the traditional conserv-atism of the churches. 
 Thus he appears as an enemy to the existing churches instead of rejoicing at their higher develop-ment into a new and truer interpretation of their dogmas...”(ibid. 
, Vol. 
 XVI, 1906, p. 
 122). 
 Carus himself admits that“I appear reactionary to many free-thinkers who blame mefor not joining their chorus in denouncing all religion as superstition” (355). 
 It is quite evident that we have here a leader of a gang of American literary rascals who are engaged in doping thepeople with religious opium. 
 Mach and Kleinpeter joinedthis gang evidently as the result of a slight “misconception”. 
 *The Monist ,80 Vol. 
 XVI, 1906, July; P. 
 Carus, “Professor Mach’s Philosophy”, pp. 
 320, 345, 333. 
 The article is a reply to an article byKleinpeter which appeared in the same journal. 
 **Ibid. 
, Vol. 
 XIII, p. 
 24, et seq. 
, “Theology as a Science”, an arti-5. 
 A. 
 BOGDANOV’S “EMPIRIO -MONISM” “I personally,” writes Bogdanov of himself, “know so far of only one empirio-monist in literature—a certain A. 
Bogdanov. 
 But I know him very well and can answer for itthat his views fully accord with the sacramental formula ofthe primacy of nature over mind. 
 Namely, he regards allthat exists as a continuous chain of development, the lower links of which are lost in the chaos of elements, while the higher links, known to us, represent the experience of men [Bogdanov’s italics]—psychical and, still higher, physicalexperience. 
 This experience, and the knowledge arisingtherefrom, correspond to what is usually called mind”(Empirio-monism , III, xii). 
 What Bogdanov ridicules here as a “sacramental” formula is the well-known proposition of Engels, whom Bogdanov,however, diplomatically avoids mentioning! We do not dif-fer from Engels, oh, no! But let us examine more carefully Bogdanov’s own sum-mary of his famous “empirio-monism” and “substitution”. 
 The physical world is called the experience of men and it is declared that physical experience is “ higher ” in the chain of development than psychical. 
 But this is utter nonsense!And it is precisely the kind of nonsense that is characteris-tic of all idealist philosophies. 
 It is simply farcical forBogdanov to class this “system” as materialism. 
 With me, too, he says, nature is primary and mind secondary. 
 If En-gels’ definition is to be thus construed, then Hegel is alsoa materialist, for with him, too, psychical experience (un-der the title of the Absolute Idea) comes first, then follow,“higher”, the physical world, nature, and, lastly, humanknowledge, which through nature apprehends the Absolute Idea. 
 Not a single idealist will deny the primacy of nature taken in this sense, for it is not a genuine primacy, since infact nature is not taken as the immediately given, as the starting-point of epistemology. 
 Nature is in fact reached asthe result of a long transition, through abstractions of the “psychical”. 
 It is immaterial what these abstractions are called: whether Absolute Idea, Universal Self, World Will, and so on and so forth. 
 These terms distinguish the differ-ent varieties of idealism, and such varieties exist in countless numbers. 
 The essence of idealism is that the psychical is taken as the starting-point; from it external nature is de-duced, and only then is the ordinary human consciousness deduced from nature. 
 Hence, this primary “psychical” al-ways turns out to be a lifeless abstraction concealing a di-luted theology. 
 For instance, everybody knows what ahuman idea is; but an idea independent of man and prior to man, an idea in the abstract, an Absolute Idea, is a theolog-ical invention of the idealist Hegel. 
 Everybody knows what human sensation is; but sensation independent ofman, prior to man, is nonsense, a lifeless abstraction, anidealist artifice. 
 And it is precisely to such an idealisticartifice that Bogdanov resorts when he constructs the fol-lowing ladder. 
 1) The chaos of “elements” (we know that no other human concept than sensation is concealed behind the word “ele-ment”). 
 2) The psychical experience of men. 
3) The physical experience of men. 
4) “The knowledge arising therefrom. 
” There are no sensations (human) without man. 
 Hence the first rung of this ladder is a lifeless idealist abstrac-tion. 
 As a matter of fact, what we have here is not theusual human sensations familiar to all, but fictitious sen-sations, nobody ’s sensations, sensations in general , divine sensations—just as the ordinary human idea became divine with Hegel when it was divorced from man and man’s brain. 
 So away with the first rung!Away also with the second rung, for the psychical before the physical (and Bogdanov places the second rung before the third) is something unknown to man or science. 
 Thephysical world existed before the psychical could have ap-peared, for the latter is the highest product of the highest forms of organic matter. 
 Bogdanov’s second rung is also alifeless abstraction, it is thought without brain, humanreason divorced from man Only when we throw out the first two rungs, and only then, can we obtain a picture of the world that truly corre-sponds to natural science and materialism. 
 Namely: 1) the physical world exists independently of the mind of man and existed long prior to man, prior to any “human experience”; 2) the psychical, the mind, etc. 
, is the highest product of matter (i. 
e. 
, the physical), it is a function of that par-ticularly complex fragment of matter called the human brain. 
 “The realm of substitution,” writes Bogdanov, “coin-cides with the realm of physical phenomena; for the psy-chical phenomena we need substitute nothing, because theyare immediate complexes” (p. 
 xxxix). 
 And this precisely is idealism; for the psychical, i. 
e. 
, consciousness, idea, sensation, etc. 
, is taken as the imme-diate and the physical is deduced from it, substituted for it. 
 The world is the non-ego created by the ego, said Fichte. 
 The world is Absolute Idea, said Hegel. 
 The world is will,said Schopenhauer. 
 The world is concept and idea, says the immanentist Rehmke. 
 Being is consciousness, says the immanentist Schuppe. 
 The physical is a substitution forthe psychical, says Bogdanov. 
 One must be blind not to per-ceive the identical idealist essence under these various ver-bal cloaks. 
 “Let us ask ourselves the following question,” writes Bogdanov in Book I of Empirio-monism (pp. 
 128-29): “What is a ‘living being’, for instance, ‘man’?” And he an-swers: “‘Man’ is primarily a definite complex of ‘immediateexperiences’. 
 [Mark, “ primarily ”!] Then , in the further de-velopment of experience, ‘man’ becomes both for himselfand for others a physical body amidst other physical bodies. 
” Why, this is a sheer “complex” of absurdities, fit only for deducing the immortality of the soul, or the idea of God,and so forth. 
 Man is primarily a complex of immediate ex-periences and in the course of further development becomes a physical body! That means that there are “immediate ex-periences” without a physical body, prior to a physical body! What a pity that this magnificent philosophy has not yet found acceptance in our theological seminaries! There itsmerits would have been fully appreciated. 
 “...We have admitted that physical nature itself is a product [Bogdanov’s italics] of complexes of an immediate character (to which psychical co-ordinations also belong), that it is the reflection of such complexes in others, analog-ous to them, but of the most complex type (in the socially-organised experience of living beings)” (146). 
 A philosophy which teaches that physical nature itself is a product, is a philosophy of clericalism pure and simple. 
 And its character is in no wise altered by the fact that Bog-danov himself emphatically repudiates all religion. 
 Dühr-ing was also an atheist; he even proposed to prohibit re-ligion in his “socialitarian” order. 
 Nevertheless, Engels wasabsolutely right in pointing out that Dühring’s “system”could not be made to hang together without religion. 
 81 The same is true of Bogdanov, with the essential differencethat the quoted passage is not a chance inconsistency butthe very essence of his “empirio-monism” and of all his “sub-stitution”. 
 If nature is a product, it is obvious that it can bea product only of something that is greater, richer, broader,mightier than nature, of something that exists; for in order to “produce” nature, it must exist independently of nature. 
 That means that something exists outside nature, something which moreover produces nature. 
 In plain language this is called God. 
 The idealist philosophers have always sought tochange this latter name, to make it more abstract, morevague and at the same time (for the sake of plausibility) to bring it nearer to the “psychical”, as an “immediate com-plex”, as the immediately given which requires no proof. 
 Ab-solute Idea, Universal Spirit, World Will, “ general substitu-tion” of the psychical for the physical, are different formula-tions of one and the same idea. 
 Every man knows, and scienceinvestigates, idea, mind, will, the psychical, as a function of the normally operating human brain. 
 To divorce this function from matter organised in a definite way, to convertthis function into a universal, general abstraction, to “sub-stitute” this abstraction for the whole of physical nature,this is the raving of philosophical idealism and a mockeryof science. 
 Materialism says that the “socially-organised experience of living beings” is a product of physical nature, a resultof a long development of the latter, of development from astate of physical nature when no society, organisation, ex-perience, or living beings existed or could have existed. 
Idealism says that physical nature is a product of this ex-perience of living beings, and in saying this, idealism is equating (if not subordinating) nature to God. 
 For God isundoubtedly a product of the socially-organised experience of living beings. 
 No matter from what angle you look at it, Bogdanov’s philosophy contains nothing but a reactionary muddle. 
 Bogdanov thinks that to speak of the social organisation of experience is “cognitive socialism” (Bk. 
 III, p. 
 xxxiv). 
This is insane twaddle. 
 If socialism is thus regarded, theJesuits are ardent adherents of “cognitive socialism”, forthe starting-point of their epistemology is divinity as “so-cially-organised experience”. 
 And there can be no doubt that Catholicism is a socially-organised experience; only,it reflects not objective truth (which Bogdanov denies, butwhich science reflects), but the exploitation of the ignoranceof the masses by definite social classes. 
 But why speak of the Jesuits! We find Bogdanov’s “cog-nitive socialism” in its entirety among the immanentists, so beloved of Mach. 
 Leclair regards nature as the conscious-ness of “mankind” ( Der Realismus , etc. 
, S. 
 55), but not of the individual. 
 The bourgeois philosophers will serve youup any amount of such Fichtean cognitive socialism. 
 Schup-pe also emphasises das generische , das gattungsmässige Mo-ment des Bewusstseins (Vierteljahrsschrift für wissenschaft-liche Philosophie , Bd. 
 XVII, S. 
 379-80), i. 
e. 
, the general, the generic factor of consciousness. 
 To think that philosophi-cal idealism vanishes when the consciousness of mankind issubstituted for the consciousness of the individual, or thesocially-organised experience for the experience of one per-son, is like thinking that capitalism vanishes when one capitalist is replaced by a joint-stock company. 
 Our Russian Machists, Yushkevich and Valentinov, echo the materialist Rakhmetov in asserting that Bogdanov is anidealist (at the same time foully abusing Rakhmetov him-self). 
 But they were incapable of thinking where this ideal-ism came from. 
 They make out that Bogdanov is an indi-vidual and chance phenomenon, an isolated case. 
 This isnot true. 
 Bogdanov personally may think that he has in-vented an “original” system, but one has only to comparehim with the above-mentioned disciples of Mach to re-alise the falsity of such an opinion. 
 The difference between Bogdanov and Cornelius is far less than the difference be-tween Cornelius and Carus. 
 The difference between Bogdanovand Carus is less (as far as their philosophical systems are concerned, of course, and not the deliberateness of their reactionary implications) than the difference between Carus and Ziehen, and so on. 
 Bogdanov is only one of the mani-festations of that “socially-organised experience” which tes-tifies to the growth of Machism into idealism. 
 Bogdanov(we are here, of course, speaking exclusively of Bogdanov as a philosopher) could not have made his appearance had thedoctrines of his teacher Mach contained no “elements” ... of Berkeleianism. 
 And I cannot imagine a more “terrible vengeance” on Bogdanov than to have his Empirio-monism translated, say, into German and presented for review toLeclair and Schubert-Soldern, Cornelius and Kleinpeter,Carus and Pillon (the French collaborator and disciple ofRenouvier). 
 The compliments that would be paid by these outright comrades-in-arms and, at times, direct followers of Mach to the “substitution” would be more eloquent thantheir arguments. 
 However, it would scarcely be correct to regard Bogda-nov’s philosophy as a finished and static system. 
 In thenine years from 1899 to 1908, Bogdanov has gone through four stages in his philosophical peregrinations. 
 At the be-ginning he was a “natural-historical” materialist (i. 
e. 
,semi-unconsciously and instinctively faithful to the spiritof natural science). 
 His Fundamental Elements of the His-torical Outlook on Nature bears obvious traces of that stage. 
 The second stage was the “energetics” of Ostwald, which was so fashionable in the latter nineties, a muddled agnosticism which at times stumbled into idealism. 
 From Ostwald(the title-page of Ostwald’s Lectures on Natural Philosophy bears the inscription: “Dedicated to E. 
 Mach”) Bogdanovwent over to Mach, that is, he borrowed the fundamentalpremises of a subjective idealism that is as inconsistent and muddled as Mach’s entire philosophy. 
 The fourth stage is an attempt to eliminate some of the contradictions of Mach-ism, and to create a semblance of objective idealism. 
 “Thetheory of general substitution” shows that Bogdanov hasdescribed a curve of almost 180 ° from his starting position. 
 Is this stage of Bogdanov’s philosophy more remote or less remote from dialectical materialism than the previous stages? If Bogdanov remains in one place, then it is, of course,more remote. 
 If he keeps moving along the same curve in which he has been moving for the last nine years, it is less remote. 
 He now has only one serious step to make in order to return once more to materialism, namely, universally to discard his whole universal substitution. 
 For this universalsubstitution gathers into one Chinese pigtail all the trans-gressions of half-hearted idealism and all the weaknessesof consistent subjective idealism, just as ( si licet parva componere magnis! —if it is permissible to compare the great with the small) Hegel’s “Absolute Idea” gathered together all the contradictions of Kantian idealism and all the weak-nesses of Fichteanism. 
 Feuerbach had to make only one serious step in order to return to materialism, namely, uni-versally to discard, absolutely to eliminate, the AbsoluteIdea, that Hegelian “substitution-of the psychical” for phys-ical nature. 
 Feuerbach cut off the Chinese pigtail of philo-sophical idealism, in other words, he took nature as the basiswithout any “substitution” whatever. 
 We must wait and see whether the Chinese pigtail of Machist idealism will go on growing for much longer. 
 6. 
 THE “THEORY OF SYMBOLS” (OR HIEROGLYPHS) AND THE CRITICISM OF HELMHOLTZ As a supplement to what has been said above of the idealists as the comrades-in-arms and successors of empirio-criticism, it will be appropriate to dwell on the character of the Machist criticism of certain philosophical proposi-tions touched upon in our literature. 
 For instance, our Mach-ist would-be Marxists fastened with glee on Plekhanov’s“hieroglyphs”, that is, on the theory that man’s sensationsand ideas are not copies of real things and processes ofnature, not their images, but conventional signs, symbols, hieroglyphs, and so on. 
 82 Bazarov ridicules this hieroglyph-ic materialism; and, it should be stated, he would be right in doing so if he rejected hieroglyphic materialism in fa-vour of non-hieroglyphic materialism . 
 But Bazarov here again resorts to a sleight-of-hand and palms off his renun-ciation of materialism as a criticism of “hieroglyphism”. 
 Engels speaks neither of symbols nor of hieroglyphs, but of copies, photographs, images, mirror-reflections of things. 
Instead of pointing out the erroneousness of Plekhanov’s deviation from Engels’ formulation of materialism, Bazarov uses Plekhanov’s error in order to conceal Engels’ truth from the reader. 
 To make clear both Plekhanov’s error and Bazarov’s confusion we shall refer to an important advocate of the“theory of symbols” (calling a symbol a hieroglyph changesnothing), Helmholtz, and shall see how he was criticisedby the materialists and by the idealists in conjunction with the Machists. 
 Helmholtz, a scientist of the first magnitude, was as inconsistent in philosophy as are the great majority ofnatural scientists. 
 He tended toward Kantianism, but in hisepistemology he did not adhere consistently even to thisstandpoint. 
 Here for instance are same passages on the sub-ject of the correspondence of ideas and objects from his Phys-iological Optics *: “I have ... designated sensations as merely symbols for the relations of the external world and I have denied that they have any similarity or equivalence to whatthey represent” (French translation, p. 
 579; German original,p. 
 442). 
 This is agnosticism, but on the same page further on we read: “Our concepts and ideas are effects wrought on our nervous system and our consciousness by the objects thatare perceived and apprehended. 
” This is materialism. 
 ButHelmholtz is not clear as to the relation between absoluteand relative truth, as is evident from his subsequent remarks. 
For instance, a little further on he says: “I therefore think that there can be no possible meaning in speaking of the truth of our ideas save as a practical truth. 
 Our ideas of things cannot be anything but symbols, naturally given signs for things, which we learn to use in order to regulateour movements and actions. 
 When we have learned to readthese symbols rightly we are in a position with their aid to direct our actions so as to achieve the desired result.... 
” This is not correct. 
 Helmholtz here lapses into subjectivism,into a denial of objective reality and objective truth. 
 Andhe arrives at a flagrant untruth when he concludes the para-graph with the words: “An idea and the object it representsobviously belong to two entirely different worlds.... 
” Only the Kantians thus divorce idea from reality, consciousness *Helmholtz, Handbuch der physiologischen Optik . 
—Ed. 
 from nature. 
 However, a little further on we read: “As to the properties of the objects of the external world, a little reflection will show that all the properties we may attribute to them merely signify the effects wrought by them either on our senses or on other natural objects” (French ed. 
,p. 
 581; German original, p. 
 445; I translate from the French). 
Here again Helmholtz reverts to the materialist position. 
Helmholtz was an inconsistent Kantian, now recognising a priori laws of thought, now tending towards the “trans-cendental reality” of time and space (i. 
e. 
, to a materialistconception of them); now deriving human sensations fromexternal objects acting on our sense-organs, and now declar-ing sensations to be only symbols, i. 
e. 
, certain arbitrarysigns divorced from the “entirely different” world of the things signified (cf. 
 Victor Heyfelder, Ueber den Begriff der Erfahrung bei Helmholtz , Berlin, 1897). 
 In a speech delivered in 1878 on “Facts in Perception” (“a noteworthy pronouncement from the realistic camp”, asLeclair characterised this speech) Helmholtz expressed hisviews as follows: “Our sensations are indeed effects wrought by external causes in our organs, and the manner in which such effects manifest themselves, of course, depends veryessentially on the nature of the apparatus on which theseeffects are wrought. 
 Inasmuch as the quality of our sensationinforms us of the properties of the external action by whichthis sensation is produced, the latter can be regarded as its sign (Zeichen ), but not as its image . 
 For a certain resemblance to the object imaged is demanded of an image.... 
 But asign need not resemble that of which it is a sign...” ( Vor-träge und Reden , 1884, Bd. 
 II, S. 
 226). 
 If sensations are not images of things, but only signs or symbols which have “noresemblance” to them, then Helmholtz’s initial materialist premise is undermined; the existence of external objects becomes subject to doubt; for signs or symbols may quitepossibly indicate imaginary objects, and everybody is fa-miliar with instances of such signs or symbols. 
 Helmholtz, following Kant, attempts to draw something like an abso-lute boundary between the “phenomenon” and the “thing-in-itself”. 
 Helmholtz harbours an insuperable prejudice against straightforward, clear, and open materialism. 
 But a littlefurther on he himself says: “I do not see how one could re-fute a system even of the most extreme subjective idealism that chose to regard life as a dream. 
 One might declare it to be highly improbable and unsatisfactory—I myself would in this connection subscribe to the severest expressions ofrepudiation—yet it could be constructed consistently.... 
 Therealistic hypothesis, on the contrary, trusts the evidence(Aussage ) of ordinary self-observation, according to which the changes of perception that follow an action have no psy-chical connection with the preceding impulse of volition. 
 This hypothesis regards everything that seems to be sub-stantiated by our everyday perception, viz. 
, the materialworld outside of us, as existing independently of our ideas”(242-43). 
 “Undoubtedly, the realistic hypothesis is the sim-plest we can construct; it has been tested and verified in an extremely broad field of application; it is sharply defined in its several parts and, therefore, it is in the highest degreeuseful and fruitful as a basis of action” (243). 
 Helmholtz’sagnosticism also resembles “shamefaced materialism”, withcertain Kantian twists, in distinction to Huxley’s Berke-leian twists. 
 Albrecht Rau, a follower of Feuerbach, therefore vigor-ously criticises Helmholtz’s theory of symbols as an incon-sistent deviation from “realism”. 
 Helmholtz’s basic view,says Rau, is a realistic hypothesis, according to which “weapprehend the objective properties of things with the helpof our senses”. 
 * The theory of symbols cannot be reconciled with such a view (which, as we have seen, is wholly materi-alist), for it implies a certain distrust of perception, a dis-trust of the evidence of our sense-organs. 
 It is beyond doubtI that an image can never wholly compare with the model,but an image is one thing, a symbol, a conventional sign , another. 
 The image inevitably and of necessity implies the objective reality of that which it “images”. 
 “Conventional sign”, symbol, hieroglyph are concepts which introduce anentirely unnecessary element of agnosticism. 
 Albrecht Rau,therefore, is perfectly right in saying that Helmholtz’stheory of symbols pays tribute to Kantianism. 
 “Had Helm-holtz,” says Rau, “remained true to his realistic conception, had he consistently adhered to the basic principle that the *Albrecht Rau, Empfinden und Denken , Giessen, 1896, S. 
 304. 
 properties of bodies express the relations of bodies to each other and also to us, he obviously would have had no need of the whole theory of symbols; he could then have said, briefly and clearly: the sensations which are produced inus by things are reflections of the nature of those things”(ibid. 
, p. 
 320). 
 That is the way a materialist criticises Helmholtz. 
 He rejects Helmholtz’s hieroglyphic or symbolic materialism or semi-materialism in favour of Feuerbach’s consistent materialism. 
 The idealist Leclair (a representative of the “immanent-ist school”, so dear to Mach’s heart and mind) also accusesHelmholtz of inconsistency, of wavering between material-ism and spiritualism. 
 ( Der Realismus , etc. 
, S. 
 154. 
) But for Leclair the theory of symbols is not insufficiently mate-rialistic but too materialistic. 
 Leclair says: “Helmholtzthinks that the perceptions of our consciousness offer suffi-cient support for the cognition of sequence in time as wellas of the identity or difference of transcendental causes. 
This in Helmholtz’s opinion is sufficient for the assumption and cognition of law in the realm of the transcendental” (i. 
e. 
, in the realm of the objectively real) (p. 
 33). 
 And Le-clair thunders against this “dogmatic prejudice of Helm-holtz’s”. 
 “Berkeley’s God,” he exclaims, “as the hypothet-ical cause of the conformity to natural law of the ideas in our mind is at least just as capable of satisfying our need of causality as a world of external objects” (34). 
 “A consistent application of the theory of symbols ... can achieve nothingwithout a generous admixture of vulgar realism” (i. 
e. 
,materialism) (p. 
 35). 
 That is how a “critical idealist” criticised Helmholtz for his materialism in 1879. 
 Twenty years later, in his ar-ticle “The Fundamental Views of Ernst Mach and Heinrich Hertz on Physics”, * Kleinpeter, the disciple of Mach so highly praised by his teacher, refuted in the following waythe “antiquated” Helmholtz with the aid of Mach’s “recent”philosophy. 
 Let us for the moment leave aside Hertz (who,in fact, was as inconsistent as Helmholtz) and examine Klein-*Archiv für Philosophie ,83 II, Systematische Philosophie , Bd. 
 V, 1899, S. 
 163-64. 
 peter’s comparison of Mach and Helmholtz. 
 Having quoted a number of passages from the works of both writers, and having particularly stressed Mach’s well-known statements to the effect that bodies are mental symbols for complexesof sensations and so on, Kleinpeter says: “If we follow Helmholtz’s line of thought, we shall en-counter the following basic postulates: “1) There exist objects of the external world. 
 “2) A change in these objects is inconceivable without the action of some cause (which is thought of as real). 
 “3) ‘Cause, according to the original meaning of the word, is the unchangeable residue or being behind the changingphenomena, namely, matter and the law of its action,force. 
’ [Kleinpeter’s quotation from Helmholtz. 
] “4) It is possible to deduce all phenomena from their causes in a logically strict and unambiguous way. 
 “5) The achievement of this end is equivalent to the pos-session of objective truth, the acquisition ( Erlangung ) of which is thus regarded as conceivable” (163). 
 Rendered indignant by these postulates, by their con-tradictoriness and the creation of insoluble problems, Klein-peter remarks that Helmholtz does not hold strictly to theseviews and sometimes employs “turns of speech which aresomewhat suggestive of Mach’s purely logical understandingof such words” as matter, force, causality, etc. 
 “It is not difficult to find the source of our dissatisfaction with Helmholtz, if we recall Mach’s fine, clear words. 
 The false understanding of the words mass, force, etc. 
, is the bas-ic weakness of Helmholtz’s whole argument. 
 These are onlyconcepts, products of our imagination and not realities exist-ing outside thought. 
 We are not even in a position to knowsuch things. 
 From the observation of our senses we are in general unable, owing to their imperfection, to make even a single uniquely determined conclusion. 
 We can never as-sert, for instance, that upon reading a certain scale ( durch Ablesen einer Skala ) we shall obtain a definite figure: there are always, within certain limits, an infinite number ofpossible figures all equally compatible with the facts of observation. 
 And to have knowledge of something real lying outside us—that is for us quite impossible. 
 Let us assume,however, that it were possible, and that we did get to know reality; in that case we should have no right to apply the laws of logic to it, for they are our laws, applicable only to our conceptions, to our mental products [Kleinpeter’s ital-ics]. 
 Between facts there is no logical connection, but onlya simple succession; apodictic assertions are here unthink-able. 
 It is therefore incorrect to say that one fact is the causeof another and, consequently, the whole deduction builtup by Helmholtz on this conception falls to the ground. 
 Finally, the attainment of objective truth, i. 
e. 
, truth exist-ing independently of any subject, is impossible, not onlybecause of the nature of our senses, but also because as men(wir als Menschen ) we can in general have no notion of what exists quite independently of us” (164). 
 As the reader sees, our disciple of Mach, repeating the favourite phrases of his teacher and of Bogdanov, who does not own himself a Machist, rejects Helmholtz’s whole phi-losophy, rejects it from the idealist standpoint. 
 The theoryof symbols is not even especially singled out by the idealist,who regards it as an unimportant and perhaps accidental dev-iation from materialism. 
 And Helmholtz is chosen by Klein-peter as a representative of the “traditional views in phys-ics”, “views shared to this day by the majority of physicists”(160). 
 The result we have arrived at is that Plekhanov was guilty of an obvious mistake in his exposition of material-ism, but that Bazarov completely muddled the matter, mixed up materialism with idealism and put forward in opposition to the “theory of symbols” or “hieroglyphic ma-terialism” the idealist nonsense that “sense-perception isthe reality existing outside us”. 
 From the Kantian Helm-holtz, just as from Kant himself, the materialists went tothe left, the Machists to the right. 
 7. 
 TWO KINDS OF CRITICISM OF DÜHRING Let us note another characteristic feature in the Machists’ incredible distortion of materialism. 
 Valentinov endeav-ours to beat the Marxists by comparing them to Büchner, who supposedly has much in common with Plekhanov, al-though Engels sharply dissociated himself from Büchner. 
Bogdanov, approaching the same question from another an-gle, defends, as it were, the “materialism of the natural scien-tists”, which, he says, “is usually spoken of with a certain contempt” ( Empirio-monism , Bk. 
 III, p. 
 x). 
 Both Valen-tinov and Bogdanov are wretchedly muddled on this ques-tion. 
 Marx and Engels always “spoke contemptuously” ofbad socialists; but from this it follows that they demandedthe teaching of correct socialism, scientific socialism, andnot a flight from socialism to bourgeois views. 
 Marx and Engels always condemned bad (and, particularly, anti-dia-lectical) materialism; but they condemned it from the stand-point of a higher, more advanced, dialectical material-ism, and not from the standpoint of Humism or Berkeleian-ism. 
 Marx, Engels and Dietzgen would discuss the badmaterialists, reason with them and seek to correct their er-ros. 
 But they would not even discuss the Humeans and Berkeleians, Mach and Avenarius, confining themselves to asingle still more contemptuous remark about their trend as a whole . 
 Therefore, the endless faces and grimaces made by our Machists over Holbach and Co. 
, Büchner and Co. 
, etc. 
,are absolutely nothing but an attempt to throw dust in the eyes of the public, a cover for the departure of Machism as a whole from the very foundations of materialism in gen-eral, and a fear to take up a straightforward and clear posi-tion with regard to Engels. 
 And it would be hard to express oneself more clearly on the French materialism of the eighteenth century and on Büchner, Vogt and Moleschott, than Engels does at the end of Chapter II of his Ludwig Feuerbach . 
 It is impossible not to understand Engels, unless one deliberately wishes to dis-tort him. 
 Marx and I are materialists—says Engels in thischapter, explaining what fundamentally distinguishes all schools of materialism from the whole camp of the idealists, from all the Kantians and Humeans in general. 
 And Engels reproaches Feuerbach for a certain pusillanimity , a certain frivolity of thought, as expressed in his rejection at timesof materialism in general because of the mistakes of one oranother school of materialists. 
 Feuerbach “should not haveconfounded the doctrines of these itinerant preaches [Büch-ner and Co. 
] with materialism in general, ” 84 says Engels (S. 
 21). 
 Only minds that are spoilt by reading and credu-lously accepting the doctrines of the German reactionary pro-fessors could have misunderstood the nature of such re-proaches levelled by Engels at Feuerbach. 
 Engels says very clearly that Büchner and Co. 
 “by no means overcame the limitations of their teachers”, i. 
e. 
,the materialists of the eighteenth century, that they had notmade a single step forward . 
 And it is for this, and this alone , that Engels took Büchner and Co. 
 to task; not for their ma-terialism, as the ignoramuses think, but because they did not advance materialism, because “ they did not in the least make it their business to develop the theory [of materialism] any further ”. 
 It was for this alone that Engels took Büchner and Co. 
 to task. 
 And thereupon point by point Engels enu-merates three fundamental “limitations” ( Beschränktheit ) of the French materialists of the eighteenth century, from which Marx and Engels had emancipated themselves, but from which Büchner and Co. 
 were unable to emancipate them-selves. 
 The first limitation was that the views of the oldmaterialists were “mechanical”, in the sense that they be-lieved in “the exclusive application of the standards of me-chanics to processes of a chemical and organic nature” (S. 
 19). 
 We shall see in the next chapter that failure to understand these words of Engels’ caused certain people to succumbto idealism through the new physics. 
 Engels does not rejectmechanical materialism for the faults attributed to it by physicists of the “recent” idealist (alias Machist) trend. 
The second limitation was the metaphysical character of the views of the old materialists, meaning the “ anti-dialectical character of their philosophy ”. 
 This limitation is fully shared with Büchner and Co. 
 by our Machists, who, as wehave seen, entirely failed to understand Engels’ applicationof dialectics to epistemology (for example, absolute and rela-tive truth). 
 The third limitation was the preservation of idealism “up above”, in the realm of the social sciences, a non-understanding of historical materialism. 
 Having enumerated these three “limitations” and ex-plained them with exhaustive clarity (S. 
 19-21), Engels then and there adds that they (Büchner and Co. 
) did not emerge “from these limits ” (über diese Schranken ). 
 Exclusively for these three things and exclusively within these limits, does Engels refute both the materialism ofthe eighteenth century and the doctrines of Büchner and Co. 
! /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR On all other, more elementary, questions of materialism (questions distorted by the Machists) there is and can be no difference between Marx and Engels on the one hand and all these old materialists on the other. 
 It was only the RussianMachists who brought confusion into this perfectly clearquestion, since for their West-European teachers and co-thinkers the radical difference between the line of Mach andCo. 
 and the line of the materialists generally is quite ob-vious. 
 Our Machists found it necessary to confuse the issue in order to represent their break with Marxism and theirdesertion to the camp of bourgeois philosophy as “minorcorrections”—of Marxism! Take Dühring. 
 It is hard to imagine anything more con-temptuous than the opinion of him expressed by Engels. 
 But at the same time that Dühring was criticised by Engels , just see how he was criticised by Leclair , who praises Mach’s “revolutionising philosophy”. 
 Leclair regards Dühring asthe “ extreme Left ” of materialism, which “without any evasion declares sensation, as well as every activity ofconsciousness and intelligence in general, to be the secre-tion, function, supreme flower, aggregate effect, etc. 
, of the animal organism” ( Der Realismus , etc. 
, 1879, S. 
 23-24). 
 Is it for this that Engels criticised Dühring? No. 
 In this he was in full agreement with Dühring, as he was with every other materialist. 
 He criticised Dühring from the diametri-cally opposite standpoint, namely, for the inconsistency of his materialism, for his idealist fancies, which left aloophole for fideism. 
 “Nature itself works both within ideating beings and from without, in order to create the required knowledge ofthe course of things by systematically producing coherent views. 
” Leclair quotes these words of Dühring’s and savagely attacks the materialism of such a point of view, the “crudemetaphysics” of this materialism, the “self-deception”, etc. 
,etc. 
 (S. 
 160 and 161-63). 
 Is it for this that Engels criticised Dühring? No. 
 He ridi-culed all pretentious language, but in recognising objective law in nature, reflected by consciousness, Engels was fully in agreement with Dühring , as he was with every other materi-alist. 
 “Thought is a form of reality higher than the rest.... 
 A fun-damental premise is the independence and distinction of the materially real world from the groups of manifestations of consciousness. 
” Leclair quotes these words of Dühring’stogether with a number of Dühring’s attacks on Kant, etc. 
,and for this accuses Dühring of “metaphysics” (S. 
 218-22),of subscribing to “a metaphysical dogma”, etc. 
 Is it for this that Engels criticised Dühring? No. 
 That the world exists independently of the mind and that every deviation from this truth on the part of the Kantians, Hu-means, Berkeleians, and so forth, is false—on this pointEngels was fully in agreement with Dühring, as he was withevery other materialist. 
 Had Engels seen from what angle Leclair, in the spirit of Mach, criticised Dühring, he would have called both these philosophical reactionaries names a hundred times more contemptuous than those he called Düh-ring. 
 To Leclair Dühring was the incarnation of perni-cious realism and materialism (cf. 
 also Beiträge zu einer mo-nistischen Erkenntnistheorie , 1882, S. 
 45). 
 In 1878, W. 
 Schuppe, teacher and comrade-in-arms of Mach, accused Dühring of “visionary realism” ( Traumrealismus ) * in revenge for the epithet “visionary idealism” which Dühring hadhurled against all idealists. 
 For Engels, on the contrary , Dühring was not a sufficiently steadfast, clear and consistent materialist. 
 Marx and Engels, as well as J. 
 Dietzgen, entered the phil-osophical arena at a time when materialism reigned among the advanced intellectuals in general, and in working-classcircles in particular. 
 It is therefore quite natural that theyshould have devoted their attention not to a repetition ofold ideas but to a serious theoretical development of material-ism, its application to history, in other words, to the com-pletion of the edifice of materialist philosophy up to its sum-mit. 
 It is quite natural that in the sphere of epistemology they confined themselves to correcting Feuerbach’s errors, to ridiculing the banalities of the materialist Dühring, tocriticising the errors of Büchner (see J. 
 Dietzgen), to empha-sising what these most widely known and popular writers *Dr. 
 Wilhelm Schuppe, Erkenntnistheoretische Logik , Bonn, 1878, S. 
 56. 
 among the workers particularly lacked, namely, dialectics. 
 Marx, Engels and J. 
 Dietzgen did not worry about the ele-mentary truths of materialism, which had been cried by the hucksters in dozens of books, but devoted all their attentionto ensuring that these elementary truths should not be vul-garised, should not be over-simplified, should not lead tostagnation of thought (“materialism below, idealism above”),to forgetfulness of the valuable fruit of the idealist systems, Hegelian dialectics—that pearl which those farmyard cocks, the Büchners, the Dührings and Co. 
 (as well as Leclair, Mach,Avenarius and so forth), could not pick out from the dung-heap of absolute idealism. 
 If one envisages at all concretely these historical conditions in which the philosophical works of Engels and J. 
 Dietzgen were written, it will be perfectly clear why they were more concerned to dissociate themselves from the vulgarisation of the elementary truths of materialism than to defend these truths themselves. 
 Marx and Engels were similarly moreconcerned to dissociate themselves from the vulgarisationof the fundamental demands of political democracy than to defend these demands. 
 Only disciples of the philosophical reactionaries could have “failed to notice” this circumstance, and could havepresented the case to their readers in such a way as to makeit appear that Marx and Engels did not know what beinga materialist means. 
 8. 
 HOW COULD J. 
 DIETZGEN HAVE FOUND FAVOUR WITH THE REACTIONARY PHILOSOPHERS? The previously cited example of Helfond already con-tains the answer to this question, and we shall not examine the innumerable instances in which J. 
 Dietzgen receives Helfond-like treatment at the hands of our Machists. 
 It ismore expedient to quote a number of passages from J. 
 Dietz-gen himself in order to bring out his weak points. 
 85 “Thought is a function of the brain,” says Dietzgen ( Das Wesen der menschlichen Kopfarbeit , 1903, S. 
 52; there is a Russian translation). 
 “Thought is a product of the brain.... 
 My desk, as the content of my thought, is identical withthat thought, does not differ from it. 
 But my desk outside of my head is a separate object quite distinct from it” (53). 
 These perfectly clear materialistic propositions are, however, supplemented by Dietzgen thus: “Nevertheless, the non-sensible idea is also sensible, material, i. 
e. 
, real.... 
 The minddiffers no more from the table, light, or sound than thesethings differ from each other” (54). 
 This is obviously false. 
That both thought and matter are “real”, i. 
e. 
, exist, is true. 
But to say that thought is material is to make a false step, a step towards confusing materialism and idealism. 
 Basi-cally, this is more an inexact expression of Dietzgen’s, whoelsewhere correctly says: “Mind and matter at least havethis in common, that they exist” (80). 
 “Thinking,” saysDietzgen, “is a work of the body.... 
 In order to think Irequire a substance that can be thought of. 
 This substance is provided in the phenomena of nature and life.... 
 Matter is the boundary of the mind, beyond which the latter cannotpass.... 
 Mind is a product of matter, but matter is more thana product of mind...” (64). 
 The Machists refrain from ana-lysing such materialist arguments of the materialist Dietzgen!They prefer to fasten on passages where he is inexact and muddled. 
 For example, he says that natural scientists can be “idealists only outside their field” (108). 
 Whether thisis so, and why it is so, on this the Machists are silent. 
 But apage or so earlier Dietzgen recognises the “positive side ofmodern idealism” (106) and the “inadequacy of the mate-rialist principle”, which should rejoice the Machists. 
 The incorrectly expressed thought of Dietzgen’s consists in the fact that the difference between matter and mind is also relative and not excessive (107). 
 This is true, but what follows from this is not that materialism as such is inadequate, but thatmetaphysical, anti-dialectical materialism is inadequate. 
 “Simple, scientific truth is not based on a person. 
 It has its foundation outside [i. 
e. 
, of the person], in its material; it is objective truth.... 
 We call ourselves materialists.... 
Philosophical materialists are distinguished by the fact thatthey put the corporeal world at the beginning, at the head,and put the idea, or spirit, as the sequel, whereas their op-ponents, after the manner of religion, derive things from the word ... the material world from the idea” ( Kleinere philo-sophische Schriften , 1903, S. 
 59, 62). 
 The Machists avoid this recognition of objective truth and repetition of Eng-els’ definition of materialism. 
 But Dietzgen goes on to say: “We would be equally right in calling ourselves idealists, for our system is based on the total result of philosophy, on the scientific investigation of the idea, on a clear insightinto the nature of mind” (63). 
 It is not difficult to seize uponthis obviously incorrect phrase in order to deny material-ism. 
 Actually, Dietzgen’s formulation is more incorrectthan his basic thought, which amounts to this, that the old materialism was unable to investigate ideas scientifically (with the aid of historical materialism). 
 Here are Dietzgen’s ideas on the old materialism. 
 “Like our understanding of political economy, our materialismis a scientific, historical conquest. 
 Just as definitely as wedistinguish ourselves from the socialists of the past, so we distinguish ourselves from the old materialists. 
 With the latter we have only this in common, that we acknowledgematter to be the premise, or prime base of the idea” (140). 
This word “only” is significant! It contains the whole episte-mological foundation of materialism, as distinguished from agnosticism, Machism, idealism. 
 But Dietzgen’s attention is here concentrated on dissociating himself from vulgar materialism. 
 But then follows a little further on a passage that is quite incorrect: “The concept matter must be broadened. 
 It em-braces all the phenomena of reality, as well as our facultyof conceiving or explaining” (141). 
 This is a muddle which can only lead to confusing materialism and idealism under the guise of “broadening” the former. 
 To seize upon this“broadening” would be to forget the basis of Dietzgen’s philosophy, the recognition of matter as the primary, “theboundary of the mind”. 
 But, as a matter of fact, a few linesfurther down Dietzgen corrects himself: “The whole governs the part, matter the mind.... 
 In this sense we may love and honour the material world ... as the first cause, as the creatorof heaven and earth” (142). 
 That the conception of “matter”must also include thoughts, as Dietzgen repeats in the Excur-sions (op. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 214), is a muddle, for if such an inclusion is made, the epistemological contrast between mind and mat-ter, idealism and materialism, a contrast upon which Dietz-gen himself insists, loses all meaning. 
 That this contrastmust not be made “excessive”, exaggerated, metaphysical, is beyond dispute (and it is the great merit of the dialectical materialist Dietzgen that he emphasised this). 
 The limits of the absolute necessity and absolute truth of this relative contrast are precisely those limits which define the trend of epistemological investigations. 
 To operate beyond theselimits with the antithesis of matter and mind, physicaland mental, as though they were absolute opposites, wouldbe a great mistake. 
 Dietzgen, unlike Engels, expresses his thoughts in a vague, unclear, mushy way. 
 But apart from his defects of expo-sition and individual mistakes, he not unsuccessfully cham-pions the “ materialist theory of knowledge ” (S. 
 222 and 271), “dialectical materialism ” (S. 
 224). 
 “The materialist theory of knowledge then,” says Dietzgen, “amounts to the recognition that the human organ of perception radiates no metaphysical light, but is a piece of nature which reflects other pieces ofnature” (222-23). 
 “Our perceptive faculty is not a supernat-ural source of truth, but a mirror-like instrument, whichreflects the things of the world, or nature” (243). 
 Our pro-found Machists avoid an analysis of each individual proposi-tion of Dietzgen’s materialist theory of knowledge , but seize upon his deviations from that theory, upon his vagueness and confusion. 
 J. 
 Dietzgen could find favour with the reacti-onary philosophers because he occasionally gets muddled. 
And, it goes without saying, where there is a muddle thereyou will find Machists. 
 Marx wrote to Kugelmann on December 5, 1868: “A fairly long time ago he [Dietzgen] sent me a fragment of a manu-script on the ‘faculty of thought’ which, in spite of a certainconfusion and of too frequent repetition, contains much thatis excellent and—as the independent product of a workingman—admirable” (Russian translation, p 53). 
 86 Mr. 
 Valen-tinov quotes this opinion, but it never dawned on him to ask what Marx regarded as Dietzgen’s confusion , whether it was that which brings Dietzgen close to Mach, or that whichdistinguishes Dietzgen from Mach. 
 Mr. 
 Valentinov does notask this question because he read both Dietzgen and Marx’sletters after the manner of Gogol’s Petrushka. 
 Yet it is not difficult to find the answer to this question. 
 Marx frequently called his world outlook dialectical materialism, and Engels’“Anti-Dühring ”, the whole of which Marx read through in manuscript , expounds precisely this world outlook. 
 Hence, it should have been clear even to the Valentinovs that Dietz-gen’s confusion could lie only in his deviation from a consist-ent application of dialectics, from consistent materialism , in particular from Anti-Dühring . 
 Does it now dawn upon Mr. 
 Valentinov and his brethren that what Marx could call Dietzgen’s confusion is only that which brings Dietzgen close to Mach , who went from Kant not towards materialism, but towards Berkeley and Hume? Or was it that the materialist Marx called Dietzgen’s mate-rialist theory of knowledge confused, yet approved his de-viations from materialism, that is, approved what differsfrom Anti-Dühring , which was written with his (Marx’s) participation? Whom are they trying to fool, our Machists, who desire to be regarded as Marxists and at the same time inform theworld that “ their ” Mach approved of Dietzgen? Have our heroes failed to guess that Mach could approve in Dietzgenonly that which Marx called confusion? But taken as a whole, J. 
 Dietzgen does not deserve so severe a censure. 
 He is nine-tenths a materialist and never made any claims either to originality or to possessing aspecial philosophy distinct from materialism. 
 He spoke ofMarx frequently, and invariably as the head of the trend (Kleinere philosophische Schriften , S. 
 4—an opinion uttered in 1873; on page 95—in 1876—he emphasises that Marx and Engels “possessed the necessary philosophical school”, i. 
e. 
, philosophical education, on page 181—in 1886—he speaks ofMarx and Engels as the “acknowledged founders” of thetrend). 
 Dietzgen was a Marxist, and Eugene Dietzgen and—alas!—Comrade P. 
 Dauge are rendering him poor service bytheir invention of “naturmonismus”, “Dietzgenism”, etc. 
 “Dietzgenism” as distinct from dialectical materialism is confusion , a step towards reactionary philosophy, an attempt to create a trend not from what is great in Joseph Dietzgen(and in that worker-philosopher, who discovered dialecticalmaterialism in his own way, there is much that is great!)but from his weak points . 
 I shall confine myself to two examples in order to illus-trate how Comrade P. 
 Dauge and Eugene Dietzgen are slid-ing into reactionary philosophy. 
 In the second edition of the Akquisit87 (p. 
 273), Dauge writes: “Even bourgeois criticism points out the connection between Dietzgen’s philosophy and empirio-criticism and also the immanentist school,” and further on, “especiallyLeclair” (a quotation from a “bourgeois criticism”). 
 That P. 
 Dauge values and esteems J. 
 Dietzgen cannot be doubted. 
 But it also cannot be doubted that he is defaming him by citing without protest the opinion of a bourgeois scribbler who classes the sworn enemy of fideism and of the professors—the “graduated flunkeys” of the bourgeoisie—with the outspoken preacher of fideism and avowed reac-tionary, Leclair. 
 It is possible that Dauge repeated another’sopinion of the immanentists and of Leclair without himselfbeing familiar with the writings of these reactionaries. 
 But let this serve him as a warning: the road away from Marx to the peculiarities of Dietzgen—to Mach—to theimmanentists—is a road leading into a morass. 
 To classhim not only with Leclair but even with Mach is to laystress on Dietzgen the muddlehead as distinct from Dietzgenthe materialist. 
 I shall defend Dietzgen against Dauge. 
 I assert that Dietz-gen did not deserve the shame of being classed with Leclair. 
And I can cite a witness, a most authoritative one on such aquestion, one who is as much a reactionary, as much a fideistand “immanentist” philosopher as Leclair himself, namely,Schubert-Soldern. 
 In 1896 he wrote: “The Social-Democrats willingly lean for support on Hegel with more or less (usual-ly less) justification, only they materialise the Hegelianphilosophy; cf. 
 J. 
 Dietzgen.... 
 With Dietzgen, the absolutebecomes the universal, and this becomes the thing-in-it-self, the absolute subject, whose appearances are its predi-cates. 
 That he [Dietzgen] thereby makes a pure abstraction the basis of the concrete process, he does not, of course, realise any more than Hegel himself did.... 
 He frequentlychaotically lumps together Hegel, Darwin, Haeckel, andnatural-scientific materialism” ( Die soziale Frage , S, xxxiii) Schubert-Soldern is a keener judge of philosophical shadesthan Mach, who praises everybody indiscriminately, includ-ing the Kantian Jerusalem. 
 Eugene Dietzgen was so simple-minded as to complain to the German public that in Russia the narrow materialists had “insulted” Joseph Dietzgen, and he translated Plekha-nov’s and Dauge’s articles on Joseph Dietzgen into German. 
 (See Joseph Dietzgen, Erkenntnis und Wahrheit , Stuttgart, 1908, Appendix). 
 The poor “naturmonist’s” complaint re-bounded on his own head. 
 Franz Mehring, who may be re-garded as knowing something of philosophy and Marxism,wrote in his review that Plekhanov was essentially right as against Dauge (Die Neue Zeit , 1908, No. 
 38, 19. 
 Juni, Feuilleton, S. 
 432). 
 That J. 
 Dietzgen fell into error when he deviated from Marx and Engels (S. 
 431) is for Mehring beyond question. 
 Eugene Dietzgen replied to Mehring in a long,plaintive note, in which he went so far as to say that J. 
 Dietz-gen might be of service “in reconciling” the “warring broth-ers, the orthodox and the revisionists” ( Die Neue Zeit , 1908, No. 
 44, 31. 
 Juli, S. 
 652). 
 Another warning, Comrade Dauge: the road away from Marx to “Dietzgenism” and “Machism” is a road into the morass , not for individuals, not for Tom, Dick and Harry, but for the trend. 
 And do not complain, Machist gentlemen, that I refer to “authorities”; your outcry against the authorities is simply a screen for the fact that for the socialist authorities (Marx,Engels, Lafargue, Mehring, Kautsky) you are substitutingbourgeois authorities (Mach, Petzoldt, Avenarius and the immanentists). 
 You would do better not to raise the questionof “authorities” and “authoritarianism”! C H A P T E R F I V E THE RECENT REVOLUTION IN NATURAL SCIENCE, AND PHILOSOPHICAL IDEALISM A year ago, in Die Neue Zeit (1906-01, No. 
 52), there ap-peared an article by Joseph Diner-Dénes entitled “Marxismand the Recent Revolution in the Natural Sciences”. 
 Thedefect of this article is that it ignores the epistemologicalconclusions which are being drawn from the “new” physics and which are of special interest to us at the present time. 
 But it is precisely this defect which renders the point ofview and the conclusions of the author particularly interest-ing for us. 
 Joseph Diner-Dénes, like the present writer,holds the view of the “rank-and-file Marxist”, of whom ourMachists speak with such haughty contempt. 
 For instance, Mr. 
 Yushkevich writes that “ordinarily, the average rank-and-file Marxist calls himself a dialectical materialist”(p. 
 1 of his book). 
 And now this rank-and-file Marxist, inthe person of J. 
 Diner-Dénes, has directly compared the recent discoveries in science, and especially in physics(X-rays, Becquerel rays, radium, etc. 
 88), with Engels’ Anti-Dühring . 
 To what conclusion has this comparison led him? “In the most varied fields of natural science,” writesDiner-Dénes, “new knowledge has been acquired, all ofwhich tends towards that single point which Engels desiredto make clear, namely, that in nature ‘there are no irrecon-cilable contradictions’, no forcibly fixed boundary-lines and distinctions’, and that if contradictions and distinc-tions are met with in nature, it is because we alone haveintroduced their rigidity and absoluteness into nature. 
”It was discovered, for instance, that light and electricity are only manifestations of one and the same force of nature. 
89 Each day it becomes more probable that chemical affinity may be reduced to electrical processes. 
 The indestructible and non-disintegrable elements of chemistry, whose numbercontinues to grow as though in derision of the unity of theworld, prove to be destructible and disintegrable. 
 The ele-ment radium has been converted into the element helium. 
 90 “Just as all the forces of nature have been reduced to one force, so all substances in nature have been reduced to one substance ” (Diner-Dénes’ italics). 
 Quoting the opinion of one of the writers who regard the atom as only a condensa-tion of the ether, 91 the author exclaims: “How brilliantly does this confirm the statement made by Engels thirty yearsago that motion is the mode of existence of matter. 
” “All phenomena of nature are motion, and the differences between them lie only in the fact that we human beings perceivethis motion in different forms.... 
 It is as Engels said. 
 Nature,like history, is subject to the dialectical law of motion. 
” On the other hand, one cannot take up any of the writings of the Machists or about Machism without encountering pretentious references to the new physics, which is said to have refuted materialism, and so on and so forth. 
 Whetherthese assertions are well founded is another question, but theconnection between the new physics, or rather a definiteschool of the new physics, and Machism and other varietiesof modern idealist philosophy is beyond doubt. 
 To analyse Machism and at the same time to ignore this connection—as Plekhanov does 92—is to scoff at the spirit of dialectical mate-rialism, i. 
e. 
, to sacrifice the method of Engels to the letterof Engels. 
 Engels says explicitly that “with each epoch-making discovery even in the sphere of natural science[“not to speak of the history of mankind”], materialism has to change its form” ( Ludwig Feuerbach , German edition, p. 
 19). 
” 93 Hence, a revision of the “form” of Engels’ mate-rialism, a revision of his natural-philosophical propositions,is not only not “revisionism”, in the accepted meaning ofthe term, but, on the contrary, is an essential requirementof Marxism. 
 We criticise the Machists not for making such a revision, but for their purely revisionist trick of betraying the essence of materialism under the guise of criticising its form and of adopting the fundamental propositions of reac-tionary bourgeois philosophy without making the slightest attempt to deal directly, frankly and definitely with asser-tions of Engels’ which are unquestionably of extreme im-portance for the given question, as, for example, his asser-tion that “... motion without matter is unthinkable” ( Anti-Dühring , p. 
 50). 
 94 It goes without saying that in examining the connection between one of the schools of modern physicists and the re-birth of philosophical idealism, it is far from being our intention to deal with specific physical theories. 
 What inter-ests us exclusively is the epistemological conclusions thatfollow from certain definite propositions and generallyknown discoveries. 
 These epistemological conclusions are ofthemselves so insistent that many physicists are already almost reaching them. 
 What is more, there are already var-ious trends among physicists, and definite schools are be-ginning to be formed on this basis. 
 Our object, therefore,will be confined to explaining clearly the essence of the dif-ference between these various trends and the relation inwhich they stand to the fundamental lines of philosophy. 
 1. 
 THE CRISIS IN MODERN PHYSICS In his book Value of Science ,* the famous French phys-icist Henri Poincaré says that there are “signs of a seriouscrisis” in physics, and he devotes a special chapter to this crisis (Chap. 
 VIII, cf. 
 p. 
 171). 
 The crisis is not confined to the fact that “radium, the great revolutionary”, is un-dermining the principle of the conservation of energy. 
“All the other principles are equally endangered” (180). 
For instance, Lavoisier’s principle, or the principle of theconservation of mass, has been undermined by the electron theory of matter. 
 According to this theory atoms are com-posed of very minute particles called electrons, which arecharged with positive or negative electricity and “are im-mersed in a medium which we call the ether”. 
 The experi-ments of physicists provide data for calculating the velocityof the electrons and their mass (or the relation of their mass to their electric charge). 
 The velocity proves to be compara-*H. 
 Poincaré, Valeur de la science . 
—Ed. 
 ble with the velocity of light (300,000 kilometres per sec-ond), attaining, for instance, one-third of the latter. 
 Under such circumstances the twofold mass of the electron has to be taken into account, corresponding to the necessity ofovercoming the inertia, firstly, of the electron itself and,secondly, of the ether. 
 The former mass will be the real ormechanical mass of the electron, the latter the “electro-dynamic mass which represents the inertia of the ether”. 
 And it turns out that the former mass is equal to zero. 
 The en-tire mass of the electrons, or, at least, of the negative elec-trons, proves to be totally and exclusively electrodynamicin its origin. 
 95 Mass disappears. 
 The foundations of mechan-ics are undermined. 
 Newton’s principle, the equality of ac-tion and reaction, is undermined, and so on. 
 We are faced, says Poincaré, with the “ruins” of the old principles of physics, “a general debacle of principles”. 
It is true, he remarks, that all the mentioned departuresfrom principles refer to infinitesimal magnitudes; it ispossible that we are still ignorant of other infinitesimalscounteracting the undermining of the old principles. 
 More-over, radium is very rare. 
 But at any rate we have reached a “period of doubt ”. 
 We have already seen what epistemologi-cal deductions the author draws from this “period of doubt”:“it is not nature which imposes on [or dictates to] us theconcepts of space and time, but we who impose them on na-ture”; “whatever is not thought, is pure nothing”. 
 These de-ductions are idealist deductions. 
 The break-down of the most fundamental principles shows (such is Poincaré’strend of thought) that these principles are not copies, pho-tographs of nature, not images of something external in re-lation to man’s consciousness, but products of his conscious-ness. 
 Poincaré does not develop these deductions consistent-ly, nor is he essentially interested in the philosophical as-pect of the question. 
 It is dealt with in detail by the Frenchwriter on philosophical problems, Abel Rey, in his bookThe Physical Theory of the Modern Physicists (La théorie de la physique chez les physiciens contemporains , Paris, F. 
 Alcan, 1907). 
 True, the author himself is a positivist, i. 
e. 
, a muddlehead and a semi-Machist, but in this case this is even a certain advantage, for he cannot be suspectedof a desire to “slander” our Machists’ idol. 
 Rey cannot be trusted when it comes to giving an exact philosophical def-inition of concepts and of materialism in particular, for Rey too is a professor, and as such is imbued with an utter contempt for the materialists (and distinguishes himselfby utter ignorance of the epistemology of materialism). 
It goes without saying that a Marx or an Engels is abso-lutely non-existent for such “men of science”. 
 But Reysummarises carefully and in general conscientiously the ex-tremely abundant literature on the subject, not only French, but English and German as well (Ostwald and Mach in par-ticular), so that we shall have frequent recourse to his work. 
 The attention of philosophers in general, says the author, and also of those who, for one reason or another, wish tocriticise science in general, has now been particularly at-tracted towards physics. 
 “In discussing the limits and value of physical knowledge, it is in effect the legitimacy of posi-tive science, the possibility of knowing the object, that iscriticised” (pp. 
 i-ii). 
 From the “crisis in modern physics”people hasten to draw sceptical conclusions (p. 
 14). 
 Now,what is the essence of this crisis? During the first two-thirds of the nineteenth century the physicists agreed among themselves on everything essential. 
 “They believed in a pure-ly mechanical explanation of nature: they assumed thatphysics is nothing but a more complicated mechanics, name-ly, a molecular mechanics. 
 They differed only as to the meth-ods used in reducing physics to mechanics and as to the details of the mechanism.... 
 At present the spectacle presented by the physico-chemical sciences seems completely changed. 
Extreme disagreement has replaced general unanimity,and no longer does it only concern details, but leading andfundamental ideas. 
 While it would be an exaggeration to saythat each scientist has his own peculiar tendencies, it must nevertheless be noted that science, and especially physics, has, like art, its numerous schools, the conclusions of whichoften differ from, and sometimes are directly opposed andhostile to one another.... 
 “From this one may judge the significance and scope of what has been called the crisis in modern physics “Until the middle of the nineteenth century, traditional physics had assumed that it was sufficient merely to extendphysics in order to arrive at a metaphysics of matter. 
 This physics ascribed to its theories an ontological value. 
 And its theories were all mechanistic. 
 The traditional mechanism [Rey employs this word in the specific sense of a system of ideas which reduces physics to mechanics] thus claimed, overand above the results of experience, a real knowledge of the material universe. 
 This was not a hypothetical account ofexperience; it was a dogma...” (16). 
 We must here interrupt the worthy “positivist”. 
 It is clear that he is describing the materialist philosophy of traditional physics but does not want to call the devil (ma-terialism) by name. 
 Materialism to a Humean must appearto be metaphysics, dogma, a transgression of the bounds ofexperience, and so forth. 
 Knowing nothing of materialism,the Humean Rey has no conception whatever of dialectics, of the difference between dialectical materialism and meta-physical materialism, in Engels’ meaning of the term. 
Hence, the relation between absolute and relative truth,for example, is absolutely unclear to Rey. 
 “... The criticisms of traditional mechanism made during the whole of the second half of the nineteenth century weak-ened the premise of the ontological reality of mechanism. 
 On the basis of these criticisms a philosophical conceptionof physics was founded which became almost traditional inphilosophy at the end of the nineteenth century. 
 Sciencewas nothing but a symbolic formula, a method of notation(repérage , the creation of signs, marks, symbols), and since the methods of notation varied according to the schools, the conclusion was soon reached that only that was denotedwhich had been previously designed ( façonné ) by man for no-tation (for symbolisation). 
 Science became a work of artfor dilettantes, a work of art for utilitarians: views whichcould with legitimacy be generally interpreted as the ne-gation of the possibility of science. 
 A science which is a pure artifice for acting upon nature, a mere utilitarian tech-nique, has no right to call itself science, without pervert-ing the meaning of words. 
 To say that science can be noth-ing but such an artificial means of action is to disavowscience in the proper meaning of the term. 
 “The collapse of traditional mechanism, or, more pre-cisely, the criticism to which it was subjected, led to theproposition that science itself had also collapsed. 
 From the impossibility of adhering purely and simply to traditional mechanism it was inferred that science was impossible” (16-17). 
 And the author asks: “Is the present crisis in physics a temporary and external incident in the evolution of science,or is science itself making an abrupt right-about-face anddefinitely abandoning the path it has hitherto pursued?...” “If the physical and chemical sciences, which in history have been essentially emancipators, collapse in a crisis that reduces them to the status of mere technically useful recipesbut deprives them of all significance from the standpoint ofknowledge of nature, the result must needs be a completerevolution both in the art of logic and the history of ideas. 
Physics loses all educational value; the spirit of positive science it represents becomes false and dangerous. 
” Science can offer only practical recipes but no real knowledge. 
“Knowledge of the real must be sought and given by othermeans.... 
 One must take another road, one must return tosubjective intuition, to a mystical sense of reality, in aword, to the mysterious, all that of which one thought it had been deprived” (19). 
 As a positivist, the author considers such a view wrong and the crisis in physics only temporary. 
 We shall presentlysee how Rey purifies Mach, Poincaré and Co. 
 of these conclu-sions. 
 At present we shall confine ourselves to noting thefact of the “crisis” and its significance. 
 From the last words of Rey quoted by us it is quite clear what reactionary ele-ments have taken advantage of and aggravated this crisis. 
Rey explicitly states in the preface to his work that “thefideist and anti-intellectualist movement of the last yearsof the nineteenth century” is seeking “to base itself on thegeneral spirit of modern physics” (p. 
 ii). 
 In France, those who put faith above reason are called fideists (from the Latin fides , faith). 
 Anti-intellectualism is a doctrine that denies the rights or claims of reason. 
 Hence, in its philosophicalaspect, the essence of the “crisis in modern physics” is thatthe old physics regarded its theories as “real knowledgeof the material world”, i. 
e. 
, a reflection of objective real-ity. 
 The new trend in physics regards theories only as sym-bols, signs, and marks for practice, i. 
e. 
, it denies the exist-ence of an objective reality independent of our mind and reflected by it. 
 If Rey had used correct philosophical ter-minology, he would have said: the materialist theory of knowledge, instinctively accepted by the earlier physics, has been replaced by an idealist and agnostic theory ofknowledge, which, against the wishes of the idealists andagnostics, has been taken advantage of by fideism. 
 But Rey does not present this replacement, which consti-tutes the crisis, as though all the modern physicists stand opposed to all the old physicists. 
 No. 
 He shows that in their epistemological trends the modern physicists are divid-ed into three schools: the energeticist or conceptualistschool; the mechanistic or neo-mechanistic school, to whichthe vast majority of physicists still adhere; and in betweenthe two, the critical school. 
 To the first belong Mach and Duhem; to the third, Henri Poincaré; to the second, Kirch-hoff, Helmholtz, Thomson (Lord Kelvin), Maxwell—amongthe older physicists—and Larmor and Lorentz among themodern physicists. 
 What the essence of the two basic trends is (for the third is not independent, but intermediate) maybe judged from the following words of Rey’s: “Traditional mechanism constructed a system of the ma-terial world. 
” Its doctrine of the structure of matter wasbased on “elements qualitatively homogeneous and identi-cal”; and elements were to be regarded as “immutable, im-penetrable”, etc. 
 Physics “constructed a real edifice out of real materials and real cement. 
 The physicist possessed material elements , the causes and modes of their action, and the real laws of their action” (33-38). 
 “The changes in this view of physics consist above all in the rejection of the onto-logical significance of the theories and in an exaggeratedemphasis on the phenomenological significance of physics. 
”The conceptualist view operates with “pure abstractions ... and seeks a purely abstract theory which will as far as pos-sible eliminate the hypothesis of matter.... 
 The notion ofenergy thus becomes the substructure of the new physics. 
That is why conceptualist physics may most often be calledenergeticist physics”, although this designation does not fit, for example, such a representative of conceptualist physics as Mach (p. 
 46). 
 Rey’s confusion of energetics with Machism is not al-together correct, of course; nor is his assurance that the neo-mechanistic school as well is approaching a phenome-nalist view of physics (p. 
 48), despite the profundity of its disagreement with the conceptualists. 
 Rey’s “new” terminol-ogy does not clarify, but rather obscures matters; but wecould not avoid it if we were to give the reader an idea ofhow a “positivist” regards the crisis in physics. 
 Essential-ly, the opposition of the “new” school to the old views fullycoincides, as the reader could convince himself, with Klein-peter’s criticism of Helmholtz quoted above. 
 In his presen-tation of the views of the various physicists Rey reflectsthe indefiniteness and vacillation of their philosophicalviews. 
 The essence of the crisis in modern physics consists in the break-down of the old laws and basic principles, inthe rejection of an objective reality existing outside the mind, that is, in the replacement of materialism by idealism and agnosticism. 
 “Matter has disappeared”—one may thusexpress the fundamental and characteristic difficulty in re-lation to many particular questions which has created thiscrisis. 
 Let us consider this difficulty. 
 2. 
 “MATTER HAS DISAPPEARED” Such, literally, is the expression that may be encoun-tered in the descriptions given by modern physicists ofrecent discoveries. 
 For instance, L. 
 Houllevigue, in his book The Evolution of the Sciences , entitles his chapter on the new theories of matter: “Does Matter Exist?” He says: “The atom dematerialises ... matter disappears. 
” * To see how easily fundamental philosophical conclusions are drawnfrom this by the Machists, let us take Valentinov. 
 He writes:“The statement that the scientific explanation of the world can find a firm foundation ‘ only in materialism’ is nothing but a fiction, and what is more, an absurd fiction” (p. 
 67). 
 He quotes as a destroyer of this absurd fiction AugustoRighi, the well-known Italian physicist, who says thatthe electron theory “is not so much a theory of electricity *L. 
 Houllevigue, L’évolution des sciences , Paris (A. 
 Collin), 1908, pp. 
 63, 87, 88; cf. 
 his article: “Les idées des physiciens sur la matière”, 96 1908. 
 L’Année psychologique , as of matter; the new system simply puts electricity in the place of matter”. 
 (Augusto Righi, Die moderne Theorie der physikalischen Erscheinungen , Leipzig, 1905, S. 
 131. 
 There is a Russian translation. 
) Having quoted these words(p. 
 64), Mr. 
 Valentinov exclaims: “Why does Righi permit himself to commit this offence against sacred matter? Is it perhaps because he is a solip-sist, an idealist, a bourgeois criticist, an empirio-monist, or even someone worse? ” This remark, which seems to Mr. 
 Valentinov to annihilate the materialists by its sarcasm, only discloses his virgininnocence on the subject of philosophical materialism. 
 Mr. 
Valentinov has absolutely failed to understand the real connection between philosophical idealism and the “disap-pearance of matter”. 
 That “disappearance of matter” of which he speaks, in imitation of the modern physicists, hasno relation to the epistemological distinction between mate-rialism and idealism. 
 To make this clear, let us take oneof the most consistent and clear of the Machists, Karl Pear-son. 
 For him the physical universe consists of groups of sense-impressions. 
 He illustrates “our conceptual model of the physical universe” by the following diagram, explain-ing, however, that it takes no account of relative sizes ( The Grammar of Science , p. 
 282):— Ether-Prime Chemical Molecule Particle Body units atom atom (-δ)( -γ) In order to simplify his diagram, Karl Pearson entirely omits the question of the relation between ether and electric-ity, or positive electrons and negative electrons. 
 But that is not important. 
 What is important is that from Pearson’s idealist standpoint “bodies” are first regarded as sense-im-pressions, and then the constitution of these bodies out of particles, particles out of molecules and so forth affects the changes in the model of the physical world, but in no way affects the question of whether bodies are symbols of sensa-tions, or sensations images of bodies. 
 Materialism andidealism differ in their answers to the question of the source of our knowledge and of the relation of knowledge (and ofthe “mental” in general) to the physical world; while the question of the structure of matter, of atoms and electrons, is a question that concerns only this “physical world”. 
 When the physicists say “matter disappears” they mean thathitherto science reduced its investigations of the physicalworld to three ultimate concepts: matter, electricity andether; now only the two latter remain. 
 For it has become possible to reduce matter to electricity; the atom can be explained as resembling an infinitely small solar system, within which negative electrons 97 move around a positive electron98 with a definite (and, as we have seen, enormously large) velocity. 
 It is consequently possible to reduce thephysical world from scores of elements to two or three ele-ments (inasmuch as positive and negative electrons consti-tute “two essentially distinct kinds of matter”, as the phys-icist Pellat says—Rey, op. 
 cit. 
, pp. 
 294-95). 
 Hence, naturalscience leads to the “ unity of matter ” (ibid. 
) *—such is the real meaning of the statement about the disappearance ofmatter, its replacement by electricity, etc. 
, which is leadingso many people astray. 
 “Matter disappears” means that the limit within which we have hitherto known matter disap-pears and that our knowledge is penetrating deeper; propertiesof matter are likewise disappearing which formerly seemedabsolute, immutable, and primary (impenetrability, iner-tia, mass, 100 etc. 
) and which are now revealed to be relative and characteristic only of certain states of matter. 
 For the sole “property” of matter with whose recognition philosoph-*Cf. 
 Oliver Lodge, Sur les électrons , Paris, 1906, p. 
 159: “The elec-trical theory of matter”, the recognition of electricity as the “funda-mental substance”, is “an approximate accomplishment of that to whatthe philosophers strove always, that is, the unity of matter”; cf. 
 also Angusto Righi, Ueber die Struktur der Materie , Leipzig, 1908; J. 
 J. 
 Thomson, The Corpuscular Theory of Matter , London, 1907; P. 
 Langevin, “La physique des électrons”, Revue générale des sciences ,99 1905, pp. 
 257-76. 
 ical materialism is bound up is the property of being an objective reality , of existing outside the mind. 
 The error of Machism in general, as of the Machist new physics, is that it ignores this basis of philosophical mate-rialism and the distinction between metaphysical material-ism and dialectical materialism. 
 The recognition of immu-table elements, “of the immutable essence of things”, andso forth, is not materialism, but metaphysical , i. 
e. 
, anti-dialectical, materialism. 
 That is why J. 
 Dietzgen emphasised that the “subject-matter of science is endless”, that notonly the infinite, but the “smallest atom” is immeasurable,unknowable to the end, inexhaustible , “for nature in all her parts has no beginning and no end” ( Kleinere philosophische Schriften , S. 
 229-30). 
 That is why Engels gave the example of the discovery of alizarin in coal tar and criticised me-chanical materialism. 
 In order to present the question in the only correct way, that is, from the dialectical mate-rialist standpoint, we must ask: Do electrons, ether and so on exist as objective realities outside the human mind or not? The scientists will also have to answer this ques-tion unhesitatingly; and they do invariably answer it in the affirmative , just as they unhesitatingly recognise that nature existed prior to man and prior to organic matter. 
Thus, the question is decided in favour of materialism, forthe concept matter, as we already stated, epistemologicallyimplies nothing but objective reality existing independently of the human mind and reflected by it. 
 But dialectical materialism insists on the approximate, relative character of every scientific theory of the structureof matter and its properties; it insists on the absence ofabsolute boundaries in nature, on the transformation of mov-ing matter from one state into another, that from our point of view is apparently irreconcilable with it, and so forth. 
 However bizarre from the standpoint of “common sense” thetransformation of imponderable ether into ponderable matterand vice versa may appear, however “strange” may seem theabsence of any other kind of mass in the electron save electro-magnetic mass, however extraordinary may be the fact that the mechanical laws of motion are confined only to a single sphere of natural phenomena and are subordinated to the moreprofound laws of electromagnetic phenomena, and so forth— all this is but another corroboration of dialectical material-ism. 
 It is mainly because the physicists did not know dialec-tics that the new physics strayed into idealism. 
 They com-bated metaphysical (in Engels’, and not the positivist, i. 
e. 
,Humean, sense of the word) materialism and its one-sided“mechanism”, and in so doing threw out the baby with thebath-water. 
 Denying the immutability of the elements andof the properties of matter known hitherto, they ended by denying matter, i. 
e. 
, the objective reality of the physical world. 
 Denying the absolute character of some of the mostimportant and basic laws, they ended by denying all objec-tive law in nature and by declaring that a law of nature isa mere convention, “a limitation of expectation”, “a logicalnecessity”, and so forth. 
 Insisting on the approximate and relative character of our knowledge, they ended by denying the object independent of the mind, reflected approximately-correctly and relatively-truthfully by the mind. 
 And so on,and so forth, without end. 
 The opinions expressed by Bogdanov in 1899 regarding “the immutable essence of things”, the opinions of Valen-tinov and Yushkevich regarding “substance”, and so forth— are similar fruits of ignorance of dialectics. 
 From Engels’point of view, the only immutability is the reflection by thehuman mind (when there is a human mind) of an externalworld existing and developing independently of the mind. 
No other “immutability”, no other “essence”, no other “ab-solute substance”, in the sense in which these concepts were depicted by the empty professorial philosophy, exist forMarx and Engels. 
 The “essence” of things, or “substance”,is also relative; it expresses only the degree of profundity of man’s knowledge of objects; and while yesterday the pro-fundity of this knowledge did not go beyond the atom, and today does not go beyond the electron and ether, dialectical materialism insists on the temporary, relative, approximatecharacter of all these milestones in the knowledge of nature gained by the progressing science of man. 
 The electron is asinexhaustible as the atom, nature is infinite, but it infi-nitely exists . 
 And it is this sole categorical, this sole un-conditional recognition of nature’s existence outside the mind and perception of man that distinguishes dialecticalmaterialism from relativist agnosticism and idealism. 
 Let us cite two examples of the way in which the new physics wavers unconsciously and instinctively between dia-lectical materialism, which remains unknown to the bour-geois scientists, and “phenomenalism”, with its inevitablesubjectivist (and, subsequently, directly fideist) deductions. 
 This same Augusto Righi, whom Mr. 
 Valentinov was unable to interrogate on the question which interested him about materialism, writes in the introduction to his book: “What the electrons, or electrical atoms, really are remains even now a mystery; but in spite of this, the new theory isperhaps destined in time to achieve no small philosophicalsignificance, since it is arriving at entirely new hypothesesregarding the structure of ponderable matter and is strivingto reduce all phenomena of the external world to one com-mon origin. 
 “For the positivist and utilitarian tendencies of our time such an advantage may be of small consequence, and atheory may serve in the first place only as a means of con-veniently ordering and summarising facts and as a guide inthe search for further phenomena. 
 But while in former times perhaps too much confidence was placed in the faculties of the human mind, and it was considered too easy to grasp theultimate causes of all things, there is nowadays a tendencyto fall into the opposite error” (op. 
 cit. 
, S. 
 3). 
 Why does Righi dissociate himself here from the positiv-ist and utilitarian tendencies? Because, while apparently he has no definite philosophical standpoint, he instinctively clings to the reality of the external world and to the recogni-tion that the new theory is not only a “convenience” (Poin-caré), not only an “empirio-symbol” (Yushkevich), not onlya “harmonising of experience” (Bogdanov), or whatever elsesuch subjectivist fancies are called, but a further step in the cognition of objective reality. 
 Had this physicist been acquainted with dialectical materialism, his opinion of the error which is the opposite of the old metaphysical material-ism might perhaps have become the starting-point of a cor-rect philosophy. 
 But these people’s whole environmentestranges them from Marx and Engels and throws them into the embrace of vulgar official philosophy. 
 Rey too is entirely unfamiliar with dialectics. 
 But he too is compelled to state that among the modern physicists there are those who continue the traditions of “mechanism” (i. 
e. 
, materialism). 
 The path of “mechanism”, says he, is pursued not only by Kirchhoff, Hertz, Boltzmann, Maxwell, Helmholtz and Lord Kelvin. 
 “Pure mechanists, and in somerespects more mechanist than anybody else, and representingthe culmination ( l’aboutissant ) of mechanism, are those who follow Lorentz and Larmor in formulating an electricaltheory of matter and who arrive at a denial of the constancy of mass, declaring it to be a function of motion. 
 They are all mechanists because they take real motion as their starting-point ” (Rey’s italics, pp. 
 290-91). 
 “... If, for example, the recent hypotheses of Lorentz, Larmor and Langevin were, thanks to certain experimentalconfirmation, to obtain a sufficiently stable basis for the systematisation of physics, it would be certain that the laws of present-day mechanics are nothing but a corollary of thelaws of electromagnetism: they would constitute a specialcase of the latter within well-defined limits. 
 Constancy ofmass and our principle of inertia would be valid only formoderate velocities of bodies, the term ‘moderate’ being taken in relation to our senses and to the phenomena which constitute our general experience. 
 A general recasting ofmechanics would result, and hence also, a general recastingof the systematisation of physics. 
 “Would this imply the abandonment of mechanism? By no means. 
 The purely mechanist tradition would still be followed, and mechanism would pursue its normal course of development” (295). 
 “Electronic physics, which should be ranked among the theories of a generally mechanist spirit, tends at present toimpose its systematisation on physics. 
 Although the funda-mental principles of this electronic physics are not furnished by mechanics but by the experimental data of the theory of electricity, its spirit is mechanistic, because: (1) It usesfigurative (figurés ), material elements to represent physical properties and their laws; it expresses itself in terms ofperception. 
 (2) While it no longer regards physical phenome-na as particular cases of mechanical phenomena, it regards mechanical phenomena as particular cases of physical phe-nomena. 
 The laws of mechanics thus retain their direct continuity with the laws of physics, and the concepts of mechanics remain concepts of the same order as physico-chemical concepts. 
 In traditional mechanism it was motions copied ( calqués ) from relatively slow motions, which, since they alone were known and most directly observable, weretaken ... as types of all possible motions. 
 Recent experiments , on the contrary, show that it is necessary to extend our con-ception of possible motions. 
 Traditional mechanics remainsentirely intact, but it now applies only to relatively slow motions.... 
 In relation to large velocities, the laws of mo-tion are different. 
 Matter appears to be reduced to electricalparticles, the ultimate elements of the atom.... 
 (3) Motion,displacement in space, remains the only figurative ( figuré ) element of physical theory. 
 (4) Finally, what from the stand-point of the general spirit of physics comes before every other consideration is the fact that the conception of physics, its methods, its theories, and their relation to experience re-mains absolutely identical with the conception of mechan-ism, with the conception of physics held since the Renais-sance” (46-47). 
 I have given this long quotation from Rey in full because owing to his perpetual anxiety to avoid “materialist meta-physics”, it would have been impossible to expound hisstatements in any other way. 
 But however much both Reyand the physicists of whom he speaks abjure materialism, itis nevertheless beyond question that mechanics was a copyof real motions of moderate velocity, while the new physics is a copy of real motions of enormous velocity. 
 The recogni-tion of theory as a copy, as an approximate copy of objectivereality, is materialism. 
 When Rey says that among modernphysicists there “is a reaction against the conceptualist[Machist] and energeticist school”, and when he includesthe physicists of the electron theory among the representa-tives of this reaction (46), we could desire no better cor-roboration of the fact that the struggle is essentially betweenthe materialist and the idealist tendencies. 
 But we must notforget that, apart from the general prejudices against mate-rialism common to all educated philistines, the most out-standing theoreticians are handicapped by a complete ig-norance of dialectics. 
 3. 
 IS MOTION WITHOUT MATTER CONCEIVABLE? The fact that philosophical idealism is attempting to make use of the new physics, or that idealist conclusions arebeing drawn from the latter, is due not to the discovery ofnew kinds of substance and force, of matter and motion, butto the fact that an attempt is being made to conceive motionwithout matter. 
 And it is the essence of this attempt which our Machists fail to examine. 
 They were unwilling to take account of Engels’ statement that “motion without matter isunthinkable ”. 
 J. 
 Dietzgen in 1869, in his The Nature of the Workings of the Human Mind , expressed the same idea as Engels, although, it is true, not without his usual muddledattempts to “reconcile” materialism and idealism. 
 Let us leave aside these attempts, which are to a large extent to be explained by the fact that Dietzgen is arguing againstBüchner’s non-dialectical materialism, and let us examineDietzgen’s own statements on the question under considera-tion. 
 He says: “They [the idealists] want to have the gener-al without the particular, mind without matter, force with-out substance, science without experience or materia], the absolute without the relative” ( Das Wesen der menschlichen Kopfarbeit , 1903, S. 
 108). 
 Thus the endeavour to divorce motion from matter, force from substance, Dietzgen associ-ates with idealism, ranking it with the endeavour to divorcethought from the brain. 
 “Liebig,” Dietzgen continues, “who is especially fond of straying from his inductive science into the field of speculation, says in the spirit of idealism:‘force cannot be seen’” (109). 
 “The spiritualist or the ideal-ist believes in the spiritual, i. 
e. 
, ghost-like and inexplicable, nature of force” (110). 
 “The antithesis between force andmatter is as old as the antithesis between idealism and ma-terialism” (111). 
 “Of course, there is no force without mat-ter, no matter without force; forceless matter and matterlessforce are absurdities. 
 If idealist natural scientists believe inthe immaterial existence of forces, then on this point theyare not natural scientists ... but seers of ghosts” (114). 
 Thus we see that scientists who were prepared to assume that motion is conceivable without matter were to be en-countered forty years ago too, and that “on this point”Dietzgen declared them to be seers of ghosts. 
 What, then, is the connection between philosophical idealism and the di-vorce of matter from motion, the separation of substance from force? Is it not “more economical”, indeed, to conceive motion without matter? Let us imagine a consistent idealist who holds, let us say, that the entire world is his sensation, his idea, etc. 
(if we take “nobody’s” sensation or idea, this changes onlythe variety of philosophical idealism but not its essence). 
 The idealist would not even think of denying that the world is motion, i. 
e. 
, the motion of his thoughts, ideas, sensa-tions. 
 The question as to what moves, the idealist will re-ject and regard as absurd: what is taking place is a changeof his sensations, ideas come and go, and nothing more. 
Outside him there is nothing. 
 “It moves”—and that is all. 
 It is impossible to conceive a more “economical” way of thinking. 
 And no proofs, syllogisms, or definitions arecapable of refuting the solipsist if he consistently adheresto his view. 
 The fundamental distinction between the materialist and the adherent of idealist philosophy consists in the fact that the materialist regards sensation, perception, idea, and the mind of man generally, as an image of objectivereality. 
 The world is the movement of this objective reali-ty reflected by our consciousness. 
 To the movement of ideas,perceptions, etc. 
, there corresponds the movement of matteroutside me. 
 The concept matter expresses nothing more than the objective reality which is given us in sensation. 
 There-fore, to divorce motion from matter is equivalent to divorc-ing thought from objective reality, or to divorcing my sensa-tions from the external world—in a word, it is to go overto idealism. 
 The trick which is usually performed in deny-ing matter, in assuming motion without matter, consists in ignoring the relation of matter to thought. 
 The question is presented as though this relation did not exist, but in real-ity it is introduced surreptitiously; at the beginning ofthe argument it remains unexpressed, but subsequentlycrops up more or less imperceptibly. 
 Matter has disappeared, they tell us, wishing from this to draw epistemological conclusions. 
 But has thought re-mained?—we ask. 
 If not, if with the disappearance of mat-ter thought has also disappeared, if with the disappear-ance of the brain and nervous system ideas and sensations, too, have disappeared—then it follows that everything has disappeared, and your argument as a sample of “thought” (or lack of thought) has disappeared. 
 But if thought hasremained—if it is assumed that with the disappearance ofmatter, thought (idea, sensation, etc. 
) does not disappear,then you have surreptitiously gone over to the standpointof philosophical idealism. 
 And this always happens with people who wish, for the sake of “economy”, to conceive of motion without matter, for tacitly , by the very fact that they continue their argument, they are acknowledging theexistence of thought after the disappearance of matter. 
 This means that a very simple, or a very complex philosophi-cal idealism is taken as a basis; a very simple one, if it is a case of frank solipsism ( I exist, and the world is only my sensation); a very complex one, if instead of the thought,ideas and sensations of a living person, a dead abstractionis taken, that is, nobody’s thought, nobody’s idea, nobody’ssensation, but thought in general (the Absolute Idea, theUniversal Will, etc. 
), sensation as an indeterminate “ele-ment”, the “psychical”, which is substituted for the whole of physical nature, etc. 
, etc. 
 Thousands of shades of varietiesof philosophical idealism are possible and it is always pos-sible to create a thousand and first shade; and to the authorof this thousand and first little system (empirio-monism,for example) what distinguishes it from the rest may appear important. 
 From the standpoint of materialism, however, these distinctions are absolutely unessential. 
 What is essen-tial is the point of departure. 
 What is essential is that the at-tempt to think of motion without matter smuggles in thought divorced from matter—and that is philosophical idealism. 
 Therefore, for example, the English Machist Karl Pear-son, the clearest and most consistent of the Machists, who is averse to verbal artifices, directly begins the seventhchapter of his book, devoted to “matter”, with a sectionhaving the characteristic heading “All things move—butonly in conception”. 
 “It is therefore, for the sphere of per-ception, idle to ask what moves and why it moves” ( The Grammar of Science , p. 
 243). 
 Therefore, too, in the case of Bogdanov, his philosophical misadventures in fact began before his acquaintance with Mach. 
 They began from the moment he put his trust in the assertion of the eminent chemist, but poor philosopher, Ost-wald, that motion can be thought of without matter. 
 It is all the more fitting to dwell on this long-past episode inBogdanov’s philosophical development since it is impossiblewhen speaking of the connection between philosophical ideal-ism and certain trends in the new physics to ignore Ost-wald’s “energetics”. 
 “We have already said,” wrote Bogdanov in 1899, “that the nineteenth century did not succeed in definitivelyridding itself of the problem of ‘the immutable essence ofthings’. 
 This essence, under the name of ‘matter’, holds animportant place even in the world outlook of the foremostthinkers of the century” ( Fundamental Elements of the Historical Outlook on Nature , p. 
 38). 
 We said that this is a muddle. 
 The recognition of the objective reality of the outer world, the recognition ofthe existence outside our mind of eternally moving and eter-nally changing matter, is here confused with the recognitionof the immutable essence of things. 
 It is hardly possible that Bogdanov in 1899 did not rank Marx and Engels among the “foremost thinkers”. 
 But he obviously did not under-stand dialectical materialism. 
 “... In the processes of nature two aspects are usually still distinguished: matter and its motion. 
 It cannot besaid that the concept matter is distinguished by great clar-ity. 
 It is not easy to give a satisfactory answer to the ques-tion—what is matter? It is defined as the ‘cause of sensa-tions’ or as the ‘permanent possibility of sensation’; butit is evident that matter is here confused with motion.... 
” It is evident that Bogdanov is arguing incorrectly. 
 Not only does he confuse the materialist recognition of an objec-tive source of sensations (unclearly formulated in the words “cause of sensations”) with Mill’s agnostic definition of mat-ter as the permanent possibility of sensation, but the chief error here is that the author, having come within an aceof the question of the existence or non-existence of an objec-tive source of sensations, abandons this question half-way and jumps to another question, that of the existence or non-existence of matter without motion. 
 The idealist mayregard the world as the movement of our sensations (even though “socially organised” and “harmonised” to the highest degree); the materialist regards the world as the movement of an objective source, of an objective model of our sensa-tions. 
 The metaphysical, i. 
e. 
, anti-dialectical, material-ist may accept the existence of matter without motion (eventhough temporarily, before “the first impulse. 
”, etc. 
). 
 Thedialectical materialist not only regards motion as an insep-arable property of matter, but also rejects the simplified view of motion and so forth. 
 “... The most exact definition would, perhaps, be the following: ‘matter is what moves’; but this is as devoidof content as though one were to say that matter is the sub-ject of a sentence, the predicate of which is ‘moves’. 
 Thefact, most likely, is that in the epoch of statics men were wont to see something necessarily solid in the role of the subject, an ‘object’, and such an inconvenient thing forstatical thought as ‘motion’ they were prepared to tolerateonly as a predicate, as one of the attributes of ‘matter’. 
” This is something like the charge Akimov brought against the Iskrists, namely, that their programme did not con-tain the word proletariat in the nominative case! 101 Whether we say the world is moving matter, or that the world is ma-terial motion, makes no difference whatever. 
 “... But energy must have a vehicle—say those who believe in matter. 
 Why?—asks Ostwald, and with reason. 
 Must na-ture necessarily consist of subject and predicate?” (P. 
 39. 
) Ostwald’s answer, which so pleased Bogdanov in 1899, is plain sophistry. 
 Must our judgements necessarily consistof electrons and ether?—one might retort to Ostwald. 
 As amatter of fact, the mental elimination from “nature” of mat-ter as the “subject” only implies the tacit admission intophilosophy of thought as the “subject” (i. 
e. 
, as the primary, the starting-point, independent of matter). 
 Not the subject, but the objective source of sensation is eliminated, andsensation becomes the “subject”, i. 
e. 
, philosophy becomes Berkeleian, no matter in what trappings the word “sensa-tion” is afterwards decked. 
 Ostwald endeavoured to avoidthis inevitable philosophical alternative (materialism or idealism) by an indefinite use of the word “energy”, but this very endeavour only once again goes to prove the futilityof such artifices. 
 If energy is motion, you have only shift-ed the difficulty from the subject to the predicate, you have only changed the question, does matter move? into the question, is energy material? Does the transformation of energy take place outside my mind, independently of manand mankind, or are these only ideas, symbols, conventionalsigns, and so forth? And this question proved fatal to the“energeticist” philosophy, that attempt to disguise old epis-temological errors by a “new” terminology. 
 Here are examples of how the energeticist Ostwald got into a muddle. 
 In the preface to his Lectures on Natural Philosophy * he declares that he regards “as a great gain the simple and natural removal of the old difficulties inthe way of uniting the concepts matter and mind by subordi-nating both to the concept energy”. 
 This is not a gain, but a loss, because the question whether epistemological investiga-tion (Ostwald does not clearly realise that he is raising anepistemological and not a chemical issue!) is to be conduct-ed along materialist or idealist lines is not being solvedbut is being confused by an arbitrary use of the term “ener-gy”. 
 Of course, if we “subordinate” both matter and mind to this concept, the verbal annihilation of the antithesis is be-yond question, but the absurdity of the belief in sprites andhobgoblins, for instance, is not removed by calling it “ener-getics”. 
 On page 394 of Ostwald’s Lectures we read: “That all external events may be presented as processes betweenenergies can be most simply explained if our mental proc-esses are themselves energetic and impose ( aufprägen ) this property of theirs on all external phenomena. 
” This is pureidealism: it is not our thought that reflects the transforma-tion of energy in the external world, but the external worldthat reflects a “property” of our mind! The American philos-opher Hibben, pointing to this and similar passages in Ost-wald’s Lectures , aptly says that Ostwald here “appears in a Kantian disguise”: the explicability of the phenomena of theexternal world is deduced from the properties of our mind! ** “It is obvious therefore,” says Hibben, “that if the primary *Wilhelm Ostwald, Vorlesungen über Naturphilosophie , 2. 
 Aufl. 
, Leipzig, 1902, S. 
 viii. 
 **J. 
 G. 
 Hibben, “The Theory of Energetics and Its Philosophical Bearings”, The Monist , Vol. 
 XIII, No. 
 3, April 1903, pp. 
 329-30. 
 concept of energy is so defined as to embrace psychical phenomena, we have no longer the simple concept of energy as understood and recognised in scientific circles or even among the Energetiker themselves.... 
” The transformation of energy is regarded by science as an objective processindependent of the minds of men and of the experience ofmankind, that is to say, it is regarded materialistically. 
And by energy, Ostwald himself in many instances, prob-ably in the vast majority of instances, means material motion. 
 And this accounts for the remarkable phenomenon that Bogdanov, a disciple of Ostwald, having become a discipleof Mach, began to reproach Ostwald not because he does notadhere consistently to a materialistic view of energy, but because he admits the materialistic view of energy (and at times even takes it as his basis). 
 The materialists criticiseOstwald because he lapses into idealism, because he attemptsto reconcile materialism and idealism. 
 Bogdanov criticisesOstwald from the idealist standpoint. 
 In 1906 he wrote: “... Ostwald’s energetics, hostile to atomism but for the rest closely akin to the old materialism, enlisted my warmest sympathy. 
 I soon noticed, however, an important contradic-tion in his natural philosophy: although he frequently em-phasises the purely methodological significance of the concept ‘energy’, in a great number of instances he himself fails toadhere to it. 
 He every now and again converts ‘energy’ from a pure symbol of correlations between the facts of experience into the substance of experience, into the ‘world stuff’” (Empirio-monism , Bk. 
 III, pp. 
 xvi-xvii). 
 Energy is a pure symbol! After this Bogdanov may dis-pute as much as he pleases with the empirio-symbolist”Yushkevich, with the “pure Machists”, the empirio-criticists, etc. 
—from the standpoint of the materialist it is a dispute between a man who believes in a yellow devil and a man whobelieves in a green devil. 
 For the important thing is notthe differences between Bogdanov and the other Machists,but what they have in common: the idealist interpretation of “experience” and “energy”, the denial of objective reality, adaptation to which constitutes human experience and the copying of which constitutes the only scientific “methodol-ogy” and scientific “energetics”. 
 “It [Ostwald’s energetics] is indifferent to the material of the world, it is fully compatible with both the old mate-rialism and panpsychism” (i. 
e. 
, philosophical idealism?) (p. 
 xvii). 
 And Bogdanov departed from muddled energetics not by the materialist road but by the idealist road.... 
 “When energy is represented as substance it is nothing butthe old materialism minus the absolute atoms—materialismwith a correction in the sense of the continuity of the exist-ing” (ibid. 
). 
 Yes, Bogdanov left the “old” materialism, i. 
e. 
, the metaphysical materialism of the natural scientists,not for dialectical materialism, which he understood as lit-tle in 1906 as he did in 1899, but for idealism and fideism;for no educated representative of modern fideism, no imma-nentist, no “neo-criticist”, and so forth, will object to the “methodological” conception of energy, to its interpretation as a “pure symbol of correlation of the facts of experience”. 
Take Paul Carus, with whose mental make-up we have al-ready become sufficiently acquainted, and you will find thatthis Machist criticises Ostwald in the very same way as Bogdanov : “... Materialism and energetics,” writes Carus, “are exactly in the same predicament” ( The Monist , Vol. 
 XVII, 1907, No. 
 4, p. 
 536). 
 “We are very little helped by mate-rialism when we are told that everything is matter, thatbodies are matter, and that thoughts are merely a functionof matter, and Professor Ostwald’s energetics is not a whitbetter when it tells us that matter is energy, and that the soul too is only a factor of energy” (533). 
 Ostwald’s energetics is a good example of how quickly a “new” terminology becomes fashionable, and how quicklyit turns out that a somewhat altered mode of expression canin no way eliminate fundamental philosophical questionsand fundamental philosophical trends. 
 Both materialism and idealism can be expressed in terms of “energetics” (more or less consistently, of course) just as they can beexpressed in terms of “experience”, and the like. 
 Energeticistphysics is a source of new idealist attempts to conceive motionwithout matter—because of the disintegration of particlesof matter which hitherto had been accounted non-disinte-grable and because of the discovery of hitherto unknown forms of material motion. 
 4. 
 THE TWO TRENDS IN MODERN PHYSICS, AND ENGLISH SPIRITUALISM In order to illustrate concretely the philosophical bat-tle raging in present-day literature over the various con-clusions drawn from the new physics, we shall let certainof the direct participants in the “fray” speak for themselves,and we shall begin with the English. 
 The physicist Arthur W. 
 Rücker defends one trend—from the standpoint of the natu-ral scientist; the philosopher James Ward another trend—from the standpoint of epistemology. 
 At the meeting of the British Association held in Glas-gow in 1901, A. 
 W. 
 Rücker, the president of the physics sec-tion, chose as the subject of his address the question of the value of physical theory and the doubts that have been thrown on the existence of atoms, and of the ether in partic-ular. 
 The speaker referred to the physicists Poincaré andPoynting (an Englishman who shares the views of the sym-bolists, or Machists), who raised this problem, to the phi-losopher Ward, and to E. 
 Haeckel’s well-known book and attempted to present his own views. 
 * “The question at issue,” said Rücker, “is whether the hy-potheses which are at the base of the scientific theoriesnow most generally accepted are to be regarded as accuratedescriptions of the constitution of the universe around us,or merely as convenient fictions. 
” (In the terms used in our controversy with Bogdanov, Yushkevich and Co. 
: are they copies of objective reality, of moving matter, or are theyonly a “methodology”, a “pure symbol”, mere “forms oforganisation of experience”?) Rücker agrees that in practicethere may prove to be no difference between the two theories;the direction of a river can be determined as well by one who examines only the blue streak on a map or diagram as by one who knows that this streak represents a real river. 
 Theory,from the standpoint of a convenient fiction, will be an “aidto memory”, a means of “producing order” in our observa-tions in accordance with some artificial system, of “arranging *The British Association at Glasgow, 1901. 
 Presidential Address by Professor Arthur W. 
 Rücker, in The Scientific American. 
 Supple-ment , 1901, Nos. 
 1345 and 1346. 
 our knowledge”, reducing it to equations, etc. 
 We can, for instance, confine ourselves to declaring heat to be a form of motion or energy, thus exchanging “a vivid conception of moving atoms for a colourless statement as to heat energy,the real nature of which we do not attempt to define”. 
While fully recognising the possibility of achieving greatscientific successes by this method, Rücker “ventures toassert that the exposition of such a system of tactics can-not be regarded as the last word of science in the struggle for the truth”. 
 The questions still force themselves uponus: “Can we argue back from the phenomenon displayed bymatter to the constitution of matter itself ... whether wehave any reason to believe that the sketch which sciencehas already drawn is to some extent a copy, and not a mere diagram of the truth?” Analysing the problem of the structure of matter, Rücker takes air as an example, saying that it consists of gases andthat science resolves “an elementary gas into a mixtureof atoms and ether.... 
 There are those who cry ‘Halt!’ ...molecules and atoms cannot be directly perceived ... and are mere conceptions, which have their uses, but cannot be re-garded as realities”. 
 Rücker meets this objection by referringto one of numberless instances in the development of science:the rings of Saturn appear to be a continuous mass when ob-served through a telescope. 
 The mathematicians proved bycalculation that this is impossible and spectral analysis cor-roborated the conclusion reached on the basis of the calcula-tions. 
 Another objection: properties are attributed to atomsand ether such as our senses do not disclose in ordinary mat-ter. 
 Rücker answers this also, referring to such examplesas the diffusion of gases and liquids, etc. 
 A number of facts,observations and experiments prove that matter consists of discrete particles or grains. 
 Whether these particles, atoms, are distinct from the surrounding “original medium” or“basic medium” (ether), or whether they are parts of thismedium in a particular state, is still an open question,and has no bearing on the theory of the existence of atoms. 
There is no ground for denying a priori the evidence of ex-periments showing that “quasi-material substances” exist which differ from ordinary matter (atoms and ether). 
 Partic-ular errors are here inevitable, but the aggregate of scien-tific data leaves no room for doubting the existence of atoms and molecules. 
 Rücker then refers to the new data on the structure of atoms out of corpuscles (electrons) charged with negativeelectricity, and he notes the similarities in the results ofvarious experiments and calculations on the size of mole-cules: the “first approximation” gives a diameter of about100 millimicrons (millionths of a millimetre). 
 Omitting indi-vidual remarks of Rücker’s and his criticism of neo-vital-ism, 102 we quote his conclusions: “Those who belittle the ideas which have of late governed the advance of scientific theory too often assume that thereis no alternative between the opposing assertions thatatoms and the ether are mere figments of the scientific imagi-nation, or that, on the other hand, a mechanical theory of the atoms and of the ether, which is now confessedly imper-fect, would, if it could be perfected, give us a full and ade-quate representation of the underlying realities. 
 For myown part I believe that there is a via media . 
” A man in a dark room may discern objects dimly, but if he does not stumble over the furniture and does not walk into a looking-glass instead of through a door, it means that he sees somethings correctly. 
 There is no need, therefore, either to re-nounce the claim to penetrate below the surface of na-ture, or to claim that we have already fully unveiled themystery of the world around us. 
 “It may be granted that we have not yet framed a consistent image either of the nature of the atoms or of the ether in which they exist; but I havetried to show that in spite of the tentative nature of someof our theories, in spite of many outstanding difficulties,the atomic theory unifies so many facts, simplifies so muchthat is complicated, that we have a right to insist—at all events until an equally intelligible rival hypothesis is produced—that the main structure of our theory is true;that atoms are not merely aids to puzzled mathematicians,but physical realities. 
” That is how Rücker ended his address. 
 The reader will see that the speaker did not deal with epistemology, but as a matter of fact, doubtless in the name of a host of scien-tists, he was essentially defending an instinctive material-ist standpoint. 
 The gist of his position is this: The theory of physics is a copy (becoming ever more exact) of objective reality. 
 The world is matter in motion, our knowledge of which grows ever more profound. 
 The inaccuracies of Rücker’s philosophy are due to an unnecessary defence ofthe “mechanical” (why not electromagnetic?) theory of ethermotions and to a failure to understand the relation betweenrelative and absolute truth. 
 This physicist lacks only a knowledge of dialectical materialism (if we do not count, of course, those very important social considerations which induce English professors to call themselves “agnostics”). 
 Let us now see how the spiritualist James Ward criti-cised this philosophy: “Naturalism is not science, and themechanical theory of Nature, the theory which serves as itsfoundation, is no science either.... 
 Nevertheless, though Naturalism and the natural sciences, the Mechanical Theory of the Universe and mechanics as a science are logicallydistinct, yet the two are at first sight very similar andhistorically are very closely connected. 
 Between the natu-ral sciences and philosophies of the idealist (or spiritual-ist) type there is indeed no danger of confusion, for all such philosophies necessarily involve criticism of the episte-mological assumptions which science unconsciouslymakes. 
” * True! The natural sciences unconsciously assume that their teachings reflect objective reality, and only such a philosophy is reconcilable with the natural sciences! “...Notso with Naturalism, which is as innocent of any theory of knowledge as science itself. 
 In fact Naturalism, like Mate-rialism, is only physics treated as metaphysics.... 
 Natural-ism is less dogmatic than Materialism, no doubt, owing toits agnostic reservation as to the nature of ultimate reali-ty; but it insists emphatically on the priority of the mate-rial aspect of its Unknowable. 
” The materialist treats physics as metaphysics! A fa-miliar argument. 
 The recognition of an objective realityoutside man is termed metaphysics. 
 The spiritualists agreewith the Kantians and Humeans in such reproaches againstmaterialism. 
 This is understandable; for without doingaway with the objective reality of things, bodies and objects *James Ward, Naturalism and Agnosticism , 1906, Vol. 
 I, p. 
 303. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR known to everyone, it is impossible to clear the road for “real conceptions” in Rehmke’s sense!... “When the essentially philosophical question, how best to systematise experience as a whole [a plagiarism fromBogdanov, Mr. 
 Ward!], arises, the naturalist ... contendsthat we must begin from the physical side. 
 Then only arethe facts precise, determinate, and rigorously concatenated:every thought that ever stirred the human heart ... can, it holds, be traced to a perfectly definite redistribution of matter and motion.... 
 That propositions of such philosophicgenerality and scope are legitimate deductions from physicalscience, few, if any, of our modern physicists are bold enoughdirectly to maintain. 
 But many of them consider thattheir science itself is attacked by those who seek to lay bare the latent metaphysics, the physical realism, on which the Mechanical Theory of the Universe rests.... 
 The criti-cism of this theory in the preceding lectures has been so re-garded [by Rücker].... 
 In point of fact my criticism [ofthis “metaphysics”, so detested by all the Machists too]rests throughout on the expositions of a school of physicists —if one might call them so—steadily increasing in number and influence, who reject entirely the almost medieval real-ism.... 
 This realism has remained so long unquestioned,that to challenge it now seems to many to spell scientificanarchy. 
 And yet it surely verges on extravagance to sup-pose that men like Kirchhoff or Poincaré—to mention only two out of many distinguished names—who do challenge it, are seeking ‘to invalidate the methods of science’. 
 ... Todistinguish them from the old school, whom we may fairlyterm physical realists, we might call the new school phys-ical symbolists. 
 The term is not very happy, but it mayat least serve to emphasise the one difference between the two which now specially concerns us. 
 The question at issue is very simple. 
 Both schools start, of course, from thesame perceptual experiences; both employ an abstract con-ceptual system, differing in detail but essentially the same;both resort to the same methods of verification. 
 But theone believes that it is getting nearer to the ultimate reality and leaving mere appearances behind it; the other believes that it is only substituting a generalised descriptive schemethat is intellectually manageable, for the complexity of con-crete facts.... 
 In either view the value of physics as systemat-ic knowledge about [Ward’s italics] things is unaffected; its possibilities of future, extension and of practical appli-cation are in either case the same. 
 But the speculative differ-ence between the two is immense, and in this respect thequestion which is right becomes important. 
” The question is put by this frank and consistent spiritual-ist with remarkable truth and clarity. 
 Indeed, the differ-ence between the two schools in modern physics is only philosophical, only epistemological. 
 Indeed, the basic dis-tinction is only that one recognises the “ultimate” (he should have said objective) reality reflected by our theory,while the other denies it, regarding theory as only a sys-tematisation of experience, a system of empirio-symbols, and so on and so forth. 
 The new physics, having found new kinds of matter and new forms of its motion, raised the oldphilosophical questions because of the collapse of the oldphysical concepts. 
 And if the people belonging to “inter-mediate” philosophical trends (“positivists”, Humeans,Machists) are unable to put the question at issue distinct-ly, it remained for the outspoken idealist Ward to tear off all veils. 
 “... Sir A. 
 W. 
 Rücker ... devoted his Inaugural Address to a defence of physical realism against the symbolic in-terpretations recently advocated by Professors Poincaréand Poynting and by myself” (pp. 
 305-06; and in other parts of his book Ward adds to this list the names of Duhem, Pear-son and Mach; see Vol. 
 II, pp. 
 161, 63, 57, 75, 83, etc. 
). 
 “... He [Rücker] is constantly talking of ‘mental pic-tures’, while constantly protesting that atoms and ethermust be more than these. 
 Such procedure practicallyamounts to saying: In this case I can form no other picture, and therefore the reality must be like it.... 
 He [Rücker] is fair enough to allow the abstract possibility of a different men-tal picture.... 
 Nay, he allows ‘the tentative nature of someof our theories’; he admits ‘many outstanding difficulties’. 
After all, then, he is only defending a working hypothesis,and one, moreover, that has lost greatly in prestige in the last half century. 
 But if the atomic and other theories of the constitution of matter are but working hypotheses, and hy-potheses strictly confined to physical phenomena, there is no justification for a theory which maintains that mechanism is fundamental everywhere and reduces the facts of life and mind to epiphenomena—makes them, that is to say, a degree more phenomenal, a degree less real than matterand motion. 
 Such is the mechanical theory of the universe. 
Save as he seems unwittingly to countenance that, we havethen no quarrel with Sir Arthur Rücker” (pp. 
 314-15). 
 It is, of course, sheer nonsense to say that materialism ever maintained that consciousness is “less” real, or nec-essarily professed a “mechanical”, and not an electromag-netic, or some other, immeasurably more complex, pictureof the world of moving matter . 
 But in a truly tricky man-ner, much more skilfully than our Machists (i. 
e. 
, muddledidealists), the outspoken and straightforward idealist Ward seizes upon the weak points in “instinctive” natural-scien-tific materialism, as, for instance, its inability to explainthe relation of relative and absolute truth. 
 Ward turnssomersaults and declares that since truth is relative, ap-proximate, only “tentative”, it cannot reflect reality! But,on the other hand, the question of atoms, etc. 
, as “a work-ing hypothesis” is very correctly put by the spiritualist. 
 Modern, cultured fideism (which Ward directly deducesfrom his spiritualism) does not think of demanding any-thing more than the declaration that the concepts of nat-ural science are “working hypotheses”. 
 We will, sirs, sur-render science to you scientists provided you surrender epistemology, philosophy to us—such is the condition for the cohabitation of the theologians and professors in the“advanced” capitalist countries. 
 Among the other points on which Ward connects his epistemology with the “new” physics must be counted hisdetermined attack on matter . 
 What is matter and what is energy?—asks Ward, mocking at the plethora of hypotheses and their contradictoriness. 
 Is it ether or ethers?—orperhaps, some new “perfect fluid”, arbitrarily endowed withnew and improbable qualities? And Ward’s conclusion is:“... we find nothing definite except movement left. 
 Heat isa mode of motion, elasticity is a mode of motion, light and magnetism are modes of motion. 
 Nay, mass itself is, in the end, supposed to be but a mode of motion of a somethingthat is neither solid, nor liquid nor gas, that is neither itself a body nor an aggregate of bodies, that is not phe-nomenal and must not be noumenal, a veritable apeiron [a term used by the Greek philosophers signifying: infinite, boundless] on which we can impose our own terms” (Vol. 
 I,p. 
 140). 
 The spiritualist is true to himself when he divorces mo-tion from matter. 
 The movement of bodies is transformedin nature into a movement of something that is not a body with a constant mass, into a movement of an unknown charge of an unknown electricity in an unknown ether—this dialec-tics of material transformation, performed in the laboratory and in the factory, serves in the eyes of the idealist (asin the eyes of the public at large, and of the Machists) notas a confirmation of materialist dialectics, but as evidence against materialism: “...The mechanical theory, as a pro-fessed explanation of the world, receives its death-blow fromthe progress of mechanical physics itself” (143). 
 The worldis matter in motion, we reply, and the laws of its motionare reflected by mechanics in the case of moderate veloc-ities and by the electromagnetic theory in the case of great velocities. 
 “Extended, solid, indestructible atoms have always been the stronghold of materialistic views ofthe universe. 
 But, unhappily for such views, the hard, ex-tended atom was not equal to the demands which increasingknowledge made upon it” (144). 
 The destructibility ofthe atom, its inexhaustibility, the mutability of all forms of matter and of its motion, have always been the stronghold of dialectical materialism. 
 All boundaries in nature areconditional, relative, movable, and express the gradual ap-proximation of our mind towards knowledge of matter. 
 Butthis does not in any way prove that nature, matter itself,is a symbol, a conventional sign, i. 
e. 
, the product of our mind. 
 The electron is to the atom as a full stop in this book is to the size of a building 200 feet long, 100 feet broad,and 50 feet high (Lodge); it moves with a velocity as highas 270,000 kilometres per second; its mass is a functionof its velocity; it makes 500 trillion revolutions in a sec-ond—all this is much more complicated than the old me-chanics; but it is, nevertheless, movement of matter in space and time. 
 Human reason has discovered many amazingthings in nature and will discover still more, and will there-by increase its power over nature. 
 But this does not mean that nature is the creation of our mind or of abstract mind, i. 
e. 
, of Ward’s God, Bogdanov’s “substitution”, etc. 
 “Rigorously carried out as a theory of the real world, that ideal [i. 
e. 
, the ideal of “mechanism”] lands us innihilism: all changes are motions, for motions are the onlychanges we can understand, and so what moves, to be under-stood, must itself be motion” (166). 
 “As I have tried to show, and as I believe, the very advance of physics is prov-ing the most effectual cure for this ignorant faith in matterand motion as the inmost substance rather than the most ab-stract symbols of the sum of existence.... 
 We can neverget to God through a mere mechanism” (180). 
 Well, well, this is exactly in the spirit of the Studies “in” the Philosophy of Marxism ! Mr. 
 Ward, you ought to address yourself to Lunacharsky, Yushkevich, Bazarovand Bogdanov. 
 They are a little more “shamefaced” thanyou are, but they preach the same doctrine. 
 5. 
 THE TWO TRENDS IN MODERN PHYSICS, AND GERMAN IDEALISM In 1896, the well-known Kantian idealist Hermann Cohen, with unusually triumphant exultation, wrote an introduc-tion to the fifth edition of the History of Materialism (Ge-schichte des Materialismus —Ed. 
), the falsified history of materialism written by F. 
 Albert Lange. 
 “Theoretical ide-alism,” exclaimed Cohen (S. 
 xxvi), “has already begun toshake the materialism of the natural scientists, and mayneed only a little while to defeat it completely. 
” Idealismis permeating ( durchwirkung ) the new physics. 
 “Atomism must give place to dynamism.... 
” “It is a remarkable turn of affairs that research into the chemical problem of sub-stance should have led to a fundamental triumph over thematerialist view of matter. 
 Just as Thales performed thefirst abstraction of the idea of substance, and linked it withspeculations on the electron, so the theory of electricitywas destined to cause the greatest revolution in the con-ception of matter and, through the transformation of matter into force, bring about the victory of idealism”(p. 
 xxix). 
 Hermann Cohen is as clear and definite as James Ward in pointing out the fundamental philosophical trends, and does not lose himself (as our Machists do) in petty distinc-tions between this and that energeticist, symbolist, empirio-criticist, empirio-monist idealism, and so forth. 
 Cohentakes the fundamental philosophical trend of the school of physics that is now associated with the names of Mach, Poin-caré and others and correctly describes this trend as ideal-ist. 
 “The transformation of matter into force” is here for Cohen the most important triumph of idealism, just as itwas for the “ghost-seeing” scientists—whom J. 
 Dietzgen ex-posed in 1869. 
 Electricity is proclaimed a collaborator ofidealism because it has destroyed the old theory of thestructure of matter, shattered the atom and discovered new forms of material motion, so unlike the old, so totally un-investigated and unstudied, so unusual and “miraculous”,that it makes it possible to smuggle in an interpretationof nature as non-material (spiritual, mental, psychical) motion. 
 Yesterday’s limit to our knowledge of the infinites-imal particles of matter has disappeared, hence—concludes the idealist philosopher—matter has disappeared (but thought remains). 
 Every physicist and every engineer knowsthat electricity is (material) motion, but nobody knowsclearly what is moving, hence—concludes the idealist phi-losopher—we can dupe the philosophically uneducated withthe seductively “economical” proposition: let us conceive motion without matter .... 
 Hermann Cohen tries to enlist the famous physicist Hein-rich Hertz as his ally. 
 Hertz is ours—he is a Kantian, wesometimes find him admitting the a priori , he says. 
 Hertz is ours, he is a Machist—contends the Machist Kleinpeter—for in Hertz can be seen “the same subjectivist view of the nature of our concepts as in the case of Mach. 
” * This curious dispute as to where Hertz belongs is a good example of how the idealist philosophers seize on the minutest error,the slightest vagueness of expression on the part of famousscientists in order to justify their refurbished defence offideism. 
 As a matter of fact, Hertz’s philosophical pref-*Archiv für systematische Philosophie , Bd. 
 V, 1898-99, S. 
 169-70. 
 ace to his Mechanics * displays the usual standpoint of the scientist who has been intimidated by the professorial hue and cry against the “metaphysics” of materialism, but who nevertheless cannot overcome his instinctive conviction ofthe reality of the external world. 
 This has been acknowl-edged by Kleinpeter himself, who on the one hand casts tothe mass of readers thoroughly false popular pamphlets onthe theory of knowledge of natural science , in which Mach figures side by side with Hertz, while on the other hand, in specifically philosophical articles, he admits that “Hertz,as opposed to Mach and Pearson, still clings to the preju-dice that all physics can be explained in a mechanisticway”, ** that he retains the concept of the thing-in-itself and “the usual standpoint of the physicists”, and that Hertz still adheres to “a picture of the universe in itself”, and so on. 
 *** It is interesting to note Hertz’s view of energetics. 
 He writes: “If we inquire into the real reason why physicsat the present time prefers to express itself in terms ofthe theory of energy, we may answer that it is because inthis way it best avoids talking about things of which it knows very little.... 
 Of course, we are now convinced that ponderable matter consists of atoms; and in certain caseswe have fairly definite ideas of the magnitude of these atomsand of their motions. 
 But the form of the atoms, their con-nection, their motions in most cases, all these are entire-ly hidden from us.... 
 Hence our conception of atoms is therefore in itself an important and interesting object for further investigations, but is not particularly adapted toserve as a known and secure foundation for mathematicaltheories” (op. 
 cit. 
, Vol. 
 III, p. 
 21). 
 Hertz expected thatfurther study of the ether would provide an explanation ofthe “nature of traditional matter... its inertia and gravita-tional force” (Vol. 
 I, p. 
 354). 
 It is evident from this that the possibility of a non-ma-terialist view of energy did not even occur to Hertz. 
 Ener-getics served the philosophers as an excuse to desert ma-*Heinrich Hertz, Gesammelte Werke , Bd. 
 III, Leipzig, 1894, esp. 
 S. 
 1, 2, 49. 
 **Kantstudien , VIII. 
 Band, 1903, S. 
 309. 
 ***The Monist , Vol. 
 XVI, 1906, No. 
 2, p. 
 164; an article on Mach’s “monism”. 
 terialism for idealism. 
 The scientist regards energetics as a convenient method of expressing the laws of material motion at a period when, if we may so express it, physicists have left the atom but have not yet arrived at the electron. 
This period is to a large extent not yet at an end; one hypo-thesis yields place to another; nothing whatever is knownof the positive electron; only three months ago (June 22,1908), Jean Becquerel reported to the French Academy of Sciences that he had succeeded in discovering this “new component part of matter” ( Comptes rendus des séances de l’Académie des Sciences , p. 
 1311). 
 How could idealist philos-ophy refrain from taking advantage of such a favourablecircumstance as that “matter” was still only being “sought”by the human mind and was therefore no more than a “sym-bol”, etc. 
 Another German idealist, one far more reactionary than Cohen, Eduard von Hartmann, devoted a whole book to theworld outlook of modern physics ( Die Weltanschauung der modernen Physik , Leipzig, 1902). 
 We are, of course, not interested in the specific arguments of the author in favour of his own variety of idealism. 
 For us it is important only to point out that this idealist, too, notes the same phenom-ena as Rey, Ward and Cohen. 
 “Modern physics had grown upon a realist basis,” says Hartmann, “and it was only theneo-Kantian and agnostic movement of our own time thatled it to re-interpret its results in an idealist spirit” (218). 
 According to Hartmann, three epistemological systems constitute the basis of modern physics—hylo-kinetics (fromthe Greek hyle =matter, and kinesis =motion—i. 
e. 
, the recognition of physical phenomena as matter in motion),energetics, and dynamism (i. 
e. 
, the recognition of forcewithout substance). 
 Of course, the idealist Hartmann fa-vours “dynamism”, from which he draws the conclusion that the laws of nature are world-thought, in short, he “substi-tutes” the psychical for physical nature. 
 But he is forced toadmit that hylo-kinetics has the majority of physicists onits side, that it is the system that “is most frequently em-ployed” (190), that its serious defect is “materialism and atheism, which threaten from pure hylo-kinetics” (189). 
 This author quite justly regards energetics as an interme-diary system and calls it agnosticism (136). 
 Of course, it is an “ally of pure dynamism, for it dethrones substance” (pp. 
 vi, 192), but Hartmann dislikes its agnosticism as a form of “Anglomania”, which is incompatible with the genuine idealism of a true-German reac-tionary. 
 It is highly instructive to see how this irreconcilable partisan idealist (non-partisans in philosophy are just ashopelessly thick-headed as they are in politics) explains to the physicists what it means to follow one epistemological trend or another. 
 “Very few of the physicists who followthis fashion,” writes Hartmann in reference to the idealistinterpretation of the latest results in physics, “realise thefull scope and implications of such an interpretation. 
 Theyhave failed to observe that physics with its specific laws has retained significance only insofar as, despite its ideal-ism, it has adhered to realistic basic propositions, viz. 
, the existence of things-in-themselves, their real mutabil-ity in time, real causality.... 
 Only by granting these real-istic premises (the transcendental validity of causality,time and three-dimensional space), i. 
e. 
, only on the con-dition that nature, of whose laws physics speaks, coincides with a ... realm of things-in-themselves, can one speakof natural laws as distinct from psychological laws. 
 Onlyif natural laws operate in a realm independent of our mindcan they serve as an explanation of the fact that the logicallynecessary effects of our images are always images of the nat-ural-historically necessary effects of the unknown which they reflect or symbolise in our consciousness” (218-19). 
 Hartmann rightly feels that the idealism of the new phys-ics is indeed a fashion , and not a serious philosophical turn away from natural-historical materialism; and he,therefore, correctly explains to the physicists that in order to transform the “fashion” into consistent, integral philosophical idealism it is necessary radically to modifythe doctrine of the objective reality of time, space, causal-ity and natural law. 
 We cannot regard only atoms, elec-trons and ether as mere symbols, as a mere “working hypo-thesis”: time, space, the laws of nature and the whole ex-ternal world must also be proclaimed a “working hypothe-sis”. 
 Either materialism, or the universal substitutionof the psychical for the whole of physical nature; those anxious to confound the two are legion, but Bogdanov and I are not of their number. 
 Among the German physicists, Ludwig Boltzmann, who died in 1906, systematically combated the Machist tendency. 
We have already pointed out that as against those who were“carried away by the new epistemological dogmas” he simplyand clearly reduced Machism to solipsism (see above, Chap. 
I, § 6). 
 Boltzmann, of course, was afraid to call himself a materialist and even explicitly stated that he did not deny the existence of God. 
 * But his theory of knowledge is essentially materialistic, and expresses—as is admitted byS. 
 Günther, ** the historian of natural science in the nine-teenth century—the views of the majority of scientists. 
“We know,” says Boltzmann, “of the existence of all things solely from the impressions they make on our senses” (op. 
 cit. 
, S. 
 29). 
 Theory is an “image” (or copy) of nature, ofthe external world (77). 
 To those who say that matter isonly a complex of sense-perceptions, Boltzmann pointsout that in that case other people are only the sensationsof the speaker (168). 
 These “ideologues”, as Boltzmann sometimes calls the philosophical idealists, present us with a “subjective picture of the world” (176), whereas the au-thor prefers a “simpler objective picture of the world”. 
 “Theidealist compares the assertion that matter exists as wellas our sensations with the child’s opinion that a stone whichis beaten experiences pain. 
 The realist compares the asser-tion that one cannot conceive how the mental can be formed from the material, or even from the play of atoms, withthe opinion of an uneducated person who asserts that thedistance between the sun and the earth cannot be twentymillion miles, for he cannot conceive it” (186). 
 Boltzmanndoes not renounce the view that the ideal of science is to present mind and volition as “complex actions of particles of matter” (396). 
 L. 
 Boltzmann frequently polemicised against Ostwald’s energetics from the standpoint of a physicist, and arguedthat Ostwald could neither disprove nor eliminate the for-*Ludwig Boltzmann, Populäre Schriften , Leipzig, 1905, S. 
 187. 
 **Siegmund Günther, Geschichte der anorganischen Naturwissen-schaften im 19 . 
 Jahrhundert , Berlin, 1901, S. 
 942 and 941. 
 mula of kinetic energy (half the mass multiplied by the square of velocity) and that he was revolving in a vicious circle by first deducing energy from mass (by accepting the formula of kinetic energy) and then defining mass as energy(S. 
 112, 139). 
 This reminds me of Bogdanov’s paraphraseof Mach in the third book of his Empirio-monism . 
 “In sci-ence,” writes Bogdanov in reference to Mach’s Mechanics , “the concept matter is reduced to the coefficient of mass as it appears in the equations of mechanics; upon accurate anal-ysis, however, the coefficient of mass proves to be the re-ciprocal of the acceleration when two physical complexes—bodies—interact” (p. 
 146). 
 It is evident that if a certain body is taken as a unit, the motion (mechanical) of all other bodiescan be expressed as a mere relation of acceleration. 
 But this does not at all mean that “bodies” (i. 
e. 
, matter) dis-appear or cease to exist independently of our mind. 
 Whenthe whole world is reduced to the movement of electrons, itwill be possible to eliminate the electron from all equations,because it will be everywhere assumed, and the relation-ship between groups or aggregates of electrons will be re-duced to their mutual acceleration, if the forms of motion prove to be as simple as those of mechanics. 
 Combating the “phenomenalist” physics of Mach and Co. 
, Boltzmann maintained that “those who believe atomism tohave been eliminated by differential equations, cannot seethe wood for the trees” (144). 
 “If we do not wish to entertain illusions as to the significance of a differential equation ... we cannot doubt that this picture of the world (expressedin differential equations) must again by its nature be allatomic one, i. 
e. 
, an instruction that the changes in timeof a vast number of things arranged in three-dimensionalspace must be thought of in accordance with definite rules. 
 The things can, of course, be similar or dissimilar, unchange-able or changeable,” etc. 
 (146). 
 “If we are perfectly clear,”said Boltzmann in an address delivered to the Congress ofScientists held in Munich in 1899, that the phenomenalistsunder the cloak of differential equations likewise basethemselves on atom-like discrete units ( Einzelwesen ) which they have to picture as possessing now certain properties, now others for each group of phenomena, the need for asimplified, uniform atomism will soon again be felt” (223). 
 The electron theory “is developing into an atomic theory of electricity as a whole” (357). 
 The unity of nature is re-vealed in the “astonishing analogy” between the differen-tial equations of the various realms of phenomena. 
 “Thesame equations can be regarded as solving the problems ofhydrodynamics and of the theory of potentials. 
 The theoryof vortices in fluids and the theory of friction in gases ( Gas-reibung ) reveal a most astonishing analogy to the theory of electromagnetism, etc. 
” (1). 
 Those who accept “the theory of universal substitution” cannot escape the question: Whowas it that thought of “substituting” physical nature souniformly? As if in answer to those who brush aside “the physicist of the old school”, Boltzmann relates in detail how certain specialists in “physical chemistry” are adopting an episte-mological position contrary to that of Machism. 
 Vaubel,the author of “one of the best” comprehensive works of 1903(according to Boltzmann), “takes up a sharply hostile atti-tude towards the so-called phenomenalism so often recom-mended today” (381). 
 “He tries rather to obtain as con-crete and clear an idea as possible of the nature of atoms and molecules and of the forces and agencies acting betweenthem, and this idea he attempts to bring into conformitywith the most recent experiments in this field [ions, elec-trons, radium, Zeeman effect, etc. 
].... 
 The author strictlyadheres to the dualism of matter and energy, * which have this in common that each has a special law of conservation. 
 In regard to matter, the author also holds fast to the dual-ism between ponderable matter and ether, yet regards thelatter as material in the strictest sense” (381). 
 In the sec-ond volume of his work (theory of electricity) the author“from the very outset takes the view that electrical phe-nomena are determined by the interaction and movement of atom-like entities, the electrons” (383). 
 Hence, we find that what the spiritualist James Ward admitted to be true of England applies also to Germany,namely, that the physicists of the realistic school system-*Boltzmann wishes to say that the author does not attempt to conceive motion without matter. 
 To speak of dualism here is ridiculous. 
Philosophical monism and dualism consist in an adherence, consistentor inconsistent, to materialism or idealism. 
 atise the facts and discoveries of recent years no less suc-cessfully than the physicists of the symbolist school and that the essential difference between them consists “ only ” in their epistemological points of view. 
 * 6. 
 THE TWO TRENDS IN MODERN PHYSICS, AND FRENCH FIDEISM In France, idealist philosophy has seized upon the vac-illations of Machist physics with no less determination. 
 We have already seen how the neo-criticists greeted Mach’s *The work of Erich Becher, Philosophical Premises of the Exact Sciences (Philosophische Voraussetzungen der exakten Naturwissen-schaften , Leipzig, 1907), with which I became acquainted only after my book had been completed, confirms what had been said in this para-graph. 
 Holding closest of all to the epistemological point of view of Helmholtz and Boltzmann, that is, to a “shamefaced” and incomplete-ly thought-out materialism, the author devotes his work to a defenceand interpretation of the fundamental premises of physics and chem-istry. 
 This defence naturally becomes converted into a fight againstthe fashionable but increasingly-resisted Machist trend in physics(cf. 
 S. 
 91, etc. 
). 
 E. 
 Becher correctly characterises this trend as “ subjec-tive positivism ” (S. 
 iii and reduces the central point of his objection to it to a proof of the “hypothesis” of the external world (Chapters II-VII), to a proof of its “existence independently of human perceptions”(vom Wahrgenommenwerden unabhängige Existenz ). 
 The denial of this “hypothesis” by the Machists frequently leads the latter to solipsism (S. 
 78-82, etc. 
). 
 “Mach’s view that sensations and complexes of sensa-tions, and not the external world” (S. 
 138), are the only subject-matter of science, Becher calls “sensationalist-monism” ( Empfin-dungsmonismus ) and classes it with the “purely conscientialistic ten-dencies”. 
 This clumsy and absurd term is constructed from the Latinword conscientia —consciousness, and means nothing but philosophical idealism (cf. 
 S. 
 156). 
 In the last two chapters of the book E. 
 Becher quite skilfully compares the old mechanical theory with the new electri-cal theory of matter and world-picture (the “kinetico-elastic”, as theauthor puts it, with the “kinetico-electric” conception of nature). 
 Thelatter theory, based on the electron theory, is a step forward in knowl-edge of the unity of the world; according to this theory the “elementsof the material world are electrical charges” ( Ladungen , S. 
 223) . 
 “Ev-ery purely kinetic conception of nature knows nothing save a certain number of moving objects, whether they are called electrons or some-thing else. 
 The state of motion of these objects in successive time inter-vals is determined in a law-governed manner by their position and stateof motion in the preceding time interval” (225). 
 The chief defect ofBecher’s book is his absolute ignorance of dialectical materialism. 
 This ignorance frequently leads him into confusion and absurdity, on which it is impossible to dwell here. 
 Mechanics and how they immediately discerned the idealist character of the basis of Mach’s philosophy. 
 The French Machist, Henri Poincaré, was even more successful in this respect. 
 The most reactionary idealist philosophy, the implications of which were definitely fideistic, immediate-ly seized upon his theory. 
 An adherent of this philosophy, Le Roy, argued as follows: the truths of science are con-ventional signs, symbols; you have abandoned the absurd, “metaphysical” claims to knowledge of objective reality— well then, be logical and agree with us that science has prac-tical significance only for one sphere of human activity and that religion has a no less real significance for another sphere of activity; “symbolic”, Machist science has no right to deny theology. 
 H. 
 Poincaré was abashed by these conclusions and in his book Value of Science made a spe-cial attack on them. 
 But just see what epistemological position he was obliged to adopt in order to rid himself of allies of the type of Le Roy. 
 He writes: “M. 
 Le Roy re-gards the intellect as incurably impotent only in order to give greater place to other sources of knowledge, for in-stance, the heart, sentiment, instinct and faith” (214-15). 
 “I cannot follow him right to the end,” he says. 
 Scientific laws are conventions, symbols, but “if scientific ‘recipes’ have a value as rules of action, it is because we know that, in general at least, they are successful. 
 But to know this is already to know something; and if so, how can you say that we can know nothing?” (219). 
 H. 
 Poincaré resorts to the criterion of practice. 
 But he only shifts the question without settling it; for this criterion may be interpreted in a subjective as well as in an objective way. 
 Le Roy also admits this criterion for science and industry; all he denies is that this criterion proves objective truth, for such a denial suffices him for admitting the subjective truth of religion along with the subjective truth of science (i. 
e. 
, as not existing apart from mankind). 
 Poincaré realises that one cannot limit oneself to a reference to practice in arguing against Le Roy, and he passes to the question of the objectivity of science. 
 “What is the criterion of its objectivity? Well, it is ex-actly the same as the criterion of our belief in external objects. 
 These objects are real inasmuch as the sensations they evoke in us ( qu’ils nous font éprouver ) appear to us to be united by some sort of indestructible cement and not by an ephemeral accident” (269-70). 
 The author of such a remark may well be a great physi-cist, but it is absolutely indisputable that only the Voro-shilov-Yushkeviches can take him seriously as a philosopher. 
Materialism is declared to have been destroyed by a “theory”which at the first onslaught of fideism takes refuge under the wing of materialism ! For it is the purest materialism to say that sensations are evoked in us by real objects andthat ‘belief” in the objectivity of science is the same as“belief” in the objective existence of external objects. 
 “...It can be said, for instance, that ether has no less re-ality than any external body” (270). 
 What an outcry our Machists would have raised had a materialist said that! How many feeble witticisms wouldhave been uttered at the expense of “ethereal materialism”,and so forth. 
 But five pages later the founder of recent em-pirio-symbolism declares: “Everything that is not thoughtis pure nothing, since we can think nothing but thought” (276). 
 You are mistaken, M. 
 Poincaré; your works prove that there are people who can only think what is entirelydevoid of thought. 
 To this class of people belongs the no-torious muddler, Georges Sorel, who maintains that the“first two parts” of Poincaré’s book on the value of scienceare written in the “spirit of Le Roy” and that therefore these two philosophers can be “reconciled” as follows: the attempt to establish an identity between science and the world is anillusion; there is no need to raise the question whetherscience can have knowledge of nature or not, for it is suf-ficient that science should correspond with the mechanismscreated by us (Georges Sorel, Les préoccupations métaphy-siques des physiciens modernes , Paris, 1907, pp. 
 77, 80, 81). 
 But while it is sufficient merely to mention the “philos-ophy” of Poincaré and pass on, it is imperative to dwell atsome length on the work of A. 
 Rey. 
 We have already pointedout that the two basic trends in modern physics, which Reycalls the “conceptualist” and the “neo-mechanistic”, reduce themselves to the difference between the idealist and the materialist epistemologies. 
 We must now see how the posi-tivist Rey solves a problem which is diametrically opposed to that broached by the spiritualist James Ward and the idealists Cohen and Hartmann, the problem, namely, not of seizing upon the philosophical mistakes of the new phys-ics, its leanings towards idealism, but of rectifying thesemistakes and of proving the illegitimacy of the idealist(and fideist) conclusions drawn from the new physics. 
 A thread that runs through the whole of Rey’s work is the recognition of the fact that the new physical theory of the “conceptualists” (Machists) has been seized upon by fideism (pp. 
 ii, 17, 220, 362, etc. 
) and “ philosophical ideal-ism” (200), scepticism as to the rights of the intellect and the rights of science (210, 220), subjectivism (311), and soforth. 
 Therefore, Rey quite rightly makes an analysis ofthe “opinions of the physicists of the objective validity of physics” (3) the centre of his work. 
 And what are the results of this analysis?Let us take the basic concept, the concept of experience Rey assures us that Mach’s subjectivist interpretation(for the sake of simplicity and brevity we shall take Machas the representative of the school which Rey terms con-ceptualist) is a sheer misunderstanding. 
 It is true that one of the “outstanding new features of the philosophy of theend of the nineteenth century” is that “empiricism, becom-ing ever subtler and richer in nuances, leads to fideism, tothe supremacy of faith—this same empiricism that was oncethe mighty weapon of scepticism against the assertions of metaphysics. 
 Has not at bottom the real meaning of the word ‘experience’ been distorted, little by little, by imper-ceptible nuances? Experience, when returned to the condi-tions of its existence, to that experimental science whichrenders it exact and refined, leads us to necessity and totruth” (398). 
 There is no doubt that all Machism, in the broad sense of the term, is nothing but a distortion by means of imperceptible nuances, of the real meaning of theword “experience”! But how does Rey, who accuses onlythe fideists of distortion, but not Mach himself, correct thisdistortion? Listen. 
 “Experience is by definition a knowl-edge of the object. 
 In physical science this definition is more in place than anywhere else.... 
 Experience is that over which our mind has no command, that which our desires,our volition, cannot control, that which is given and which is not of our own making. 
 Experience is the object that faces ( en face du ) the subject” (314). 
 Here you have an example of how Rey defends Machism! What penetrating genius Engels revealed when he dubbedthe latest type of adherents of philosophical agnosticismand phenomenalism “shamefaced materialists”. 
 The posi-tivist and ardent phenomenalist, Rey, is a superb specimen ofthis type. 
 If experience is “knowledge of the object”, if “experience is the object that faces the subject”, if experi-ence means that “something external ( quelque chose du de-hors ) exists and necessarily exists” ( se pose et en se posant s’impose —p. 
 324), this obviously amounts to materialism! Rey’s phenomenalism, his ardent and emphatic assertionthat nothing exists save sensations, that the objective is that which is generally valid, etc. 
, etc. 
—all this is only a fig-leaf, an empty verbal covering for materialism, since we are told: “Objective is that which is given from without, imposed (imposé ) by experience; it is that which is not of our mak-ing, but which is made independently of us and which toa certain extent makes us” (320). 
 Rey defends “conceptu-alism” by destroying conceptualism! The refutation of the idealist implications of Machism is achieved only by inter-preting Machism after the manner of shamefaced material-ism. 
 Having himself admitted the distinction between thetwo trends in modern physics, Rey toils in the sweat of hisbrow to obliterate all distinctions in the interests of the materialist trend. 
 Rey says of the neo-mechanist school, for instance, that it does not admit the “least doubt, theleast uncertainty” as to the objectivity of physics (237):“Here [i. 
e. 
, on the basis of the doctrines of this school]one feels remote from the detours one was obliged to makefrom the standpoint of the other theories of physics in or-der to arrive at the assertion of this objectivity. 
” But it is just such “detours” of Machism that Rey con-ceals by casting a veil over them throughout his exposition. 
The fundamental characteristic of materialism is that itstarts from the objectivity of science, from the recognition of objective reality reflected by science, whereas idealism needs “detours” in order, in one way or another, to “deduce” objectivity from mind, consciousness, the “psychical”. 
 “Theneo-mechanist [i. 
e. 
, the prevailing] school in physics,” says Rey, “ believes in the reality of physical theory just as hu-manity believes in the reality of the external world” (p. 
 234, § 22: Thesis). 
 For this school “theory aims at being a copy (le décalque ) of the object” (235) True. 
 And this fundamental trait of the “neo-mecha-nist” school is nothing but the basis of materialist episte-mology. 
 No attempts of Rey to dissociate himself from thematerialists or to assure us that the neo-mechanists are also in essence phenomenalists, etc. 
, can weaken this basic fact. 
 The essence of the difference between the neo-mech-anists (materialists who are more or less shamefaced) andthe Machists is that the latter depart from this theory of knowledge, and departing from it inevitably fall into fideism. 
 Take Rey’s attitude to Mach’s theory of causality and necessity in nature. 
 Only at first glance, Rey assures us, does it appear that Mach is “approaching scepticism” and“subjectivism” (76); this “ambiguity” ( équivoque , p. 
 115) disappears if Mach’s teaching is taken as a whole. 
 And Reytakes it as a whole, quotes a series of passages from theWärmelehre and the Analysis of Sensations , and specially deals with the chapter on causality in the former book, but ... he takes care not to quote the decisive passage , Mach ’s declaration that there is no physical necessity , but only logical necessity ! All that one can say of such a procedure is that it does not interpret Mach but embellishes him, that itobliterates the differences between “neo-mechanism” and Machism. 
 Rey’s conclusion is that “Mach adopts the analy-sis and conclusions of Hume, Mill and all the phenomenal-ists, according to whom the causal relation has no sub-stantiality and is only a habit of thought. 
 He has also adopt-ed the fundamental thesis of phenomenalism, of which thedoctrine of causality is only a consequence, namely, that nothing exists save sensations. 
 But he adds, along a purely objectivist line, that science, analysing sensations, discov-ers in them certain permanent and common elements which,although abstracted from these sensations, have the samereality as the sensations themselves, for they are takenfrom sensations by means of perceptual observation. 
 And these permanent and common elements, such as energy and its various forms, are the foundation for the systemati-sation of physics” (117). 
 This means that Mach accepts Hume’s subjective theory of causality and interprets it in an objectivist sense! Rey shirks the issue, defends Mach by referring to his inconsist-ency, and comes to the conclusion that in the “real” inter-pretation of experience the latter leads to “necessity”. 
Now, experience is what is given to us from without; and ifthe necessity of nature and its laws are also given to manfrom without, from an objectively real nature, then, of course, all difference between Machism and materialism van-ishes. 
 Rey defends Machism against the charge of “neo-mech-anism” by capitulating to the latter all along the line, re-taining the word phenomenalism but not the essence of thattrend. 
 Poincaré, for instance, fully in the spirit of Mach, de-rives the laws of nature—including even the tri-dimension-ality of space—from “convenience”. 
 But this does not at allmean “arbitrary”, Rey hastens to “correct”. 
 Oh no, “con-venient” here expresses “ adaptation to the object ” (Rey’s italics, p. 
 196). 
 What a superb differentiation between thetwo schools and “refutation” of materialism!... “If Poin-caré’s theory is logically separated by an impassable gulf from the ontological interpretation of the mechanist school[i. 
e. 
, from the latter’s acceptance of theory as a copy ofthe object] ... if Poincaré’s theory lends itself to the sup-port of philosophical idealism, in the scientific sphere atleast it agrees very well with the general evolution of the ideas of classical physics and the tendency to regard phys-ics as objective knowledge, as objective as experience,that is, as the sensations from which experience proceeds”(200). 
 On the one hand, one cannot but recognise; on the other hand, it must be admitted. 
 On the one hand, an impassable gulf divides Poincaré from neo-mechanism, although Poin-caré stands in between Mach’s “conceptualism” and neo-mechanism, while Mach, it would appear, is not separatedby any gulf from neo-mechanism. 
 On the other hand, Poin-caré is quite compatible with classical physics which, ac-cording to Rey himself, completely accepts the standpoint of “mechanism”. 
 On the one hand, Poincaré’s theory lends itself to the support of philosophical idealism; on the otherhand, it is compatible with the objective interpretation of the word “experience”. 
 On the one hand, these bad fideists have distorted the meaning of the word “experience” by im-perceptible deviations, by departing from the correct view that “experience is the object”; on the other hand, the ob-jectivity of experience means only that experience is sensa-tion ... with which both Berkeley and Fichte entirely agree! Rey became muddled because he had set himself the im-possible task of “reconciling” the opposition between the materialist and the idealist schools in the new physics. 
 He seeks to tone down the materialism of the neo-mechanistschool, attributing to phenomenalism the views of physicistswho regard their theory as a copy of the object. 
 * And he seeks to tone down the idealism of the conceptualist schoolby pruning away the most emphatic declarations of its ad-herents and interpreting the rest in the spirit of shame-faced materialism. 
 How fictitious, and at the same time la-boured, in Rey’s disavowal of materialism is shown, for ex-ample, by his opinion of the theoretical significance ofthe differential equation of Maxwell and Hertz. 
 In the *The “conciliator”, A. 
 Rey, not only cast a veil over the formula-tion of the question by philosophical materialism but also ignored themost clearly expressed materialistic declarations of the French physi-cists. 
 He did not mention, for example, Alfred Cornu, who died in 1902. 
That physicist met the Ostwaldian “destruction [or conquest, Ueber-windung ] of scientific materialism” with a contemptuous remark regarding pretentious journalistic treatment of the question (see Revue générale des sciences , 1895, pp. 
 1030-31). 
 At the international congress of physicists held in Paris in 1900, Cornu said: “...The deeper we pene-trate into the knowledge of natural phenomena, the more does the boldCartesian conception of the mechanism of the universe develop and be-come more exact, namely, that in the physical world there is nothing save matter and motion. 
 The problem of the unity of physical forces ...has again come to the fore after the great discoveries which markedthe end of this century. 
 Also the constant concern of our modern leaders,Faraday, Maxwell, Hertz (to mention only the illustrious dead), was todefine nature more accurately and to unravel the properties of this elusive matter (matière subtile ), the receptacle of world energy.... 
 The return to Cartesian ideas is obvious.... 
” ( Rapports preséntés au congrès international de physique , Paris, 1900, t. 
 4-me, p. 
 7. 
) Lucien Poincaré, in his book Modern Physics , justly remarks that this Cartesian idea was taken up and developed by the Encyclopaedists of the eighteenth cen-tury ( La physique moderne , Paris, 1906, p. 
 14). 
 But neither this physicist nor A. 
 Cornu knew that the dialectical materialists Marx and Engels had freed this fundamental premise of materialism from the one-sided-ness of mechanical materialism. 
 opinion of the Machists, the fact that these physicists lim-it their theory to a system of equations refutes material-ism: there are equations and nothing else—no matter, no objective reality, only symbols. 
 Boltzmann refutes thisview, fully aware that he is refuting phenomenalist physics. 
Rey refutes this view, thinking he is defending phenomenal-ism! He says: “We could not refuse to class Maxwell andHertz among the ‘mechanists’ because they limited them-selves to equations similar to the differential equations of La-grange’s dynamics. 
 This does not mean that in the opinionof Maxwell and Hertz we shall be unable to base a mechan-ical theory of electricity on real elements. 
 Quite the con-trary, the fact that we represent electrical phenomena in atheory the form of which is identical with the general form of classical mechanics is proof of the possibility”... (253). 
 The indefiniteness of the present solution of the problem“will diminish in proportion as the nature of the quantities, i. 
e. 
, elements that figure in the equations, is more pre-cisely determined”. 
 The fact that one or another form ofmaterial motion has not yet been investigated is not regard-ed by Rey as a reason for denying the materiality of motion. 
 “The homogeneity of matter” (262), not as a postulate,but as a result of experience and of the development of sci-ence, “the homogeneity of the object of physics”—this isthe condition that makes the application of measurementand mathematical calculations possible. 
 Here is Rey’s estimate of the criterion of practice in the theory of knowledge: “Contrary to the propositions ofscepticism, it seems legitimate to say that the practicalvalue of science is derived from its theoretical value” (368).... 
Rey prefers not to speak of the fact that these propositionsof scepticism are unequivocally accepted by Mach, Poin-caré and their entire school. 
 “They [the practical value and theoretical value of science] are the two inseparable andstrictly parallel aspects of its objective value. 
 To say thata law of nature has practical value ... is fundamentally thesame as saying that this law of nature has objectivity. 
 Toact on the object implies to modify the object; it implies a reaction on the part of the object that conforms to the ex-pectation or anticipation contained in the proposition invirtue of which we acted on the object. 
 Hence, this expecta-tion or anticipation contains elements controlled by the ob-ject and by the action it undergoes.... 
 In these diverse theo-ries there is thus a part of objectivity” (368). 
 This is a thor-oughly materialist, and only materialist, theory of knowl-edge, for other points of view, and Machism in particular, denythat the criterion of practice has objective significance, i. 
e. 
,significance that does not depend upon man and mankind. 
 To sum up, Rey approached the question from an angle entirely different from that of Ward, Cohen and Co. 
, but he arrived at the same result, namely, the recognition thatthe materialist and idealist trends form the basis of thedivision between the two principal schools in modern physics. 
 7. 
 A RUSSIAN “IDEALIST PHYSICIST” Owing to certain unfortunate conditions under which I am obliged to work, I have been almost entirely unable toacquaint myself with the Russian literature on the subjectunder discussion. 
 I shall confine myself to an expositionof an article that has an important bearing on my theme written by our notorious reactionary philosopher, Mr. 
 Lo-patin. 
 The article, entitled “An Idealist Physicist”, ap-peared last year in Voprosy Filosofii i Psikhologii , 103 (1907, September-October). 
 A true-Russian philosophical ideal-ist, Mr. 
 Lopatin bears about the same relation to the con-temporary European idealists as, for example, the Union of the Russian People 104 does to the reactionary parties of the West. 
 All the more instructive is it, therefore, to seehow similar philosophical trends manifest themselves intotally different cultural and social surroundings. 
 Mr. 
 Lo-patin’s article is, as the French say, an éloge —a eulogy— of the Russian physicist, the late N. 
 I. 
 Shishkin (died 1906). 
 Mr. 
 Lopatin was fascinated by the fact that this cultured man, who was much interested in Hertz and the new physicsgenerally, was not only a Right-wing Constitutional-Demo-crat (p. 
 339) but a deeply religious man, a devotee of thephilosophy of Vladimir Solovyov, and so on and so forth. 
However, in spite of the fact that his main line of “endeav-our” lies in the borderland between philosophy and the police department, Mr. 
 Lopatin has also furnished certain mate-rial for a characterisation of the epistemological views of this idealist physicist. 
 Mr. 
 Lopatin writes: “He was a genuine positivist in his tireless endeavour to give the broad-est possible criticism of the methods of investigation, sup-positions and facts of science from the standpoint of theirsuitability as means and material for the constructionof an integral and perfected world outlook. 
 In this respectN. 
 I. 
 Shishkin was the very antipode of many of his contem-poraries. 
 In previous articles of mine in this periodical, I have frequently endeavoured to explain the heterogeneous and often shaky materials from which the so-called scientificworld outlook is made up. 
 They include established facts,more or less bold generalisations, hypotheses that are con-venient at the given moment for one or another field ofscience, and even auxiliary scientific fictions. 
 And all this is elevated to the dignity of incontrovertible objective truths, from the standpoint of which all other ideas and allother beliefs of a philosophical and religious nature must bejudged, and everything in them that is not indicated in thesetruths must be rejected. 
 Our highly talented natural scien-tist and thinker, Professor V. 
 I. 
 Vernadsky, has shown with exemplary clarity how shallow and out of place are such claims to convert the scientific views of a given historicalperiod into an immobile, dogmatic system obligatory forall. 
 Moreover, it is not only the broad reading public thatis guilty of making such a conversion [ footnote by Mr. 
 Lopatin : “For the broad public a number of popular books have been written, the purpose of which is to foster the conviction that there exists such a scientific catechismproviding an answer to all questions. 
 Typical works ofthis kind are Büchner’s Force and Matter and Haeckel’s The Riddle of the Universe ”] and not only individual scien-tists in particular branches of science; what is even more strange is that this sin is frequently committed by the of-ficial philosophers, all of whose efforts are at times di-rected only to proving that they are saying nothing butwhat has been said before them by representatives of theseveral sciences, and that they are only saying it in theirown language. 
 “N. 
 I. 
 Shishkin had no trace of prejudiced dogmatism. 
 He was a convinced champion of the mechanical explanationof the phenomena of nature, but for him it was only a meth-od of investigation...” (341). 
 So, so ... a familiar refrain! “He was far from believing that the mechanical theory re-veals the true nature of the phenomena investigated; he regarded it only as the most convenient and fertile methodof unifying and explaining them for the purposes of science. 
For him, therefore, the mechanical conception of natureand the materialist view of nature by no means coincide.... 
”Exactly as in the case of the authors of the Studies “in” the Philosophy of Marxism ! “Quite the contrary, it seemed to him that in questions of higher order, the mechanical the-ory ought to adopt a very critical, even a conciliatory at-titude. 
 ” In the language of the Machists this is called “over-coming the obsolete, narrow and one-sided” antithesis be-tween materialism and idealism.... 
 “Questions of the first beginning and ultimate end of things, of the inner natureof our mind, of freedom of the will, the immortality of thesoul and so forth, cannot in their full breadth of meaningcome within its scope since as a method of investigationit is confined within the natural limits of its applicabil-ity solely to the facts of physical experience” (342).... 
 The last two lines are an undoubted plagiarism from A. 
 Bog-danov’s Empirio-monism . 
 “Light can be regarded”—wrote Shishkin in his article “Psycho-physical Phenomena from the Standpoint of theMechanical Theory” ( Voprosy Filosofii i Psikhologii , Bk. 
 1, p. 
 127)—“as matter, as motion, as electricity, as sen-sation. 
” There is no doubt that Mr. 
 Lopatin is absolutely right in ranking Shishkin among the positivists and that thisphysicist belonged entirely to the Machist school of thenew physics. 
 By his statement on light, Shishkin means to say that the various methods of regarding light are var-ious methods of “organising experience” (in A. 
 Bogdanov’sterminology), all equally legitimate from different pointsof view, or that they are various “connections of elements”(in Mach’s terminology), and that, in any case, the physi-cists’ theory of light is not a copy of objective reality. 
 But Shishkin argues very badly. 
 “Light can be regarded as matter, as motion...” he says. 
 But in nature there is nei-ther matter without motion nor motion without matter. 
 Shishkin’s first “apposition” is meaningless.... 
 “As electrici-ty.... 
” Electricity is a movement of matter, hence Shishkin is wrong here too. 
 The electromagnetic theory of light has shown that light and electricity are forms of motion of oneand the same matter (ether).... 
 “As sensation.... 
” Sensa-tion is an image of matter in motion. 
 Save through sensa-tions, we can know nothing either of the forms of matteror of the forms of motion; sensations are evoked by the ac-tion of matter in motion upon our sense-organs. 
 That is how science views it. 
 The sensation of red reflects ethervibrations of a frequency of approximately 450 trillions persecond. 
 The sensation of blue reflects ether vibrations ofa frequency of approximately 620 trillions per second. 
 Thevibrations of the ether exist independently of our sensa-tions of light. 
 Our sensations of light depend on the ac-tion of the vibrations of the ether on the human organ ofvision. 
 Our sensations reflect objective reality, i. 
e. 
, some-thing that exists independently of humanity and of humansensations. 
 That is how science views it. 
 Shishkin’s argu-ment against materialism is the cheapest sophistry. 
 8. 
 THE ESSENCE AND SIGNIFICANCE OF “PHYSICAL” IDEALISM We have seen that the question of the epistemological deductions that can be drawn from the new physics has been raised and is being discussed from the most varied pointsof view in English, German and French literature. 
 Therecan be no doubt that we have before us a certain interna-tional ideological current, which is not dependent upon anyone philosophical system, but which is the result of cer-tain general causes lying outside the sphere of philosophy. 
 The foregoing review of the facts undoubtedly shows thatMachism is “connected” with the new physics, but at thesame time reveals that the idea of this connection spreadby our Machists is fundamentally incorrect . 
 As in philos-ophy, so in physics, our Machists slavishly follow the fa-shion , and are unable from their own, Marxist, standpoint to give a general survey of particular currents and to judgethe place they occupy. 
 A double falsity pervades all the talk about Mach’s phi-losophy being “the philosophy of twentieth-century nat-ural science”, “the recent philosophy of the sciences”, “re-cent natural-scientific positivism” and so forth. 
 (Bogdanovin the introduction to Analysis of Sensations , pp. 
 iv, xii; cf. 
 also Yushkevich, Valentinov and Co. 
) Firstly, Machismis ideologically connected with only one school in one branch of modern natural science. 
 Secondly, and this is the main point , what in Machism is connected with this school is not what distinguishes it from all other trends and systemsof idealist philosophy , but what it has in common with phi-losophical idealism in general . 
 It suffices to cast a glance at the entire ideological current in question as a whole in or-der to leave no shadow of doubt as to the truth of this state-ment. 
 Take the physicists of this school: the German Mach, the Frenchman Henri Poincaré, the Belgian P. 
 Duhem, theEnglishman Karl Pearson. 
 They have much in common:they have the same basis and are following the same direc-tion, as each of them rightly acknowledges. 
 But what theyhave in common includes neither the doctrine of empirio-criticism in general, nor Mach’s doctrine, say, of the “world-elements” in particular. 
 The three latter physicists evenknow nothing of either of these doctrines. 
 They have “only”one thing in common—philosophical idealism, towardswhich they all, without exception, tend more or less con-sciously, more or less decisively. 
 Take the philosophers who base themselves on this school of the new physics, who try to give it an epistemological basis and to develop it, and youwill again find the German immanentists, the disciples ofMach, the French neo-criticists and idealists, the English spir-itualists, the Russian Lopatin and, in addition, the oneand only empirio-monist, A. 
 Bogdanov. 
 They all have only one thing in common, namely, that they all—more or less consciously, more or less decisively, with an abrupt andprecipitate slant towards fideism or with a personal aversionto it (Bogdanov)—are vehicles of philosophical idealism. 
The fundamental idea of the school of the new physicsunder discussion is denial of the objective reality given us in sensation and reflected in our theories, doubt as to the existence of such a reality. 
 Here this school departsfrom materialism (inaccurately called realism, neo-mecha-nism, hylo-kinetism, and not in any appreciable degree consciously developed by the physicists themselves), which by general acknowledgement prevails among the physicists —and departs from it as a school of “physical” idealism. 
 To explain this last term, which sounds very strange, it is necessary to recall an episode in the history of mod-ern philosophy and modern science. 
 In 1866 L. 
 Feuerbachattacked Johannes Müller, the famous founder of modern physiology, and ranked him with the “physiological ideal-ists” ( Werke , Bd. 
 X, S. 
 197). 
 The idealism of this phys-iologist consisted in the fact that when investigating thesignificance of the mechanism of our sense-organs in re-lation to sensations, showing, for instance, that the sensa-tion of light is produced as the result of the action of var-ious stimuli on the eye, he was inclined to arrive from this at a denial that our sensations are images of objec-tive reality. 
 This tendency of one school of scientists to-wards “physiological idealism”, i. 
e. 
, towards an idealistinterpretation of certain data of physiology, was very ac-curately discerned by L. 
 Feuerbach. 
 The “connection” be-tween physiology and philosophical idealism, chiefly of the Kantian kind, was for a long time after that exploitedby reactionary philosophy. 
 F. 
 A. 
 Lange made great playwith physiology in support of Kantian idealism and inrefutation of materialism; while among the immanentists(whom Bogdanov so incorrectly places midway between Mach and Kant), J. 
 Rehmke in 1882 specially campaigned against the alleged confirmation of Kantianism by physiol-ogy. 
 * That a number of eminent physiologists at that time gravitated towards idealism and Kantianism is as indisput-able as that today a number of eminent physicists gravitate towards philosophical idealism. 
 “Physical” idealism, i. 
e. 
, the idealism of a certain school of physicists at the end of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the twen-tieth century, no more “refutes” materialism, no more es-tablishes the connection between idealism (or empirio-criticism) and natural science, than did the similar effortsof F. 
 A. 
 Lange and the “physiological” idealists. 
 The devia-*Johannes Rehmke, Philosophie und Kantianismus , Eisenach, 1882, S. 
 15, et seq. 
 tion towards reactionary philosophy manifested in both cases by one school of natural scientists in one branch of natural science is a temporary deflection, a transitory period of sickness in the history of science, an ailment of growth,mainly caused by the abrupt break-down of old established concepts. 
 The connection between modern “physical” idealism and the crisis of modern physics is, as we have already pointed out, generally acknowledged. 
 “The arguments of sceptical criticism levelled against modern physics”—writes A. 
 Rey,who is referring not so much to the sceptics as to the outspoken adherents of fideism, like Brunetière—“essentiallyamount to the proverbial argument of all sceptics: thediversity of opinions” (among physicists). 
 But this di-versity “cannot be any proof against the objectivity of physics”. 
 “In the history of physics, as in history gener-ally, one can distinguish great periods which differ bythe form and general aspect of theories.... 
 But as soonas a discovery is made that affects all fields of physicsbecause it establishes some cardinal fact hitherto badly or very partially perceived, the entire aspect of physics is modified; a new period begins. 
 This is what occurred afterNewton’s discoveries, and after the discoveries of Joule-Mayer and Carnot-Clausius. 
 The same thing, apparently,is taking place since the discovery of radioactivity.... 
The historian who later sees things from the necessary distance has no difficulty in discerning a steady evolution where contemporaries saw conflicts, contradictions, and di-visions into various schools. 
 Apparently, the crisis whichphysics has undergone in recent years (despite the conclu-sions drawn from it by philosophical criticism) is no differ-ent. 
 It even excellently illustrates the typical crisis of growth ( crise de croissance ) occasioned by the great modern discoveries. 
 The undeniable transformation of physics whichwill result (could there be evolution or progress withoutit?) will not perceptibly alter the scientific spirit” (op. 
 cit. 
,pp. 
 370-72). 
 Rey the conciliator tries to unite all schools of modern physics against fideism! This is a falsity, well meant, but a falsity nevertheless; for the deviation of the school ofMach-Poincaré-Pearson towards idealism (i. 
e. 
, refined fide-ism) is beyond dispute. 
 And the objectivity of physics that is associated with the basis of the “scientific spirit”, as dis-tinct from the fideist spirit, and that Rey defends so ar-dently, is nothing but a “shamefaced” formulation of mate-rialism. 
 The basic materialist spirit of physics, as of all mod-ern science, will overcome all crises, but only by the indis-pensable replacement of metaphysical materialism by dia-lectical materialism. 
 Rey the conciliator very often tries to gloss over the fact that the crisis in modern physics consists in the lat-ter’s departure from a direct, resolute and irrevocablerecognition of the objective value of its theories. 
 But factsare stronger than all attempts at reconciliation. 
 The math-ematicians, writes Rey, “in dealing as a rule with a science, the subject-matter of which, apparently at least, is created by the mind of the scientist, and in which, at any rate, con-crete phenomena are not involved in the investigation,have formed too abstract a conception of the science of phys-ics. 
 Attempts have been made to bring it ever closer to math-ematics, and a general conception of mathematics has been transposed into a general conception of physics.... 
 This is an invasion of the mathematical spirit into the methodsof judging and understanding physics that is denouncedby all the experimenters. 
 And is it not to this influence,none the less powerful because at times concealed, thatare often due the uncertainty, the wavering of mind regard-ing the objectivity of physics, and the detours made or the obstacles surmounted in order to demonstrateit?...” (227). 
 This is excellently said. 
 “Wavering of mind” as to the objectivity of physics—this is the very essence of fashion-able “physical” idealism. 
 “... The abstract fictions of mathematics seem to have interposed a screen between physical reality and the man-ner in which the mathematicians understand the science ofthis reality. 
 They vaguely feel the objectivity of physics.... 
Although they desire above all to be objective when theyengage in physics; although they seek to find and retain a foothold in reality, they are still haunted by old habits. 
 So that even in the concepts of energetics, which had tobe built more solidly and with fewer hypotheses than the old mechanism—which sought to copy ( décalquer ) the sen-sible universe and not to reconstruct it—we are still deal-ing with the theories of the mathematicians.... 
 They [the mathematicians] have done everything to save objectiv-ity, for they are well aware that without it there can beno physics.... 
 But the complexity or deviousness of theirtheories nevertheless leaves an uneasy feeling. 
 It is tooartificial, too far-fetched, too stilted ( édifié ); the experi-menter here does not feel the spontaneous confidence which constant contact with physical reality gives him.... 
 Thisin effect is what is said by all physicists who are primarilyphysicists or who are exclusively physicists—and theirname is legion; this is what is said by the entire neo-mecha-nist school.... 
 The crisis in physics lies in the conquest of the realm of physics by the mathematical spirit. 
 The prog-ress of physics on the one hand, and the progress of mathe-matics on the other, led in the nineteenth century to a closeamalgamation between these two sciences.... 
 Theoreticalphysics became mathematical physics.... 
 Then there beganthe formal period, that is to say, the period of mathematical physics, purely mathematical; mathematical physics not as a branch of physics so to speak, but as a branch of mathe-matics cultivated by the mathematicians. 
 In this new phasethe mathematician, accustomed to conceptual (purely lo-gical) elements, which furnish the sole subject-matter ofhis work, and feeling himself cramped by crude, material elements, which he found insufficiently pliable, necessarily always tended to reduce them to abstractions as far as pos-sible, to present them in an entirely non-material and con-ceptual manner, or even to ignore them altogether. 
 Theelements, as real, objective data, as physical elements, that is to say, completely disappeared. 
 There remained only formal relations represented by differential equations.... 
 If the mathematician is not the dupe of his constructivework, when he analyses theoretical physics ... he can recoverits ties with experience and its objective value, but at afirst glance, and to the uninitiated person, we seem facedwith an arbitrary development.... 
 The concept, the notion, has everywhere replaced the real element.... 
 Thus, histor-ically, by virtue of the mathematical form assumed by theo-retical physics, is explained ... the ailment ( le malaise ), the crisis of physics, and its apparent withdrawal from objective facts” (228-32). 
 Such is the first cause of “physical” idealism. 
 The reac-tionary attempts are engendered by the very progress of sci-ence. 
 The great successes achieved by natural science, the ap-proach to elements of matter so homogeneous and simple thattheir laws of motion can be treated mathematically, causedthe mathematicians to overlook matter. 
 “Matter disap-pears”, only equations remain. 
 At a new stage of development and apparently in a new manner, we get the old Kantianidea: reason prescribes laws to nature. 
 Hermann Cohen, who,as we have seen, rejoices over the idealist spirit of the newphysics, goes so far as to advocate the introduction of highermathematics in the schools—in order to imbue high-school students with the spirit of idealism, which is being driven out by our materialistic age (F. 
 A. 
 Lange, Geschichte des Materialismus , 5. 
 Auflage, 1896, Bd. 
 II, S. 
 xlix). 
 This, of course, is the ridiculous dream of a reactionary and, infact, there is and can be nothing here but a temporary in-fatuation with idealism on the part of a small number of specialists. 
 But what is highly characteristic is the way the drowning man clutches at a straw, the subtle means wherebyrepresentatives of the educated bourgeoisie artificially at-tempt to preserve, or to find a place for, the fideism whichis engendered among the masses of the people by their ig-norance and their downtrodden condition, and by the sense-less barbarity of capitalist contradictions. 
 The other cause which gave rise to “physical” idealism is the principle of relativism , the relativity of our knowl-edge, a principle which, in a period of abrupt break-downof the old theories, is taking a firm hold upon the physi-cists, and which, if the latter are ignorant of dialectics , inevitably leads to idealism. 
 This question of the relation between relativism and dialectics plays perhaps the most important part in ex-plaining the theoretical misadventures of Machism. 
 TakeRey, for instance, who like all European positivists hasno conception whatever of Marxian dialectics. 
 He employs the word dialectics exclusively in the sense of idealist philosophical speculation. 
 As a result, although he feelsthat the new physics has gone astray on the question of relativism, he nevertheless flounders helplessly and attempts to differentiate between moderate and immoderate relati-vism. 
 Of course, “immoderate relativism logically, if not in practice, borders on actual scepticism” (215), but thereis none of this “immoderate” relativism, you see, in Poin-caré. 
 Just fancy, one can, like an apothecary, weigh outa little more or a little less relativism and thus have Machism! As a matter of fact, the only theoretically correct for-mulation of the question of relativism is given in the dia-lectical materialism of Marx and Engels, and ignoranceof it is bound to lead from relativism to philosophical ide-alism. 
 Incidentally, the failure to understand this factis enough by itself to render Mr. 
 Berman’s absurd book,Dialectics in the Light of the Modern Theory of Knowl-edge , utterly valueless. 
 Mr. 
 Berman repeats the old, old nonsense about dialectics, which he has entirely failed tounderstand. 
 We have already seen that in the theory ofknowledge all the Machists, at every step , reveal a similar lack of understanding. 
 All the old truths of physics, including those which were regarded as firmly established and incontestable, prove to be relative truths— hence , there can be no objec-tive truth independent of mankind. 
 Such is the argumentnot only of all the Machists, but of the “physical” ideal-ists in general. 
 That absolute truth results from the sum-total of relative truths in the course of their development; that relative truths represent relatively faithful reflections of an object independent of mankind; that these reflectionsbecome more and more faithful; that every scientific truth,notwithstanding its relative nature, contains an elementof absolute truth—all these propositions, which are ob-vious to anyone who has thought over Engels’ Anti-Dühring , are for the “modern” theory of knowledge a book with seven seals. 
 Such works as Duhem’s Theory of Physics , * or Stallo’s, ** which Mach particularly recommends, show very clearly that these “physical” idealists attach the most significance *P. 
 Duhem, La théorie physique , son objet et sa structure , Paris, 1906. 
 **J. 
 B. 
 Stallo, The Concepts and Theories of Modern Physics , Lon-don, 1882. 
 There are French and German translations. 
 to the proof of the relativity of our knowledge, and that they are in reality vacillating between idealism and dialect-ical materialism. 
 Both authors, who belong to different pe-riods and who approach the question from different angles(Duhem’s speciality is physics, in which field he has workedfor twenty years; Stallo is a former orthodox Hegelianwho grew ashamed of his book on natural philosophy in theold Hegelian spirit, published in 1848), most energetically combat the atomistic-mechanical conception of nature. 
 They show the narrowness of this conception, the impos-sibility of accepting it as the limit of our knowledge, therigidity of many of the ideas of writers who hold this con-ception. 
 And it is indeed undeniable that the old material-ism did suffer from such a defect; Engels reproached the earlier materialists for their failure to appreciate the rel-ativity of all scientific theories, for their ignorance of dia-lectics and for their exaggeration of the mechanical pointof view. 
 But Engels (unlike Stallo) was able to discard He-gelian idealism and to grasp the great and true kernel of Hegelian dialectics. 
 Engels rejected the old metaphysical materialism for dialectical materialism, and not for relati-vism that sinks into subjectivism. 
 “The mechanical theo-ry,” says Stallo, for instance, “in common with meta-physical theories, hypostasises partial, ideal, and, it may be,purely conventional groups of attributes, or single attri-butes, and treats them as varieties of objective reality” (p. 
 150). 
 This is true if you do not deny objective reality and combat metaphysics for being anti-dialectical. 
 Stallodoes not realise this clearly. 
 He has not understood mate-rialist dialectics and therefore frequently slips, by way ofrelativism, into subjectivism and idealism. 
 The same is true of Duhem. 
 With an enormous expendi-ture of labour, and with the help of a number of interest-ing and valuable examples from the history of physics, suchas one frequently encounters in Mach, he shows that “everylaw of physics is provisional and relative, because it isapproximate” (280). 
 The man is hammering at an opendoor!—will be the thought of the Marxist when he reads the lengthy disquisitions on this subject. 
 But that is just the trouble with Duhem, Stallo, Mach and Poincaré, thatthey do not perceive the door opened by dialectical mate-rialism. 
 Being unable to give a correct formulation of rel-ativism, they slide from the latter into idealism. 
 “A law of physics, properly speaking, is neither true nor false, but approximate”—writes Duhem (p. 
 274). 
 And this “but” con-tains the beginning of the falsity, the beginning of theobliteration of the boundary between a scientific theorythat approximately reflects the object , i. 
e. 
, approaches ob-jective truth, and an arbitrary, fantastic, purely convention-al theory, such as, for example, a religious theory or the theory of the game of chess. 
 Duhem carries this falsity to the point of declaring that the question whether “material reality” corresponds to per-ceptual phenomena is metaphysics (p. 
 10). 
 Away with the question of reality! Our concepts and hypotheses are mere signs (p. 
 26), “arbitrary” (27) constructions, and so forth. 
 There is only one step from this to idealism, to the “physicsof the believer”, which too M. 
 Pierre Duhem preaches inthe Kantian spirit (Rey, p. 
 162; cf. 
 p. 
 160). 
 But the goodAdler (Fritz)—also a Machist would-be Marxist!—couldfind nothing cleverer to do than to “correct” Duhem as fol-lows: Duhem, he claims, eliminates the “realities concealed behind phenomena only as objects of theory, but not asobjects of reality ;” * This is the familiar criticism of Kan-tianism from the standpoint of Hume and Berkeley. 
 But, of course, there can be no question of any conscious Kantianism on the part of Duhem. 
 He is merely vacillating , as is Mach, not knowing on what to base his relativism. 
 In many passages he comes very close to dialectical material-ism. 
 He says that we know sound “such as it is in relationto us but not as it is in itself, in the sound-producing bodies. 
This reality, of which our sensations give us only the exter-nal and the veil, is made known to us by the theories of acous-tics. 
 They tell us that where our perceptions register only this appearance which we call sound, there really exists avery small and very rapid periodic movement,” etc. 
 (p. 
 7). 
Bodies are not symbols of sensations, but sensations are sym-bols (or rather, images) of bodies. 
 “The development of phys-ics gives rise to a constant struggle between nature, which *Translator’s note to the German translation of Duhem, Leipzig, 1903, J. 
 Barth. 
 does not tire of offering new material, and reason, which does not tire of cognising” (p. 
 32). 
 Nature is infinite, just as its smallest particle (including the electron) is infinite, but reason just as infinitely transforms “things-in-them-selves” into “things-for-us”. 
 “Thus, the struggle between real-ity and the laws of physics will continue indefinitely; toevery law that physics may formulate, reality will sooner orlater oppose a rude refutation in the form of a fact; but, indefatigable, physics will improve, modify, and complicate the refuted law” (290). 
 This would be a quite correct expo-sition of dialectical materialism if the author firmly heldto the existence of this objective reality independent of man-kind. 
 “... The theory of physics is not a purely artificial sys-tem which is convenient today and unsuitable tomorrow ... it is a classification, which becomes more and more natural, a reflection, which grows clearer and clearer, of the realitiesthat the experimental method cannot contemplate face toface” (p. 
 445). 
 In this last phrase the Machist Duhem flirts with Kan-tian idealism: it is as if the way is being opened for a meth-od other than the “experimental” one, and as if we cannot know the “things-in-themselves” directly, immediately,face to face. 
 But if the theory of physics becomes more andmore natural, that means that “nature”, reality, “reflected”by this theory, exists independently of our consciousness—and that is precisely the view of dialectical materialism. 
 In short, the “physical” idealism of today, exactly like the “physiological” idealism of yesterday, merely signifiesthat one school of natural scientists in one branch of natu-ral science has slid into a reactionary philosophy, beingunable to rise directly and at once from metaphysical mate-rialism to dialectical materialism. 
 * This step is being *The famous chemist, William Ramsay, says: “I have been (re-quently asked: ‘But is not electricity a vibration? How can wirelesstelegraphy be explained by the passage of little particles or corpuscles?’The answer is: ‘Electricity is a thing ; it is [Ramsay’s italics] these mi-nute corpuscles, but when they leave an object, a wave, like a wave oflight, spreads through the ether, and this wave is used for wireless telegraph’” (William Ramsay, Essays , Biographical and Chemical , London, 1908 p. 
 126). 
 Having spoken about the transformation of ra-dium into helium, Ramsay remarks: “At least one so-called element canno longer be regarded as ultimate matter, but is itself undergoing made, and will be made, by modern physics; but it is ad-vancing towards the only true method and the only true philosophy of natural science not directly, but by zigzags, not consciously, but instinctively, not clearly perceivingits “final goal”, but drawing closer to it gropingly, unstead-ily, and sometimes even with its back turned to it. 
 Mod-ern physics is in travail; it is giving birth to dialecticalmaterialism. 
 The process of child-birth is painful. 
 And in addition to a living healthy being, there are bound to be pro-duced certain dead products, refuse fit only for the garbage-heap. 
 And the entire school of physical idealism, the entireempirio-critical philosophy, together with empirio-sym-bolism, empirio-monism, and so on, and so forth, must beregarded as such refuse! change into a simpler form of matter” (p. 
 160). 
 “Now it is almost cer-tain that negative electricity is a particular form of matter; and positive electricity is matter deprived of negative electricity—that is, minusthis electric matter” (176). 
 “Now what is electricity? It used to be be-lieved, formerly, that there were two kinds of electricity, one called pos-itive and the other negative. 
 At that time it could not have been possi-ble to answer the question. 
 But recent researches make it probable that what used to be called negative electricity is really a substance. 
 Indeed, the relative weight of its particles has been measured; each is aboutone seven-hundredth of the mass of an atom of hydrogen.... 
 Atoms ofelectricity are named ‘electrons’” (196). 
 If our Machists who writebooks and articles on philosophical subjects were capable of thinking,they would understand that the expression “matter disappears”, “mat-ter is reduced to electricity”, etc. 
, is only an epistemologically helpless expression of the truth that science is able to discover new forms ofmatter, new forms of material motion, to reduce the old forms to thenew forms, and so on. 
 C H A P T E R S I X EMPIRIO -CRITICISM AND HISTORICAL MATERIALISM The Russian Machists, as we have already seen, are di-vided into two camps. 
 Mr. 
 V. 
 Chernov and the collabora-tors of Russkoye Bogatstvo 105 are downright and consistent opponents of dialectical materialism, both in philosophyand history. 
 The other company of Machists, in whom we are more interested here, are would-be Marxists, who try in every way to assure their readers that Machism is compat-ible with the historical materialism of Marx and Engels. 
True, these assurances are for the most part nothing butassurances; not a single Machist would-be Marxist has evermade the slightest attempt to present in any systematic way the real tendencies of the founders of empirio-criti-cism in the field of the social sciences. 
 We shall dwell brieflyon this question, turning first to the statements to be foundin writings of the German empirio-criticists and then tothose of their Russian disciples. 
 1. 
 THE EXCURSIONS OF THE GERMAN EMPIRIO -CRITICISTS INTO THE FIELD OF THE SOCIAL SCIENCES In 1895, when R. 
 Avenarius was still alive, there ap-peared in the philosophical journal edited by him an articleby his disciple, F. 
 Blei, entitled “Metaphysics in Political Economy”. 
 * All the teachers of empirio-criticism wage war *Vierteljahrsschrift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie , 1895, Bd. 
 XIX, F. 
 Blei, “Die Metaphysik in der National-ökonomie”, S. 
 378-90. 
 on the “metaphysics” not only of explicit and conscious philosophical materialism, but also of natural science, which instinctively adopts the standpoint of the material-ist theory of knowledge. 
 The disciple takes up arms againstmetaphysics in political economy. 
 The fight is directedagainst the most varied schools of political economy, butwe are interested only in the character of the empirio-critical argument against the school of Marx and Engels. 
 “The purpose of the present investigation,” writes Franz Blei, “is to show that all political economy until now,in its endeavour to interpret the phenomena of economiclife, operates with metaphysical premises; that it ... ‘de-rives’ the ‘laws’ governing an economy from the ‘nature’ ofthe latter, and man is merely something accidental in rela-tion to these ‘laws’. 
 ... In all its theories political economy has hitherto rested on metaphysical grounds; all its theo-ries are unbiological, and therefore unscientific and worth-less for knowledge.... 
 The theoreticians do not know whatthey are building their theories on, what the soil is of whichthese theories are the fruit. 
 They regard themselves as real-ists operating without any premises whatever, for they are dealing with ‘sober’ ( nüchterne ), ‘practical’ and ‘tan-gible’ ( sinnfällige ) economic phenomena.... 
 And all have that family resemblance to many trends in physiologywhich only the same parents—viz. 
, metaphysics and specu-lation—can transmit to their children, in this case the phys-iologists and economists. 
 One school of economists ana-lyses the ‘phenomena’ of ‘economy’ [Avenarius and hisschool put ordinary words in quotation marks in order toshow that they, the true philosophers, understand the essen-tially “metaphysical character” of such a vulgar use ofwords, unrefined by “epistemological analysis”] without placing what they find ( das Gefundene ) in this way into rela-tion with the behaviour of individuals; the physiologistsexclude the behaviour of the individual from their investiga-tions as being ‘actions of the soul’ ( Wirkungen der Seele), while the economists of this trend declare the behaviour ofindividuals to be negligible in relation to the ‘immanent laws of economy’” (378-79). 
 With Marx, theory estab-lished “economic laws” from constructed processes, and these“laws” figured in the initial section ( Initialabschnitt ) of the dependent vital series, while the economic processes figured in the final section ( Finalabschnitt ).... 
 “Economy” was transformed by the economists into a transcendental cat-egory, in which they discovered such “laws” as they wishedto discover: the “laws” of “capital” and “labour”, “rent”,“wages” and “profit”. 
 The economists transformed man intoa Platonic idea—“capitalist”, “worker”, etc. 
 Socialismascribed to the “capitalist” the character of being “greedy for profit”, liberalism ascribed to the worker the character of being “grasping”—and both characters were moreover ex-plained by the “operation of the laws of capital” (381-82). 
 “Marx came to the study of French socialism and politi-cal economy with a socialist world outlook, and his aim asregards knowledge was to provide the ‘theoretical founda-tion’ for his world outlook in order to ‘safeguard’ his ini-tial value. 
 He found the law of value in Ricardo ... butthe conclusions which the French Socialists drew fromRicardo could not satisfy Marx in his endeavour to ‘safe-guard’ his E-value brought into a vital-difference, i. 
e. 
,his ‘world outlook’, for these conclusions had already en-tered as a component part into the content of his initial value in the form of ‘indignation at the robbery of theworkers’, and so forth. 
 The conclusions were rejected as‘being formally untrue economically’ for they are ‘simplyan application of morality to political economy’. 
 ‘Butwhat may be formally untrue economically, may all the same be true from the point of view of world history. 
 If the mor-al consciousness of the mass declares an economic factto be unjust, that is a proof that the fact itself has beenoutlived, that other economic facts have made their appear-ance, owing to which the former one has become unbearableand untenable. 
 Therefore, a very true economic content may be concealed behind the formal economic incorrectness. 
’” (From Engels’ preface to Karl Marx’s The Poverty of Philos-ophy . 
) Having quoted the above passage from Engels, Blei con-tinues: “In the above quotation the middle section ( Medial-abschnitt ) of the dependent series which interests us here is detached [ abgehoben —a technical term of Avenarius’ im-plying: reached the consciousness, separated off]. 
 Afterthe ‘cognition’ that an ‘economic fact’ must be concealed behind the ‘moral consciousness of injustice’, comes the final section ( Finalabschnitt : the theory of Marx is a state-ment, i. 
e. 
, an E-value, i. 
e. 
, a vital-difference which passes through three stages, three sections, initial, middleand final: Initialabschnitt , Medialabschnitt , Finalabschnitt ) ... i. 
e. 
, the ‘cognition’ of this ‘economic fact’. 
 Or, in otherwords, the task now is to ‘find again’ the initial value,the ‘world outlook’, in the ‘economic facts’ in order to ‘safeguard’ this initial value. 
—This definite variation of the dependent series already contains the Marxian me-taphysics, regardless of how the ‘cognised’ appears in thefinal section ( Finalabschnitt ). 
 ‘The socialist world out-look’, as the independent E-value, ‘absolute truth’, isgiven a basis ‘retrospectively’ by means of a ‘special’ the-ory of knowledge, namely, the economic system of Marx and the materialist theory of history.... 
 By means of the con-cept of surplus-value the ‘subjective’ ‘truth’ in the Marx-ian world outlook finds its ‘objective truth’ in the theoryof knowledge of the ‘economic categories’—the safe-guarding of the initial value is completed and metaphysics has retrospectively received its critique of knowledge” (384-86). 
 The reader is probably indignant with us for quoting at such length this incredibly trivial rigmarole, this quasi-scientific tomfoolery decked out in the terminology ofAvenarius. 
 But— wer den “Feind ” will verstehen , muss im Feindes “Lande gehen ”—who would know the enemy must go into the enemy ’s territory. 
 106 And R . 
 Avenarius’ philosoph-ical journal is indeed enemy territory for Marxists. 
 And weinvite the reader to overcome for a minute his legitimateaversion for the buffoons of bourgeois science and to ana-lyse the argument of Avenarius’ disciple and collaborator. 
 Argument number one: Marx is a “metaphysician” who did not grasp the epistemological “critique of concepts”,who did not work out a general theory of knowledge andwho simply inserted materialism into his “special theoryof knowledge”. 
 This argument contains nothing original to Blei per-sonally. 
 We have already seen scores and hundreds of times that all the founders of empirio-criticism and all the Rus-sian Machists accuse materialism of “metaphysics”, or, more accurately, they repeat the hackneyed arguments of the Kantians, Humeans and idealists against materialist “metaphysics”. 
 Argument number two: Marxism is as “metaphysical” as natural science (physiology). 
 And here again it is notBlei who is “responsible” for this argument, but Mach andAvenarius; for it was they who declared war on “natural-historical metaphysics”, applying that name to the in-stinctively materialist theory of knowledge to which (on their own admission and according to the judgement of allwho are in any way versed in the subject) the vast majorityof natural scientists adhere. 
 Argument number three: Marxism declares that “per-sonality” is a quantité négligeable , a cypher, that man is “something accidental”, subject to certain “immanent laws of economics”, that an analysis des Gefundenen , i. 
e. 
, of what is found, of what is given, etc. 
, is lacking. 
 This ar-gument is a complete repetition of the circle of ideas of the empirio-critical “principal co-ordination”, i. 
e. 
, ofthe idealist crotchet in Avenarius’ theory. 
 Blei is abso-lutely right when he says that it is impossible to find the slightest hint of such idealist nonsense in Marx and Engels,and that from the standpoint of this nonsense it is inev-itable that Marxism must be rejected completely , from the very beginning, from its fundamental philosophicalpremises. 
 Argument number four: Marx’s theory is “unbiological”, it knows nothing of “vital-differences” and suchlike spu-rious biological terms which constitute the “science” ofthe reactionary professor, Avenarius. 
 Blei’s argument iscorrect from the standpoint of Machism, for the gulf be-tween Marx’s theory and Avenarius’ “biological” triviali-ties is indeed obvious at once. 
 We shall presently see how the Russian Machist would-be Marxists in effect followedin Blei’s footsteps. 
 Argument number five: the partisanship, the partial-ity of Marx’s theory and the preconceived nature of hissolution. 
 The empirio-criticists as a whole , and not Blei alone, claim to be non-partisan both in philosophy and in social science. 
 They are neither for socialism nor for lib-eralism. 
 They make no differentiation between the fun-damental and irreconcilable trends of materialism and ideal-ism in philosophy, but endeavour to rise above them. 
 We have traced this tendency of Machism through a long se-ries of problems of epistemology, and we ought not to besurprised when we encounter it in sociology. 
 “Argument” number six: ridiculing “objective” truth. 
 Blei at once sensed, and rightly sensed, that historicalmaterialism and Marx’s entire economic doctrine are per-meated through and through by a recognition of objective truth. 
 And Blei accurately expressed the tendencies ofthe doctrines of Mach and Avenarius when “from the verythreshold”, so to speak, he rejected Marxism precisely be-cause of the idea of objective truth, when he at once de-clared that there was indeed nothing behind the Marxist teaching save the “subjective” views of Marx. 
 And if our Machists renounce Blei (as they surely will), we shall tell them: You must not blame the mirror forshowing a crooked face. 
 Blei is a mirror which accurate-ly reflects the tendencies of empirio-criticism, and a re-nouncement by our Machists would only bear witness to their good intentions—and to their absurd eclectical endeavours to combine Marx and Avenarius. 
 Let us pass from Blei to Petzoldt. 
 If the former is a mere disciple, the latter is declared by such outstanding empirio-criticists as Lesevich to be a master. 
 While Blei posed thequestion of Marxism explicitly, Petzoldt—who would not demean himself by dealing with a mere Marx or a mere Eng-els—sets forth in positive form the views of empirio-crit-icism on sociology, which enables us to compare them withMarxism. 
 The second volume of Petzoldt’s Introduction to the Philosophy of Pure Experience is entitled “ Auf dem Wege zum Dauernden ” (“Towards Stability”). 
 The author makes the tendency towards stability the basis of his investiga-tion. 
 “The main features of the ultimate ( endgültige ) state of stability of humanity can be inferred in its formal as-pect. 
 We thus arrive at the foundations of ethics, aestheticsand the formal theory of knowledge” (S. 
 iii). 
 “Human de-velopment bears its goal within itself, it too tends towards a perfect ( vollkommenen ) state of stability” (60). 
 The signs of this are abundant and varied. 
 For instance, are there many ardent radicals who do not in their old age become “more sensible”, more restrained? True, this “premature stability” (S. 
 62) is characteristic of the philistine. 
 But do not philistines constitute the “compact majority” (S. 
 62). 
 Our philosopher’s conclusion, which he gives in ital-ics, is this: “The most essential feature of all the aimsof our reasoning and creative activity is stability” (72). 
The explanation is: “Many cannot bear to see a key lying obliquely on the table, still less a picture hanging crooked on the wall.... 
 And such people are not necessarily pedants.... 
It is only that they have a feeling that something is not in order ” (72, Petzoldt’s italics). 
 In a word, the “tendency to stability is a striving for an extreme, by its nature ultimate,state” (73). 
 All this is taken from the fifth chapter of Volume II entitled “The Psychical Tendency to Stability”. 
 The proofs of this tendency are all very weighty. 
 For instance: “Thestriving for an extreme, a highest, in the original spatialsense, is pursued by the majority of mountain climbers. 
It is not always the desire for a spacious view or joy inthe physical exercise of climbing in fresh air and wide na-ture that urges them towards the peaks, but also the in-stinct which is deeply ingrained in every organic beingto persist in an adopted path of activity until a naturalaim has been achieved” (73). 
 Another example: the amountof money people will pay to secure a complete collectionof postage stamps! “It makes one’s head swim to examine the price-list of a dealer in postage stamps.... 
 And yet noth-ing is more natural and comprehensible than this urge forstability” (74). 
 The philosophically untutored can have no conception of the breadth of the principles of stability and of econo-my of thought. 
 Petzoldt develops his “theory” in detail for the profane. 
 “Sympathy is an expression of the imme-diate need for a state of stability,” states § 28. 
 “Sympathyis not a repetition, a duplication of the observed suffering,but suffering on account of this suffering.... 
 The greatestemphasis must be placed on the immediacy of sympathy. 
If we admit this we thereby admit that the welfare of others can concern a man just as immediately and fundamentally as his own welfare, and we thus at the same time reject everyutilitarian and eudaemonic foundation of ethics. 
 Thanks to /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR its longing for stability and peace, human nature is not fun-damentally evil, but anxious to help.... 
 “The immediacy of sympathy is frequently manifested in the immediacy of help. 
 The rescuer will often fling him-self without thought to save a drowning man. 
 He cannotbear the sight of a person struggling with death; he for-gets his other obligations and perhaps risks his own lifeand the life of his near ones in order to save the useless life of some degraded drunkard; in other words, under cer-tain circumstances sympathy can drive one to actions thatare morally unjustifiable. 
” And scores and hundreds of pages of empirio-critical philosophy are filled with such unspeakable platitudes! Morality is deduced from the concept of the “moral state of stability”. 
 (The second section of Volume II: “Stable States of the Soul”, Chapter 1, “On Ethical Stable States”. 
)“The state of stability, according to the concept of it, con-tains no conditions of change in any of its components. 
From this it at once follows that it can contain no possi-bility of war” (202). 
 “Economic and social equality follows from the concept of the final ( endgültig ), stable state” (213). 
 This “state of stability” is derived not from religion butfrom “science”. 
 The “majority” cannot bring it about, asthe socialists suppose, nor can the power of the socialists“help humanity” (207). 
 Oh, no!—it is “free development”that will lead to the ideal. 
 Are not, indeed, the profits of capital decreasing and are not wages constantly increasing? (223). 
 All the assertions about “wage slavery” are untrue(229). 
 A slave’s leg could be broken with impunity—butnow? No, “moral progress” is beyond doubt; look at theuniversity settlements in England, at the Salvation Army(230), at the German “ethical societies”. 
 In the name of “aesthetic stability” (Chapter II, Section 2) “romanticism” is rejected. 
 But romanticism includes also all forms of inor-dinate extension of the ego, idealism, metaphysics, occult-ism, solipsism, egoism, the “forcible coercion of the minori-ty by the majority” and the “social-democratic ideal of theorganisation of all labour by the state” (240-41). 
 * *It is in the same spirit that Mach expresses himself in favour of the bureaucratic socialism of Popper and Menger, which guarantees The infinite stupidity of the philistine, smugly retail-ing the most hackneyed rubbish under cover of a new “em-pirio-critical” systematisation and terminology—that is what the sociological excursions of Blei, Petzoldt andMach amount to. 
 A pretentious cloak of verbal artifices,clumsy devices of syllogistics, subtle scholasticism—inshort, as in epistemology, so in sociology, the same re-actionary content under the same flamboyant signboard. 
 Let us now turn to the Russian Machists. 
 2. 
 HOW BOGDANOV CORRECTS AND “DEVELOPS” In his article “The Development of Life in Nature and Society” (1902, see From the Psychology of Society , p. 
 35, et seq. 
), Bogdanov quotes the well-known passage from the preface to Zur Kritik ,107 where the “great sociologist”, i. 
e. 
, Marx, expounds the basis of historical materialism. 
Having quoted Marx’s words, Bogdanov declares that the“old formulation of historical monism, without ceasingto be basically true, no longer fully satisfies us” (37). 
 The author wishes, therefore, to correct the theory, or to de-velop it, starting from the basis of the theory itself . 
 The author’s chief conclusion is as follows: “We have shown that social forms belong to the com-prehensive genus —biological adaptations. 
 But we have not thereby defined the province of social forms; for a defi-nition, not only the genus , but also the species must be established.... 
 In their struggle for existence men can uniteonly with the help of consciousness : without consciousness there can be no intercourse. 
 Hence, social life in all its manifestations is a consciously psychical life .... 
 Sociality is inseparable from consciousness. 
 Social being and social consciousness are , in the exact meaning of these terms , iden-tical ” (50, 51, Bogdanov’s italics). 
 That this conclusion has nothing in common with Marx-ism has been pointed out by Orthodox ( Philosophical Essays , the “freedom of the individual”, whereas, he says, the doctrine of the Social-Democrats, which “compares unfavourably” with this socialism, threatens a “slavery even more universal and more oppressive than that of a monarchical or oligarchical state”. 
 See Erkenntnis und Irrtum , 2. 
 Auflage, 1906, S. 
 80-81. 
 St. 
 Petersburg, 1906, p 183, and preceding). 
 But Bogdanov responded simply by abuse, picking upon an error in quo-tation: instead of “in the exact meaning of these terms”, Orthodox had quoted “in the full meaning of these terms”. 
This error was indeed committed, and the author had everyright to correct it; but to raise a cry of “mutilation”, “sub-stitution”, and so forth ( Empirio-monism , Bk. 
 III, p. 
 xliv), is simply to obscure the essence of the point at issue by wretched words. 
 Whatever “exact” meaning Bogdanov may have invented for the terms “social being” and “social con-sciousness”, there can be no doubt that the statement wehave quoted is not correct . 
 Social being and social conscious-ness are not identical, just as being in general and con-sciousness in general are not identical. 
 From the fact that in their intercourse men act as conscious beings, it does not follow at all that social consciousness is identical with social being. 
 In all social formations of any complexity—and in the capitalist social formation in particular—peoplein their intercourse are not conscious of what kind of social relations are being formed, in accordance with what laws they develop, etc. 
 For instance, a peasant when he sells his grain enters into “intercourse” with the world producersof grain in the world market, but he is not conscious of it;nor is he conscious of the kind of social relations that areformed on the basis of exchange. 
 Social consciousness re-flects social being—that is Marx’s teaching. 
 A reflection may be an approximately true copy of the reflected, but to speak of identity is absurd. 
 Consciousness in general reflects being—that is a general thesis of all materialism. 
 It is im-possible not to see its direct and inseparable connection with the thesis of historical materialism: social consciousnessreflects social being. 
 Bogdanov’s attempt to correct and develop Marx unno-ticeably “in the spirit of his basis” is an obvious distortionof this materialist basis in the spirit of idealism . 
 It would be ludicrous to deny it. 
 Let us recall Bazarov’s expositionof empirio-criticism (not empirio-monism, oh no!—there issuch a wide, wide difference between these “systems”!): “sense-perception is the reality existing outside us”. 
 This is plain idealism, a plain theory of the identity of conscious-ness and being. 
 Recall, further, the formulation of W. 
 Schup-pe, the immanentist (who swore and vowed as fervently as Bazarov and Co. 
 that he was not an idealist, and who with no less vigour than Bogdanov insisted on the very “exact” meaning of his terms): “being is consciousness”. 
 Now com-pare with this the refutation of Marx’s historical materialism by the immanentist Schubert-Soldern: “Every materialprocess of production is always an act of consciousness on thepart of its observer.... 
 In its epistemological aspect, it is not the external process of production that is the primary (prius ), but the subject or subjects; in other words, even the purelymaterial process of production does not lead (us) out of thegeneral connection of consciousness ( Bewusstseinszusammen-hang ). 
” (See Das menschliche Glück und die soziale Frage , S. 
 293, 295-96). 
 Bogdanov may curse the materialists as much as he likes for “mutilating his thoughts”, but no curses willalter the simple and plain fact. 
 The correction of Marx’stheory and the development of Marx supposedly in the spir-it of Marx by the “empirio-monist” Bogdanov differ in no essential respect from the refutation of Marx by the ideal-ist and epistemological solipsist Schubert-Soldern. 
 Bogdanov assures us that he is not an idealist. 
 Schubert-Soldern as-sures us that he is a realist (Bazarov even believed him). 
In our time a philosopher has to declare himself a “realist”and an “enemy of idealism”. 
 It is about time you Machistgentlemen understood this. 
 The immanentists, the empirio-criticists and the em-pirio-monists all argue over particulars, over details, overthe formulation of idealism , whereas we from the very outset reject all the principles of their philosophy common tothis trinity. 
 Let Bogdanov, accepting in the best senseand with the best of intentions all the conclusions of Marx, preach the “identity” of social being and social conscious-ness; we shall say: Bogdanov minus “empirio-monism” (or rather, minus Machism) is a Marxist. 
 For this theory of the identity of social being and social consciousness is sheer nonsense and an absolutely reactionary theory. 
 If certain peo-ple reconcile it with Marxism, with Marxist behaviour, we must admit that these people are better than their theory, but we must not justify outrageous theoretical distortionsof Marxism. 
 Bogdanov reconciles his theory with Marx’s conclusions by sacrificing elementary consistency for the sake of these con-clusions. 
 Every individual producer in the world economic system realises that he is introducing this or that changeinto the technique of production; every owner realises thathe exchanges certain products for others; but these produc-ers and these owners do not realise that in doing so theyare thereby changing social being . 
 The sum-total of these changes in all their ramifications in the capitalist world economy could not be grasped even by seventy Marxes. 
The most important thing is that the laws of these changes have been discovered, that the objective logic of these changes and of their historical development has in its chiefand basic features been disclosed—objective, not in the sense that a society of conscious beings, of people, could exist and develop independently of the existence of con-scious beings (and it is only such trifles that Bogdanovstresses by his “theory”), but in the sense that social being is independent of the social consciousness of people. 
 The fact that you live and conduct your business, beget children, produce products and exchange them, gives rise to an ob-jectively necessary chain of events, a chain of development,which is independent of your social consciousness, and is never grasped by the latter completely. 
 The highest taskof humanity is to comprehend this objective logic of eco-nomic evolution (the evolution of social life) in its general and fundamental features, so that it may be possible to adapt to it one’s social consciousness and the consciousness of the advanced classes of all capitalist countries in asdefinite, clear and critical a fashion as possible. 
 Bogdanov admits all this. 
 And what does this mean? It means in effect that he throws overboard his theory of the “identity of social being and social consciousness”, that it remains an empty scholastic appendage, as empty, deadand useless as the “theory of general substitution” or thedoctrine of “elements”, “introjection” and the rest of theMachist nonsense. 
 But the “dead lay hold of the living”;the dead scholastic appendage, against the will of and in-dependently of the consciousness of Bogdanov, converts his philosophy into a serviceable tool of the Schubert-Solderns and other reactionaries, who in a thousand different keys, from a hundred professorial chairs, disseminate this dead thing as a living thing, direct it against the living thing, for the purpose of stifling the latter. 
 Bogdanov personally is a sworn enemy of reaction in general and of bourgeois reac-tion in particular. 
 Bogdanov’s “substitution” and theoryof the “identity of social being and social consciousness”serve this reaction. 
 It is sad, but true. 
 Materialism in general recognises objectively real being (matter) as independent of the consciousness, sensation, experience, etc. 
, of humanity. 
 Historical materialism re-cognises social being as independent of the social conscious-ness of humanity. 
 In both cases consciousness is only thereflection of being, at best an approximately true (adequate,perfectly exact) reflection of it. 
 From this Marxist philos-ophy, which is cast from a single piece of steel, you cannot eliminate one basic premise, one essential part, withoutdeparting from objective truth, without falling a prey tobourgeois-reactionary falsehood. 
 Here are further examples of how the dead philosophy of idealism lays hold of the living Marxist Bogdanov. 
 The article “What Is Idealism?”, 1901 (ibid. 
, p. 
 11, et seq. 
): “We arrive at the following conclusion: both wherepeople agree in their judgements of progress and where theydisagree, the basic meaning of the idea of progress is thesame, namely, increasing completeness and harmony of con-scious life . 
 This is the objective content of the concept prog-ress.... 
 If we now compare the psychological formulation of the idea of progress thus arrived at with the previously ex-plained biological formulation [“biological progress is an increase in the sum-total of life ”, p. 
 14], we shall easily con-vince ourselves that the former fully coincides with the latterand can be deduced from it.... 
 And since social life amounts to the psychical life of members of society, here too the content of the idea of progress is the same—increase in the complete-ness and harmony of life; only we must add: the social life of people. 
 And, of course, the idea of social progress neverhad and cannot have any other content” (p. 
 16). 
 “We have found ... that idealism expresses the victory in the human soul of moods more social over moods less social, that a progressive ideal is a reflection of the sociallyprogressive tendency in the idealist psychology” (32). 
 It need hardly be said that all this play with biology and sociology contains not a grain of Marxism. 
 Both in Spencer and Mikhailovsky one may find any number of definitions not a whit worse than this, defining nothing but the “goodintentions” of the author and betraying a complete lack of understanding of “what is idealism” and what materialism. 
 The author begins Book III of Empirio-monism , the ar-ticle “Social Selection (Foundations of Method)”, 1906, by rejecting the “eclectic socio-biological attempts of Lan-ge, Ferri, Woltmann and many others” (p. 
 1), and on page15 we find the following conclusion of the “enquiry”: “Wecan formulate the fundamental connection between energet-ics and social selection as follows: “Every act of social selection represents an increase or decrease of the energy of the social complex concerned. 
 In the former case we have ‘positive selection ’, in the latter ‘negative selection ’. 
” (Author’s italics. 
) And such unspeakable nonsense is served out as Marxism! Can one imagine anything more sterile, lifeless and scho-lastic than this string of biological and energeticist terms that contribute nothing, and can contribute nothing, in the sphere of the social sciences? There is not a shadowof concrete economic study here, not a hint of Marx’s meth-od, the method of dialectics and the world outlook of ma-terialism, only a mere invention of definitions and attempts to fit them into the ready-made conclusions of Marxism. 
 “The rapid growth of the productive forces of capitalist society is undoubtedly an increase in the energy of thesocial whole.... 
” The second half of the phrase is undoubt-edly a simple repetition of the first half expressed in mean-ingless terms which seem to lend “profundity” to the ques-tion, but which in reality in no way differ from the eclectic biologico-sociological attempts of Lange and Co. 
!—“but the disharmonious character of this process leads to itsculmination in a ‘crisis’, in a vast waste of productiveforces, in a sharp decrease of energy: positive selectionis replaced by negative selection” (18). 
 In what way does this differ from Lange? A biologico-energeticist label is tacked on to ready-made conclusions about crises, without any concrete material whatever beingadded and without the nature of crises being elucidated. 
 All this is done with the very best intentions, for the au-thor wishes to corroborate and deepen Marx’s conclusions; but in point of fact he only dilutes them with an intoler-ably dreary and lifeless scholasticism. 
 The only “Marxism”here is a repetition of an already known conclusion, and all the “new” proof of it, all this “ social energetics ” (34) and “social selection”, is a mere collection of words , a sheer mockery of Marxism. 
 Bogdanov is not engaged in a Marxist enquiry at all; all he is doing is to reclothe results already obtained bythis enquiry in a biological and energeticist terminology. 
The whole attempt is worthless from beginning to end, forthe concepts “selection”, “assimilation and dissimilation”of energy, the energetic balance, and so on and so forth, when applied to the sphere of the social sciences, are emp-ty phrases . 
 In fact, an enquiry into social phenomena and an elucidation of the method of the social sciences cannot be undertaken with the aid of these concepts. 
 Nothing iseasier than to tack an “energeticist” or “biologico-sociolog-ical” label on to such phenomena as crises, revolutions, the class struggle and so forth; but neither is there anything more sterile, more scholastic and lifeless than such an occu-pation. 
 The important thing is not that Bogdanov tries tofit all his results and conclusions into Marxist theory—or “nearly” all (we have seen the “correction” he made on thesubject of the relation of social being to social consciousness) —but that the methods of fitting—this “social energetics”— are thoroughly false and in no way differ from the methodsof Lange. 
 “Herr Lange ( On the Labour Question , etc. 
, 2nd ed. 
),” Marx wrote to Kugelmann on June 27, 1870, “sings my praisesloudly, but with the object of making himself important. 
 Herr Lange, you see, has made a great discovery. 
 The whole of history can be brought under a single great natural law. 
This natural law is the phrase (in this application Dar-win’s expression becomes nothing but a phrase) ‘strugglefor life’, and the content of this phrase is the Malthusianlaw of population or, rather, over-population. 
 So, instead of analysing the ‘struggle for life’ as represented histor-ically in various definite forms of society, all that has tobe done is to translate every concrete struggle into the phrase ‘struggle for life’, and this phrase itself into the Malthusian ‘population fantasy’. 
 One must admit that this is a very impressive method—for swaggering, sham-scientific, bombastic ignorance and intellectual laziness. 
”108 The basis of Marx’s criticism of Lange is not that Lange foists Malthusianism in particular upon sociology, butthat the transfer of biological concepts in general to the sphere of the social sciences is phrase-mongering . 
 Whether the transfer is undertaken with “good” intentions, or with the purpose of bolstering up false sociological conclusions,the phrase-mongering none the less remains phrase-monger-ing. 
 And Bogdanov’s “social energetics”, his coupling ofthe doctrine of social selection with Marxism, is just suchphrase-mongering. 
 Just as in epistemology Mach and Avenarius did not develop idealism, but only overlaid the old idealist errors with pretentious terminological nonsense (“elements”,“principal co-ordination”, “introjection”, etc. 
), so in sociol-ogy, even when there is sincere sympathy for Marxist con-clusions, empirio-criticism results in a distortion of histor-ical materialism by means of pretentious, empty energeticist and biological verbiage. 
 A historical peculiarity of modern Russian Machism (or rather of the Machist epidemic among a section of the So-cial-Democrats) is the following. 
 Feuerbach was a “mate-rialist below and an idealist above”; this to a certain ex-tent applies also to Büchner, Vogt, Moleschott and Dühring, with the essential difference that all these philosophers werepygmies and wretched scribblers compared with Feuerbach. 
 Marx and Engels, as they grew out of Feuerbach and matured in the fight against the scribblers, naturally paidmost attention to crowning the structure of philosophical materialism, that is, not to the materialist epistemology but to the materialist conception of history. 
 That is whyMarx and Engels laid the emphasis in their works rather ondialectical materialism than on dialectical materialism , and insisted on historical materialism rather than on his-torical materialism . 
 Our would-be Marxist Machists ap-proached Marxism in an entirely different historical period, at a time when bourgeois philosophy was particularly spe-cialising in epistemology, and, having assimilated in a one-sided and mutilated form certain of the component parts of dialectics (relativism, for instance), was directing its at-tention chiefly to a defence or restoration of idealism be low and not of idealism above. 
 At any rate, positivismin general, and Machism in particular, have been muchmore occupied in subtly falsifying epistemology—simulatingmaterialism and concealing their idealism under a pseudo-materialist terminology—and have paid comparatively little attention to the philosophy of history. 
 Our Mach-ists did not understand Marxism because they happened toapproach it from the other side , so to speak, and they have assimilated—and at times not so much assimilated as learntby rote—Marx’s economic and historical theory, withoutclearly apprehending its foundation, viz. 
, philosoph-ical materialism. 
 And the result is that Bogdanov and Co. 
 deserve to be called Russian Büchners and Dühringsturned inside out. 
 They want to be materialists above,but are unable to rid themselves of muddled idealism be-low! In the case of Bogdanov, “above” there is historicalmaterialism, vulgarised, it is true, and much corrupted by idealism, “below” there is idealism, disguised by Marx-ist terminology and counterfeiting Marxist language. 
 “So-cially-organised experience”, “collective labour process”,and so forth are Marxist words, but they are all only words , concealing an idealist philosophy that declares things tobe complexes of “elements”, of sensations, the external world to be “experience”, or an “empirio-symbol” of man-kind, physical nature to be a “product” of the “psychical”,and so on and so forth. 
 An ever subtler falsification of Marxism, an ever sub-tler presentation of anti-materialist doctrines under theguise of Marxism—this is the characteristic feature of mod-ern revisionism in political economy, in questions of tactics and in philosophy generally, equally in epistemologyand in sociology. 
 3. 
 SUVOROV’S “FOUNDATIONS OF SOCIAL PHILOSOPHY” The Studies “in” the Philosophy of Marxism , which con-cludes with the article by Comrade S. 
 Suvorov mentionedabove, by very reason of the collective nature of the book constitutes an unusually aromatic bouquet. 
 When you have at one time and side by side the utterances of Bazarov109, who says that according to Engels “sense-perception is the real-ity existing outside us”, of Berman, who declares the dia-lectics of Marx and Engels to be mysticism, of Lunachar-sky, who goes to the length of religion, of Yushkevich,who introduces the “Logos in the irrational stream of ex-perience”, of Bogdanov, who calls idealism the philos-ophy of Marxism, of Helfond, who purges J. 
 Dietzgen of materialism, and lastly, of S. 
 Suvorov with his article“Foundations of Social Philosophy”—you at once sense the“aroma” of the new alignment. 
 Quantity has passed intoquality. 
 The “seekers”, who up to now had been seekingseparately in individual articles and books, have come out with a veritable pronunciamento. 
 Individual disagreements among them are obliterated by the very fact of their collec-tive utterance against (and not “in”) the philosophy of Marxism, and the reactionary features of Machism as a cur-rent become manifest. 
 Under these circumstances, Suvorov’s article is all the more interesting for the fact that the author is neither an empirio-monist nor an empirio-criticist, but simplya “realist”. 
 What relates him, therefore, to the rest of thecompany is not what distinguishes Bazarov, Yushkevichand Bogdanov as philosophers, but what they all have incommon against dialectical materialism. 
 A comparison of the sociological arguments of this “realist” with the ar-guments of the empirio-monist will help us to depict theircommon tendency. 
 Suvorov writes: “In the gradation of the laws that reg-ulate the world process, the particular and complex be-come reduced to the general and simple, and all of them are subordinate to the universal law of development— the law of the economy of forces . 
 The essence of this law is that every system of forces is the more capable of conservationand development the less its expenditure , the greater its accumulation and the more effectively expenditure servesaccumulation . 
 The forms of mobile equilibrium, which long ago evoked the idea of objective purposiveness (the solar system, the cycle of terrestrial phenomena, the proc-ess of life), arise and develop by virtue of the conservation and accumulation of the energy inherent in them—by vir-tue of their intrinsic economy. 
 The law of economy of forces is the unifying and regulating principle of all develop-ment—inorganic, biological and social” (p. 
 293, author’sitalics). 
 With what remarkable ease do our “positivists” and “realists” concoct “universal laws”! What a pity theselaws are no whit better than those concocted as easily and swiftly by Eugen Dühring. 
 Suvorov’s “universal law” is just as empty and bombastic phrase-mongering as Dühr-ing’s universal laws. 
 Try to apply this law to the first of thethree fields mentioned by the author—inorganic develop-ment. 
 You will see that no “economy of forces” apart from the law of the conservation and transformation of energy can be applied here, let alone applied “universally”. 
 But the author had already set apart the law of the “conser-vation of energy”, had already mentioned it (p. 
 292) as aseparate law. 
 * What then remained in the field of inorgan-ic development apart from this law? Where are the addi-tions or complications, or new discoveries, or new facts which entitled the author to modify (“perfect”) the law of the conservation and transformation of energy into the lawof the “ economy of forces ”? There are no such facts or dis-coveries; Suvorov does not even hint at them. 
 He simply—to make it look impressive, as Turgenev’s Bazarov usedto say—flourished his pen and forth came a new “uni-*It is characteristic that Suvorov calls the discovery of the law of the conservation and transformation of energy110 “the establishment of the basic principles of energetics ” (292). 
 Has our would-be Marxist “realist” ever heard of the fact that both the vulgar materialists, Büch-ner and Co. 
, and the dialectical materialist, Engels, regarded this law as the establishment of the basic principles of materialism ? Has our “realist” ever reflected on the meaning of this difference? He has not;he has merely followed the fashion, repeated Ostwald, and that is all. 
That is just the trouble: “realists” like this succumb to fashion, whereasEngels, for instance, assimilated the , to him , new term , energy, and be-gan to employ it in 1885 (Preface to the 2nd ed. 
 of Anti-Dühring ) and in 1888 ( Ludwig Feuerbach ), but to employ it equally with the concepts of “force” and “motion” and along with them. 
 Engels was able to en-rich his materialism by adopting a new terminology. 
 The “realists” and other muddleheads seized upon the new term without noticingthe difference between materialism and energetics! versal law” of “real-monistic philosophy” (p. 
 292). 
 See what fine fellows we are! How are we worse than Dühring? Take the second field of development—the biological. 
 In this field, where the development of organisms takesplace through the struggle for existence and selection, isit the law of the economy of forces or the “law” of the wast-age of forces that is universal? But never mind! “Real-monistic philosophy” can interpret the “ meaning ” of a uni-versal law in one field in one way and in another field in another way, for instance, as the development of higher organisms from lower. 
 What does it matter if the universallaw thus becomes an empty phrase—the principle of “mon-ism” is preserved. 
 And in the third field (the social), the“universal law” can be interpreted in a third sense—as the development of productive forces. 
 That is why it is a “uni-versal law”—so that it can be made to cover anything youplease. 
 “Although social science is still young, it already pos-sesses both a solid foundation and definite generalisa-tions; in the nineteenth century it reached a theoretical level—and this constitutes Marx’s chief merit. 
 He elevat-ed social science to the level of a social theory.... 
” Engelssaid that Marx transformed socialism from a utopia into ascience, but this is not enough for Suvorov. 
 It will soundmore impressive if we also distinguish theory from science (was there a social science before Marx?)—and it does not matter if the distinction is absurd! “... by establishing the fundamental law of social dy-namics according to which the evolution of productiveforces is the determining principle of all economic andsocial development. 
 But the development of productiveforces corresponds to the growth of the productivity of labour, to the relative reduction in expenditure and in-crease in the accumulation of energy [see how fertile the“real-monistic philosophy” is: a new, energeticist, sub-stantiation of Marxism has been created!] ... this is the eco-nomic principle. 
 Thus, Marx made the principle of theeconomy of forces the basis of the social theory.... 
” This “thus” is truly superb! Because Marx has a political economy, let us therefore chew the word “economy”, and call the cud “real-monistic philosophy”! No, Marx did not make any principle of the economy of forces the basis of his theory. 
 These are absurdities in-vented by people who covet the laurels of Eugen Dühring. 
 Marx gave an absolutely precise definition of the conceptgrowth of productive forces, and he studied the concreteprocess of this growth. 
 But Suvorov invented a new termto designate the concept analysed by Marx; and his inven-tion was a very unhappy one and only confused matters. 
 For Suvorov did not explain what is meant by the “economy of forces”, how it can be measured, how this concept canbe applied, what precise and definite facts it embraces;—and this cannot be explained, because it is a muddle. 
Listen to this: “... This law of social economy is not only the principle of the internal unity of social science [can you make any-thing of this, reader?], but also the connecting link be-tween social theory and the general theory of being”(294). 
 Well, well, here we have “the general theory of being” discovered anew by S. 
 Suvorov, after it has already been discovered many times and in the most varied forms by numerous representatives of scholastic philosophy. 
 We con-gratulate the Russian Machists on this new “general theoryof being”! Let us hope that their next collective work willbe entirely devoted to the substantiation and developmentof this great discovery! The way our representative of realistic, or real-monistic, philosophy expounds Marx’s theory can be seen from thefollowing example: “In general, the productive forces ofmen form a genetic gradation [ugh!] and consist of theirlabour energy, harnessed elemental forces, culturally mod-ified nature and the instruments of labour which make up the technique of production.... 
 In relation to the process of labour these forces perform a purely economic function;they save labour energy and increase the productivity of itsexpenditure” (298). 
 Productive forces perform an economicfunction in relation to the process of labour! This is just asthough one were to say that vital forces perform a vital function in relation to the process of life. 
 This is not ex-pounding Marx; this is clogging up Marxism with an incred-ible clutter of words. 
 It is impossible to enumerate all the clutter contained in Suvorov’s article. 
 “The socialisation of a class is ex-pressed in the growth of its collective power over both peo-ple and their property” (313). 
 “...The class struggle aims atestablishing forms of equilibrium between social forces”(322). 
 Social dissension, enmity and struggle are essentiallynegative, anti-social phenomena. 
 “Social progress, in itsbasic content, is the growth of sociality, of social connections between people” (328). 
 One could fill volumes with collec-tions of such banalities—and the representatives of bourgeoissociology are filling volumes with them. 
 But to passthem off as the philosophy of Marxism—that is going too far!If Suvorov’s article were an experiment in popularisingMarxism, one would not judge it very severely. 
 Everyone would admit that the author’s intentions were of the best but that the experiment was very unsuccessful. 
 And thatwould be the end of it. 
 But when a group of Machists pre-sent us with such stuff and call it the Foundations of Social Philosophy , and when we see the same methods of “develop-ing” Marxism employed in Bogdanov’s philosophical books, we arrive at the inevitable conclusion that there is an in-separable connection between reactionary epistemology andreactionary efforts in sociology. 
 4. 
 PARTIES IN PHILOSOPHY AND PHILOSOPHICAL BLOCKHEADS It remains for us to examine the relation between Mach-ism and religion. 
 But this broadens into the question ofwhether, in general, there are parties in philosophy, andwhat is meant by non-partisanship in philosophy. 
 Throughout the preceding exposition, in connection with every problem of epistemology touched upon and in connection with every philosophical question raised by thenew physics, we traced the struggle between materialism and idealism . 
 Behind the mass of new terminological ar-tifices, behind the clutter of erudite scholasticism, weinvariably discerned two principal alignments, two fun-damental trends in the solution of philosophical problems. 
 Whether nature, matter, the physical, the external worldshould be taken as primary, and consciousness, mind, sensation (experience—as the widespread terminology of our time has it), the psychical, etc. 
, should be regarded as secondary—that is the root question which in fact con-tinues to divide the philosophers into two great camps . 
 The source of thousands upon thousands of errors and of theconfusion reigning in this sphere is the fact that beneaththe covering of terms, definitions, scholastic devices andverbal artifices, these two fundamental trends are over-looked . 
 (Bogdanov, for instance, refuses to acknowledge his idealism, because, you see, instead of the “metaphysical”concepts “nature” and “mind”, he has taken the “experien-tial”: physical and psychical. 
 A word has been changed!) The genius of Marx and Engels lies precisely in the fact that during a very long period, nearly half a century , they developed materialism, further advanced one fundamental trend in philosophy, did not rest content with repeatingepistemological problems that had already been solved,but consistently applied—and showed how to apply— this same materialism in the sphere of the social sciences, mercilessly brushing aside as rubbish all nonsense, pre-tentious hotchpotch, the innumerable attempts to “discover” a “new” line in philosophy, to invent a “new” trend and soforth. 
 The verbal nature of such attempts, the scholasticplay with new philosophical “isms”, the clogging of theissue by pretentious devices, the inability to comprehendand clearly present the struggle between the two fundamen-tal epistemological trends—this is what Marx and Engels persistently tracked down and fought against throughouttheir activity. 
 We said, “nearly half a century”. 
 And, indeed, as far back as 1843, when Marx was only becoming Marx, i. 
e. 
,the founder of socialism as a science, the founder of mod-ern materialism , which is immeasurably richer in con-tent and incomparably more consistent than all precedingforms of materialism—even at that time Marx pointed outwith amazing clarity the basic trends in philosophy. 
 KarlGrün quotes a letter from Marx to Feuerbach dated October20, 1843, 111 in which Marx invites Feuerbach to write an article for the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher112 against Schelling. 
 This Schelling, writes Marx, is a shallow brag-gart with his claims to having embraced and transcended all previous philosophical trends. 
 “To the French roman-ticists and mystics he [Schelling] says: I am the union of philosophy and theology; to the French materialists: I am the union of the flesh and the idea; to the Frenchsceptics: I am the destroyer of dogmatism. 
” * That the “sceptics”, be they called Humeans or Kantians (or, inthe twentieth century, Machists), cry out against the “dog-matism” of both materialism and idealism, Marx at that time already saw; and, without letting himself be divert-ed by any one of a thousand wretched little philosophicalsystems, he was able through Feuerbach to take directlythe materialist road against idealism. 
 Thirty years later,in the afterword to the second edition of the first volumeof Capital , Marx just as clearly and definitely contrasted his materialism to Hegel’s idealism , i. 
e. 
, the most con-sistent and most developed idealism; he contemptuouslybrushed Comtean “positivism” aside and dubbed as wretchedepigoni the contemporary philosophers who imagined thatthey had destroyed Hegel when in reality they had revertedto a repetition of the pre-Hegelian errors of Kant and Hume. 
 113 In the letter to Kugelmann of June 27, 1870, Marx refers just as contemptuously to “Büchner, Lange,Dühring, Fechner, etc. 
”, because they were incapable ofunderstanding Hegel’s dialectics and treated him withscorn. 
 ** And finally, take the various philosophical ut-terances by Marx in Capital and other works, and you will find an invariable basic motif: insistence upon materialism and contemptuous derision of all obscurity, of all confu-sion and all deviations towards idealism. 
 All Marx’s phil-osophical utterances revolve within these two funda-mental opposites, and from the standpoint of professorialphilosophy, their defect lies in this “narrowness” and “one-sidedness”. 
 In reality, this refusal to recognise the hybrid projects for reconciling materialism and idealism *Karl Grün, Ludwig Feuerbach in seinem Briefwechsel und Nach-lass , sowie in seiner philosophischen Charakterentwicklung , I. 
 Bd. 
, Leipzig, 1874, S. 
 361. 
 **Of the positivist Beesly, Marx, in a letter of December 13, 1870, speaks as follows: “Professor Beesly is a Comtist and as such obliged to think up all sorts of crotchets. 
”114 Compare this with the opinion of the positivists à la Huxley given by Engels in 1892. 
115 constitutes the great merit of Marx, who moved forward along a sharply-defined philosophical road. 
 Entirely in the spirit of Marx, and in close collabora-tion with him, Engels in all his philosophical works brieflyand clearly contrasts the materialist and idealist linesin regard to all questions, without, either in 1878, or 1888, or 1892, 116 taking seriously the endless attempts to “tran-scend” the “one-sidedness” of materialism and idealism, to proclaim a new trend—some kind of “positivism”, “real-ism”, or other professorial charlatanism. 
 Engels con-ducted his whole fight against Dühring completely under the watchword of consistent adherence to materialism,accusing the materialist Dühring of verbally confusing theissue, of phrase-mongering, of methods of reasoning which involved a concession to idealism and adoption of the po-sition of idealism. 
 Either materialism consistent to theend, or the falsehood and confusion of philosophical ideal-ism—such is the formulation of the question given inevery paragraph of Anti-Dühring ; and only people whose minds had already been corrupted by reactionary professo-rial philosophy could fail to notice it. 
 And right until 1894, when the last preface was written to Anti-Dühring , revised and enlarged by the author for the last time, En-gels continued to follow the latest developments bothin philosophy and science, and continued with all hisformer resoluteness to hold to his lucid and firm position, brushing away the litter of new systems, big and little. 
 That Engels followed the new developments in philosophy is evident from Ludwig Feuerbach . 
 In the 1888 preface, mention is even made of such a phenomenon as the re-birth of classical German philosophy in England and Scan-dinavia, whereas Engels (both in the preface and in the text of the book) has nothing but the most extreme con-tempt for the prevailing neo-Kantianism and Humism. 
 Itis quite obvious that Engels, observing the repetition byfashionable German and English philosophy of the old pre-Hegelian errors of Kantianism and Humism, was preparedto expect some good even from the turn to Hegel (in Eng-land and Scandinavia), hoping that the great idealist and dialectician would help to disclose petty idealist and met-aphysical errors. 
 117 Without undertaking an examination of the vast number of shades of neo-Kantianism in Germany and of Humism in England, Engels from the very outset refutes their funda-mental deviation from materialism. 
 Engels declares thatthe entire tendency of these two schools is “ scientifically a step backward ”. 
 And what is his opinion of the undoubt-edly “positivist”, according to the current terminology,the undoubtedly “realist” tendency of these neo-Kantians and Humeans, among whose number, for instance, he could not help knowing Huxley? That “positivism” and that “real-ism” which attracted, and which continue to attract, aninfinite number of muddleheads, Engels declared to be a t b e s t a philistine method of smuggling in materialism while publicly abusing and disavowing it! It suffices to reflect only a very little on such an appraisal of Thomas Huxley— a very great scientist and an incomparably more realisticrealist and positive positivist than Mach, Avenarius and Co. 
—in order to understand how contemptuously Engels wouldhave greeted the present infatuation of a handful of Marxistswith “recent positivism”, or “recent realism”, etc. 
 Marx and Engels were partisans in philosophy from start to finish, they were able to detect the deviationsfrom materialism and concessions to idealism and fideism inevery one of the “recent” trends. 
 They therefore appraisedHuxley exclusively from the standpoint of his materialist consistency. 
 They therefore reproached Feuerbach for not pursuing materialism to the end, for renouncing materialism because of the errors of individual materialists, for com-bating religion in order to renovate it or invent a new re-ligion, for being unable in sociology to rid himself of ideal-ist phraseology and become a materialist. 
 And whatever particular mistakes he committed in his exposition of dialectical materialism, J. 
 Dietzgen fully appreciated and took over this great and most precioustradition of his teachers. 
 Dietzgen sinned much by hisclumsy deviations from materialism, but he never attemptedto dissociate himself from it in principle, he never attempt-ed to raise a “new” banner and always at the decisive moment he firmly and categorically declared: I am a ma-terialist; our philosophy is a materialist philosophy. 
 “Ofall parties,” our Joseph Dietzgen justly said, “the middle party is the most repulsive.... 
 Just as parties in politics are more and more becoming divided into two camps ... so science too is being divided into two general classes (Generalklassen ): metaphysicians on the one hand, and physicists, or materialists, on the other. 
 * The intermediate elements and conciliatory quacks, with their various appel-lations—spiritualists, sensationalists, realists, etc. 
, etc. 
—fall into the current on their way. 
 We aim at definiteness and clarity. 
 The reactionaries who sound a retreat ( Ret-raitebläser ) call themselves idealists, ** and materialists should be the name for all who are striving to liberate thehuman mind from the metaphysical spell.... 
 If we comparethe two parties respectively to solid and liquid, betweenthem there is a mush. 
” *** True! The “realists”, etc. 
, including the “positivists”, the Machists, etc. 
, are all a wretched mush; they are a con-temptible middle party in philosophy, who confuse the ma-terialist and idealist trends on every question. 
 The attemptto escape from these two basic trends in philosophy is noth-ing but “conciliatory quackery”. 
 J. 
 Dietzgen had not the slightest doubt that the “scien-tific priestcraft” of idealist philosophy is simply theantechamber to open priestcraft. 
 “Scientific priestcraft,” hewrote, “is seriously endeavouring to assist religious priest-craft” (op. 
 cit. 
, 51). 
 “In particular, the sphere of epistemol-ogy, the misunderstanding of the human mind, is such a louse-hole” ( Lausgrube ) in which both kinds of priests “lay their eggs”. 
 “Graduated flunkeys”, who with their talk of“ideal blessings” stultify the people by their tortuous ( ge-schraubte ) “idealism” (53)—that is J. 
 Dietzgen’s opinion of the professors of philosophy. 
 “Just as the antipodes of thegood God is the devil, so the professorial priest ( Kathederpfa-ffen) has his opposite pole in the materialist. 
” The material-ist theory of knowledge is “a universal weapon against reli-*Here again we have a clumsy and inexact expression: instead of “metaphysicians”, he should have said “idealists”. 
 Elsewhere Dietz-gen himself contrasts the metaphysicians and the dialecticians. 
 **Note that Dietzgen has corrected himself and now explains more exactly which is the party of the enemies of materialism. 
 *** See the article, “Social-Democratic Philosophy”, written in 1876, Kleinere philosophische Schriften , 1903, S. 
 135. 
 gious belief” (55), and not only against the “notorious, formal and common religion of the priests, but also against the most refined, elevated professorial religion of muddled (benebelter ) idealists” (58). 
 Dietzgen was ready to prefer “religious honesty” to the “half-heartedness” of free-thinking professors (60), for “therea system prevails”, there we find integral people, people whodo not separate theory from practice. 
 For the Herr profes-sors “philosophy is not a science, but a means of defence against Social-Democracy” (107). 
 “Those who call them-selves philosophers—professors and university lecturers—are,despite their apparent free-thinking, more or less immersedin superstition and mysticism ... and in relation to Social-Democracy constitute a single ... reactionary mass” (108). 
 “Now, in order to follow the true path, without being led astray by all the religious and philosophical gib-berish ( Welsch ), it is necessary to study the falsest of all false paths ( der Holzweg der Holzwege ), philosophy” (103). 
 Let us now examine Mach, Avenarius and their school from the standpoint of parties in philosophy. 
 Oh, these gentlemen boast of their non-partisanship , and if they have an antipodes, it is the materialist ... and only the ma-terialist. 
 A red thread that runs through all the writings of all the Machists is the stupid claim to have “risen above” materialism and idealism, to have transcended this “obso-lete” antithesis; but in fact this whole fraternity is con-tinually sliding into idealism and it conducts a steady and incessant struggle against materialism. 
 The subtle episte-mological crotchets of a man like Avenarius remain a pro-fessorial invention, an attempt to form a small philosophi-cal sect “of his own”; but, as a matter of fact , in the general circumstances of the struggle of ideas and trends in modern society, the objective part played by these epistemological artifices is in every case the same, namely, to clear the wayfor idealism and fideism, and to serve them faithfully. 
 In fact,it cannot be an accident that the English spiritualists,like Ward, the French neo-criticists, who praise Mach for his attack on materialism and the German immanentists all fasten on the small school of empirio-criticists! Dietz-gen’s expression, “graduated flunkeys of fideism”, hits the nail on the head in the case of Mach, Avenarius and their whole school. 
 * It is the misfortune of the Russian Machists, who un-dertook to “reconcile” Machism and Marxism, that theytrusted the reactionary professors of philosophy and as aresult slipped down an inclined plane. 
 The methods ofoperation employed in the various attempts to develop andsupplement Marx were very naïve. 
 They read Ostwald, be-lieve Ostwald, paraphrase Ostwald and call it Marxism. 
 They read Mach, believe Mach, paraphrase Mach and call itMarxism. 
 They read Poincaré, believe Poincaré, paraphrasePoincaré and call it Marxism! Not a single one of these professors, who are capable of making very valuable con-tributions in the special fields of chemistry, history or physics, can be trusted one iota when it comes to philoso-phy. 
 Why? For the same reason that not a single professor of political economy, who may be capable of very valuablecontributions in the field of factual and specialised investi-gations, can be trusted one iota when it comes to the general theory of political economy. 
 For in modern society the lat-ter is as much a partisan science as is epistemology . 
 Taken as a whole, the professors of economics are nothing but learned *Here is another example of how the widespread currents of reaction-ary bourgeois philosophy make use of Machism in practice. 
 Perhapsthe “latest fashion” in the latest American philosophy is “pragmat-ism 118 (from the Greek word “pragma”—action; that is, a philosophy of action). 
 The philosophical journals speak perhaps more of pragmatism than of anything else. 
 Pragmatism ridicules the metaphysics both of materialism and idealism, acclaims experience and only experience,recognises practice as the only criterion, refers to the positivist move-ment in general, especially turns for support to Ostwald , Mach , Pearson , Poincaré and Duhem , for the belief that science is not an “absolute copy of reality” and ... successfully deduces from all this a God for practi-cal purposes, and only for practical purposes, without any metaphys-ics, and without transcending the bounds of experience (cf. 
 WilliamJames, Pragmatism. 
 A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking , New York and London, 1907, pp. 
 57 and 106 especially). 
 From the stand-point of materialism the difference between Machism and pragmatismis as insignificant and unimportant as the difference between empirio-criticism and empirio-monism. 
 Compare, for example, Bogdanov’s definition of truth with the pragmatist definition of truth, which is:“Truth for a pragmatist becomes a class-name for all sorts of definiteworking values in experience’ (ibid. 
, p. 
 68). 
 salesmen of the capitalist class, while the professors of philosophy are learned salesmen of the theologians. 
 The task of Marxists in both cases is to be able to mas-ter and refashion the achievements of these “salesmen” (forinstance, you will not make the slightest progress in the in-vestigation of new economic phenomena without makinguse of the works of these salesmen) and to be able to lop off their reactionary tendency, to pursue our own line and to combat the whole line of the forces and classes hostile to us. 
 And this is just what our Machists were unable to do;they slavishly follow the lead of the reactionary professo-rial philosophy. 
 “Perhaps we have gone astray, but we areseeking,” wrote Lunacharsky in the name of the authors ofthe Studies . 
 The trouble is that it is not you who are seeking, but you who are being sought ! You do not go with your, i. 
e. 
, Marxist (for you want to be Marxists), standpoint to everychange in the bourgeois philosophical fashion; the fashioncomes to you, foists upon you its new falsifications adaptedto the idealist taste, one day à la Ostwald, the next day à la Mach, and the day after à la Poincaré. 
 These silly “theoretical” devices (“energetics”, “elements”, “introjec-tions”, etc. 
) in which you so naïvely believe are confinedto a narrow and tiny school, while the ideological andsocial tendency of these devices is immediately seized upon by the Wards, the neo-criticists, the immanentists, theLopatins and the pragmatists, and serves their purposes . 
 The infatuation for empirio-criticist and “physical” ideal-ism passes as rapidly as the infatuation for neo-Kantianismand “physiological” idealism; but fideism takes advantageof every such infatuation and modifies its devices in a thou-sand ways for the benefit of philosophical idealism. 
 The attitude towards religion and the attitude towards natural science excellently illustrate the actual class uti-lisation of empirio-criticism by bourgeois reactionaries. 
 Take the first question. 
 Do you think it is an accident that in a collective work directed against the philosophy of Marxism Lunacharsky went so far as to speak of the“deification of the higher human potentialities”, of “reli-gious atheism”, etc. 
? * If you do, it is only because the *Studies , pp. 
 157, 159. 
 In Zagranichnaya Gazeta119 the same au-thor speaks of “scientific socialism in its religious significance” (No. 
 Russian Machists have not informed the public correctly regarding the whole Machist current in Europe and the attitude of this current to religion. 
 Not only is this atti-tude in no way like that of Marx, Engels, J. 
 Dietzgen andeven Feuerbach, but it is the very opposite , beginning with Petzoldt’s statement that empirio-criticism “contradictsneither theism nor atheism” ( Einführung in die Philosophie der reinen Erfahrung , Bd. 
 I, S. 
 351), or Mach’s declaration that “religious opinion is a private affair” (French transla-tion, p. 
 434), and ending with the explicit fideism , the explicitly arch-reactionary views of Cornelius, who praises Mach and whom Mach praises, of Carus and of all the imma-nentists. 
 The neutrality of a philosopher in this question is in itself servility to fideism, and Mach and Avenarius, because of the very premises of their epistemology, do not and cannot rise above neutrality. 
 Once you deny objective reality, given us in sensation, you have already lost every weapon against fideism, foryou have slipped into agnosticism or subjectivism—andthat is all that fideism requires. 
 If the perceptual world is objective reality, then the door is closed to every other “reality” or quasi-reality (remember that Bazarov believedthe “realism” of the immanentists, who declare God to bea “real concept”). 
 If the world is matter in motion, mattercan and must be infinitely studied in the infinitely complexand detailed manifestations and ramifications of this mo-tion, the motion of this matter; but beyond it, beyond the “physical”, external world, with which everyone is familiar,there can be nothing. 
 And the hostility to materialism andthe torrents of slander against the materialists are all inthe order of things in civilised and democratic Europe. 
All this is going on to this day. 
 All this is being concealed from the public by the Russian Machists, who have not once attempted even simply to compare the attacks made on materialism by Mach, Avenarius, Petzoldt and Co. 
,with the statements made in favour of materialism by Feuer-bach, Marx, Engels and J. 
 Dietzgen. 
 But this “concealment” of the attitude of Mach and Avenarius to fideism will not avail. 
 The facts speak for 3, p. 
 5) and in Obrazovaniye ,120 1908, No. 
 1, p. 
 164, he explicitly says: “For a long time a new religion has been maturing within me. 
 ” themselves. 
 No efforts can release these reactionary pro-fessors from the pillory in which they have been placed by the kisses of Ward, the neo-criticists, Schuppe, Schubert-Soldern, Leclair, the pragmatists, etc. 
 And the influenceof the persons mentioned, as philosophers and professors,the widespread extent of their ideas among the “educated”,i. 
e. 
, the bourgeois, public and the special literature theyhave created are ten times wider and richer than the spe-cial little school of Mach and Avenarius. 
 The little school serves those who require it, and it is exploited as it de-serves to be exploited. 
 The shameful things to which Lunacharsky has stooped are not exceptional; they are the product of empirio-crit-icism, both Russian and German. 
 They cannot be de-fended on the grounds of the “good intentions” of the au-thor, or the “special meaning” of his words; if it were thedirect and common, i. 
e. 
, the directly fideist meaning, weshould not stop to discuss matters with the author, for mostlikely not a single Marxist could be found in whose eyessuch statements would not place Anatole Lunacharsky exactly in the same category as Peter Struve. 
 If this is not the case (and it is not yet the case), it is exclusively because we perceive the “special” meaning and are fighting while there is still ground for a fight on comradely lines. 
 This is just the disgrace of Lunacharsky’s statements—thathe could combine them with his “good” intentions. 
 This is just the evil of his “theory”—that it permits the use of such methods or of such conclusions for realising good in-tentions. 
 This is just the trouble—that at best “good” in-tentions are the subjective affair of Tom, Dick or Harry,while the social significance of such statements is definite and indisputable, and no reservation or explanation can diminish it. 
 One must be blind not to see the ideological affinity between Lunacharsky’s “deification of the higher human po-tentialities” and Bogdanov’s “general substitution” of thepsychical for all physical nature. 
 This is one and the samethought; in the one case it is expressed principally from the aesthetic standpoint, and in the other from the epis-temological standpoint. 
 “Substitution”, approaching thesubject tacitly and from a different angle, already deifies the “higher human potentialities”, by divorcing the “psy-chical” from man and by substituting an immensely extend-ed, abstract, divinely-lifeless “psychical in general” for all physical nature . 
 And what of Yushkevich’s “Logos” introduced into the “irrational stream of experience”? A single claw ensnared, and the bird is lost. 
 And our Machists have all become ensnared in idealism, that is,in a diluted, subtle fideism; they became ensnared from the moment they took “sensation” not as an image of the external world but as a special “element”. 
 It is nobody’ssensation, nobody’s mind, nobody’s spirit, nobody’s will—this is what one inevitably comes to if one does not rec-ognise the materialist theory that the human mind reflects an objectively real external world. 
 5. 
 ERNST HAECKEL AND ERNST MACH Let us now examine the attitude of Machism, as a philo-sophical current , towards the natural sciences. 
 All Mach-ism, from beginning to end, combats the “metaphysics” of the natural sciences, this being the name they give tonatural-scientific materialism , i. 
e. 
, to the instinctive, unwitting, unformed, philosophically unconscious convic-tion shared by the overwhelming majority of scientists re-garding the objective reality of the external world reflect-ed by our consciousness. 
 And our Machists deceitfully keep silent about this fact and obscure or confuse the insepar-able connection between the instinctive materialism of the natural scientists and philosophical materialism as a trend, a trend known long ago and hundreds of times affirmed byMarx and Engels. 
 Take Avenarius. 
 In his very first work, Philosophie als Denken der Welt gemäss dem Prinzip des kleinsten Kraft-masses , published in 1876, he attacked the metaphysics of natural science, * i. 
e. 
, natural-scientific materialism, and, as he himself admitted in 1891 (without, however, “correct-ing” his views!), attacked it from the standpoint of epis-temological idealism. 
 *§§ 79, 114, etc. 
 Take Mach. 
 From 1872 (or even earlier) down to 1906 he waged continuous war on the metaphysics of natural science. 
 However, he was conscientious enough to admit that his views were shared by “a number of philosophers”(the immanentists included), but by “ very few scientists” (Analysis of Sensations , p. 
 9). 
 In 1906 Mach also honest-ly admitted that the “majority of natural scientists adhere tomaterialism” ( Erkenntnis und Irrtum , 2. 
 Aufl. 
, S. 
 4). 
 Take Petzoldt. 
 In 1900 he proclaimed that the “natural sciences are thoroughly ( ganz und gar ) imbued with meta-physics”. 
 “Their experience has still to be purified” ( Ein-führung in die Philosophie der reinen Erfahrung , Bd. 
 I, S. 
 343). 
 We know that Avenarius and Petzoldt “purify” ex-perience of all recognition of the objective reality given us in sensation. 
 In 1904 Petzoldt declared: “The mechan-ical world outlook of the modern scientist is essentiallyno better than that of the ancient Indians.... 
 It makesno difference whether the world rests on a mythical ele-phant or on just as mythical a swarm of molecules andatoms epistemologically thought of as real and therefore not used merely metaphorically ( bloss bildlich )” (Bd. 
 II, S. 
 176). 
 Take Willy, the only Machist decent enough to be ashamed of his kinship with the immanentists. 
 Yet, in 1905he too declared: “... The natural sciences, after all, are alsoin many respects an authority of which we must rid our-selves” ( Gegen die Schulweisheit , S. 
 158). 
 But this is all sheer obscurantism , out-and-out reaction. 
 To regard atoms, molecules, electrons, etc. 
, as an approxi-mately true reflection in our mind of the objectively real movement of matter is equivalent to believing in an elephant upon which the world rests! No wonder that this obscur-antist , decked in the cap and bells of fashionable positiv-ism, was greeted by the immanentists with open arms . 
 There is not a single immanentist who would not furiously attack the “metaphysics” of natural science, the “material-ism” of natural scientists, precisely because of the recog-nition by the scientists of the objective reality of matter (and its particles), time, space, laws of nature, etc. 
, etc. 
 Long before the new discoveries in physics which gaverise to “physical idealism” Leclair, using Mach as a support, combated “The Predominant Materialist Trend ( Grundzug ) of Modern Natural Science” (the title of § 6 of Der Realismus usw . 
, 1879), Schubert-Soldern fought “The Metaphysics of Natural Science” (the title of Chapter II of Grundlagen einer Erkenntnistheorie , 1884), Rehmke battled with natural-scientific “materialism”, that “ metaphysics of the street ” (Philosophie und Kantianismus , 1882, S. 
 17), etc. 
, etc. 
 And the immanentists quite legitimately drew direct and outspoken fideist conclusions from this Machist idea of the “metaphysical character” of natural-scientific mate-rialism. 
 If natural science in its theories depicts not objec-tive reality, but only metaphors, symbols, forms of human experience, etc. 
, it is beyond dispute that humanity is en-titled to create for itself in another sphere no less “real concepts”, such as God, and so forth. 
 The philosophy of the scientist Mach is to science what the kiss of the Christian Judas was to Christ. 
 Mach likewisebetrays science into the hands of fideism by virtually de-serting to the camp of philosophical idealism. 
 Mach’s re-nunciation of natural-scientific materialism is a reactionary phenomenon in every respect. 
 We saw this quite clearly when we spoke of the struggle of the “physical idealists”against the majority of natural scientists, who continue to maintain the standpoint of the old philosophy. 
 We shallsee it still more clearly if we compare the famous scientist,Ernst Haeckel, with the famous (among the reactionary philistines) philosopher, Ernst Mach. 
 The storm provoked by Ernst Haeckel’s The Riddle of the Universe in every civilised country strikingly brought out, on the one hand, the partisan character of philosophy in modern society and, on the other, the true social sig-nificance of the struggle of materialism against idealism and agnosticism. 
 The fact that the book was sold in hun-dreds of thousands of copies, that it was immediately trans-lated into all languages and that it appeared in speciallycheap editions, clearly demonstrates that the book “foundits way to the people”, that there are masses of readers whom Ernst Haeckel at once won over to his side. 
 This popular little book became a weapon in the class struggle. 
 The professors of philosophy and theology in every countryof the world set about denouncing and annihilating Haeckel in every possible way. 
 The eminent English physicist Lodge hastened to defend God against Haeckel. 
 The Russian physicist Mr. 
 Chwolson went to Germany to publish a vile reactionary pamphlet attacking Haeckel and to assure therespectable philistines that not all scientists now holdthe position of “naïve realism”. 
 * Innumerable theologians joined the campaign against Haeckel. 
 There was no abusenot showered on him by the official professors of philoso-phy. 
 ** It was amusing to see how—perhaps for the first time in their lives—the eyes of these mummies, dried andshrunken in the atmosphere of lifeless scholasticism, beganto gleam and their cheeks to glow under the slaps whichHaeckel administered them. 
 The high-priests of pure science,and, it would appear, of the most abstract theory, fair-ly groaned with rage. 
 And throughout all the howling of the philosophical die-hards (the idealist Paulsen, theimmanentist Rehmke, the Kantian Adickes, and the others,and their name is legion) one underlying motif is clearlyaudible: they are all against the “ metaphysics ” of natural science, against “dogmatism”, against “the exaggeration of the value and significance of natural science”, against “natural-scientific materialism ”. 
 He is a materialist—at him! at the materialist! He is deceiving the public by notcalling himself a materialist directly!—that is what partic-ularly drives the worthy professors to fury. 
 Especially noteworthy in all this tragicomedy *** is the fact that Haeckel himself renounces materialism and rejects the appellation. 
 What is more, far from rejectingreligion altogether, he has invented his own religion(something like Bulgakov’s “atheistic faith” or Lunachar-sky’s “religious atheism”), and on grounds of principle *O. 
 D. 
 Chwolson, Hegel , Haeckel , Kossuth und das zwölfte Gebot , 1906. 
 Cf. 
 S. 
 80. 
 **The pamphlet of Heinrich Schmidt, Der Kampf und die Welträt-sel (Bonn, 1900), gives a fairly good picture of the campaign launched against Haeckel by the professors of philosophy and theology. 
 But thispamphlet is already very much out-of-date. 
 *** The tragic element was introduced by the attempt made on Haeckel’s life this spring (1908). 
 After Haeckel had received a numberof anonymous letters addressing him by such epithets as “dog”, “athe-ist”, “monkey”, and so forth, some true German soul threw a stoneof no mean size through the window of Haeckel’s study in Jena. 
 advocates a union of religion and science. 
 What is the matter then? What “fatal misunderstanding” started the row? The point is that Haeckel’s philosophical naïveté, his lack of definite partisan aims, his anxiety to respect the pre-vailing philistine prejudice against materialism, his per-sonal conciliatory tendencies and proposals concerningreligion, all this gave the greater salience to the general spirit of his book, the ineradicability of natural-scientific materialism and its irreconcilability with all official profes-sorial philosophy and theology. 
 Haeckel personally doesnot seek a rupture with the philistines, but what he expoundswith such unshakably naïve conviction is absolutely in-compatible with any of the shades of prevailing philosoph-ical idealism. 
 All these shades, from the crudest reaction-ary theories of a Hartmann, to the positivism of Petzoldt,who fancies himself up-to-date, progressive and advanced,or the empirio-criticism of Mach— all are in accord that natural-scientific materialism is “metaphysics”, that therecognition of an objective reality underlying the theories and conclusions of science is sheer “naïve realism”, etc. 
 And to this doctrine, “sacred” to all professorial philosophy and theology, every page of Haeckel gives a slap in the face . 
 This scientist, who undoubtedly expressed the very firmlyimplanted, although ill-defined opinions, sentiments andtendencies of the overwhelming majority of the scientists at the end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the twen-tieth century, instantly, easily and simply revealed whatprofessorial philosophy tried to conceal from the publicand from itself, namely, the fact that there is a foundation,growing ever wider and firmer, which shatters all the effortsand strivings of the thousand and one little schools of phil-osophical idealism, positivism, realism, empirio-criticism and other confusionism. 
 This foundation is natural-scien-tific materialism . 
 The conviction of the “naïve realists” (in other words, of all humanity) that our sensations are imagesof an objectively real external world is the convictionof the mass of scientists, one that is steadily growing and gaining in strength. 
 The cause of the founders of new philosophical schools and of the inventors of new epistemological “isms” is for THE MONISTIC THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 3. 
 Cognition is a physio-logical process, whose ana-tomical organ is the brain. 
 4. 
 The only part of the hu-man brain in which knowl-edge is engendered is aspatially limited region ofthe cortex, the phronema. 
 5. 
 The phronema is a highly-perfected dynamo,THE DUALISTIC THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 3. 
 Cognition is not a physiological but a purelyspiritual process. 
 4. 
 The part of the human brain which appears to func-tion as the organ of knowl-edge is in fact only theinstrument that permits thespiritual process to man-ifest itself. 
 5. 
 The phronema as the organ of reason is not auton-ever and hopelessly lost. 
 They may flounder about in their “original” petty systems; they may strive to engage the attention of a few admirers in the interesting controversy as to who was the first to exclaim, “Eh!”—the empirio-critical Bobchinsky, or the empirio-monistic Dobchinsky 121; they may even devote themselves to creating an extensive“special” literature, like the “immanentists”. 
 But thecourse of development of natural science, despite its vacillations and hesitations, despite the unconscious charac-ter of the materialism of the natural scientists, despiteyesterday’s infatuation with fashionable “physiologicalidealism” or today’s infatuation with fashionable “physicalidealism”, is sweeping aside all the petty systems and ar-tifices, again and again bringing to the forefront the “meta-physics” of natural-scientific materialism . 
 Here is an illustration of this from Haeckel. 
 In his The Wonders of Life , Haeckel compares the monistic and dualis-tic theories of knowledge. 
 We give the most interestingpoints of the comparison *: . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 *I use the French translation, Les merveilles de la vie , Paris, Schleicher, Tables I et XVI. 
 This typical quotation from his works shows that Haeckel does not attempt an analysis of philosophical prob-lems and is not able to contrast the materialist theory of knowledge with the idealist theory of knowledge. 
 Heridicules all idealist—more broadly, all peculiarly phil-osophical—artifices from the standpoint of natural sci-ence, without even admitting the idea that any other theory of knowledge than natural-scientific materialism is pos-sible. 
 He ridicules the philosophers from the standpoint of a materialist, without realising that his standpoint is that of a materialist! The impotent wrath aroused in the philosophers by this almighty materialism is comprehensible. 
 We quotedabove the opinion of the “true-Russian” Lopatin. 
 And here is the opinion of Mr. 
 Rudolf Willy, the most progressive of the “empirio-criticists”, who is irreconcilably hostileto idealism (don’t laugh!). 
 “Haeckel’s monism is a veryheterogeneous mixture: it combines certain natural-scien-tific laws, such as the law of the conservation of energy... with certain scholastic traditions about substance and the thing-in-itself into a chaotic jumble” ( Gegen die Schul-weisheit , S. 
 128). 
 What has annoyed this most worthy “recent positivist”? Well, how could he help being annoyed when he immediatelyrealised that from Haeckel’s standpoint all the great doc-trines of his teacher Avenarius—for instance, that the brain is not the organ of thought, that sensations are not images of the external world, that matter (“substance”) or“the thing-in-itself” is not an objective reality, and sothe individual parts of which, the phroneta, consist of millions of cells (phrona-tal cells). 
 Just as in the caseof every other organ of thebody, so in the case of thismental organ, its function,the "mind", is the sum-to-tal of the functions of its constituent cells. 
omous, but through its con-stituent parts (phroneta) and the cells that compose them, serves only as inter-mediary between the non-material mind and the ex-ternal world. 
 Human rea-son differs absolutely from the mind of the higher ani-mals and from the instinctof the lower animals. 
 forth—are nothing but sheer idealist gibberish !? Haeckel did not say it in so many words because he did not concern himself with philosophy and was not acquainted with “empi-rio-criticism ” as such . 
 But Rudolf Willy could not help realising that a hundred thousand readers of Haeckel meantas many people spitting in the face of the philosophy o f Mach and Avenarius. 
 Willy wipes his face in advance, in the Lopatin manner . 
 For the essence of the arguments which Mr. 
 Lopatin and Mr. 
 Willy marshal against materialism in general and natural-scientific materialism in particular,is exactly the same in both. 
 To us Marxists, the differencebetween Mr. 
 Lopatin and Messrs. 
 Willy, Petzoldt, Mach andCo. 
 is no greater than the difference between the Protes-tant theologians and the Catholic theologians. 
 The “war” on Haeckel has proved that this view of ours corresponds to objective reality , i. 
e. 
, to the class nature of modern society and its class ideological tendencies. 
 Here is another little example. 
 The Machist Klein-peter has translated from English into German a work byCarl Snyder, World Picture from the Standpoint of Modern Natural Science (Das Weltbild der moderner Naturuwis-senschaft , Leipzig, 1905), which had a wide circulation in America. 
 This work gives a clear and popular accountof a number of recent discoveries in physics and otherbranches of natural science. 
 And the Machist Kleinpeterwas called upon to supply the book with a preface in which he makes certain reservations , such as, for example, that Snyder’s epistemology is “not satisfactory” (S. 
 v). 
 Whyso? Because Snyder never entertains the slightest doubtthat the world picture is a picture of how matter movesand of how “ matter thinks ” (S. 
 288). 
 In his next book, The World Machine (London and New York, 1907), Snyder, referring to the fact that his book is dedicated to the mem-ory of Democritus of Abdera, who lived about 460-360B. 
 C. 
, says: “Democritus has often been styled the grand-sire of materialism. 
 It is a school of philosophy that is alittle out of fashion nowadays; yet it is worthy of notethat practically all of the modern advance in our ideas of this world has been grounded upon his conceptions. 
 Practi-cally speaking, materialistic assumptions are simplyunescapable in physical investigations” (p. 
 140). 
 “... If he likes, he may dream with good Bishop Berke-ley that it is all a dream. 
 Yet comforting as may be the legerdemain of an idealised idealism, there are still few among us who, whatever they may think regarding the prob-lem of the external world, doubt that they themselves exist;and it needs no long pursuit of the will-o’-the-wisps of theIch and non-Ich to assure oneself that if in an unguarded moment we assume that we ourselves have a personality and a being, we let in the whole procession of appearances which come of the six gates of the senses. 
 The nebularhypothesis, the light-bearing ether, the atomic theory,and all their like, may be but convenient ‘working hypo-theses’, but it is well to remember that, in the absence ofnegative proof, they stand on more or less the same foot-ing as the hypothesis that a being you call ‘you’, Oh, In-dulgent Reader, scans these lines” (pp. 
 31-32). 
 Imagine the bitter lot of a Machist when his favourite subtle constructions, which reduce the categories of natu-ral science to mere working hypotheses, are laughed at bythe scientists on both sides of the ocean as sheer nonsense! Is it to be wondered at that Rudolf Willy, in 1905 , combats Democritus as though he were a living enemy, therebyproviding an excellent illustration of the partisan character of philosophy and once more exposing the real position he himself takes up in this partisan struggle? Hewrites: “Of course, Democritus was not conscious of the fact that atoms and the void are only fictitious concepts which perform mere accessory services ( blosse Handlanger-dienste ), and maintain their existence only by grace of expediency, just as long as they prove useful. 
 Democrituswas not free enough for this; but neither are our modernnatural scientists, with few exceptions. 
 The faith of old Democritus is also the faith of our natural scientists” (op. 
 cit. 
, S. 
 57). 
 And there is good reason for despair! The “empirio-criticists” have proved in quite a “new way” that bothspace and atoms are “working hypotheses”; and yet the na-tural scientists deride this Berkeleianism and follow Hae-ckel! We are by no means idealists, this is a slander; we are only striving (together with the idealists) to refutethe epistemological line of Democritus; we have been striving to do so for more than 2,000 years, but all in vain! And it only remains for our leader Ernst Mach to dedicate his last work, the outcome of his life and philosophy, Knowledge and Error , to Wilhelm Schuppe and to remark ruefully in the text that the majority of natural scientistsare materialists and that “we also” sympathise with Hae-ckel ... for his “free-thinking” (S. 
 14). 
 And there he completely betrays himself, this ideolo-gist of reactionary philistinism who follows the arch-reac-tionary Schuppe and “ sympathises ” with Haeckel’s free-think-ing. 
 They are all like this, these humanitarian philistinesin Europe, with their freedom-loving sympathies and theirideological (as well as political and economic) captivityto the Wilhelm Schuppes. 
 * Non-partisanship in philosophy is only wretchedly masked servility to idealism and fideism. 
 Let us, in conclusion, compare this with the opinion of Haeckel held by Franz Mehring, who not only wants to be,but who knows how to be a Marxist. 
 The moment The Riddle of the Universe appeared, towards the end of 1899, Mehring pointed out that “Haeckel’s work, both in its less good and its very good aspects, is eminently adapted to help clarify the apparently rather confused views prevailingin the party as to the significance for it of historical ma-terialism, on the one hand, and historical materialism , on the other. 
” ** Haeckel’s defect is that he has no con-ception of historical materialism, which leads him to utter a number of howling absurdities about politics, about “monistic religion”, and so on and so forth. 
 “Haeckel isa materialist and monist, not a historical but a natural-scientific materialist” (ibid. 
). 
 “He who wants to perceive this inability [of natural-scientific materialism to deal with social problems] tan-gibly, he who wants to be convinced that natural-scientific materialism must be broadened into historical materialism *Plekhanov in his criticism of Machism was less concerned with refuting Mach than with dealing a factional blow at Bolshevism. 
 Forthis petty and miserable exploitation of fundamental theoretical differ-ences, he has already been deservedly punished—through two books by Machist Mensheviks. 
 122 **Fr. 
 Mehring, “Die Welträtsel”, Neue Zeit , 1899-1900, XVIII, 1, 418. 
 if it is really to be an invincible weapon in the great strug-gle for emancipation of mankind, let him read Haeckel’s book. 
 “But let him not read it for this purpose alone! Its uncommonly weak side is inseparably bound up with itsuncommonly strong side, viz. 
, with the comprehensibleand clear description (which after all takes up by far thegreater and more important part of the book) given by Haeckel of the development of the natural sciences in this [the nineteenth] century, or, in other words, of thetriumphant march of natural-scientific materialism . 
” * *Ibid. 
, p. 
 419. 
 CONCLUSION There are four standpoints from which a Marxist should proceed to form a judgement of empirio-criticism. 
 First and foremost, the theoretical foundations of this philosophy must be compared with those of dialectical materialism. 
 Such a comparison, to which the first threechapters were devoted, reveals, along the whole line o f epistemological problems, the thoroughly reactionary char-acter of empirio-criticism, which uses new artifices, termsand subtleties to disguise the old errors of idealism and agnosticism . 
 Only sheer ignorance of the nature of phil-osophical materialism generally and of the nature ofMarx’s and Engels’ dialectical method can lead one to speakof “combining” empirio-criticism and Marxism. 
 Secondly, the place of empirio-criticism, as one very small school of specialists in philosophy, in relation to the other modern schools of philosophy must be determined. 
 Both Mach and Avenarius started with Kant and, leavinghim, proceeded not towards materialism, but in the oppositedirection, towards Hume and Berkeley. 
 Imagining that hewas “purifying experience” generally, Avenarius was infact only purifying agnosticism of Kantianism. 
 The whole school of Mach and Avenarius is moving more and more defi-nitely towards idealism, hand in hand with one of the mostreactionary of the idealist schools, viz. 
, the so-called im-manentists. 
 Thirdly, the indubitable connection between Machism and one school in one branch of modern natural science must be borne in mind. 
 The vast majority of scientists, both generally and in the special branch of science inquestion, viz. 
, physics, are invariably on the side of mate- /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR rialism. 
 A minority of new physicists, however, influenced by the break-down of old theories brought about by the great discoveries of recent years, influenced by the crisis in the new physics, which has very clearly revealed therelativity of our knowledge, have, owing to their ignoranceof dialectics, slipped into idealism by way of relativism. 
The physical idealism in vogue today is as reactionary andtransitory an infatuation as was the fashionable physiolog-ical idealism of the recent past. 
 Fourthly, behind the epistemological scholasticism of empirio-criticism one must not fail to see the struggle ofparties in philosophy, a struggle which in the last anal-ysis reflects the tendencies and ideology of the antago-nistic classes in modern society. 
 Recent philosophy is as partisan as was philosophy two thousand years ago. 
 The contending parties are essentially—although this is con-cealed by a pseudo-erudite quackery of new terms or bya weak-minded non-partisanship—materialism and idealism. 
The latter is merely a subtle, refined form of fideism, whichstands fully armed, commands vast organisations and stead-ily continues to exercise influence on the masses, turning the slightest vacillation in philosophical thought to itsown advantage. 
 The objective, class role of empirio-criti-cism consists entirely in rendering faithful service to thefideists in their struggle against materialism in generaland historical materialism in particular. 
 S U P P L E M E N T T O C H A P T E R F O U R, S E C T I O N 1* 123 WHAT ANGLE DID N. 
 G. 
 CHERNYSHEVSKY CRITICISE KANTIANISM? In the first section of Chapter Four we showed in detail that the materialists criticised Kant, and continue tocriticise him, from a standpoint diametrically oppositeto that from which Mach and Avenarius criticise him. 
 Itwould not be superfluous to add here, albeit briefly, anindication of the epistemological position held by the great Russian Hegelian and materialist, N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky. 
 Shortly after Albrecht Rau, the German disciple of Feuerbach, had published his criticism of Kant, the greatRussian writer N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky, who was also a discipleof Feuerbach, first attempted an explicit statement of hisattitude towards both Feuerbach and Kant. 
 N. 
 G. 
 Cherny-shevsky had appeared in Russian literature as a follower of Feuerbach as early as the fifties, but our censorshipdid not allow him even to mention Feuerbach’s name. 
 In1888, in the preface to the projected third edition of hisThe Aesthetic Relation of Art to Reality , N. 
 G. 
 Cherny-shevsky attempted to allude directly to Feuerbach, but in 1888 too the censor refused to allow even a mere refer-ence to Feuerbach! It was not until 1906 that the prefacesaw the light (see N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky, Collected Works , Vol. 
 X, Part II, pp. 
 190-97). 
 In this preface Chernyshevskydevotes half a page to criticising Kant and the naturalscientists who follow Kant in their philosophical conclu-sions. 
 *See pp. 
 194-205 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 Here is the excellent argument given by Chernyshevsky in 1888: “Natural scientists who imagine themselves to be build-ers of all-embracing theories are really disciples, and usu-ally poor disciples, of the ancient thinkers who evolvedthe metaphysical systems, usually thinkers whose systemshad already been partially destroyed by Schelling and final-ly destroyed by Hegel. 
 One need only point out that the majority of the natural scientists who endeavour to con-struct broad theories of the laws of operation of humanthought only repeat Kant’s metaphysical theory regardingthe subjectivity of our knowledge.... 
” (For the benefitof the Russian Machists who manage to muddle everything,let us say that Chernyshevsky is below Engels insofar as in his terminology he confuses the opposition between mate-rialism and idealism with the opposition between metaphysi-cal thought and dialectical thought; but Chernyshevsky isentirely on Engels’ level insofar as he takes Kant to tasknot for realism, but for agnosticism and subjectivism, notfor recognition of the “thing-in-itself”, but for inability to derive our knowledge from this objective source. 
) “... they argue from Kant’s words that the forms of our sense-per-ception have no resemblance to the forms of the actualexistence of objects.... 
” (For the benefit of the Russian Mach-ists who manage to muddle everything, let us say thatChernyshevsky’s criticism of Kant is the diametrical op-posite of the criticism of Kant by Avenarius, Mach and the immanentists, because for Chernyshevsky, as for everymaterialist, the forms of our sense-perception do resemblethe forms of the actual—i. 
e. 
, objectively real—existenceof objects. 
) “... that, therefore, really existing objects, theirreal qualities, and the real relations between them are unknowable to us.... 
” (For the benefit of the Russian Mach-ists who manage to muddle everything, let us say thatfor Chernyshevsky, as for every materialist, objects, orto use Kant’s ornate language, “things-in-themselves”,really exist and are fully knowable to us, knowable in their existence, their qualities and the real relations between them. 
) “... and if they were knowable they could not be the object of our thought, which shapes all the materialof knowledge into forms totally different from the forms of actual existence, that, moreover, the very laws of thought have only a subjective significance.... 
” (For the benefit of the Machist muddlers, let us say that for Chernyshevsky, as for every materialist, the laws of thought have not mere-ly a subjective significance; in other words, the laws ofthought reflect the forms of actual existence of objects,fully resemble, and do not differ from these forms. 
) “... thatin reality there is nothing corresponding to what appears to us to be the connection of cause and effect, for there is neither antecedent nor subsequent, neither whole nor parts,and so on and so forth.... 
” (For the benefit of the Machistmuddlers, let us say that for Chernyshevsky, as for every ma-terialist, there does exist in reality what appears to us to bethe connection between cause and effect, there is objective causality or natural necessity. 
) “... When natural scientists stop uttering such and similar metaphysical nonsense, theywill be capable of working out, and probably will work out,on the basis of natural science, a system of concepts moreexact and complete than those propounded by Feuerbach.... 
”(For the benefit of the Machist muddlers, let us say that Chernyshevsky regards as metaphysical nonsense all devia-tions from materialism, both in the direction of idealismand in the direction of agnosticism. 
) “...But meanwhile,the best statement of the scientific concepts of the so-calledfundamental problems of man’s inquisitiveness remainsthat made by Feuerbach” (pp. 
 195-96). 
 By the fundamental problems of man’s inquisitiveness Chernyshevsky means what in modern language are known as the fundamentalproblems of the theory of knowledge, or epistemology. 
Chernyshevsky is the only really great Russian writer who,from the fifties until 1888, was able to keep on the levelof an integral philosophical materialism and who spurned the wretched nonsense of the neo-Kantians, positivists, Machists and other muddleheads. 
 But Chernyshevsky did notsucceed in rising, or, rather, owing to the backwardnessof Russian life, was unable to rise, to the level of the dia-lectical materialism of Marx and Engels. 
 N O T E S 1 2 3 4 5 6 7“Ten Questions to a Lecturer ” was written by Lenin during the first half of May 1908 in London. 
 He had come there from Geneva to work on his book Materialism and Empirio-criticism , and he sent the questions to I. 
 F. 
 Dubrovinsky, a member of the Bol-shevik centre and one of the editors of the newspaper Proletary , as theses for a speech on the occasion of the lecture entitled “Ad-ventures of One Philosophical School” given by A. 
 Bogdanov in Geneva on May 15 (28), 1908. 
 Bogdanov, Lunacharsky and others, who supported Machist standpoints in philosophy, took advantage of Lenin’s absence to increase their activity. 
 Under the guise of criticising “mate-rialism of the Plekhanov school”; they revised materialist philos-ophy and tried to show that empirio-monism, the variety of Machism invented by Bogdanov, and not dialectical materialism, was the philosophy of Bolshevism. 
 In preparing his speech, Dubrovinsky made changes in the second, third and tenth questions and deleted the seventh question. 
 In his speech, which was based on Lenin’s theses, Dubrovinsky (who used the pseudonym Dorov) sharply criticised Bogdanov’s views, declaring that Bolshevism had nothing in common with empirio-monism and showing that the advocacy of “god-building” was incompatible with dialectical materialism. 
 p. 
 13 See F. 
 Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy (K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 369-70). 
 p. 
 15 See F. 
 Engels, “Special Introduction to the English Edition of 1892” of his work Socialism : Utopian and Scientific , and his Lud-wig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy (K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 99-102, 370-71). 
 p. 
 15 See F. 
 Engels, Anti-Dühring , Moscow, 1959, p. 
 65. 
 p. 
 15 See F. 
 Engels, Anti-Dühring , Moscow, 1959, p. 
 86. 
 p. 
 15 See F. 
 Engels, Anti-Dühring , Moscow, 1959, pp. 
 53-54, 157. 
 p. 
 15 Lenin is referring to Ernst Mach’s book Erkenntnis und Irrtum . 
 Skizzen zur Psychologie der Forschung (Knowledge and Error . 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR Sketches of the Psychology of Investigation ), the first edition of which was published in Leipzig in 1905. 
 For Lenin’s characterisation of the immanentist school see Materialism and Empirio-criticism , especially Chapter Four, Section 3 (pp. 
 209-17 of this volume). 
 p. 
 16 Lenin is referring to the chapter entitled “A. 
 Bogdanov’s Em-pirio-monism”, in P. 
 S. 
 Yushkevich’s book Materialism and Crit-ical Realism. 
 Philosophical Trends in Marxism , St. 
 Petersburg, 1908, pp. 
 161-93. 
 p. 
 16 Lenin is referring to Joseph Petzoldt’s book Das Weltproblem von positivistischen Standpunkte aus (The World Problem from the Positivist Standpoint ). 
 p. 
 16 See Lenin’s letter to A. 
 M. 
 Gorky of February 12 (25), 1908 present edition, Vol. 
 13, pp. 
 448-54). 
 p. 
 16 The book Materialism and Empirio-criticism . 
 Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy was written by Lenin during February to October 1908 in Geneva and London. 
 It was published in Moscow in May 1909 by the Zveno Publishers. 
 The manuscript of the book and Lenin’s preparatory material for it have so far not been found. 
 The book is the outcome of a prodigious amount of creative scientific research carried out by Lenin during nine months. 
 His main work on the book was carried out in Geneva libraries, but in order to obtain a detailed knowledge of the modern literature of philosophy and natural science he went in May 1908 to London, where he worked for about a month in the library of the British Museum. 
 The list of sources quoted or mentioned by Lenin in his book exceeds 200 titles. 
 In December 1908 Lenin went from Geneva to Paris where he worked until April 1909 on correcting the proofs of his book. 
 He had to agree to tone down some passages of the work so as not to give the tsarist censorship an excuse for prohibiting its publication. 
 It was published in Russia under great difficulties. 
 Lenin insisted on the speedy issue of the book, stressing that “not only literary but also serious political obligations” were involved in its publi-cation. 
 Lenin’s work Materialism and Empirio-criticism played a de-cisive part in combating the Machist revision of Marxism. 
 It enabled the philosophical ideas of Marxism to spread widely among the mass of party members and helped the party activists and progressive workers to master dialectical and historical materialism. 
 This classical work of Lenin’s has achieved a wide circulation in many countries, and has been published in over 20 languages. 
 p. 
 17 V. 
 I. 
 Lenin in a letter to A. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova-Yelizarova, dated Oc-tober 26 (November 8), 1908, wrote: “... if considerations due to the censorship prove very severe, the word ‘clericalism’ could be8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15replaced everywhere by the word ‘fideism’ with an explanatory note (‘fideism is a doctrine which substitutes faith for knowledge, or which generally attaches significance to faith’). 
 This is in case of need—to explain the nature of the concessions which I am ready to make” (see Collected Works , present edition, Vol. 
 37, p. 
 395). 
 In another letter to his sister, Lenin proposed replacing the word “clericalism” by the word “Shamanism”, to which she answered: “It is already too late for Shamanism. 
 And is it really better?” (Ibid. 
, p. 
 662). 
 From the text of the book Materialism and Empirio-crit-icism it can be seen that the word “fideism” was substituted for “clericalism”, although the latter word remained unaltered in some places. 
 The note suggested by Lenin was given in the first edition of the book and was retained in subsequent editions. 
 p. 
 19 Lenin is referring to a religious-philosophical tendency hostile to Marxism called “god-building”, which arose in the period of reaction among a section of the party intellectuals who had desert-ed Marxism after the defeat of the revolution of 1905-07. 
 The “god-builders” (A. 
 V. 
 Lunacharsky, V. 
 Bazarov and others) preached the creation of a new “socialist” religion in an attempt to— reconcile Marxism with religion. 
 At one time A. 
 M. 
 Gorky support-ed them. 
 An enlarged meeting of the editorial board of Proletary (1909) condemned “god-building” and stated in a special resolution that the Bolshevik group has nothing in common with “such a distor-tion of scientific socialism”. 
 The reactionary nature of “god-build-ing” was exposed by Lenin in his work Materialism and Empirio-criticism and in his letters to Gorky of February-April 1908 and November-December 1913. 
 p. 
 19 V. 
 I. 
 Nevsky’s article “Dialectical Materialism and the Philos-ophy of Dead Reaction” was published in 1920 as an appendix to the second edition of the book Materialism and Empirio-crit-icism. 
 p. 
 21 A. 
 Bogdanov put forward the idea of “proletarian culture” as early as 1909, by which he meant that the proletariat should elab-orate its “own” culture in contradistinction to that of the past. 
 After the October Socialist Revolution Bogdanov and his fel-low-thinkers adopted the so-called proletarian cultural-educa-tional organisations (Proletcult) as the field of their activities. 
 With the aid of this convenient rostrum, they began actively to propagade anti-Marxist views, virtually denied the importance of the cultural inheritance of the past, and endeavoured “by labora-tory methods” divorced from life to create a culture for the prole-tariat, counterposing the latter to the rest of the working people and above all to the peasantry. 
 Lenin waged a consistent struggle against the separatism and sectarianism of the Proletcult and against the anti-Marxist views of its ideologists. 
 In 1920 the Central Committee of the Party adopted a special decision on subordination of the activities 16 17 18of the Proletcult to the People’s Commissariat for Education. 
 in the twenties, the Proletcult organisations began to decline and in 1932 they ceased to exist. 
 p. 
 21 See K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 369-70. 
 p. 
 33 See K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 101. 
 p. 
 33 Neo-Kantianism —a reactionary trend in bourgeois philosophy preaching subjective idealism under the slogan of a return to Kant-ian philosophy. 
 It arose in the middle of the nineteenth century in Germany, where at this time there was an increased interest in Kantianism. 
 In 1865 Otto Liebmann’s book Kant and the Epi-gones was published, each chapter ending with the call: “Back to Kant”. 
 Liebmann put forward the task of correcting Kant’s “main error”—the recognition of “things-in-themselves”. 
 The re-vival of Kantianism was helped by the works of Kuno Fischer and Eduard Zeller, and one of the early representatives of neo-Kantian-ism was Friedrich Albert Lange who tried to use physiology as a basis for agnosticism. 
 Later, two main schools of neo-Kantianism were formed: that of Marburg (Hermann Cohen, Paul Natorp, etc. 
) and that of Freiburg or Baden (Wilhelm Windelband, Heinrich Rickert, etc. 
). 
 The former tried to substantiate idealism by speculating on the successes of natural science, especially on the penetration of math-ematical methods into physics; the latter counterposed the social sciences to natural science, trying to prove that historical phenom-ena are strictly individual and not subject to the operation of any laws. 
 Both schools put the question of the logical basis of science in place of the fundamental question of philosophy. 
 Crit-icising Kant “from the right”, the neo-Kantians declared the “thing-in-itself” to be a “limiting concept” to which knowledge was tending. 
 Denying the objective existence of the material world, they regarded as the object of knowledge not the laws of nature and society, but merely the phenomena of consciousness. 
 In con-trast to the agnosticism of the natural scientists, that of the neo-Kantians was not “shamefaced materialism”, for it asserted the impotence of science in regard to cognition and changes of reality. 
 The neo-Kantians openly attacked Marxism, counterposing to it “ethical socialism”. 
 In accordance with their theory of knowledge they declared socialism to be the “ethical ideal” of human social existence, an ideal to which mankind was striving but which it could not attain. 
 This “theory” of the neo-Kantians was seized upon by the revisionists, headed by Eduard Bernstein, who put forward the slogan: “The movement is everything, the final goal is nothing”. 
 Neo-Kantianism was one of the philosophical pillars of the Second International. 
 In Russia attempts to “combine” neo-Kantianism and Marxism were made by the “legal Marxists”; G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov, Paul Lafargue and Franz Mehring opposed the 19 20 21 22neo-Kantian revision of Marxism. 
 Lenin laid bare the reactionary nature of neo-Kantianism and showed its connection with other trends of bourgeois philosophy (immanentism, Machism, prag-matism, etc. 
). 
 At the present time the representatives of neo-Kantianism are grouped round the magazine Kantstudien published in West Ger-many (Cologne). 
 p. 
 33 Die Neue Zeit (New Times )—the theoretical magazine of the German Social-Democratic Party, published in Stuttgart, 1883-1923. 
 Until October 1917 it was edited by Karl Kautsky, after that by Heinrich Cunow. 
 Several works by Marx and Engels were published for the first time in Neue Zeit , e. 
g. 
, K. 
 Marx’s Cri-tique of the Gotha Programme , F. 
 Engels’ Contribution to the Critique of the Social-Democratic Draft Programme of 1891 , and others. 
 Engels constantly helped the editors of the magazine by his advice and often criticised it for allowing departures from Marx-ism to be published in it. 
 Contributors to Neue Zeit included outstanding leaders of the German and international workers’ movement at the turn of the century: August Bebel, Wilhelm Liebknecht, Rosa Luxemburg, Franz Mehring, Clara Zetkin, G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov, Paul Lafargue, and others. 
 From the second half of the nineties onwards, after the death of Engels, the magazine began systematically publishing articles by revisionists, including a series of articles by Eduard Bernstein, “Problems of Socialism”, which marked the opening of a campaign of the revisionists againstMarxism. 
 During the First World War, the magazine adopted a Centrist position, in effect supporting the social-chauvinists. 
 p. 
 33 The Encyclopaedists —a group of philosophers, natural scientists and publicists of the French Enlightenment in the eighteenth cen-tury who joined in publishing the Encyclopédie ou dictionnaire raisonné des sciences , des arts et des métiets (Encyclopaedia or Ex-planatory Dictionary of the Sciences , Arts and Professions ) (1751-80). 
 It was organised and led by Denis Diderot, whose closest assistant was Jean le Rond d’Alembert. 
 Paul Henri Holbach, Claude Adrien Helvetius and Voltaire actively assisted in publish-ing the Encyclopaedia and Jean Jacques Rousseau contributed to the first volumes. 
 The Encyclopaedists were the ideologists of the revolutionary bourgeoisie and they played a decisive part in the ideological preparation for the eighteenth-century bourgeois revolution in France. 
 p. 
 35 See F. 
 Engels, Anti-Dühring , Moscow, 1959, pp. 
 34, 53-54. 
 p. 
 41 Revue néo-scolastique (Neo-scholastic Review )—a theological-philosophical magazine founded by the Catholic philosophical society in Louvain (Belgium), published from 1894 to 1909 under the editorship of Cardinal Mercier. 
 It is now issued under the title of Revue philosophique de Louvain (Philosophical Review of Lou-vain ). 
 p. 
 48 23 24 25 26Der Kampf (The Struggle )—a monthly magazine, the organ of Austrian Social-Democracy, published in Vienna from 1907 to 1934. 
 It took up an opportunist, Centrist position under the cover of Left phraseology. 
 Among its editors were Otto Bauer, Adolf Braun, Karl Renner, Friedrich Adler and others. 
 p. 
 53 The International Socialist Review —an American monthly magazine of a revisionist tendency, published in Chicago from 1900 to 1918. 
 p. 
 53 Vierteljahrsschrift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie (Quarterly of Scientific Philosophy )—a magazine of the empirio-criticists (Machists), published in Leipzig from 1877 to 1916 (from 1902 its title was Vierteljahrsschrift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie und Soziologie ) (Quarterly of Scientific Philosophy and Sociology ). 
 It was founded by Richard Avenarius and published under his editorship until 1896; after 1896 it was edited by Ernst Mach. 
 Contributors included Wilhelm Wundt, Alois Riehl, Wilhelm Schuppe and others. 
 Lenin’s appraisal of the magazine is given on p. 
 317 of this volume. 
 p. 
 57 Spinozism —the system of views of the Dutch seventeenth-cen-tury materialist philosopher Benedict Spinoza, according to whom all things are manifestations (modes) of a single, universal substance which is its own cause and identical with “god, or nature”. 
 The essence of substance is expressed in innumerable qualities—attri-butes, the most important of which are extension and thought. 
 Spinoza regarded causality as a form of the interconnection of the separate phenomena of nature, understanding by it the immediate reciprocal action of bodies whose first cause is substance. 
 The action of all modes of substance, including man, is strictly one of neces-sity; the notion of accident arises only in consequence of ignorance of the totality of all the acting causes. 
 Since thought is one of the attributes of universal substance, the connection and order of ideas are in principle the same as the order and connection of things, and the possibility of human knowledge of the world is unlimited. 
 For the same reason, of the three forms of cognition—sensuous, rational and rational-intuitive—the last is regarded as the most trustworthy, in which “a thing is perceived singly through its essence or through knowledge of its immediate cause” (B. 
 Spinoza, Tractatus de intellectus emendatione , et de via , qua optime veram rerum cognitionem dirigitur ). 
 This method enables man both to know his own passions and to become master over them; man’s freedom consists in knowing the necessity of nature and of the pas-sions of his soul. 
 Spinozism was not only a form of materialism, but also of athe-ism, since it rejected ideas of god as a supernatural being who had created the world and rules it. 
 At the same time, by identifying god and nature he made a concession to theology. 
 This retreat, as also the mechanical character of Spinoza’s materialism, was due, 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34on the one hand, to the level of knowledge at that epoch and, on the other hand, to the limited progressive nature of the young Dutch bourgeoisie, whose interests were expressed by Spinoza’s philosophy. 
 Subsequently, a sharp ideological struggle, which has continued to the present day, developed round the philosophical legacy of the great Dutch thinker. 
 Idealist philosophy, by taking advantage of the inevitable historical limitations of Spinoza’s views, distorts the materialist essence of Spinozism, which was an important stage in the development of the materialist world out-look. 
 p. 
 61 Philosophische Studien (Philosophical Studies )—a magazine of an idealist tendency devoted primarily to questions of psychology, published by Wilhelm Wundt in Leipzig from 1881 to 1904. 
 From 1905 it was published under the title Psychologische Studien (Psy-chological Studies ). 
 p. 
 61 Petrushka —a serf domestic servant, one of the characters in N. 
 V. 
 Gogol’s novel Dead Souls ; he used to read books by syllables without paying any attention to the meaning, being interested only in the mechanical process of reading. 
 p. 
 62 See F. 
 Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical Ger-man Philosophy (K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 358-59). 
 p. 
 64 Mind —a magazine of an idealist tendency, devoted to questions of philosophy and sociology. 
 It was published from 1876 in Lon-don, and is now issued in Edinburgh; the first editor was Profes-sor Croom Robertson. 
 p. 
 71 Struve , P. 
 B. 
 —a former “legal Marxist”, one of the founders of the Cadet Party (see Note 67), a monarchist and counter-revolu-tionary. 
 Menshikov , M. 
 O. 
 —a contributor to the reactionary newspaper Novoye Vremya. 
 Lenin called him “a true watchdog of the tsarist Black Hundreds. 
” p. 
 73 It can be seen from Lenin’s letter to A. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova-Yelizarova, dated December 6 (19), 1908, that the original phrase in the manu-script, viz. 
, “Lunacharsky even ‘mentally projected’ for himself a god”, was toned down because of the censorship. 
 Lenin wrote in his letter: “’Mentally projected for himself a god’ should be altered to ‘mentally projected for himself’—well to use a mild expres-sion—‘religious conceptions’, or something of that sort” ( Collected Works , present edition, Vol. 
 37, p. 
 403). 
 p. 
 78 See F. 
 Engels, Anti-Dühring , Moscow, 1959, p. 
 55. 
 p. 
 87 See K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 363, 372. 
 p. 
 87 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43Lenin is referring to the literary portrait drawn by I. 
 S. 
 Turge-nev in his prose poem “A Rule of Life”. 
 p. 
 88 Archiv für systematische Philosophie (Archives of Systematic Philosophy )—a journal of an idealist tendency published in Berlin from 1895 to 1931, being the second, independent section of the journal Archiv für Philosophie (see Note 83). 
 Its first editor was Paul Natorp. 
 From 1925 the journal was published under the title Archiv für systematische Philosophie und Soziologie (Archives of Systematic Philosophy and Sociology ). 
 p. 
 95 Kantstudien (Kantian Studies )—a German philosophical journal of an idealist tendency, the organ of the neo-Kantians. 
 It was founded by Hans Vaihinger and published, with interruptions, from 1897 to 1944 (Hamburg-Berlin-Cologne). 
 Publication was re-sumed in 1954. 
 The journal devotes considerable space to comments on Kant’s philosophy. 
 Besides neo-Kantians, its contributors include representatives of other idealist trends. 
 p. 
 95 Nature —a weekly journal of natural science, published in London from 1869. 
 p. 
 95 In preparing the first edition of Materialism and Empirio-crit-icism for the press, A. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova-Yelizarova altered the words “a more honest literary antagonist” to “a more principled literary antagonist”. 
 Lenin objected to this correction and on February 27 (March 12), 1909, he wrote to his sister: “ Please do not tone down anything in the passages against Bogdanov, Lunacharsky and Co. 
 Toning down is impossible. 
 You have done away with the state-ment that Chernov is a ‘more honest’ antagonist than they are and that is a great pity. 
 That shade is not brought out. 
 It is not in accord with the whole nature of my accusations. 
 The crux of the matter is that our Machists are dishonest , basely craven enemies of Marxism in philosophy” ( Collected Works , present edition, Vol. 
 37, p. 
 416). 
 p. 
 98 See K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 369-71. 
 p. 
 100 Lenin is referring to Voroshilov, a character depicted by I. 
 S. 
 Turgenev in his novel Smoke , as the type of a pseudo-learned dog-matist. 
 Lenin gave a description of him in his work “The Agrarian Question and the ‘Critics of Marx’” (see present edition, Vol. 
 5, p. 
 151). 
 p. 
 100 See F. 
 Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical Ger-man Philosophy (K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 371). 
 p. 
 101 K. 
 Marx, “Theses on Feuerbach” (K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Select-ed Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 403). 
 p. 
 104 44 45 46 47 48 49See K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 100. 
 p. 
 107 F. 
 Engels, “Special Introduction to the English Edition of 1892” of his work Socialism : Utopian and Scientific (see K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 100). 
 p. 
 110 See F. 
 Engels, Anti-Dühring , Moscow, 1959, p. 
 65. 
 p. 
 117 Beltov , N. 
—a pseudonym of G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov. 
 p. 
 121 See F. 
 Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical Ger-man Philosophy (K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 371). 
 p. 
 127 Scepticism —a philosophical trend that casts doubt on the pos-sibility of knowing objective reality. 
 It arose in ancient Greece as early as the 4th to 3rd centuries B. 
 C. 
 (Pyrrho, Aenesidemus,Sextus Empiricus). 
 The adherents of ancient scepticism drew ag-nostic conclusions from the premises of sensationalism. 
 Making thesubjectivity of sensation into an absolute, the sceptics insisted onthe need to refrain from any definite judgements about things. 
 They considered that man cannot go beyond his sensations and determine their truth. 
 During the period of the Renaissance, the French philosophers Michel Montaigne, Pierre Charron and Pierre Bayle made use ofscepticism for combating medieval scholasticism and the Church. 
In the eighteenth century scepticism was revived in the agnos-ticism of Hume and Kant, and an attempt to modernise ancient scepticism was made by Gottlieb Schulze (Aenesidemus). 
 Thearguments of scepticism were used by the Machists, neo-Kantiansand other idealist philosophical schools from the middle of thenineteenth to the beginning of the twentieth century. 
 Epicureanism —the doctrine of the ancient Greek philosopher Epicurus of the 4th to 3rd centuries B. 
 C. 
 and his successors. 
 The aim of philosophy, according to this doctrine, was man’s happi-ness; freeing him from suffering and enabling him to attain astate of bliss. 
 It taught that philosophy was called upon to over-come obstacles to happiness: the fear of death due to ignoranceof the laws of nature and giving rise therefore to belief in super-natural, divine forces. 
 As regards the theory of knowledge, Epicurus was a sensational-ist. 
 He supposed that very subtle images proceed from things andpenetrate the human soul through the sense-organs. 
 Conceptions ofthings are formed on the basis of the sensuous perceptions of thesoul, in which memory preserves only the general features of im-ages. 
 Epicurus regarded sense-perceptions themselves as the crite-rion of truth, and he considered that the source of errors lay in theaccidental character of individual sensations or in the over-hastyformation of judgements. 
 50 51 52 53 54 5556 57 58 59 60 61 62 63The idealists, who distorted the teaching of this great material-ist of ancient Greece, made more attacks on Epicureanism than on the other philosophical theories of antiquity. 
 In the definition of sensationalism quoted by Lenin, Franck rightly regards Epicureanism as a variety of it, but he draws an incorrect distinction between Epicureanism and objective mate-rialist sensationalism. 
 p. 
 131 See F. 
 Engels, Anti-Dühring , Moscow, 1959, pp. 
 120-22. 
 p. 
 134 See F. 
 Engels, Anti-Dühring , Moscow, 1959, p. 
 127. 
 p. 
 135 See the letter of K. 
 Marx to L. 
 Kugelmann of December 5, 1868 (K. 
 Marx, Briefe an Kugelmann , Inoizdat, 1940). 
 p. 
 135 Lenin is referring to Marx’s “Theses on Feuerbach” (1845) and to the works by F. 
 Engels: Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classi-cal German Philosophy (1888) and the “Special Introduction to the English Edition of 1892” of his Socialism : Utopian and Scientific (see K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 403-05, 358-403, 93-115). 
 p. 
 138 See K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 403, 101. 
 p. 
 138 Bishop Eulogius —member of the State Duma, a monarchist and extreme reactionary. 
 p. 
 139 Revue de philosophie (Review of Philosophy )—a French idealist journal founded by E. 
 Peillaubt, which was published in Paris from 1900 to 1939. 
 p. 
 150 See F. 
 Engels, Anti-Dühring , Moscow, 1959, pp. 
 33, 36, 55. 
 p. 
 156 See K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow 1958, pp. 
 387, 389. 
 p. 
 157 Annalen der Naturphilosophie (Annals of Natural Philosophy )— a journal of a positivist tendency, published by Wilhelm Ostwald in Leipzig from 1901 to 1921. 
 Its contributors included Ernst Mach, Paul Volkmann and others. 
 p. 
 165 See F. 
 Engels, Anti-Dühring , Moscow, 1959, p. 
 65. 
 p. 
 173 See F. 
 Engels, Anti-Dühring , Moscow, 1959, p. 
 76. 
 p. 
 176 Natural Science —a monthly journal published in London from 1892 to 1899. 
 p. 
 183 The Philosophical Review —an American journal of an idealist tendency, founded by Jacob Gould Schurman. 
 It began publica-tion in 1892. 
 p. 
 184 64 65 66 67Instead of the words “provokes ... not a smile, but disgust”, the first edition of the book had “provokes more than a smile”. 
 After he had read the proofs Lenin asked A. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova-Yelizarova to alter the phrase in the text or indicate this in the errata. 
 Le-nin’s correction was printed in a list of errata appended to the first edition. 
 p. 
 187 See F. 
 Engels, Anti-Dühring , Moscow, 1959, p. 
 157. 
 p. 
 188 “The subjective method in sociology ”—an anti-scientific idealist approach to historical processes which refuses to acknowledge ob-jective laws of social development, reducing them to the arbitrary actions of “outstanding personalities”. 
 In the thirties and fortiesof the nineteenth century, adherents of the subjectivist school in sociology were the Young Hegelians Bruno Bauer, David Strauss, Max Stirner and others, who declared the people to be an “uncrit-ical mass” that follows “critically thinking personalities”. 
 K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels in the Holy Family , the German Ideology and other works made a thorough and profound criticism of the views of theYoung Hegelians. 
 In Russia in the second half of the nineteenth century representatives of the subjective method in sociology were the liberal Narodniks (P. 
 L. 
 Lavrov, N. 
 K. 
 Mikhailovsky andothers), who denied the objective nature of the laws of social devel-opment and reduced history to the actions of individual heroes, “outstanding personalities”. 
 Marxism-Leninism exposed the fallacy of the subjective-idealist trend in sociology and created a genuinely scientific, integral theory of social development, of the decisive part played by themasses in history and of the significance of the activity of individ-uals. 
 p. 
 191 Constitutional-Democrats (Cadets)—members of the Constitutional-Democratic Party, the leading party of the liberal-monarchist bour-geoisie in Russia. 
 The Cadet Party was founded in October 1905; it included representatives of the bourgeoisie, landlord Zemstvo mem-bers and bourgeois intellectuals. 
 Prominent leaders of the Cadetswere P. 
 N. 
 Milyukov, S. 
 A. 
 Muromtsev, V. 
 A. 
 Maklakov, A. 
 I. 
 Shin-garev, P. 
 B. 
 Struve, F. 
 I. 
 Rodichev and others. 
 To deceive the working people the Cadets falsely entitled themselves the “partyof people’s freedom”, but actually did not go beyond the demand for a constitutional monarchy. 
 The Cadets made the struggle against the revolutionary movement their chief aim and endeav-oured to share power with the tsar and feudal landlords. 
 During the First World War the Cadets actively supported the annexationist foreign policy of the tsarist government. 
 During the Februarybourgeois-democratic revolution they tried to save the monarchy. 
 Occupying a leading position in the bourgeois Provisional Govern-ment, the Cadets pursued an anti-popular, counter-revolutionary policy convenient to the American-Anglo-French imperialists. 
 After the victory of the October Socialist Revolution the Cadets 68came out as irreconcilable enemies of Soviet power and took an active part in all the armed actions of the counter-revolutionaries and the campaigns of the interventionists. 
 After the rout of the interventionists and whiteguards the Cadets became émigrés but did not cease their anti-Soviet counter-revolutionary activity. 
 Purishkevich , V. 
 M. 
 —a representative of the parties of the extreme Right in the Duma, a big landlord and arch-reactionary. 
 p. 
 199 This refers to the opportunist trend that developed within the German Social-Democratic Party in the second half of the seventies of the nineteenth century. 
 Its chief ideologists were Karl Höch-berg, Eduard Bernstein and Karl August Schramm, who were influenced by Dühringism. 
 Bernstein and Louis Viereck, along with Johann Most and others, actively helped to spread the eclec-tic views of Eugen Dühring among the German Social-Democrats. 
 Höchberg, who, as Marx expressed it, had “bought” his way into the Party by his money, demanded that socialism should be made a movement of “humanity in general” based on the “sense of jus-tice” of both the oppressed and the representatives of the “upper classes”. 
 In Berlin, Viereck took the initiative in forming the Maurita-nian Club, in which Dühringism prevailed and which set itself the task of bringing “educated people” to “socialism” and achiev-ing class collaboration between the workers and the bourgeoisie. 
 After the promulgation of the Anti-Socialist Law in Germany (1878), the leaders of the Mauritanian Club migrated to Zurich where they continued their efforts to win over the bourgeoisie to “socialism”. 
 The opportunist, anti-Marxist character of Höchberg’s group was clearly shown in regard to the founding in Zurich of a central organ of the German Social-Democratic Party. 
 Höchberg and his co-thinkers considered that the newspaper should not carry out the revolutionary policy of the Party but should limit itself to the abstract preaching of socialist ideals. 
 The Party leadership— August Bebel, Wilhelm Liebknecht and others—in fact underesti-mated the opportunist danger by entrusting the publication of the newspaper to the Zurich group. 
 In July 1879 the Jahrbuch für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozial-politik (Annal of Social Science and Social Politics ), the journal edited by Höchberg, published an article entitled “A Retrospective Review of the Socialist Movement in Germany”, which discussed the revolutionary tactics of the Party. 
 The authors of the article— Höchberg, Schramm and Bernstein—accused the Party of having provoked the Anti-Socialist Law by its attacks on the bourgeoisie, and called for alliance with and subordination to the bourgeoisie, on the grounds that the working class was not able to emancipate itself by its own efforts. 
 These opportunist, reformist views evoked sharp protest from Marx and Engels, who rightly regarded them as a betrayal of the Party, and in September 1879 they came out with their famous “Circular Letter” (see K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, 69 70 71 72 73 74Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1955, pp. 
 388-95). 
 “The result of Marx’s ‘furious’ attack,” wrote Lenin in describing the struggle of the founders of Marxism against opportunism, “was that the op-portunists retreated and—made themselves scarce. 
 In a letter dated November 19, 1879, Marx announced that Höchberg had been removed from the editorial committee and that all the influential leaders of the Party—Bebel, Liebknecht, Bracke, etc. 
—had repu-diated his ideas” (present edition, Vol, 12, p. 
 367). 
 Subsequently Höchberg and Schramm left the workers’ move-ment, but Bernstein, who temporarily refrained from advocating opportunism, became one of the leaders of German Social-Democ-racy. 
 The theoretical confusion, however, and the opportunist position adopted by Bernstein at the end of the seventies, were not accidental. 
 After Engels’ death, Bernstein openly came out with a revision of Marxism, putting forward the opportunist slo-gan: “The movement is everything, the final goal is nothing”, which was a further development of the basic propositions of the 1879 article. 
 p. 
 203 Le Socialiste (The Socialist )—a weekly newspaper published from 1885 as the theoretical organ of the French Workers’ Party; from 1902 it was the organ of the Socialist Party of France, and from 1905 of the French Socialist Party. 
 The newspaper reprint-ed articles by Marx and Engels and published articles by promi-nent leaders of the French and international working-class move-ment at the turn of the century: Paul Lafargue, Wilhelm Lieb-knecht, Clara Zetkin, G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov and others. 
 The newspaper cessed publication in 1915. 
 p. 
 204 K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 376. 
 p. 
 206 Lenin is referring to Engels’ work Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy (1888) and the “Special Introduction to the English Edition of 1892” of his Socialism : Utopian and Scientific (see K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 370-71, 99-102). 
 p. 
 206 See K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 378. 
 p. 
 206 See F. 
 Engels’ “Special Introduction to the English Edition of 1892” of his Socialism : Utopian and Scientific (K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Eng-els, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 99). 
 p. 
 207 Zeitschrift für immanente Philosophie (Journal for Immanentist Philosophy )—a German reactionary journal, published in Berlin from 1895 to 1900 under the editorship of M. 
 R. 
 Kauffmann, with the participation of Wilhelm Schuppe and Richard von Schubert-Soldern. 
 p. 
 211 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82L’Année philosophique (The Philosophical Year )—the organ of the French “neo-criticists”, published in Paris from 1890 to 1913 under the editorship of F. 
 Pillon. 
 p. 
 212 Lenin is referring to the lying statement of P. 
 A. 
 Stolypin, Chair-man of the Council of Ministers, who denied the existence in the postal service of “ cabinets noirs ” engaged in examining the corro-spondence of persons regarded as suspects by the tsarist government. 
 p. 
 220 Nozdrev —a character in N. 
 V. 
 Gogol’s novel Dead Souls ; a land-lord, swindler and trouble-maker. 
 Gogol called him a “historical personage”, since wherever he appeared “histories” and rows devel-oped. 
 p. 
 223 Revue philosophique de la France et de l’Étranger (Philosophical Review of France and Abroad )—a journal founded in Paris in 1876 by the French psychologist Théodule Ribot. 
 p. 
 224 The Open Court —a journal of a religious tendency, published in Chicago from 1887 to 1936. 
 p. 
 224 The Monist —an American philosophical journal of an idealist tendency, edited by Paul Carus. 
 It was published in Chicago from 1890 to 1936. 
 p. 
 225 See F. 
 Engels, Anti-Dühring , Moscow, 1959, pp. 
 435-38. 
 p. 
 229 In Geneva in 1892 appeared the first Russian edition of Engels’ work Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philos-ophy , translated by G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov and with a foreword and notes by him. 
 Commenting on Engels’ formulation of the fundamen-tal question of philosophy and characterisation of agnosticism, Plekhanov gave a critical exposition of the theory of knowledge of a number of trends of idealist philosophy (Hume, Kant, the neo-Kantians, etc. 
) and counterposed to them the materialist theory of knowledge. 
 In doing so he committed an error by saying: “Our sensations are in their way hieroglyphs which inform us of what is taking place in reality. 
 The hieroglyphs do not resemble the events conveyed by them. 
 But they can with complete fidel-ity convey both the events themselves, and—what is the main thing—the relations existing between them” (G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov, Selected Philosophical Works , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, p. 
 536). 
 In 1905, in the notes to the second edition of Engels’ work, Plekhanov ad-mitted: “I also failed to express myself quite exactly” (ibid. 
, p. 
 515). 
 Plekhanov’s error, although appearing to be a question of terminology, was a concession to agnosticism and bore witness to his insufficiently profound understanding of the dialectics of the process of cognition. 
 p. 
 232 83 84 85 86 87 88Archiv für Philosophie (Philosophical Archives )—a German phi-losophical journal of an idealist tendency, organ of the neo-Kant-ians and Machists. 
 It was published in Berlin from 1895 to 1931 in two parallel editions: the first, entitled Archiv für Geschichte der Philosophie (Archives of the History of Philosophy ), was edited by L. 
 Stein, the second, entitled Archiv für systematische Phi-losophie (Archives of Systematic Philosophy ), was edited by Paul Natorp. 
 From 1925 the journal appeared under the title of Archiv für systematische Philosophie und Soziologie (Archives of Systemat-ic Philosophy and Sociology ). 
 p. 
 236 See K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 375. 
 p. 
 239 The Institute of Marxism-Leninism has in its archives a copy of Joseph Dietzgen’s book Kleinere philosophische Schriften. 
 Eine Auswahl (Minor Philosophical Writings. 
 A Selection ), Stuttgart, Dietz, 1903, with annotations by Lenin. 
 The book includes seven articles published in 1870-78 in the newspapers Volksstaat (People ’s State) and Vorwärts (Forward ) as well as a work entitled Streifzüge eines Sozialisten in das Gebiet der Erkenntnistheorie (Excursions of a Socialist in the Field of the Theory of Knowledge ), which was published in 1887 as a separate pamphlet. 
 Most of Lenin ‘s annotations were made while he was working on the book Materialism and Empirio-criticism . 
 They consist of un-derlinings and remarks in the text and on the margins; in several cases Lenin marks correct ideas of Dietzgen’s with the letter “ α” and departures from dialectical materialism with the letter “ β”, Lenin’s annotations bring into prominence Dietzgen’s description of the partisan character of philosophy, the relations between phi-losophy and natural science, the subject-matter of philosophy, the fundamental philosophical categories, the problem of the cog-nisability of the world, the appraisal of Kant, Hegel and Feuer-bach, the attitude to Marx and Engels, and Dietzgen’s militant atheism. 
 At the same time Lenin notes Dietzgen’s confusion in regard to philosophical categories, his attempt to “widen” the concept of matter by including in it “all the phenomena of reality, hence also our cognitive ability”, etc. 
 p. 
 243 Lenin is referring to Letters of Karl Marx to Kugelmann , Mem-ber of the International , St. 
 Petersburg, 1907 (see K. 
 Marx, Brie-fe an Kugelmann , Inoizdat, 1940). 
 p. 
 246 P. 
 Dauge wrote an afterword entitled “Joseph Dietzgen and His Critic, G. 
 Plekhanov” to the second Russian edition of Joseph Dietzgen’s Akquisit der Philosophie . 
 p. 
 248 X-rays , Becquerel rays , radium —discoveries which laid the basis for the development of atomic physics. 
 X-rays (Röntgen rays) are extremely short-wave electromagnetic radiation which can pass through media impenetrable by visible 89 90 91light. 
 They were discovered by the German physicist Wilhelm Konrad Röntgen in December 1895 who described their main prop-erties; later the nature of this radiation was discovered. 
 In 1896 the French physicist Antoine-Henri Becquerel, while studying the action of various fluorescent substances on photo-graphic film, discovered that uranium salts affect such film in the dark even without previous exposure to light. 
 By further exper-iments he showed that this action was due to a new form of radia-tion distinct from X-rays. 
 Investigating this new form of radiation, Pierre and Marie Curie established that it was due to a hitherto unknown property of matter which they called radioactivity. 
 As a result of their experi-ments two new radioactive elements were discovered: polonium and radium (1898). 
 Later it was found that Becquerel’s rays con-sist of three components (alpha-, beta-and gamma-rays). 
 p. 
 250 This discovery was made by James Clerk Maxwell. 
 By generalis-ing Michael Faraday’s experimental results in the study of elec-tromagnetic phenomena he created the theory of the electromagnet-ic field, from which it followed that changes of the electromagnet-ic field are propagated with the speed of light. 
 On the basis of his researches, Maxwell in 1865 concluded that light consists of electromagnetic vibrations. 
 In 1886-89 his theory was confirmed experimentally by Heinrich Hertz, who proved the existence of electromagnetic waves. 
 p. 
 251 The study of radioactivity revealed the existence of a special kind of radiation: alpha-, beta-and gamma-rays. 
 In 1903, Ernest Rutherford and Frederick Soddy suggested that radioactivity was the spontaneous transformation of one chemical element into anoth-er. 
 This was speedily confirmed by William Ramsay and Frederick Soddy, who discovered that helium was one of the products of radioactive disintegration of radon (1903). 
 Shortly afterwards it was discovered that helium was formed by the disintegration of radium and other radioactive elements showing alpha-radioactiv-ity. 
 This formation of helium was an important argument in favour of the theory of radioactive transformations, and could only be explained by supposing that alpha-rays are the nuclei of helium atoms. 
 This was confirmed in 1909 by the experiments of E. 
 Rutherford and T. 
 Royds. 
 p. 
 251 Lenin uses the concept of the ether, which was still generally ac-cepted in physics at the beginning of the twentieth century. 
 The idea of the ether as a special material medium filling all space and acting as the carrier of light, gravitational forces, etc. 
, was put forward in the seventeenth century. 
 Later, the notion of different forms of the ether, independent of one another (electromagnetic, magnetic, etc. 
) was introduced to explain various phenomena. 
 Owing to the success of the wave theory of light, the concept of the luminiferous ether (Christian Huygens, Augustin Fresnel and oth-ers) was especially developed; subsequently the hypothesis of a 92 93 94 95single ether arose. 
 As science developed, however, the concept of the ether came into contradiction with new facts. 
 The untenability of the hypothesis of the ether as a universal mechanical medium was proved by the theory of relativity; the rational elements con-tained in the hypothesis of the ether were reflected in the quantum field theory (the vacuum concept). 
 p. 
 251 Lenin repeatedly pointed out the limited nature of Plekhanov’s criticism of Machism. 
 In 1905, in connection with his preface to the second Russian edition of Engels’ Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy, Lenin wrote: “How petty are his sallies and ‘pinpricks’ against the Machists! For me this is the more to be regretted since Plekhanov’s criticism of Mach seems to me essentially correct” ( Lenin Miscellany XXVI , p. 
 21). 
 In 1907-08, in the works Fundamental Problems of Marxism , Materialismus militans and others, Plekhanov criticised Machism and its adher-ents in Russia (Bogdanov, Lunacharsky and others) and pointed out the fallacy of their attempts to combine Marxism with the subjective-idealist philosophy of Mach and Avenarius. 
 In so doing, Plekhanov “was less concerned with refuting Mach than with dead-ing a factional blow at Bolshevism” (see p. 
 355 of this volume). 
 Plekhanov’s opposition to Machism played a positive part in defending Marxist philosophy from the attacks of the revisionists, but he did not give a deep theoretical analysis of empirio-criticism, and did not reveal the direct dependence of Machism on the crisis in natural science, confining himself to a criticism of the idealist epistemological views of some of its adherents. 
 p. 
 251 See K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 375. 
 p. 
 251 See F. 
 Engels, Anti-Dühring , Moscow, 1959, p. 
 86. 
 p. 
 252 The description of the concept of mass given by Henri Poincaré and quoted by Lenin was in accord with the level of development of physics at that time. 
 The development of the electronic theory that followed the discovery of the electron made it possible to explain the nature of the mass of the electron. 
 Joseph John Thom-son advanced the hypothesis that the actual mass of the electron is determined by the energy of the electromagnetic field (i. 
e. 
, the inertia of the electron is due to the inertia of the field). 
 The concept of the electromagnetic mass of the electron was introduced, and this mass was found to depend on the velocity of motion of the electron. 
 The mechanical mass of the electron, however, like that of any other particle, was regarded as unchanging. 
 The exist-ence of the mechanical mass should have been revealed by experi-ments on the dependence of the electromagnetic mass of the elec-tron on its velocity. 
 However, these experiments, performed by Walter Kaufmann in 1901-02, unexpectedly showed that the electron behaved as if all its mass was of an electromagnetic nature. 
 Hence the conclusion was drawn that, in the case of the electron, 96 97mechanical mass, which was formerly regarded as an inalienable property of matter, has disappeared. 
 This circumstance gave rise to various kinds of philosophical speculations and statements about the “disappearance of matter”, the fallacy of which was demonstrated by Lenin. 
 The further development of physics (rela-tivity theory) showed that mechanical mass also depends on veloci-ty of motion and that the mass of the electron cannot be reduced wholly to electromagnetic mass. 
 p. 
 253 L’Année psychologique (The Psychological Year )—the organ of a group of French bourgeois idealist psychologists, published in Paris from 1894. 
 It was first edited by Alfred Binet, and after-wards by H. 
 Piéron. 
 p. 
 258 The idea of the compound nature of the atom arose at the end of the nineteenth century as a result of the discovery of the periodic system of elements by Mendeleyev, the electromagnetic nature of light, the electron, and the phenomena of radioactivity. 
 Various models of the atom were proposed. 
 Lenin regarded as most probable the planetary model, the idea of which was advanced as a guess at the end of the nineteenth century. 
 It was experimentally confirmed by Ernest Rutherford, who investigated the penetration of various substances by alpha-particles (positively charged helium nuclei) and came to the conclusion that the positive charge is concentrated at the centre of the atom, occupying a very small part of the latter’s volume. 
 In 1911 he suggested a model of the atom having a posi-tively charged nucleus at the centre, with a mass almost equal to the whole mass of the atom, around which electrons revolve in var-ious orbits, like planets round the sun. 
 This model, however, could not explain the stability of the atom. 
 The first successful attempt to create a theory of atomic structure was based on Rutherford’s model and made use of the quantum postulates of Niels Bohr (1913). 
 According to this first quantum theory of the atom, an electron moves in one of the “stable” orbits (corresponding to definite dis-crete energy values) without radiation; radiation or absorption of a definite portion of energy by the atom occurs only on the passage of the electron from one orbit to another. 
 Further advances in physics enriched the representation of the structure of the atom. 
 An important part was played here by Louis de Broglie’s prediction of wave properties of micro-objects and the subsequent creation of quantum mechanics by Erwin Schrödinger, Werner Heisenberg and others. 
 According to modern ideas the atomic nucleus is surrounded by a cloud of electrons, which occupy various orbits corresponding to definite energy values, and which form with the nucleus a single interconnected system. 
 The development of physics has shown that the atomic nucleus consists of elementary particles—nucleons (protons and neutrons). 
 New properties of the electron—besides its mass and charge, which were already known in the early twentieth century—have been discovered, including the possibility of its conversion into other particles, In addition to the electron, a number of new elementary 98 99 100 101 102 . 
 103particles with diverse properties have been discovered (photons, protons, neutrons, neutrinos, various kinds of mesons and hype-rons). 
 Particles have also been discovered which possess character-istics equal in magnitude to those of other particles but of oppo-site sign (so-called anti-particles). 
 The development of knowledge of the structure of matter has led to man’s mastery over nuclear processes and the utilisation of nuclear energy, initiating a new technical revolution of tremendous significance for the future of mankind. 
 p. 
 260 Positive electron —the name given at the turn of the century to the elementary particle bearing a charge of positive electricity. 
 The existence of the positive electron (positron) in the modern sense was predicted in 1928 by the British physicist Paul Dirac; in 1932 the American physicist Carl Anderson discovered the positron in cosmic rays. 
 p. 
 260 Revue générale des sciences pures et appliquées (General Review of Pure and Applied Science )—a journal of natural science pub-lished in Paris from 1890. 
 It was founded by Laurence Olivier. 
 p. 
 260 This refers apparently to mechanical mass, which classical physics regarded as an eternal and unchanging property of matter. 
 p. 
 260 Lenin is referring to a speech made at the Second Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 by the “Economist” Akimov, who opposed the Party programme put forward by Iskra , one of his arguments being that in the programme the word “proletariat” occurred as the object, not the subject, of the sentence. 
 p. 
 270 Neo-vitalism —an idealist trend in biology which arose at the end of the nineteenth century in opposition to the materialist world outlook and Darwinism. 
 Its representatives (Wilhelm Roux, Hans Driesch, Jakob Uexküll and others) revived the anti-scientific views of vitalism. 
 They attempted to explain the phenomena of life and the purposiveness of living organisms by the action of special non-material factors (“life force”, “entelechy”, etc. 
), thus making living nature fundamentally different from non-living nature. 
 The fallacious, anti-scientific character of neo-vitalism was exposed in the works of the materialist biologists (Ernst Hae-ckel, K. 
 A. 
 Timiryazev, I. 
 P. 
 Pavlov, etc. 
). 
 p. 
 276 Voprosy Filosofii i Psikhologii (Problems of Philosophy and Psy-chology )—a journal of an idealist tendency, founded by Professor N. 
 Y. 
 Grot, published in Moscow from November 1889 to April 1918 (from 1894 it was published by the Moscow Psychological Society). 
 It contained articles on philosophy, psychology, logic, ethics, aesthetics, critical notes and analyses of theories and works 104 105 106of West-European philosophers and psychologists, reviews of books on philosophy and of foreign philosophical journals, and other material. 
 In the nineties its contributors included the “legal Marx-ists” P . 
B. 
 Struve and S. 
 N. 
 Bulgakov, and in the years of reaction —A. 
 Bogdanov and other Machists. 
 From 1894 it was edited by L. 
 M. 
 Lopatin. 
 p. 
 299 Union of the Russian People —an ultra-reactionary, Black-Hundred organisation of the monarchists, formed in October 1905 in St. 
 Petersburg for combating the revolutionary movement. 
 The Union united reactionary landlords, big house owners, merchants, police officials, clergy, urban petty-bourgeoisie, kulaks, and declassed and criminal elements. 
 It was headed by V. 
 A. 
 Bobrinsky, A. 
 I. 
 Dubrovin, P. 
 A. 
 Krushevan, N. 
 E. 
 Markov 2nd, V. 
 M. 
 Purish-kevich and others. 
 Its press organs were the newspapers Russkoye Znamya (Russian Flag ), Obyedineniye (Union ), and Groza (Storm ). 
 Branches of the Union were opened in many Russian towns. 
 The Union defended the continuance of the tsarist autocracy, the preservation of semi-feudal landlordism and the privileges of the nobility. 
 Its motto was the monarchist, nationalist slogan of the feudal epoch—“orthodox religion, autocracy, nationhood”. 
 It chose pogroms and murder as its chief weapon against the revo-lution. 
 Helped and protected by the police, its members openly and with impunity beat up and murdered leading revolutionary workers and representatives of the democratic intelligentsia, dis-rupted and fired on meetings, organised anti-Jewish pogroms and viciously persecuted non-Russian nationalities. 
 After the dissolution of the Second Duma, the Union split into two organisations: the “Chamber of the Archangel Michael” headed by Purishkevich, which advocated using the Third Duma for coun-ter-revolutionary aims, and the Union of the Russian People proper, headed by Dubrovin, which continued the tactics of open terrorism. 
 Both of the Black-Hundred organisations were abolished during the February bourgeois-democratic revolution of 1917. 
 After the October Socialist Revolution, former members of these organ-isations took an active part in counter-revolutionary revolts and conspiracies against the Soviet power. 
 p. 
 299 Russkoye Bogatstvo (Russian Wealth )—a monthly magazine pub-lished in St. 
 Petersburg from 1876 to 1918. 
 From the beginning of the nineties it passed into the hands of the liberal Narodniks headed by N. 
 K. 
 Mikhailovsky. 
 Grouped round the magazine were publicists who subsequently became prominent members of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, the Party of “Popular Socialists” and the Trudovik groups in the State Duma. 
 In 1906 it became the organ of the semi-Cadet Trudovik Popular Socialist Party. 
 p. 
 314 These words are an adaptation of a couplet by Goethe, taken by Lenin from I. 
 S. 
 Turgenev’s novel Virgin Soil . 
 p. 
 317 107 108 109 110 111This refers to the Preface to Marx’s work Zur Kritik der poli-tischen Ökonomie (Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy ) p. 
 322 See K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1955, p. 
 290. 
 p. 
 329 Bazarov , V. 
 (Rudnev , V. 
 A. 
 ), 1874-1939—philosopher and econ-omist. 
 From 1896 onwards took part in the Social-Democratic movement. 
 In 1905-07 collaborated on several Bolshevik publi-cations. 
 In the period of reaction (1907-10) drew away from Bol-shevism; advocated “god-building” and empirio-criticism; was one of the leading representatives of the Machist revision of Marxism. 
 p. 
 331 The discovery of the law of the conservation and transformation of energy, led up to by the whole development of natural science especially contributed to by the work of Lomonosov, occurred in the forties of the nineteenth century (the works of Robert Mayer, James Joule and Hermann Helmholtz). 
 The word energy in its mod-ern sense was introduced in 1853 by William Rankin, but it only came into general use in the seventies and eighties. 
 Most physicists were at first critical of the new law, but its correctness was speedily proved in all spheres of natural science. 
 Engels considered this law one of the most important achievements of the nineteenth century and he looked on it as a universal law of nature expressing in the language of physics the unity of the material world. 
 “The unity of all motion in nature,” he wrote, “is no longer a philosoph-ical assertion, but a natural scientific fact” ( Dialectics of Nature , p. 
 264). 
 Some scientists cast doubt on the universal nature of the law of the conservation and transformation of energy and tried to in-terpret it in an idealist spirit. 
 Thus, Mach refused to regard it as a universal law of nature and considered that it amounted merely to an acknowledgement of the causal dependence of phenomena. 
 Wilhelm Ostwald regarded it as the sole universal law of nature and he tried to deny the objective reality of matter, to discard the concept of matter and to prove that energy exists without matter, reducing all phenomena of nature, society and thought to energy. 
 A. 
 Bogdanov tried to depict social changes as an increase or de-crease of energy. 
 Lenin criticised “energeticism” as one of the manifestations of “physical idealism” and he showed the untenability in principle of attempts to transfer the laws of natural science to social phenom-ena. 
 The further development of science, and study of the phenom-ena of the micro-world, confirmed the universal character of the law of the conservation and transformation of energy; the relativ-ity theory established the universal relationship between energy and mass. 
 p. 
 332 See Early Writings of K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels , 1956, Russian edi-tion, pp. 
 257-58. 
 p. 
 336 112 113 114 115 116 117Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher (German-French Yearbooks )—an annual published in Paris in German, edited by Karl Marx and Arnold Ruge. 
 Only the first, double number was issued in Feb-ruary 1844. 
 It contained Marx’s works “The Jewish Question” and “Contribution to the Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right. 
 Introduction”, as well as Engels’ “Outlines of a Criticism of Polit-ical Economy” and “The Position of England. 
 Thomas Carlyle. 
 ‘Past and Present’”. 
 These works mark the definitive adoption of the standpoint of materialism and communism by Marx and Eng-els. 
 Marx’s disagreement in principle with the bourgeois radical Ruge was the main reason why the journal ceased to appear. 
 p. 
 336 See K. 
 Marx, Capital , Vol. 
 I, Moscow, 1959, p. 
 19. 
 p. 
 337 See K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1955, pp. 
 290, 306. 
 p. 
 337 See F. 
 Engels’ “Special Introduction to the English Edition of 1892” of his Socialism : Utopian and Scientific (K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Eng-els, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 99-102). 
 p. 
 337 Lenin is referring to Engels’ works Anti-Dühring (1878), Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy (1888), “Spe-cial Introduction to the English Edition of 1892” of Socialism : Utopian and Scientific (see F. 
 Engels, Anti-Dühring and K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 
 358-402, 93-115). 
 p. 
 338 See K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 II, Moscow, 1958, p. 
 359. 
 The turn to Hegel in the second half of the nineteenth century was characteristic of the development of bourgeois philosophy in a number of European countries and the U. 
S. 
A. 
 In Britain it began with the appearance in 1865 of James Hutchison Stirling’s book The Secret of Hegel . 
 The bourgeois ideologists were attracted by Hegel’s absolute idealism, which offered wide opportunities for a theoretical justification of religion. 
 There developed a special philosophical trend which was given the name of Anglo-Hegel-ianism, whose representatives (Thomas Green, the brothers Ed-ward and John Caird, Francis Bradley and others) vigorously at-tacked materialism, making use of the reactionary aspects of He-gel’s doctrine. 
 In the Scandinavian countries, too, Hegelian philosophy became more influential in the second half of the eighteenth century. 
 In Sweden its revival was sponsored by Johann Borelius who counter-posed Hegelianism to the prevailing subjective-idealist philosophy. 
 In Norway the Right-wing Hegelians Marcus Jacob Monrad, G. 
 W. 
 Ling and others interpreted Hegel’s philosophy in the spirit of mysticism, discarding its rationalism and trying to sub-ordinate science to religion. 
 In Denmark, where Hegelian phi-118losophy began to spread even during Hegel’s lifetime, it was crit-icised from the same standpoint. 
 The spread of Hegel’s philosophy did not lead to its revival; the bourgeois epigones of Hegel “developed” (mainly in the spirit of subjective idealism) various aspects of his conservative philo-sophical system. 
 All this paved the way for the emergence at the turn of the century of neo-Hegelianism—a reactionary trend of bourgeois philosophical thought in the imperialist era that attempt-ed to adapt Hegel’s philosophy to fascist ideology. 
 p. 
 338 Pragmatism —a subjective-idealist trend of bourgeois (mainly American) philosophy in the imperialist era. 
 It arose in the seven-ties of the last century in the U. 
S. 
A. 
 as a reflection of specific features of the development of American capitalism, replacing the hitherto prevailing religious philosophy. 
 The main propositions of pragmatism were formulated by Charles Peirce. 
 As an independ-ent philosophical tendency it took shape at the turn of the century in the works of William James and Ferdinand Schiller and was further developed in the instrumentalism of John Dewey. 
 The pragmatists consider that the central problem of philosophy is the attainment of true knowledge. 
 However, they completely distort the very concept of truth; already Peirce looked on cogni-tion as a purely psychological, subjective process of achieving religious belief. 
 James substituted the concept of “usefulness ”, of success or advantage, for the concept of truth, i. 
e. 
, for the ob-jectively true reflection of reality. 
 From his point of view, all concepts, including religious ones, are true insofar as they are use-ful. 
 Dewey went even farther by declaring all scientific theories, all moral principles and social institutions, to be merely “instru-ments” for the attainment of the personal aims of the individual. 
 As the criterion of the “truth” (usefulness) of knowledge, the prag-matists take experience, understood not as human social practice but as the constant stream of individual experiences, of the sub-jective phenomena of consciousness; they regard this experience as the sole reality, declaring the concepts of matter and mind “obso-lete”. 
 Like the Machists, the pragmatists claim to have created a “third line” in philosophy; they try to place themselves above ma-terialism and idealism, while in fact advocating one of the varieties of idealism. 
 In contrast to materialist monism, the pragmatists put forward the standpoint of “pluralism”, according to which there is no internal connection, no conformity to law, in the universe; it is like a mosaic which each person builds in his own way, out of his own individual experiences. 
 Hence, starting out from the needs of the given moment, pragmatism considers it possible to give different, even contradictory, explanations of one and the same phenomenon. 
 Consistency is declared to be unnecessary; if it is to a man’s advantage, he can be a determinist or an indeter-minist, he can assert or deny the existence of God, and so on. 
 By basing themselves on the subjective-idealist tradition of English philosophy from Berkeley and Hume to John Stuart Mill, by exploiting particular aspects of the theories of Kant, Mach 119 120 121 122 123and Avenarius, Nietzsche and Henri Bergson, the American prag-matists created one of the most reactionary philosophical trends of modern times, a convenient form for theoretically defending the interests of the imperialist bourgeoisie. 
 It is for this reason that pragmatism spread so widely in the U. 
S. 
A. 
, becoming almost the official American philosophy. 
 There have been advocates of pragmatism at various times in Italy, Germany, France, Czecho-slovakia and other countries. 
 p. 
 342 Zagranichnaya Gazeta (Gazette Etrangère )—the weekly newspaper of a group of Russian emigrants, published in Geneva from March 16 to April 13, 1908. 
 The four numbers that appeared during this period dealt mainly with the life of Russian emigrants and carried material on events in Russia and abroad. 
 The second number pub-lished Lenin’s speech “Lessons of the Commune” at an internation-al meeting in Geneva on March 18, 1908. 
 The newspaper contained propaganda for god-building and Machism (articles by A. 
 Bogdanov and A. 
 V. 
 Lunacharsky). 
 Lenin quotes a passage from A. 
 V. 
 Lunacharsky’s “Sketches of Modern Russian Literature”, which was published in Nos. 
 2 and 3 of the newspaper. 
 p. 
 343 Obrazovaniye (Education )—a legal monthly literary magazine of a popular scientific and socio-political character published in St. 
 Petersburg from 1892 to 1909. 
 In 1902-08 it printed articles by Social-Democrats. 
 In No. 
 2, 1906, the magazine printed Chapters V-IX of Lenin’s work “The Agrarian Crisis and the ‘Critics of Marx’”. 
 p. 
 344 Bobchinsky , Dobchinsky —two closely similar characters in Gogol’s comedy Inspector-General , chatterers and tale-bearers. 
 p. 
 351 Lenin is referring to two booklets by Machist Mensheviks published in 1908: N. 
 Valentinov’s Philosophical Constructions of Marx-ism and P. 
 Yushkevich’s Materialism and Critical Realism . 
 p. 
 355 The manuscript of the “ Supplement to Chapter Four , Section 1 , ‘From What Angle Did N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky Criticise Kantianism?’” was sent by Lenin to A. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova-Yelizarova in the second half of March, when the book was already in the press. 
 In a letter to his sister dated March 10 or 11 (23 or 24), 1909, Lenin wrote in refer-ence to this supplement: “I am sending you a supplement. 
 It is not worth while delaying on account of it. 
 But if there is time, put it at the end of the book, after the conclusion, in small print, for in-stance. 
 I regard it as extremely important to counterpose ‘Cher-nyshevsky’ to the Machists. 
” ( Collected Works , present edition Vol. 
 37, pp. 
 419-20. 
) p. 
 359 THE LIFE AND WORK OF V. 
 I. 
 LENIN Chronology (February 1908 -May 1909 ) First half of February January 25 (February 7) January 31 (February 13) February 11 (24) February, before the 12th (25th) February 12 (25)1906 Lenin begins work on the book Materialism and Empirio-criticism , becomes a member of the Société de Lecture in Geneva and reads philosophical literature in its library. 
 Lenin informs A. 
 M. 
 Gorky by letter that he has been carefully reading the works of Bogdanov, Bazarov, Lunacharsky and other Machists and is convinced that their philosophical views are erro-neous. 
 “I am for materialism, against ‘empirio’ and so forth,” he writes. 
 In a letter to A. 
 M. 
 Gorky, Lenin controverts his stand on questions of philosophy; he defends the materialism of Marx and Engels. 
 Lenin attends a conference of the editorial board of the newspaper Proletary in connection with the note in Die Neue Zeit about the struggle in the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 on questions of philosophy. 
 The conference unanimously adopts Lenin’s text of a statement by the editorial board of Proletary , which stresses that the philosophical controversy is not of a factional nature and that the whole attempt to present differences on philosophy as factional is radically wrong. 
 Lenin writes to relatives in St. 
 Petersburg, asking them to find and send him his philosophical manu-script of 1906 attacking Bogdanov’s empirio-mon-ism, which he intends to reprint under the heading “Notes of an Ordinary Marxist on Philosophy”. 
 Lenin writes to A. 
 M. 
 Gorky on the need for an irreconcilable struggle against Machism and the Russian Machists (Bogdanov and others); he out-lines the history of the differences among the Bolsheviks on questions of philosophy, which have been aggravated by the publication of the Mach-lsts’ book Studies in the Philosophy of Marxism . 
 March 11 (24) Second half of March-not later than April 3 (16) Not earlier than March-not later than Oc-tober 14 (27) April 3 (16) Between April 10 and 17 (23 and 30 April MayIn a letter to A. 
 M. 
 Gorky, Lenin gives a strongly adverse estimate of the Machists book Studies in the Philosophy of Marxism ; he stresses the need for combating the Machists on philosophical ques-tions. 
 Lenin writes the article “Marxism and Revisionism” for the symposium Karl Marx (1818-83). 
 In his notes to the article Lenin speaks of his intention in the near future to combat Studies in the Philosophy of Marxism in a number of articles or a special pamphlet. 
 Lenin reads and makes notes in J. 
 Dietzgen’s Kei-nere philosophische Schriften. 
 Eine Auswahl (Minor Philosophical Writings. 
 A Selection ), Stuttgart, Dietz, 1903. 
 Lenin makes wide use of this book for his Materialism and Empirio-criticism . 
 Lenin informs A. 
 M. 
 Gorky by letter of the “formal declaration of war” on the Machists, having in mind his article “Marxism and Revisionism”. 
 Lenin writes in a letter to A. 
 V. 
 Lunacharsky that he has parted company with the advocates of “com-bining scientific socialism with religion” and with all the Machists. 
 At A. 
 M. 
 Gorky’s request, Lenin visits him in Capri. 
 Lenin informs A. 
 Bogdanov, V. 
 Bazarov and A. 
 V. 
 Lunacharsky of his absolute divergence from them on questions of philosophy. 
 Lenin reads F. 
 Engels’ article “Über historischen Materialismus” (“On Historical Materialism”) printed in the magazine Die Neue Zeit , No. 
 1, XI Jahrgang, I. 
 Band, 1892/93, and makes notes in it. 
 Lenin uses Engels’ article for the book Mate-rialism and Empirio-criticism . 
 Lenin works in the library of the British Museum in London on the literature dealing with philosophy and natural science not available in the Geneva libraries. 
 He needed this literature for writing Materialism and Empirio-criticism . 
 Lenin writes “Ten Questions to a Lecturer”, which he sends from London as theses for the speech of I. 
 F. 
 Dubrovinsky (Innokenty) on the occasion of the lecture entitled “Adventures of One Philo-sophical School” given by A. 
 Bogdanov in Geneva on May 15 (28), 1908. 
 End of May-beginning of June Not before May June 7 (20) June 18 (July 1) June 30 (July 13) August September October 14 (27) October 26 (November 8)On his return to Geneva from London, at a meeting of the editorial board of Proletary , Lenin and I. 
 F. 
 Dubrovinsky reject A. 
 Bogdanov’s draft resolution which stated that advocacy of empirio-criticism “does not contradict” the interests of the Bolshevik faction, and which proposed to condemn I. 
 F. 
 Dubrovinsky’s speech on A. 
 Bogdanov’s lecture. 
 Lenin reads G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov’s book Fundamental Problems of Marxism (St. 
 Petersburg, 1908) and makes notes in it. 
 In a letter to M. 
 A. 
 Ulyanova, Lenin expresses regret that P. 
 G. 
 Dauge, the “Moscow Philosopher-Editor”, had refused to print Materialism and Empirio-criticism and he asks for another publisher to be found. 
 In a letter to V. 
 V. 
 Vorovsky in Odessa, Lenin writes that the differences with A. 
 Bogdanov and G. 
 A. 
 Alexinsky have sharpened and a break with them is inevitable; he enquires about the possibil-ity of his book on philosophy being published. 
 Lenin informs M. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova by letter about his work on Materialism and Empirio-criticism and asks for G. 
 I. 
 Chelpanov’s two books, Avenarius and His School and Immanentist Philosophy , to be sent to him. 
 In the name of the editorial board of Proletary Lenin demands that A. 
 Bogdanov should give a public exposition in the press of his philosophical and political views. 
 Lenin writes the preface to Materialism and Empi-rio-criticism . 
 He gives the manuscript of his book to V. 
 F. 
 Gorin (Galkin) to read through. 
 Lenin informs A. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova-Yelizarova in a letter that he has completed his work on the book Materialism and Empirio-criticism , and asks for a reliable address to which to send the manuscript and, if at all possible, to conclude an agreement for the book’s publication. 
 In a letter to A. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova-Yelizarova Lenin asks for an address to which to send the manuscript of Materialism and Empirio-criticism ; he agrees, in the event of the censorship being particularly October 28 (November 10) November, before the 4th (17th) November 13 (26) November 27 (December 10) Between No-vember 29 and December 1 (December 12 and 14) December 6 (19)severe, to replace the word “clericalism” in the book by the word “fideism”, explaining its mean-ing in a footnote. 
 In a letter to the Machist Menshevik P. 
 S. 
 Yush-kevich in St. 
 Petersburg, Lenin rejects the sugges-tion that he should contribute to the literary-philosophical symposium which it was proposedto publish. 
 Lenin sends the manuscript of Materialism and Empirio-criticism to V. 
 A. 
 Levitsky in Podolsk. 
 In a letter to A. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova-Yelizarova, Lenin acknowledges the receipt of her letter of November 9 (22), which mentioned that the manuscript of Materialism and Empirio-criticism had been re-ceived; he proposes that in the absence of anotherpublisher the manuscript should be sent to V. 
 D. 
Bonch-Bruyevich at the Zhizn i Znanie (Life and Knowledge ) Publishers; he asks for an addition to the text at the end of the “Introduction”, where mention is made of N. 
 Valentinov. 
 In a telegram to A. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova-Yelizarova, Lenin agrees to accept the conditions of the Zveno Pub-lishers in Moscow for the publication of Mate-rialism and Empirio-criticism . 
 In a letter to M. 
 A. 
 Ulyanova, Lenin asks A. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova-Yelizarova to expedite the drawing up ofthe agreement with the Zveno Publishers and insists that the agreement should contain a demand forimmediate publication of the book Materialism and Empirio-criticism ; he advises that the agree-ment should be concluded in his name and not inthat of Anna Ilyinichna in order to avoid her beinginvolved in responsibility under the press laws. 
 Lenin and N. 
 K. 
 Krupskaya move from Geneva to Paris, the city to which the publication of thenewspaper Proletary was being transferred. 
 In a letter to A. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova-Yelizarova, Lenin agrees to a softening of the tone in regard to Bazarov and Bogdanov but objects to softening the expres-sions relating to Yushkevich and Valentinov inMaterialism and Empirio-criticism ; he announces /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR December 11 (24) December 30 (January 12, 1909 ) 1908 Not before 1908 Later than 1908 Beginning of the year January-June January 2 (February 6) January-Aprilhis agreement to changing the words “clericalism” “mentally projected a god”, and so on, only if thepublisher demands it by an ultimatum for censor-ship reasons. 
 In a letter to A. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova-Yelizarova, Lenin asks to send him a copy of the uncorrected proofsand later the printed sheets of Materialism and Empirio-criticism in order to be able to make very important corrections; he gives instructions about the type for the paragraph headings. 
 He mentions two letters sent earlier, containing anaddition about Erich Becher’s book and a numberof corrections to the text. 
 In a letter (in French) to the Director of the National Library in Paris, Lenin asks for a ticket giving him the right to use the library. 
 Lenin reads Ludwig Feuerbach’s book Sämtliche Werke , Zweiter Band ( Collected Works , Vol. 
 2), Leipzig, 1846, and makes notes in it. 
 Lenin uses this book for Materialism and Empirio-criticism . 
 Lenin reads V. 
 Shulyatikov’s book The Justi-fication of Capitalism in West-European Phi-losophy , from Descartes to E. 
 Mach , and makes notes in it, concluding with an appraisal of the book. 
 Lenin reads A. 
 Rey’s book La philosophie moderne (Modern Philosophy ), Paris, 1908, and makes notes in it. 
 1909 Lenin reads lectures on philosophy to a Bolshevikcircle in Paris. 
 Lenin works in the National Library and the Sor-bonne Library of Paris University on literature dealing with problems of philosophy and naturalscience. 
 In a letter to A. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova-Yelizarova, Lenin acknowledges receipt of the first pages of the proofs of Materialism and Empirio-criticism . 
 Lenin works on the proofs of Materialism and Empirio-criticism . 
 February 1 (14) February 4 or 6 (17 or 18) February 10 (23) February 2 (March 9) February 27 (March 12) March 8-9 (21-22 ) March 10 or 11 (23 or 24) March 13 (26)At a meeting of the editorial board of Proletary Lenin demands that the board publicly oppose Lunacharsky’s god-building. 
 An editorial article against god-building (“The Wrong Road”) was printed on February 12 (25) in Proletary , No. 
 42. 
 In a letter to A. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova-Yelizarova, Lenin sends corrections to the current page-proofs of the book, reports that 27 pages of the manuscript are missing from the proofs and firmly requests that care be taken to see that nothing is omitted in printing the book. 
 In a letter to A. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova-Yelizarova, Lenin acknowledges receipt of the 8th and 9th printed sheets of page-proofs; he mentions that there were no omissions, that the proof-reading of the sheets has been done well, and he sends his corrections to them. 
 Lenin sends A. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova-Yelizarova a letter containing corrections to the 10th and 11th printed sheets. 
 Lenin reports about the break with A. 
 Bog-danov and A. 
 V. 
 Lunacharsky and asks that in reading the page-proofs of the book the formula-tions against them should not be toned down and that the issue of the book should be expedited; he thanks I. 
 I. 
 Skvortsov-Stepanov for his help in publishing the book. 
 In a letter to A. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova-Yelizarova, Lenin sends a list of the misprints in printed sheets 6-9 and 13, and again asks for the publication of the book to be expedited. 
 In a postscript Lenin again insists that nothing shall be toned down in the passages opposing Bogdanov, Lunacharsky and other Machists. 
 In a letter to A. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova-Yelizarova, Lenin again requests that on no account should the parts opposing Bogdanov, Lunacharsky and others be toned down and sends a list of misprints in printed sheets 1-5 of the book. 
 Lenin sends to A. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova-Yelizarova in Moscow the addition “From What Angle Did N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky Criticise Kantianism?” to Section 1, Chapter Four of Materialism and Em-pirio-criticism . 
 Lenin sends A. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova-Yelizarova a list March 23 (April 5) March 2 (April 6) March 26 (April 8) April 21 (May 4) Between April 29 and May 4 (May 12 and 17) May 4 (17) May 8 (21) May, before the 12th (25th) May 13 (26)proofs and asks to be informed when the book is expected to appear. 
 Lenin sends A. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova-Yelizarova a list of misprints in the 14th printed sheet of the proofs and asks that in the proofs the phrase about Ver-nadsky “materialist-thinker” should be changedto “naturalist thinker”, or to mention it in the listof misprints. 
 In a letter to A. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova-Yelizarova, Lenin acknowledges receipt of printed sheets 10-12 ofthe book and the 21st printed sheet of the proofs,and he sends a list of the misprints in them. 
 In a letter to A. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova-Yelizarova, Lenin acknowledges receipt of the 22nd printed sheet of the proofs and informs her of the dispatch of thecorrections to it; he asks that everything possiblebe done for the book Materialism and Empirio-criticism to appear in the first half of April. 
 “I have not only literary but also serious political obliga-tions connected with its publication,” wrote Lenin. 
 In a letter to I. 
 F. 
 Dubrovinsky, Lenin informs him that he has received news that Materialism and Empirio-criticism has appeared, and he promises to send it to him in Paris by April 25-26 (May 8-9). 
 Lenin’s book Materialism and Empirio-criticism. 
 Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophyis issued by the Zveno Publishers, Moscow. 
 Lenin sends Rosa Luxemburg his book Materialism and Empirio-criticism and asks that the publi-cation of the book should be mentioned in themagazine Die Neue Zeit , which was done (see Die Neue Zeit , No. 
 2, October 8, 1909, p. 
 64). 
 In a letter to M. 
 A. 
 Ulyanova, Lenin acknowledges re-ceipt of the book Materialism and Empirio-criticism and comments favourably on the way the bookwas published. 
 Lenin presents a copy of Materialism and Empi-rio-criticism to V. 
 F. 
 Gorin (Galkin). 
 In a letter to A. 
 I. 
 Ulyanova-Yelizarova, Lenin May-September June 5 (18) Beginning of the summer SummerEmpirio-criticism, comments favourably on theway it was published, and writes about the immi-nent split with the Otzovists and Ultimatists. 
 The magazines Vozrozhdeniye (Rebirth ), No. 
 7-8, Sovremenny Mir (Modern World ), No. 
 7, Kri-tickeskoye Obozreniye (Critical Review ), issue V, and the newspaper Russkiye Vedomosti (Russian Recorder ), No. 
 22, publish reviews by bourgeois and Menshevik authors of Lenin’s book Materialism and Empirio-criticism . 
 The newspaper Odesskoye Obozreniye (Odessa Review ), No. 
 436, carries a note by V. 
 V. 
 Vorovsky on V. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s book; because of the censorshipthe note was ostensibly devoted to a book by Max Verworn, Natural Science and World Outlook , The Problem of Life , Moscow, 1909. 
 Lenin sends a copy of Materialism and Empirio-criticism to I. 
 I. 
 Skvortsov-Stepanov. 
 In the summer Lenin visits Paul Lafargue and talks with him on philosophical problems and hisbook Materialism and Empirio-criticism . 
 N A M E I N D E X A Adickes, Erich, 349 Adler, Friedrich, 53, 57, 64, 96, 116, 220, 311 Akimov (V. 
 Makhnovets), 270 d’Alembert, Jean le Rond, 36, 37 Axelrod, L. 
 I. 
 (Orthodox), 111, 322 Avenarius, Richard, 22, 27, 28, 39, 40, 42-50, 51, 53, 56-57, 59, 81, 85-94, 112, 114, 116, 126, 128, 136, 144, 145, 147-53, 158, 159, 161, 164, 166, 169, 188, 190, 194, 195, 197, 199, 204-19, 223, 225, 239, 243, 249, 314, 315, 317-19, 329, 339, 341, 342, 344, 345, 346, 352, 353, 359, 360 B Baumann, J. 
, 192 Bax, Ernst Belfort, 150 Bazarov, V. 
, 19, 22, 25, 73, 82-87, 98, 107, 110-17, 141, 169, 184, 197, 212, 213, 216, 219, 232, 233, 238, 282, 323, 324, 331, 344 Bebel, August, 213 Becher, Erich, 192, 290 Becquerel, Henri, 250 Beesly, Edward Spencer, 337 Bentley, J. 
 M. 
, 184 Beltov (a pseudonym of Ple-khanov)—See Plekhanov Berkeley, George, 23-36, 38, 42-44, 47, 52, 65, 67, 69, 70, 83, 85, 92, 105, 108, 114, 118, 122, 126, 184, 192, 194,196, 197, 200, 201, 202, 204, 208, 211, 214, 222-23, 236, 247, 297, 311, 354, 373 Berman, J. 
 A. 
, 19, 98, 190, 309, 331 Bernstein, Eduard, 203 Biedermann, Alois Emanuel, 212 Bismarck, Otto von, 139 Blei, Franz, 314-16, 318-19 Bogdanov, A. 
, 16, 19, 21, 22, 27, 48, 50, 51, 58-59, 66, 89, 90, 94, 95, 98, 111, 122, 127, 132-34, 136, 137, 143, 146, 149, 153, 168, 186, 188, 197, 212, 219, 222, 223, 225-31, 238, 262, 263, 269, 270-72, 274, 278, 282, 287, 288, 301, 303,. 
 304, 323-26, 328-31, 336, 342, 345 Bolin, Wilhelm, 201 Boltzmann, Ludwig, 96, 264, 287-89, 298 Brunetière, Ferdinand, 305 Büchner, Ludwig, 47, 238, 240, 242, 266, 300, 329, 330, 332, 337 Bulgakov, S. 
 N. 
, 349 C Carnot, Nicolas Léonard Sadi 305 Carstanjen, Friedrich, 66, 147 151, 152, 153 Carus, Paul, 224, 225, 230, 273, 344 Cauwelaert, F. 
 van, 48, 60, 149 Chateaubriand, François René, 203 Chernov, V. 
 M. 
, 22, 101, 104, 107, 111, 116 129, 134, 137 186, 191, 205 212, 215, 314 Chernyshevsky, N. 
 G. 
, 359-61 Chwolson, O. 
 D. 
, 349 Clausius, Rudolf, 305 Clifford, William Kingdon, 224 Cohen, Hermann, 100, 282-85, 293, 299, 308 Comte, Auguste, 205 Condiliac, Etienne Bonnot, 35 Cornelius, Hans, 218, 219, 223, 230, 344 Cornu, Marie Alfred, 297 D Darwin, Charles Robert, 248, 328 Dauge, P. 
 G. 
, 247, 248 Delacroix, Henri, 207 Democritus, 130, 353, 354 Descartes, René, 36 Diderot, Denis, 35-38, 46, 48, 113, 126 Dietzgen, Eugene, 120, 247-48 Dietzgen, Joseph, 22, 116-17, 120, 121, 135, 136, 139, 157, 174, 210 239, 242, 248, 261, 266, 283, 331, 339-41, 344 Diner-Dénes, Joseph, 250, 251 Dixon, Edward T. 
, 95 Duhem, Pierre, 52, 257, 279, 303, 309-12, 342 Dühring, Eugen, 41, 42, 76, 131, 133, 134, 173, 114, 178, 186, 203, 229, 241-43, 329 330, 332-34, 337, 338 E Engels, Frederick, 15, 16, 19, 20, 22, 32, 33, 41, 42, 47, 48, 52, 55, 61, 64, 66, 76, 84, 87, 92, 98-104, 107-17, 122, 123, 136, 139, 141, 146, 147, 151, 155-57, 159, 162, 166, 173, 177, 183, 184-90, 197, 201-07, 226, 227, 233, 239-43, 244-47, 249-52, 254,255, 261, 263, 266-69, 294, 297, 309, 310, 314, 315, 316, 318, 319, 329, 334, 336-39, 344, 357, 360, 361 Eulogius, Bishop, 139 Ewald (Friedlander), Oskar, 61, 73, 74, 91, 94 F Faraday, Michael, 297 Fechner, Gustav Theodor, 337 Ferri, Enrico, 327 Feuerbach, Ludwig, 22, 48, 52, 82, 84, 85, 99, 104, 105, 116, 118, 119, 122, 130, 137, 141, 142, 153, 155, 159, 162, 168, 175, 176, 200, 201, 204-06, 232, 235, 242, 304, 329, 337, 339, 344, 359, 361 Fichte, Johann Gottlieb, 68, 69, 72, 77, 81, 95, 141 144 149, 152, 195-97, 199, 210, 214 , 228, 297 Fischer, Kuno, 197Fournière, Eugéne, 203 Franck, Adolf, 131 Frank, Philipp, 165 Fraser, Alexander Campbell, 23, 30, 32 Friedlander—see Ewald G Göring, Karl, 100 Grassmann, Hermann Günther, 171 Grün, Karl, 84, 201, 336 Günther, Siegmund, 287 H Haeckel, Ernst, 46, 95, 174, 225, 248, 274, 300, 348-56 Hartmann, Eduard von, 65, 285, 286, 293, 350 Haym, Rudolf, 84, 153 Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 84, 95, 100, 101, 127, 137, 187, 190, 192, 226, 228, 232, 248, 337, 338, 360 Heinze, Max, 193 Helfond, O. 
 I. 
, 19, 157, 158, 243, 331 Helmholtz, Hermann, 232-38, 257, 258, 264, 290 Hering, Ewald, 186 Hertz, Heinrich, 222, 236, 264, 284, 297, 299 Heyfelder, Victor, 234 Hibben, John Grier, 271 Höchberg, Karl, 203 Holbach, Paul, 239 Hönigswald, Richard, 23, 95, 171 Houllevigue, Louis, 258 Hume, David, 33, 35, 52, 65, 99-103 107, 113, 116, 127, 128, 136, 140, 141, 155, 158, 159, 161, 166, 183, 185, 194, 196, 197, 201, 203-08, 211, 219, 247, 295, 296, 311, 337, 357 Huxley, Thomas Henry, 35, 92, 207, 208, 235, 337, 339 I Ilyin, V. 
 (Lenin), 100 J James, William, 342 Jaurès, Jean, 203 Jerusalem, Wilhelm, 95, 149, 248 Joule, James Prescott, 305 K Kant, Immanuel, 26, 33, 95, 100-02, 111, 116, 118, 121, 127, 128, 138, 140, 155, 158, 161, 166, 168, 172, 178, 183, 184, 192, 194, 204, 206, 214, 221, 222, 224, 233, 238, 242, 254, 304, 337, 357, 359, 360Kautsky, Karl, 100, 204, 249 Kelvin, Lord—see Thomson Wil-liam Kirchhoff, Gustav Robert, 171, 257, 264, 278 Kleinpeter, Hans, 94, 192, 207, 221-25, 231, 237-38, 258, 284, 353 Knox, Howard V. 
, 224 Kugelmann, Ludwig, 135, 246, 328, 337 L Laas, Ernst, 100, 206, 211 Lafargue, Paul, 202, 203, 204, 249 Lagrange, Jos. 
 Louis, 298 Lange, Friedrich Albert, 100, 202, 206, 211, 282, 304, 308, 328-29, 337 Langevin, Paul, 260, 264 Larmor, Joseph, 257, 264 Lavoisier, Antoine Laurent, 252 Leclair, Anton von, 70, 180, 199, 209, 210, 212, 216, 230, 231, 234, 236, 241-43, 248, 345, 347 Le Roy, Edouard, 291, 293 Lesevich, V. 
, 56, 191, 207, 210 Lévy, Albert, 105-06 Liebig, Justus, 266 Liebknecht, Wilhelm, 111 Liebmann, Otto, 100 Locke, John, 30, 126 Lodge, Oliver, 95, 260, 281, 349 Lopatin, L. 
 M. 
, 299-301, 303, 343, 352-53 Lorentz, Hendrik Anton, 257, 263 Lucka, Emil, 95, 166, 193 Lunacharsky, A. 
 V. 
, 19, 78, 80, 187, 188, 282, 331, 343, 345, 349 M Mach, Ernst, 16, 22, 23, 26, 27, 28, 34, 38, 48, 51-69, 71, 75, 76, 78, 80, 87, 88, 91, 93, 97, 104, 106, 109, 112, 114, 116, 126, 130, 136, 141, 145, 146, 149, 151, 158-61, 164, 166, 169-73, 175, 177-86, 190, 194, 199, 200, 204-24, 230, 231, 236, 239, 241-43, 247-49, 254, 256-57, 269-72, 279, 283, 284, 288, 291, 293, 295-96, 298, 303-05, 309-11, 318, 319, 321, 329, 339, 341-48, 350, 353, 355, 357, 359 Malon, Benoit, 203 Marx, Karl, 19, 20, 41, 48, 52, 53, 55, 66, 84, 99, 104-06, 117, 135, 137-39, 141-43, 147, 158, 159, 162, 169, 172, 185, 190, 197, 201, 203, 204, 216, 239-41, 242, 246-49, 254, 262, 263, 269, 297, 309, 314-19, 322, 324, 328-31, 333-34, 336, 337, 339, 343, 344, 346, 357, 361 Mayer, Julius Robert, 305 Maxwell, James Clerk, 257, 264, 297 Mehring, Franz, 20, 249, 355 Menger, Anton, 321 Menshikov, M. 
 O. 
, 73, 130, 212 Mercier, Louis Sebastian, 203 Mikhailovsky, N. 
 K. 
, 205, 327 Mill, John Stuart, 109, 145, 269, 295 Moleschott, Jakob 47, 239, 329 Morgan, Conwy Lloyd, 46, 183 Müller, Johannes, 304 N Newton, Isaac, 179, 253, 305 O Orthodox (a pseudonym of Axel-rod)—see Axelrod Ostwald, Wilhelm, 50, 51, 59, 168, 225, 231, 254, 269-73, 332, 342, 343 P Paulsen, Friedrich, 349 Pearson, Karl, 52,92, 93, 95,96, 145, 146, 160, 161, 183, 184, 207, 213, 224, 259, 260, 268, 279, 284, 303, 305, 342 Pellat, Henri, 260 Petzoldt, Josef, 16, 27, 42, 56, 62, 66, 75, 77-81, 85, 93 128, 136, 147, 151, 161-64 172, 174, 188, 190, 205, 207, 210, 213, 215, 220, 224, 249, 319-22, 344, 347, 350, 353 Pillon, François, 34, 35, 212, 231 Plato, 84, 130 Plekhanov (Beltov), G. 
 V. 
, 22, 23, 25, 57, 82, 84 86, 87, 98-101, 104, 105, 110, 111, 112, 115, 121, 123, 141, 146, 151, 152-53, 197, 233, 238, 249, 251, 355 Poincaré, Henri, 30, 52, 165, 182, 252, 253, 256, 257, 263, 274, 278, 279, 283, 291-92, 296, 298, 303, 305, 309, 310, 342, 343 Poincaré, Lucien, 296 Popper, Josef, 321 Poynting, J. 
 Henry, 274, 279 Purishkevich, V. 
 M. 
, 199 Pyrrho, 140, 203 R Rakhmetov (Oskar Blum), 230 Ramsay, William, 312 Rappoport, Charles, 203 Rau, Albrecht, 201, 202, 235, 375 Rehmke, Johannes, 70, 180, 200, 209, 210, 213-14, 228, 278, 304, 348, 349 Renouvier, Charles, 207, 211-13, 231 Rey, Abel, 253-57, 260, 263-65, 285, 292-98, 305, 308, 311 Ricardo, David, 316 Riehl, Alois, 100, 148, 207, 211 Righi, Augusto, 258, 260, 263 Robespierre, Maximilian, 203 Rodier, Georges, 224 Rücker, Arthur William, 274-76, 278-80 Ryle, R. 
 J. 
, 184 S Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph, 95, 336, 360 Schmidt, Heinrich, 349 Schopenhauer, Arthur, 192, 206, 228 Schubert-Soldern, Richard, 70, 76, 86, 180, 209, 210, 213, 214, 216, 217, 231, 248, 324, 325, 345, 348 Schulze, Gottlieb Ernst (Schulze-Aenesidemus), 140-41, 185, 195-97, 199 Schuppe, Wilhelm, 16, 70, 72, 74, 78, 86, 112, 180, 209, 210, 213, 215, 219, 223, 228, 230, 242, 323-24, 345, 355 Schwegler, F. 
 K. 
 A. 
, 131 Senior, William Nagsau, 138 Sextus, 140 Shishkin, N. 
 I. 
, 299-302 Smith, Norman Kemp, 71-72, 92, 149 Snyder, Carl, 353 Socrates, 84 Solovyov, V. 
 S. 
, 299 Sorel, Georges, 292 Spencer, Herbert, 205, 224, 327 Stallo, John Bernard, 309, 310 Starcke, C. 
 N. 
, 206 Stolypin, P. 
 A. 
, 220 Struve, P. 
 B. 
, 73, 212, 345 Suvorov, S. 
 A. 
, 19, 330-34 T Thales, 282 Thomson, William, Lord Kel-vin, 257, 264 Thomson, J. 
 J. 
, 260U Ueberweg, Friedrich, 193 V Valentinov, V. 
 (N. 
 V. 
 Volsky), 16, 19, 22, 38, 85, 86, 98, 149, 153, 186, 197, 212, 215, 230, 238, 246, 259, 262, 303 Vaubel, Johann Wilhelm, 289 Vernadsky, V. 
 I. 
, 300 Verworn, Max, 223 Vogt, Karl, 47, 239, 329 Volkmann, Paul, 166 W Ward, James, 92, 172, 207, 208, 274, 277-83, 285, 289, 293, 299, 341, 345 Willy, Rudolf, 48, 61, 74, 75, 79-81, 85, 164, 207, 210, 347, 352, 354 Windelband, Wilhelm, 206 Woltmann, Ludwig, 327 Wundt, Wilhelm, 62, 65, 70, 76, 91, 93, 148, 151, 152, 159, 172, 193, 206, 215 Y Yushkevich, P. 
 S. 
, 16, 19, 22, 30, 61, 65, 70, 98, 149, 164-67, 173, 176, 197, 205, 206, 231, 250, 262, 263, 272, 273 282, 292, 303, 331, 346 Z Ziehen, Theodor, 223, 231 B. 
 n. 
 leHnH coЧnHeHnr T O M 1 4 На английскот языке