L E N I N COLLECTED WORKS /FL0065/FL0069 A IN ACCORDANCE WITH A DECISION OF THE NINTH CONGRESS OF THE R . 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) AND THE SECOND CONGRESS OF SOVIETS OF THE U . 
S. 
S. 
R. 
 B. 
 n. 
 l d H n H С О Ч И Н E Н И Я И з д a н u е ч е m в е p m o e ГОСУДАРСТВ ЕНН ОЕ ИЗ ДАТ ЕЛЬ СТВО ПОЛИТИЧЕ СКОЙ ЛИ ТЕРАТУ РЫ M О С К В А V. 
 I. 
 L E N I N cOLLEcTED WORKS VOLUME /FL0065/FL0069 !pril–December 19/FL00340 PROGRESS PUBLISHERS MOSCOW TRANSLATED THE RUSSIAN EDITED BY J U L I U S K A T Z E R First printing 1966 Second printing 1974 From Marx to Mao M L © Digital Reprints 2012 www. 
marx 2mao. 
com 13 17 21 23 26 31 39 46 56 66 7790 105 107 109 111 113117 117 119 123C O N T E N T S Preface ........................ “LEFT -WING” COMMUNISM—AN INFANTILE DISORDER .... 
. 
 I. 
In What Sense We Can Speak of the International Significance of the Russian Revolution ...... II. 
An Essential Condition of the Bolsheviks’ Success III. 
The Principal Stages in the History of Bolshevism IV. 
The Struggle Against Which Enemies Within theWorking-Class Movement Helped Bolshevism Develop, Gain Strength, and Become Steeled ... V. 
“Left-Wing” Communism in Germany . 
 The Leaders, the Party, the Class, the Masses ....... 
. 
 VI. 
Should Revolutionaries Work in Reactionary TradeUnions? ................... 
 VII. 
Should We Participate in Bourgeois Parliaments? . 
 VIII. 
No Compromises? ............... IX. 
“Left-Wing” Communism in Great Britain .... 
 X. 
Several Conclusions ............. 
. 
 Appendix ...................... 
 I. 
The Split Among the German Communists .... 
 II. 
The Communists and the Independents in Germany III. 
Turati and Co . 
 in Italy ............ IV. 
False Conclusions from Correct Premises .... 
. 
 V. 
 ...................... 
 Letter from Wijnkoop ............... SPEECH DELIVERED AT AN ALL-RUSSIA CONGRESS OF GLASS AND PORCELAIN WORKERS, APRIL 29, 1920 ......... THE FIRST SUBBOTNIK ON THE MOSCOW-KAZAN RAIL-WAY TO THE ALL-RUSSIA MAY DAY SUBBOTNIK....... 
Page SPEECH AT A MEETING DEDICATED TO THE LAYING OF THE FOUNDATION STONE OF A MONUMENT TO LIBERATED LABOUR, MAY 1, 1920 . 
 Newspaper Report ............. 
. 
 SPEECH TO MEN OF THE RED ARMY LEAVING FOR THE POLISHFRONT, MAY 5, 1920. 
 Newspaper Report .......... 
. 
 SPEECH DELIVERED AT A JOINT SESSION OF THE ALL-RUSSIA CENTRAL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE, THE MOSCOW SOVIET OF WORKERS’, PEASANTS’ AND RED ARMY DEPUTIES, TRADE UNIONS, AND FACTORY COMMITTEES, MAY 5, 1920 ...... TELEGRAM TO THE SOVIET SOCIALIST GOVERNMENT OF AZER -BAIJAN ........................ SPEECH AT AN ENLARGED CONFERENCE OF WORKERS AND RED ARMY MEN IN ROGOZHSKO -SIMONOVSKY DISTRICT OF MOSCOW, MAY 13, 1920 . 
 Newspaper Report .......... 
 TO THE INDIAN REVOLUTIONARY ASSOCIATION ....... 
. 
 LETTER TO THE BRITISH WORKERS ............. 
 PRELIMINARY DRAFT THESES ON THE NATIONAL AND THE COLO -NIAL QUESTIONS . 
 For the Second Congress of the Communist International ..................... PRELIMINARY DRAFT THESES ON THE AGRARIAN QUESTION . 
 For the Second Congress of the Communist International .... 
 KOMMUNISMUS . 
 Journal of the Communist International for the Countries of South -Eastern Europe (in German ), Vienna , No. 
 1-2 (February 1, 1920 ) to No . 
 18 (May 8, 1920 )......... SPEECH DELIVERED AT THE SECOND ALL -RUSSIA CONFERENCE OF ORGANISERS RESPONSIBLE FOR RURAL WORK, JUNE 12, 1920 TELEPHONE MESSAGE TO THE PRESIDIUM OF THE ALL -RUSSIA FOOD CONFERENCE, JULY 1, 1920 ............. 
 AID FOR THE WOUNDED OF THE RED ARMY! ....... 
. 
 THESES ON THE FUNDAMENTAL TASKS OF THE SECOND CON -GRESS OF THE COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL ......... I. 
The Essence of the Dictatorship of the Proletariat and of Soviet Power ............. 
 II. 
What Immediate and Universal Preparation for theDictatorship of the Proletariat Should Consist In . 
 III. 
Rectification of the Political Line—Partly Also of the Composition—of Parties Affiliated or Desiring to Affiliate to the Communist International .... 
 REPLY TO A LETTER THE JOINT PROVISIONAL COM -MITTEE FOR THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF BRITAIN ....... 
126 127 129 135 136 138 139 144 152 165 168181 183 184 185 188 197 202 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR TELEPHONE MESSAGE TO J . 
 V. 
 STALIN, JULY 12 or 13, 1920 ... TELEGRAM TO J . 
 V. 
 STALIN, JULY 17, 1920 .......... 
 THE TERMS OF ADMISSION INTO THE COMMUNIST INTERNA -TIONAL ........................ ARTICLE TWENTY OF THE TERMS OF ADMISSION INTO THE COM -MUNIST INTERNATIONAL ................ 
. 
 THE SECOND CONGRESS OF THE COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL , July 19-August 7, 1920 ................ 
. 
 1. 
REPORT ON THE INTERNATIONAL SITUATION AND THE FUNDAMENTAL TASKS OF THE COMMUNIST INTERNA -TIONAL, JULY 19 ................ 
. 
 2. 
SPEECH ON THE ROLE OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY, JULY 23 3. 
REPORT OF THE COMMISSION ON THE NATIONAL AND THE COLONIAL QUESTIONS, JULY 26 .......... 
. 
 4. 
SPEECH ON THE TERMS OF ADMISSION INTO THE COMMU -NIST INTERNATIONAL, JULY 30 ............ 5. 
SPEECH ON PARLIAMENTARIANISM, AUGUST 2 .... 
. 
 6. 
SPEECH ON AFFILIATION TO THE BRITISH LABOURPARTY, AUGUST 6................ 
. 
 TELEGRAM TO J . 
 V. 
 STALIN, AUGUST 2, 1920 ......... TELEGRAM TO J . 
 V. 
 STALIN, AUGUST 4, 1920 ......... TELEGRAM TO J . 
 V. 
 STALIN, AUGUST 11, 1920 ....... 
. 
 LETTER TO THE AUSTRIAN COMMUNISTS .......... 
 THE SECOND CONGRESS OF THE COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL . 
. 
 REPLY TO MR . 
 SEGRUE, DAILY NEWS CORRESPONDENT .... 
 SPEECH DELIVERED AT THE NINTH ALL-RUSSIA CONFERENCE OF THE RUSSIAN COMMUNIST PARTY (BOLSHEVIKS), SEPTEM -BER 22, 1920 . 
 Newspaper Report ............. 
. 
 LETTER TO THE GERMAN AND THE FRENCH WORKERS . 
 Regard-ing the Discussion on the Second Congress of the Communist International ..................... THE TASKS OF THE YOUTH LEAGUES . 
 Speech Delivered at the Third All-Russia Congress of the Russian Young CommunistLeague , October 2, 1920 ................ 
. 
 SPEECH DELIVERED AT A CONGRESS OF LEATHER INDUSTRY WORKERS, OCTOBER 2, 1920 ............... TO THE POOR PEASANTS OF THE UKRAINE .........203 205 206 212 213 215 235 240 246 253 257 264 265266267270273 275 280283 300 314 ON PROLETARIAN CULTURE ................ 
 SPEECH DELIVERED AT A CONFERENCE OF CHAIRMEN OF UYEZD, VOLOST AND VILLAGE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEES OFMOSCOW GUBERNIA, OCTOBER 15, 1920.......... 
. 
 CONCLUDING REMARKS AT A CONFERENCE OF CHAIRMEN OFUYEZD, VOLOST AND VILLAGE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEES OF MOS-COW GUBERNIA, OCTOBER 15, 1920 ............. 
 TELEGRAM TO THE SOVIET GOVERNMENT OF THE UKRAINEAND THE GENERAL HEADQUARTERS OF THE SOUTHERN FRONT A CONTRIBUTION TO THE HISTORY OF THE QUESTION OF THE DICTATORSHIP. 
 A Note ................ 
. 
 TELEGRAM TO J . 
 V. 
 STALIN, OCTOBER 29, 1920 ....... 
. 
 SPEECH DELIVERED AT AN ALL -RUSSIA CONFERENCE OF POLITICAL EDUCATION WORKERS OF GUBERNIA AND UYEZDEDUCATION DEPARTMENTS, NOVEMBER 3, 1920....... 
. 
 DRAFT RESOLUTION ON “THE TASKS OF THE TRADE UNIONS,AND THE METHODS OF THEIR ACCOMPLISHMENT”....... 
 ON THE STRUGGLE WITHIN THE ITALIAN SOCIALIST PARTY . 
. 
 False Talk on Freedom ( Instead of an Epilogue ).... 
 SPEECH AT A JOINT PLENUM OF THE MOSCOW SOVIET OF WORKERS’, PEASANTS’ AND RED ARMY DEPUTIES, THE MOSCOWCOMMITTEE OF THE R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) AND THE MOSCOW CITY TRADE UNION COUNCIL, DEDICATED TO THE THIRD ANNIVERSARY OFTHE OCTOBER REVOLUTION, NOVEMBER 6, 1920....... 
. 
 TELEGRAM TO J . 
 V. 
 STALIN, NOVEMBER 13, 1920 ....... 
 THESES ON PRODUCTION PROPAGANDA . 
 Rough Draft .... 
. 
 EXTRACT DIRECT -LINE TALK BETWEEN V . 
 I. 
 LENIN AND J. 
 V. 
 STALIN ...................... 
 OUR FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC POSITION AND THE TASKS OF THE PARTY . 
 Speech Delivered to the Moscow Gubernia Confer-ence of the R . 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
), November 21, 1920 ......... SPEECH DELIVERED AT THE MOSCOW GUBERNIA CONFERENCE OF THE R . 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) ON ELECTIONS TO THE MOSCOW COMMITTEE, NOVEMBER 21, 1920 ................... 
 SPEECH DELIVERED AT A CONFERENCE OF FACTORY TRADEUNION COMMITTEES OF MOSCOW ENTERPRISES OF THE PRINTING AND PUBLISHING INDUSTRY, NOVEMBER 25, 1920. 
 Brief News -paper Report .....................316 318 334 339 340 362 363 374 377 391 397 403404 407 408 427 429 SPEECH DELIVERED AT A MEETING OF CELLS’ SECRETARIES OF THE MOSCOW ORGANISATION OF THE R . 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
), NOVEMBER 26, 1920. 
 Newspaper Report ................ 
. 
 SPEECH DELIVERED AT A GENERAL MEETING OF COMMUNISTSOF ZAMOSKVORECHYE DISTRICT, MOSCOW, NOVEMBER 29, 1920. 
 Brief Newspaper Report ................ 
. 
 Concluding Remarks ................ 
 TELEGRAM TO THE CHAIRMAN OF THE REVOLUTIONARYMILITARY COMMITTEE OF ARMENIA............ SPEECH DELIVERED AT A MEETING OF ACTIVISTS OF THEMOSCOW ORGANISATION OF THE R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
), DECEMBER 6, 1920 . 
. 
 MESSAGE OF GREETINGS TO THE ALL-RUSSIA CONFERENCE OF GUBERNIA DEPARTMENTS FOR WORK AMONG WOMEN . 
 Tele-phone Message ..................... THE EIGHTH ALL-RUSSIA CONGRESS OF SOVIETS, Decem-ber 22-29, 1920 ..................... 1. 
REPORT ON CONCESSIONS DELIVERED TO THE R . 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) GROUP AT THE EIGHTH CONGRESS OF SOVIETS, DECEM-BER 21 ...................... 
 2. 
REPORT ON THE WORK OF THE COUNCIL OF PEOPLE’SCOMMISSARS, DECEMBER 22............. 
. 
 3. 
REPLY TO THE DEBATE ON THE REPORT ON THE WORKOF THE COUNCIL OF PEOPLE’S COMMISSARS, DECEMBER 23 4. 
SPEECH DELIVERED AT A MEETING OF THE R . 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) GROUP OF THE EIGHTH CONGRESS OF SOVIETS, DECEM-BER 24...................... 
 5. 
DRAFT RESOLUTION OF THE EIGHTH CONGRESS OF SOVIETSON THE REPORT ON ELECTRIFICATION......... 6. 
DRAFT RESOLUTION OF THE R . 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) GROUP OF THE EIGHTH CONGRESS OF SOVIETS ............ LETTER TO THE WORKERS OF RED PRESNYA DISTRICT OF MOS-COW, DECEMBER 25, 1920................ 
 Notes ........................ The Life and Work of V . 
 I. 
 Lenin . 
 Outstanding Dates .... 
 ILLUSTRATIONS V. 
 I. 
 Lenin, May 1920 ................ 
. 
 The first page of V . 
 I. 
 Lenin’s manuscript “ Left-Wing ” Communism—An Infantile Disorder , April -May 1920 .... 
. 
430 434 435 437 438 460 461 463 487519 525 532534 535 537 587 16-17 19 PREFACE Volume 31 contains Lenin’s writings of the period between April and December 1920, during the conclusive defeat ofthe interventionists’ basic forces in the war against the White Poles and Wrangel, the Entente’s last puppets. 
 The bulk of the volume is made up of writings dealing with the defence of the Soviet Republic, the tasks of social-ist construction, and problems of the international com-munist movement. 
 The volume includes “ Left-Wing ” Communism—an In-fantile Disorder in which—from the experience of the history of Bolshevism, the three Russian revolutions,and the first years of the Soviet state—Lenin furtherdeveloped the theory of the proletarian revolution andthe dictatorship of the proletariat, set forth the stra-tegy and the tactics of Leninism, and revealed the inter-national significance of the Great October Socialist Revo-lution and the revolutionary experience of the BolshevikParty. 
 Lenin showed that international opportunism wasthe chief enemy within the working-class movement, brandedthe Second International’s leaders as accomplices in theimperialists’ banditry, and subjected to an exhaustive criticism the anti-Marxist sectarian tactics of the “Left-wing” Communists in the international working-classmovement. 
 A considerable part of the volume consists of documents pertaining to preparations for the Second Congress of theCommunist International, as well as Lenin’s reports and speeches to the Congress. 
 Among these are: “Preliminary Draft Theses on the National and the Colonial Questions”,Preliminary Draft Theses on the Agrarian Question”, “Theses on the Fundamental Tasks of the Second Congress of the Communist International”, “The Terms of Admission into the Communist International”, “Report on the Inter-national Situation and the Fundamental Tasks of the Com-munist International, July 19, 1920” and others. 
 Thesedocuments substantiated the programme and the organisa-tional and tactical principles of the world communistmovement. 
 The documents: “Letter to the Austrian Communists”, “Let-ter to the German and the French Workers. 
 Regardingthe Discussion on the Second Congress of the CommunistInternational”. 
 “On the Struggle Within the Italian So-cialist Party” reflect the struggle waged by Lenin for theimplementation of the Comintern’s fundamental decisions in the world working-class movement. 
 In speeches on international and home situation delivered at the Ninth All-Russia Conference of the Russian Com-munist Party (Bolsheviks), the Moscow Gubernia Con-ference, and trade union congresses, Lenin unmasked theEntente’s new plan to strangle Soviet Russia with the aid of bourgeois-landowner Poland and Wrangel, and called upon the working class and the working masses to bendevery effort to organise for victory over the intervention-ists, and summed up the Red Army’s successes in smashingthe military forces of Wrangel and bourgeois-landownerPoland. 
 A group of documents, viz. 
, “Report on Concessions Delivered to the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) Group at the Eighth Congressof Soviets, December 21, 1920”, “Report on the Work ofthe Council of People’s Commissars, December 22, 1920”,“Draft Resolution of the Eighth Congress of Soviets onthe Report on Electrification” and others deal with ques-tions of state and economic construction and substantiate the part to be played by electrification in the restorationand socialist development of the national economy. 
 In the draft resolution for the Proletcult Congress, en-titled “On Proletarian Culture”, and in “Speech Deliveredat an All-Russia Conference of Political Education Workers of Gubernia and Uyezd Education Departments, Novem-ber 3, 1920” Lenin criticised Proletcult’s distortion of theParty line in the sphere of culture, showed the role of the Party and the proletarian state in building up a socialist culture, set forth the Marxist attitude towards the finest achievements of human thought and culture, and defined the tasks confronting art and education in the strugglefor the consolidation of the proletariat’s dictatorship. 
 In his speech “The Tasks of the Youth Leagues”, deliv-ered at the Third All-Russia Congress of the Russian YoungCommunist League on October 2, 1920, Lenin named the fundamental task confronting the League—the commu-nist upbringing of the rising generation, revealed the closelinks between that work and the struggle waged by theproletariat and all working people to build up a communistsociety, and formulated the principles of communistmorality. 
 This volume contains twenty-one documents first pub-lished in the Fourth (Russian) Edition of the Collected Works . 
 In his “Speech to Men of the Red Army Leaving for the Polish Front, May 5, 1920”, and in his “Speech at anEnlarged Conference of Workers and Red Army Men inRogozhsko-Simonovsky District of Moscow, May 13, 1920” Lenin called upon the workers and Red Army men to spare no effort to bring about the defeat of the enemy. 
 The documents, “To the Indian Revolutionary Associa-tion”, “Reply to a Letter from the Joint Provisional Com-mittee for the Communist Party of Britain”, “ArticleTwenty of the Terms of Admission into the Communist International”—all deal with problems of the world com-munist movement. 
 A number of documents: “Speech at a Meeting Dedicated to the Laying of the Foundation Stone of a Monument toLiberated Labour, May 1, 1920”, “To the Poor Peasantsof the Ukraine”, “Telegram to the Soviet Government of the Ukraine and the General Headquarters of the Southern Front”, “Speech Delivered at a Meeting of Cells’ Secre-taries of the Moscow Organisation of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
), No-vember 26, 1920”, “Concluding Remarks” to the reportat a general meeting of Communists of ZamoskvorechyeDistrict, November 29, 1920, “Telegram to the Chairman of the Revolutionary Military Committee of Armenia” have as their subject the tasks set by the rehabilitationand development of the national economy. 
 The following documents were published for the first time in the Fourth (Russian) Edition of the Collected Works : “Draft Resolution on ‘The Tasks of the Trade Unions, and the Methods of Their Accomplishment’” and “Speech Deliveredat the Moscow Gubernia Conference of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) onElections to the Moscow Committee, November 21, 1920”. 
These deal with problems of Party and trade union work,and the foreign policy of the Soviet Government. 
 V. 
 I. 
 L E N I N May 1920 “LEF T-WIN G” COMMUNIS M— AN INFANTIL E DISORD ER*1 Written in April-May 1920 Published in pamphlet Published according to the text of form, in June 1920 the pamphlet, as checked against the manuscript *Revised translation by Julius Katzer “LEFT-WING ” COMMUNISM — AN INFANTILE DISORDER *1 Written in April-May 1920 Published in pamphlet Published according to the text of form, in June 1920 the pamphlet, as checked against the manuscript *Revised translation by Julius Katzer The first page of V. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s manuscript “Left-Wing ” Communism—an Infantile Disorder , April-May 1920 Reduced The first page of V. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s manuscript “Left-Wing ” Communism—an Infantile Disorder , April-May 1920 Reduced I IN WHAT SENSE WE CAN SPEAK OF THE INTERNATIONAL SIGNIFICANCE OF THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION In the first months after the proletariat in Russia had won political power (October 25 [November 7], 1917), it might have seemed that the enormous difference between backward Russia and the advanced countries of WesternEurope would lead to the proletarian revolution in thelatter countries bearing very little resemblance to ours. 
We now possess quite considerable international experience,which shows very definitely that certain fundamental fea-tures of our revolution have a significance that is not local, or peculiarly national, or Russian alone, but international. 
I am not speaking here of international significance inthe broad sense of the term: not merely several but all theprimary features of our revolution, and many of its second-ary features, are of international significance in the mean-ing of its effect on all countries. 
 I am speaking of it in the narrowest sense of the word, taking international signif-icance to mean the international validity or the historicalinevitability of a repetition, on an international scale,of what has taken place in our country. 
 It must be admittedthat certain fundamental features of our revolution do possess that significance. 
 It would, of course, be grossly erroneous to exaggerate this truth and to extend it beyond certain fundamentalfeatures of our revolution. 
 It would also be erroneous tolose sight of the fact that, soon after the victory of theproletarian revolution in at least one of the advanced countries, a sharp change will probably come about: Russia will cease to be the model and will once again become abackward country (in the “Soviet” and the socialist sense). 
 At the present moment in history, however, it is the Russian model that reveals to all countries something —and something highly significant—of their near and in-evitable future. 
 Advanced workers in all lands have longrealised this; more often than not, they have grasped itwith their revolutionary class instinct rather than realisedit. 
 Herein lies the international “significance” (in the nar-row sense of the word) of Soviet power, and of the funda-mentals of Bolshevik theory and tactics. 
 The “revolution-ary” leaders of the Second International, such as Kautskyin Germany and Otto Bauer and Friedrich Adler in Aus-tria, have failed to understand this, which is why theyhave proved to be reactionaries and advocates of the worstkind of opportunism and social treachery. 
 Incidentally, the anonymous pamphlet entitled The World Revolution (Weltrevolution ), which appeared in Vienna in 1919 ( Sozia-listische Bücherei , Heft 11; Ignaz Brand *), very clearly reveals their entire thinking and their entire range of ideas,or, rather, the full extent of their stupidity, pedantry, base-ness and betrayal of working-class interests—and that, moreover, under the guise of “defending” the idea of “world revolution”. 
 We shall, however, deal with this pamphlet in greater detail some other time. 
 We shall here note only one morepoint: in bygone days, when he was still a Marxist andnot a renegade, Kautsky, dealing with the question as an historian, foresaw the possibility of a situation arising in which the revolutionary spirit of the Russian proletariatwould provide a model to Western Europe. 
 This was in 1902,when Kautsky wrote an article for the revolutionary Iskra , 2 entitled “The Slavs and Revolution”. 
 Here is what he wrote in the article: “At the present time [in contrast with 1848] ** it would seem that not only have the Slavs entered the ranks of the revolutionary nations, but that the centre of revolutionary thought and revolutionary actionis shifting more and more to the Slavs. 
 The revolutionary centre isshifting from the West to the East. 
 In the first half of the nineteenth *Ignaz Brand, Socialist Library , Vol. 
 11. 
— Ed. 
 **Interpolations in brackets within quotations are by Lenin, unless otherwise indicated. 
— Ed. 
 century it was located in France, at times in England. 
 In 1848 Ger-many too joined the ranks of the revolutionary nations.... 
 The new century has begun with events which suggest the idea that we are approaching a further shift of the revolutionary centre, namely, to Russia.... 
 Russia, which has borrowed so much revolutionary initia-tive from the West, is now perhaps herself ready to serve the West as a source of revolutionary energy. 
 The Russian revolutionary move-ment that is now flaring up will perhaps prove to be the most potent means of exorcising the spirit of flabby philistinism and coldly cal-culating politics that is beginning to spread in our midst, and it may cause the fighting spirit and the passionate devotion to our great ideals to flare up again. 
 To Western Europe, Russia has long ceased to be a bulwark of reaction and absolutism. 
 I think the reverse is true today. 
 Western Europe is becoming Russia’s bulwark of reaction and absolutism.... 
 The Russian revolutionaries might perhaps have coped with the tsar long ago had they not been compelled at the same time to fight his ally—European capital. 
 Let us hope that this time they will succeed in coping with both enemies, and that the new ‘Holy Alliance’ will collapse more rapidly than its predecessors did. 
 How-ever the present struggle in Russia may end, the blood and suffering of the martyrs whom, unfortunately, it will produce in too great numbers, will not have been in vain. 
 They will nourish the shoots of social revolution throughout the civilised world and make them grow more luxuriantly and rapidly. 
 In 1848 the Slavs were a killing frost which blighted the flowers of the people’s spring. 
 Perhaps they are now destined to be the storm that will break the ice of reaction and irresistibly bring with it a new and happy spring for the nations” (Karl Kautsky, “The Slavs and Revolution”, Iskra , Russian Social-Democratic revolutiodary newspaper, No. 
 18, March 10, 1902). 
 How well Karl Kautsky wrote eighteen years ago! II AN ESSENTIAL CONDITION OF THE BOLSHEVIKS’ SUCCESS It is, I think, almost universally realised at present that the Bolsheviks could not have retained power for two anda half months, let alone two and a half years, without themost rigorous and truly iron discipline in our Party, or without the fullest and unreserved support from the entire mass of the working class, that is, from all thinking, honest,devoted and influential elements in it, capable of leadingthe backward strata or carrying the latter along with them. 
 The dictatorship of the proletariat means a most deter-mined and most ruthless war waged by the new class against a more powerful enemy, the bourgeoisie, whose resistance is increased tenfold by their overthrow (even if only in a single country), and whose power lies, not only in the strength of international capital, the strength and dura-bility of their international connections, but also in theforce of habit , in the strength of small-scale production . 
 Unfortunately, small-scale production is still widespreadin the world, and small-scale production engenders capital-ism and the bourgeoisie continuously, daily, hourly, spon-taneously, and on a mass scale. 
 All these reasons make thedictatorship of the proletariat necessary, and victory overthe bourgeoisie is impossible without a long, stubborn anddesperate life-and-death struggle which calls for tenacity,discipline, and a single and inflexible will. 
 I repeat: the experience of the victorious dictatorship of the proletariat in Russia has clearly shown even to thosewho are incapable of thinking or have had no occasion togive thought to the matter that absolute centralisation andrigorous discipline of the proletariat are an essential con-dition of victory over the bourgeoisie. 
 This is often dwelt on. 
 However, not nearly enough thought is given to what it means, and under what conditionsit is possible. 
 Would it not be better if the salutationsaddressed to the Soviets and the Bolsheviks were more frequently accompanied by a profound analysis of the reasons why the Bolsheviks have been able to build up the discipline needed by the revolutionary proletariat? As a current of political thought and as a political party, Bolshevism has existed since 1903. 
 Only the history ofBolshevism during the entire period of its existence can satisfactorily explain why it has been able to build upand maintain, under most difficult conditions, the iron discipline needed for the victory of the proletariat. 
 The first questions to arise are: how is the discipline of the proletariat’s revolutionary party maintained? Howis it tested? How is it reinforced? First, by the class-con-sciousness of the proletarian vanguard and by its devotionto the revolution, by its tenacity, self-sacrifice and heroism. 
 Second, by its ability to link up, maintain the closest contact, and—if you wish—merge, in certain measure,with the broadest masses of the working people—primarily with the proletariat, but also with the non-proletarian masses of working people. 
 Third, by the correctness of the political leadership exercised by this vanguard, by the correctness of its political strategy and tactics, providedthe broad masses have seen, from their own experience , that they are correct. 
 Without these conditions, disciplinein a revolutionary party really capable of being the partyof the advanced class, whose mission it is to overthrow the bourgeoisie and transform the whole of society, cannot be achieved. 
 Without these conditions, all attempts toestablish discipline inevitably fall flat and end up in phrase-mongering and clowning. 
 On the other hand, these con-ditions cannot emerge at once. 
 They are created only byprolonged effort and hard-won experience. 
 Their creation is facilitated by a correct revolutionary theory, which, in its turn, is not a dogma, but assumes final shape onlyin close connection with the practical activity of a trulymass and truly revolutionary movement. 
 The fact that, in 1917-20, Bolshevism was able, under unprecedentedly difficult conditions, to build up and suc-cessfully maintain the strictest centralisation and iron discipline was due simply to a number of historical pecu-liarities of Russia. 
 On the one hand, Bolshevism arose in 1903 on a very firm foundation of Marxist theory. 
 The correctness of thisrevolutionary theory, and of it alone, has been proved, not only by world experience throughout the nineteenth cen-tury, but especially by the experience of the seekings andvacillations, the errors and disappointments of revolutionarythought in Russia. 
 For about half a century—approxi-mately from the forties to the nineties of the last century—progressive thought in Russia, oppressed by a most brutal and reactionary tsarism, sought eagerly for a correct rev-olutionary theory, and followed with the utmost diligenceand thoroughness each and every “last word” in this spherein Europe and America. 
 Russia achieved Marxism—theonly correct revolutionary theory—through the agony she experienced in the course of half a century of unparalleled torment and sacrifice, of unparalleled revolutionary hero-ism, incredible energy, devoted searching, study, practicaltrial, disappointment, verification, and comparison with European experience. 
 Thanks to the political emigration caused by tsarism, revolutionary Russia, in the second half of the nineteenth century, acquired a wealth of international links and excellent information on the formsand theories of the world revolutionary movement, such asno other country possessed. 
 On the other hand, Bolshevism, which had arisen on this granite foundation of theory, went through fifteen years of practical history (1903-17) unequalled anywhere in the world in its wealth of experience. 
 During those fifteen years, no othercountry knew anything even approximating to that revo-lutionary experience, that rapid and varied succession ofdifferent forms of the movement—legal and illegal, peacefuland stormy, underground and open, local circles and mass movements, and parliamentary and terrorist forms. 
 In no other country has there been concentrated, in so brief a period,such a wealth of forms, shades, and methods of struggle ofall classes of modern society, a struggle which, owing tothe backwardness of the country and the severity of thetsarist yoke, matured with exceptional rapidity, and assimilated most eagerly and successfully the appropriate “last word” of American and European political experience. 
 III THE PRINCIPAL STAGES IN THE HISTORY OF BOLSHEVISM The years of preparation for revolution (1903-05). 
 The approach of a great storm was sensed everywhere. 
 Allclasses were in a state of ferment and preparation. 
 Abroad,the press of the political exiles discussed the theoreticalaspects of all the fundamental problems of the revolution. 
 Representatives of the three main classes, of the three principal political trends—the liberal-bourgeois, the petty-bourgeois-democratic (concealed behind “social-democratic”and “social-revolutionary” labels 3), and the proletarian-revolutionary—anticipated and prepared the impendingopen class struggle by waging a most bitter struggle on issues of programme and tactics. 
 All the issues on which the masses waged an armed struggle in 1905-07 and 1917-20can (and should) be studied, in their embryonic form, in the press of the period. 
 Among these three main trends there were, of course, a host of intermediate, transitional or half-hearted forms. 
 It would be more correct to say that those political and ideological trends which were genuinelyof a class nature crystallised in the struggle of press organs,parties, factions and groups; the classes were forging therequisite political and ideological weapons for the impendingbattles. 
 The years of revolution (1905-07). 
 All classes came out into the open. 
 All programmatical and tactical views weretested by the action of the masses. 
 In its extent and acute-ness, the strike struggle had no parallel anywhere in theworld. 
 The economic strike developed into a political strike,and the latter into insurrection. 
 The relations between the proletariat, as the leader, and the vacillating and unstable peasantry, as the led, were tested in practice. 
 The Sovietform of organisation came into being in the spontaneousdevelopment of the struggle. 
 The controversies of thatperiod over the significance of the Soviets anticipated thegreat struggle of 1917-20. 
 The alternation of parliamentary and non-parliamentary forms of struggle, of the tactics of boycotting parliament and that of participating in par-liament, of legal and illegal forms of struggle, and likewisetheir interrelations and connections—all this was markedby an extraordinary wealth of content. 
 As for teaching thefundamentals of political science to masses and leaders, to classes and parties alike, each month of this period was equivalent to an entire year of “peaceful” and “constitu-tional” development. 
 Without the “dress rehearsal” of 1905,the victory of the October Revolution in 1917 would havebeen impossible. 
 The years of reaction (1907-10). 
 Tsarism was victorious. 
 All the revolutionary and opposition parties were smashed. 
 Depression, demoralisation, splits, discord, defection, andpornography took the place of politics. 
 There was an evergreater drift towards philosophical idealism; mysticismbecame the garb of counter-revolutionary sentiments. 
 Atthe same time, however, it was this great defeat that taught the revolutionary parties and the revolutionary class a real and very useful lesson, a lesson in historical dialectics,a lesson in an understanding of the political struggle, and in the art and science of waging that struggle. 
 It is at mo-ments of need that one learns who one’s friends are. 
 Defeated armies learn their lesson. 
 Victorious tsarism was compelled to speed up the des-truction of the remnants of the pre-bourgeois, patriarchalmode of life in Russia. 
 The country’s development alongbourgeois lines proceeded apace. 
 Illusions that stood out-side and above class distinctions, illusions concerning the possibility of avoiding capitalism, were scattered to the winds. 
 The class struggle manifested itself in a quite newand more distinct way. 
 The revolutionary parties had to complete their educa-tion. 
 They were learning how to attack. 
 Now they had torealise that such knowledge must be supplemented with the knowledge of how to retreat in good order. 
 They had to realise—and it is from bitter experience that the revo-lutionary class learns to realise this—that victory is im-possible unless one has learned how to attack and retreatproperly. 
 Of all the defeated opposition and revolutionaryparties, the Bolsheviks effected the most orderly retreat, with the least loss to their “army”, with its core best pre-served, with the least significant splits (in point of depthand incurability), with the least demoralisation, and inthe best condition to resume work on the broadest scaleand in the most correct and energetic manner. 
 The Bolshe-viks achieved this only because they ruthlessly exposed and expelled the revolutionary phrase-mongers, those who did not wish to understand that one had to retreat, thatone had to know how to retreat, and that one had absolute-ly to learn how to work legally in the most reactionaryof parliaments, in the most reactionary of trade unions,co-operative and insurance societies and similar organisa-tions. 
 The years of revival (1910-14). 
 At first progress was incredibly slow, then, following the Lena events of 1912,it became somewhat more rapid. 
 Overcoming unprecedenteddifficulties, the Bolsheviks thrust back the Mensheviks,whose role as bourgeois agents in the working-class move-ment was clearly realised by the entire bourgeoisie after 1905, and whom the bourgeoisie therefore supported in athousand ways against the Bolsheviks. 
 But the Bolsheviks would never have succeeded in doing this had they not followed the correct tactics of combining illegal work with the utilisation of “legal opportunities”, which they made a point of doing. 
 In the elections to the arch-reactionary Duma,the Bolsheviks won the full support of the worker curia. 
 The First Imperialist World War (1914-17). 
 Legal parlia-mentarianism, with an extremely reactionary “parliament”,rendered most useful service to the Bolsheviks, the party of the revolutionary proletariat. 
 The Bolshevik deputies were exiled to Siberia. 
 4 All shades of social-imperialism social-chauvinism, social-patriotism, inconsistent and con-sistent internationalism, pacifism, and the revolutionaryrepudiation of pacifist illusions found full expression inthe Russian emigre press. 
 The learned fools and the old women of the Second International, who had arrogantly and contemptuously turned up their noses at the abundanceof “factions” in the Russian socialist movement and at thebitter struggle they were waging among themselves, wereunable—when the war deprived them of their vaunted“legality” in all the advanced countries—to organise any-thing even approximating such a free (illegal) interchange of views and such a free (illegal) evolution of correct viewsas the Russian revolutionaries did in Switzerland and ina number of other countries. 
 That was why both the avowedsocial-patriots and the “Kautskyites” of all countries provedto be the worst traitors to the proletariat. 
 One of the prin-cipal reasons why Bolshevism was able to achieve victory in 1917-20 was that, since the end of 1914, it has been ruth-lessly exposing the baseness and vileness of social-chauv-inism and “Kautskyism” (to which Longuetism 5 in France, the views of the Fabians6 and the leaders of the Independ-ent Labour Party7 in Britain, of Turati in Italy, etc. 
, cor-respond), the masses later becoming more and more con-vinced, from their own experience, of the correctness of theBolshevik views. 
 The second revolution in Russia (February to October 1917). 
 Tsarism’s senility and obsoleteness had (with theaid of the blows and hardships of a most agonising war) created an incredibly destructive force directed against it. 
 Within a few days Russia was transformed into a demo-cratic bourgeois republic, freer—in war conditions—than any other country in the world. 
 The leaders of the oppo-sition and revolutionary parties began to set up a govern-ment, just as is done in the most “strictly parliamentary” republics-the fact that a man had been a leader of anopposition party in parliament—even in a most reactionaryparliament— facilitated his subsequent role in the revo-lution. 
 In a few weeks the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolution-aries thoroughly assimilated all the methods and manners, the arguments and sophistries of the European heroes ofthe Second International, of the ministerialists 8 and other opportunist riff-raff. 
 Everything we now read about theScheidemanns and Noskes, about Kautsky and Hilferding,Renner and Austerlitz, Otto Bauer and Fritz Adler, Turati and Longuet, about the Fabians and the leaders of the Independent Labour Party of Britain—all this seems tous (and indeed is) a dreary repetition, a reiteration, ofan old and familiar refrain. 
 We have already witnessed allthis in the instance of the Mensheviks. 
 As history wouldhave it, the opportunists of a backward country became the forerunners of the opportunists in a number of advanced countries. 
 If the heroes of the Second International have all gone bankrupt and have disgraced themselves over the questionof the significance and role of the Soviets and Soviet rule;if the leaders of the three very important parties which have now left the Second International (namely, the German Independent Social-Democratic Party, 9 the French Longuet-ists and the British Independent Labour Party) have dis-graced themselves and become entangled in this questionin a most “telling” fashion; if they have all shown them-selves slaves to the prejudices of petty-bourgeois democracy (fully in the spirit of the petty-bourgeois of 1848 who called themselves “Social-Democrats”)—then we can only say thatwe have already witnessed all this in the instance of the Mensheviks. 
 As history would have it, the Soviets cameinto being in Russia in 1905; from February to October 1917they were turned to a false use by the Mensheviks, who went bankrupt because of their inability to understand the role and significance of the Soviets; today the idea of Sovietpower has emerged throughout the world and is spreading among the proletariat of all countries with extraordinary speed. 
 Like our Mensheviks, the old heroes of the Second International are everywhere going bankrupt, because they are incapable of understanding the role and significanceof the Soviets. 
 Experience has proved that, on certain veryimportant questions of the proletarian revolution, all coun-tries will inevitably have to do what Russia has done. 
 Despite views that are today often to be met with in Europe and America, the Bolsheviks began their victorious struggle against the parliamentary and (in fact) bourgeois re-public and against the Mensheviks in a very cautious man-ner, and the preparations they made for it were by no meanssimple. 
 At the beginning of the period mentioned, we didnot call for the overthrow of the government but explained that it was impossible to overthrow it without first chang-ing the composition and the temper of the Soviets. 
 We didnot proclaim a boycott of the bourgeois parliament, theConstituent Assembly, but said—and following the April(1917) Conference of our Party began to state officially inthe name of the Party—that a bourgeois republic with a Constituent Assembly would be better than a bourgeois republic without a Constituent Assembly, but that a “work-ers’ and peasants’” republic, a Soviet republic, would bebetter than any bourgeois-democratic, parliamentaryrepublic. 
 Without such thorough, circumspect and longpreparations, we could not have achieved victory in October 1917, or have consolidated that victory. 
 IV THE STRUGGLE AGAINST WHICH ENEMIES WITHIN THE WORKING-CLASS MOVEMENT HELPED BOLSHEVISM DEVELOP, GAIN STRENGTH, AND BECOME STEELED First and foremost, the struggle against opportunism, which in 1914 definitely developed into social-chauvinismand definitely sided with the bourgeoisie, against the pro-letariat. 
 Naturally, this was Bolshevism’s principal enemy within the working-class movement. 
 It still remains the principal enemy on an international scale. 
 The Bolshevikshave been devoting the greatest attention to this enemy. 
 This aspect of Bolshevik activities is now fairly well known abroad too. 
 It was, however, different with Bolshevism’s other enemy within the working-class movement. 
 Little is known inother countries of the fact that Bolshevism took shape,developed and became steeled in the long years of struggleagainst petty-bourgeois revolutionism , which smacks of anarchism, or borrows something from the latter and, in all essential matters, does not measure up to the conditions and requirements of a consistently proletarian class strug-gle. 
 Marxist theory has established—and the experienceof all European revolutions and revolutionary movementshas fully confirmed—that the petty proprietor, the smallmaster (a social type existing on a very extensive and even mass scale in many European countries), who, under capi-talism, always suffers oppression and very frequently a mostacute and rapid deterioration in his conditions of life, andeven ruin, easily goes to revolutionary extremes, but isincapable of perseverance, organisation, discipline andsteadfastness. 
 A petty bourgeois driven to frenzy by the horrors of capitalism is a social phenomenon which, like anarchism, is characteristic of all capitalist countries. 
 Theinstability of such revolutionism, its barrenness, and its ten-dency to turn rapidly into submission, apathy, phantasms,and even a frenzied infatuation with one bourgeois fad oranother—all this is common knowledge. 
 However, a theo-retical or abstract recognition of these truths does not at all rid revolutionary parties of old errors, which alwayscrop up at unexpected occasions, in somewhat new forms,in a hitherto unfamiliar garb or surroundings, in anunusual—a more or less unusual—situation. 
 Anarchism was not infrequently a kind of penalty for the opportunist sins of the working-class movement. 
 The two monstrosities complemented each other. 
 And if inRussia—despite the more petty-bourgeois composition ofher population as compared with the other Europeancountries—anarchism’s influence was negligible during thetwo revolutions (of 1905 and 1917) and the preparations for them, this should no doubt stand partly to the credit of Bolshevism, which has always waged a most ruthless anduncompromising struggle against opportunism. 
 I say “partly”, since of still greater importance in weakening anarch-ism’s influence in Russia was the circumstance that in the past (the seventies of the nineteenth century) it was able to develop inordinately and to reveal its absolute erroneous-ness, its unfitness to serve the revolutionary class as a guid-ing theory. 
 When it came into being in 1903, Bolshevism took over the tradition of a ruthless struggle against petty-bourgeois, semi-anarchist (or dilettante-anarchist) revolutionism, a tradition which had always existed in revolutionary So-cial-Democracy and had become particularly strong in ourcountry during the years 1900-03, when the foundationsfor a mass party of the revolutionary proletariat were beinglaid in Russia. 
 Bolshevism took over and carried on the struggle against a party which, more than any other, expressed the tendencies of petty-bourgeois revolutionism,namely, the “Socialist-Revolutionary” Party, and wagedthat struggle on three main issues. 
 First, that party, whichrejected Marxism, stubbornly refused (or, it might be morecorrect to say: was unable) to understand the need for a strictly objective appraisal of the class forces and their alignment, before taking any political action. 
 Second, thisparty considered itself particularly “revolutionary”, or“Left”, because of its recognition of individual terrorism,assassination—something that we Marxists emphaticallyrejected. 
 It was, of course, only on grounds of expediency that we rejected individual terrorism, whereas people who were capable of condemning “on principle” the terror ofthe Great French Revolution, or, in general, the terroremployed by a victorious revolutionary party which isbesieged by the bourgeoisie of the whole world, were ridi-culed and laughed to scorn by Plekhanov in 1900-03, when he was a Marxist and a revolutionary. 
 Third, the “Social-ist-Revolutionaries” thought it very “Left” to sneer atthe comparatively insignificant opportunist sins of theGerman Social-Democratic Party, while they themselvesimitated the extreme opportunists of that party, for ex-ample, on the agrarian question, or on the question of the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 History, incidentally, has now confirmed on a vast and world-wide scale the opinion we have always advocated, namely, that German revolutionary Social-Democracy (note that as far back as 1900-03 Plekhanov demanded Bernstein’s expulsion from the Party, and in 1913 the Bol-sheviks, always continuing this tradition, exposed Legien’s10 baseness, vileness and treachery) came closest to being the party the revolutionary proletariat needs in order to achievevictory. 
 Today, in 1920, after all the ignominious failuresand crises of the war period and the early post-war years, it can be plainly seen that, of all the Western parties, the German revolutionary Social-Democrats produced the finestleaders, and recovered and gained new strength more rap-idly than the others did. 
 This may be seen in the instancesboth of the Spartacists 11 and the Left, proletarian wing of the Independent Social-Democratic Party of Germany, which is waging an incessant struggle against the oppor-tunism and spinelessness of the Kautskys, Hilferdings,Ledebours and Crispiens. 
 If we now cast a glance to takein a complete historical period, namely, from the ParisCommune to the first Socialist Soviet Republic, we shallfind that Marxism’s attitude to anarchism in general stands out most definitely and unmistakably. 
 In the final analysis, Marxism proved to be correct, and although the anarchistsrightly pointed to the opportunist views on the state prev-alent among most of the socialist parties, it must be said,first, that this opportunism was connected with the dis-tortion, and even deliberate suppression, of Marx’s views on the state (in my book, The State and Revolution , I point-ed out that for thirty-six years, from 1875 to 1911, Bebelwithheld a letter by Engels, 12 which very clearly, vividly, bluntly and definitively exposed the opportunism of thecurrent Social-Democratic views on the state); second, thatthe rectification of these opportunist views, and the recog-nition of Soviet power and its superiority to bourgeois parliamentary democracy proceeded most rapidly and ex-tensively among those trends in the socialist parties ofEurope and America that were most Marxist. 
 The struggle that Bolshevism waged against “Left” de-viations within its own Party assumed particularly large proportions on two occasions: in 1908, on the question of whether or not to participate in a most reactionary “par-liament” and in the legal workers’ societies, which were being restricted by most reactionary laws; and again in 1918 (the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk13), on the question of whether one “compromise” or another was permissible. 
 In 1908 the “Left” Bolsheviks were expelled from our Party for stubbornly refusing to understand the necessityof participating in a most reactionary “parliament”. 
 14 The “Lefts”—among whom there were many splendid revolu-tionaries who subsequently were (and still are) commend-able members of the Communist Party—based themselves particularly on the successful experience of the 1905 boy-cott. 
 When, in August 1905, the tsar proclaimed the con-vocation of a consultative “parliament”, 15 the Bolsheviks called for its boycott, in the teeth of all the oppositionparties and the Mensheviks, and the “parliament” was in fact swept away by the revolution of October 1905. 
 16 The boycott proved correct at the time, not because non-participation in reactionary parliaments is correct in gen-eral, but because we accurately appraised the objectivesituation, which was leading to the rapid development ofthe mass strikes first into a political strike, then into a revolutionary strike, and finally into an uprising. 
 More-over, the struggle centred at that time on the questionof whether the convocation of the first representative as-sembly should be left to the tsar, or an attempt shouldbe made to wrest its convocation from the old regime. 
 Whenthere was not, and could not be, any certainty that the objective situation was of a similar kind, and when there was no certainty of a similar trend and the same rate ofdevelopment, the boycott was no longer correct. 
 The Bolsheviks’ boycott of “parliament” in 1905 enriched the revolutionary proletariat with highly valuable polit-ical experience and showed that, when legal and illegal, parliamentary and non-parliamentary forms of struggle are combined, it is sometimes useful and even essentialto reject parliamentary forms. 
 It would, however, be highlyerroneous to apply this experience blindly, imitativelyand uncritically to other conditions and other situations. 
 The Bolsheviks’ boycott of the Duma in 1906 was a mistake, although a minor and easily remediable one. 
 * The boycott *What applies to individuals also applies—with necessary modi-fications—to politics and parties. 
 It is not he who makes no mistakes of the Duma in 1907, 1908 and subsequent years was a most serious error and difficult to remedy, because, on the one hand, a very rapid rise of the revolutionary tide and its conversion into an uprising was not to be expected, and,on the other hand, the entire historical situation attendantupon the renovation of the bourgeois monarchy called forlegal and illegal activities being combined. 
 Today, whenwe look back at this fully completed historical period, whose connection with subsequent periods has now become quite clear, it becomes most obvious that in 1908-14 theBolsheviks could not have preserved (let alone strengthened and developed) the core of the revolutionary party ofthe proletariat, had they not upheld, in a most strenuousstruggle, the viewpoint that it was obligatory to combine legal and illegal forms of struggle, and that it was oblig-atory to participate even in a most reactionary parliament and in a number of other institutions hemmed in by reac-tionary laws (sick benefit societies, etc. 
). 
 In 1918 things did not reach a split. 
 At that time the “Left” Communists formed only a separate group or “fac-tion” within our Party, and that not for long. 
 In the same year, 1918, the most prominent representatives of “LeftCommunism”, for example, Comrades Radek and Bukharin,openly acknowledged their error. 
 It had seemed to themthat the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk was a compromise withthe imperialists, which was inexcusable on principle and harmful to the party of the revolutionary proletariat. 
 It was indeed a compromise with the imperialists, but it wasa compromise which, under the circumstances, had to be made. 
 Today, when I hear our tactics in signing the Brest-Litovsk Treaty being attacked by the Socialist-Revolution-aries, for instance, or when I hear Comrade Lansbury say, in a conversation with me, “Our British trade union lead-ers say that if it was permissible for the Bolsheviks to com-promise, it is permissible for them to compromise too”,I usually reply by first of all giving a simple and “popular”example: that is intelligent. 
 There are no such men, nor can there be. 
 It is he whose errors are not very grave and who is able to rectify them easily and quickly that is intelligent. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR Imagine that your car is held up by armed bandits. 
 You hand them over your money, passport, revolver and car. 
 In return you are rid of the pleasant company of the bandits. 
 That is unquestionably a compromise. 
 “ Do ut des ” (I “give” you money, fire-arms and a car “so that you give” me the op-portunity to get away from you with a whole skin). 
 It would,however, be difficult to find a sane man who would declaresuch a compromise to be “inadmissible on principle”, or who would call the compromiser an accomplice of the ban-dits (even though the bandits might use the car and the fire-arms for further robberies). 
 Our compromise with the ban-dits of German imperialism was just that kind of com-promise. 
 But when, in 1914-18 and then in 1918-20, the Menshe-viks and Socialist-Revolutionaries in Russia, the Scheide-mannites (and to a large extent the Kautskyites) in Germany,Otto Bauer and Friedrich Adler (to say nothing of theRenners and Co. 
) in Austria, the Renaudels and Longuetsand Co. 
 in France, the Fabians, the Independents and theLabourites in Britain entered into compromises with the bandits of their own bourgeoisie, and sometimes of the “Allied” bourgeoisie, and against the revolutionary pro-letariat of their own countries, all these gentlemen wereactually acting as accomplices in banditry . 
 The conclusion is clear: to reject compromises “on prin-ciple”, to reject the permissibility of compromises in gener-al, no matter of what kind, is childishness, which it is dif-ficult even to consider seriously. 
 A political leader whodesires to be useful to the revolutionary proletariat mustbe able to distinguish concrete cases of compromises that are inexcusable and are an expression of opportunism andtreachery ; he must direct all the force of criticism, the full intensity of merciless exposure and relentless war, against these concrete compromises, and not allow the past masters of “practical” socialism and the parliamentary Jesuits tododge and wriggle out of responsibility by means of dis-quisitions on “compromises in general”. 
 It is in this waythat the “leaders” of the British trade unions, as well as of the Fabian society and the “Independent” Labour Party, dodge responsibility for the treachery they have perpetrated , for having made a compromise that is really tantamount to the worst kind of opportunism, treachery and betrayal. 
 There are different kinds of compromises. 
 One must be able to analyse the situation and the concrete conditionsof each compromise, or of each variety of compromise. 
 Onemust learn to distinguish between a man who has given uphis money and fire-arms to bandits so as to lessen the evilthey can do and to facilitate their capture and execution, and a man who gives his money and fire-arms to bandits so as to share in the loot. 
 In politics this is by no meansalways as elementary as it is in this childishly simple exam-ple. 
 However, anyone who is out to think up for the workerssome kind of recipe that will provide them with cut-and-dried solutions for all contingencies, or promises that the policy of the revolutionary proletariat will never come up against difficult or complex situations, is simply a char-latan. 
 To leave no room for misinterpretation, I shall attempt to outline, if only very briefly, several fundamental rulesfor the analysis of concrete compromises. 
 The party which entered into a compromise with the German imperialists by signing the Treaty of Brest-Litovskhad been evolving its internationalism in practice eversince the end of 1914. 
 It was not afraid to call for the de-feat of the tsarist monarchy and to condemn “defence ofcountry” in a war between two imperialist robbers. 
 The parliamentary representatives of this party preferred exile in Siberia to taking a road leading to ministerial portfoliosin a bourgeois government. 
 The revolution that overthrewtsarism and established a democratic republic put thisparty to a new and tremendous test—it did not enter intoany agreements with its “own” imperialists, but prepared and brought about their overthrow. 
 When it had assumed political power, this party did not leave a vestige of eitherlanded or capitalist ownership. 
 After making public andrepudiating the imperialists’ secret treaties, this partyproposed peace to all nations, and yielded to the violence of the Brest-Litovsk robbers only after the Anglo-French imperialists had torpedoed the conclusion of a peace, and after the Bolsheviks had done everything humanly possibleto hasten the revolution in Germany and other countries. 
 The absolute correctness of this compromise, entered into by such a party in such a situation, is becoming ever clearer and more obvious with every day. 
 The Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries in Russia (like all the leaders of the Second International throughoutthe world, in 1914-20) began with treachery—by directly orindirectly justifying “defence of country”, i. 
e. 
, the defenceof their own predatory bourgeoisie. 
 They continued their treachery by entering into a coalition with the bourgeoisie of their own country, and fighting, together with their own bourgeoisie, against the revolutionary proletariat of theirown country. 
 Their bloc, first with Kerensky and the Cadets,and then with Kolchak and Denikin in Russia—like thebloc of their confrères abroad with the bourgeoisie of their respective countries—was in fact desertion to the side of the bourgeoisie, against the proletariat. 
 From beginningto end, their compromise with the bandits of imperialism meant their becoming accomplices in imperialist banditry. 
 V “LEFT-WING” COMMUNISM IN GERMANY. 
 THE LEADERS, THE PARTY, THE CLASS, THE MASSES The German Communists we must now speak of call themselves, not “Left-wingers” but, if I am not mistaken, an “opposition on principle”. 
17 From what follows below it will, however, be seen that they reveal all the symptomsof the “infantile disorder of Leftism”. 
 Published by the “local group in Frankfurt am Main”, a pamphlet reflecting the point of view of this opposition, and entitled The Split in the Communist Party of Germany (The Spartacus League ) sets forth the substance of this Opposition’s views most saliently, and with the utmostclarity and concision. 
 A few quotations will suffice to ac-quaint the reader with that substance: “The Communist Party is the party of the most determined class struggle.... 
” “...Politically, the transitional period [between capitalism and Socialism]: is one of the proletarian dictatorship.... 
” “...The question arises: who is to exercise this dictatorship: the Communist Party or the proletarian class ? ... Fundamentally , should we strive for a dictatorship of the Communist Party, or for a dictatorship of the proletarian class?...” (All italics as in the original. 
) The author of the pamphlet goes on to accuse the Cen-tral Committee of the Communist Party of Germany ofseeking ways of achieving a coalition with the Independent Social-Democratic Party of Germany , and of raising “ the question of recognising , in principle , all political means ” of struggle, including parliamentarianism, with the solepurpose of concealing its actual and main efforts to forma coalition with the Independents. 
 The pamphlet goes on tosay: “The opposition have chosen another road. 
 They are of the opinion that the question of the rule of the Communist Party and of the dicta-torship of the Party is merely one of tactics. 
 In any case, rule by the Communist Party is the ultimate form of any party rule. 
 Fundamentally , we must work for the dictatorship of the proletarian class. 
 And all the measures of the Party, its organisations, methods of struggle, strategy and tactics should be directed to that end. 
 Accord-ingly, all compromise with other parties, all reversion to parliamentary forms of struggle, which have become historically and politically obsolete, and any policy of manoeuvring and compromise must be emphatically rejected. 
” “Specifically proletarian methods of revolu-tionary struggle must be strongly emphasised. 
 New forms of organi-sation must be created on the widest basis and with the widest scope in order to enlist the most extensive proletarian circles and strata to take part in the revolutionary struggle under the leadership of the Communist Party. 
 A Workers ’ Union , based on factory organisations, should be the rallying point for all revolutionary elements. 
 This should unite all workers who follow the slogan: ‘Get out of the trade unions!’ It is here that the militant proletariat musters its ranks for battle. 
 Recognition of the class struggle, of the Soviet system and of the dictatorship should be sufficient for enrolment. 
 All sub-sequent political education of the fighting masses and their political orientation in the struggle are the task of the Communist Party, which stands outside the Workers’ Union.... 
 “...Consequently, two Communist parties are now arrayed against each other: “One is a party of leaders , which is out to organise the revolution-ary struggle and to direct it from above , accepting compromises and parliamentarianism so as to create a situation enabling it to join a coalition government exercising a dictatorship. 
 “The other is a mass party , which expects an upsurge of the revo-lutionary struggle from below , which knows and applies a single method in this struggle—a method which clearly leads to the goal— and rejects all parliamentary and opportunist methods. 
 That single method is the unconditional overthrow of the bourgeoisie , so as then to set up the proletarian class dictatorship for the accomplishment of socialism.... 
 “... There—the dictatorship of leaders; here—the dictatorship of the masses! That is our slogan. 
” Such are the main features characterising the views of the opposition in the German Communist Party. 
 Any Bolshevik who has consciously participated in the development of Bolshevism since 1903 or has closelyobserved that development will at once say, after readingthese arguments, “What old and familiar rubbish! What‘Left-wing’ childishness!” But let us examine these arguments a little more closely. 
 The mere presentation of the question—“dictatorship of the party or dictatorship of the class; dictatorship (party) of the leaders, or dictatorship (party) of the masses?”— testifies to most incredibly and hopelessly muddled think-ing. 
 These people want to invent something quite out of the ordinary, and, in their effort to be clever, make them-selves ridiculous. 
 It is common knowledge that the massesare divided into classes; that the masses can be contrasted with classes only by contrasting the vast majority in gen-eral, regardless of division according to status in the socialsystem of production, with categories holding a definite status in the social system of production; that as a rule and in most cases—at least in present-day civilised coun-tries—classes are led by political parties; that political parties, as a general rule, are run by more or less stable groups composed of the most authoritative, influential andexperienced members, who are elected to the most respon-sible positions, and are called leaders. 
 All this is elementary. 
 All this is clear and simple. 
 Why replace this with somekind of rigmarole, some new Volapük? On the one hand, these people seem to have got muddled when they found themselves in a predicament, when the party’s abrupttransition from legality to illegality upset the customary, normal and simple relations between leaders, parties and classes. 
 In Germany, as in other European countries, peoplehad become too accustomed to legality, to the free and proper election of “leaders” at regular party congresses, to the convenient method of testing the class composition of parties through parliamentary elections, mass meetings, the press, the sentiments of the trade unions and other associations, etc. 
 When, instead of this customary proced-ure, it became necessary, because of the stormy developmentof the revolution and the development of the civil war,to go over rapidly from legality to illegality, to combinethe two, and to adopt the “inconvenient” and “undemo-cratic” methods of selecting, or forming, or preserving “groups of leaders”—people lost their bearings and beganto think up some unmitigated nonsense. 
 Certain membersof the Communist Party of Holland, * who were unlucky enough to be born in a small country with tradi-tions and conditions of highly privileged and highly stable legality, and who had never seen a transition from legality to illegality, probably fell into confusion, lost their heads,and helped create these absurd inventions. 
 On the other hand, one can see simply a thoughtless and incoherent use of the now “fashionable” terms: “masses”and “leaders”. 
 These people have heard and memorised a great many attacks on “leaders”, in which the latter have been contrasted with the “masses”; however, they haveproved unable to think matters out and gain a clear under-standing of what it was all about. 
 The divergence between “leaders” and “masses” was brought out with particular clarity and sharpness in all countries at the end of the imperialist war and following it. 
 The principal reason for this was explained many timesby Marx and Engels between the years 1852 and 1892, fromthe example of Britain. 
 That country’s exclusive positionled to the emergence, from the “masses”, of a semi-petty-bourgeois, opportunist “labour aristocracy”. 
 The leaders of this labour aristocracy were constantly going over to the bourgeoisie, and were directly or indirectly on its payroll. 
 Marx earned the honour of incurring the hatred ofthese disreputable persons by openly branding them astraitors. 
 Present-day (twentieth-century) imperialism hasgiven a few advanced countries an exceptionally privileged position, which, everywhere in the Second International, has produced a certain type of traitor, opportunist, and *See Note No. 
 41. 
— Ed. 
 social-chauvinist leaders, who champion the interests of their own craft, their own section of the labour aristocracy. 
 The opportunist parties have become separated from the “masses”, i. 
e. 
, from the broadest strata of the working people, their majority, the lowest-paid workers. 
 The revo-lutionary proletariat cannot be victorious unless this evil is combated, unless the opportunist, social-traitor leaders are exposed, discredited and expelled. 
 That is the policy the Third International has embarked on. 
 To go so far, in this connection, as to contrast, in genera l, the dictatorship of the masses with a dictatorship of the leaders is ridiculously absurd, and stupid. 
 What is partic-ularly amusing is that, in fact, instead of the old leaders, who hold generally accepted views on simple matters, new leaders are brought forth (under cover of the slogan “Down with the leaders!”), who talk rank stuff and nonsense. 
 Such are Laufenberg, Wolffheim, Horner ,18 Karl Schröder, Fried-rich Wendel and Karl Erler ,* in Germany. 
 Erler’s attempts to give the question more “profundity ” and to proclaim that in general political parties are unnecessary and “bour-geois” are so supremely absurd that one can only shrug one’s shoulders. 
 It all goes to drive home the truth thata minor error can always assume monstrous proportionsif it is persisted in, if profound justifications are soughtfor it, and if it is carried to its logical conclusion. 
 Repudiation of the Party principle and of Party disci-pline—that is what the opposition has arrived at . 
 And this is tantamount to completely disarming the proletariat in *Karl Erler, “The Dissolution of the Party”, Kommunistische Arbeiterzeitung ,19 Hamburg, February 7, 1920, No. 
 32: “The working class cannot destroy the bourgeois state without destroying bourgeois democracy, and it cannot destroy bourgeois democracy w ithout destroying parties. 
” The more muddle-headed of the syndicalists and anarchists in the Latin countries may derive “satisfaction” from the fact that solid Germans, who evidently consider themselves Marxists (by theirarticles in the above-mentioned paper K. 
 Erler and K. 
 Horner have shown most plainly that they consider themselves sound Marxists, but talk incredible nonsense in a most ridiculous manner and revealtheir failure to understand the ABC of Marxism), go to the lengthof making utterly inept statements. 
 Mere acceptance of Marxism doesnot save one from errors. 
 We Russians know this especially well,because Marxism has been very often the “fashion” in our country. 
 the interests of the bourgeoisie . 
 It all adds up to that petty-bourgeois diffuseness and instability, that incapacity for sustained effort, unity and organised action, which, if encour-aged, must inevitably destroy any proletarian revolutionarymovement. 
 From the standpoint of communism, repudia-tion of the Party principle means attempting to leap fromthe eve of capitalism’s collapse (in Germany), not to thelower or the intermediate phase of communism, but to the higher. 
 We in Russia (in the third year since the overthrow of the bourgeoisie) are making the first steps in the tran-sition from capitalism to socialism or the lower stage ofcommunism. 
 Classes still remain, and will remain every-where for years after the proletariat’s conquest of power. 
 Perhaps in Britain, where there is no peasantry (but where petty proprietors exist), this period may be shorter. 
 The abolition of classes means, not merely ousting the land-owners and the capitalists—that is something we accom-plished with comparative ease; it also means abolishing the small commodity producers , and they cannot be ousted , or crushed; we must learn to live with them. 
 They can (and must) be transformed and re-educated only by means of very prolonged, slow, and cautious organisational work. 
They surround the proletariat on every side with a petty-bourgeois atmosphere, which permeates and corrupts theproletariat, and constantly causes among the proletariatrelapses into petty-bourgeois spinelessness, disunity, in-dividualism, and alternating moods of exaltation and dejec-tion. 
 The strictest centralisation and discipline arerequired within the political party of the proletariat in orderto counteract this, in order that the organisational role of the proletariat (and that is its principal role) may be exercised correctly, successfully and victoriously. 
 The dic-tatorship of the proletariat means a persistent struggle— bloody and bloodless, violent and peaceful, military andeconomic, educational and administrative—against theforces and traditions of the old society. 
 The force of habitin millions and tens of millions is a most formidable force. 
Without a party of iron that has been tempered in the struggle, a party enjoying the confidence of all honest peo-ple in the class in question, a party capable of watchingand influencing the mood of the masses, such a struggle cannot be waged successfully. 
 It is a thousand times easier to vanquish the centralised big bourgeoisie than to “van-quish” the millions upon millions of petty proprietors; however, through their ordinary, everyday, imperceptible,elusive and demoralising activities, they produce the very results which the bourgeoisie need and which tend to restore the bourgeoisie. 
 Whoever brings about even the slightestweakening of the iron discipline of the party of the prole-tariat (especially during its dictatorship), is actually aiding the bourgeoisie against the proletariat. 
 Parallel with the question of the leaders—the party—the class—the masses, we must pose the question of the“reactionary” trade unions. 
 But first I shall take theliberty of making a few concluding remarks based on the experience of our Party. 
 There have always been attacks on the “dictatorship of leaders” in our Party. 
 The first timeI heard such attacks, I recall, was in 1895, when, officially,no party yet existed, but a central group was taking shapein St. 
 Petersburg, which was to assume the leadership ofthe district groups. 
 20 At the Ninth Congress of our Party (April 1920)21 there was a small opposition, which also spoke against the “dictatorship of leaders”, against the“oligarchy”, and so on. 
 There is therefore nothing surpris-ing, new, or terrible in the “infantile disorder” of “Left-wing communism” among the Germans. 
 The ailmentinvolves no danger, and after it the organism even becomes more robust. 
 In our case, on the other hand, the rapid alternation of legal and illegal work, which made it necessaryto keep the general staff—the leaders—under cover andcloak them in the greatest secrecy, sometimes gave riseto extremely dangerous consequences. 
 The worst of thesewas that in 1912 the agent provocateur Malinovsky got into the Bolshevik Central Committee. 
 He betrayed scores and scores of the best and most loyal comrades, causedthem to be sentenced to penal servitude, and hastened thedeath of many of them. 
 That he did not cause still greaterharm was due to the correct balance between legal and ille-gal work. 
 As member of the Party’s Central Committee and Duma deputy, Malinovsky was forced, in order to gain our confidence, to help us establish legal daily papers,which even under tsarism were able to wage a struggle against the Menshevik opportunism and to spread the fun-damentals of Bolshevism in a suitably disguised form. 
 While, with one hand, Malinovsky sent scores and scores of the finest Bolsheviks to penal servitude and death, he wasobliged, with the other, to assist in the education of scoresand scores of thousands of new Bolsheviks through themedium of the legal press. 
 Those German (and also British,American, French and Italian) comrades who are faced with the task of learning how to conduct revolutionary work within the reactionary trade unions would do well to giveserious thought to this fact. 
 * In many countries, including the most advanced, the bourgeoisie are undoubtedly sending agents provocateurs into the Communist parties and will continue to do so. 
 A skilful combining of illegal and legal work is one of the ways to combat this danger. 
 VI SHOULD REVOLUTIONARIES WORK IN REACTIONARY TRADE UNIONS? The German “Lefts” consider that, as far as they are concerned, the reply to this question is an unqualifiednegative. 
 In their opinion, declamations and angry outcries(such as uttered by K. 
 Horner in a particularly “solid” andparticularly stupid manner) against “reactionary” and “counter-revolutionary” trade unions are sufficient “proof” that it is unnecessary and even inexcusable for revolution-aries and Communists to work in yellow, social-chauvinist,compromising and counter-revolutionary trade unions of theLegien type. 
 *Malinovsky was a prisoner of war in Germany. 
 On his return to Russia when the Bolsheviks were in power he was instantly put ontrial and shot by our workers. 
 The Mensheviks attacked us most bitterly for our mistake—the fact that an agent provocateur had become a member of the Central Committee of our Party. 
 But when, underKerensky, we demanded the arrest and trial of Rodzyanko, the Chair-man of the Duma, because he had known, even before the war, that Malinovsky was an agent provocateur and had not informed the Tru-doviks and the workers in the Duma, neither the Mensheviks nor the Socialist-Revolutionaries in the Kerensky government supported our demand, and Rodzyanko remained at large and made off unhin-dered to join Denikin. 
 However firmly the German “Lefts” may be convinced of the revolutionism of such tactics, the latter are in fact fundamentally wrong, and contain nothing but empty phrases. 
 To make this clear, I shall begin with our own experience, in keeping with the general plan of the present pamphlet,which is aimed at applying to Western Europe whateveris universally practicable, significant and relevant in the history and the present-day tactics of Bolshevism. 
 In Russia today, the connection between leaders, party, class and masses, as well as the attitude of the dictatorshipof the proletariat and its party to the trade unions, areconcretely as follows: the dictatorship is exercised by theproletariat organised in the Soviets; the proletariat is guided by the Communist Party of Bolsheviks, which, according to the figures of the latest Party Congress (April1920), has a membership of 611,000. 
 The membership variedgreatly both before and after the October Revolution, andused to be much smaller, even in 1918 and 1919. 
 22 We are apprehensive of an excessive growth of the Party, because careerists and charlatans, who deserve only to be shot, inevitably do all they can to insinuate themselves into theranks of the ruling party. 
 The last time we opened wide thedoors of the Party—to workers and peasants only—was when(in the winter of 1919) Yudenich was within a few verstsof Petrograd, and Denikin was in Orel (about 350 versts from Moscow), i. 
e. 
, when the Soviet Republic was in mortal danger, and when adventurers, careerists, charlatans andunreliable persons generally could not possibly count onmaking a profitable career (and had more reason to expectthe gallows and torture) by joining the Communists. 
 23 The Party, which holds annual congresses (the most recent on the basis of one delegate per 1,000 members), is directed by a Central Committee of nineteen elected at the Congress,while the current work in Moscow has to be carried on by still smaller bodies, known as the Organising Bureau and the Political Bureau, which are elected at ple-nary meetings of the Central Committee, five members of the Central Committee to each bureau. 
 This, it would appear, is a full-fledged “oligarchy”. 
 No importantpolitical or organisational question is decided by any state institution in our republic without the guidance of the Party’s Central Committee. 
 In its work, the Party relies directly on the trade unions , which, according to the data of the last congress (April1920), now have a membership of over four million andare formally non-Party . 
 Actually, all the directing bodies of the vast majority of the unions, and primarily, of course,of the all-Russia general trade union centre or bureau (the All-Russia Central Council of Trade Unions), are made up of Communists and carry out all the directives of theParty. 
 Thus, on the whole, we have a formally non-com-munist, flexible and relatively wide and very powerfulproletarian apparatus, by means of which the Party is Lclosely linked up with the class and the masses , and by means of which, under the leadership of the Party, the class dictatorship is exercised. 
 Without close contacts with the trade unions, and without their energetic support and devotedefforts, not only in economic, but also in military affairs, it would of course have been impossible for us to governthe country and to maintain the dictatorship for two and a half months, let alone two and a half years. 
 In practice, these very close contacts naturally call for highly complexand diversified work in the form of propaganda, agitation,timely and frequent conferences, not only with the leadingtrade union workers, but with influential trade union work-ers generally; they call for a determined struggle against the Mensheviks, who still have a certain though very small following to whom they teach all kinds of counter-revolutionary machinations, ranging from an ideologicaldefence of ( bourgeois ) democracy and the preaching that the trade unions should be “independent” (independent of pro-letarian state power!) to sabotage of proletarian discipline, etc. 
, etc. 
 We consider that contacts with the “masses” through the trade unions are not enough. 
 In the course of our revo-lution, practical activities have given rise to such insti-tutions as non-Party workers ’ and peasants ’ conferences , and we strive by every means to support, develop and extend this institution in order to be able to observe the temper of the masses, come closer to them, meet their requirements,promote the best among them to state posts, etc. 
 Under a recent decree on the transformation of the People’s Com-missariat of State Control into the Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection, non-Party conferences of this kind have been empowered to select members of the State Control to carryout various kinds of investigations, etc. 
 Then, of course, all the work of the Party is carried on through the Soviets, which embrace the working masses,irrespective of occupation. 
 The district congresses of Soviets are democratic institutions, the like of which even the best of the democratic republics of the bourgeois worldhave never known; through these congresses (whose pro-ceedings the Party endeavours to follow with the closestattention), as well as by continually appointing class-conscious workers to various posts in the rural districts, the proletariat exercises its role of leader of the peasantry, gives effect to the dictatorship of the urban proletariat,wages a systematic struggle against the rich, bourgeois,exploiting and profiteering peasantry, etc. 
 Such is the general mechanism of the proletarian state power viewed “from above”, from the standpoint of the practical implementation of the dictatorship. 
 We hope that the reader will understand why the Russian Bolshevik,who has known this mechanism for twenty-five years and hasseen it develop out of small, illegal and undergroundcircles, cannot help regarding all this talk about “fromabove” or “from below”, about the dictatorship of leaders or the dictatorship of the masses, etc. 
, as ridiculous and childish nonsense, something like discussing whether a man’sleft leg or right arm is of greater use to him. 
 We cannot but regard as equally ridiculous and childish nonsense the pompous, very learned, and frightfullyrevolutionary disquisitions of the German Lefts to the effect that Communists cannot and should not work in reaction-ary trade unions, that it is permissible to turn down suchwork, that it is necessary to withdraw from the trade unionsand create a brand-new and immaculate “Workers’ Union”invented by very pleasant (and, probably, for the mostpart very youthful) Communists, etc. 
, etc. 
 Capitalism inevitably leaves socialism the legacy, on the one hand, of the old trade and craft distinctions amongthe workers, distinctions evolved in the course of centuries; on the other hand, trade unions, which only very slowly, in the course of years and years, can and will develop into broader industrial unions with less of the craft union about them (embracing entire industries, and not only crafts,trades and occupations), and later proceed, through theseindustrial unions, to eliminate the division of labour amongpeople, to educate and school people, give them all-round development and an all-round training, so that they are able to do everything. 
 Communism is advancing and must advance towards that goal, and will reach it, but only after very many years. 
 To attempt in practice, today, toanticipate this future result of a fully developed, fully stabi-lised and constituted, fully comprehensive and maturecommunism would be like trying to teach higher mathemat-ics to a child of four. 
 We can (and must) begin to build socialism, not with abstract human material, or with human material speciallyprepared by us, but with the human material bequeathed tous by capitalism. 
 True, that is no easy matter, but no otherapproach to this task is serious enough to warrant discus-sion. 
 The trade unions were a tremendous step forward for the working class in the early days of capitalist develop-ment, inasmuch as they marked a transition from the wor-kers’ disunity and helplessness to the rudiments of class organisation. 
 When the revolutionary party of the proletariat , the highest form of proletarian class organisa-tion, began to take shape (and the Party will not meritthe name until it learns to weld the leaders into oneindivisible whole with the class and the masses) the tradeunions inevitably began to reveal certain reactionary fea-tures, a certain craft narrow-mindedness, a certain tendency to be non-political, a certain inertness, etc. 
 However, the de-velopment of the proletariat did not, and could not, proceedanywhere in the world otherwise than through the tradeunions, through reciprocal action between them and theparty of the working class. 
 The proletariat’s conquest ofpolitical power is a gigantic step forward for the proletar-iat as a class, and the Party must more than ever and in a new way, not only in the old, educate and guide the tradeunions, at the same time bearing in mind that they are and will long remain an indispensable “school of com-munism” and a preparatory school that trains proletarians to exercise their dictatorship, an indispensable organisation of the workers for the gradual transfer of the managementof the whole economic life of the country to the workingclass (and not to the separate trades), and later to all theworking people. 
 In the sense mentioned above, a certain “reactionism” in the trade unions is inevitable under the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 Not to understand this means a completefailure to understand the fundamental conditions of thetransition from capitalism to socialism. 
 It would be egre-gious folly to fear this “reactionism” or to try to evade or leap over it, for it would mean fearing that function of the proletarian vanguard which consists in training, educating, enlightening and drawing into the new life themost backward strata and masses of the working class andthe peasantry. 
 On the other hand, it would be a still gravererror to postpone the achievement of the dictatorship ofthe proletariat until a time when there will not be a single worker with a narrow-minded craft outlook, or with craft and craft-union prejudices. 
 The art of politics (and theCommunist’s correct understanding of his tasks) consistsin correctly gauging the conditions and the moment whenthe vanguard of the proletariat can successfully assumepower, when it is able—during and after the seizure of power—to win adequate support from sufficiently broad strata of the working class and of the non-proletarian work-ing masses, and when it is able thereafter to maintain,consolidate and extend its rule by educating, training andattracting ever broader masses of the working people. 
 Further. 
 In countries more advanced than Russia, a certain reactionism in the trade unions has been and was bound to be manifested in a far greater measure than inour country. 
 Our Mensheviks found support in the tradeunions (and to some extent still do so in a small numberof unions), as a result of the latter’s craft narrow-minded-ness, craft selfishness and opportunism. 
 The Mensheviks of the West have acquired a much firmer footing in the trade unions; there the craft-union , narrow-minded , selfish , case-hardened , covetous , and petty-bourgeois “labour aristocracy ”, imperialist-minded , and imperialist-corrupted , has developed into a much stronger section than in our coun-try. 
 That is incontestable. 
 The struggle against the Gomper-ses, and against the Jouhaux, Hendersons, Merrheims,Legiens and Co. 
 in Western Europe is much more difficultthan the struggle against our Mensheviks, who are an absolute-ly homogeneous social and political type. 
 This struggle must be waged ruthlessly, and it must unfailingly be brought— as we brought it—to a point when all the incorrigible lead-ers of opportunism and social-chauvinism are completelydiscredited and driven out of the trade unions. 
 Politicalpower cannot be captured (and the attempt to capture itshould not be made) until the struggle has reached a certainstage. 
 This “certain stage” will be different in different coun-tries and in different circumstances; it can be correctly gauged only by thoughtful, experienced and knowledgeablepolitical leaders of the proletariat in each particular country. 
(In Russia the elections to the Constituent Assembly inNovember 1917, a few days after the proletarian revolutionof October 25, 1917, were one of the criteria of the success of this struggle. 
 In these elections the Mensheviks were utterly defeated; they received 700,000 votes—1,400,000if the vote in Transcaucasia is added—as against 9,000,000votes polled by the Bolsheviks. 
 See my article, “The Con-stituent Assembly Elections and the Dictatorship of theProletariat”, 24 in the Communist International25 No. 
 7-8. 
) We are waging a struggle against the “labour aristoc-racy” in the name of the masses of the workers and inorder to win them over to our side; we are waging the struggleagainst the opportunist and social-chauvinist leaders inorder to win the working class over to our side. 
 It wouldbe absurd to forget this most elementary and most self-evident truth. 
 Yet it is this very absurdity that the German “Left” Communists perpetrate when, because of the reactionary and counter-revolutionary character ofthe trade union top leadership , they jump to me conclusion that ... we must withdraw from the trade unions, refuseto work in them, and create new and artificial forms of labour organisation! This is so unpardonable a blunder that it is tantamount to the greatest service Communistscould render the bourgeoisie. 
 Like all the opportunist, social-chauvinist, and Kautskyite trade union leaders, our Mensheviks are nothing but “agents of the bourgeoisie in the working-class movement” (as we have always said the Mensheviks are), or “labour lieutenants of the capitalistclass”, to use the splendid and profoundly true expressionof the followers of Daniel De Leon in America. 
 To refuse towork in the reactionary trade unions means leaving theinsufficiently developed or backward masses of workers under the influence of the reactionary leaders, the agents of the bourgeoisie, the labour aristocrats, or “workers whohave become completely bourgeois” (cf. 
 Engels’s letter toMarx in 1858 about the British workers 26). 
 This ridiculous “theory” that Communists should not work in reactionary trade unions reveals with the utmost clarity the frivolous attitude of the “Left” Communists towards the question of influencing the “masses”, andtheir misuse of clamour about the “masses”. 
 If you wantto help the “masses” and win the sympathy andsupport of the “masses”, you should not fear difficulties,or pinpricks, chicanery, insults and persecution from the “leaders” (who, being opportunists and social-chauvinists, are in most cases directly or indirectly connected with thebourgeoisie and the police), but must absolutely work wherever the masses are to be found . 
 You must be capable of any sacrifice, of overcoming the greatest obstacles, inorder to carry on agitation and propaganda systematically, perseveringly, persistently and patiently in those insti-tutions, societies and associations—even the most reaction-ary—in which proletarian or semi-proletarian masses areto be found. 
 The trade unions and the workers’ co-opera-tives (the latter sometimes, at least) are the very organisa-tions in which the masses are to be found. 
 According to figures quoted in the Swedish paper Folkets Dagblad Poli-tiken of March 10, 1920, the trade union membership in Great Britain increased from 5,500,000 at the end of 1917to 6,600,000 at the end of 1918, an increase of 19 per cent. 
Towards the close of 1919, the membership was estimatedat 7,500,000. 
 I have not got the corresponding figures for France and Germany to hand, but absolutely incontestable and generally known facts testify to a rapid rise in thetrade union membership in these countries too. 
 These facts make crystal clear something that is con-firmed by thousands of other symptoms, namely, that class-consciousness and the desire for organisation are growing among the proletarian masses, among the rank and file,among the backward elements. 
 Millions of workers inGreat Britain, France and Germany are for the first time passing from a complete lack of organisation to the ele-mentary, lowest, simplest, and (to those still thoroughly imbued with bourgeois-democratic prejudices) most easily comprehensible form of organisation, namely, the tradeunions; yet the revolutionary but imprudent Left Commu-nists stand by, crying out “the masses”, “the masses!” butrefusing to work within the trade unions , on the pretext that they are “reactionary”, and invent a brand-new, immaculate little “Workers’ Union”, which is guiltless of bourgeois-democratic prejudices and innocent of craft ornarrow-minded craft-union sins, a union which, they claim,will be (!) a broad organisation. 
 “Recognition of the Sovietsystem and the dictatorship” will be the only (!) condition of membership. 
 (See the passage quoted above. 
) It would be hard to imagine any greater ineptitude or greater harm to the revolution than that caused by the“Left” revolutionaries! Why, if we in Russia today, aftertwo and a half years of unprecedented victories over thebourgeoisie of Russia and the Entente, were to make “recog-nition of the dictatorship” a condition of trade union membership, we would be doing a very foolish thing, damaging our influence among the masses, and helping theMensheviks. 
 The task devolving on Communists is toconvince the backward elements, to work among them, and not to fence themselves off from them with artificial and childishly “Left” slogans. 
 There can be no doubt that the Gomperses, the Hender-sons, the Jouhaux and the Legiens are very grateful to those“Left” revolutionaries who, like the German opposition“on principle” (heaven preserve us from such “principles”!),or like some of the revolutionaries in the American Indus-trial Workers of the World 27 advocate quitting the reac-tionary trade unions and refusing to work in them. 
 These men, the “leaders” of opportunism, will no doubt resortto every device of bourgeois diplomacy and to the aid of bourgeois governments, the clergy, the police and the courts, to keep Communists out of the trade unions, oust them by every means, make their work in the trade unions as unpleas-ant as possible, and insult, bait and persecute them. 
 Wemust be able to stand up to all this, agree to make anysacrifice, and even—if need be—to resort to various strat-agems, artifices and illegal methods, to evasions and sub-terfuges, as long as we get into the trade unions, remain in them, and carry on communist work within them at all costs. 
 Under tsarism we had no “legal opportunities”whatsoever until 1905. 
 However, when Zubatov, agent ofthe secret police, organised Black-Hundred workers’assemblies and workingmen’s societies for the purpose oftrapping revolutionaries and combating them, we sent members of our Party to these assemblies and into these societies (I personally remember one of them, ComradeBabushkin, a leading St. 
 Petersburg factory worker, shotby order of the tsar’s generals in 1906). 
 They establishedcontacts with the masses, were able to carry on their agi-tation, and succeeded in wresting workers from the influence of Zubatov’s agents. 
 * Of course, in Western Europe, which is imbued with most deep-rooted legalistic, constitutional-ist and bourgeois-democratic prejudices, this is moredifficult of achievement. 
 However, it can and must be carriedout, and systematically at that. 
 The Executive Committee of the Third International must, in my opinion, positively condemn, and call upon the next congress of the Communist International to con-demn both the policy of refusing to work in reactionarytrade unions in general (explaining in detail why suchrefusal is unwise, and what extreme harm it does to thecause of the proletarian revolution) and, in particular, the line of conduct of some members of the Communist Party of Holland, who—whether directly or indirectly,overtly or covertly, wholly or partly, it does not matter—have supported this erroneous policy. 
 The Third Interna-*The Gomperses, Hendersons, Jouhaux and Legiens are nothing but Zubatovs, differing from our Zubatov only in their Europeangarb and polish, and the civilised, refined and democratically suave manner of conducting their despicable policy. 
 tional must break with the tactics of the Second Internation-al; it must not evade or play down points at issue, but must pose them in a straightforward fashion. 
 The whole truth has been put squarely to the “Independents” (theIndependent Social-Democratic Party of Germany); thewhole truth must likewise be put squarely to the “Left”Communists. 
 VII SHOULD WE PARTICIPATE IN BOURGEOIS PARLIAMENTS? It is with the utmost contempt—and the utmost levity— that the German “Left” Communists reply to this questionin the negative. 
 Their arguments? In the passage quoted above we read: “... All reversion to parliamentary forms of struggle, which have become historically and politically obsolete, must be emphatically rejected.... 
” This is said with ridiculous pretentiousness, and is patently wrong. 
 “Reversion” to parliamentarianism, forsooth! Perhaps there is already a Soviet republic in Germany?It does not look like it! How, then, can one speak of “rever-sion”? Is this not an empty phrase? Parliamentarianism has become “historically obsolete”. 
 That is true in the propaganda sense. 
 However, everybody knows that this is still a far cry from overcoming it in practice. 
 Capitalism could have been declared—and withfull justice—to be “historically obsolete” many decadesago, but that does not at all remove the need for a verylong and very persistent struggle on the basis of capitalism. 
Parliamentarianism is “historically obsolete” from the standpoint of world history, i. 
e. 
, the era of bourgeois parlia-mentarianism is over, and the era of the proletarian dictator-ship has begun. 
 That is incontestable. 
 But world historyis counted in decades. 
 Ten or twenty years earlier or latermakes no difference when measured with the yardstickof world history; from the standpoint of world history it is a trifle that cannot be considered even approximately. 
 But for that very reason, it is a glaring theoretical error toapply the yardstick of world history to practical politics. 
 Is parliamentarianism “politically obsolete”? That is quite a different matter. 
 If that were true, the position of the “Lefts” would be a strong one. 
 But it has to be proved by a most searching analysis, and the “Lefts” do not evenknow how to approach the matter. 
 In the “Theses on Par-liamentarianism”, published in the Bulletin of the Provi-sional Bureau in Amsterdam of the Communist InternationalNo. 
 1, February 1920, and obviously expressing the Dutch-Left or Left-Dutch strivings, the analysis, as we shall see, is also hopelessly poor. 
 In the first place, contrary to the opinion of such outstand-ing political leaders as Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Lieb-knecht, the German “Lefts”, as we know, considered parlia-mentarianism “politically obsolete” even in January 1919. 
 We know that the “Lefts” were mistaken. 
 This fact alone utterly destroys, at a single stroke, the proposition thatparliamentarianism is “politically obsolete”. 
 It is for the“Lefts” to prove why their error, indisputable at that time,is no longer an error. 
 They do not and cannot produceeven a shred of proof. 
 A political party’s attitude towards its own mistakes is one of the most important and surest ways of judging how earnest the party is and how it fulfilsin practice its obligations towards its class and the working people . 
 Frankly acknowledging a mistake, ascertaining the reasons for it, analysing the conditions that have led upto it, and thrashing out the means of its rectification—that is the hallmark of a serious party; that is how it should perform its duties, and how it should educate and train itsclass , and then the masses . 
 By failing to fulfil this duty and give the utmost attention and consideration tothe study of their patent error, the “Lefts” in Germany(and in Holland) have proved that they are not a party of a class , but a circle, not a party of the masses , but a group of intellectualists and of a few workers whoape the worst features of intellectualism. 
 Second, in the same pamphlet of the Frankfurt group of “Lefts”, which we have already cited in detail, we read: “... The millions of workers who still follow the policy of the Centre [the Catholic “Centre” Party] are counter-revolutionary. 
The rural proletarians provide the legions of counter-revolutionary troops. 
” (Page 3 of the pamphlet. 
) Everything goes to show that this statement is far too sweeping and exaggerated. 
 But the basic fact set forth here is incontrovertible, and its acknowledgement by the “Lefts” is particularly clear evidence of their mistake. 
How can one say that “parliamentarianism is politicallyobsolete”, when “millions” and “legions” of proletarians are not only still in favour of parliamentarianism in general,but are downright “counter-revolutionary”!? It is obvious that parliamentarianism in Germany is not yet politically obsolete. 
 It is obvious that the “Lefts” in Germany havemistaken their desire , their politico-ideological attitude, for objective reality. 
 That is a most dangerous mistakefor revolutionaries to make. 
 In Russia—where, over a par-ticularly long period and in particularly varied forms, the most brutal and savage yoke of tsarism produced revo-lutionaries of diverse shades, revolutionaries who displayedamazing devotion, enthusiasm, heroism and will power—in Russia we have observed this mistake of the revolution-aries at very close quarters; we have studied it veryattentively and have a first-hand knowledge of it; that is why we can also see it especially clearly in others. 
 Parlia-mentarianism is of course “politically obsolete” to the Com-munists in Germany; but—and that is the whole point—we must not regard what is obsolete to us as something obsolete to a class , to the masses . 
 Here again we find that the “Lefts” do not know how to reason, do not know how to act as the party of a class , as the party of the masses . 
 You must not sink to the level of the masses, to the levelof the backward strata of the class. 
 That is incontestable. 
You must tell them the bitter truth. 
 You are in duty boundto call their bourgeois-democratic and parliamentary pre-judices what they are—prejudices. 
 But at the same time you must soberly follow the actual state of the class-con-sciousness and preparedness of the entire class (not onlyof its communist vanguard), and of all the working people (not only of their advanced elements). 
 Even if only a fairly large minority of the industrial workers, and not “millions” and “legions”, follow the lead of the Catholic clergy—and a similar minority of rural workers follow the landowners and kulaks (Grossbauern)—itundoubtedly signifies that parliamentarianism in Germany has not yet politically outlived itself, that participation in parliamentary elections and in the struggle on the parlia-mentary rostrum is obligatory on the party of the revolu-tionary proletariat specifically for the purpose of educat-ing the backward strata of its own class , and for the purpose of awakening and enlightening the undeveloped, down-trodden and ignorant rural masses . 
 Whilst you lack the strength to do away with bourgeois parliaments and every other type of reactionary institution, you must work within them because it is there that you will still find workers who are duped by the priests and stultified by the condi-tions of rural life; otherwise you risk turning into nothingbut windbags. 
 Third, the “Left” Communists have a great deal to say in praise of us Bolsheviks. 
 One sometimes feels like telling them to praise us less and to try to get a better knowledgeof the Bolsheviks’ tactics. 
 We took part in the electionsto the Constituent Assembly, the Russian bourgeois parlia-ment in September-November 1917. 
 Were our tacticscorrect or not? If not, then this should be clearly stated and proved, for it is necessary in evolving the correct tactics for international communism. 
 If they were correct, thencertain conclusions must be drawn. 
 Of course, there can beno question of placing conditions in Russia on a par withconditions in Western Europe. 
 But as regards the particularquestion of the meaning of the concept that “parliamentari-anism has become politically obsolete”, due account should be taken of our experience, for unless concrete ex-perience is taken into account such concepts very easily turninto empty phrases. 
 In September-November 1917, did we,the Russian Bolsheviks, not have more right than any Western Communists to consider that parliamentarianism was politically obsolete in Russia? Of course we did, for the point is not whether bourgeois parliaments have existedfor a long time or a short time, but how far the massesof the working people are prepared (ideologically, politi-cally and practically) to accept the Soviet system and todissolve the bourgeois-democratic parliament (or allow it to be dissolved). 
 It is an absolutely incontestable and fully established historical fact that, in September-November1917, the urban working-class and the soldiers and peasants of Russia were, because of a number of special conditions, exceptionally well prepared to accept the Soviet system and to disband the most democratic of bourgeois parlia-ments. 
 Nevertheless, the Bolsheviks did not boycott the Constituent Assembly, but took part in the elections bothbefore and after the proletariat conquered political power. 
 That these elections yielded exceedingly valuable (and tothe proletariat, highly useful) political results has, I make bold to hope, been proved by me in the above-mentioned article, which analyses in detail the returns of the electionsto the Constituent Assembly in Russia. 
 The conclusion which follows from this is absolutely incontrovertible: it has been proved that, far from caus-ing harm to the revolutionary proletariat, participation in a bourgeois-democratic parliament, even a few weeks before the victory of a Soviet republic and even after such a victory, actually helps that proletariat to prove to the backward masses why such parliaments deserve to be done away with;it facilitates their successful dissolution, and helps to make bourgeois parliamentarianism “politically obsolete”. 
 To ignore this experience, while at the same time claiming affilia-tion to the Communist International , which must work out its tactics internationally (not as narrow or exclusively nation-al tactics, but as international tactics), means commit-ting a gross error and actually abandoning internationalismin deed, while recognising it in word. 
 Now let us examine the “Dutch-Left” arguments in favour of non-participation in parliaments. 
 The following is thetext of Thesis No. 
 4, the most important of the above-mentioned “Dutch” theses: “When the capitalist system of production has broken down, and society is in a state of revolution, parliamentary action graduallyloses importance as compared with the action of the masses them-selves. 
 When, in these conditions, parliament becomes the centre andorgan of the counter-revolution, whilst, on the other hand, the labour-ing class builds up the instruments of its power in the Soviets, it may even prove necessary to abstain from all and any participation in parliamentary action. 
” The first sentence is obviously wrong, since action by the masses, a big strike, for instance, is more importantthan parliamentary activity at all times, and not only during a revolution or in a revolutionary situation. 
 This obviously untenable and historically and politically incor-rect argument merely shows very clearly that the authors completely ignore both the general European experience(the French experience before the revolutions of 1848 and1870; the German experience of 1878-90, etc. 
) and theRussian experience (see above) of the importance ofcombining legal and illegal struggle. 
 This question is of immense importance both in general and in particular, because in all civilised and advanced countries the time is rapidly approaching when such a combination will moreand more become—and has already partly become—man-datory on the party of the revolutionary proletariat, inas-much as civil war between the proletariat and the bourgeoi-sie is maturing and is imminent, and because of savage persecution of the Communists by republican governmentsand bourgeois governments generally, which resort to anyviolation of legality (the example of America is edifyingenough), etc. 
 The Dutch, and the Lefts in general, haveutterly failed to understand this highly important question. 
 The second sentence is, in the first place, historically wrong. 
 We Bolsheviks participated in the most counter-revolutionary parliaments, and experience has shownthat this participation was not only useful but indispen-sable to the party of the revolutionary proletariat, afterthe first bourgeois revolution in Russia (1905), so as to pave the way for the second bourgeois revolution (February 1917), and then for the socialist revolution (October 1917). 
In the second place, this sentence is amazingly illogical. 
If a parliament becomes an organ and a “centre” (in realityit never has been and never can be a “centre”, but that isby the way) of counter-revolution, while the workers are building up the instruments of their power in the form of the Soviets, then it follows that the workers must prepare—ideologically, politically and technically—for the struggleof the Soviets against parliament, for the dispersal of par-liament by the Soviets. 
 But it does not at all follow thatthis dispersal is hindered, or is not facilitated, by the pres-ence of a Soviet opposition within the counter-revolutionary parliament. 
 In the course of our victorious struggle againstDenikin and Kolchak, we never found that the existence of a Soviet and proletarian opposition in their camp was immaterial to our victories. 
 We know perfectly well that the dispersal of the Constituent Assembly on January 5, 1918 was not hampered but was actually facilitated by the factthat, within the counter-revolutionary Constituent Assemblywhich was about to be dispersed, there was a consistentBolshevik, as well as an inconsistent, Left Socialist-Revo-lutionary Soviet opposition. 
 The authors of the theses are engaged in muddled thinking; they have forgotten the experience of many, if not all, revolutions, which showsthe great usefulness, during a revolution, of a combination of mass action outside a reactionary parliament with anopposition sympathetic to (or, better still, directly support-ing) the revolution within it. 
 The Dutch, and the “Lefts” in general, argue in this respect like doctrinaires of the revo-lution, who have never taken part in a real revolution, havenever given thought to the history of revolutions, or havenaively mistaken subjective “rejection” of a reactionaryinstitution for its actual destruction by the combinedoperation of a number of objective factors. 
 The surest way of discrediting and damaging a new political (and not only political) idea is to reduce it to absurdity on theplea of defending it. 
 For any truth, if “overdone” (as Dietz-gen Senior put it), if exaggerated, or if carried beyondthe limits of its actual applicability, can be reduced to anabsurdity, and is even bound to become an absurdity under these conditions. 
 That is just the kind of disservice the Dutch and German Lefts are rendering to the new truthof the Soviet form of government being superior tobourgeois-democratic parliaments. 
 Of course, anyonewould be in error who voiced the outmoded viewpointor in general considered it impermissible, in all and any circumstances, to reject participation in bourgeois par-liaments. 
 I cannot attempt here to formulate the conditionsunder which a boycott is useful, since the object of thispamphlet is far more modest, namely, to study Russianexperience in connection with certain topical questionsof international communist tactics. 
 Russian experience has provided us with one successful and correct instance (1905), and another that was incorrect (1906), of the use ofa boycott by the Bolsheviks. 
 Analysing the first case, we see that we succeeded in preventing a reactionary government from convening a reactionary parliament in a situation in which extra-parliamentary revolutionary mass action (strikes in particular) was developing at great speed, when nota single section of the proletariat and the peasantry couldsupport the reactionary government in any way, and whenthe revolutionary proletariat was gaining influence overthe backward masses through the strike struggle and through the agrarian movement. 
 It is quite obvious that this expe-rience is not applicable to present-day European conditions. 
It is likewise quite obvious—and the foregoing argumentsbear this out—that the advocacy, even if with reservations,by the Dutch and the other “Lefts” of refusal to participatein parliaments is fundamentally wrong and detrimental to the cause of the revolutionary proletariat. 
 In Western Europe and America, parliament has become most odious to the revolutionary vanguard of the workingclass. 
 That cannot be denied. 
 It can readily be understood,for it is difficult to imagine anything more infamous, vileor treacherous than the behaviour of the vast majority of socialist and Social-Democratic parliamentary deputies during and after the war. 
 It would, however, be not onlyunreasonable but actually criminal to yield to this moodwhen deciding how this generally recognised evil should be fought. 
 In many countries of Western Europe, the revo-lutionary mood, we might say, is at present a “novelty”, or a “rarity”, which has all too long been vainly and impatiently awaited; perhaps that is why people so easilyyield to that mood. 
 Certainly, without a revolutionarymood among the masses, and without conditions facilitat-ing the growth of this mood, revolutionary tactics willnever develop into action. 
 In Russia, however, lengthy, painful and sanguinary experience has taught us the truth that revolutionary tactics cannot be built on a revolutionarymood alone. 
 Tactics must be based on a sober and strictlyobjective appraisal of all the class forces in a particular state (and of the states that surround it, and of all statesthe world over) as well as of the experience of revolutionary movements. 
 It is very easy to show one’s “revolutionary” temper merely by hurling abuse at parliamentary opportun-ism, or merely by repudiating participation in parliaments; its very ease, however, cannot turn this into a solution of a difficult, a very difficult, problem. 
 It is far more difficult to create a really revolutionary parliamentary group in a European parliament than it was in Russia. 
That stands to reason. 
 But it is only a particular expressionof the general truth that it was easy for Russia, in thespecific and historically unique situation of 1917, to start the socialist revolution, but it will be more difficult for Russia than for the European countries to continue the revolution and bring it to its consummation. 
 I had occasionto point this out already at the beginning of 1918, and ourexperience of the past two years has entirely confirmedthe correctness of this view. 
 Certain specific conditions,viz. 
, (1) the possibility of linking up the Soviet revolution with the ending, as a consequence of this revolution, of the imperialist war, which had exhausted the workers andpeasants to an incredible degree; (2) the possibility oftaking temporary advantage of the mortal conflict betweenthe world’s two most powerful groups of imperialist robbers,who were unable to unite against their Soviet enemy; (3) the possibility of enduring a comparatively lengthy civil war, partly owing to the enormous size of the country and to thepoor means of communication; (4) the existence of sucha profound bourgeois-democratic revolutionary movementamong the peasantry that the party of the proletariat wasable to adopt the revolutionary demands of the peasant party (the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, the majority of whose members were definitely hostile to Bolshevism) andrealise them at once, thanks to the conquest of politicalpower by the proletariat—all these specific conditions donot at present exist in Western Europe, and a repetition ofsuch or similar conditions will not occur so easily. 
 Inciden-tally, apart from a number of other causes, that is why it is more difficult for Western Europe to start a socialist revolution than it was for us. 
 To attempt to “circumvent”this difficulty by “skipping” the arduous job of utilisingreactionary parliaments for revolutionary purposes isabsolutely childish. 
 You want to create a new society, yet you fear the difficulties involved in forming a good parliamentary group made up of convinced, devoted andheroic Communists, in a reactionary parliament! Is that not childish? If Karl Liebknecht in Germany and Z. 
 Höglund in Sweden were able, even without mass support from below, to set examples of the truly revolutionary utilisation of reactionary parliaments, why should a rapidly growingrevolutionary mass party, in the midst of the post-wardisillusionment and embitterment of the masses, be unableto forge a communist group in the worst of parliaments?It is because, in Western Europe, the backward masses of the workers and—to an even greater degree—of the small peasants are much more imbued with bourgeois-democraticand parliamentary prejudices than they were in Russia;because of that, it is only from within such institutions as bourgeois parliaments that Communists can (and must)wage a long and persistent struggle, undaunted by any difficulties, to expose, dispel and overcome these prejudices. 
 The German “Lefts” complain of bad “leaders” in their party, give way to despair, and even arrive at a ridiculous“negation” of “leaders”. 
 But in conditions in which it isoften necessary to hide “leaders” underground, the evolutionof good “leaders”, reliable, tested and authoritative, is a very difficult matter; these difficulties cannot be success-fully overcome without combining legal and illegal work,and without testing the “leaders ”, among other ways , in parliaments. 
 Criticism—the most keen, ruthless anduncompromising criticism—should be directed, not againstparliamentarianism or parliamentary activities, but against those leaders who are unable—and still more against those who are unwilling —to utilise parliamentary elections and the parliamentary rostrum in a revolutionary and communistmanner. 
 Only such criticism—combined, of course, withthe dismissal of incapable leaders and their replacement bycapable ones—will constitute useful and fruitful revolu-tionary work that will simultaneously train the “leaders” to be worthy of the working class and of all working people,and train the masses to be able properly to understand thepolitical situation and the often very complicated andintricate tasks that spring from that situation. 
 * *I have had too little opportunity to acquaint myself with “Left-wing” communism in Italy. 
 Comrade Bordiga and his faction of Ab-stentionist Communists ( Comunista astensionista ) are certainly wrong VIII NO COMPROMISES? In the quotation from the Frankfurt pamphlet, we have seen how emphatically the “Lefts” have advanced thisslogan. 
 It is sad to see people who no doubt consider them-selves Marxists, and want to be Marxists, forget the fun-damental truths of Marxism. 
 This is what Engels—who, like Marx, was one of those rarest of authors whose every sentence in every one of their fundamental works containsa remarkably profound content—wrote in 1874, againstthe manifesto of the thirty-three Blanquist Communards: “’We are Communists’ [the Blanquist Communards wrote in their manifesto], ‘because we want to attain our goal without stopping at intermediate stations, without any compromises, which only postpone the day of victory andprolong the period of slavery. 
 ’ “The German Communists are Communists because, through all the intermediate stations and all compromisescreated, not by them but by the course of historical develop-ment, they clearly perceive and constantly pursue the final aim—the abolition of classes and the creation of a societyin which there will no longer be private ownership of land in advocating non-participation in parliament. 
 But on one point, it seems to me, Comrade Bordiga is right—as far as can be judgedfrom two issues of his paper, Il Soviet (Nos. 
 3 and 4, January 18 and February 1, 1920), from four issues of Comrade Serrati’s excellent periodical, Comunismo (Nos. 
 1 -4, October 1 -November 30, 1919), and from separate issues of Italian bourgeois papers which I have seen. 
Comrade Bordiga and his group are right in attacking Turatiand his partisans, who remain in a party which has recognised Sovietpower and the dictatorship of the proletariat, and yet continue their former pernicious and opportunist policy as members of parliament. 
 Of course, in tolerating this, Comrade Serrati and the entire ItalianSocialist Party 28 are making a mistake which threatens to do as much harm and give rise to the same dangers as it did in Hungary, wherethe Hungarian Turatis sabotaged both the party and the Soviet govern-ment 29 from within. 
 Such a mistaken, inconsistent, or spineless atti-tude towards the opportunist parliamentarians gives rise to “Left-wing” communism, on the one hand, and to a certain extent justifies its existence, on the other. 
 Comrade Serrati is obviously wrong whenhe accuses Deputy Turati of being “inconsistent” ( Comunismo No. 
 3), for it is the Italian Socialist Party itself that is inconsistentin tolerating such opportunist parliamentarians as Turati and Co. 
 or of the means of production. 
 The thirty-three Blanquists are Communists just because they imagine that, merely because they want to skip the intermediate stations and compromises, the matter is settled, and if ‘it begins’ in thenext few days—which they take for granted—and they takeover power, ‘communism will be introduced’ the day aftertomorrow. 
 If that is not immediately possible, they are notCommunists. 
 “What childish innocence h is to present one’s own impatience as a theoretically convincing argument!” (Frede-rick Engels, “Programme of the Blanquist Communards”, 30 from the German Social-Democratic newspaper Volksstaat , 1874, No. 
 73, given in the Russian translation of Articles , 1871-1875 , Petrograd, 1919, pp. 
 52-53). 
 In the same article, Engels expresses his profound esteem for Vaillant, and speaks of the “unquestionable merit” ofthe latter (who, like Guesde, was one of the most prominentleaders of international socialism until their betrayal ofsocialism in August 1914). 
 But Engels does not fail to givea detailed analysis of an obvious error. 
 Of course, to very young and inexperienced revolutionaries, as well as to petty-bourgeois revolutionaries of even very respectable ageand great experience, it seems extremely “dangerous”, incomprehensible and wrong to “permit compromises”. 
 Many sophists (being unusually or excessively “experienced” politicians) reason exactly in the same way as the Britishleaders of opportunism mentioned by Comrade Lansbury: “If the Bolsheviks are permitted a certain compromise, why should we not be permitted any kind of compromise?”However, proletarians schooled in numerous strikes (to take only this manifestation of the class struggle) usually assimilate in admirable fashion the very profound truth(philosophical, historical, political and psychological) expounded by Engels. 
 Every proletarian has been through strikes and has experienced “compromises” with the hatedoppressors and exploiters, when the workers have had to return to work either without having achieved anything or else agreeing to only a partial satisfaction of their demands. 
Every proletarian—as a result of the conditions of the mass struggle and the acute intensification of class antagonisms he lives among—sees the difference between a compromise enforced by objective conditions (such as lack of strike funds, no outside support, starvation and exhaustion)—a compromise which in no way minimises the revolutionary devotion and readiness to carry on the struggle on the partof the workers who have agreed to such a compromise—and,on the other hand, a compromise by traitors who try toascribe to objective causes their self-interest (strike-breakersalso enter into “compromises”!), their cowardice, desire to toady to the capitalists, and readiness to yield to intim-idation, sometimes to persuasion, sometimes to sops,and sometimes to flattery from the capitalists. 
 (The historyof the British labour movement provides a very large num-ber of instances of such treacherous compromises by Britishtrade union leaders, but, in one form or another, almost all workers in all countries have witnessed the same sort of thing. 
) Naturally, there are individual cases of exceptional dif-ficulty and complexity, when the greatest efforts arenecessary for a proper assessment of the actual character ofthis or that “compromise”, just as there are cases of homi-cide when it is by no means easy to establish whether the homicide was fully justified and even necessary (as, forexample, legitimate self-defence), or due to unpardonablenegligence, or even to a cunningly executed perfidious plan. 
Of course, in politics, where it is sometimes a matter ofextremely complex relations—national and international— between classes and parties, very many cases will arise that will be much more difficult than the question of alegitimate “compromise” in a strike or a treacherous “com-promise” by a strike-breaker, treacherous leader, etc. 
 Itwould be absurd to formulate a recipe or general rule (“Nocompromises!”) to suit all cases. 
 One must use one’s own brains and be able to find one’s bearings in each particular instance. 
 It is, in fact, one of the functions of a party organ-isation and of party leaders worthy of the name, to acquire,through the prolonged, persistent, variegated and compre-hensive efforts of all thinking representatives of a givenclass, * the knowledge, experience and—in addition to *Within every class, even in the conditions prevailing in the most enlightened countries, even within the most advanced class, knowledge and experience—the political flair necessary for the speedy and correct solution of complex political problems. 
 Naïve and quite inexperienced people imagine that the permissibility of compromise in general is sufficient to obliterate any distinction between opportunism, againstwhich we are waging, and must wage, an unremittingstruggle, and revolutionary Marxism, or communism. 
 Butif such people do not yet know that in nature and in society all distinctions are fluid and up to a certain point conven-tional, nothing can help them but lengthy training, educa-tion, enlightenment, and political and everyday experi-ence. 
 In the practical questions that arise in the politicsof any particular or specific historical moment, it is impor-tant to single out those which display the principal type of intolerable and treacherous compromises, such as embody an opportunism that is fatal to the revolutionary class,and to exert all efforts to explain them and combat them. 
During . 
. 
the 1914-18 imperialist war between two groupsof equally predatory countries, social-chauvinism was theprincipal and fundamental type of opportunism, i. 
e. 
, sup-port of “defence of country”, which in such a war was really equivalent to defence of the predatory interests ofone’s “own” bourgeoisie. 
 After the war, defence of the rob-ber League of Nations, 31 defence of direct or indirect alli-ances with the bourgeoisie of one’s own country against therevolutionary proletariat and the “Soviet” movement, and defence of bourgeois democracy and bourgeois parlia-mentarianism against “Soviet power” became the prin-cipal manifestations of those intolerable and treacherouscompromises, whose sum total constituted an opportunismfatal to the revolutionary proletariat and its cause. 
 “...All compromise with other parties ... any policy of manoeuvr-ing and compromise must be emphatically rejected,” the German Lefts write in the Frankfurt pamphlet. 
 and even when the circumstances of the moment have aroused allits spiritual forces to an exceptional degree, there always are—andinevitably will be as long as classes exist, as long as a classless society has not fully consolidated itself, and has not developed on its ownfoundations—representatives of the class who do not think, and are incapable of thinking, for themselves. 
 Capitalism would not be the oppressor of the masses that it actually is, if things were otherwise. 
 It is surprising that, with such views, these Lefts do not emphatically condemn Bolshevism! After all, the German Lefts cannot but know that the entire history of Bolshevism, both before and after the October Revolution, is full of instances of changes of tack, conciliatory tactics and com-promises with other parties, including bourgeois parties! To carry on a war for the overthrow of the international bourgeoisie, a war which is a hundred times more difficult, protracted and complex than the most stubborn of ordi-nary wars between states, and to renounce in advance anychange of tack, or any utilisation of a conflict of interests(even if temporary) among one’s enemies, or any concilia-tion or compromise with possible allies (even if they aretemporary, unstable, vacillating or conditional allies)— is that not ridiculous in the extreme? Is it not like making a difficult ascent of an unexplored and hitherto inaccessiblemountain and refusing in advance ever to move in zigzags,ever to retrace one’s steps, or ever to abandon a courseonce selected, and to try others? And yet people so immatureand inexperienced (if youth were the explanation, it would not be so bad; young people are preordained to talk such nonsense for a certain period) have met with support—whether direct or indirect, open or covert, whole or partial,it does not matter—from some members of the CommunistParty of Holland. 
 After the first socialist revolution of the proletariat, and the overthrow of the bourgeoisie in some country, the proletariat of that country remains for a long time weaker than the bourgeoisie, simply because of the latter’s exten-sive international links, and also because of the spontaneousand continuous restoration and regeneration of capitalismand the bourgeoisie by the small commodity producers of the country which has overthrown the bourgeoisie. 
 The more powerful enemy can be vanquished only by exertingthe utmost effort, and by the most thorough, careful,attentive, skilful and obligatory use of any, even the smallest, rift between the enemies, any conflict of interests amongthe bourgeoisie of the various countries and among the various groups or types of bourgeoisie within the various coun-tries, and also by taking advantage of any, even the smallest,opportunity of winning a mass ally, even though this ally is temporary, vacillating, unstable, unreliable and condi-tional. 
 Those who do not understand this reveal a failure to understand even the smallest grain of Marxism, of modem scientific socialism in general . 
 Those who have not proved in practice , over a fairly considerable period of time and in fairly varied political situations, their abil-ity to apply this truth in practice have not yet learned tohelp the revolutionary class in its struggle to emancipate all toiling humanity from the exploiters. 
 And this applies equally to the period before and after the proletariat has won political power. 
 Our theory is not a dogma, but a guide to action , said Marx and Engels. 
 32 The greatest blunder, the greatest crime, committed by such “out-and-out” Marxists as Karl Kautsky, Otto Bauer, etc. 
, is that they have not understood this and have been unable to apply it at crucial moments of theproletarian revolution. 
 “Political activity is not like thepavement of Nevsky Prospekt” (the well-kept, broad andlevel pavement of the perfectly straight principal thorough-fare of St. 
 Petersburg), N. 
 G. 
 Chernyshevsky, the great Russian socialist of the pre-Marxist period, used to say. 
 Since Chernyshevsky’s time, disregard or forgetfulness ofthis truth has cost Russian revolutionaries countlesssacrifices. 
 We must strive at all costs to prevent the Left Communists and West-European and American revo-lutionaries that are devoted to the working class from pay-ing as dearly as the backward Russians did to learn this truth. 
 Prior to the downfall of tsarism, the Russian revolution-ary Social-Democrats made repeated use of the servicesof the bourgeois liberals, i. 
e. 
, they concluded numerouspractical compromises with the latter. 
 In 1901-02, even prior to the appearance of Bolshevism, the old editorial board of Iskra (consisting of Plekhanov, Axelrod, Zasulich, Martov, Potresov and myself) concluded (not for long,it is true) a formal political alliance with Struve, the poli-tical leader of bourgeois liberalism, while at the same timebeing able to wage an unremitting and most merciless ideological and political struggle against bourgeois liberal-ism and against the slightest manifestations of its influencein the working-class movement. 
 The Bolsheviks have always adhered to this policy. 
 Since 1905 they have systematically advocated an alliance between the work-ing class and the peasantry, against the liberal bourgeoisie and tsarism, never, however, refusing to support the bour-geoisie against tsarism (for instance, during second roundsof elections, or during second ballots) and never ceasingtheir relentless ideological and political struggle againstthe Socialist-Revolutionaries, the bourgeois-revolutionary peasant party, exposing them as petty-bourgeois democrats who have falsely described themselves as socialists. 
 Duringthe Duma elections of 1907, the Bolsheviks entered brieflyinto a formal political bloc with the Socialist-Revolution-aries. 
 Between 1903 and 1912, there were periods of severalyears in which we were formally united with the Mensheviks in a single Social-Democratic Party, but we never stopped our ideological and political struggle against them asopportunists and vehicles of bourgeois influence on the pro-letariat. 
 During the war, we concluded certain compromiseswith the Kautskyites, with the Left Mensheviks (Martov),and with a section of the Socialist-Revolutionaries (Cher-nov and Natanson); we were together with them at Zimmer-wald and Kienthal, 33 and issued joint manifestos. 
 However, we never ceased and never relaxed our ideological andpolitical struggle against the Kautskyites, Martov andChernov (when Natanson died in 1919, a “Revolutionary-Communist” Narodnik, 34 he was very close to and almost in agreement with us). 
 At the very moment of the October Revolution, we entered into an informal but very important(and very successful) political bloc with the petty-bourgeoispeasantry by adopting the Socialist-Revolutionary agrarian programme in its entirety , without a single alteration—i. 
e. 
, we effected an undeniable compromise in order to prove to the peasants that we wanted, not to “steam-roller” them but to reach agreement with them. 
 At the same time we pro-posed (and soon after effected) a formal political bloc,including participation in the government, with the LeftSocialist-Revolutionaries, who dissolved this bloc afterthe conclusion of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk and then, in July 1918, went to the length of armed rebellion, and subsequently of an armed struggle, against us. 
 It is therefore understandable why the attacks made by the German Lefts against the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Germany for entertaining the idea of a bloc with the Independents (the Independent Social-Democratic Party of Germany—the Kautskyites) are abso-lutely inane, in our opinion, and clear proof that the “Lefts”are in the wrong . 
 In Russia, too, there were Right Menshe-viks (participants in the Kerensky government), who cor-responded to the German Scheidemanns, and Left Menshe-viks (Martov), corresponding to the German Kautskyites and standing in opposition to the Right Mensheviks. 
 A gradualshift of the worker masses from the Mensheviks over to theBolsheviks was to be clearly seen in 1917. 
 At the First All-Russia Congress of Soviets, held in June 1917, we hadonly 13 per cent of the votes; the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks had a majority. 
 At the Second Con-gress of Soviets (October 25, 1917, old style) we had 51per cent of the votes. 
 Why is it that in Germany the same and absolutely identical shift of the workers from Right to Left did not immediately strengthen the Communists,but first strengthened the midway Independent Party, although the latter never had independent political ideas or an independent policy, but merely wavered betweenthe Scheidemanns and the Communists? One of the evident reasons was the erroneous tactics of the German Communists, who must fearlessly and honestlyadmit this error and learn to rectify it. 
 The error consisted in their denial of the need to take part in the reactionary bourgeois parliaments and in the reactionary trade unions;the error consisted in numerous manifestations of that “Left-wing” infantile disorder which has now come to the surfaceand will consequently be cured the more thoroughly, themore rapidly and with greater advantage to the organism. 
 The German Independent Social-Democratic Party is obviously not a homogeneous body. 
 Alongside the oldopportunist leaders (Kautsky, Hilferding and apparently,to a considerable extent, Crispien, Ledebour and others)—these have revealed their inability to understand thesignificance of Soviet power and the dictatorship of the proletariat, and their inability to lead the proletariat’s revolutionary struggle—there has emerged in this partya Left and proletarian wing, which is growing most rapidly. 
 Hundreds of thousands of members of this party (which has, I think, a membership of some three-quarters of a million) are proletarians who are abandoning Schei-demann and are rapidly going over to communism. 
This proletarian wing has already proposed—at the LeipzigCongress of the Independents (1919)—immediate and un-conditional affiliation to the Third International. 
 To feara “compromise” with this wing of the party is positively ridiculous. 
 On the contrary, it is the duty of Communists to seek and find a suitable form of compromise with them, a compromise which, on the one hand, will facilitate andaccelerate the necessary complete fusion with this wing and,on the other, will in no way hamper the Communists intheir ideological and political struggle against the opportu-nist Right wing of the Independents. 
 It will probably be no easy matter to devise a suitable form of compromise—but only a charlatan could promise the German workersand the German Communists an “easy” road to victory. 
 Capitalism would not be capitalism if the proletariat pur sang were not surrounded by a large number of exceedingly motley types intermediate between the proletarian and the semi-proletarian (who earns his livelihood in part bythe sale of his labour-power), between the semi-proletarianand the small peasant (and petty artisan, handicraft workerand small master in general), between the small peasantand the middle peasant, and so on, and if the proletariat itself were not divided into more developed and less devel-oped strata, if it were not divided according to territorialorigin, trade, sometimes according to religion, and so on. 
From all this follows the necessity, the absolute necessity,for the Communist Party, the vanguard of the proletariat,its class-conscious section, to resort to changes of tack, to conciliation and compromises with the various groups of proletarians, with the various parties of the workers andsmall masters. 
 It is entirely a matter of knowing how to apply these tactics in order to raise —not lower—the general level of proletarian class-consciousness, revolutionary spirit, andability to fight and win. 
 Incidentally, it should be noted that the Bolsheviks’ victory over the Mensheviks called for the application of tactics of changes of tack, concilia-tion and compromises, not only before but also after the October Revolution of 1917, but the changes of tack and compromises were, of course, such as assisted, boosted and consolidated the Bolsheviks at the expense of the Menshe-viks. 
 The petty-bourgeois democrats (including the Menshe-viks) inevitably vacillate between the bourgeoisie and theproletariat, between bourgeois democracy and the Sovietsystem, between reformism and revolutionism, betweenlove for the workers and fear of the proletarian dictatorship, etc. 
 The Communists’ proper tactics should consist in uti-lising these vacillations, not ignoring them; utilising them calls for concessions to elements that are turning towardsthe proletariat—whenever and in the measure that theyturn towards the proletariat—in addition to fighting thosewho turn towards the bourgeoisie. 
 As a result of the applica-tion of the correct tactics, Menshevism began to disintegrate, and has been disintegrating more and more in our country;the stubbornly opportunist leaders are being isolated, andthe best of the workers and the best elements among thepetty-bourgeois democrats are being brought into ourcamp. 
 This is a lengthy process, and the hasty “decision”— “No compromises, no manoeuvres”—can only prejudice the strengthening of the revolutionary proletariat’s influenceand the enlargement of its forces. 
 Lastly, one of the undoubted errors of the German “Lefts” lies in their downright refusal to recognise the Treaty ofVersailles. 
 The more “weightily” and “pompously”, the more “emphatically” and peremptorily this viewpoint is formulated (by K. 
 Horner, for instance), the less sense itseems to make. 
 It is not enough, under the present condi-tions of the international proletarian revolution, to repu-diate the preposterous absurdities of “National Bolshevism”(Laufenberg and others), which has gone to the length of advocating a bloc with the German bourgeoisie for a war against the Entente. 
 One must realise that it is utterlyfalse tactics to refuse to admit that a Soviet Germany (ifa German Soviet republic were soon to arise) would haveto recognise the Treaty of Versailles for a time, and to sub-mit to it. 
 From this it does not follow that the Independents —at a time when the Scheidemanns were in the govern-ment, when the Soviet government in Hungary had notyet been overthrown, and when it was still possible that a Soviet revolution in Vienna would support Soviet Hunga-ry—were right, under the circumstances , in putting forward the demand that the Treaty of Versailles should be signed. 
 At that time the Independents tacked and manoeuvredvery clumsily, for they more or less accepted responsibilityfor the Scheidemann traitors, and more or less backslidfrom advocacy of a ruthless (and most calmly conducted)class war against the Scheidemanns, to advocacy of a “classless” or “above-class” standpoint. 
 In the present situation, however, the German Communists should obviously not deprive themselves of freedom of actionby giving a positive and categorical promise to repudiatethe Treaty of Versailles in the event of communism’s vic-tory. 
 That would be absurd. 
 They should say: the Scheide-manns and the Kautskyites have committed a number of acts of treachery hindering (and in part quite ruining) thechances of an alliance with Soviet Russia and Soviet Hun-gary. 
 We Communists will do all we can to facilitate and pave the way for such an alliance. 
 However, we are in no way obligated to repudiate the Treaty of Versailles, come what may, or to do so at once. 
 The possibility of its success-ful repudiation will depend, not only on the German, butalso on the international successes of the Soviet movement. 
The Scheidemanns and the Kautskyites have hampered thismovement; we are helping it. 
 That is the gist of the mat-ter; therein lies the fundamental difference. 
 And if our class enemies, the exploiters and their Scheidemann and Kautsky-ite lackeys, have missed many an opportunity of streng-thening both the German and the international Sovietmovement, of strengthening both the German and theinternational Soviet revolution, the blame lies with them. 
The Soviet revolution in Germany will strengthen the international Soviet movement, which is the strongest bulwark (and the only reliable, invincible and world-widebulwark) against the Treaty of Versailles and againstinternational imperialism in general. 
 To give absolute,categorical and immediate precedence to liberation from theTreaty of Versailles and to give it precedence over the ques-tion of liberating other countries oppressed by imperialism, from the yoke of imperialism, is philistine nationalism(worthy of the Kautskys, the Hilferdings, the Otto Bauers /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR and Co. 
), not revolutionary internationalism. 
 The over-throw of the bourgeoisie in any of the large European coun-tries, including Germany, would be such a gain for the international revolution that, for its sake, one can, andif necessary should, tolerate a more prolonged existence of the Treaty of Versailles . 
 If Russia, standing alone, could endure the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk for several months,to the advantage of the revolution, there is nothing impos-sible in a Soviet Germany, allied with Soviet Russia, endur-ing the existence of the Treaty of Versailles for a longerperiod, to the advantage of the revolution. 
 The imperialists of France, Britain, etc. 
, are trying to provoke and ensnare the German Communists: “Say thatyou will not sign the Treaty of Versailles!” they urge. 
 Like babes, the Left Communists fall into the trap laid for them, instead of skilfully manoeuvring against the craftyand, at present , stronger enemy, and instead of telling him, “We shall sign the Treaty of Versailles now”It is folly, not revolutionism, to deprive ourselves madvance of any freedom of action, openly to inform an enemy who is at present better armed than we are whether we shall fight him, and when. 
 To accept battle at a time when it isobviously advantageous to the enemy, but not to us, iscriminal; political leaders of the revolutionary class areabsolutely useless if they are incapable of “changing tack,or offering conciliation and compromise” in order to take evasive action in a patently disadvantageous battle. 
 IX “LEFT-WING” COMMUNISM IN GREAT BRITAIN There is no Communist Party in Great Britain as yet, but there is a fresh, broad, powerful and rapidly growingcommunist movement among the workers, which justifiesthe best hopes. 
 There are several political parties and organ-isations (the British Socialist Party, 35 the Socialist Labour Party, the South Wales Socialist Society, the Work-ers’ Socialist Federation36), which desire to form a Com-munist Party and are already negotiating among themselvesto this end. 
 In its issue of February 21, 1920, Vol. 
 VI, No. 
 48, The Workers ’ Dreadnought , weekly organ of the last of the organisations mentioned, carried an article by the editor, Comrade Sylvia Pankhurst, entitled “Towards a Communist Party”. 
 The article outlines the progress of thenegotiations between the four organisations mentioned, forthe formation of a united Communist Party, on the basis ofaffiliation to the Third International, the recognition ofthe Soviet system instead of parliamentarianism, and the recognition of the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 It appears that one of the greatest obstacles to the immediate forma-tion of a united Communist Party is presented by the dis-agreement on the questions of participation in Parliamentand on whether the new Communist Party should affiliate tothe old, trade-unionist, opportunist and social-chauvinist Labour Party, which is mostly made up of trade unions. 
 The Workers’ Socialist Federation and the Socialist LabourParty * are opposed to taking part in parliamentary elections and in Parliament, and they are opposed to affiliation tothe Labour Party; in this they disagree with all or with mostof the members of the British Socialist Party, which they regard as the “Right wing of the Communist parties” in Great Britain. 
 (Page 5, Sylvia Pankhurst’s article. 
) Thus, the main division is the same as in Germany, not-withstanding the enormous difference in the forms in whichthe disagreements manifest themselves (in Germany theform is far closer to the “Russian” than it is in Great Brit-ain), and in a number of other things. 
 Let us examine the arguments of the “Lefts”. 
 On the question of participation in Parliament, Comrade Sylvia Pankhurst refers to an article in the same issue, byComrade Gallacher, who writes in the name of the ScottishWorkers’ Council in Glasgow. 
 “The above council,” he writes, “is definitely anti-parliamentar-ian, and has behind it the Left wing of the various political bodies. 
 We represent the revolutionary movement in Scotland, strivingcontinually to build up a revolutionary organisation within theindustries [in various branches of production], and a CommunistParty, based on social committees, throughout the country. 
 For *I believe this party is opposed to affiliation to the Labour Party but not all its members are opposed to participation in Parliament. 
 a considerable time we have been sparring with the official parlia-mentarians. 
 We have not considered it necessary to declare open warfare on them, and they are afraid to open an attack on us. 
 “But this state of affairs cannot long continue. 
 We are winning all along the line. 
 “The rank and file of the I. 
L. 
P. 
 in Scotland is becoming more and more disgusted with the thought of Parliament, and the Soviets[the Russian word transliterated into English is used] or Workers’ Councils are being supported by almost every branch. 
 This is very serious, of course, for the gentlemen who look to politics for a profes-sion, and they are using any and every means to persuade their mem-bers to come back into the parliamentary fold. 
 Revolutionary comrades must not [all italics are the author’s] give any support to this gang. 
Our fight here is going to be a difficult one. 
 One of the worst features of it will be the treachery of those whose personal ambition is a more impelling force than their regard for the revolution. 
 Any support givento parliamentarism is simply assisting to put power into the hands of our British Scheidemanns and Noskes. 
 Henderson, Clynes and Co. 
 are hopelessly reactionary. 
 The official I. 
L. 
P. 
 is more and morecoming under the control of middle-class Liberals, who ... have found their ‘spiritual home’ in the camp of Messrs. 
 MacDonald, Snowden and Co. 
 The official I. 
L. 
P. 
 is bitterly hostile to the Third Internation-al, the rank and file is for it. 
 Any support to the parliamentary oppor-tunists is simply playing into the hands of the former. 
 The B. 
S. 
P. 
 doesn’t count at all here.... 
 What is wanted here is a sound revolu-tionary industrial organisation, and a Communist Party working along clear, well-defined, scientific lines. 
 If our comrades can assist us in building these, we will take their help gladly; if they cannot,for God’s sake let them keep out altogether, lest they betray the revolution by lending their support to the reactionaries, who are so eagerly clamouring for parliamentary ‘honours’ (?) [the query markis the author’s] and who are so anxious to prove that they can rule as effectively as the ‘boss’ class politicians themselves. 
” In my opinion, this letter to the editor expresses excel-lently the temper and point of view of the young Commu-nists, or of rank-and-file workers who are only just begin-ning to accept communism. 
 This temper is highly gratifyingand valuable; we must learn to appreciate and support it for, in its absence, it would be hopeless to expect the victory of the proletarian revolution in Great Britain, orin any other country for that matter. 
 People who can giveexpression to this temper of the masses, and are able toevoke such a temper (which is very often dormant, un-conscious and latent) among the masses, should be appre-ciated and given every assistance. 
 At the same time, we must tell them openly and frankly that a state of mind is by itself insufficient for leadership of the masses in a great revolu-tionary struggle, and that the cause of the revolution may well be harmed by certain errors that people who are most devoted to the cause of the revolution are about to commit,or are committing. 
 Comrade Gallacher’s letter undoubtedlyreveals the rudiments of all the mistakes that are being made by the German “Left” Communists and were madeby the Russian “Left” Bolsheviks in 1908 and 1918. 
 The writer of the letter is full of a noble and working-class hatred for the bourgeois “class politicians” (a hatredunderstood and shared, however, not only by proletariansbut by all working people, by all Kleinen Leuten * to use the German expression). 
 In a representative of the oppressedand exploited masses, this hatred is truly the “beginning of all wisdom”, the basis of any socialist and communist movement and of its success. 
 The writer, however, hasapparently lost sight of the fact that politics is a scienceand an art that does not fall from the skies or come gratis,and that, if it wants to overcome the bourgeoisie, the pro-letariat must train its own proletarian “class politicians”, of a kind in no way inferior to bourgeois politicians. 
 The writer of the letter fully realises that only workers’ Soviets, not parliament, can be the instrument enablingthe proletariat to achieve its aims; those who have failedto understand this are, of course, out-and-out reactionaries,even if they are most highly educated people, most ex-perienced politicians, most sincere socialists, most erudite Marxists, and most honest citizens and fathers of families. 
But the writer of the letter does not even ask—it doesnot occur to him to ask—whether it is possible tobring about the Soviets’ victory over parliament withoutgetting pro-Soviet politicians into parliament, without disintegrating parliamentarianism from within , without working within parliament for the success of the Sovietsin their forthcoming task of dispersing parliament. 
Yet the writer of the letter expresses the absolutelycorrect idea that the Communist Party in Great Britainmust act on scientific principles. 
 Science demands, first, that the experience of other countries be taken into account, *“Small folk, little people” (Germ. 
). 
— Ed. 
 especially if these other countries, which are also capitalist, are undergoing, or have recently undergone, a very similar experience; second, it demands that account be taken of all the forces, groups, parties, classes and masses operating in a given country, and also that policy should not bedetermined only by the desires and views, by the degree ofclass-consciousness and the militancy of one group orparty alone. 
 It is true that the Hendersons, the Clyneses, the Mac-Donalds and the Snowdens are hopelessly reactionary. 
It is equally true that they want to assume power (thoughthey would prefer a coalition with the bourgeoisie), thatthey want to “rule” along the old bourgeois lines, and thatwhen they are in power they will certainly behave like the Scheidemanns and Noskes. 
 All that is true. 
 But it does not at all follow that to support them means treachery tothe revolution; what does follow is that, in the interests ofthe revolution, working-class revolutionaries should givethese gentlemen a certain amount of parliamentary support. 
To explain this idea, I shall take two contemporary British political documents: (1) the speech delivered by Prime Minister Lloyd George on March 18, 1920 (as reported inThe Manchester Guardian of March 19, 1920), and (2) the arguments of a “Left” Communist, Comrade Sylvia Pank-hurst, in the article mentioned above. 
 In his speech Lloyd George entered into a polemic with Asquith (who had been especially invited to this meeting but declined to attend) and with those Liberals who want,not a coalition with the Conservatives, but closer relationswith the Labour Party. 
 (In the above-quoted letter, Com-rade Gallacher also points to the fact that Liberals are join-ing the Independent Labour Party. 
) Lloyd George argued that a coalition—and a close coalition at that—between the Liberals and the Conservatives was essential, otherwisethere might be a victory for the Labour Party, which LloydGeorge prefers to call “Socialist” and which is working forthe “common ownership” of the means of production. 
 “Itis ... known as communism in France,” the leader of the British bourgeoisie said, putting it popularly for his audi-ence, Liberal M. 
P. 
s who probably never knew it before. 
 InGermany it was called socialism, and in Russia it is called Bolshevism, he went on to say. 
 To Liberals this is unaccept-able on principle, Lloyd George explained, because they stand in principle for private property. 
 “Civilisation is in jeopardy,” the speaker declared, and consequentlyLiberals and Conservatives must unite.... 
 “...If you go to the agricultural areas,” said Lloyd George, “I agree you have the old party divisions as strong as ever. 
 They areremoved from the danger. 
 It does not walk their lanes. 
 But when they see it they will be as strong as some of these industrial constituencies are now. 
 Four-fifths of this country is industrial and commercial;hardly one-fifth is agricultural. 
 It is one of the things I have constantlyin my mind when I think of the dangers of the future here. 
 In Francethe population is agricultural, and you have a solid body of opinionwhich does not move very rapidly, and which is not very easily excit-ed by revolutionary movements. 
 That is not the case here. 
 This country is more top-heavy than any country in the world, and if itbegins to rock, the crash here, for that reason, will be greater than inany land. 
” From this the reader will see that Mr. 
 Lloyd George is not only a very intelligent man, but one who has also learneda great deal from the Marxists. 
 We too have something to learn from Lloyd George. 
 Of definite interest is the following episode, which occurred in the course of the discussion after Lloyd George’sspeech: “Mr. 
 Wallace , M. 
P. 
: I should like to ask what the Prime Minister considers the effect might be in the industrial constituencies uponthe industrial workers, so many of whom are Liberals at the presenttime and from whom we get so much support. 
 Would not a possibleresult be to cause an immediate overwhelming accession of strength to the Labour Party from men who at present are our cordial support-ers? “The Prime Minister: I take a totally different view. 
 The fact that Liberals are fighting among themselves undoubtedly drivesa very considerable number of Liberals in despair to the LabourParty, where you get a considerable body of Liberals, very able men, whose business it is to discredit the Government. 
 The result is undoubt-edly to bring a good accession of public sentiment to the LabourParty. 
 It does not go to the Liberals who are outside, it goes to theLabour Party, the by-elections show that. 
” It may be said, in passing, that this argument shows in particular how muddled even the most intelligent membersof the bourgeoisie have become and how they cannot helpcommitting irreparable blunders. 
 That, in fact, is what will bring about the downfall of the bourgeoisie. 
 Our people, however, may commit blunders (provided, of course, that they are not too serious and are rectified in time) and yet, in the long run, will prove the victors. 
 The second political document is the following argument advanced by Comrade Sylvia Pankhurst, a “Left” Commu-nist: “...Comrade Inkpin [the General Secretary of the British Social-ist Party] refers to the Labour Party as ‘the main body of the work-ing-class movement’. 
 Another comrade of the British SocialistParty, at the Third International, just held, put the BritishSocialist Party position more strongly. 
 He said: ‘We regard theLabour Party as the organised working class. 
’ “We do not take this view of the Labour Party. 
 The Labour Party is very large numerically though its membership is to a great extentquiescent and apathetic, consisting of men and women who have joinedthe trade unions because their workmates are trade unionists, andto share the friendly benefits. 
 “But we recognise that the great size of the Labour Party is also due to the fact that it is the creation of a school of thought beyond which the majority of the British working class has not yet emerged,though great changes are at work in the mind of the people whichwill presently alter this state of affairs.... 
 “The British Labour Party, like the social-patriotic organisations of other countries, will, in the natural development of society, inevi-tably come into power. 
 It is for the Communists to build up the forces that will overthrow the social patriots, and in this country we mustnot delay or falter in that work. 
 “We must not dissipate our energy in adding to the strength of the Labour Party; its rise to power is inevitable. 
 We must concentrateon making a communist movement that will vanquish it. 
 The Labour Party will soon be forming a government; the revolutionary opposi-tion must make ready to attack it.... 
” Thus the liberal bourgeoisie are abandoning the historical system of “two parties” (of exploiters), which has beenhallowed by centuries of experience and has been extremelyadvantageous to the exploiters, and consider it necessaryfor these two parties to join forces against the Labour Party. 
 A number of Liberals are deserting to the Labour Party like rats from a sinking ship. 
 The Left Communists believethat the transfer of power to the Labour Party is inevitableand admit that it now has the backing of most workers. 
From this they draw the strange conclusion which ComradeSylvia Pankhurst formulates as follows: “The Communist Party must not compromise.... 
 The Communist Party must keep its doctrine pure, and its independence of reformisminviolate, its mission is to lead the way, without stopping or turning,by the direct road to the communist revolution. 
” On the contrary, the fact that most British workers still follow the lead of the British Kerenskys or Scheidemannsand have not yet had experience of a government composed ofthese people—an experience which was necessary in Russia and Germany so as to secure the mass transition of the workers to communism—undoubtedly indicates that the BritishCommunists should participate in parliamentary action, that they should, from within parliament, help the masses of the workers see the results of a Henderson and Snowdengovernment in practice, and that they should help the Hender-sons and Snowdens defeat the united forces of Lloyd George and Churchill. 
 To act otherwise would mean hamperingthe cause of the revolution, since revolution is impossiblewithout a change in the views of the majority of the workingclass, a change brought about by the political experience ofthe masses, never by propaganda alone. 
 “To lead the way without compromises, without turning”—this slogan is obviously wrong if it comes from a patently impotent minor-ity of the workers who know (or at all events should know)that given a Henderson and Snowden victory over LloydGeorge and Churchill, the majority will soon become dis-appointed in their leaders and will begin to support com-munism (or at all events will adopt an attitude of neutrality, and, in the main, of sympathetic neutrality, towards theCommunists). 
 It is as though 10,000 soldiers were to hurlthemselves into battle against an enemy force of 50,000,when it would be proper to “halt”, “take evasive action”,or even effect a “compromise” so as to gain time until the arrival of the 100,000 reinforcements that are on their way but cannot go into action immediately. 
 That is intellectual-ist childishness, not the serious tactics of a revolutionaryclass. 
 The fundamental law of revolution, which has been confirmed by all revolutions and especially by all three Russian revolutions in the twentieth century, is as follows: for a revolution to take place it is not enough for the exploit-ed and oppressed masses to realise the impossibility of living in the old way, and demand changes; for a revolution to take place it is essential that the exploiters should not be able to live and rule in the old way. 
 It is only when the “lower classes ” do not want to live in the old way and the “upper classes” cannot carry on in the old way that the revolution can triumph. 
 This truth can be expressed in otherwords: revolution is impossible without a nation-wide crisis(affecting both the exploited and the exploiters). 
 It follows that, for a revolution to take place, it is essential, first, that a majority of the workers (or at least a majority ofthe class-conscious, thinking, and politically active workers)should fully realise that revolution is necessary, and thatthey should be prepared to die for it; second, that the rulingclasses should be going through a governmental crisis, which draws even the most backward masses into politics (symptomatic of any genuine revolution is a rapid, tenfoldand even hundredfold increase in the size of the workingand oppressed masses—hitherto apathetic—who are capableof waging the political struggle), weakens the government,and makes it possible for the revolutionaries to rapidly overthrow it. 
 Incidentally, as can also be seen from Lloyd George’s speech, both conditions for a successful proletarian revolu-tion are clearly maturing in Great Britain. 
 The errors of theLeft Communists are particularly dangerous at present,because certain revolutionaries are not displaying a sufficient-ly thoughtful, sufficiently attentive, sufficiently intelligent and sufficiently shrewd attitude toward each of these con-ditions. 
 If we are the party of the revolutionary class,and not merely a revolutionary group, and if we want themasses to follow us (and unless we achieve that, we standthe risk of remaining mere windbags), we must, first, help Henderson or Snowden to beat Lloyd George and Churchill (or, rather, compel the former to beat the latter, becausethe former are afraid of their victory! ); second, we must help the majority of the working class to be convinced by theirown experience that we are right, i. 
e. 
, that the Hendersonsand Snowdens are absolutely good for nothing, that they are petty-bourgeois and treacherous by nature, and that their bankruptcy is inevitable; third, we must bring nearer themoment when, on the basis of the disappointment of most of the workers in the Hendersons, it will be possible, with serious chances of success, to overthrow the government of the Hendersons at once; because if the most astute and solid Lloyd George, that big, not petty, bourgeois, is dis-playing consternation and is more and more weakeninghimself (and the bourgeoisie as a whole) by his “friction”with Churchill today and with Asquith tomorrow, howmuch greater will be the consternation of a Henderson gov-ernment! I will put it more concretely. 
 In my opinion, the British Communists should unite their four parties and groups(all very weak, and some of them very, very weak) intoa single Communist Party on the basis of the principles ofthe Third International and of obligatory participation in parliament. 
 The Communist Party should propose the following “compromise” election agreement to the Hen-dersons and Snowdens: let us jointly fight against the alliancebetween Lloyd George and the Conservatives; let us shareparliamentary seats in proportion to the number of workers’votes polled for the Labour Party and for the Communist Party (not in elections, but in a special ballot), and let us retain complete freedom of agitation, propaganda and polit-ical activity. 
 Of course, without this latter condition, wecannot agree to a bloc, for that would be treachery; theBritish Communists must demand and get complete freedomto expose the Hendersons and the Snowdens in the same way as ( for fifteen years —1903-17) the Russian Bolsheviks demanded and got it in respect of the Russian Hendersonsand Snowdens, i. 
e. 
, the Mensheviks. 
 If the Hendersons and the Snowdens accept a bloc on these terms, we shall be the gainers, because the number ofparliamentary seats is of no importance to us; we are not out for seats. 
 We shall yield on this point (whilst the Hen-dersons and especially their new friends—or new masters—the Liberals who have joined the Independent LabourParty are most eager to get seats). 
 We shall be the gainers,because we shall carry our agitation among the masses at a time when Lloyd George himself has “incensed” them, and we shall not only be helping the Labour Party to establish its government sooner, but shall also be helping the massessooner to understand the communist propaganda that we shall carry on against the Hendersons, without any reticence or omission. 
 If the Hendersons and the Snowdens reject a bloc with us on these terms, we shall gain still more, for we shallat once have shown the masses (note that, even in the pure-ly Menshevik and completely opportunist IndependentLabour Party, the rank and file are in favour of Soviets) that the Hendersons prefer their close relations with the capitalists to the unity of all the workers. 
 We shall immedi-ately gain in the eyes of the masses , who, particularly after the brilliant, highly correct and highly useful (to commu-nism) explanations given by Lloyd George, will be sympa-thetic to the idea of uniting all the workers against the LloydGeorge-Conservative alliance. 
 We shall gain immediately, because we shall have demonstrated to the masses that the Hendersons and the Snowdens are afraid to beat LloydGeorge, afraid to assume power alone, and are strivingto secure the secret support of Lloyd George, who is openly extending a hand to the Conservatives, against theLabour Party. 
 It should be noted that in Russia, after the revolution of February 27, 1917 (old style), the Bolsheviks’ propaganda against the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolu-tionaries (i. 
e. 
, the Russian Hendersons and Snowdens)derived benefit precisely from a circumstance of this kind. 
We said to the Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revolutiona-ries: assume full power without the bourgeoisie, because you have a majority in the Soviets (at the First All-Russia Congress of Soviets, in June 1917, the Bolsheviks had only13 per cent of the votes). 
 But the Russian Hendersons andSnowdens were afraid to assume power without the bourgeoi-sie, and when the bourgeoisie held up the elections to theConstituent Assembly, knowing full well that the elections would give a majority to the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks * (who formed a close political bloc and in *The results of the November 1917 elections to the Constituent Assembly in Russia, based on returns embracing over 36,000,000voters, were as follows: the Bolsheviks obtained 25 per cent ofthe votes; the various parties of the landowners and the bourgeoisieobtained 13 per cent, and the petty-bourgeois-democratic parties,i. 
e. 
, the Socialist-Revolutionaries, Mensheviks and a number of similar small groups obtained 62 per cent. 
 fact represented only petty-bourgeois democracy), the So-cialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks were unable energetically and consistently to oppose these delays. 
 If the Hendersons and the Snowdens reject a bloc with the Communists, the latter will immediately gain bywinning the sympathy of the masses and discrediting theHendersons and Snowdens; if, as a result, we do lose afew parliamentary seats, it is a matter of no significance to us. 
 We would put up our candidates in a very few but absolutely safe constituencies, namely, constituencies whereour candidatures would not give any seats to the Liberalsat the expense of the Labour candidates. 
 We would takepart in the election campaign, distribute leaflets agitatingfor communism, and, in all constituencies where we have no candidates, we would urge the electors to vote for the Labour candidate and against the bourgeois candidate . 
 Com-rades Sylvia Pankhurst and Gallacher are mistaken in think-ing that this is a betrayal of communism, or a renunciationof the struggle against the social-traitors. 
 On the contrary,the cause of communist revolution would undoubtedly gain thereby. 
 At present, British Communists very often find it hard even to approach the masses, and even to get a hearing fromthem. 
 If I come out as a Communist and call upon them tovote for Henderson and against Lloyd George, they willcertainly give me a hearing. 
 And I shall be able to explain in a popular manner, not only why the Soviets are better than a parliament and why the dictatorship of the proletar-iat is better than the dictatorship of Churchill (disguisedwith the signboard of bourgeois “democracy”), but also that,with my vote, I want to support Henderson in the sameway as the rope supports a hanged man—that the impending establishment of a government of the Hendersons will prove that I am right, will bring the masses over to my side, andwill hasten the political death of the Hendersons and theSnowdens just as was the case with their kindred spiritsin Russia and Germany. 
 If the objection is raised that these tactics are too “subtle” or too complex for the masses to understand, that these tactics will split and scatter our forces, will prevent us fromconcentrating them on Soviet revolution, etc. 
, I will reply to the “Left” objectors: don’t ascribe your doctrinairism to the masses! The masses in Russia are no doubt no better educated than the masses in Britain; if anything, they are less so. 
 Yet the masses understood the Bolsheviks, andthe fact that, in September 1917, on the eve of the Soviet revolution, the Bolsheviks put up their candidates for abourgeois parliament (the Constituent Assembly) and onthe day after the Soviet revolution, in November 1917, took part in the elections to this Constituent Assembly, which they got rid of on January 5, 1918—this did not hamperthe Bolsheviks, but, on the contrary, helped them. 
 I cannot deal here with the second point of disagreement among the British Communists—the question of affilia-tion or non-affiliation to the Labour Party. 
 I have too little material at my disposal on this question, which is highly complex because of the unique character of theBritish Labour Party, whose very structure is so unlikethat of the political parties usual in the European conti-nent. 
 It is beyond doubt, however, first, that in this question,too, those who try to deduce the tactics of the revolutionary proletariat from principles such as: “The Communist Party must keep its doctrine pure, and its independence of reform-ism inviolate; its mission is to lead the way, withoutstopping or turning, by the direct road to the communistrevolution”—will inevitably fall into error. 
 Such princi-ples are merely a repetition of the mistake made by the French Blanquist Communards, who, in 1874, “repudiated” all compromises and all intermediate stages. 
 Second, it isbeyond doubt that, in this question too, as always, the taskconsists in learning to apply the general and basic principlesof communism to the specific relations between classes and parties, to the specific features in the objective development towards communism, which are different in each country and which we must be able to discover, study, and predict. 
 This, however, should be discussed, not in connection with British communism alone, but in connection with thegeneral conclusions concerning the development of com-munism in all capitalist countries. 
 We shall now proceed to deal with this subject. 
 X SEVERAL CONCLUSIONS The Russian bourgeois revolution of 1905 revealed a highly original turn in world history: in one of the mostbackward capitalist countries, the strike movement attaineda scope and power unprecedented anywhere in the world. 
In the first month of 1905 alone , the number of strikers was ten times the annual average for the previous decade (1895-1904); from January to October 1905, strikes grew all thetime and reached enormous proportions. 
 Under the influenceof a number of unique historical conditions, backwardRussia was the first to show the world, not only the growth,by leaps and bounds, of the independent activity of the oppressed masses in time of revolution (this had occurred in all great revolutions), but also that the significance of theproletariat is infinitely greater than its proportion in thetotal population; it showed a combination of the economicstrike and the political strike, with the latter developinginto an armed uprising, and the birth of the Soviets, a new form of mass struggle and mass organisation of the classes oppressed by capitalism. 
 The revolutions of February and October 1917 led to the all-round development of the Soviets on a nation-widescale and to their victory in the proletarian socialist revo-lution. 
 In less than two years, the international character of the Soviets, the spread of this form of struggle and organ-isation to the world working-class movement and thehistorical mission of the Soviets as the grave-digger, heirand successor of bourgeois parliamentarianism and of bour-geois democracy in general, all became clear. 
 But that is not all. 
 The history of the working-class movement now shows that, in all countries, it is about to go through (and is already going through) a struggle waged bycommunism—emergent, gaining strength and advancingtowards victory—against, primarily, Menshevism, i. 
e. 
,opportunism and social-chauvinism (the home brand in eachparticular country), and then as a complement, so to say, Left-wing communism. 
 The former struggle has developed in all countries, apparently without any exception, as aduel between the Second International (already virtually dead) and the Third International. 
 The latter struggle is to be seen in Germany, Great Britain, Italy, America (at any rate, a certain section of the Industrial Workers of the World and of the anarcho-syndicalist trends uphold theerrors of Left-wing communism alongside of an almost uni-versal and almost unreserved acceptance of the Soviet sys-tem), and in France (the attitude of a section of the formersyndicalists towards the political party and parliamentar-ianism, also alongside of the acceptance of the Soviet sys-tem); in other words, the struggle is undoubtedly beingwaged, not only on an international, but even on a world-wide scale. 
 But while the working-class movement is everywhere going through what is actually the same kind of prepara-tory school for victory over the bourgeoisie, it is achieving that development in its own way in each country. 
 The big and advanced capitalist countries are travelling this roadfar more rapidly than did Bolshevism, to which history granted fifteen years to prepare itself for victory, as anorganised political trend. 
 In the brief space of a year, the Third International has already scored a decisive victory; it has defeated the yellow, social-chauvinist Second Inter-national, which only a few months ago was incomparablystronger than the Third International, seemed stable andpowerful, and enjoyed every possible support—direct andindirect, material (Cabinet posts, passports, the press) and ideological—from the world bourgeoisie. 
 It is now essential that Communists of every country should quite consciously take into account both the funda-mental objectives of the struggle against opportunism and“Left” doctrinairism, and the concrete features which this struggle assumes and must inevitably assume in each country, in conformity with the specific character of its eco-nomics, politics, culture, and national composition (Ire-land, etc. 
), its colonies, religious divisions, and so on andso forth. 
 Dissatisfaction with the Second International isfelt everywhere and is spreading and growing, both becauseof its opportunism and because of its inability or incapac-ity to create a really centralised and really leading centre capable of directing the international tactics of the revo-lutionary proletariat in its struggle for a world Soviet republic. 
 It should be clearly realised that such a leading centre can never be built up on stereotyped, mechanically equated, and identical tactical rules of struggle. 
 As long as national and state distinctions exist among peoples andcountries—and these will continue to exist for a very longtime to come, even after the dictatorship of the proletariathas been established on a world-wide scale—the unity ofthe international tactics of the communist working-class movement in all countries demands, not the elimination of variety of the suppression of national distinctions(which is a pipe dream at present), but an application ofthe fundamental principles of communism (Soviet power and the dictatorship of the proletariat), which will correctly modify these principles in certain particulars , correctly adapt and apply them to national and national-state dis-tinctions. 
 To seek out, investigate, predict, and grasp thatwhich is nationally specific and nationally distinctive, in theconcrete manner in which each country should tackle a single international task: victory over opportunism and Leftdoctrinarism within the working-class movement; the overthrow of the bourgeoisie; the establishment of a Soviet republic and a proletarian dictatorship—such is the basictask in the historical period that all the advanced coun-tries (and not they alone) are going through. 
 The chiefthing—though, of course, far from everything—the chiefthing, has already been achieved: the vanguard of the working class has been won over, has ranged itself on the side of Soviet government and against parliamentarianism,on the side of the dictatorship of the proletariat and againstbourgeois democracy. 
 All efforts and all attention shouldnow be concentrated on the next step, which may seem—and from a certain viewpoint actually is—less fundamental, but, on the other hand, is actually closer to a practical accomplishment of the task. 
 That step is: the search afterforms of the transition or the approach to the proletarian revolution. 
 The proletarian vanguard has been won over ideologi-cally. 
 That is the main thing. 
 Without this, not even the first step towards victory can be made. 
 But that is still quite a long way from victory. 
 Victory cannot be wonwith a vanguard alone. 
 To throw only the vanguard into the decisive battle, before the entire class, the broad masses, have taken up a position either of direct support for the vanguard, or at least of sympathetic neutrality towards it and of precluded support for the enemy, would be, notmerely foolish but criminal. 
 Propaganda and agitationalone are not enough for an entire class, the broad massesof the working people, those oppressed by capital, to takeup such a stand. 
 For that, the masses must have their own political experience. 
 Such is the fundamental law of all great revolutions, which has been confirmed with compellingforce and vividness, not only in Russia but in Germany aswell. 
 To turn resolutely towards communism, it was neces-sary, not only for the ignorant and often illiterate massesof Russia, but also for the literate and well-educated masses of Germany, to realise from their own bitter experience the absolute impotence and spinelessness, . 
the absolutehelplessness and servility to the bourgeoisie, and the uttervileness of the government of the paladins of the SecondInternational; they had to realise that a dictatorship ofthe extreme reactionaries (Kornilov 37 in Russia; Kapp38 and Co. 
 in Germany) is inevitably the only alternative toa dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 The immediate objective of the class-conscious vanguard of the international working-class movement, i. 
e. 
, theCommunist parties, groups and trends, is to be able tolead the broad masses (who are still, for the most part, apathetic, inert, dormant and convention-ridden) to their new position, or, rather, to be able to lead, not only their own party but also these masses in their advance and tran-sition to the new position. 
 While the first historical objec-tive (that of winning over the class-conscious vanguardof the proletariat to the side of Soviet power and the dicta-torship of the working class) could not have been reached without a complete ideological and political victory overopportunism and social-chauvinism, the second and imme-diate objective, which consists in being able to lead themasses to a new position ensuring the victory of the vanguard in the revolution, cannot be reached without the liquidation of Left doctrinairism, and without a full elimination of its errors. 
 As long as it was (and inasmuch as it still is) a question of winning the proletariat’s vanguard over to the side of communism, priority went and still goes to propaganda work; even propaganda circles, with all their parochial limitations, are useful under these conditions, and produce good results. 
But when it is a question of practical action by the masses,of the disposition, if one may so put it, of vast armies, ofthe alignment of all the class forces in a given society for the final and decisive battle , then propagandist methods alone, the mere repetition of the truths of “pure” com-munism, are of no avail. 
 In these circumstances, one mustnot count in thousands, like the propagandist belonging to asmall group that has not yet given leadership to the masses;in these circumstances one must count in millions andtens of millions. 
 In these circumstances, we must ask our-selves, not only whether we have convinced the vanguard of the revolutionary class, but also whether the historicallyeffective forces of all classes—positively of all the classes in a given society, without exception—are arrayed in sucha way that the decisive battle is at hand—in such a waythat: (1) all the class forces hostile to us have become suf-ficiently entangled, are sufficiently at loggerheads with each other, have sufficiently weakened themselves in astruggle which is beyond their strength; (2) all the vacillat-ing and unstable, intermediate elements—the petty bour-geoisie and the petty-bourgeois democrats, as distinct fromthe bourgeoisie—have sufficiently exposed themselves in the eyes of the people, have sufficiently disgraced themselves through their practical bankruptcy, and (3) among the pro-letariat, a mass sentiment favouring the most determined,bold and dedicated revolutionary action against the bour-geoisie has emerged and begun to grow vigorously. 
 Thenrevolution is indeed ripe; then, indeed, if we have correctly gauged all the conditions indicated and summarised above, and if we have chosen the right moment, our victory isassured. 
 The differences between the Churchills and the Lloyd Georges—with insignificant national distinctions, thesepolitical types exist in all countries—on the one hand, and between the Hendersons and the Lloyd Georges on the other, are quite minor and unimportant from the stand-point of pure (i. 
e. 
, abstract) communism, i. 
e. 
, communism that has not yet matured to the stage of practical political action by the masses. 
 However, from the standpoint of this practical action by the masses, these differences are most important. 
 To take due account of these differences, andto determine the moment when the inevitable conflictsbetween these “friends”, which weaken and enfeeble all the “friends ” taken together , will have come to a head— that is the concern, the task, of a Communist who wants to be, not merely a class-conscious and convinced propagan-dist of ideas, but a practical leader of the masses in the revolution. 
 It is necessary to link the strictest devotion tothe ideas of communism with the ability to effect all thenecessary practical compromises, tacks, conciliatorymanoeuvres, zigzags, retreats and so on, in order to speed up the achievement and then loss of political power by the Hendersons (the heroes of the Second International, if weare not to name individual representatives of petty-bourgeoisdemocracy who call themselves socialists); to acceleratetheir inevitable bankruptcy in practice, which will enlightenthe masses in the spirit of our ideas, in the direction of communism; to accelerate the inevitable friction, quarrels, conflicts and complete disintegration among the Hendersons,the Lloyd Georges and the Churchills (the Mensheviks,the Socialist-Revolutionaries, the Constitutional-Democrats,the monarchists; the Scheidemanns, the bourgeoisie and theKappists, etc. 
); to select the proper moment when the discord among these “pillars of sacrosanct private property” is at its height, so that, through a decisive offensive, theproletariat will defeat them all and capture politicalpower. 
 History as a whole, and the history of revolutions in particular, is always richer in content, more varied, more multiform, more lively and ingenious than is imagined by even the best parties, the most class-conscious vanguardsof the most advanced classes. 
 This can readily be under-stood, because even the finest of vanguards express the class-consciousness, will, passion and imagination of tens ofthousands, whereas at moments of great upsurge and the exertion of all human capacities, revolutions are made by the class-consciousness, will, passion and imagination oftens of millions, spurred on by a most acute struggle of classes. 
 Two very important practical conclusions follow from this: first, that in order to accomplish its task the revolutionary class must be able to master all forms or aspects of social activity without exception (completing after thecapture of political power—sometimes at great risk andwith very great danger—what it did not complete beforethe capture of power); second, that the revolutionary classmust be prepared for the most rapid and brusque replace-ment of one form by another. 
 One will readily agree that any army which does not train to use all the weapons, all the means and methodsof warfare that the enemy possesses, or may possess, isbehaving in an unwise or even criminal manner. 
 Thisapplies to politics even more than it does to the art of war. 
 In politics it is even harder to know in advance which methods of struggle will be applicable and to our advantagein certain future conditions. 
 Unless we learn to apply allthe methods of struggle, we may suffer grave and sometimeseven decisive defeat, if changes beyond our control inthe position of the other classes bring to the forefront a form of activity in which we are especially weak. 
 If, how-ever, we learn to use all the methods of struggle, victorywill be certain, because we represent the interests of thereally foremost and really revolutionary class, even if cir-cumstances do not permit us to make use of weapons thatare most dangerous to the enemy, weapons that deal the swiftest mortal blows. 
 Inexperienced revolutionaries often think that legal methods of struggle are opportunist because,in this field, the bourgeoisie has most frequently deceivedand duped the workers (particularly in “peaceful” andnon-revolutionary times), while illegal methods of struggleare revolutionary. 
 That, however, is wrong. 
 The truth is that those parties and leaders are opportunists and traitors to the working class that are unable or unwilling (do notsay, “I can’t”; say, “I shan’t”) to use illegal methods ofstruggle in conditions such as those which prevailed, forexample, during the imperialist war of 1914-18, when thebourgeoisie of the freest democratic countries most brazenly and brutally deceived the workers, and smothered the truth about the predatory character of the war. 
 But revolution-aries who are incapable of combining illegal forms of struggle with every form of legal struggle are poor revolu-tionaries indeed. 
 It is not difficult to be a revolutionary when revolution has already broken out and is in spate, when all people are joining the revolution just becausethey are carried away, because it is the vogue, and some-times even from careerist motives. 
 After its victory, the pro-letariat has to make most strenuous efforts, even the mostpainful, so as to “liberate” itself from such pseudo-revolu-tionaries. 
 It is far more difficult—and far more precious— to be a revolutionary when the conditions for direct, open,really mass and really revolutionary struggle do not yet exist , to be able to champion the interests of the revolution (by propaganda, agitation and organisation) in non-revolu-tionary bodies, and quite often in downright reactionary bodies, in a non-revolutionary situation, among the masses who are incapable of immediately appreciating the needfor revolutionary methods of action. 
 To be able to seek,find and correctly determine the specific path or the parti-cular turn of events that will lead the masses to the real, decisive and final revolutionary struggle—such is the main objective of communism in Western Europe and in America today. 
 Britain is an example. 
 We cannot tell—no one can tell in advance—how soon a real proletarian revolution willflare up there, and what immediate cause will most serve to rouse, kindle, and impel into the struggle the very wide masses, who are still dormant. 
 Hence, it is our duty to carry on all our preparatory work in such a way as to be“well shod on all four feet” (as the late Plekhanov, when hewas a Marxist and revolutionary, was fond of saying). 
It is possible that the breach will be forced, the ice broken,by a parliamentary crisis, or by a crisis arising from colo-nial and imperialist contradictions, which are hopelessly entangled and are becoming increasingly painful and acute,or perhaps by some third cause, etc. 
 We are not discussingthe kind of struggle that will determine the fate of the prole-tarian revolution in Great Britain (no Communist has anydoubt on that score; for all of us this is a foregone conclusion): what we are discussing is the immediate cause that will bring into motion the now dormant proletarian masses, and lead them right up to revolution. 
 Let us not forget that in the French bourgeois republic, for example, in a situation which, from both the interna-tional and the national viewpoints, was a hundred times less revolutionary than it is today, such an “unexpected” and“petty” cause as one of the many thousands of fraudulentmachinations of the reactionary military caste (the Dreyfuscase 39) was enough to bring the people to the brink of civil war! In Great Britain the Communists should constantly, unremittingly and unswervingly utilise parliamentary elec-tions and all the vicissitudes of the Irish, colonial andworld-imperialist policy of the British Government, andall other fields, spheres and aspects of public life, andwork in all of them in a new way, in a communist way, in the spirit of the Third, not the Second, International. 
 I have neither the time nor the space here to describe the“Russian” “Bolshevik” methods of participation in parlia-mentary elections and in the parliamentary struggle; I can,however, assure foreign Communists that they were quiteunlike the usual West-European parliamentary campaigns. 
 From this the conclusion is often drawn: “Well, that was in Russia; in our country parliamentarianism is different. 
”This is a false conclusion. 
 Communists, adherents of theThird International in all countries, exist for the purposeof changing —all along the line, in all spheres of life—the old socialist, trade unionist, syndicalist, and parliamentary type of work into a new type of work, the communist. 
 In Russia, too, there was always an abundance of opportun-ism, purely bourgeois sharp practices and capitalist riggingin the elections. 
 In Western Europe and in America, theCommunist must learn to create a new, uncustomary,non-opportunist, and non-careerist parliamentarianism; the Communist parties must issue their slogans; true proletar-ians, with the help of the unorganised and downtroddenpoor, should distribute leaflets, canvass workers’ housesand cottages of the rural proletarians and peasants in theremote villages (fortunately there are many times fewerremote villages in Europe than in Russia, and in Britain the number is very small); they should go into the public houses, penetrate into unions, societies and chance gather-ings of the common people, and speak to the people, not in learned (or very parliamentary) language; they should not at all strive to “get seats” in parliament, but should everywhere try to get people to think, and draw the masses into the struggle, to take the bourgeoisie at its word andutilise the machinery it has set up, the elections it hasappointed, and the appeals it has made to the people; theyshould try to explain to the people what Bolshevism is,in a way that was never possible (under bourgeois rule) outside of election times (exclusive, of course, of times of big strikes, when in Russia a similar apparatus for wide-spread popular agitation worked even more intensively). 
It is very difficult to do this in Western Europe and ex-tremely difficult in America, but it can and must be done,for the objectives of communism cannot be achieved without effort. 
 We must work to accomplish practical tasks, ever more varied and ever more closely connected with allbranches of social life, winning branch after branch, and sphere after sphere from the bourgeoisie . 
 In Great Britain, further, the work of propaganda, agitation and organisation among the armed forces and among the oppressed and underprivileged nationalities in their “own ” state (Ireland, the colonies) must also be tackled in a new fashion (one that is not socialist, but communist;not reformist, but revolutionary). 
 That is because, in theera of imperialism in general and especially today after a warthat was a sore trial to the peoples and has quickly opened their eyes to the truth (i. 
e. 
, the fact that tens of millions were killed and maimed for the sole purpose of decidingwhether the British or the German robbers should plunderthe largest number of countries), all these spheres of sociallife and heavily charged with inflammable material andare creating numerous causes of conflicts, crises and an intensification of the class struggle. 
 We do not and cannot know which spark—of the innumerable sparks that areflying about in all countries as a result of the world economicand political crisis—will kindle the conflagration, in thesense of raising up the masses; we must, therefore, withour new and communist principles, set to work to stir up all and sundry, even the oldest, mustiest and seem-ingly hopeless spheres, for otherwise we shall not be able tocope with our tasks, shall not be comprehensively prepared, shall not be in possession of all the weapons and shall not prepare ourselves either to gain victory over the bour-geoisie (which arranged all aspects of social life—and has now disarranged them—in its bourgeois fashion), or tobring about the impending communist reorganisation ofevery sphere of life, following that victory. 
 Since the proletarian revolution in Russia and its victo-ries on an international scale, expected neither by the bourgeoisie nor the philistines, the entire world has become different, and the bourgeoisie everywhere has become diffe-rent too. 
 It is terrified of “Bolshevism”, exasperated byit almost to the point of frenzy, and for that very reasonit is, on the one hand, precipitating the progress of eventsand, on the other, concentrating on the forcible suppression of Bolshevism, thereby weakening its own position in a number of other fields. 
 In their tactics the Communists inall the advanced countries must take both these circum-stances into account. 
 When the Russian Cadets and Kerensky began furiously to hound the Bolsheviks—especially since April 1917, and more particularly in June and July 1917—they overdid things. 
 Millions of copies of bourgeois papers, clamouringin every key against the Bolsheviks, helped the masses tomake an appraisal of Bolshevism; apart from the newspa-pers, all public life was full of discussions about Bolshevism,as a result of the bourgeoisie’s “zeal”. 
 Today the million-aires of all countries are behaving on an international scale in a way that deserves our heartiest thanks. 
 They arehounding Bolshevism with the same zeal as Kerensky andCo. 
 did; they, too, are overdoing things and helping us just as Kerensky did. 
 When the French bourgeoisie makesBolshevism the central issue in the elections, and accuses the comparatively moderate or vacillating socialists of being Bolsheviks; when the American bourgeoisie, whichhas completely lost its head, seizes thousands and thousandsof people on suspicion of Bolshevism, creates an atmosphereof panic, and broadcasts stories of Bolshevik plots, when,despite all its wisdom and experience, the British bourgeoi-sie—the most “solid” in the world—makes incredible blunders, founds richly endowed “anti-Bolshevik socie-ties”, creates a special literature on Bolshevism, and recruits an extra number of scientists, agitators and clergy-men to combat it, we must salute and thank the capitalists. 
 They are working for us. 
 They are helping us to get the masses interested in the essence and significance of Bolshe-vism, and they cannot do otherwise, for they have already failed to ignore Bolshevism and stifle it. 
 But at the same time, the bourgeoisie sees practically only one aspect of Bolshevism—insurrection, violence, and terror; it therefore strives to prepare itself for resistance and opposition primarily in this field. 
 It is possible that, in certain instances, in certain countries, and for certainbrief periods, it will succeed in this. 
 We must reckon withsuch an eventuality, and we have absolutely nothing tofear if it does succeed. 
 Communism is emerging in posi-tively every sphere of public life; its beginnings are to be seen literally on all sides. 
 The “contagion” (to use thefavourite metaphor of the bourgeoisie and the bourgeoispolice, the one mostly to their liking) has very thoroughlypenetrated the organism and has completely permeatedit. 
 If special efforts are made to block one of the channels, the “contagion” will find another one, sometimes very unexpectedly. 
 Life will assert itself. 
 Let the bourgeoisierave, work itself into a frenzy, go to extremes, commitfollies, take vengeance on the Bolsheviks in advance, andendeavour to kill off (as in India, Hungary, Germany, etc. 
)more hundreds, thousands, and hundreds of thousands of yesterday’s and tomorrow’s Bolsheviks. 
 In acting thus, the bourgeoisie is acting as all historically doomedclasses have done. 
 Communists should know that, in anycase, the future belongs to them; therefore, we can (andmust) combine the most intense passion in the great revo-lutionary struggle, with the coolest and most sober ap-praisal of the frenzied ravings of the bourgeoisie. 
 The Russian revolution was cruelly defeated in 1905; the RussianBolsheviks were defeated in July 1917; over 15,000 GermanCommunists were killed as a result of the wily provocationand cunning manoeuvres of Scheidemann and Noske, whowere working hand in glove with the bourgeoisie and the monarchist generals; White terror is raging in Finland and Hungary. 
 But in all cases in all countries, commu-nism is becoming steeled and is growing; its roots are so deep that persecution does not weaken or debilitate it, but only strengthens it. 
 Only one thing is lacking to enable us to march forward more confidently and firmly to victory, namely, the universal and thorough awareness of all Com-munists in all countries of the necessity to display theutmost flexibility in their tactics. 
 The communist movement, which is developing magnificently, now lacks, especially inthe advanced countries, this awareness and the ability to apply it in practice. 
 That which happened to such leaders of the Second Inter-national, such highly erudite Marxists devoted to social-ism as Kautsky, Otto Bauer and others, could (and should)provide a useful lesson. 
 They fully appreciated the needfor flexible tactics; they themselves learned Marxist dia-lectic and taught it to others (and much of what they have done in this field will always remain a valuable contribu-tion to socialist literature); however, in the application of this dialectic they committed such an error, or provedto be so undialectical in practice, so incapable of taking into account the rapid change of forms and the rapid acqui-sition of new content by the old forms, that their fate is not much more enviable than that of Hyndman, Guesdeand Plekhanov. 
 The principal reason for their bankruptcywas that they were hypnotised by a definite form of growthof the working-class movement and socialism, forgot allabout the one-sidedness of that form, were afraid to see the break-up which objective conditions made inevitable, and continued to repeat simple and, at first glance, incon-testable axioms that had been learned by rote, like: “threeis more than two”. 
 But politics is more like algebra thanarithmetic, and still more like higher than elementarymathematics. 
 In reality, all the old forms of the socialist movement have acquired a new content, and, consequently, a new symbol, the “minus” sign, has appeared in front ofall the figures; our wiseacres, however, have stubbornlycontinued (and still continue) to persuade themselves andothers that “minus three” is more than “minus two”. 
 We must see to it that Communists do not make a similar mistake, only in the opposite sense, or rather, we must see to it that a similar mistake , only made in the opposite sense by the “Left” Communists, is corrected as soon as possible and eliminated as rapidly and pain-lessly as possible. 
 It is not only Right doctrinairism that is erroneous; Left doctrinairism is erroneous too. 
 Of course, the mistake of Left doctrinairism in communism is at pres-ent a thousand times less dangerous and less significantthan that of Right doctrinairism (i. 
e. 
, social-chauvinismand Kautskyism); but, after all, that is only due to thefact that Left communism is a very young trend, is only just coming into being. 
 It is only for this reason that, under certain conditions, the disease can be easily eradicated,and we must set to work with the utmost energy to eradi-cate it. 
 The old forms burst asunder, for it turned out that their new content—anti-proletarian and reactionary—had attained an inordinate development. 
 From the standpoint of the development of international communism, our work todayhas such a durable and powerful content (for Soviet powerand the dictatorship of the proletariat) that it can and must manifest itself in any form, both new and old; it can and must regenerate, conquer and subjugate all forms, not only the new but also the old—not for the purpose of reconciling itself with the old, but for the purpose ofmaking all and every form—new and old—a weapon forthe complete and irrevocable victory of communism. 
 The Communists must exert every effort to direct the working-class movement and social development in general along the straightest and shortest road to the victory of Soviet power and the dictatorship of the proletariat ona world-wide scale. 
 That is an incontestable truth. 
 Butit is enough to take one little step farther—a step thatmight seem to be in the same direction—and truth turnsinto error. 
 We have only to say, as the German and British Left Communists do, that we recognise only one road, only the direct road, and that we will not permit tacking,conciliatory manoeuvres, or compromising—and it willbe a mistake which may cause, and in part has alreadycaused and is causing, very grave prejudice to communism. 
Right doctrinairism persisted in recognising only the old forms, and became utterly bankrupt, for it did not notice the new content. 
 Left doctrinairism persists in the uncon-ditional repudiation of certain old forms, failing to see that the new content is forcing its way through all and sundry forms, that it is our duty as Communists to master all forms, to learn how, with the maximum rapidity, to supplement one form with another, to substitute one for another, andto adapt our tactics to any such change that does not comefrom our class or from our efforts. 
 World revolution has been so powerfully stimulated and accelerated by the horrors, vileness and abominations of the world imperialist war and by the hopelessness of the situation created by it, this revolution is developingin scope and depth with such splendid rapidity, with sucha wonderful variety of changing forms, with such aninstructive practical refutation of all doctrinairism, thatthere is every reason to hope for a rapid and complete recovery of the international communist movement from the infantile disorder of “Left-wing” communism. 
 April 27, 1920 APPENDIX Before publishing houses in our country—which has been plundered by the imperialists of the whole world inrevenge for the proletarian revolution, and which is stillbeing plundered and blockaded by them regardless of allpromises they made to their workers—were able to bringout my pamphlet, additional material arrived from abroad. 
 Without claiming to present in my pamphlet anything more than the cursory notes of a publicist, I shall dwellbriefly upon a few points. 
 I THE SPLIT AMONG THE GERMAN COMMUNISTS The split among the Communists in Germany is an accomplished fact. 
 The “Lefts”, or the “opposition on prin-ciple”, have formed a separate Communist Workers’ Party,as distinct from the Communist Party. 
 A split also seems imminent in Italy—I say “seems”, as I have only two additional issues (Nos. 
 7 and 8) of the Left newspaper,Il Soviet , in which the possibility of and necessity for a split is openly discussed, and mention is also made of acongress of the “Abstentionist” group (or the boycottists,i. 
e. 
, opponents of participation in parliament), which group is still part of the Italian Socialist Party. 
 There is reason to fear that the split with the “Lefts”, the anti-parliamentarians (in part anti-politicals too, whoare opposed to any political party and to work in the tradeunions), will become an international phenomenon, likethe split with the “Centrists” (i. 
e. 
, Kautskyites, Longuet-ists, Independents, etc. 
). 
 Let that be so. 
 At all events, a split is better than confusion, which hampers the ideolog-ical, theoretical and revolutionary growth and maturingof the party, and its harmonious, really organised practicalwork which actually paves the way for the dictatorshipof the proletariat. 
 Let the “Lefts” put themselves to a practical test on a national and international scale. 
 Let them try to preparefor (and then implement) the dictatorship of the proletariat,without a rigorously centralised party with iron discipline,without the ability to become masters of every sphere,every branch, and every variety of political and cultural work. 
 Practical experience will soon teach them. 
 Only, every effort should be made to prevent the split with the “Lefts” from impeding—or to see that it impedes as little as possible—the necessary amalgamation into a single party, inevitable in the near future, of all partici-pants in the working-class movement who sincerely and conscientiously stand for Soviet government and the dicta-torship of the proletariat. 
 It was the exceptional goodfortune of the Bolsheviks in Russia to have had fifteenyears for a systematic and consummated struggle bothagainst the Mensheviks (i. 
e. 
, the opportunists and “Cen-trists”) and against the “Lefts”, long before the masses began direct action for the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
In Europe and America the same work has now to be doneby forced marches, so to say. 
 Certain individuals, espe-cially among unsuccessful aspirants to leadership, may(if they lack proletarian discipline and are not honest towards themselves) persist in their mistakes for a long time; however, when the time is ripe, the masses of theworkers will themselves unite easily and rapidly and uniteall sincere Communists to form a single party capableof establishing the Soviet system and the dictatorship ofthe proletariat. 
 * *With regard to the question of future amalgamation of the “Left” Communists, the anti-parliamentarians, with the Commu-nists in general, I would make the following additional remarks. 
 In the measure in which I have been able to familiarise myself with the newspapers of the “Left” Communists and the Communists in generalin Germany, I find that the former have the advantage of being better able than the latter to carry on agitation among the masses. 
 I have repeatedly observed something similar to this in the history of theBolshevik Party, though on a smaller scale, in individual local organisations, and not on a national scale. 
 For instance, in 1907-08 the “Left” Bolsheviks, on certain occasions and in certain places,carried on more successful agitation among the masses than we did. 
 This may partly have been due to the fact that at a revolutionary moment, or at a time when revolutionary recollections are still fresh,it is easier to approach the masses with tactics of sheer negation. 
 This, however, is not an argument to prove the correctness of such tactics. 
 At all events, there is not the least doubt that a Communistparty that wishes to be the real vanguard the advanced detachment, of the revolutionary class , of the proletariat—and which, in addition wishes to learn to lead the masses , not only the proletarian, but also the non -proletarian masses of working and exploited people—must know how to conduct propaganda, how to organise, and how to carry on agitation in a manner most simple and comprehensible, mostclear and vivid, both to the urban, factory masses and to the rural masses. 
 II THE COMMUNISTS AND THE INDEPENDENTS IN GERMANY In this pamphlet I have expressed the opinion that a compromise between the Communists and the Left wingof the Independents is necessary and useful to communism, but will not be easy to bring about. 
 Newspapers which I have subsequently received have confirmed this opinionon both points. 
 No. 
 32 of The Red Flag , organ of the Central Committee, the Communist Party of Germany ( Die Rote Fahne , Zentralorgan der Kommunistischen Partei Deutsch-lands, Spartakusbund, * of March 26, 1920) published a “statement” by this Central Committee regarding the Kapp-Lüttwitz military putsch and on the “socialist gov-ernment”. 
 This statement is quite correct both in itsbasic premise and its practical conclusions. 
 The basic prem-ise is that at present there is no “objective basis” for thedictatorship of the proletariat because the “majority ofthe urban workers” support the Independents. 
 The conclu-sion is: a promise to be a “loyal opposition” (i. 
e. 
, renun-ciation of preparations for a “forcible overthrow”) to a “socialist government if it excludes bourgeois-capitalist parties”. 
 In the main, this tactic is undoubtedly correct. 
 Yet, even if minor inaccuracies of formulation should not be dwelt on, it is impossible to pass over in silence the factthat a government consisting of social-traitors should not (in an official statement by the Communist Party) be called “socialist”, that one should not speak of the exclu-sion of “bourgeois-capitalist parties”, when the parties both of the Scheidemanns and of the Kautskys and Crispiens are petty-bourgeois-democratic parties; that things shouldnever be written that are contained in §4 of the statement, which reads: “...A state of affairs in which political freedom can be enjoyed without restriction, and bourgeois democracy cannot operate as the *The Spartacus League. 
— Ed. 
 dictatorship of capital is, from the viewpoint of the development of the proletarian dictatorship; of the utmost importance in furtherwinning the proletarian masses over to the side of commu-nism.... 
 ” Such a state of affairs is impossible. 
 Petty-bourgeois leaders, the German Hendersons (Scheidemanns) and Snow-dens (Crispiens), do not and cannot go beyond the bounds of bourgeois democracy, which, in its turn, cannot but be a dictatorship of capital. 
 To achieve the practical resultsthat the Central Committee of the Communist Party hadbeen quite rightly working for, there was no need to writesuch things, which are wrong in principle and politicallyharmful. 
 It would have been sufficient to say (if one wished to observe parliamentary amenities): “As long as the major-ity of the urban workers follow the Independents, weCommunists must do nothing to prevent those workersfrom getting rid of their last philistine-democratic (i. 
e. 
,‘bourgeois-capitalist’) illusions by going through the expe-rience of having a government of their ‘own’. 
” That is suffi-cient ground for a compromise, which is really necessary and should consist in renouncing, for a certain period, allattempts at the forcible overthrow of a government whichenjoys the confidence of a majority of the urban workers. 
But in everyday mass agitation, in which one is not boundby official parliamentary amenities, one might, of course, add: “Let scoundrels like the Scheidemanns, and philistines like the Kautskys and Crispiens reveal by their deeds howthey have been fooled themselves and how they are foolingthe workers; their ‘clean’ government will itself do the‘cleanest’ job of all in ‘cleansing’ the Augean stables ofsocialism, Social-Democracy and other forms of social treachery. 
” The real nature of the present leaders of the Independent Social-Democratic Party of Germany (leaders of whomit has been wrongly said that they have already lost allinfluence, whereas in reality they are even more dangerousto the proletariat that the Hungarian Social-Democrats who styled themselves Communists and promised to “support” the dictatorship of the proletariat) was onceagain revealed during the German equivalent of the Korni- /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR lov revolt, i. 
e. 
, the Kapp-Lüttwitz putsch . 
* A small but striking illustration is provided by two brief articles—one by Karl Kautsky entitled “Decisive Hours” (“Entscheidende Stunden”) in Freiheit (Freedom ), organ of the Independents, of March 30, 1920, and the other by Arthur Crispien entitled“On the Political Situation” (in the same newspaper, issueof April 14, 1920). 
 These gentlemen are absolutely inca-pable of thinking and reasoning like revolutionaries. 
 They are snivelling philistine democrats, who become a thousand times more dangerous to the proletariat when they claimto be supporters of Soviet government and of the dictator-ship of the proletariat because, in fact, whenever a diffi-cult and dangerous situation arises they are sure to committreachery ... while “sincerely” believing that they are helping the proletariat! Did not the Hungarian Social-Democrats, after rechristening themselves Communists,also want to “help” the proletariat when, because of theircowardice and spinelessness, they considered the positionof Soviet power in Hungary hopeless and went snivellingto the agents of the Entente capitalists and the Entente hangmen? III TURATI AND CO. 
 IN ITALY The issues of the Italian newspaper Il Soviet referred to above fully confirm what I have said in the pamphletabout the Italian Socialist Party’s error in toleratingsuch members and even such a group of parliamentariansin their ranks. 
 It is still further confirmed by an outsideobserver like the Rome correspondent of The Manchester Guardian , organ of the British liberal bourgeoisie, whose interview with Turati is published in its issue of March 12,1920. 
 The correspondent writes: *Incidentally, this has been dealt with in an exceptionally clear, concise, precise and Marxist way in the excellent organ of the AustrianCommunist Party, The Red Banner , of March 28 and 30, 1920. 
 ( Die Rote Fahne , Wien, 1920, Nos. 
 266 and 267; L. 
L. 
: “ Ein neuer Abschnitt der deutschen Revolution ” [“A New Stage of the German Revolution”— Ed. 
]). 
 “...Signor Turati’s opinion is that the revolutionary peril is not such as to cause undue anxiety in Italy. 
 The Maximalists are fanningthe fire of Soviet theories only to keep the masses awake and excited. 
These theories are, however, merely legendary notions, unripe pro-grammes, incapable of being put to practical use. 
 They are likely only to maintain the working classes in a state of expectation. 
 Thevery men who use them as a lure to dazzle proletarian eyes find them-selves compelled to fight a daily battle for the extortion of someoften trifling economic advantages so as to delay the moment whenthe working classes will lose their illusions and faith in their cherished myths. 
 Hence a long string of strikes of all sizes and with all pretexts up to the very latest ones in the mail and railway services—strikes which make the already hard conditions of the country stillworse. 
 The country is irritated owing to the difficulties connectedwith its Adriatic problem, is weighed down by its foreign debt andby its inflated paper circulation, and yet it is still far from realising the necessity of adopting that discipline of work which alone can restore order and prosperity.... 
” It is clear as daylight that this British correspondent has blurted out the truth, which is probably being concealedand glossed over both by Turati himself, and his bour-geois defenders, accomplices and inspirers in Italy. 
 That truth is that the ideas and political activities of Turati, Trèves, Modigliani, Dugoni and Co. 
 are really and preciselyof the kind that the British correspondent has described. 
It is downright social treachery. 
 Just look at this advocacyof order and discipline among the workers, who are wage-slaves toiling to enrich the capitalists ! And how familiar to us Russians are all these Menshevik speeches! What a valuable admission it is that the masses are in favour of Soviet government! How stupid and vulgarly bourgeoisis the failure to understand the revolutionary role of strikeswhich are spreading spontaneously! Indeed, the correspond-ent of the British bourgeois-liberal newspaper has rendered Turati and Co. 
 a disservice and has excellently confirmed the correctness of the demand by Comrade Bordiga andhis friends on Il Soviet , who are insisting that the Italian Socialist Party, if it really wants to be for the Third Inter-national, should drum Turati and Co. 
 out of its ranks andbecome a Communist Party both in name and in deed. 
 IV FALSE CONCLUSIONS CORRECT PREMISES However, Comrade Bordiga and his “Left” friends draw from their correct criticism of Turati and Co. 
 the wrongconclusion that any participation in parliament is harmfulin principle. 
 The Italian “Lefts” cannot advance even ashadow of serious argument in support of this view. 
 They simply do not know (or try to forget) the international examples of really revolutionary and communist utilisationof bourgeois parliaments, which has been of unquestionablevalue in preparing for the proletarian revolution. 
 Theysimply cannot conceive of any “new” ways of that utilisa-tion, and keep on repeatedly and endlessly vociferating about the “old” non-Bolshevik way. 
 Herein lies their fundamental error. 
 In all fields of activity, and not in the parliamentary sphere alone, com-munism must introduce (and without long and persistent effort it will be unable to introduce) something new in prin-ciple that will represent a radical break with the traditions of the Second International (while retaining and developing what was good in the latter). 
 Let us take, say, journalistic work. 
 Newspapers, pamphlets and leaflets perform the indispensable work of propaganda,agitation and organisation. 
 No mass movement in anycountry at all civilised can get along without a journalistic apparatus. 
 No outcries against “leaders” or solemn vows to keep the masses uncontaminated by the influence ofleaders will relieve us of the necessity of using, for thiswork, people from a bourgeois-intellectual environmentor will rid us of the bourgeois-democratic, “private prop-erty” atmosphere and environment in which this work is carried out under capitalism. 
 Even two and a half years after the overthrow of the bourgeoisie, after the conquestof political power by the proletariat, we still have thisatmosphere around us, this environment of mass (peasant,artisan) bourgeois-democratic private property relations. 
 Parliamentarianism is one form of activity; journalism is another. 
 The content of both can and should be communist if those engaged in these two spheres are genuineCommunists, really members of a proletarian mass party. 
 Yet, in neither sphere—and in no other sphere of activity under capitalism and during the period of transition from capitalism to socialism—is it possible to avoid those diffi-culties which the proletariat must overcome, those specialproblems which the proletariat must solve so as to use,for its own purposes, the services of people from the ranksof the bourgeoisie, eradicate bourgeois-intellectualist preju-dices and influences, and weaken the resistance of (and, ultimately, completely transform) the petty-bourgeois en-vironment. 
 Did we not, before the war of 1914-18, witness in all countries innumerable cases of extreme “Left” anarchists,syndicalists and others fulminating against parliamentar-ianism, deriding bourgeois-vulgarised parliamentary social-ists, castigating their careerism, and so on and so forth, and yet themselves pursuing the same kind of bourgeois career through journalism and through work in the syndi-cates (trade unions)? Is not the example of Jouhaux andMerrheim, to limit oneself to France, typical in this respect? The childishness of those who “repudiate” participation in parliament consists in their thinking it possible to “solve ” the difficult problem of combating bourgeois-democratic influences within the working-class movement in such a “simple”, “easy”, allegedly revolutionary manner,whereas they are actually merely running away from theirown shadows, only closing their eyes to difficulties and trying to shrug them off with mere words. 
 The most shame-less careerism, the bourgeois utilisation of parliamentaryseats, glaringly reformist perversion of parliamentary activ-ity, and vulgar petty-bourgeois conservatism are allunquestionably common and prevalent features engenderedeverywhere by capitalism, not only outside but also within the working-class movement. 
 But the selfsame capitalism and the bourgeois environment it creates (which disappearsvery slowly even after the overthrow of the bourgeoisie,since the peasantry constantly regenerates the bourgeoisie)give rise to what is essentially the same bourgeois careerism,national chauvinism, petty-bourgeois vulgarity, etc. 
— merely varying insignificantly in form—in positively every sphere of activity and life. 
 You think, my dear boycottists and anti-parliamentarians that you are “terribly revolutionary”, but in reality you are frightened by the comparatively minor difficulties of the struggle against bourgeois influences within the working-class movement, whereas your victory—i. 
e. 
, theoverthrow of the bourgeoisie and the conquest of politicalpower by the proletariat—will create these very same diffi-culties on a still larger, an infinitely larger scale. 
 Likechildren, you are frightened by a minor difficulty which confronts you today, but you do not understand that tomor-row, and the day after, you will still have to learn, andlearn thoroughly, to overcome the selfsame difficulties,only on an immeasurably greater scale. 
 Under Soviet rule, your proletarian party and ours will be invaded by a still larger number of bourgeois intellec-tuals. 
 They will worm their way into the Soviets, the courts, and the administration, since communism cannot be builtotherwise than with the aid of the human material createdby capitalism, and the bourgeois intellectuals cannot beexpelled and destroyed, but must be won over, remoulded,assimilated and re-educated, just as we must—in a pro-tracted struggle waged on the basis of the dictatorship of the proletariat—re-educate the proletarians themselves,who do not abandon their petty-bourgeois prejudices atone stroke, by a miracle, at the behest of the Virgin Mary,at the behest of a slogan, resolution or decree, but only inthe course of a long and difficult mass struggle against mass petty-bourgeois influences. 
 Under Soviet rule, these same problems, which the anti-parliamentarians now so proudly,so haughtily, so lightly and so childishly brush aside witha wave of the hand— these selfsame problems are arising anew within the Soviets, within the Soviet administration, among the Soviet “pleaders” (in Russia we have abolished, and have rightly abolished, the bourgeois legal bar, but it is reviving again under the cover of the “Soviet pleaders” 40). 
 Among Soviet engineers, Soviet school-teachers and theprivileged, i. 
e. 
, the most highly skilled and best situated,workers at Soviet factories, we observe a constant revival of absolutely all the negative traits peculiar to bourgeois parliamentarianism, and we are conquering this evil—grad-ually—only by a tireless, prolonged and persistent strugglebased on proletarian organisation and discipline. 
 Of course, under the rule of the bourgeoisie it is very “difficult” to eradicate bourgeois habits from our own, i. 
e. 
, the workers’, party; it is “difficult” to expel from the party the familiar parliamentary leaders who have beenhopelessly corrupted by bourgeois prejudices; it is “diffi-cult” to subject to proletarian discipline the absolutelyessential (even if very limited) number of people comingfrom the ranks of the bourgeoisie; it is “difficult” to form, in a bourgeois parliament, a communist group fully worthy of the working class; it is “difficult” to ensure that thecommunist parliamentarians do not engage in bourgeoisparliamentary inanities, but concern themselves with thevery urgent work of propaganda, agitation and organisa-tion among the masses. 
 All this is “difficult”, to be sure; it was difficult in Russia, and it is vastly more difficult in Western Europe and in America, where the bourgeoisieis far stronger, where bourgeois-democratic traditions arestronger, and so on. 
 Yet all these “difficulties” are mere child’s play compared with the same sort of problems which, in any event, the proletariat will have most certainly to solve in order to achieve victory, both during the proletarian revolutionand after the seizure of power by the proletariat. 
 Comparedwith these truly gigantic problems of re-educating, under the proletarian dictatorship, millions of peasants andsmall proprietors, hundreds of thousands of office employees, officials and bourgeois intellectuals, of subordi-nating them all to the proletarian state and to proletarianleadership, of eradicating their bourgeois habits and tradi-tions—compared with these gigantic problems it is child-ishly easy to create, under the rule of the bourgeoisie,and in a bourgeois parliament, a really communist group of a real proletarian party. 
 If our “Left” and anti-parliamentarian comrades do not learn to overcome even such a small difficulty now, wemay safely assert that either they will prove incapableof achieving the dictatorship of the proletariat, and willbe unable to subordinate and remould the bourgeois intel-lectuals and bourgeois institutions on a wide scale, or they will have to hastily complete their education , and, by that haste, will do a great deal of harm to the cause of the pro-letariat, will commit more errors than usual, will mani-fest more than average weakness and inefficiency, and so on and so forth. 
 Until the bourgeoisie has been overthrown and, after that, until small-scale economy and small commodityproduction have entirely disappeared, the bourgeois atmos-phere, proprietary habits and petty-bourgeois traditionswill hamper proletarian work both outside and within the working-class movement, not only in a single field of activity—the parliamentary—but, inevitably, in everyfield of social activity, in all cultural and political sphereswithout exception. 
 The attempt to brush aside, to fenceoneself off from one of the “unpleasant” problems or diffi-culties in some one sphere of activity is a profound mistake, which will later most certainly have to be paid for. 
 We must learn how to master every sphere of work and activitywithout exception, to overcome all difficulties and eradicateall bourgeois habits, customs and traditions everywhere. 
Any other way of presenting the question is just trifling,mere childishness. 
 May 12, 1920 V In the Russian edition of this book I somewhat incorrect-ly described the conduct of the Communist Party of Hollandas a whole, in the sphere of international revolutionary policy. 
 I therefore avail myself of the present opportunity to publish a letter from our Dutch comrades on this questionand to correct the expression “Dutch Tribunists”, whichI used in the Russian text, and for which I now substitutethe words “certain members of the Communist Party ofHolland”. 
 41 N. 
 Lenin LETTER WIJNKOOP Moscow, June 30, 1920 Dear Comrade Lenin, Thanks to your kindness, we members of the Dutch delegation to the Second Congress of the Communist International were able to read your “ Left-Wing ” Communism—an Infantile Disorder prior to its publication in the European languages. 
 In several places in the book you emphasise your disapproval of the part played by some members of the Communist Party of Holland in internationalpolitics. 
 We feel, nevertheless, that we must protest against your laying the responsibility for their actions on the Communist Party. 
 This is highly inaccurate. 
 Moreover, it is unjust, because these membersof the Communist Party of Holland take little or no part in the Party’scurrent activities and are endeavourng, directly or indirectly, togive effect, in the Communist Party of Holland, to opposition slogansagainst which the Party and all its organs have waged, and continue to wage to this day, a most energetic struggle. 
 Fraternally yours, D. 
 J. 
 Wijnkoop (on behalf of the Dutch delegation) SPEECH DELIVERED AT AN ALL -RUSSIA CONGRESS OF GLASS AND PORCELAIN WORKERS APRIL 29, 1920 Yesterday brought us two pieces of news: the first is very bad—a report about a manifesto by Pilsudski, head of the Polish Government. 
 I have not yet seen the text ofthis manifesto; I was told of it on the telephone. 
 One thingis certain, however, that it is tantamount to Poland’sdeclaration of war on the Ukraine. 
 The French imperial-ists’ influence has evidently gained the upper hand in Poland’s government circles. 
 The Polish Government has decided to drop its recent policy of tacking and manoeuvr-ing around the peace negotiations with us, and to starthostilities on a wider front. 
 The Poles have already cap-tured Zhitomir and are marching on Kiev. 
 This demandsof us the most determined and urgent defence of the interests of the proletariat. 
 We do not doubt that we shall be able to defend those interests; we do not doubt that this newattempt by the Entente imperialists to strangle SovietRussia will fall through just as the Denikin and the Kolchakventures have. 
 Poland is obviously getting all her militarysupport from France, Britain, and the entire Entente. 
 It is highly characteristic, in this connection, that in the last stage of the negotiations with us about the Crimeathe British Government has considerably changed its orig-inally favourable attitude. 
 In reply to Great Britain’scall to us to show clemency to Denikin’s soldiers, who arebeing driven into the sea, we have said that we were prepared to spare the lives of the Crimean whiteguards if, for its part, the Entente shows clemency to the defeated Hungar-ian Communists and allows them to enter Soviet Russia. 
 We do not need to shed the blood of these Crimean white-guards; we are not vindictive. 
 We have, however, received no reply to our Note from the British Government, which, in connection with Poland’s action, seems in no hurry toreply. 
 But we are sure that no supporters of interventionare to be found among the British workers, even the mostopportunistically minded. 
 We have information to the effect that even in Poland the Polish Socialist Party, which has persecuted Polish Communists, has stated in its newspaper that Polandshould not break off peace negotiations with Soviet Russiaby presenting an ultimatum demanding that these talksshould be conducted in Borisov. 
 This newspaper considerssuch conduct by the Polish Government a crime. 
 The Poles have proposed that the peace talks should take place in Borisov without any cessation of hostilities. 
 Conductingnegotiations in this particular place would prevent usfrom continuing hostilities during the talks, while givingPoland complete freedom of action in this respect. 
 Of course,we could not conduct peace negotiations on such terms, and we proposed that they should be transferred to Paris, Revel, Warsaw, Moscow or some other city mutually agreedupon with Poland. 
 The reply to this proposal was anextensive Polish offensive along the entire front. 
 We have nodoubt that the Polish Government started this war ofaggression in defiance of the wishes of its workers. 
 That is why we face this new military gamble quite calmly; we know that we shall emerge the victors. 
 But you know,comrades, that any war is accompanied by tremendousdifficulties, to overcome which we have more than onceappealed to the worker masses for support. 
 The war withPoland has been forced upon us. 
 We have no designs what-ever on Poland’s independence, just as we have no designs on the independence of Lithuania or Byelorussia. 
 Yet,despite an our willingness to come to terms, war has beenforced upon us; that being the case, we must rise up as oneman to defend both ourselves and the Ukraine from theonslaught of the Polish imperialists. 
 ( Loud applause . 
) For that purpose we must again make a certain change of plans. 
 However much we might desire to go over to peace-ful construction as soon as possible and on the greatest possible scale, the fact that war has been forced upon us makes it imperative that we subordinate everything to the demands of that war so as to achieve the most successful and rapid results. 
 We must explain to the workers andpeasants why an Entente-instigated Poland has launcheda war against us. 
 We must explain that this has been donein order to widen the barrier and deepen the gulf separatingthe proletariat of Germany from us. 
 On the other hand, we received news from Baku yester-day which shows that the position of Soviet Russia isimproving. 
 We know that our industry is at a standstill owingto lack of fuel. 
 News has come in that the Baku proletariathas taken over power and overthrown the Azerbaijan Govern-ment. 
 This means that we now have an economic base that may put life into our whole industry. 
 In Baku there is a million poods * of oil which could not be sold, with the result that even Nobel, the oil magnate, tried to start talkswith us for the delivery of this oil to Soviet Russia. 
 Thusour railways and industry will receive very substantialaid from the Baku oilfields. 
 Comrade Tsyurupa, the People’s Commissar for Food, informed me today that in Kuban Region and in the Cauca-sus there are vast stocks of grain which we can count onhaving sent here. 
 That means that we shall have fuel forindustry and bread for the people. 
 By exerting every effortto restore the transport system, we shall be able to secure bread and oil, which will serve as a sound economic basis for relations between the workers and the peasants. 
 We saythat the peasants must give their surplus grain to the work-ers because under present-day conditions, the sale of thesesurpluses would be a crime. 
 Consequently, as soon as weget our industry going, we shall make every effort to sati-sfy the peasants’ need of manufactured goods from the cities. 
 After outlining the Republic’s general position today in these few words and to the extent permitted by thetime, I shall take the liberty of concluding by expressingthe conviction that at the present moment, at this newstage of our relations with Poland, when both Kuban grain and Baku oil have been made available to us, the four *1 pood is approximately 36 lbs. 
 avoirdupois. 
— Ed. 
 million workers organised in the trade unions, through whom we have conducted our Soviet policy with the backing of the broad strata of the peasants, will, without confining themselves to the narrow limits of their trade union life,go on giving every support to the further success and devel-opment of the proletariat’s common cause. 
 We know thatthe workers’ class-consciousness and unity and the completesolidarity of the trade unions have been the only force that have made possible the brilliant victories of the Red Army, an army which has been the finest medium of spread-ing political enlightenment among the peasants, teachingthem to oust self-seekers from their ranks so as to keeppower in the hands of the workers. 
 Now, too, we need thatclass-consciousness, that unity and complete solidarity of the trade unions in the war against Poland and in the work of restoring industry. 
 What we need today is thefurther maintenance and tightening of the disciplinenecessary in all branches of production. 
 The class-consciousworkers know that if you, the workers, had not displayedthis discipline hitherto, we might have suffered the fate of Hungary. 
 Let the comrades remember that and, in their localities, ensure the complete subordination of all tothe one fundamental task: we must abolish, we must elimi-nate as soon as possible the accursed motto—every manfor himself and the devil take the hindmost. 
 Proletarianlabour discipline must be raised to the highest pitch of intensity—and then we shall be invincible. 
 We will show that the Soviet Republic cannot be overthrown and thatwe shall succeed in winning the aid of all the other republicsof the world. 
 ( Continuous applause from all members of the congress ; cries of “Long live our leader Comrade Lenin!”) Pravda No. 
 92, Published according to April 30, 1920 the Pravda text FRO M THE FIRS T SUBBOTNIK ON THE MOSCO W-KAZA N RAILWAY TO THE ALL-RUSSIA MAY DAY SUBBOTNI K42 The distance indicated in the above title has been covered in a single year. 
 This is an enormous distance. 
 Although all our subbotniks are still weak, and each subbotnik revealsa host of defects in arrangement, organisation and disci-pline, the main thing has been done. 
 A heavy and ponderousmass has been shifted, and that is the essence of the matter. 
 We are not deceiving ourselves in the least about the little that has yet been done and about the infinite amountof work that has yet to be done; however, only maliciousenemies of the working people, only malicious supportersof the bourgeoisie, can treat the May 1 subbotnik with dis-dain; only the most contemptible people, who have irrevo-cably sold themselves to the capitalists, can condemn the utilisation of the great First of May festival for a mass-scale attempt to introduce communist labour. 
 This is the very first time since the overthrow of the tsars, the landowners and the capitalists that the groundis being cleared for the actual building of socialism, for the development of new social links, a new discipline of work in common and a new national (and later an international)system of economy of world-historic importance. 
 This isa matter of transforming the very habits of the people,habits which, for a long time to come, have been defiledand debased by the accursed private ownership of the means of production, and also by the entire atmosphere of bickering, distrust, enmity, disunity and mutual intriguethat is inevitably generated—and constantly regenerated— by petty individual economy, the economy of private owners in conditions of “free” exchange among them. 
 For hundreds of years, freedom of trade and of exchange has been to millions of people the supreme gospel of economicwisdom, the most deep-rooted habit of hundreds and hun-dreds of millions of people. 
 This freedom is just as utterlyfalse, serving to mask capitalist deception, coercion andexploitation, as are the other “freedoms” proclaimed and implemented by the bourgeoisie, such as the “freedom to work” (actually the freedom to starve), and so on. 
 In the main we have broken irrevocably with this “freedom” of the property-owner to be a property-owner,with this “freedom” of capital to exploit labour, and weshall finish the job. 
 We are combating its remnants ruthlessly, with all our might. 
 Down with the old social links, the old economic rela-tionships, the old “freedom” of labour ( subordinated to capital ), the old laws, the old habits! Let us build a new society!We were not daunted by defeats during the great revolu-tionary war against tsarism, against the bourgeoisie, against the omnipotent imperialist world powers. 
 We shall not be daunted by the gigantic difficulties and by the errors that are inevitable at the outset of a mostdifficult task; the transformation of all labour habits andcustoms requires decades. 
 We solemnly and firmly promise one another that we shall make every sacrifice, that we shall hold out and win in this most arduous struggle—the struggle against the force of habit—that we shall workindefatigably for years and decades. 
 We shall work to doaway with the accursed maxim: “Every man for himselfand the devil take the hindmost”, the habit of looking upon work merely as a duty, and of considering rightful only that work which is paid for at certain rates. 
 We shall workto inculcate in people’s minds, turn into a habit, and bringinto the day-by-day life of the masses, the rule: “All foreach and each for all”; the rule: “From each according tohis ability, to each according to his needs”; we shall work for the gradual but steady introduction of communist discipline and communist labour. 
 We have shifted a huge mountain, a huge mass of conserv-atism, ignorance, stubborn adherence to the habits of “freedom of trade” and of the “free” buying and selling of human labour-power like any other commodity. 
 We have begun to undermine and destroy the most deep-rootedprejudices, the firmest, age-long and ingrained habits. 
In a single year our subbotniks have made an immensestride forward. 
 They are still infinitely weak, but that willnot daunt us. 
 We have seen our “infinitely weak” Soviet state, before our very eyes, gaining strength and becoming a mighty world force, as a result of our own efforts. 
 Weshall work for years and decades practising subbotniks,developing them, spreading them, improving them andconverting them into a habit. 
 We shall achieve the victoryof communist labour. 
 Pervomaisky Subbotnik , Published according to May 2, 1920 the newspaper text Signed: N. 
 Lenin SPEECH AT A MEETING DEDICATED TO THE LAYING OF THE FOUNDATION STONE OF A MONUMENT TO LIBERATED LABOUR MAY 1, 1920 NEWSPAPER REPORT (Comrade Lenin mounts the platform to unanimous ap-plause from the audience . 
) Comrades, this was once the site of the monument to a tsar. 
 Today we are laying thefoundation stone of a monument to the glory of liberated labour. 
 The capitalists used to speak of the freedom of labour, while the workers and the peasants were obligedto sell them their labour and, in consequence, were freeto die of starvation. 
 We call that kind of labour wage-slavery. 
 We know that it is no easy matter to organisefree labour in the proper way and to work in the conditions of the difficult times we are living through. 
 Today’s subbot-nik is the first step along that road, but if we carry on inthe same way we shall create a kind of labour that is genu-inely free. 
 ( Prolonged and unanimous applause . 
) Pravda No. 
 94, Published according to May 4, 1920 the Pravda text SPEEC H TO MEN OF THE RED ARMY LEAVIN G FOR THE POLIS H FRONT MAY 5, 192043 NEWSPAPER REPORT Comrades: You know that, instigated by the Entente, the Polish landowners and capitalists have forced a new war on us. 
 Remember, comrades, that we have no quarrelwith the Polish peasants and workers; we have recognised Poland’s independence and the Polish People’s Republic, and shall continue to do so. 
 We have proposed peace toPoland on the basis of the integrity of her frontiers, al-though these frontiers extend far beyond the purely Polishpopulation. 
 We have agreed to make all concessions, whichis something each of you should remember at the front. 
 Let your attitude to the Poles there prove that you are soldiers of a workers’ and peasants’ republic, that you arecoming to them, not as aggressors but as liberators. 
 Nowthat, despite our efforts, the Polish magnates have concludedan alliance with Petlyura, launched an offensive, areapproaching Kiev, and are spreading rumours in the foreign press that they have already captured Kiev—which is the sheerest fabrication since only yesterday I was talkingon the direct line with F. 
 Kon, who is in Kiev—we say:Comrades, we have been able to repel a more terrible ene-my; we have been able to defeat our own landowners andcapitalists, and we shall defeat the Polish landowners and capitalists too! All of us here today should pledge our-selves, give a solemn promise, that we shall stand as oneman so as not to allow a victory of the Polish magnates and capitalists. 
 Long live the peasants and workers of a free inde-pendent Polish Republic! Down with the Polish magnates, landowners and capitalists! Long live our Red Workers ’ and Peasants’ Army! ( The mighty strains of the “Interna-tionale ” and cries of “Hurrah ” drown Comrade Lenin ’s final words . 
) Pravda No. 
 96, Published according to May 6, 1920 the newspaper text SPEEC H DELIVERE D AT A JOIN T SESSIO N OF THE ALL-RUSSI A CENTRA L EXECUTIV E COMMITTEE, THE MOSCO W SOVIE T OF WORKE RS’, PEASAN TS’ AND RED ARM Y DEPUTIES , TRAD E UNIONS, AND FACTOR Y COMMITTEES MAY 5, 192044 (Applause . 
) Comrades, I should like to draw your atten-tion to a feature that, from the international point of view or more correctly from the point of view of Russia’s international position, distinguishes the present war from previous wars. 
 Of course, none of you doubt, or coulddoubt, that this war is a link in a long chain of eventsrevealing the international bourgeoisie’s frantic resistanceto the victorious proletariat, a frantic attempt by theinternational bourgeoisie to crush Soviet Russia, to over-throw the first Soviet state at all costs and by all means. 
 There cannot be the least doubt that there is a connectionbetween these events, between the international bourgeoi-sie’s previous attempts and the present war. 
 At the sametime, however, we see the tremendous difference betweenthis war and previous wars, from the point of view of our international position. 
 We see the tremendous impetus our struggle has given to the international working-classmovement. 
 We see how the international proletariat reactsto Soviet Russia’s victories, how the world proletarianstruggle is mounting and gaining strength, and what gigan-tic work has been carried out in the little more than the two years of the Soviet Republic’s existence. 
 You remember how the most responsible and most power-ful ministers of the mightiest and unrivalled capitalist powers announced quite recently that they had prepared an alliance of fourteen powers against Russia; you know how, under pressure from the powerful capitalists of France and Britain, this alliance brought Yudenich,Kolchak and Denikin together, and how it drew up areally grandiose and comprehensive war plan. 
 If wedestroyed that plan, it was because the imperialists’unity was illusory, and the forces of the international bourgeoisie cannot stand up to a single trial when it comes to sacrificing oneself. 
 It appeared that, after four yearsof the imperialist slaughter, the working people do notrecognise the justice of a war against us, and in them wehave a great ally. 
 The Entente’s plan was really destruc-tive, but it came to grief because, despite their most powerful alliance, the capitalist states could not carry it through, proved powerless to give it effect. 
 None of thepowers, any one of which could have the advantage overus, could show unity, because the organised proletariatdoes not support it; no army—neither the French nor theBritish—could get its soldiers to fight on Russian soil, against the Soviet Republic. 
 If, in our mind’s eye, we follow the desperate situations our republic was faced with when, in fact, it was standingup to the whole world, against powers far more powerfulthan it, and if we recollect how we emerged fully victo-rious from these formidable trials, then these recollections will give us a clear idea of what we are confronted with now. 
 Here we see a plan that is not new and at the sametime does not at all resemble the really comprehensive andsingle plan we were faced with six months ago. 
 What wehave is the relics of the former plan and, in the light of theinternational alignment of forces, this is the greatest assu-rance of the futility of the present attempt. 
 The former plan was an attempt on the part of all the imperialist powersto crush the workers’ and peasants’ republic, in alliancewith all the small border states of the former Russian Em-pire, which had been shamelessly and outrageously oppressedby the tsarist and capitalist government of Great Russia. 
 At present, several powers, in alliance with one of the border states, are attempting to accomplish that which provedimpossible to all the imperialist powers in alliance with all the border states, and was undertaken by them twelve and six months ago in alliance with Kolchak, Denikin and others. 
 We now see the relics of the imperialists’ plan. 
 The great tenacity being shown by the bourgeoisie is a feature ofthe imperialist plans. 
 They know that they are fightingto retain power at home, and that it is not the Russian orthe Polish question that is being decided, but the questionof their own survival. 
 It is therefore to be expected that they will try to salvage the former and unsuccessful plan from the wreck. 
 We can all clearly see the clash of the imperialist states’ interests. 
 Despite all pronouncements by their ministersabout the peaceful settlement of questions in dispute, theimperialist powers cannot in reality take a single serious step in political matters without disagreeing. 
 The French need a powerful Poland and a powerful Russia of the tsaristbrand, and they are prepared to make every sacrifice tothis end. 
 Because of her geographical position, Britainwants something else—the break-up of Russia and a weakPoland, so as to ensure a balance between France and Ger-many which would give the imperialist victors control of colonies acquired by robbing Germany as a consequenceof the world war. 
 Here the clash of interests is really strik-ing; no matter how the representatives of the imperialistpowers at San Remo 45 try to assure us that there is full unanimity among the Allies, we know that this is not the case. 
 We know that Poland’s offensive is a relic of the old plan that once united the entire international bourgeoisie. 
If that ambitious plan failed at that time, even though fromthe purely military standpoint it was assured of success,it is hopeless today, even in that aspect. 
 Furthermore, we know that the imperialist powers, who have entered into an alliance with the Polish bourgeoisie, and the PolishGovernment are in a bigger mess than ever. 
 Each politicalmove made by the Polish bourgeoisie over the past months,weeks and days has shown them up to their own workingpeople. 
 They have been quarrelling with their allies, and cannot make a single consistent move in their policy. 
 At one moment they announce their unyielding attitudeto Soviet Russia and the impossibility of conducting any kind of talks with her, while at the next moment they raise the blockade, and solemnly announce this on behalf of an allegedly existing alliance, an allegedly existing League of Nations, and then they again commence a policyof vacillation. 
 In consequence of all this, the imperialistshave enabled us to prove that our policy is peaceful, andthat our international policy has nothing in common eitherwith tsarist policies or those of the Russian capitalists or the Russian bourgeoisie, even a democratic bourgeoisie. 
 We have proved to the entire world that our foreign policyhas nothing in common with the policy constantly ascribedto us by all the bourgeois press. 
 Consequently, the Polesthemselves have exposed every piece of deception in theirpolicy. 
 The experience of three Russian revolutions has shown us how they were prepared, and how each served as the basis for the further development of home and foreignpolicy. 
 This experience has proved that in the preparationof revolution those ruling classes are our most faithfulassistants which, laying claim to all kinds of coalitions,constituent assemblies and so on, and asserting that they re-present the will of the people, in fact reveal—through their own policy at every serious, difficult or crucial moment inthe life of the country—the self-interest of squabbling bour-geois groups that cannot come to terms, rival capitalistgroups that unmask themselves a hundred times moreeffectively than communist propaganda can do. 
 In no coun-try or state can the working class—even if it is most revo-lutionary—ever be revolutionised by any propaganda andagitation unless that agitation is backed up in practiceby the behaviour of the ruling classes of that country. 
 What is now taking place in all capitalist countries (and this will develop even more with time, particularly in a country like Poland) makes us confident that, if we emerged victorious from a war undoubtedly far more arduous, andif we have correctly assessed the discord and the impossi-bility of reconciliation among the bourgeoisie of variousgroups and parties at times when they stand in particularneed of such unity, the present improvement in our interna-tional position is enormous. 
 This fills us with confidence, not only in view of the internal alignment of forces, butalso of our international position. 
 If we consider the entire system of present-day imperialist states, and all their strivings—and we know that their urge to use any moment for an attack on Russia is irresistible—and appraise them quite objectively in the light of the incontrovertible factsof the history of recent years and particularly of the pastsix months, we shall see that the international enemy isweakening, that all attempts at an alliance between theimperialists are becoming more and more futile, and that, from this aspect, our victory is assured. 
 However, comrades, while working on economic problems and concentrating all our attention on peaceful economicconstruction, we must rapidly re-form our ranks as we facethe approach of a new war. 
 Our entire army, which hasrecently been a labour army, 46 must now turn its attention to other matters. 
 We must discontinue everything else and concentrate on this new war. 
 We are perfectly aware that,after all that we have been through, we do not have to fearthe enemy now facing us, but he may impose new and heavysacrifices on the workers and peasants, may greatly impedeour economic construction, and bring about the devastation and ruin of tens, hundreds and thousands of peasant house-holds. 
 He may also, by his temporary success, revive theextinct hopes of the imperialists we have defeated, who willof course not fail to join forces with this enemy. 
 We must,therefore, declare that the rule we have followed throughoutall previous wars must be resolutely reinforced. 
 Since, despite all our most conciliatory intentions and the fact that we made great concessions and renounced all national claims,the Polish landowners and the Polish bourgeoisie have forceda war on us; since we are certain, and we must be certain,that the bourgeoisie of all countries, even those that atpresent are not helping the Poles, will help them when the war flares up, because it is not only a Russian or a Polish issue, but one of the survival of the entire bourgeoisie—then we must remember and at all costs implement the rulewhich we have followed in our policy and which has alwaysbeen a guarantee of our success. 
 That rule is: once thingshave led to war, everything must be subordinated to the war effort; the entire internal life of the country must be subor-dinated to wartime needs; the slightest hesitation on thisscore is inexcusable. 
 No matter how hard it is for the great majority of comrades to tear themselves away from their work, which has only recently been switched onto a new course, more gratifying and essential to the tasks of peaceful construction, it must be remembered that the least over-sight or inattention may often mean the deaths of tens ofthousands of our best comrades, our younger generationof workers and peasants, our Communists who, as always,are in the front ranks of the fighters. 
 Therefore, once more— everything for the war effort. 
 No meeting, no conference should be held without having as its first item the question:have we done everything possible to help the war effort;have our forces been sufficiently mobilised; have wesent sufficient help to the front? Only those people whocannot help at the front should remain here. 
 Every sacri-fice, every assistance for the front, without the least hesi-tation! And, by concentrating all efforts and making everysacrifice, we shall undoubtedly triumph again. 
 ( Applause . 
) Published in 1920 in the book Published according to Verbatim Reports of the Plenary the text in the book Meetings of the Moscow Soviet of Workers ’, Peasants ’ and Red Army Deputies TELEGRAM TO THE SOVIET SOCIALIST GOVERNMENT OF AZERBAIJAN Baku The Council of People’s Commissars welcomes the lib-eration of the toiling masses of the independent Azerbaijan Republic and expresses its firm confidence that, under theleadership of its Soviet Government, the independentRepublic of Azerbaijan will, together with the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
,uphold its freedom and independence against imperialism,the sworn enemy of the oppressed nations of the East. 
 Long live the independent Soviet Republic of Azerbaijan! Long live the workers and peasants of Azerbaijan!Long live the alliance of the workers and peasants of Azerbaijan and Russia! V. 
 Ulyanov (Lenin ) Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars May 5, 1920 Kommunist (Baku) No. 
 7, Published according to May 9, 1920 the newspaper text SPEECH AT AN ENLARGED CONFERENCE OF WORKERS AND RED ARMY MEN IN ROGOZHSKO -SIMONOVSKY DISTRICT OF MOSCOW MAY 13, 1920 NEWSPAPER REPORT The Soviet Republic is again going through a difficult period. 
 After dealing with Kolchak and Denikin, the Rus-sian proletariat was preparing to devote all its spiritual andmaterial forces to the restoration of the country’s economic life. 
 We thought that the bourgeois government of Poland would not hazard a new venture. 
 The Polish Communists, itis true, had said that, just because the Polish Governmenthad nothing more to lose, it would not hesitate to drive itsworkers and peasants into any kind of adventure. 
 We,however, think that the Polish proletariat, together with the proletariat of Lithuania and Byelorussia, will see to it that the Polish bourgeoisie and nobility are driven outof the country. 
 The Russian workers’ and peasants’ govern-ment has made enormous concessions to Poland, wishingthereby to prove to the Polish people that it has ended withtsarism’s policy towards small states. 
 Behind the Polish bourgeoisie stand the capitalists of France, who are manoeuvring to sell military supplies toPoland at good prices, thus recovering the losses incurredwith Kolchak and Denikin. 
 It is significant that no Entente power dares to come out openly against Soviet Russia, for fear of showing the workers its true colours. 
 At present it is of the utmost importance for us to make the politically illiterate and back-ward citizens realise that we have done everything to avoid fresh bloodshed, that the Polish worker and peasant are no enemies of ours, but that we shall fight and fight ruth-lessly if the Polish bourgeoisie is out for war, hand in glove with Petlyura. 
 In the final analysis, victory in any wardepends on the spirit animating the masses that spill theirown blood on the field of battle. 
 The conviction that the waris in a just cause and the realisation that their lives mustbe laid down for the welfare of their brothers strengthen the morale of the fighting men and enable them to endure incredible hardships. 
 Tsarist generals say that our RedArmy men are capable of enduring hardships that the tsar’sarmy could never have stood up to. 
 The reason is that everymobilised worker or peasant knows what he is fightingfor and is ready to shed his own blood for the triumph of justice and socialism. 
 The realisation by the masses of the causes and aims of the war is of tremendous importance and ensures victory. 
 Our country has been exhausted by war, and we are pre-pared to make great concessions to end the bloodshed andapply ourselves to peaceful labour. 
 That was why, when Bullitt came to Russia and proposed a harsh peace, the Soviet Government signed it 47 so as to enable the Soviets to gain strength. 
 At present we are again obliged to issue the call, “Every-thing for the war effort!” All trade union and Party organisa-tions must bend every effort to help the heroic Red Army. 
 We shall very soon convince the whole world of the justice of our cause. 
 A British trade union delegation arrived in Petrograd yesterday. 
 Few of its members are in sympathy with us, butwe are sure that when they return home they will be our bestpropagandists. 
 48 Even former tsarist generals consider Poland’s claims unjust and are helping us. 
 The Russian workers and peasants join us in saying, “Everything for thewar effort, everything for victory”. 
 Let us devote all ourforces to secure victory. 
 ( A storm of applause . 
) Kommunistichesky Trud No. 
 44, Published according to May 14, 1920 the newspaper text TO THE INDIA N REVOLUTIONAR Y ASSOCIATIO N49 I am glad to hear that the principles of self-determination and the liberation of oppressed nations from exploitation by foreign and native capitalists, proclaimed by the Work-ers’ and Peasants’ Republic, have met with such a ready response among progressive Indians, who are waging aheroic fight for freedom. 
 The working masses of Russiaare following with unflagging attention the awakening ofthe Indian workers and peasants. 
 The organisation anddiscipline of the working people and their perseverance and solidarity with the working people of the world are an earnest of ultimate success. 
 We welcome the close allianceof Moslem and non-Moslem elements. 
 We sincerely want tosee this alliance extended to all the toilers of the East. 
Only when the Indian, Chinese, Korean, Japanese, Persian,and Turkish workers and peasants join hands and march together in the common cause of liberation—only then will decisive victory over the exploiters be ensured. 
 Long livea free Asia! Pravda No. 
 108, Published according to May 20, 1920 the newspaper text LETTE R TO THE BRITIS H WORKER S50 Comrades: First of all permit me to thank you for sending your delegation here to acquaint themselves with Soviet Russia. 
 When your delegation suggested to me that I should send a letter through them to the British workers and perhapsalso proposals to the British Government, I replied that Igratefully accepted the first suggestion but that I mustaddress myself to the government, not through a workers’delegation but directly, on behalf of our government, through Comrade Chicherin. 
 We have on very many occasions addressed ourselves this way to the British Government,making the most formal and solemn proposals to start peacetalks. 
 All our representatives—Comrade Litvinov, Com-rade Krasin and the rest—are unceasingly continuing tomake these proposals. 
 The British Government stubbornly refuses to accept them. 
 It is not surprising, therefore, that I desired to speak to the delegates of the British workersexclusively as delegates of the workers, not as a repre-sentative of the government of Soviet Russia, but simplyas a Communist. 
 I was not surprised to find that several members of your delegation hold a standpoint, not of the working class butof the bourgeoisie, of the exploiting class: in all capitalistcountries the imperialist war fully revealed an old ulcer,namely, the desertion of the majority of the workers’parliamentary and trade union leaders to the side of thebourgeoisie. 
 On the false pretext of “defence of country” they were actually defending the predatory interests of either of the two groups of robbers of the entire world—the Anglo-American-French group, or the German group; they entered into an alliance with the bourgeoisie, against the revolutionary struggle of the proletariat; they covered up this treachery with sentimental petty-bourgeois reform-ist and pacifist phrases about peaceful evolution, constitu-tional methods, democracy, etc. 
 This is what happened inall countries; it is not surprising that in Britain this stateof affairs has also been reflected in the composition of yourdelegation. 
 Members of your delegation, Shaw and Guest—obviously surprised and hurt by my statement that Britain, notwith-standing our peace proposals and notwithstanding the decla-rations of her government, is continuing her intervention,waging war against us and helping Wrangel in the Crimeaand whiteguard Poland—asked me whether I had proof of this, and whether I could show how many trainloads of military supplies Britain had provided Poland with, etc. 
I replied that, to obtain the secret treaties of the BritishGovernment, it was necessary to overthrow it in a revolu-tionary manner and to seize all its foreign policy docu-ments in the same way as we did in 1917. 
 Any educated man, anybody sincerely interested in politics, was aware even prior to our revolution that the tsar had secret treatieswith the predatory governments of Britain, France, Amer-ica, Italy and Japan concerning the division of the spoils,concerning Constantinople, Galicia, Armenia, Syria, Meso-potamia, etc. 
 Only liars and hypocrites (excluding, of course, absolutely ignorant, backward and illiterate people) could deny this, or pretend not to know of this. 
 However,without a revolution, we could never have obtained thesecret documents of the predatory governments of the capi-talist class. 
 Those leaders or representatives of the Britishproletariat—whether they are members of Parliament, trade union leaders, journalists, or others—who pretend ignorance of the secret treaties between Britain, France, America,Italy, Japan and Poland concerning the plunder of othercountries, concerning the division of the spoils, and whodo not wage a revolutionary struggle in order to exposethese treaties, are merely once again showing that they are faithful servants of the capitalists. 
 We have known this for a long time; we are exposing this in our own countryand in all other countries of the world. 
 The visit to Russia of a delegation of the British workers will hasten the expo-sure of such leaders in Britain too. 
 I had a conversation with your delegation on Wednesday, May 26. 
 On the following day telegrams arrived statingthat Bonar Law had admitted in the British Parliamentthat military aid had been given to Poland in October“for defence against Russia” (of course only for defence, andonly in October! There are still “influential labour leaders” in Britain who are helping the capitalists to dupe the work-ers!), but the New Statesman , the most moderate of moderate petty-bourgeois newspapers or journals, wrote oftanks being supplied to Poland, which were more powerfulthan those used against the Germans during the war. 
 Afterthis, can one refrain from ridiculing such “leaders” of the British workers that ask with an air of injured innocence whether there is any “proof” that Britain is fighting againstRussia and is helping Poland and the whiteguards in theCrimea? Members of the delegation asked me which I considered more important: the formation in Britain of a consistently revolutionary Communist Party, or obtaining the immediate aid of the masses of the workers in Britain for the cause ofpeace with Russia. 
 I replied that this is a matter of one’sconvictions. 
 Sincere supporters of the emancipation of theworkers from the yoke of capital cannot possibly be opposedto the formation of a Communist Party, which alone is capable of training the workers in a non-bourgeois and non-petty-bourgeois manner, and is alone capable of genu-inely exposing, ridiculing and disgracing “leaders” who candoubt whether Britain is helping Poland, etc. 
 There is noneed to fear the Communists will be too numerous in Brit-ain, because there is not even a small Communist Party there. 
 But if anyone continues to remain in intellectual slavery to the bourgeoisie, and continues to share petty-bourgeois prejudices about “democracy” ( bourgeois democ-racy), pacifism, etc. 
, then of course such people wouldonly do more harm to the proletariat if they took it intotheir heads to call themselves Communists, and affiliate to the Third International. 
 All that these people are ca-pable of doing is to pass sentimental “resolutions” againstintervention couched exclusively in philistine phrases. 
 In a certain sense these resolutions are also useful, namely, in the sense that the old “leaders” (adherents of bourgeois democracy, of peaceful methods, etc. 
, etc. 
) will make them-selves ridiculous in the eyes of the masses, and the more theypass empty, non-committal resolutions unaccompanied byrevolutionary action, the sooner will they expose themselves. 
Let each man stick to his job: let the Communists workdirectly through their Party, awakening the revolutionary consciousness of the workers. 
 Let those who supported the “defence of country” during the imperialist war for thepartitioning of the world, “defence” of the secret treatybetween the British capitalists and the tsar to plunderTurkey, let those who “do not see” that Britain is helpingPoland and the whiteguards in Russia—let such people hasten to increase the number of their “peace resolutions” to the point of becoming ridiculous; the more they do that,the sooner will they meet with the fate of Kerensky, theMensheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries in Russia. 
 Several members of your delegation questioned me with surprise about the Red terror, about the absence of freedom of the press in Russia, of freedom of assembly, about our persecution of Mensheviks and pro-Menshevik workers, etc. 
My reply was that the real cause of the terror is the Britishimperialists and their “allies”, who practised and are stillpractising a White terror in Finland and in Hungary, inIndia and in Ireland, who have been supporting Yudenich, Kolchak, Denikin, Pilsudski and Wrangel. 
 Our Red terror is a defence of the working class against the exploiters, thecrushing of resistance from the exploiters with whom theSocialist-Revolutionaries, the Mensheviks and an insignifi-cant number of pro-Menshevik workers have sided. 
 Freedomof the press and assembly under bourgeois democracy is freedom for the wealthy to conspire against the working people, freedom for the capitalists to bribe and buy up thepress. 
 I have explained this in newspaper articles so oftenthat I have derived no pleasure in repeating myself. 
 Two days after my talk with your delegation, the news-papers reported that, besides the arrests of Monatte and Loriot in France, Sylvia Pankhurst had been arrested in Britain. 
 This is the best possible reply the British Govern-ment could give to a question that the non-Communist British labour “leaders”, who are captives to bourgeois prejudices, are afraid even to ask, namely, which class the terror is directed against—the oppressed and exploited, or the oppressors and exploiters? Is it a question ofthe “freedom” of the capitalists to rob, deceive and dupethe working people, or of the “freedom” of the toilersfrom the yoke of the capitalists, the speculators andthe property-owners? Comrade Sylvia Pankhurst repre-sents the interests of hundreds upon hundreds of mil-lions of people that are oppressed by the British and othercapitalists. 
 That is why she is subjected to a White terror,has been deprived of liberty, etc. 
 The labour “leaders”who pursue a non-Communist policy are 99 per cent repre-sentatives of the bourgeoisie, of its deceit, its prejudices. 
 In conclusion, I want to thank you once again, comrades, for having sent your delegation here. 
 Despite the hostilityof many of the delegates towards the Soviet system andthe dictatorship of the proletariat, and although many ofthem are in the grip of bourgeois prejudices, their acquaint-ance with Soviet Russia will inevitably accelerate the col-lapse of capitalism throughout the world. 
 N. 
 Lenin 30. 
5. 
1920 Pravda No. 
 130, Published according to June 17, 1920 the newspaper text PRELIMINAR Y DRAF T THESES ON THE NATIONA L AND THE COLONIA L QUESTION S51 FOR THE SECOND CONGRESS OF THE COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL In submitting for discussion by the Second Congress of the Communist International the following draft theses on the national and the colonial questions I would requestall comrades, especially those who possess concrete informa-tion on any of these very complex problems, to let me havetheir opinions, amendments, addenda and concrete remarksin the most concise form (no more than two or three pages ), particularly on the following points: Austrian experience;Polish-Jewish and Ukrainian experience;Alsace-Lorraine and Belgium;Ireland; Danish-German, Italo-French and Italo-Slav relations; Balkan experience; Eastern peoples;The struggle against Pan-Islamism;Relations in the Caucasus; The Bashkir and Tatar Republics; Kirghizia;Turkestan, its experience;Negroes in America;Colonies;China-Korea-Japan. 
 N. 
 Lenin June 5, 1920 1) An abstract or formal posing of the problem of equality in general and national equality in particular is in the very nature of bourgeois democracy. 
 Under the guise of the equality of the individual in general, bourgeois democracyproclaims the formal or legal equality of the property-owner and the proletarian, the exploiter and the exploited,thereby grossly deceiving the oppressed classes. 
 On theplea that all men are absolutely equal, the bourgeoisie is transforming the idea of equality, which is itself a reflection of relations in commodity production, into aweapon in its struggle against the abolition of classes. 
The real meaning of the demand for equality consists inits being a demand for the abolition of classes. 
 2) In conformity with its fundamental task of combating bourgeois democracy and exposing its falseness and hypoc-risy, the Communist Party, as the avowed champion ofthe proletarian struggle to overthrow the bourgeois yoke,must base its policy, in the national question too, not onabstract and formal principles but, first, on a precise ap-praisal of the specific historical situation and, primarily, of economic conditions; second, on a clear distinction between the interests of the oppressed classes, of workingand exploited people, and the general concept of nationalinterests as a whole, which implies the interests of the rulingclass; third, on an equally clear distinction between theoppressed, dependent and subject nations and the oppress-ing, exploiting and sovereign nations, in order to counter the bourgeois-democratic lies that play down this colonialand financial enslavement of the vast majority of the world’spopulation by an insignificant minority of the richest andadvanced capitalist countries, a feature characteristic ofthe era of finance capital and imperialism. 
 3) The imperialist war of 1914-18 has very clearly revealed to all nations and to the oppressed classes of the wholeworld the falseness of bourgeois-democratic phrases, bypractically demonstrating that the Treaty of Versailles ofthe celebrated “Western democracies” is an even morebrutal and foul act of violence against weak nations than was the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk of the German Junkers and the Kaiser. 
 The League of Nations and the entire post-war policy of the Entente reveal this truth with even greater /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR clarity and distinctness. 
 They are everywhere intensifying the revolutionary struggle both of the proletariat in the advanced countries and of the toiling masses in the colonial and dependent countries. 
 They are hastening the collapse ofthe petty-bourgeois nationalist illusions that nations canlive together in peace and equality under capitalism. 
 4) From these fundamental premises it follows that the Communist International’s entire policy on the national and the colonial questions should rest primarily on a closer union of the proletarians and the working masses of allnations and countries for a joint revolutionary struggleto overthrow the landowners and the bourgeoisie. 
 This unionalone will guarantee victory over capitalism, without whichthe abolition of national oppression and inequality is impossible. 
 5) The world political situation has now placed the dicta-torship of the proletariat on the order of the day. 
 Worldpolitical developments are of necessity concentrated on asingle focus—the struggle of the world bourgeoisie againstthe Soviet Russian Republic, around which are inev-itably grouped, on the one hand, the Soviet movements of the advanced workers in all countries, and, on the other,all the national liberation movements in the colonies andamong the oppressed nationalities, who are learning frombitter experience that their only salvation lies in theSoviet system’s victory over world imperialism. 
 6) Consequently, one cannot at present confine oneself to a bare recognition or proclamation of the need for closerunion between the working people of the various nations;a policy must be pursued that will achieve the closest al-liance, with Soviet Russia, of all the national and colonialliberation movements. 
 The form of this alliance should be determined by the degree of development of the com-munist movement in the proletariat of each country, orof the bourgeois-democratic liberation movement of theworkers and peasants in backward countries or amongbackward nationalities. 
 7) Federation is a transitional form to the complete unity of the working people of different nations. 
 The feasibility of federation has already been demonstrated in practiceboth by the relations between the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
 and other Soviet Republics (the Hungarian, Finnish52 and Latvian53 in the past, and the Azerbaijan and Ukrainian at present), and by the relations within the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
 in respect of nationalities which formerly enjoyed neither statehoodnor autonomy (e. 
g. 
, the Bashkir and Tatar autonomousrepublics in the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
, founded in 1919 and 1920respectively). 
 8) In this respect, it is the task of the Communist Inter-national to further develop and also to study and test by experience these new federations, which are arisingon the basis of the Soviet system and the Soviet movement. 
In recognising that federation is a transitional form tocomplete unity, it is necessary to strive for ever closerfederal unity, bearing in mind, first, that the Soviet re-publics, surrounded as they are by the imperialist powers of the whole world—which from the military standpointare immeasurably stronger—cannot possibly continue toexist without the closest alliance; second, that a closeeconomic alliance between the Soviet republics is necessary,otherwise the productive forces which have been ruined by imperialism cannot be restored and the well-being of the working people cannot be ensured; third, that there is atendency towards the creation of a single world economy,regulated by the proletariat of all nations as an integralwhole and according to a common plan. 
 This tendency hasalready revealed itself quite clearly under capitalism and is bound to be further developed and consummated under socialism. 
 9) The Communist International’s national policy in the sphere of relations within the state cannot be restrictedto the bare, formal, purely declaratory and actually non-committal recognition of the equality of nations to which the bourgeois democrats confine themselves—both those who frankly admit being such, and those who assume thename of socialists (such as the socialists of the SecondInternational). 
 In all their propaganda and agitation—both within par-liament and outside it—the Communist parties must con-sistently expose that constant violation of the equality of nations and of the guaranteed rights of national minori-ties which is to be seen in all capitalist countries, despite their “democratic” constitutions. 
 It is also necessary, first, constantly to explain that only the Soviet system is ca-pable of ensuring genuine equality of nations, by uniting first the proletarians and then the whole mass of the work-ing population in the struggle against the bourgeoisie;and, second, that all Communist parties should renderdirect aid to the revolutionary movements among the de-pendent and underprivileged nations (for example, Ireland, the American Negroes, etc. 
) and in the colonies. 
 Without the latter condition, which is particularly im-portant, the struggle against the oppression of dependentnations and colonies, as well as recognition of their rightto secede, are but a false signboard, as is evidenced by theparties of the Second International. 
 10) Recognition of internationalism in word, and its replacement in deed by petty-bourgeois nationalism andpacifism, in all propaganda, agitation and practical work,is very common, not only among the parties of the SecondInternational, but also among those which have withdrawnfrom it, and often even among parties which now call them-selves communist. 
 The urgency of the struggle against this evil, against the most deep-rooted petty-bourgeois nationalprejudices, looms ever larger with the mounting exigencyof the task of converting the dictatorship of the proletariatfrom a national dictatorship (i. 
e. 
, existing in a singlecountry and incapable of determining world politics) into an international one (i. 
e. 
, a dictatorship of the proletariat involving at least several advanced countries, and capableof exercising a decisive influence upon world politics asa whole). 
 Petty-bourgeois nationalism proclaims as inter-nationalism the mere recognition of the equality of nations,and nothing more. 
 Quite apart from the fact that this recog-nition is purely verbal, petty-bourgeois nationalism pre-serves national self-interest intact, whereas proletarian inter-nationalism demands, first, that the interests of the pro-letarian struggle in any one country should be subordinatedto the interests of that struggle on a world-wide scale, and,second, that a nation which is achieving victory over the bourgeoisie should be able and willing to make the greatest national sacrifices for the overthrow of internationalcapital. 
 Thus, in countries that are already fully capitalist and have workers’ parties that really act as the vanguard of the proletariat, the struggle against opportunist and petty-bourgeois pacifist distortions of the concept and policyof internationalism is a primary and cardinal task. 
 11) With regard to the more backward states and nations, in which feudal or patriarchal and patriarchal-peasantrelations predominate, it is particularly important to bear in mind: first, that all Communist parties must assist the bour-geois-democratic liberation movement in these countries,and that the duty of rendering the most active assistancerests primarily with the workers of the country the back-ward nation is colonially or financially dependent on; second, the need for a struggle against the clergy and other influential reactionary and medieval elements inbackward countries; third, the need to combat Pan-Islamism and similar trends, which strive to combine the liberation movementagainst European and American imperialism with an attempt to strengthen the positions of the khans, land-owners, mullahs, etc. 
; * fourth, the need, in backward countries, to give special support to the peasant movement against the landowners,against landed proprietorship, and against all manifesta-tions or survivals of feudalism, and to strive to lend the peasant movement the most revolutionary character by establishing the closest possible alliance between the West-European communist proletariat and the revolutionary peas-ant movement in the East, in the colonies, and in the back-ward countries generally. 
 It is particularly necessary toexert every effort to apply the basic principles of the So-viet system in countries where pre-capitalist relations pre-dominate—by setting up “working people’s Soviets”, etc. 
; fifth, the need for a determined struggle against attempts to give a communist colouring to bourgeois-democraticliberation trends in the backward countries; the CommunistInternational should support bourgeois-democratic national *In the proofs Lenin inserted a brace opposite points 2 and 3 and wrote “2 and 3 to be united”. 
— Ed. 
 movements in colonial and backward countries only on condition that, in these countries, the elements of future proletarian parties, which will be communist not only in name, are brought together and trained to understand theirspecial tasks, i. 
e. 
, those of the struggle against the bourgeois-democratic movements within their own nations. 
 The Com-munist International must enter into a temporary alliancewith bourgeois democracy in the colonial and backward countries, but should not merge with it, and should under all circumstances uphold the independence of the proletar-ian movement even if it is in its most embryonic form; sixth, the need constantly to explain and expose among the broadest working masses of all countries, and particu-larly of the backward countries, the deception systemati-cally practised by the imperialist powers, which, under the guise of politically independent states, set up statesthat are wholly dependent upon them economically, finan-cially and militarily. 
 Under present-day internationalconditions there is no salvation for dependent and weaknations except in a union of Soviet republics. 
 12) The age-old oppression of colonial and weak nation-alities by the imperialist powers has not only filled theworking masses of the oppressed countries with animositytowards the oppressor nations, but has also aroused dis-trust in these nations in general, even in their proletariat. 
The despicable betrayal of socialism by the majority of the official leaders of this proletariat in 1914-19, when “defence of country” was used as a social-chauvinist cloakto conceal the defence of the “right” of their “own” bour-geoisie to oppress colonies and fleece financially dependentcountries, was certain to enhance this perfectly legitimatedistrust. 
 On the other hand, the more backward the country, the stronger is the hold of small-scale agricultural production, patriarchalism and isolation, which inevitablylend particular strength and tenacity to the deepest ofpetty-bourgeois prejudices, i. 
e. 
, to national egoism andnational narrow-mindedness. 
 These prejudices are boundto die out very slowly, for they can disappear only after imperialism and capitalism have disappeared in the advanced countries, and after the entire foundation of thebackward countries’ economic life has radically changed. 
 It is therefore the duty of the class-conscious communist proletariat of all countries to regard with particular caution and attention the survivals of national sentiments in the countries and among nationalities which have been oppres-sed the longest; it is equally necessary to make certain con-cessions with a view to more rapidly overcoming this distrustand these prejudices. 
 Complete victory over capitalismcannot be won unless the proletariat and, following it, the mass of working people in all countries and nations through-out the world voluntarily strive for alliance and unity. 
 Published in June 1920 Published according to the manu -script and checked against the text of the proof -sheet, as emended by V. 
 I. 
 Lenin PRELIMINARY DRAFT THESES ON THE AGRARIAN QUESTION FOR THE SECOND CONGRESS OF THE COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL In his article,54 Comrade Marchlewski gave an excellent explanation of the reasons why the Second International, which has now become the yellow International, failed, notonly to define the revolutionary proletariat’s tactics onthe agrarian question, but even to pose that questionproperly. 
 Comrade Marchlewski then went on to set forththe theoretical fundamentals of the Third International’s communist agrarian programme. 
 These fundamentals can (and, I think, should) serve as the basis of the general resolution on the agrarian ques-tion for the Communist International Congress, which willmeet on July 15, 1920. 
 The following is a preliminary draft of that resolution: 1) Only the urban and industrial proletariat, led by the Communist Party, can liberate the working masses ofthe countryside from the yoke of capital and landed pro-prietorship, from ruin and the imperialist wars which willinevitably break out again and again if the capitalist systemremains. 
 There is no salvation for the working masses of the countryside except in alliance with the communist proletariat, and unless they give the latter devoted sup-port in its revolutionary struggle to throw off the yokeof the landowners (the big landed proprietors) and thebourgeoisie. 
 On the other hand, the industrial workers cannot accomplish their epoch-making mission of emancipating mankind from the yoke of capital and from wars if theyconfine themselves to their narrow craft, or trade interests, and smugly restrict themselves to attaining an improve-ment in their own conditions, which may sometimes be tolerable in the petty-bourgeois sense. 
 This is exactly what happens to the “labour aristocracy” of many advancedcountries, who constitute the core of the so-called social-ist parties of the Second International; they are actuallythe bitter enemies and betrayers of socialism, petty-bour-geois chauvinists and agents of the bourgeoisie within the working-class movement. 
 The proletariat is a really revo-lutionary class and acts in a really socialist manner onlywhen it comes out and acts as the vanguard of all the work-ing and exploited people, as their leader in the strugglefor the overthrow of the exploiters; this, however, cannotbe achieved unless the class struggle is carried into the countryside, unless the rural working masses are united about the Communist Party of the urban proletariat, andunless they are trained by the proletariat. 
 2) The working and exploited people of the countryside, whom the urban proletariat must lead into the struggle or,at all events, win over, are represented in all capitalist countries by the following classes: first, the agricultural proletariat, wage-labourers (by the year, season, or day), who obtain their livelihood by work-ing for hire at capitalist agricultural enterprises. 
 Theorganisation of this class (political, military, trade union,co-operative, cultural, educational, etc. 
) independently and separately from other groups of the rural population, the conduct of intensive propaganda and agitation among thisclass, and the winning of its support for the Soviets andthe dictatorship of the proletariat constitute the fundamental tasks of the Communist parties in all countries; second, the semi-proletarians or peasants who till tiny plots of land, i. 
e. 
, those who obtain their livelihood partly as wage-labourers at agricultural and industrial capitalistenterprises and partly by working their own or rented plotsof land, which provide their families only with part oftheir means of subsistence. 
 This group of the rural workingpopulation is very numerous in all capitalist countries; its existence and special position are played down by the representatives of the bourgeoisie and by the yellow “so-cialists” belonging to the Second International, partly by deliberately deceiving the workers and partly by blindly submitting to the routine of petty-bourgeois views and lumping together this group with the mass of the “peas-antry”. 
 This bourgeois method of duping the workers isto be seen mostly in Germany and in France, but also inAmerica and other countries. 
 If the work of the CommunistParty is properly organised, this group will become itsassured supporter, for the lot of these semi-proletarians is a very hard one and they stand to gain enormously and immediately from Soviet government and the dictatorshipof the proletariat: third, the small peasantry, i. 
e. 
, the small-scale tillers who, either as owners or as tenants, hold small plots ofland which enable them to satisfy the needs of their fami-lies and their farms, and do not hire outside labour. 
 This stratum, as such, undoubtedly stands to gain by the vic-tory of the proletariat, which will fully and immediatelybring it: (a) deliverance from the necessity of paying thebig landowners rent or a share of the crop (for example,the métayers in France, also in Italy and other countries); (b) deliverance from mortgages; (c) deliverance from the numerous forms of oppression by and dependence on thebig landowners (forest lands and their use, etc. 
); (d) imme-diate aid for their farms from the proletarian state (the useof the agricultural implements and part of the buildingson the big capitalist farms confiscated by the proletariat and the immediate conversion, by the proletarian state, of the rural co-operative societies and agricultural associa-tions from organisations which under capitalism servedabove all the rich and middle peasants, into organisationsthat will primarily assist the poor, i. 
e. 
, proletarians,semi-proletarians, small peasants, etc. 
), and many other things. 
 At the same time the Communist Party must clearly realise that during the transitional period from capitalismto communism, i. 
e. 
, during the dictatorship of the prole-tariat, this stratum, or at all events part of it, will inevi-tably vacillate towards unrestricted freedom of trade and the free enjoyment of the rights of private property. 
 That is because this stratum, which, if only in a small way, isa seller of articles of consumption, has been corrupted by profiteering and by proprietary habits. 
 However, if a firm proletarian policy is pursued, and if the victorious prole-tariat deals very resolutely with the big landowners and the big peasants, this stratum’s vacillation cannot be con-siderable and cannot alter the fact that, on the whole, itwill side with the proletarian revolution. 
 3) Taken together, the three groups enumerated above constitute the majority of the rural population in all capi-talist countries. 
 That is why the success of the proletarian revolution is fully assured, not only in the cities but in thecountryside as well. 
 The reverse view is widespread; how-ever, it persists only, first, because of the deception system-atically practised by bourgeois science and statistics,which do everything to gloss over both the gulf that separa-tes the above-mentioned classes in the countryside from the exploiters, the landowners and capitalists, and thatwhich separates the semi-proletarians and small peas-ants from the big peasants; second, it persists because ofthe inability and unwillingness of the heroes of the yellowSecond International and of the “labour aristocracy” in the advanced countries, which has been corrupted by im-perialist privileges, to conduct genuinely proletarian revo-lutionary work of propaganda, agitation and organisationamong the rural poor; the attention of the opportunistshas always been and still is wholly concentrated on invent-ing theoretical and practical compromises with the bour eoisie, including the big and middle peasants (who are dealt with below), and not on the revolutionary overthrowof the bourgeois government and the bourgeoisie by theproletariat; it persists, third, because of the obstinaterefusal to understand—so obstinate as to be equivalent toa prejudice (connected with all the other bourgeois-demo-cratic and parliamentary prejudices)—a truth which has been fully proved by Marxist theory and fully corroborated bythe experience of the proletarian revolution in Russia,namely, that although the three enumerated categories ofthe rural population—who are incredibly downtrodden,disunited, crushed, and doomed to semi-barbarous con-ditions of existence in all countries, even the most advanced —are economically, socially, and culturally interested inthe victory of socialism, they are capable of giving resolute support to the revolutionary proletariat only after the latter has won political power, only after it has resolutely dealt with the big landowners and capitalists, and only after these downtrodden people see in practice that they have an organised leader and champion, strong and firmenough to assist and lead them and to show them the rightpath. 
 4) In the economic sense, one should understand by “middle peasants” those small farmers who, (1) either as owners or tenants, hold plots of land that are also smallbut, under capitalism, are sufficient not only to provide,as a general rule, a meagre subsistence for the family andthe bare minimum needed to maintain the farm, but alsoproduce a certain surplus which may, in good years at least, be converted into capital; (2) quite frequently (for example, one farm out of two or three) resort to the employmentof hired labour. 
 A concrete example of the middle peas-ants in an advanced capitalist country is provided by thegroup of farms of five to ten hectares in Germany, in which,according to the census of 1907, the number of farms employing hired labourers is about one-third of the total number of farms in this group. 
 * In France, where the cul-tivation of special crops is more developed—for example,grape-growing, which requires a very large amount oflabour—this group probably employs outside hired labourto a somewhat greater extent. 
 The revolutionary proletariat cannot set itself the task— at least not in the immediate future or in the initial periodof the dictatorship of the proletariat—of winning over thisstratum, but must confine itself to the task of neutralisingit, i. 
e. 
, rendering it neutral in the struggle between theproletariat and the bourgeoisie. 
 This stratum inevitably *Here are the exact figures: the number of farms of five to ten hectares—652,798 (out of a total of 5,736,082), these employed 487,704 hired labourers of various kinds, while members of the farmers’ families ( Familienangehörige ) working on the farms numbered 2,003,633. 
 In Austria, according to the census of 1902, this groupcomprised 383,331 farms, of which 126,136 employed hired labour;the hired labourers working on these farms numbered 146,044 andthe working members of the farmers’ families 1,265,969. 
 The total number of farms in Austria was 2,856,349. 
 vacillates between these two forces; in the beginning of the new epoch and in the developed capitalist countries, it will, in the main, incline towards the bourgeoisie. 
 That is because the world outlook and the sentiments of theproperty-owners are prevalent among this stratum, whichhas a direct interest in profiteering, in “freedom” of tradeand in property, and stands in direct antagonism to thewage-workers. 
 By abolishing rent and mortgages, the vic-torious proletariat will immediately improve the position of this stratum. 
 In most capitalist countries, however, theproletarian state should not at once completely abolishprivate property; at all events, it guarantees both the smalland the middle peasantry, not only the preservation oftheir plots of land but also their enlargement to cover the total area they usually rented (the abolition of rent). 
 A combination of such measures with a ruthless struggle against the bourgeoisie fully guarantees the success of thepolicy of neutralisation. 
 The proletarian state must effectthe transition to collective farming with extreme cautionand only very gradually, by the force of example, without any coercion of the middle peasant. 
 5) The big peasants ( Grossbauern ) are capitalist entre-preneurs in agriculture, who as a rule employ several hired labourers and are connected with the “peasantry” onlyin their low cultural level, habits of life, and the manuallabour they themselves perform on their farms. 
 These con-stitute the biggest of the bourgeois strata who are open and determined enemies of the revolutionary proletariat. 
 Inall their work in the countryside, the Communist partiesmust concentrate their attention mainly on the struggleagainst this stratum, on liberating the toiling and exploitedmajority of the rural population from the ideological and political influence of these exploiters, etc. 
 Following the victory of the proletariat in the cities, all sorts of manifestations of resistance and sabotage, aswell as direct armed action of a counter-revolutionary char-acter on the part of this stratum, are absolutely inevitable. 
The revolutionary proletariat must therefore immediately begin the ideological and organisational preparation of the forces necessary to completely disarm this stratumand, simultaneously with the overthrow of the capitalists in industry, to deal this stratum a most determined, ruth-less and smashing blow at the very first signs of resistance; for this purpose, the rural proletariat must be armed and village Soviets organised, in which the exploiters musthave no place, and in which proletarians and semi-prole-tarians must be ensured predominance. 
 However, the expropriation even of the big peasants can in no way be made an immediate task of the victorious proletariat, because the material and especially the tech-nical conditions, as well as the social conditions, for thesocialisation of such farms are still lacking. 
 In individualand probably exceptional cases, those parts of their landwhich they rent out in small plots or which are particul-arly needed by the surrounding small-peasant population will be confiscated; the small peasants should also be guar-anteed, on certain terms, the free use of part of the agri-cultural machinery belonging to the big peasants, etc. 
 Asa general rule, however, the proletarian state must allowthe big peasants to retain their land, confiscating it onlyif they resist the power of the working and exploited people. 
 The experience of the Russian proletarian revolution, in which the struggle against the big peasantry was compli-cated and protracted by a number of special conditions,showed nevertheless that, when taught a severe lesson forthe slightest attempt at resistance, this stratum is capableof loyally fulfilling the tasks set by the proletarian state, and even begins to be imbued although very slowly with respect for the government which protects all who workand is ruthless towards the idle rich. 
 The special conditions which, in Russia, complicated and retarded the struggle of the proletariat against thebig peasants after it had defeated the bourgeoisie were, in the main, the following: after October 25 (November 7), 1917, the Russian revolution passed through the stage of the“general democratic”—that is, basically the bourgeois-democratic—struggle of the peasantry as a whole againstthe landowners; the cultural and numerical weakness of theurban proletariat; and, lastly, the enormous distances and extremely poor means of communication. 
 Inasmuch as these retarding conditions do not exist in the advanced countries,the revolutionary proletariat of Europe and America should prepare far more energetically, and achieve far more rapidly, resolutely, and successfully, complete victory over the resistance of the big peasantry, completely depriving it of the slightest possibility of offering resistance. 
 This isimperative because, until such a complete and absolute vic-tory is achieved, the masses of the rural proletarians, semi-proletarians, and small peasants cannot be brought toaccept the proletarian state as a fully stable one. 
 6) The revolutionary proletariat must immediately and unreservedly confiscate all landed estates, those of thebig landowners, who, in capitalist countries—directly orthrough their tenant farmers—systematically exploit wage-labour and the neighbouring small (and, not infrequently,part of the middle) peasantry, do not themselves engage in manual labour, and are in the main descended from the feudal lords (the nobles in Russia, Germany, and Hun-gary, the restored seigneurs in France, the lords in Britain,and the former slave-owners in America), or are rich finan-cial magnates, or else a mixture of both these categoriesof exploiters and parasites. 
 Under no circumstances is it permissible for Com-munist parties to advocate or practise compensating thebig landowners for the confiscated lands, for under present-day conditions in Europe and America this would be tant-amount to a betrayal of socialism and the imposition ofnew tribute upon the masses of working and exploited people, to whom the war has meant the greatest hardships, while it has increased the number of millionaires andenriched them. 
 As to the mode of cultivation of the land that the victo-rious proletariat confiscates from the big landowners, thedistribution of that land among the peasantry for their use has been predominant in Russia, owing to her economic backwardness; it is only in relatively rare and exceptionalcases that state farms have been organised on the formerestates which the proletarian state runs at its own expense,converting the former wage-labourers into workers for thestate and members of the Soviets, which administer the state. 
 The Communist International is of the opinion that in the case of the advanced capitalist countries it would becorrect to keep most of the big agricultural enterprises intact and to conduct them on the lines of the “state farms” in Russia. 
 It would, however, be grossly erroneous to exaggerate or to stereotype this rule and never to permit the free grantof part of the land that belonged to the expropriated expropriators to the neighbouring small and sometimesmiddle peasants. 
 First, the objection usually raised to this, namely, that large-scale farming is technically superior, often amounts to an indisputable theoretical truth being replaced by theworst kind of opportunism and betrayal of the revolution. 
To achieve the success of this revolution, the proletariatshould not shrink from a temporary decline in production,any more than the bourgeois opponents of slavery in North America shrank from a temporary decline in cotton pro-duction as a consequence of the Civil War of 1863-65. 
 Whatis most important to the bourgeois is production for thesake of production; what is most important to the work-ing and exploited population is the overthrow of theexploiters and the creation of conditions that will permit the working people to work for themselves, and not for the capitalists. 
 It is the primary and fundamental task of theproletariat to ensure the proletarian victory and itsstability. 
 There can, however, be no stable proletariangovernment unless the middle peasantry is neutralised andthe support is secured of a very considerable section of the small peasantry, if not all of them. 
 Second, not merely an increase but even the preservation of large-scale production in agriculture presupposes theexistence of a fully developed and revolutionarily con-scious rural proletariat with considerable experience of tradeunion and political organisation behind it. 
 Where this condition does not yet exist, or where this work cannot expediently be entrusted to class-conscious and competentindustrial workers, hasty attempts to set up large state-conducted farms can only discredit the proletarian govern-ment. 
 Under such conditions, the utmost caution mustbe exercised and the most thorough preparations made when state farms are set up. 
 Third, in all capitalist countries, even the most advanced, there still exist survivals of medieval, semi-feudal exploitation of the neighbouring small peasants by the big landowners as in the case of the Instleute * in Germany, the métayers in France, and the sharecroppers in the United States (not only Negroes, who, in the Southern States,are mostly exploited in this way, but sometimes whitestoo). 
 In such cases it is incumbent on the proletarian stateto grant the small peasants free use of the lands they for-merly rented, since no other economic or technical basis exists, and it cannot be created at one stroke. 
 The implements and stock of the big farms must be con-fiscated without fail and converted into state property,with the absolute condition that, after the requirements of the big state farms have been met, the neighbouringsmall peasants may have the use of these implements gratis, in compliance with conditions drawn up by the proletarian state. 
 In the period immediately following the proletarian revolution, it is absolutely necessary, not only to con-fiscate the estates of the big landowners at once, but alsoto deport or to intern them all as leaders of counter-revo-lution and ruthless oppressors of the entire rural popula-tion. 
 However, with the consolidation of the proletarianpower in the countryside as well as in the cities, systematicefforts should be made to employ (under the special con-trol of highly reliable communist workers) those forceswithin this class that possess valuable experience, know-how, and organising skill, to build large-scale socialist agriculture. 
 7) The victory of socialism over capitalism and the consolidation of socialism may be regarded as ensured onlywhen the proletarian state power, having completely sup-pressed all resistance by the exploiters and assured itself complete subordination and stability, has reorganised the whole of industry on the lines of large-scale collectiveproduction and on a modern technical basis (founded onthe electrification of the entire economy). 
 This alone willenable the cities to render such radical assistance, technicaland social, to the backward and scattered rural population as will create the material basis necessary to boost the *Tenant farmers. 
— Ed. 
 productivity of agricultural and of farm labour in general, thereby encouraging the small farmers by the force of exam-ple and in their own interests to adopt large-scale, collec-tive and mechanised agriculture. 
 Although nominallyrecognised by all socialists, this indisputable theoreticaltruth is in fact distorted by the opportunism prevalentin the yellow Second International and among the leadersof the German and the British “Independents”, the French Longuetists, etc. 
 This distortion consists in attention being directed towards the relatively remote, beautiful, and rosyfuture; attention is deflected from the immediate tasksof the difficult practical transition and approach to thatfuture. 
 In practice, it consists in preaching a compromisewith the bourgeoisie and a “class truce”, i. 
e. 
, complete betrayal of the proletariat, which is now waging a struggle amidst the unprecedented ruin and impoverishment createdeverywhere by the war, and amidst the unprecedented enrich-ment and arrogance of a handful of millionaires resultingfrom that war. 
 It is in the countryside that a genuine possibility of a successful struggle for socialism demands, first, that all Communist parties should inculcate in the industrial pro-letariat a realisation of the need to make sacrifices, andbe prepared to make sacrifices so as to overthrow the bour-geoisie and consolidate proletarian power—since the dic-tatorship of the proletariat implies both the ability of the proletariat to organise and lead all the working and exploited people, and the vanguard’s ability to make theutmost sacrifices and to display the utmost heroism to thatend; second, success demands that, as a result of theworkers’ victory, the labouring and most exploited massesin the countryside achieve an immediate and considerable improvement in their conditions at the expense of the ex-ploiters—for without that the industrial proletariat cannotget the support of the rural areas and, in particular, willbe unable to ensure the supply of food for the cities. 
 8) The enormous difficulty of organising and training for the revolutionary struggle the masses of rural working people, whom capitalism has reduced to a state of great wretchedness, disunity and frequently semi-medievaldependence, makes it necessary for the Communist parties to devote special attention to the strike struggle in the rural districts, give greater support to mass strikes by the agricultural proletarians and semi-proletarians, and help develop the strike movement in every way. 
 The experienceof the Russian revolutions of 1905 and of 1917, now con-firmed and extended by the experience of Germany and otheradvanced countries, shows that the growing mass strikestruggle (into which, under certain conditions, the small peasants can and should also be drawn) is alone capable of rousing the countryside from its lethargy, awakening theclass-consciousness of the exploited masses in the country-side, making them realise the need for class organisation,and revealing to them in a vivid and practical manner theimportance of their alliance with the urban workers. 
 This Congress of the Communist International brands as traitors and renegades those socialists—to be found,unfortunately, not only in the yellow Second International,but also in the three very important European parties whichhave withdrawn from that International—who are not onlycapable of remaining indifferent to the strike struggle in the countryside, but even (like Karl Kautsky) of opposing it on the grounds that it threatens to reduce the outputof articles of consumption. 
 Neither programmes nor themost solemn declarations are of any value whatever unlessit is proved in practice, in deed, that the Communists andworkers’ leaders are able to place above everything else in the world the development and the victory of the pro-letarian revolution, and to make the greatest sacrificesfor it, for otherwise there is no way out, no salvation fromstarvation, ruin, and new imperialist wars. 
 In particular, it should be pointed out that the leaders of the old socialist movement and representatives of the “labour aristocracy”—who now often make verbal conces-sions to communism and even nominally side with it inorder to preserve their prestige among the worker masses,which are rapidly becoming revolutionary—should be testedfor their loyalty to the cause of the proletariat and theirsuitability for responsible positions in those spheres of work where the development of revolutionary consciousness and the revolutionary struggle is most marked, the resistanceof the landowners and the bourgeoisie (the big peasants, the kulaks) most fierce, and the difference between the so-cialist compromiser and the communist revolutionary most striking. 
 9) The Communist parties must exert every effort to begin, as speedily as possible, to set up Soviets ofDeputies in the countryside, and in the first place Sovietsof hired labourers and semi-proletarians. 
 Only if they arelinked up with the mass strike struggle and with the most oppressed class can the Soviets perform their functions, and become consolidated enough to influence (and laterto incorporate) the small peasants. 
 If, however, the strikestruggle has not yet developed, and the agricultural pro-letariat is as yet incapable of strong organisation owingboth to the severe oppression by the landowners and the big peasants and to lack of support from the industrial workers and their unions, then the formation of Sovietsof Deputies in the rural areas will require lengthy prepa-ration by means of the organisation of communist cells,even if only small ones, intensified agitation—in whichthe demands of communism are enunciated in the simplest manner and illustrated by the most glaring examples of exploitation and oppression—and the arrangement of sys-tematic visits of industrial workers to the rural districts,and so on. 
 Written at the beginning of June 1920 Published in June 1920 Published according to the manuscript KOMMUNISMUS JOURNAL OF THE COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL FOR THE COUNTRIES OF SOUTH -EASTERN EUROPE (IN GERMAN ), VIENNA, NO. 
 1-2 (FEBRUARY 1, 1920 ) TO NO. 
 18 (MAY 8, 1920 ) This excellent journal, which is published in Vienna under the above title, contains a great deal of highly in-teresting material on the growth of the communist move-ment in Austria, Poland and other countries, together witha chronicle of the international movement, and articles onHungary and Germany, on general tasks and tactics, etc. 
A shortcoming that strikes the eye even at a cursory exam-ination cannot, however, be disregarded—the indubitable symptoms of the “infantile disorder of Left-wing Commu-nism” that has affected the journal, a subject on which Ihave written a short pamphlet that has just appeared inPetrograd. 
 The excellent journal Kommunismus reveals three symp-toms of this malady, which I would like at once to deal with briefly. 
 No. 
 6 (March 1, 1920) contains an article by Com-rade G. 
 L. 
 55 entitled “On the Question of Parliamentari-anism”, which the editors designate as controversial, andfrom which Comrade B. 
 K. 
, 56 the author of an article enti-tled “On the Question of the Parliamentary Boycott”(No. 
 18, May 8, 1920), directly dissociates himself (fortu-nately), i. 
e. 
, declares that he is in disagreement with it. 
 G. 
 L. 
’s article is very Left-wing, and very poor. 
 Its Marxism is purely verbal; its distinction between “defen-sive” and “offensive” tactics is artificial; it gives no con-crete analysis of precise and definite historical situations;it takes no account of what is most essential (the need to take over and to learn to take over, all fields of work and all institutions in which the bourgeoisie exerts its influenceover the masses, etc. 
). 
 No. 
 14 (April 17, 1920), carries an article by Comrade B. 
 K. 
, entitled “The Events in Germany”, in which he criticises a statement made by the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Germany on March 21, 1920, whichstatement I too criticised in the pamphlet mentioned above. 
However, our criticisms differ radically in character. 
 Com-rade B. 
 K. 
 criticises on the basis of quotations from Marx,which refer to a situation unlike the present one, he wholly rejects the tactics of the German Communist Party’s Central Committee and absolutely evades what is most important,that which constitutes the very gist, the living soul, ofMarxism—a concrete analysis of a concrete situation. 
 Sincemost of the urban workers have abandoned the Scheideman-nites for the Kautskyites, and since, within the Kautskian party (a party “independent” of correct revolutionary tac-tics) they are continuing to abandon its Right wing infavour of the Left, i. 
e. 
, in fact, of communism—since thatis the case, is it permissible to take no account of the transi-tional and compromise measures to be adopted with regardto such workers ? Is it permissible to disregard and to gloss over the experience of the Bolsheviks, who, in April and May 1917, pursued what was in fact a policy of compro-mise, when they declared that the Provisional Government(Lvov, Milyukov, Kerensky and the rest) could not beoverthrown at once, since in the Soviets, they still hadthe backing of the workers and it was first of all necessary to bring about a change in views in the majority, or a con-siderable part, of those workers? I consider that impermissible. 
Lastly, Comrade B. 
 K. 
’s article in Kommunismus No. 
 18, which I have mentioned, very vividly, strikingly and effecti-vely reveals his error in sympathising with the tactics of boycotting parliaments in present-day Europe. 
 When the author dissociates himself from the “syndicalist boycott”and the “passive” boycott, but at the same time invents aspecial kind of “active” (Ah, how “Left”!...) boycott, thefull extent of the errors in his argument is brought outvery strikingly. 
 “An active boycott,” the author writes, “means that the Com-munist Party does not confine itself to disseminating the sloganadvocating non-participation in elections, but, in the interests of the boycott, engages in revolutionary agitation just as extensively as if it were participating in the elections and as if its agitation andaction were designed to secure the greatest possible number of pro-letarian votes. 
” (P. 
 552). 
 This is a gem. 
 This demolishes the anti-parliamentarians better that any criticism could. 
 An “active” boycott isdevised “as though” we were participating in elections!!The mass of unenlightened and semi-enlightened workers and peasants take a serious part in elections, for they still entertain bourgeois-democratic prejudices, are still underthe sway of those prejudices. 
 And instead of helping theunenlightened (although at times “highly-cultured”) pettybourgeois to get rid of their prejudices by their ownexperience, we are to hold aloof from taking part in parlia-ments and to amuse ourselves by inventing tactics free of all commonplace and bourgeois contamination!! Bravo, bravo, Comrade B. 
 K. 
! By your defence of anti-parliamentarianism you will help us to destroy this follymuch sooner than I can through my criticism. 
 N. 
 Lenin 12. 
6. 
1920 Published in June 1920 Published according to the manuscript SPEEC H DELIVERE D AT THE SECON D ALL-RUSSIA CONFERENC E OF ORGANISER S RESPONSIBLE FOR RURA L WORK JUN E 12, 192057 Comrades, I am very glad to be able to greet you who have come to this conference to discuss work in the rural areas. 
 Permit me first to dwell briefly on the internationalposition of the Soviet Republic and our tasks in connectionwith it, and then to say a few words about the tasks inthe rural districts, which, in my opinion, should now assume prime importance to Party workers. 
 As regards the Republic’s international standing, you are of course well aware of the main facts about the Polish offensive. 
 An incredible number of lies are being spreadon this subject abroad, due to the so-called freedom ofthe press, which consists in all the most important organs of the press abroad being bought up by the capitalists, and being filled 99 per cent with articles by mercenary hacks. 
That is what they call freedom of the press, due to whichthere is no limit to the lies that are being spread. 
 Withregard to the Polish offensive in particular, they are trying tomake out that the Bolsheviks presented impossible demands to Poland and launched an offensive, whereas you all know very well that we fully consented even to the immensefrontiers held by the Poles before the offensive began. 
 Weset more store by the lives of our Red Army men than bya war for Byelorussia and Lithuania, which the Poles hadseized. 
 We declared in the most solemn terms—not only in the name of the Council of People’s Commissars, but also in a special manifesto of the All-Russia CentralExecutive Committee, 58 the supreme body in the Soviet Republic—we declared to the Polish Government, to the bourgeois and landowner government, besides appealing to the Polish workers and peasants, that we proposed negotia-tions for peace on the basis of the front that existed at thetime, i. 
e. 
, the front that left Lithuania and Byelorussia—non-Polish territory—in the hands of the Poles. 
 We wereand still are convinced that the Polish landowners andcapitalists will be unable to retain foreign territory, and that we shall gain more even from the most unfavourable peace, since we shall save the lives of our Red Army men,and every month of peace makes us ten times as strong,whereas to every other government, including the bourgeoisgovernment of Poland, every month of peace means greaterand greater disintegration. 
 Although our peace proposals were very far-reaching, and although certain very hasty and, as far as talking goes, highly revolutionary revolution-aries, even called our proposals Tolstoyan—when, as amatter of fact, the Bolsheviks’ actions have, I think, shownsufficiently that there is not a jot of Tolstoyanism in us—we considered it our duty, in the face of such a thing as war, to show that we were prepared to make the maximum possible concessions, and especially to show that we wouldnot wage war for boundaries for which so much blood hadbeen spilt, since to us that was a matter of little significance. 
 We were prepared to make concessions no other govern-ment can make; we offered Poland territory which it would be useful to compare with that described in a document published yesterday, I think, and coming from the supremeorgan of the Allies, the British, French and other imperial-ists, in which Poland’s eastern frontiers are indicated. 
 59 These capitalists in Britain and France imagine that it is they who lay down boundaries. 
 But, thank goodness, there are others besides them who do that—the workers and peasants have learnt to establish their boundariesthemselves. 
 These capitalists have fixed the Polish boundaries much farther to the west than those we proposed. 
 This document,coming from the Allies in Paris, is clear proof that they have arrived at a deal with Wrangel. 
 They assure us that they want peace with Soviet Russia, that they supportneither Poland nor Wrangel. 
 We, however, say that it is an unscrupulous lie with which they are trying to shield them-selves; for they say that they are not supplying any more arms, when as a matter of fact they are supplying them just as they did several months ago. 
 Today’s reports statethat rich trophies have been captured—a carload of newBritish machine guns; Comrade Trotsky reports that brand-new French cartridges were captured the other day. 
 Whatother confirmation do we need that Poland is acting with the aid of British and French equipment, with the aid of Brit-ish and French cartridges, that she is acting with the aid ofBritish and French money? If they now declare that Polandwill herself establish her eastern borders, then that is inconsequence of a direct deal with Wrangel. 
 That is obviousto anybody. 
 The entire situation makes it perfectly clear that the Polish landowners and bourgeoisie are fighting exclusively with the aid of the British and the French. 
The latter, however, are lying brazenly, just as theydid when they assured us that they had not sent Bullitt, untilhe finally returned to America and came out and publishedthe documents he had gathered here. 
 These gentlemen, these capitalist tradesmen, cannot act contrary to their nature. 
 That is obvious. 
 They can onlyreason like tradesmen. 
 When our diplomats do not actlike tradesmen, and when we say that the lives of our RedArmy men are more precious to us than any vast boundarychanges they, of course, with their purely tradesmen’s reasoning, cannot understand it. 
 When, a year ago, we proposed to Bullitt a treaty which was extremely favourableto them and extremely unfavourable to us, a treaty thatwould have left huge territories in the hands of Denikinand Kolchak, we did so in the certainty that, if peace wereconcluded, the whiteguard government would never be able to retain power. 
 With their tradesmen’s reasoning, they could only interpret this as a confession of our weakness. 
 “If the Bol-sheviks agree to such a peace,” they argued, “it must meanthat they are at their last gasp. 
” And the bourgeois pressexulted, the diplomats rubbed their hands with glee, and millions of pounds sterling were advanced to Kolchak and Denikin. 
 True, they did not give them hard cash, but sup-plied them with arms at usurious prices, fully convinced that the Bolsheviks could not cope with them at all. 
 The upshot was that Kolchak and Denikin were routed and their hundreds of millions of pounds went up in smoke. 
 We are now getting trainload after trainload of excellent Britishequipment; you can often meet entire divisions of RussianRed Army men clad in excellent British uniforms; theother day a comrade who arrived from the Caucasus toldme that an entire division of Red Army men are wearing Italian bersagliere uniforms. 
 I am very sorry that I am unable to show you photographs of these Russian Red Armymen clad in bersagliere uniforms. 
 All I can say is that, afterall, the British equipment has been of some use and thatRussian Red Army men are grateful to the British tradesmenwho have fitted them out because they reasoned like trades-men, and who have been thrashed, are being thrashed, and will be thrashed time and time again. 
 ( Applause . 
) We find the same thing with the Polish offensive. 
 This is another instance of God (if he exists, of course) firstdepriving of reason those whom he would punish. 
 TheEntente is undoubtedly headed by very shrewd men, ex-cellent politicians, yet these people commit folly after folly. 
 They raise up against us one country after another,enabling us to smash them one by one. 
 Why, if only theysucceeded in uniting—and they do have the League ofNations and there is no corner of the earth to which theirmilitary power does not extend. 
 Nobody, it would seem, could unite all the enemy forces better and launch them against the Soviets. 
 Yet they cannot unite them. 
 They gointo battle part by part. 
 They merely threaten, boast andbluff. 
 Six months ago they declared that they had musteredfourteen states against the Soviets, and that in a matterof months they would be in Moscow and Petrograd. 
 But today I received a pamphlet from Finland, containing the reminiscences of a certain whiteguard officer about theoffensive against Petrograd; prior to that I received a state-ment of protest from several Russians of the Cadet brand,members of the North-Western Government, which tellsof how certain British generals invited them to a confer-ence and suggested to them through an interpreter, and sometimes in excellent Russian, that they should form agovernment right away, on the spot—a Russian govern-ment, of course, a democratic government, it goes without saying, in the spirit of the Constituent Assembly—and how they were told to sign on the dotted line. 
 And, though they were bitter enemies of the Bolsheviks, these Russianofficers, these Cadets, were outraged by the brazen inso-lence of the British officers, who dictated to them, andordered them, in a tone of a drill sergeant (and onlylike a Russian one can), to sign what they were told to— and they go on to relate how the whole affair fell through. 
 I regret that we are unable to give extensive distributionto these documents, to these confessions of whiteguardofficers who took part in the advance on Petrograd. 
 Why is that so? It is because their League of Nations is a league only in name; in fact it is a pack of wolves that are all the time at each other’s throats and do not trust one another in the least. 
 As a matter of fact, they are even now boasting that Latvia, Rumania and Finland will join Poland in the at-tack; it is clear from the diplomatic negotiations thatwhen Poland began her offensive the powers that were con-ducting peace negotiations with us changed their tone, and came out with statements whose insolence was some-times amazing. 
 They reason like tradesmen—and you can-not expect anything else from a tradesman. 
 It seemed tothem that this was the time to square accounts with SovietRussia, so they turned high and mighty. 
 Let them do so. 
 We have seen the same thing in the case of other states, far bigger ones, but we have paid no heed to that because,as experience has shown, all the threats from Finland,Rumania, Latvia and the other bourgeois states that arewholly dependent on the Entente, have come to nought. 
Poland signed a treaty only with Petlyura, a general without an army, which has evoked even greater bitterness among the Ukrainian population and has induced more and moresemi-bourgeois elements to side with Soviet Russia. 
 So,once again, instead of a general offensive, you have isolatedaction by Poland alone. 
 And now we see that although ourforces had to spend a lot of time on the move because they were farther away from the frontiers than the Poles were and we needed more time to bring up our troops, the latterhave begun to advance. 
 Some days ago our cavalry captured Zhitomir. 
 Our forces have cut the last road linking Kiev with the Polish front both in the south and the north, which means that the Poles have lost Kiev irrevocably. 
 At the same time we learn that Skólski has resigned, that thePolish Government are in a state of uncertainty and agi-tation and are already declaring that they will offer usnew peace terms. 
 Just as you please, you landowner andcapitalist gentlemen! We will give the Polish peace terms due consideration. 
 What we see is that their government are waging war against the wishes of their own bourgeoisie;that the Polish National Democrats, 60 who correspond to our Cadets and Octobrists—the most bitter counter-revolutionary landowners and bourgeois—are opposed tothe war, for they realise that they cannot win such a war, and that it is being run by Polish adventurers, by the Socialist-Revolutionaries, the Polish Socialist Party, 61 people marked most by features characterising the Socialist-Revo-lutionaries, namely, revolutionary talk, boastfulness, patri-otism, chauvinism, buffoonery and sheer claptrap. 
 We arefamiliar with such people. 
 When, after they have bitten off more than they can chew in this war, they begin to reshuffle their Cabinet and to say that they propose peacetalks to us, we say: “Just as you please, gentlemen, havea try. 
 We, however, are counting only on the Polish workersand peasants. 
 We shall also talk peace, only not with you,the Polish landowners and bourgeois, but with the Polish workers and peasants, and we shall see what will come of such negotiations. 
” Comrades, despite the successes we are gaining on the Polish front, the position at present demands every effortof us. 
 The most dangerous thing in a war that breaks outin conditions like those in the present war with Poland is to underrate the enemy and to reassure ourselves with the thought that we are the stronger. 
 That is a most dangerousthing, which may lead to defeat in the war; it is the worstfeature in the Russian character, which expresses itselfin enervation and flabbiness. 
 It is important, not only tobegin but to carry on and hold out; that is what we Rus-sians are not good at. 
 Only by long training, through a proletarian disciplined struggle against all wavering andvacillation, only through such endurance can the Russian working masses be brought to rid themselves of this bad habit. 
 We have given Kolchak, Denikin and Yudenich a sound thrashing, but we have not yet finished the job. 
 Wrangelis still in the Crimea. 
 We said to ourselves: “Well,now we are the stronger”—and that has led to instanceafter instance of slackness and slovenliness. 
 Meanwhile,Wrangel is receiving aid from Great Britain. 
 This is done through traders, but it cannot be proved. 
 Only the other day he landed troops and captured Melitopol. 
True, according to the latest reports we have re-capturedit; but in this case, too, we had let it slip from our handsmost shamefully just because we were strong. 
 Just becauseYudenich, Kolchak and Denikin have been smashed, the Russian begins to reveal his nature and take things easy, with the result that we let things slide. 
 His slovenlinessleads to tens of thousands of his comrades losing their lives. 
Here is a fundamental Russian trait: when not a singlejob has been carried through to the end he is apt to let thingsslide unless he is prodded. 
 This trait must be ruthlessly combated, for it leads to tens of thousands of the finest Red Army men and peasants losing their lives, and thecontinued sufferings of famine. 
 And so, though we are strong-er than the Poles, our slogan in the war that has been im-posed on us must be—an end to all slackness! Since warhas proved inevitable, everything must be devoted to the war effort; the least slackness or lack of drive must be pun-ished by wartime laws. 
 War means war, and let nobodyin the rear or in any peaceful occupation dare shirk thisduty! The slogan must be—everything for the war effort! Other-wise we shall be unable to cope with the Polish nobles and bourgeoisie. 
 To finish with this war, we must teach a conclusive lesson to the last of the neighbouring powersthat still dares to play at this game. 
 We must give themso severe a lesson that they will warn their children, theirgrandchildren and their great-grandchildren to refrain fromsuch things. 
 ( Applause . 
) And so, comrades, at every meet-ing, assembly and business conference, in all groups at all party institutions and on all executive bodies, itis the prime duty of those who are working in the country-side, of propagandists and agitators, and all the comrades engaged in any field of peaceful labour to give top priority and full effect to the slogan: “Everything for the war effort!” Until complete victory is won in this war, we must guar-antee ourselves against the errors and follies we have beencommitting for years. 
 I do not know how many mistakesa Russian has to make before he learns his lesson. 
 We have already had an instance of our thinking that the war was over before we had crushed the enemy, and we left Wrangelin the Crimea. 
 I repeat, the slogan, “Everything for thewar effort!” must be the chief item on the agenda at everyconference, at every meeting, on every executive body. 
 We must ask ourselves: have we bent every effort, have we made every sacrifice to bring the war to an end? This is a question of saving the lives of tens of thousands of ourfinest comrades, who are perishing at the front, in the fore-most ranks. 
 It is a matter of saving ourselves from the faminewhich is imminent just because we are not fighting thewar to a finish, when we can and must do that and quickly, too. 
 For this, discipline and subordination must be enforced at all costs and with the utmost severity. 
 The least con-donement, the least slackness displayed here, in the rear,in any peaceful pursuit, will mean the loss of thousands oflives, and starvation in the rear. 
 That is why faults like these must be treated with ruth-less severity. 
 That is the first and principal lesson to be drawn from the civil war in Soviet Russia. 
 It is the firstand principal lesson which every Party worker must bearin mind under all circumstances, especially if his job isone of agitation and propaganda; he must know that hewill be a worthless Communist and a traitor to the Soviet state if he does not, in respect to every shortcoming, how-ever slight, implement this slogan with inflexible firmnessand with ruthless determination. 
 If this condition isobserved, an early victory will be assured, and we shallbe fully guaranteed against famine. 
 We receive reports about the situation in the outlying regions, from comrades arriving from remote parts of the country. 
 I have seen comrades from Siberia, and also Com-rades Lunacharsky and Rykov, who have returned from the Ukraine and the North Caucasus. 
 They speak with boundless amazement of the wealth of these regions. 
 In the Ukraine pigs are being fed on wheat; in the Northern Caucasus the peasant women, when selling milk, rinse their cans withmilk. 
 Trainloads of wool, leather and other wealth are ontheir way from Siberia; tens of thousands of poods of saltare lying in Siberia. 
 In our parts, on the other hand, thepeasants have been worn down, and refuse to give grain in exchange for paper money, which, as they see it, cannot restore their farms. 
 Here, in Moscow, we may find starvingworkers carrying on at their machines. 
 The continuationof the war is the chief obstacle to our keeping the workersbetter fed and restoring their shattered health. 
 Just becausewe have slipped up on the Crimea, tens of thousands will go short of food for another six months. 
 This is all due to poor organisation and discipline on our part. 
 Peoplehere are dying, while in the Ukraine, in the North Caucasusand in Siberia we have wealth untold, with which we couldfeed the hungry workers and restore industry. 
 To restore oureconomic life, we need discipline. 
 The proletarian dicta-torship should display itself primarily in the advanced, the most class-conscious and most disciplined of the urbanand industrial workers—the greatest sufferers from hungerwho have made great sacrifices during these two years—educating, training and disciplining all the other proletari-ans, who are often not class-conscious, and all working people and the peasantry. 
 All sentimentality, all claptrap about democracy must be scrapped. 
 Let us leave the clap-trap to the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks;they have spoken enough about democracy to Kolchak,Denikin and Yudenich. 
 Let them clear out and go overto Wrangel. 
 He will complete their schooling. 
 But that schooling must be given to those who have not yet learnt the lesson. 
 We maintain that the workers who have assumed the burdens and have ensured the tranquility and strength ofthe Soviets through their untold sacrifices, should regardthemselves as a vanguard that will raise up the rest of the working masses by education and discipline. 
 We know that the working man, as we have inherited him from capital-ism, is in a state of utter benightedness and ignorance, and does not realise that work can be done, not only under the lash of capital, but also under the guidance of the organised worker. 
 He is, however, capable of believing all that if we demonstrate it in practice. 
 The working man cannotlearn that from books but he can learn it if we demonstrateit to him in practice: he will have either to work underthe guidance of the class-conscious industrial worker, orsubmit to the yoke of Kolchak, Wrangel and the rest. 
 And so, we must, at any cost, have the strictest discipline, and conscious performance of what the vanguard of the prole-tariat prescribes, of what it has learnt from its hard expe-rience. 
 If all steps are taken for the achievement of our aim,that will fully guarantee our emergence from the economicchaos and disruption caused by the imperialist war. 
 Grain collections yielded 30,000,000 poods in the season following August 1, 1917, and 110,000,000 poods in the season fol-lowing August 1918. 
 That shows that we have begun toemerge from our difficulties. 
 Since August 1,1919, over150,000,000 poods have been brought in to date. 
 That showsthat we are making it. 
 But we have not yet properly seen to the Ukraine, the North Caucasus and Siberia. 
 If that is done we shall really be able to provide the worker with agood two pounds of bread a day. 
 I should also like to dwell, comrades, on a question of importance to you, rural Party workers, with whom I am insome measure acquainted from Party documents. 
 I want to tell you that instruction, Party activities, agitation and propaganda will be your principal work. 
 One of the mainshortcomings in this work is that we do not know how torun state affairs, and that with our comrades, even withthose who are in charge of work here, the habits of the oldunderground conditions are still too strong, i. 
e. 
, habits of the time when we used to gather in small circles here or abroad, and did not have the slightest idea or inkling of howthe work of the state has to be carried on. 
 That, however,is something we have got to know, for we must rememberthat we have to govern millions. 
 Any person in authoritywho goes to the rural districts, as delegate or representative of the Central Committee, must remember that we have a tremendous machinery of state which is still function-ing poorly because we do not know how to run it properly. 
 In the rural districts there are hundreds of thousands of teachers who are browbeaten and intimidated by the ku-laks, or who have been frightened out of their wits by the old tsarist officials, and cannot understand, are not ina position to understand, the principles of Soviet govern-ment. 
 We have a huge military apparatus. 
 Withoutthe military commissars we would not have had a RedArmy. 
 We also have the apparatus of the Vsevobuch , 62 which, together with its military functions, should be carrying oncultural work, should be educating the peasants. 
 This statemachinery functions very poorly; it contains no reallydevoted and convinced people, no real Communists. 
 Andyou, who are going to the rural districts as Communists, must work not in isolation from this apparatus, but, on the contrary, in close conjunction with it. 
 Every Party agitatorwho goes to a rural district must at the same time be aninspector of schools: not an inspector in the old senseof the word, not in the sense of meddling in educationalaffairs—that must not be permitted—but in the sense of co-ordinating his work with that of the People’s Commis-sariat of Education, with the work of the Vsevobuch , with the work of the military commissars; he must regard him-self as representative of the state, as representative ofa party that is governing Russia. 
 When he comes toa rural district he must not only act as propagandist and teacher; he must at the same time see to it that the school-teachers, who have never heard a living word, and thosescores and hundreds of military commissars, all playa part in the Party agitator’s work. 
 Every school-teachershould have agitational pamphlets, and should notonly have them, but read them to the peasants. 
 He should know that he will lose his job unless he does that. 
 The same applies to the military commissars; theyshould have these pamphlets and read them out to thepeasants. 
 The Soviet government employs hundreds of thousands of office workers, who are either bourgeois or semi-bourgeois, or else have been so downtrodden that they have absolutely no confidence in our Soviet government, or feelso far removed from that government that they think it is somewhere far-off, over there in Moscow, while next to them are the kulaks, who have grain, but hold on to it and will not let them have any, so that they are starving. 
 Here the Party worker has a double job. 
 He must remember that he isnot only a propagandist, that he must not only come to theassistance of the most downtrodden strata of the population—that is his principal job, not to do which means that heis no Party worker and has no right to call himself a Com-munist—but that, in addition, he must act as a represen-tative of the Soviet government, he must establish con-tacts with the teachers, and co-ordinate his work withthat of the People’s Commissariat of Education. 
 He mustnot be an inspector in the sense of exercising control andsupervision; he must act as a representative of the govern-ing Party, which is now administering all Russia through part of the proletariat; in this capacity he must rememberthat his job is one of instruction, and that he must enlistand educate all the teachers and military commissars todo the same work as his. 
 They are not familiar with thiswork; you must teach it to them. 
 They are at present defence-less against the well-fed peasant. 
 You must help them to shake off this dependence. 
 You must firmly rememberthat you are not only propagandists and agitators, but alsorepresentatives of the state; you must not destroy the exist-ing apparatus, or interfere with it and muddle its organi-sation, but must organise your work so that, as efficient instructors, propagandists and agitators, even after a brief period of work in the rural districts, you will leave yourmark, not only in the papers of the peasant Communistsyou have educated, but also in the minds of the peoplewhose work you inspect and guide, and to whom you giveassignments, demanding that every teacher and military commissar should work in the Soviet spirit under all cir-cumstances, that he should know that this is his duty,that he must remember that if he does not perform that duty,he will lose his job; they should all sense and see in everyagitator a fully empowered representative of the Sovietgovernment. 
 If this is done, and if you employ your forces properly, you will multiply them, with the result that every body ofagitators will leave a mark behind them in the shape of an apparatus of organisation, which already exists, but as yet functions imperfectly and unsatisfactorily. 
 In this sphere too, as in all others, I wish you success. 
 (Prolonged applause . 
) Published in 1920 Published according to in the pamphlet Speech by V. 
 I. 
 Lenin the pamphlet text at the Second All-Russia Confer-ence of Organisers Responsible for Rural Work TELEPHONE MESSAGE TO THE PRESIDIUM OF THE ALL -RUSSIA FOOD CONFERENCE JULY 1, 1920 Comrades, I would have liked very much to attend your meeting and say something on the main food problems on your agenda. 
 But, unfortunately, I am unable to indulgemy wish and am obliged to content myself with addressingyou briefly in this telephone message. 
 I must inform you,comrades, that the successful outcome of your work, whichis extremely onerous and responsible, recently induced the Council of People’s Commissars to adopt a resolution ex-pressing satisfaction with the results achieved by the foodbodies in the matter of produce procurements. 
 It is beyondquestion that the food bodies have grown in organisationalstrength during the past two years and more. 
 This islargely due to your efforts. 
 But we cannot, of course, rest content with the results achieved. 
 The hunger front, the next in importance afterthe war front, is imposing a number of new tasks upon you,and unless they are accomplished it will be impossible eitherto go on consolidating the workers’ and peasants’ govern-ment or to solve the immediate and urgent problems of economic development. 
 I also hope that you will help our economic development by establishing proper relations with the co-operativesocieties on the basis of the decisions of the Party Congress, 63 so as to properly accomplish the difficult but grateful taskof transforming the petty-bourgeois co-operatives into socialist co-operatives. 
 The successes you have already achieved in food affairs oblige you more than ever to cope with the new tasks at all costs, and thus approach a real solution of the food problem. 
 For to whom much has been given, of him much shall be demanded; and your work has shown that you have already been given quite a lot. 
 Permit me then, towish you success in solving the problems on the agendaof your conference, and also in your daily work, which Iam sure, when the conference is over, you will tackle onthe spot with redoubled energy. 
 Written on June 30, 1920 Published in Pravda No. 
 163, Published according to July 2, 1920 the newspaper text AID FOR THE WOUNDED OF THE RED ARMY! Thanks to the heroism of the factory workers and of all working people, and despite the extraordinary dif-ficulties and the terribly slow rate of progress, we are suc-ceeding in reviving and restoring the economic life, which was shattered by the tsar and the capitalists. 
 Matters areon the upgrade if ever so slowly. 
 However, all our difficul-ties and hardships are as nothing compared with what hasfallen to the lot of the wounded Red Army men, who arespilling their own blood in defence of the workers’ and peasants’ government, against the Polish nobles and capital-ists, who are being egged on by the capitalists of GreatBritain, France and America. 
 Let each man in the rear be mindful of his duty and help the wounded Red Army men to the best of his ability. 
 N. 
 Lenin July 2, 1920 A facsimile of the manuscript Published according to published in the magazine the magazine text Raneny Krasnoarmeyets No. 
 1, July 5, 1920 THESES ON THE FUNDAMENTAL TASKS OF THE SECOND CONGRESS OF THE COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL 1. 
 The present stage in the development of the interna-tional communist movement is marked by the fact that the finest representatives of the revolutionary proletariatin all capitalist countries have fully grasped the fundamen-tal principles of the Communist International, viz. 
, dicta-torship of the proletariat and Soviet power, and have rangedthemselves with unbounded enthusiasm on the side of the Communist International. 
 An even bigger and more im-portant step forward is the definite sympathy with thesefundamental principles that has everywhere taken shapeamong the broadest masses; not only of the urban prole-tariat, but of the advanced section of the rural workers aswell. 
 On the other hand, two errors, or failings, are to be observed in the very rapidly growing international communistmovement. 
 One, which is very grave and constitutes animmense and immediate danger to the success of the causeof proletarian emancipation, is that a section of the oldleaders and of the old parties of the Second International— some yielding half-unconsciously to the wishes and pres-sure of the masses, and some deliberately deceiving themasses in order to retain their function of agents andassistants of the bourgeoisie within the working-class move-ment—declare their qualified or even unqualified adher-ence to the Third International, while actually remaining in all their practical party and political work, on the level of the Second International. 
 Such a state of affairs isabsolutely intolerable, because it leads to downright corruption of the masses, detracts from the Third Inter-national’s prestige, and threatens a repetition of the same acts of treachery as were perpetrated by the Hungarian Social-Democrats, who so hastily assumed the title of Com-munists. 
 The other error, which is far less significant andis more in the nature of growing pains of the movement,consists in a tendency towards “Leftism” which resultsin a wrong appraisal of the role and the tasks of the party with regard to the class and the masses, and a wrong attitude towards the revolutionary Communists’ obligationto work in bourgeois parliaments and reactionary tradeunions. 
 Communists are in duty bound, not to gloss over short-comings in their movement, but to criticise them openly so as to remedy them the more speedily and radically. 
 For this purpose it is necessary: first, to define as con-cretely as possible, particularly on the basis of the practicalexperience already acquired, the content of the concepts“dictatorship of the proletariat” and “Soviet power”;second, to specify the precise content of the immediate and systematic preparatory work to be carried on in all coun-tries so as to give effect to these slogans; and third, to spec-ify the methods and means of rectifying the faults in ourmovement. 
 I THE ESSENCE OF THE DICTATORSHIP OF THE PROLETARIAT AND OF SOVIET POWER 2. 
 The victory of socialism (as the first stage of com-munism) over capitalism requires that the proletariat, asthe only really revolutionary class, shall accomplish thefollowing three tasks. 
 First—overthrow the exploiters, and first and foremost the bourgeoisie, as their principal eco-nomic and political representative; utterly rout them; crushtheir resistance; absolutely preclude any attempt on theirpart to restore the yoke of capital and wage-slavery. 
 Second—win over and bring under the leadership of the Commu-nist Party, the revolutionary vanguard of the proletariat, not only the entire proletariat, or its vast majority, but all who labour and are exploited by capital; educate,organise, train and discipline them in the actual course of a supremely bold and ruthlessly firm struggle against the exploiters; wrest this vast majority of the population in all the capitalist countries from dependence on the bourgeoisie; imbue it, through its own practical experience, with con-fidence in the leading role of the proletariat and of itsrevolutionary vanguard. 
 Third—neutralise, or render harm-less, the inevitable vacillation between the bourgeoisieand the proletariat, between bourgeois democracy and So-viet power, to be seen in the class of petty proprietors in agriculture, industry and commerce—a class which is stillfairly numerous in nearly all advanced countries, althoughcomprising only a minority of the population—as wellas in the stratum of intellectuals, salary earners, etc. 
, whichcorresponds to this class. 
 The first and second tasks are independent ones, each requiring its own special methods of action with regard tothe exploiters and to the exploited respectively. 
 The thirdtask follows from the first two, and merely requires a skil-ful, timely and flexible combination of methods of the firstand second type, depending on the specific circumstances in each separate instance of vacillation. 
 3. 
 In the concrete situation created throughout the world, and above all in the most advanced, powerful, enlightenedand free capitalist countries, by militarism, imperialism,the oppression of colonies and weak countries, the world-wide imperialist butchery and the “Peace” of Versailles— in that situation the very idea of the capitalists peacefully submitting to the will of the majority of the exploited,the very idea of a peaceful, reformist transition to social-ism, is not merely sheer philistine stupidity but also down-right deception of the workers, embellishment of capital-ist wage-slavery, and concealment of the truth. 
 That truth consists in the bourgeoisie, even the most enlightened and democratic, no longer hesitating at any fraud or crime,even the massacre of millions of workers and peasants, soas to preserve private ownership of the means of production. 
Only the forcible overthrow of the bourgeoisie, the con-fiscation of its property, the destruction of the entire bour-geois state apparatus from top to bottom—parliamentary, judicial, military, bureaucratic, administrative, municipal,etc. 
—right down to the wholesale deportation or internment of the most dangerous and stubborn exploiters and the institution of strict surveillance over them so as to foil their inevitable attempts to resist and to restore capitalist slavery—only such measures can ensure real submission ofthe whole class of exploiters. 
 On the other hand, the idea, common among the old parties and the old leaders of the Second International,that the majority of the exploited toilers can achieve com-plete clarity of socialist consciousness and firm socialist convictions and character under capitalist slavery, underthe yoke of the bourgeoisie (which assumes an infinitevariety of forms that become more subtle and at the sametime more brutal and ruthless the higher the cultural levelin a given capitalist country) is also idealisation of capital-ism and of bourgeois democracy, as well as deception of the workers. 
 In fact, it is only after the vanguard ofthe proletariat, supported by the whole or the majority ofthis, the only revolutionary class, overthrows the exploit-ers, suppresses them, emancipates the exploited from theirstate of slavery and-immediately improves their conditions of life at the expense of the expropriated capitalists—it is only after this, and only in the actual process of an acuteclass struggle, that the masses of the toilers and exploitedcan be educated, trained and organised around the proletar-iat under whose influence and guidance, they can get ridof the selfishness, disunity, vices and weaknesses engendered by private property; only then will they be converted into a free union of free workers. 
 4. 
 Victory over capitalism calls for proper relations between the leading (Communist) party, the revolutionaryclass (the proletariat) and the masses, i. 
e. 
, the entire bodyof the toilers and the exploited. 
 Only the Communist Party, if it is really the vanguard of the revolutionary class, if it really comprises all the finest representatives of thatclass, if it consists of fully conscious and staunch Commu-nists who have been educated and steeled by the experienceof a persistent revolutionary struggle, and if it has succeed-ed in linking itself inseparably with the whole life of its class and, through it, with the whole mass of the exploited, and in completely winning the confidence of this class andthis mass—only such a party is capable of leading the /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR proletariat in a final, most ruthless and decisive struggle against all the forces of capitalism. 
 On the other hand, it is only under the leadership of such a party that the proletariat is capable of displaying the full might of itsrevolutionary onslaught, and of overcoming the inevitableapathy and occasional resistance of that small minority,the labour aristocracy, who have been corrupted by capital-ism, the old trade union and co-operative leaders, etc. 
—only then will it be capable of displaying its full might, which, because of the very economic structure of capitalist society,is infinitely greater than its proportion of the population. 
Finally, it is only after they have been really emancipatedfrom the yoke of the bourgeoisie and of the bourgeois machin-ery of state, only after they have found an opportun-ity of organising in their Soviets in a really free way (free from the exploiters), that the masses, i. 
e. 
, the toilers andexploited as a body, can display, for the first time in his-tory, all the initiative and energy of tens of millions ofpeople who have been crushed by capitalism. 
 Only whenthe Soviets have become the sole state apparatus is it really possible to ensure the participation, in the work of adminis-tration, of the entire mass of the exploited, who, even underthe most enlightened and freest bourgeois democracy, havealways actually been excluded 99 per cent from participa-tion in the work of administration. 
 It is only in the Sovietsthat the exploited masses really begin to learn—not in books, but from their own practical experience—the work of socialist construction, of creating a new social disciplineand a free union of free workers. 
 II WHAT IMMEDIATE AND UNIVERSAL PREPARATION FOR THE DICTATORSHIP OF THE PROLETARIAT SHOULD CONSIST IN 5. 
 The present stage in the development of the interna-tional communist movement is marked by the fact that in the vast majority of capitalist countries, the proletariat’s preparations to effect its dictatorship have not been complet-ed, and, in many cases, have not even been systematically begun. 
 From this it does not, however, follow that the proletarian revolution is impossible in the immediate future; it is perfectly possible, since the entire economic and political situation is most inflammable and abounds incauses of a sudden flare-up; the other condition for revo-lution, apart from the proletariat’s preparedness, viz. 
,a general state of crisis in all the ruling and in all bourgeoisparties, also exists. 
 However, it does follow that the Commun-ist Parties’ current task consists not in accelerating the revolution, but in intensifying the preparation of the pro-letariat. 
 On the other hand, the facts cited above fromthe history of many socialist parties make it incumbent onus to see that “recognition” of the dictatorship of the pro-letariat shall not remain a more matter of words. 
 Hence, from the point of view of the international prole-tarian movement, it is the Communist parties’ principaltask at the present moment to unite the scattered Commu-nist forces, to form a single Communist Party in every coun-try (or to reinforce or renovate the already existing Party)in order to increase tenfold the work of preparing the prole-tariat for the conquest of political power—political power, moreover, in the form of the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
The ordinary socialist work conducted by groups andparties which recognise the dictatorship of the proletariathas by no means undergone that fundamental reorganisa-tion, that fundamental renovation, which is essential before this work can be considered communist work and ade-quate to the tasks to be accomplished on the eve of prole-tarian dictatorship. 
 6. 
 The proletariat’s conquest of political power does not put a stop to its class struggle against the bourgeoisie;on the contrary, it renders that struggle most widespread, intense and ruthless. 
 Owing to the extreme intensification of the struggle all groups, parties and leaders in the work-ing-class movement who have fully or partly adopted thestand of reformism, of the “Centre”, etc. 
, inevitably sidewith the bourgeoisie or join the waverers, or else (what isthe most dangerous of all) land in the ranks of the unreliable friends of the victorious proletariat. 
 Hence, preparation for the dictatorship of the proletariat calls, not only foran intensification of the struggle against reformist and “Centrist” tendencies, but also for a change in the character of that struggle. 
 The struggle cannot be restricted to explain-ing the erroneousness of these tendencies; it must unswerv-ingly and ruthlessly expose any leader of the working-class movement who reveals such tendencies, for otherwisethe proletariat cannot know who it will march with intothe decisive struggle against the bourgeoisie. 
 This struggleis such that at any moment it may—and actually does, as experience has shown—substitute criticism with weap-ons for the weapon of criticism. 
 64 Any inconsistency or weakness in exposing those who show themselves to bereformists or “Centrists” means directly increasing thedanger of the power of the proletariat being overthrown bythe bourgeoisie, which tomorrow will utilise for the counter-revolution that which short-sighted people today see merely as “theoretical difference”. 
 7. 
 In particular, we must not restrict ourselves to the usual repudiation, in principle, of all collaboration betweenthe proletariat and the bourgeoisie, of all “collaboration-ism”. 
 Under the dictatorship of the proletariat, which will never be able, at one stroke, to abolish private prop-erty completely, mere defence of “liberty” and “equal-ity”, while private ownership of the means of productionis preserved, turns into “collaboration” with the bourgeoi-sie, and undermines the rule of the working class. 
 Thedictatorship of the proletariat means that the state uses its whole machinery of power to uphold and perpetuate “no-liberty” for the exploiters to continue their oppressionand exploitation, “inequality” between the owner of prop-erty (i. 
e. 
, one who has appropriated for himself certainmeans of production created by social labour) and thenon-owner. 
 That which, prior to the victory of the prole-tariat, seems merely a theoretical difference on the question of “democracy” inevitably becomes, on the day followingvictory, a question that is settled by force of arms. 
 Conse-quently, even preliminary work in preparing the massesto effect the dictatorship of the proletariat is impossiblewithout a radical change in the entire character of the struggle against the “Centrists” and the “champions of democracy”. 
 8. 
 The dictatorship of the proletariat is the most deter-mined and revolutionary form of the proletariat’s class struggle against the bourgeoisie. 
 This struggle can be suc-cessful only when the most revolutionary vanguard of the proletariat has the backing of the overwhelming majorityof the proletariat. 
 Hence, preparation for the dictatorshipof the proletariat entails not only explanation of the bour-geois character of all reformism, of all defence of democracy,while private ownership of the means of production is preserved; it entails, not only exposure of such trends, which are in fact a defence of the bourgeoisie within thelabour movement; it also calls for old leaders being replacedby Communists in proletarian organisations of absolutelyevery type—not only political, but also trade union, co-operative, educational, etc. 
 The more complete, lengthy and firmly established the rule of bourgeois democracy has been in a given country, the more the bourgeoisie willhave succeeded in securing the appointment to such leadingposts of people whose minds have been moulded by it andimbued with its views and prejudices, and who have veryoften been directly or indirectly bought by it. 
 These repre-sentatives of the labour aristocracy, bourgeoisified workers, should be ousted from all their posts a hundred times moresweepingly than hitherto, and replaced by workers—evenby wholly inexperienced men, provided they are connectedwith the exploited masses and enjoy their confidence inthe struggle against the exploiters. 
 The dictatorship of the proletariat will require the appointment of such inexpe-rienced workers to the most responsible posts in the state;otherwise the workers’ government will be impotent andwill not have the support of the masses. 
 9. 
 The dictatorship of the proletariat means that all toiling and exploited people, who have been disunited, deceived, intimidated, oppressed, downtrodden and crushed by the capitalist class, come under the full leadershipof the only class trained for that leadership by the wholehistory of capitalism. 
 That is why the following is one ofthe methods whereby preparations for the dictatorshipof the proletariat should be started everywhere and imme-diately: In all organisations, unions and associations without exception, and first and foremost in proletarian organi-sations, but also in those of the non-proletarian toiling and exploited masses (political, trade union, military, co-operative, educational, sports, etc. 
, etc. 
), groups or cells of Communists should be formed—preferably opengroups, but underground groups as well, the latter beingessential whenever there is reason to expect their suppres-sion, or the arrest or banishment of their members on thepart of the bourgeoisie; these cells, which are to be in close touch with one another and with the Party centre, should, by pooling their experience, carrying on work of agitation,propaganda and organisation, adapting themselves to abso-lutely every sphere of public life and to every variety andcategory of the toiling masses, systematically educatethemselves, the Party, the class, and the masses by means of such diversified work. 
 In this connection, it is of the utmost importance that necessary distinctions between the methods of work shouldbe evolved in practice: on the one hand, in relation tothe “leaders”, or “responsible representatives”, who arevery often hopelessly beset with petty-bourgeois and impe-rialist prejudices—such “leaders” must be ruthlessly exposed and expelled from the working-class movement—and,on the other hand, in relation to the masses, who, partic-ularly after the imperialist holocaust, are for the mostpart inclined to listen to and accept the doctrine that theguidance from the proletariat is essential, as the only way of escape from capitalist slavery. 
 We must learn to approach the masses with particular patience and caution so as to beable to understand the distinctive features in the mentalityof each stratum, calling, etc. 
, of these masses. 
 10. 
 In particular, there is a group or cell of Communists that deserves exceptional attention and care from the Party, i. 
e. 
, the parliamentary group of Party members, who are deputies to bourgeois representative institutions (primarilythe national, but also local, municipal, etc. 
, representativeinstitutions). 
 On the one hand, it is this tribune which isheld in particular regard by large sections of the toilingmasses, who are backward or imbued with petty-bourgeois prejudices; it is therefore imperative for Communists to utilise this tribune to conduct propaganda, agitation andorganisational work and to explain to the masses why the dispersal of the bourgeois parliament by the national congress of Soviets was legitimate in Russia (and, at the proper time, will be legitimate in any country). 
 On the other hand, the entire history of bourgeois democracy,particularly in the advanced countries, has converted theparliamentary rostrum into one of the principal, if not theprincipal, venues of unparalleled fraudulency, financialand political deception of the people, careerism, hypocrisy and oppression of the working people. 
 The intense hatred of parliaments felt by the best representatives of the revo-lutionary proletariat is therefore quite justified. 
 The Com-munist parties and all parties affiliated to the Third Inter-national—especially those which have not arisen by split-ting away from the old parties and by waging a long and per-sistent struggle against them, but through the old parties accepting (often nominally) the new stand—should thereforeadopt a most strict attitude towards their parliamentarygroups; the latter must be brought under the full controland direction of the Central Committees of the Parties;they must consist, in the main, of revolutionary workers; speeches by members of parliament should be carefully analysed in the Party press and at Party meetings, froma strictly communist standpoint; deputies should be sentto carry on agitational work among the masses; those whomanifest Second International leanings should be expelledfrom the parliamentary groups, etc. 
 11. 
 One of the chief causes hampering the revolutionary working-class movement in the developed capitalist coun-tries is the fact that because of their colonial possessionsand the super-profits gained by finance capital, etc. 
, thecapitalists of these countries have been able to create arelatively larger and more stable labour aristocracy, a sec-tion which comprises a small minority of the working class. 
 This minority enjoys better terms of employmentand is most-imbued with a narrow-minded craft spiritand with petty-bourgeois and imperialist prejudices. 
 Itforms the real social pillar of the Second International,of the reformists and the “Centrists”; at present it might even be called the social mainstay of the bourgeoisie. 
 No preparation of the proletariat for the overthrow of thebourgeoisie is possible, even in the preliminary sense, unless an immediate, systematic, extensive and open struggle is waged against this stratum, which, as experience has already fully shown, will no doubt provide the bourgeois White guards with many a recruit after the victory of theproletariat. 
 All parties affiliated to the Third Interna-tional must at all costs give effect to the slogans: “Deeperinto the thick of the masses”, “Closer links with the masses”—meaning by the masses all those who toil and are exploit-ed by capital, particularly those who are least organised and educated, who are most oppressed and least amenableto organisation. 
 The proletariat becomes revolutionary only insofar as it does not restrict itself to the narrow framework of craftinterests, only when in all matters and spheres of public life, it acts as the leader of all the toiling and exploited masses; it cannot achieve its dictatorship unless it is pre-pared and able to make the greatest sacrifices for the sakeof victory over the bourgeoisie. 
 In this respect, the expe-rience of Russia is significant both in principle and in prac-tice. 
 The proletariat could not have achieved its dictatorship there, or won the universally acknowledged respect and confidence of all the toiling masses, had it not made themost sacrifices, or starved more than any other sectionof those masses at the most crucial moments of the onslaught,war and blockade effected by the world bourgeoisie. 
 In particular, the Communist Party and all advanced proletarians must give all-round and unstinted support especially to the spontaneous and mass strike movement,which, under the yoke of capital, is alone capable of reallyrousing, educating and organising the masses, of imbuingthem with complete confidence in the leadership of the revo-lutionary proletariat. 
 Without such preparation, no dicta-torship of the proletariat is possible; those who are capable of publicly opposing strikes, such as Kautsky in Germanyand Turati in Italy, cannot possibly be tolerated in the ranksof parties affiliated to the Third International. 
 This applieseven more, of course, to those trade union and parliamentaryleaders who so often betray the workers by using the expe-rience of strikes to teach them reformism, and not revolu-tion (for instance, in Britain and in France in recentyears). 
 12. 
 In all countries, even in those that are freest, most “legal”, and most “peaceful” in the sense that the class struggle is least acute there, it is now absolutely indispen-sable for every Communist Party to systematically combinelegal and illegal work, legal and illegal organisations. 
Notwithstanding their false and hypocritical declarations,the governments of even the most enlightened and freestof countries, where the bourgeois-democratic system is most “stable”, are already systematically and secretly drawing up blacklists of Communists and constantlyviolating their own constitutions so as to give secret orsemi-secret encouragement to the whiteguards and to themurder of Communists in all countries, making secretpreparations for the arrest of Communists, planting agents provocateurs among the Communists, etc. 
, etc. 
 Only a most reactionary philistine, no matter what cloak of fine“democratic” and pacifist phrases he may don, will denythis fact or the conclusion that of necessity follows from it,viz. 
, that all legal Communist parties must immediatelyform illegal organisations for the systematic conduct of illegal work and for complete preparations for the moment the bourgeoisie resorts to persecution. 
 Illegal work is mostnecessary in the army, the navy and the police because,since the imperialist holocaust, governments the worldover have begun to stand in dread of people’s armies whichare open to the workers and peasants, and are secretly resort-ing to all kinds of methods to set up military units specially recruited from the bourgeoisie and equipped with the mostup-to-date weapons. 
 On the other hand, it is likewise necessary that, in all cases without exception, the parties should not restrictthemselves to illegal work, but should conduct legal work as well, overcoming all obstacles, starting legal publica-tions, and forming legal organisations under the mostvaried names, which should be frequently changed if neces-sary. 
 This is being practised by the illegal Communistparties in Finland, Hungary, partly in Germany, Poland,Latvia, etc. 
 It should be practised by the Industrial Workers of the World in the U. 
S. 
A. 
 and by all Communist parties at present legal, should public prosecutors see fit to takeproceedings against them on the grounds of resolutions adopted by Congresses of the Communist International, etc. 
 A combination of illegal and legal work is an absolute principle dictated, not only by all features of the presentperiod, that of the eve of the proletarian dictatorship, butalso by the necessity of proving to the bourgeoisie that thereis not, nor can there be, any sphere of activity that cannotbe won by the Communists; above all, it is dictated by the fact that broad strata of the proletariat and even broader strata of the non-proletarian toiling and exploited massesstill exist everywhere, who continue to believe in bourgeois-democratic legality and whom we must undeceive withoutfail. 
 13. 
 In particular, the conditions of the working-class press in most advanced capitalist countries strikingly reveal the utter fraudulency of liberty and equality underbourgeois democracy, as well as the necessity of system-atically combining legal work with illegal work. 
 Both invanquished Germany and in victorious America, the entirepower of the bourgeoisie’s machinery of state and all the machinations of the financial magnates are employed to deprive the workers of their press, these including legalproceedings, the arrest (or murder by hired assassins) ofeditors, denial of mailing privileges, the cutting off of papersupplies, and so on and so forth. 
 Besides, the news servicesessential to daily newspapers are run by bourgeois telegraph agencies, while advertisements, without which a large newspaper cannot pay its way, depend on the “good will”of the capitalists. 
 To sum up: through skulduggery andthe pressure of capital and the bourgeois state, the bour-geoisie is depriving the revolutionary proletariat of itspress. 
 To combat this, the Communist parties must create a new type of periodical press for mass distribution amongthe workers: first, legal publications, which, withoutcalling themselves communist and without publicisingtheir links with the Party, must learn to make use of anylegal opportunity, however slight, just as the Bolsheviks did under the tsar, after 1905; secondly, illegal leaflets, even the briefest and published at irregular intervals, butreprinted at numerous printshops by workers (secretly, or, if the movement has become strong enough, by the revolutionary seizure of printshops), and providing the proletariat with outspoken revolutionary information and revolutionary slogans. 
 Preparations for the dictatorship of the proletariat is impossible without a revolutionary struggle, into whichthe masses are drawn, for the freedom of the communistpress. 
 III RECTIFICATION OF THE POLITICAL LINE—PARTLY ALSO OF THE COMPOSITION—OF PARTIES AFFILIATED OR DESIRING TO AFFILIATE TO THE COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL 14. 
 The measure in which the proletariat in countries most important from the viewpoint of world economicsand politics is prepared to establish its dictatorship can beseen with the greatest objectivity and precision in the fact that the most influential parties of the Second Interna-tional, viz. 
, the French Socialist Party, the IndependentSocial-Democratic Party of Germany, the IndependentLabour Party of Great Britain and the Socialist Party ofAmerica, 65 have withdrawn from this yellow Interna-tional, and have decided—the first three conditionally, the latter even unconditionally—to affiliate to the Third In-ternational. 
 This proves that not only the vanguard ofthe revolutionary proletariat but its majority too havebegun to come over to our side, convinced by the entirecourse of events. 
 The main thing now is the ability toconsummate this process and to consolidate firmly in point of organisation what has been achieved, so as to advance all along the line, without the slightest wavering. 
 15. 
 All the activities of the parties mentioned (to which should be added the Socialist Party of Switzerland, 66 i f the telegraph reports of its decision to join the Third Inter-national are true) show—as any periodical of these parties will strikingly confirm—that they are not yet communist, and quite often run directly counter to the fundamentalprinciples of the Third International, viz. 
, the recognition of the dictatorship of the proletariat and Soviet government in place of bourgeois democracy. 
 Accordingly, the Second Congress of the Communist International must resolve that it cannot immediatelyaccept the affiliation of these parties; that it endorses thereply given by the Executive Committee of the ThirdInternational to the German “Independents” 67; that it confirms its readiness to conduct negotiations with any party that withdraws from the Second International and desires to enter into closer relations with the Third Interna-tional; that it will admit the delegates of such parties ina deliberative capacity to all its congresses and conferences;that it sets the following conditions for the complete ad-hesion of these (and similar), parties with the Communist International: 1) All decisions of all Congresses of the Communist International and of its Executive Committee to be pub-lished in all the periodicals of the parties concerned; 2) These decisions to be discussed at special meetings of all sections or local organisations of the parties; 3) After such discussion, special congresses of the parties to be convened to sum up the results, and for the purposeof— 4) Purging the parties of elements that continue to act in the spirit of the Second International; 5) All periodical publications of the parties to be placed under exclusively Communist editorship. 
 The Second Congress of the Third International should instruct its Executive Committee formally to accept theseand similar parties into the Third International afterascertaining that all these conditions have actually beenmet and that the activities of the parties have assumed a communist character. 
 16. 
 As to the question of the conduct of Communists now holding a minority of the responsible posts in theseand similar parties, the Second Congress of the CommunistInternational should resolve that, in view of the obviousgrowth of sincere sympathy for communism among working-men belonging to these parties, it would be undesirable for Communists to resign from the latter, as long as theycan carry on work within them for the recognition of the dictatorship of the proletariat and Soviet government, and as long as it is possible to criticise the opportunists and Centrists who still remain in these parties. 
 At the same time, the Second Congress of the Third International should declare in favour of Communist groupsand organisations, or groups and organisations sympathis-ing with communism, joining the Labour Party in GreatBritain, despite its membership in the Second International. 
 As long as this party ensures its affiliated organisations their present freedom of criticism and freedom to carry onwork of propaganda, agitation and organisation in favourof the dictatorship of the proletariat and Soviet government,and as long as this party preserves the character of a fed-eration of all trade union organisations of the working class, it is imperative for Communists to do everything and to make certain compromises in order to be able toexercise their influence on the broadest masses of the work-ers, to expose their opportunist leaders from a higher trib-une, that is in fuller view of the masses, and to hastenthe transfer of political power from the direct representa-tives of the bourgeoisie to the “labour lieutenants of the capitalist class”, so that the masses may be more quicklyweaned away from their last illusions on this score. 
 17. 
 Concerning the Socialist Party of Italy, the Second Congress of the Third International considers that thecriticism of that party and the practical proposals submit-ted to the National Council of the Socialist Party of Italy in the name of the party’s Turin section, 68 as set forth in L’Ordine Nuovo of May 8, 1920, are in the main correct and are fully in keeping with the fundamental principlesof the Third International. 
 Accordingly, the Second Congress of the Third Interna-tional requests the Socialist Party of Italy to convene a special congress to discuss these proposals and also all thedecisions of the two Congresses of the Communist Interna-tional for the purpose of rectifying the party’s line and ofpurging it, particularly its parliamentary group, of non-Communist elements. 
 18. 
 The Second Congress of the Third International considers erroneous the views on the Party’s relation tothe class and to the masses, and the view that it is not obligatory for Communist parties to participate in bourgeois parliaments and in reactionary trade unions. 
 These views have been refuted in detail in special decisions of the present Congress, and advocated most fully by the Commu-nist Workers’ Party of Germany, and partly by the CommunistParty of Switzerland 69, by Kommunismus , organ of the East-European Secretariat of the Communist Internationalin Vienna, by the now dissolved secretariat in Amsterdam, by several Dutch comrades, by several Communist organi-sations in Great Britain, as, for example, the Workers’Socialist Federation, etc. 
, and also by the Industrial Work-ers of the World in the U. 
S. 
A. 
 and the Shop Stewards’Committees in Great Britain, etc. 
 Nevertheless, the Second. 
 Congress of the Third Interna-tional considers it possible and desirable that those of the above-mentioned organisations which have not yetofficially affiliated to the Communist International shoulddo so immediately; for in the present instance, particularlyas regards the Industrial Workers of the World in theU. 
S. 
A. 
 and Australia, as well as the Shop Stewards’ Com-mittees in Great Britain, we are dealing with a profoundly proletarian and mass movement, which in all essentialsactually stands by the basic principles of the CommunistInternational. 
 The erroneous views held by these organisa-tions regarding participation in bourgeois parliaments canbe explained, not so much by the influence of elements coming from the bourgeoisie, who bring their essentially petty-bourgeois views into the movement—views such asanarchists often hold—as by the political inexperience ofproletarians who are quite revolutionary and connected withthe masses. 
 For this reason, the Second Congress of the Third Inter-national requests all Communist organisations and groups in the Anglo-Saxon countries, even if the Industrial Workersof the World and the Shop Stewards’ Committees do notimmediately affiliate to the Third International, to pursuea very friendly policy towards these organisations, to estab-lish closer contacts with them and the masses that sym-pathise with them, and to explain to them in a friendly spirit—on the basis of the experience of all revolutions,and particularly of the three Russian revolutions of the twentieth century—the erroneousness of their views as set forth above, and not to desist from further efforts to amalgamate with these organisations to form a single Communist party. 
 19. 
 In this connection, the Congress draws the attention of all comrades, particularly in the Latin and Anglo-Saxoncountries, to the fact that, since the war, a profound ideolog-ical division has been taking place among anarchists all over the world regarding the attitude to be adopted towards the dictatorship of the proletariat and Soviet government. 
Moreover, a proper understanding of these principles isparticularly to be seen among proletarian elementsthat have often been impelled towards anarchism by aperfectly legitimate hatred of the opportunism and reform-ism of the parties of the Second International. 
 That under-standing is growing the more widespread among them,the more familiar they become with the experience of Russia,Finland, Hungary, Latvia, Poland and Germany. 
 The Congress therefore considers it the duty of all Commu-nists to do everything to help all proletarian mass elements to abandon anarchism and come over to the side of the Third International. 
 The Congress points out that themeasure in which genuinely Communist parties succeedin winning mass proletarian elements rather than intellec-tual, and petty-bourgeois elements away from anarchism,is a criterion of the success of those Parties. 
 July 4, 1920 Published in July 1920 REPL Y TO A LETTE R FRO M THE JOIN T PROVISIONAL COMMITTE E FOR THE COMMUNIS T PARTY OF BRITA IN70 I have received a letter from the Joint Provisional Com-mittee for the Communist Party of Britain, dated June 20, and, in accordance with their request, I hasten to reply that I am in complete sympathy with their plans for theimmediate organisation of a single Communist Party ofBritain. 
 I consider erroneous the tactics pursued by ComradeSylvia Pankhurst and the Workers’ Socialist Federation,who refuse to collaborate in the amalgamation of the Brit-ish Socialist Party, the Socialist Labour Party and others to form a single Communist party. 
 Personally I am in favourof participation in Parliament and of affiliation to theLabour Party, given wholly free and independent communistactivities. 
 I shall defend these tactics at the Second Congressof the Third International on July 15, 1920 in Moscow. 
 I consider it most desirable that a single Communist party be speedily organised on the basis of the decisions of theThird International, and that such a party should establishthe closest contact with the Industrial Workers of theWorld and the Shop Stewards’ Committees, in order to bringabout a complete merger with them in the near future. 
 N. 
 Lenin 8. 
7. 
1920 Published in English in The Call No. 
 224, July 22, 1920 First published in Russian in the Published according to Fourth Edition the manuscript of the Collected Works TELEPHONE MESSAGE TO J. 
 V. 
 STALIN By telephone to Stalin , Kharkov A Note has been received from Curzon. 
 He proposes an armistice with Poland on the following terms: the Polisharmy to withdraw beyond the line fixed by last year’speace conference, 71 viz. 
, Grodno, Yalovka, Nemirov, Brest-Litovsk, Dorogusk, Ustilug, Krylov. 
 This line cuts across Galicia between Przemysl and Rava-Russkaya, right upto the Carpathians. 
 We keep everything east of this line. 
Our army is to withdraw 50 kilometres east of this line. 
 A conference of representatives of Soviet Russia, Poland,Latvia, Lithuania and Finland is to be held in London under the auspices of the peace conference. 
 Representatives of Eastern Galicia will be allowed to attend. 
 We can sendanybody we like as our representative. 
 It has been proposedto us that we conclude an armistice with Wrangel, providedhe withdraws to the Crimea. 
 Wrangel is going to Londonto discuss the fate of his army, but not as member of the conference. 
 We have been given a week for our reply. 
 Besides, the Curzon Note says that the Polish Governmenthas given its consent to a peace with Russia, on the basisof these terms. 
 Such is the Curzon Note. 
 I ask Stalin: 1) to expedite execution of the order to furiously inten-sify the offensive; 2) to inform me of his (Stalin’s) opinion. 
 For my part, I think that all this is a piece of knavery aimed at the annexation of the Crimea, which is advanced so insolently in the Note. 
 The idea is to snatch victory out of our hands with the aid of false promises. 
 Lenin Stalin’s reply to be recorded and sent on to me by telephone . 
 Lenin Written July 12 or 13, 1920 First published in the Fourth Published according to (Russian) Edition the manuscript copy of the Collected Works revised and emended by V. 
 I. 
 Lenin TELEGRAM TO J. 
 V. 
 STALIN Kharkov Revolutionary Council of the South-Western Front To Stalin, urgent 17. 
7. 
1920 The Central Committee plenum has adopted almost in full the proposals I have made. 
72 You will receive the full text. 
 Keep me informed without fail, twice weekly incipher and in detail, regarding the development of opera-tions and the course of events. 
 Lenin First published in the Fourth Published according to (Russian) Edition the manuscript copy of the Collected Works THE TERMS OF ADMISSION INTO THE COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL The First, Inaugural Congress of the Communist Inter-national73 did not draw up precise conditions for the admission of parties into the Third International. 
 When theFirst Congress was convened, only communist trends and groups existed in most countries. 
 It is in a different situation that the Second World Con-gress of the Communist International is meeting. 
 In most countries, Communist parties and organisations , not merely trends, now exist. 
 Parties and groups only recently affiliated to the Second International are more and more frequently applying formembership in the Third International, though they havenot become really Communist. 
 The Second International has definitely been smashed. 
 Aware that the Second Inter-national is beyond hope, the intermediate parties and groupsof the “Centre” are trying to lean on the Communist Inter-national, which is steadily gaining in strength. 
 At thesame time, however, they hope to retain a degree of “auton-omy” that will enable them to pursue their previous opportunist or “Centrist” policies. 
 The Communist Inter-national is, to a certain extent, becoming the vogue. 
 The desire of certain leading “Centre” groups to join the Third International provides oblique confirmation thatit has won the sympathy of the vast majority of class-conscious workers throughout the world, and is becoming a more powerful force with each day. 
 In certain circumstances, the Communist International may be faced with the danger of dilution by the influx of wavering and irresolute groups that have not as yet broken with their Second International ideology. 
 Besides, some of the big parties (Italy, Sweden), in which the majority have adopted the communist standpoint,still contain a strong reformist and social-pacifist wingthat is only waiting for an opportune moment to raise itshead again, begin active sabotage of the proletarian revo-lution, and thereby help the bourgeoisie and the Second International. 
 No Communist should forget the lessons of the Hungar-ian Soviet Republic. 
 The Hungarian proletariat paiddearly for the Hungarian Communists having united withthe reformists. 
 In view of all this, the Second World Congress deems it necessary to lay down absolutely precise terms for the admission of new parties, and also to set forth the obliga-tions incurred by the parties already affiliated. 
 The Second Congress of the Communist International resolves that the following are the terms of Cominternmembership: * * * 1. 
 Day-by-day propaganda and agitation must be genu-inely communist in character. 
 All press organs belongingto the parties must be edited by reliable Communists whohave given proof of their devotion to the cause of the prole-tarian revolution. 
 The dictatorship of the proletariat should not be discussed merely as a stock phrase to be learned by rote; it should be popularised in such a way thatthe practical facts systematically dealt with in our pressday by day will drive home to every rank-and-file workingman and working woman, every soldier and peasant, thatit is indispensable to them. 
 Third International supporters should use all media to which they have access—the press, public meetings, trade unions, and co-operative socie-ties—to expose systematically and relentlessly, not onlythe bourgeoisie but also its accomplices—the reformistsof every shade. 
 2. 
 Any organisation that wishes to join the Communist International must consistently and systematically dismiss reformists and “Centrists” from positions of any responsi-bility in the working-class movement (party organisations, editorial boards, trade unions, parliamentary groups, co-operative societies, municipal councils, etc. 
), replacing them by reliable Communists. 
 The fact that in some cases rank-and-file workers may at first have to replace“experienced” leaders should be no deterrent. 
 3. 
 In countries where a state of siege or emergency legis-lation makes it impossible for Communists to conducttheir activities legally, it is absolutely essential that legal and illegal work should be combined. 
 In almost all the countries of Europe and America, the class struggle isentering the phase of civil war. 
 In these conditions, Commu-nists can place no trust in bourgeois legality. 
 They musteverywhere build up a parallel illegal organisation, which, at the decisive moment, will be in a position to help the Party fulfil its duty to the revolution. 
 4. 
 Persistent and systematic propaganda and agitation must be conducted in the armed forces, and Communistcells formed in every military unit. 
 In the main Commu-nists will have to do this work illegally; failure to engagein it would be tantamount to a betrayal of their revolution-ary duty and incompatible with membership in the Third International. 
 5. 
 Regular and systematic agitation is indispensable in the countryside. 
 The working class cannot consolidateits victory without support from at least a section of thefarm labourers and poor peasants, and without neutralis-ing, through its policy, part of the rest of the rural popula-tion. 
 In the present period communist activity in thecountryside is of primary importance. 
 It should be con-ducted, in the main, through revolutionary worker-Com-munists who have contacts with the rural areas. 
 To forgothis work or entrust it to unreliable semi-reformist elements is tantamount to renouncing the proletarian revolution. 
 6. 
 It is the duty of any party wishing to belong to the Third International to expose, not only avowed social-patriotism, but also the falsehood and hypocrisy of social-pacifism. 
 It must systematically demonstrate to the workersthat, without the revolutionary overthrow of capitalism, no international arbitration courts, no talk about a reduction of armaments, no “democratic” reorganisation of the Leagueof Nations will save mankind from new imperialist wars. 
 7. 
 It is the duty of parties wishing to belong to the Com-munist International to recognise the need for a complete and absolute break with reformism and “Centrist” policy, and to conduct propaganda among the party membershipfor that break. 
 Without this, a consistent communist policyis impossible. 
 The Communist International demands imperatively and uncompromisingly that this break be effected at the earliest possible date. 
 It cannot tolerate a situation in which avowed reformists, such as Turati, Modigliani and others,are entitled to consider themselves members of the ThirdInternational. 
 Such a state of affairs would lead to theThird International strongly resembling the defunct SecondInternational. 
 8. 
 Parties in countries whose bourgeoisie possess colonies and oppress other nations must pursue a most well-definedand clear-cut policy in respect of colonies and oppressednations. 
 Any party wishing to join the Third Internationalmust ruthlessly expose the colonial machinations of theimperialists of its “own” country, must support—in deed, not merely in word—every colonial liberation movement, demand the expulsion of its compatriot imperialists fromthe colonies, inculcate in the hearts of the workers of itsown country an attitude of true brotherhood with the work-ing population of the colonies and the oppressed nations,and conduct systematic agitation among the armed forces against all oppression of the colonial peoples. 
 9. 
 It is the duty of any party wishing to join the Commu-nist International to conduct systematic and unflaggingcommunist work in the trade unions, co-operative societiesand other mass workers’ organisations. 
 Communist cellsshould be formed in the trade unions, and, by their sustained and unflagging work, win the unions over to the commu-nist cause. 
 In every phase of their day-by-day activitythese cells must unmask the treachery of the social-patriotsand the vacillation of the “Centrists”. 
 The cells must becompletely subordinate to the party as a whole. 
 10. 
 It is the duty of any party belonging to the Communist International to wage a determined struggle against the Amsterdam “International” of yellow trade unions. 
 74 Its indefatigable propaganda should show the organised workers the need to break with the yellow Amsterdam International. 
 It must give every support to the emerging international federation of Red trade unions75 which are associated with the Communist International. 
 11. 
 It is the duty of parties wishing to join the Third International to re-examine the composition of their parlia-mentary groups, eliminate unreliable elements and effec-tively subordinate these groups to the Party Central Com-mittees. 
 They must demand that every Communist prole-tarian should subordinate all his activities to the interestsof truly revolutionary propaganda and agitation. 
 12. 
 The periodical and non-periodical press, and all publishing enterprises, must likewise be fully subordinateto the Party Central Committee, whether the party as a whole is legal or illegal at the time. 
 Publishing enterprises should not be allowed to abuse their autonomy and pursue anypolicies that are not in full accord with that of the Party. 
 13. 
 Parties belonging to the Communist International must be organised on the principle of democratic centralism . 
 In this period of acute civil war, the Communist parties can perform their duty only if they are organised in a most centralised manner, are marked by an iron disciplinebordering on military discipline, and have strong andauthoritative party centres invested with wide powers andenjoying the unanimous confidence of the membership. 
 14. 
 Communist parties in countries where Communists can conduct their work legally must carry out periodic membership purges (re-registrations) with the aim of sys-tematically ridding the party of petty-bourgeois elementsthat inevitably percolate into them. 
 15. 
 It is the duty of any party wishing to join the Commu-nist International selflessly to help any Soviet republic in its struggle against counter-revolutionary forces. 
 Commu-nist parties must conduct incessant propaganda urging theworkers to refuse to transport war materials destined forthe enemies of the Soviet republics; they must conductlegal or illegal propaganda in the armed forces dispatchedto strangle the workers’ republics, etc. 
 16. 
 It is the duty of parties which have still kept their old Social-Democratic programmes to revise them as speed-ily as possible and draw up new communist programmes in conformity with the specific conditions in their respective countries, and in the spirit of (Communist International decisions. 
 As a rule, the programmes of all parties belong-ing to the Communist International must be approvedby a regular Congress of the Communist International orby its Executive Committee. 
 In the event of the ExecutiveCommittee withholding approval, the party is entitled toappeal to the Congress of the Communist International. 
 17. 
 All decisions of the Communist International’s congresses and of its Executive Committee are binding onall affiliated parties. 
 Operating in conditions of acutecivil war, the Communist International must be far morecentralised than the Second International was. 
 It standsto reason, however, that in every aspect of their work the Communist International and its Executive Committee must take into account the diversity of conditions in whichthe respective parties have to fight and work, and adoptdecisions binding on all parties only on matters in whichsuch decisions are possible. 
 18. 
 In view of the foregoing, parties wishing to join the Communist International must change their name. 
 Any party seeking affiliation must call itself the Communist Party of the country in question (Section of the Third,Communist International). 
 The question of a party’s nameis not merely a formality, but a matter of major politicalimportance. 
 The Communist International has declared a resolute war on the bourgeois world and all yellow Social-Democratic parties. 
 The difference between the Communistparties and the old and official “Social-Democratic”, or“socialist”, parties, which have betrayed the banner ofthe working class, must be made absolutely clear to everyrank-and-file worker. 
 19. 
 After the conclusion of the proceedings of the Second World Congress of the Communist International, any partywishing to join the Communist International must at theearliest date convene an extraordinary congress for officialacceptance of the above obligations on behalf of the entireparty. 
 Published in July 1920 ARTICL E TWENTY OF THE TERMS OF ADMISSION INT O THE COMMUNIS T INTERNATIONA L76 Parties which now wish to join the Third International but have not yet radically changed their previous tactics must do everything necessary, before joining the Interna-tional, for at least two-thirds of their respective CentralCommittees and all the principal central Party bodies tobe made up of comrades who came out publicly, prior tothe Second Congress of the Communist International, with unambiguous statements in favour of joining the Third International. 
 Exceptions may be allowed with theconsent of the Executive Committee of the Third Interna-tional. 
 The latter has the right to make exceptions also forrepresentatives of the “Centre”, named in §7. 
 First published in 1921 Published according to in the book The Second Congress the text of the book of the Communist International. 
 Verbatim Report . 
 Published by the Communist International, Petrograd THE SECON D CONGRES S OF THE COMMUNIS T INTERNATIONA L77 JULY 19 -AUGUST 7, 1920 First published in full in 1921 in the book The Second Congress of the Communist International , Verbatim Report . 
 Published by the Communist International, PetrogradThe Report on the International Situation is published according to the text of the book, checked against the verbatim report as emended byLenin; speeches are published accord-ing to the text of the book, checked against the ver batim report in German THE SECOND CONGRESS OF THE COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL77 JULY 19 -AUGUST 7, 1920 First published in full in 1921 in the book The Second Congress of the Communist International , Verbatim Report . 
 Published by the Communist International, PetrogradThe Report on the International Situation is published according to the text of the book, checked against the verbatim report as emended byLenin; speeches are published accord-ing to the text of the book, checked against the ver batim report in German 1 REPORT ON THE INTERNATIONAL SITUATION AND THE FUNDAMENTAL TASKS OF THE COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL JULY 19 (An ovation breaks out. 
 All present rise to their feet and applaud. 
 The speaker tries to begin , but the applause and cries in all languages continue. 
 The ovation does not abate. 
 ) Comrades, the theses on the questions of the fundamental tasks of the Communist International have been published in all languages and contain nothing that is materiallynew (particularly to the Russian comrades). 
 That is because,in a considerable measure, they extend several of the mainfeatures of our revolutionary experience and the lessonsof our revolutionary movement to a number of Western countries, to Western Europe. 
 My report will therefore deal at greater length, if in brief outline, with the first partof my subject, namely, the international situation. 
 Imperialism’s economic relations constitute the core of the entire international situation as it now exists. 
 Through-out the twentieth century, this new, highest and final stage of capitalism has fully taken shape. 
 Of course, you all know that the enormous dimensions that capital hasreached are the most characteristic and essential featureof imperialism. 
 The place of free competition has beentaken by huge monopolies. 
 An insignificant number of capi-talists have, in some cases, been able to concentrate in their hands entire branches of industry; these have passed into the hands of combines, cartels, syndicates and trusts, notinfrequently of an international nature. 
 Thus, entire branches of industry, not only in single countries, but all over the world, have been taken over by monopolists in the field of finance, property rights, and partly of production. 
 This has formed the basis for the unprecedented domina-tion exercised by an insignificant number of very big banks,financial tycoons, financial magnates who have, in fact,transformed even the freest republics into financial monarch-ies. 
 Before the war this was publicly recognised by such far from revolutionary writers as, for example, Lysis in France. 
 This domination by a handful of capitalists achieved full development when the whole world had been parti-tioned, not only in the sense that the various sources ofraw materials and means of production had been seized by the biggest capitalists, but also in the sense that the prelim-inary partition of the colonies had been completed. 
Some forty years ago, the population of the colonies stoodat somewhat over 250,000,000, who were subordinated tosix capitalist powers. 
 Before the war of 1914, the popula-tion of the colonies was estimated at about 600,000,000, and if we add countries like Persia, Turkey, and China, which were already semi-colonies, we shall get, in roundfigures, a population of a thousand million people oppressedthrough colonial dependence by the richest, most civilisedand freest countries. 
 And you know that, apart from directpolitical and juridical dependence, colonial dependence presumes a number of relations of financial and economic dependence, a number of wars, which were not regardedas wars because very often they amounted to sheer massa-cres, when European and American imperialist troops,armed with the most up-to-date weapons of destruction,slaughtered the unarmed and defenceless inhabitants of colonial countries. 
 The first imperialist war of 1914-18 was the inevitable outcome of this partition of the whole world, of this domi-nation by the capitalist monopolies, of this great powerwielded by an insignificant number of very big banks—two, three, four or five in each country. 
 This war was waged for the repartitioning of the whole world. 
 It was waged in order to decide which of the small groups of the biggeststates—the British or the German—was to obtain the opportunity and the right to rob, strangle and exploit the whole world. 
 You know that the war settled this question in favour of the British group. 
 And, as a result of this war, all capitalist contradictions have become immeasur-ably more acute. 
 At a single stroke the war relegated about250,000,000 of the world’s inhabitants to what is equivalentto colonial status, viz. 
, Russia, whose population can betaken at about 130,000,000, and Austria-Hungary, Germa-ny and Bulgaria, with a total population of not less than 120,000,000. 
 That means 250,000,000 people living incountries, of which some, like Germany, are among themost advanced, most enlightened, most cultured, and ona level with modern technical progress. 
 By means of theTreaty of Versailles, the war imposed such terms upon these countries that advanced peoples have been reduced to a state of colonial dependence, poverty, starvation,ruin, and loss of rights: this treaty binds them for manygenerations, placing them in conditions that no civilisednation has ever lived in. 
 The following is the post-warpicture of the world: at least 1,250 million people are at once brought under the colonial yoke, exploited by a brutal capitalism, which once boasted of its love for peace, andhas some right to do so some fifty years ago, when theworld was not yet partitioned, the monopolies did not asyet rule, and capitalism could still develop in a relativelypeaceful way, without tremendous military conflicts. 
 Today, after this “peaceful” period, we see a monstrous intensification of oppression, the reversion to a colonialand military oppression that is far worse than before. 
 TheTreaty of Versailles has placed Germany and the other defea-ted countries in a position that makes their economic existencephysically impossible, deprives them of all rights, and humiliates them. 
 How many nations are the beneficiaries? To answer this question we must recall that the population of theUnited States—the only full beneficiary from the war, acountry which, from a heavy debtor, has become a generalcreditor—is no more than 100,000,000. 
 The population of Japan—which gained a great deal by keeping out of the European-American conflict and by seizing the enormousAsian continent—is 50,000,000. 
 The population of Britain, which next to the above-mentioned countries gained most, is about 50,000,000. 
 If we add the neutral countries with their very small populations, countries which were enriched by the war, we shall get, in round figures, some 250,000,000people. 
 Thus you get the broad outlines of the picture of the world as it appeared after the imperialist war. 
 In theoppressed colonies—countries which are being dismembered, such as Persia, Turkey and China, and in countries that were defeated and have been relegated to the position ofcolonies—there are 1,250 million inhabitants. 
 Not morethan 250,000,000 inhabit countries that have retainedtheir old positions, but have become economically depend-ent upon America, and all of which, during the war, were militarily dependent, once the war involved the whole world and did not permit a single state to remain reallyneutral. 
 And, finally, we have not more than 250,000,000inhabitants in countries whose top stratum, the capitalistsalone, benefited from the partition of the world. 
 We thusget a total of about 1,750 million comprising the entire population of the world. 
 I would like to remind you of this picture of the world, for all the basic contradictions ofcapitalism, of imperialism, which are leading up to revo-lution, all the basic contradictions in the working-classmovement that have led up to the furious struggle againstthe Second International, facts our chairman has referred to, are all connected with this partitioning of the world’s population. 
 Of course, these figures give the economic picture of the world only approximately, in broad outline. 
 And, comrades,it is natural that, with the population of the world dividedin this way, exploitation by finance capital, the capitalist monopolies, has increased many times over. 
 Not only have the colonial and the defeated countries been reduced to a state of dependence; within each victorstate the contradictions have grown more acute; all the capi-talist contradictions have become aggravated. 
 I shallillustrate this briefly with a few examples. 
 Let us take the national debts. 
 We know that the debts of the principal European states increased no less than sevenfoldin the period between 1914 and 1920. 
 I shall quote another economic source, one of particular significance—Keynes, the British diplomat and author of The Economic Consequences of the Peace , who, on instructions from his government, took part in the Versailles peace negotiations, observedthem on the spot from the purely bourgeois point of view,studied the subject in detail, step by step, and took part inthe conferences as an economist. 
 He has arrived at conclu-sions which are more weighty, more striking and more instructive than any a Communist revolutionary could draw, because they are the conclusions of a well-knownbourgeois and implacable enemy of Bolshevism, which he,like the British philistine he is, imagines as somethingmonstrous, ferocious, and bestial. 
 Keynes has reached theconclusion that after the Peace of Versailles, Europe and the whole world are heading for bankruptcy. 
 He has resigned, and thrown his book in the government’s face with thewords: “What you are doing is madness”. 
 I shall quotehis figures, which can be summed up as follows. 
 What are the debtor-creditor relations that have devel-oped between the principal powers? I shall convert pounds sterling into gold rubles, at a rate of ten gold rubles to one pound. 
 Here is what we get: the United States has assetsamounting to 19,000 million, its liabilities are nil. 
 Beforethe war it was in Britain’s debt. 
 In his report on April 14,1920, to the last congress of the Communist Party of Ger-many, Comrade Levi very correctly pointed out that there are now only two powers in the world that can act independ-ently, viz. 
, Britain and America. 
 America alone is abso-lutely independent financially. 
 Before the war she was adebtor; she is now a creditor only. 
 All the other powersin the world are debtors. 
 Britain has been reduced to aposition in which her assets total 17,000 million, and her liabilities 8,000 million. 
 She is already half-way to becom-ing a debtor nation. 
 Moreover, her assets include about6,000 million owed to her by Russia. 
 Included in the debtare military supplies received by Russia during the war. 
When Krasin, as representative of the Russian SovietGovernment, recently had occasion to discuss with Lloyd George the subject of debt agreements, he made it plain to the scientists and politicians, to the British Government’sleaders, that they were labouring under a strange delusion if they were counting on getting these debts repaid. 
 The British diplomat Keynes has already laid this delusion bare. 
 Of course, it is not only or even not at all a question of the Russian revolutionary government having no wishto pay the debts. 
 No government would pay, because thesedebts are usurious interest on a sum that has been paidtwenty times over, and the selfsame bourgeois Keynes, who does not in the least sympathise with the Russian revolutionary movement, says: “It is clear that these debtscannot be taken into account. 
” In regard to France, Keynes quotes the following figures: her assets amount to 3,500 million, and her liabilitiesto 10,500 million! And this is a country which the French themselves called the world’s money-lender, because her “savings” were enormous; the proceeds of colonial andfinancial pillage—a gigantic capital—enabled her to grantthousands upon thousands of millions in loans, particularlyto Russia. 
 These loans brought in an enormous revenue. 
Notwithstanding this and notwithstanding victory, France has been reduced to debtor status. 
 A bourgeois American source, quoted by Comrade Braun, a Communist, in his book Who Must Pay the War Debts ? (Leipzig, 1920), estimates the ratio of debts to nationalwealth as follows: in the victor countries, Britain andFrance, the ratio of debts to aggregate national wealth is over 50 per cent; in Italy the percentage is between 60 and 70, and in Russia 90. 
 As you know, however, these debtsdo not disturb us, because we followed Keynes’s excellentadvice just a little before his book appeared—we annulledall our debts. 
 ( Stormy applause . 
) In this, however, Keynes reveals the usual crankiness of the philistine: while advising that all debts should be annulled, he goes on to say that, of course, France onlystands to gain by it, that, of course, Britain will not losevery much, as nothing can be got out of Russia in any case;America will lose a fair amount, but Keynes counts onAmerican “generosity”! On this point our views differ from those of Keynes and other petty-bourgeois pacifists. 
 We think that to get the debts annulled they will have to waitfor something else to happen, and will have to try working in a direction other than counting on the “generosity” of the capitalists. 
 These few figures go to show that the imperialist war has created an impossible situation for the victor powersas well. 
 This is further shown by the enormous disparitybetween wages and price rises. 
 On March 8 of this year,the Supreme Economic Council, an institution chargedwith protecting the bourgeois system throughout the world from the mounting revolution, adopted a resolution which ended with an appeal for order, industry and thrift, provid-ed, of course, the workers remain the slaves of capital. 
This Supreme Economic Council, organ of the Entente andof the capitalists of the whole world, presented the follow-ing summary. 
 In the United States of America food prices have risen, on the average, by 120 per cent, whereas wages have increasedonly by 100 per cent. 
 In Britain, food prices have goneup by 170 per cent, and wages 130 per cent; in France, foodprices—300 per cent, and wages 200 per cent; in Japan—food prices 130 per cent, and wages 60 per cent (I have analysed Comrade Braun’s figures in his pamphlet and those of the Supreme Economic Council as published inThe Times of March 10, 1920). 
 In such circumstances, the workers’ mounting resent-ment, the growth of a revolutionary temper and ideas,and the increase in spontaneous mass strikes are obviously inevitable, since the position of the workers is becoming intolerable. 
 The workers’ own experience is convincingthem that the capitalists have become prodigiously enrichedby the war and are placing the burden of war costs anddebts upon the workers’ shoulders. 
 We recently learnt bycable that America wants to deport another 500 Communists to Russia so as to get rid of “dangerous agitators”. 
 Even if America deports to our country, not 500 but 500,000 Russian, American, Japanese and French “agita-tors” that will make no difference, because there will stillbe the disparity between prices and wages, which they cando nothing about. 
 The reason why they can do nothing about it is because private property is most strictly safeguarded, is “sacred” there. 
 That should not be forgotten, because itis only in Russia that the exploiters’ private property has been abolished. 
 The capitalists can do nothing about the gap between prices and wages, and the workers cannot live on their previous wages. 
 The old methods are useless against this calamity. 
 Nothing can be achieved by isolated strikes,the parliamentary struggle, or the vote, because “privateproperty is sacred”, and the capitalists have accumulatedsuch debts that the whole world is in bondage to a handfulof men. 
 Meanwhile the workers’ living conditions are becom-ing more and more unbearable. 
 There is no other way out but to abolish the exploiters’ “private property”. 
 In his pamphlet Britain and the World Revolution , valua-ble extracts from which were published by our Bulletin of the People ’s Commissariat of Foreign Affairs of February 1920, Comrade Lapinsky points out that in Britain coal export prices have doubled as against those anticipated by official industrial circles. 
 In Lancashire things have gone so far that shares are at a premium of 400 per cent. 
 Bank profits are at least 40-50per cent. 
 It should, moreover, be noted that, in determin-ing bank profits, all bank officials are able to conceal the lion’s share of profits by calling them, not profits but bonuses, commissions, etc. 
 So here, too, indisputable economicfacts prove that the wealth of a tiny handful of people hasgrown prodigiously and that their luxury beggars descrip-tion, while the poverty of the working class is steadilygrowing. 
 We must particularly note the further circum-stance brought out very clearly by Comrade Levi in the report I have just referred to, namely, the change in thevalue of money. 
 Money has everywhere depreciated as aresult of the debts, the issue of paper currency, etc. 
 Thesame bourgeois source I have already mentioned, namely,the statement of the Supreme Economic Council of March 8, 1920, has calculated that in Britain the depreciation in the value of currency as against the dollar is approximatelyone-third, in France and Italy two-thirds, and in Germanyas much as 96 per cent. 
 This fact shows that the “mechanism” of the world capitalist economy is falling apart. 
 The trade relations on which the acquisition of raw materials and the sale of commodi-ties hinge under capitalism cannot go on; they cannotcontinue to be based on the subordination of a number of countries to a single country—the reason being the change in the value of money. 
 No wealthy country can exist or trade unless it sells its goods and obtains raw materials. 
 Thus we have a situation in which America, a wealthy country that all countries are subordinate to, cannot buyor sell. 
 And the selfsame Keynes who went through theentire gamut of the Versailles negotiations has been com-pelled to acknowledge this impossibility despite his unyield-ing determination to defend capitalism, and all his hatred of Bolshevism. 
 Incidentally, I do not think any communistmanifesto, or one that is revolutionary in general, couldcompare in forcefulness with those pages in Keynes’s bookwhich depict Wilson and “Wilsonism” in action. 
 Wilsonwas the idol of philistines and pacifists like Keynes and a number of heroes of the Second International (and even of the “Two-and-a-Half” International 78), who exalted the “Fourteen Points” and even wrote “learned” books aboutthe “roots” of Wilson’s policy; they hoped that Wilsonwould save “social peace”, reconcile exploiters and exploit-ed, and bring about social reforms. 
 Keynes showed vividly how Wilson was made a fool of, and all these illusions were shattered at the first impact with the practical, mercan-tile and huckster policy of capital as personified by Clemen-ceau and Lloyd George. 
 The masses of the workers nowsee more clearly than ever, from their own experience—and the learned pedants could see it just by reading Keynes’s book—that the “roots” of Wilson’s policy lay in sancti-monious piffle, petty-bourgeois phrase-mongering, and anutter inability to understand the class struggle. 
 In consequence of all this, two conditions, two funda-mental situations, have inevitably and naturally emerged. 
On the one hand, the impoverishment of the masses has grown incredibly, primarily among 1,250 million people, i. 
e. 
, 70 per cent of the world’s population. 
 These are thecolonial and dependent countries whose inhabitants possessno legal rights, countries “mandated” to the brigands offinance. 
 Besides, the enslavement of the defeated countrieshas been sanctioned by the Treaty of Versailles and by existing secret treaties regarding Russia, whose validity, it is true, is sometimes about as real as that of the scrapsof paper stating that we owe so many thousands of millions. 
 For the first time in world history, we see robbery, slavery, dependence, poverty and starvation imposed upon 1,250 million people by a legal act. 
 On the other hand, the workers in each of the creditor countries have found themselves in conditions that areintolerable. 
 The war has led to an unprecedented aggrava-tion of all capitalist contradictions, this being the originof the intense revolutionary ferment that is ever growing. 
 During the war people were put under military discipline, hurled into the ranks of death, or threatened with imme-diate wartime punishment. 
 Because of the war conditionspeople could not see the economic realities. 
 Writers, poets,the clergy, the whole press were engaged in nothing butglorifying the war. 
 Now that the war has ended, the expo-sures have begun: German imperialism with its Peace of Brest-Litovsk has been laid bare; the Treaty of Versailles,which was to have been a victory for imperialism butproved its defeat, has been exposed. 
 Incidentally, theexample of Keynes shows that in Europe and Americatens and hundreds of thousands of petty-bourgeois, intel-lectuals, and simply more or less literate and educated people, have had to follow the road taken by Keynes, whoresigned and threw in the face of the government a bookexposing it. 
 Keynes has shown what is taking place andwill take place in the minds of thousands and hundreds ofthousands of people when they realise that all the speeches about a “war for liberty”, etc. 
, were sheer deception, and that as a result only a handful of people were enriched,while the others were ruined and reduced to slavery. 
 Is itnot a fact that the bourgeois Keynes declares that, to surviveand save the British economy, the British must secure theresumption of free commercial intercourse between Ger-many and Russia? How can this be achieved? By cancel-ling all debts, as Keynes proposes. 
 This is an idea that hasbeen arrived at not only by Keynes, the learned economist;millions of people are or will be getting the same idea. 
And millions of people hear bourgeois economists declarethat there is no way out except annulling the debts; therefore “damn the Bolsheviks” (who have annulled the debts), and let us appeal to America’s “generosity”! I think that,on behalf of the Congress of the Communist International, we should send a message of thanks to these economists, who have been agitating for Bolshevism. 
 If, on the one hand, the economic position of the masses has become intolerable, and, on the other hand, the disin-tegration described by Keynes has set in and is growingamong the negligible minority of all-powerful victor coun-tries, then we are in the presence of the maturing of thetwo conditions for the world revolution. 
 We now have before us a somewhat more complete picture of the whole world. 
 We know what dependence upon a hand-ful of rich men means to 1,250 million people who have beenplaced in intolerable conditions of existence. 
 On the otherhand, when the peoples were presented with the League ofNations Covenant, declaring that the League had put an end to war and would henceforth not permit anyone to break the peace, and when this Covenant, the last hope of workingpeople all over the world, came into force, it proved to bea victory of the first order for us. 
 Before it came into force,people used to say that it was impossible not to imposespecial conditions on a country like Germany, but when the Covenant was drawn up, everything would come out all right. 
 Yet, when the Covenant was published, the bitterestopponents of Bolshevism were obliged to repudiate it. 
When the Covenant came into operation, it appeared thata small group of the richest countries, the “Big Four”—inthe persons of Clemenceau, Lloyd George, Orlando and Wilson—had been put on the job of creating the new rela-tions! When the machinery of the Covenant was put intooperation, this led to a complete breakdown. 
 We saw this in the case of the wars against Russia. 
 Weak, ruined and crushed, Russia, a most backward country,fought against all the nations, against a league of the rich and powerful states that dominate the world, and emerged victorious. 
 We could not put up a force that was anythinglike the equal of theirs, and yet we proved the victors. 
Why was that? Because there was not a jot of unity amongthem, because each power worked against the other. 
 Francewanted Russia to pay her debts and become a formidable force against Germany; Britain wanted to partition Russia, and attempted to seize the Baku oilfields and conclude atreaty with the border states of Russia. 
 Among the official British documents there is a Paper which scrupulously enumerates all the states (fourteen in all) which some six months ago, in December 1919, pledged themselves to take Moscow and Petrograd. 
 Britain based her policy on thesestates, to whom she granted loans running into millions. 
All these calculations have now misfired, and all the loansare unrecoverable. 
 Such is the situation created by the League of Nations. 
 Every day of this Covenant’s existence provides the best propaganda for Bolshevism, since the most powerful adher-ents of the capitalist “order” are revealing that, on everyquestion, they put spokes in one another’s wheels. 
 Furiouswrangling over the partitioning of Turkey, Persia, Mesopo-tamia and China is going on between Japan, Britain, Amer-ica and France. 
 The bourgeois press in these countries is full of the bitterest attacks and the angriest statementsagainst their “colleagues” for trying to snatch the bootyfrom under their noses. 
 We see complete discord at the top,among this handful, this very small number of extremelyrich countries. 
 There are 1,250 million people who find it impossible to live in the conditions of servitude which “advanced” and civilised capitalism wishes to impose onthem: after all, these represent 70 per cent of the world’spopulation. 
 This handful of the richest states—Britain,America and Japan (though Japan was able to plunderthe Eastern, the Asian countries, she cannot constitute an independent financial and military force without sup-port from another country)—these two or three countriesare unable to organise economic relations, and are directingtheir policies toward disrupting policies of their colleaguesand partners in the League of Nations. 
 Hence the worldcrisis; it is these economic roots of the crisis that provide the chief reason of the brilliant successes the Communist International is achieving. 
 Comrades, we have now come to the question of the revo-lutionary crisis as the basis of our revolutionary action. 
And here we must first of all note two widespread errors. 
On the one hand, bourgeois economists depict this crisis simply as “unrest”, to use the elegant expression of the British. 
 On the other hand, revolutionaries sometimestry to prove that the crisis is absolutely insoluble. 
 This is a mistake. 
 There is no such thing as an absolutely hopeless situation. 
 The bourgeoisie are behaving like bare-faced plunderers who have lost their heads; they are com-mitting folly after folly, thus aggravating the situationand hastening their doom. 
 All that is true. 
 But nobodycan “prove” that it is absolutely impossible for them topacify a minority of the exploited with some petty con-cessions, and suppress some movement or uprising of some section of the oppressed and exploited. 
 To try to “prove” in advance that there is “absolutely” no way out of thesituation would be sheer pedantry, or playing with conceptsand catchwords. 
 Practice alone can serve as real “proof”in this and similar questions. 
 All over the world, the bour-geois system is experiencing a tremendous revolutionary crisis. 
 The revolutionary parties must now “prove” in practice that they have sufficient understanding andorganisation, contact with the exploited masses, and deter-mination and skill to utilise this crisis for a successful,a victorious revolution. 
 It is mainly to prepare this “proof” that we have gathered at this Congress of the Communist International. 
 To illustrate to what extent opportunism still prevails among parties that wish to affiliate to the Third Internation-al, and how far the work of some parties is removed frompreparing the revolutionary class to utilise the revolution-ary crisis, I shall quote the leader of the British Independ-ent Labour Party, Ramsay MacDonald. 
 In his book, Parliament and Revolution , which deals with the basic problems that are now engaging our attention, MacDonalddescribes the state of affairs in what is something like abourgeois pacifist spirit. 
 He admits that there is a revo-lutionary crisis and that revolutionary sentiments are growing, that the sympathies of the workers are with the Soviets and the dictatorship of the proletariat (note thatthis refers to Britain) and that the dictatorship of theproletariat is better than the present dictatorship of theBritish bourgeoisie. 
 But MacDonald remains a thorough-paced bourgeois pacifist and compromiser, a petty bourgeois who dreams of a government that stands above classes. 
 Like all bourgeoisliars, sophists and pedants, MacDonald recognises the class struggle merely as a “descriptive fact”. 
 He ignores the experience of Kerensky, the Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries of Russia, the similar experience of Hun-gary, Germany, etc. 
, in regard to creating a “democratic”government allegedly standing above classes. 
 MacDonaldlulls his party and those workers who have the misfortuneto regard this bourgeois as a socialist, this philistine asa leader, with the words: “We know that all this [i. 
e. 
, the revolutionary crisis, the revolutionary ferment] will pass ... settle down. 
” The war, he says, inevitably provokedthe crisis, but after the war it will all “settle down”, evenif not at once! That is what has been written by a man who is leader of a party that wants to affiliate to the Third International. 
 This is a revelation—the more valuable for its rare out-spokenness—of what is no less frequently to be seen in thetop ranks of the French Socialist Party and the GermanIndependent Social-Democratic Party, namely, not merelyan inability, but also an unwillingness to take advantage,in a revolutionary sense, of the revolutionary crisis, or, in other words, both an inability and an unwillingness to really prepare the party and the class in revolutionaryfashion for the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 That is the main evil in very many parties which are now leaving the Second International. 
 This is preciselywhy, in the theses I have submitted to the present Congress, I have dwelt most of all on the tasks connected with prep-arations for the dictatorship of the proletariat, and have given as concrete and exact a definition of them as pos-sible. 
 Here is another example. 
 A new book against Bolshevism was recently published. 
 An unusually large number of books of this, kind are now coming out in Europe and America; the more anti-Bolshevik books are brought out, the more strong-ly and rapidly mass sympathy for Bolshevism grows. 
 I amreferring to Otto Bauer’s Bolshevism or Social-Democracy? This book clearly demonstrates to the Germans the essenceof Menshevism, whose shameful role in the Russian revolu-tion is understood well enough by the workers of all coun-tries. 
 Otto Bauer has produced a thoroughgoing Menshevikpamphlet, although he has concealed his own sympathy with Menshevism. 
 In Europe and America, however, more precise information should now be disseminated about what Menshevism actually is, for it is a generic term for all allegedly socialist, Social-Democratic and other trendsthat are hostile to Bolshevism. 
 It would be dullwriting if we Russians were to explain to Europeans whatMenshevism is. 
 Otto Bauer has shown that in his book,and we thank in advance the bourgeois and opportunist publishers who will publish it and translate it into various languages. 
 Bauer’s book will be a useful if peculiar sup-plement to the textbooks on communism. 
 Take any para-graph, any argument in Otto Bauer’s book and indicate theMenshevism in it, where the roots lie of views that leadup to the actions of the traitors to socialism, of the friends of Kerensky, Scheidemann, etc. 
—this is a question that could be very usefully and successfully set in “examina-tions” designed to test whether communism has been prop-erly assimilated. 
 If you cannot answer this question, youare not yet a Communist, and should not join the CommunistParty. 
 ( Applause . 
) Otto Bauer has excellently expressed in a single sentence the essence of the views of world opportunism; for this,if we could do as we please in Vienna, we would put upa monument to him in his lifetime. 
 The use of force in theclass struggle in modern democracies, Otto Bauer says,would be “violence exercised against the social factors of force”. 
 You may think that this sounds queer and unintelligible. 
 It is an example of what Marxism has been reduced to, ofthe kind of banality and defence of the exploiters to whichthe most revolutionary theory can be reduced. 
 A German variety of philistinism is required, and you get the “theo-ry” that the “social factors of force” are: number; the degree of organisation; the place held in the process of productionand distribution; activity and education. 
 If a rural agri-cultural labourer or an urban working man practices revo-lutionary violence against a landowner or a capitalist,that is no dictatorship of the proletariat, no violence against the exploiters and the oppressors of the people. 
 Oh, no! This is “violence against the social factors offorce”. 
 Perhaps my example sounds something like a jest. 
 How-ever, such is the nature of present-day opportunism that its struggle against Bolshevism becomes a jest. 
 The task of involving the working class, all its thinking elements,in the struggle between international Menshevism (theMacDonalds, Otto Bauers and Co. 
) and Bolshevism is highlyuseful and very urgent to Europe and America. 
 Here we must ask: how is the persistence of such trends in Europe to be explained? Why is this opportunism strong-er in Western Europe than in our country? It is because theculture of the advanced countries has been, and still is,the result of their being able to live at the expense of athousand million oppressed people. 
 It is because thecapitalists of these countries obtain a great deal more in this way than they could obtain as profits by plundering the workers in their own countries. 
 Before the war, it was calculated that the three richest countries—Britain, France and Germany—got betweeneight and ten thousand million francs a year from the ex-port of capital alone, apart from other sources. 
 It goes without saying that, out of this tidy sum, at least five hundred millions can be spent as a sop to thelabour leaders and the labour aristocracy, i. 
e. 
, on all sortsof bribes. 
 The whole thing boils down to nothing but brib-ery. 
 It is done in a thousand different ways: by increasingcultural facilities in the largest centres, by creating edu-cational institutions, and by providing co-operative, trade union and parliamentary leaders with thousands of cushyjobs. 
 This is done wherever present-day civilised capitalistrelations exist. 
 It is these thousands of millions in super-profits that form the economic basis of opportunism in theworking-class movement. 
 In America, Britain and France we see a far greater persistence of the opportunist leaders, of the upper crust of the working class, the labour aris-tocracy; they offer stronger resistance to the Communistmovement. 
 That is why we must be prepared to find itharder for the European and American workers’ partiesto get rid of this disease than was the case in our country. 
 We know that enormous successes have been achieved in the treatment of this disease since the Third Internationalwas formed, but we have not yet finished the job; the purg-ing of the workers’ parties, the revolutionary parties of the proletariat all over the world, of bourgeois influences, of the opportunists in their ranks, is very far from complete. 
 I shall not dwell on the concrete manner in which we must do that; that is dealt with in my published theses. 
My task consists in indicating the deep economic roots ofthis phenomenon. 
 The disease is a protracted one; the cure takes longer than the optimists hoped it-would. 
 Opportunism is our principal enemy. 
 Opportunism in the upper ranks ofthe working-class movement is bourgeois socialism, notproletarian socialism. 
 It has been shown in practice thatworking-class activists who follow the opportunist trend arebetter defenders of the bourgeoisie than the bourgeois them-selves. 
 Without their leadership of the workers, the bour-geoisie could not remain in power. 
 This has been proved,not only by the history of the Kerensky regime in Russia;it has also been proved by the democratic republic in Ger-many under its Social-Democratic government, as well asby Albert Thomas’s attitude towards his bourgeois govern-ment. 
 It has been proved by similar experience in Britain and the United States. 
 This is where our principal enemyis, an enemy we must overcome. 
 We must leave this Con-gress firmly resolved to carry on this struggle to the veryend, in all parties. 
 That is our main task. 
 Compared with this task, the rectification of the errors of the “Left” trend in communism will be an easy one. 
 In a number of countries anti-parliamentarianism is to beseen, which has not been so much introduced by peopleof petty-bourgeois origin as fostered by certain advancedcontingents of the proletariat out of hatred for the old par-liamentarianism, out of a legitimate, proper and necessary hatred for the conduct of members of parliament in Bri-tain, France, Italy, in all lands. 
 Directives must be issuedby the Communist International and the comrades mustbe made more familiar with the experience of Russia, withthe significance of a genuinely proletarian political party. 
Our work will consist in accomplishing this task. 
 The fight against these errors in the proletarian movement, against these shortcomings, will be a thousand times easier thanfighting against those bourgeois who, in the guise of reformists, belong to the old parties of the Second Interna-tional and conduct the whole of their work in a bourgeois, not proletarian, spirit. 
 Comrades, in conclusion I shall deal with one other aspect of the subject. 
 Our comrade, the chairman, has said thatour Congress merits the title of a World Congress. 
 I thinkhe is right, particularly because we have here quite a numberof representatives of the revolutionary movement in the colonial and backward countries. 
 This is only a small begin-ning, but the important thing is that a beginning hasbeen made. 
 At this Congress we see taking place a unionbetween revolutionary proletarians of the capitalist,advanced countries, and the revolutionary masses of thosecountries where there is no or hardly any proletariat, i. 
e. 
, the oppressed masses of colonial, Eastern countries. 
 It is on ourselves that the consolidation of unity depends, and I amsure we shall achieve it. 
 World imperialism shall fall whenthe revolutionary onslaught of the exploited and oppressedworkers in each country, overcoming resistance from petty-bourgeois elements and the influence of the small upper crust of labour aristocrats, merges with the revolutionary onslaught of hundreds of millions of people who havehitherto stood beyond the pale of history, and have beenregarded merely as the object of history. 
 The imperialist war has helped the revolution: from the colonies, the backward countries, and the isolation they lived in, the bourgeoisie levied soldiers for this imperialist war. 
 The British bourgeoisie impressed on thesoldiers from India that it was the duty of the Indian peas-ants to defend Great Britain against Germany; the Frenchbourgeoisie impressed on soldiers from the French coloniesthat it was their duty to defend France. 
 They taught them the use of arms, a very useful thing, for which we might express our deep gratitude to the bourgeoisie—express ourgratitude on behalf of all the Russian workers and peasants,and particularly on behalf of all the Russian Red Army. 
The imperialist war has drawn the dependent peoples intoworld history. 
 And one of the most important tasks now confronting us is to consider how the foundation-stone of the organisation of the Soviet movement Can be laid in thenon-capitalist countries. 
 Soviets are possible there; they will not be workers’ Soviets, but peasants’ Soviets, or Soviets of working people. 
 Much work will have to be done; errors will be inevitable; many difficulties will be encountered along this road. 
 Itis the fundamental task of the Second Congress to elabo-rate or indicate the practical principles that will enablethe work, till now carried on in an unorganised fashionamong hundreds of millions of people, to be carried on in an organised, coherent and systematic fashion. 
 Now, a year or a little more after the First Congress of the Communist International, we have emerged victors overthe Second International; it is not only among the workersof the civilised countries that the ideas of the Soviets havespread; it is not only to them that they have become known and intelligible. 
 The workers of all lands are ridiculing the wiseacres, not a few of whom call themselves socialistsand argue in a learned or almost learned manner about theSoviet “system”, as the German systematists are fond ofcalling it, or the Soviet “idea” as the British GuildSocialists 79 call it. 
 Not infrequently, these arguments about the Soviet “system” or “idea” becloud the workers’ eyes and their minds. 
 However, the workers are brushing thispedantic rubbish aside and are taking up the weapon pro-vided by the Soviets. 
 A recognition of the role and signifi-cance of the Soviets has now also spread to the lands ofthe East. 
 The groundwork has been laid for the Soviet movement all over the East, all over Asia, among all the colonialpeoples. 
 The proposition that the exploited must rise up against the exploiters and establish their Soviets is not a very com-plex one. 
 After our experience, after two and a half years of the existence of the Soviet Republic in Russia, and after the First Congress of the Third International, this ideais becoming accessible to hundreds of millions of peopleoppressed by the exploiters all over the world. 
 We in Rus-sia are often obliged to compromise, to bide our time, sincewe are weaker than the international imperialists, yet we know that we are defending the interests of this mass of a thousand and a quarter million people. 
 For the time being,we are hampered by barriers, prejudices and ignorance which are receding into the past with every passing hour; but we are more and more becoming representatives and genuine defenders of this 70 per cent of the world’s population, this mass of working and exploited people. 
 It is with pride thatwe can say: at the First Congress we were in fact merelypropagandists; we were only spreading the fundamentalideas among the world’s proletariat; we only issued thecall for struggle; we were merely asking where the people were who were capable of taking this path. 
 Today the ad-vanced proletariat is everywhere with us. 
 A proletarian armyexists everywhere, although sometimes it is poorly organisedand needs reorganising. 
 If our comrades in all lands helpus now to organise a united army, no shortcomings willprevent us from accomplishing our task. 
 That task is the world proletarian revolution, the creation of a world Soviet republic. 
 ( Prolonged applause . 
) 2 SPEECH ON THE ROLE OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY JULY 23 Comrades, I would like to make a few remarks concerning the speeches of Comrades Tanner and McLaine. 
 Tannersays that he stands for the dictatorship of the proletariat,but he does not see the dictatorship of the proletariat quitein the way we do. 
 He says that by the dictatorship of theproletariat we actually mean the dictatorship of the organised and class-conscious minority of the proletariat. 
 True enough, in the era of capitalism, when the masses of the workers are subjected to constant exploitation andcannot develop their human capacities, the most character-istic feature of working-class political parties is that theycan involve only a minority of their class. 
 A political party can comprise only a minority of a class, in the same way as the really class-conscious workers in any capitalist societyconstitute only a minority of all workers. 
 We are thereforeobliged to recognise that it is only this class-consciousminority that can direct and lead the broad masses of theworkers. 
 And if Comrade Tanner says that he is opposed to parties, but at the same time is in favour of a minority that represents the best organised and most revolutionaryworkers showing the way to the entire proletariat, then Isay that there is really no difference between us. 
 Whatis this organised minority? If this minority is really class-conscious, if it is able to lead the masses, if it is able to reply to every question that appears on the order of the day, then it is a party in reality. 
 But if comrades like Tanner, to whom we pay special heed as representatives of a mass movement—which cannot, without a certain exaggeration, be said of the representatives of the British Socialist Party—if these comrades are in favour of therebeing a minority that will fight resolutely for the dictat-orship of the proletariat and will educate the masses ofthe workers along these lines, then this minority is in real-ity nothing but a party. 
 Comrade Tanner says that this minority should organise and lead the entire mass of work-ers. 
 If Comrade Tanner and the other comrades of the ShopStewards’ group and the Industrial Workers of the Worldaccept this—and we see from the daily talks we have hadwith them that they do accept it—if they approve the ideathat the class-conscious Communist minority of the working class leads the proletariat, then they must also agree that this is exactly the meaning of all our resolutions. 
 In thatcase the only difference between us lies in their avoidanceof the word “party” because there exists among the Britishcomrades a certain mistrust of political parties. 
 They canconceive of political parties only in the image of the parties of Gompers and Henderson, 80 parties of parliamentary smart dealers and traitors to the working class. 
 But if, byparliamentarianism, they mean what exists in Britain andAmerica today, then we too are opposed to such parliament-arianism and to such political parties. 
 What we want isnew and different parties. 
 We want parties that will be in constant and real contact with the masses and will be able to lead those masses. 
 I now come to the third question I want to touch upon in connection with Comrade McLaine’s speech. 
 He isin favour of the British Communist Party affiliating tothe Labour Party. 
 I have already expressed my opinion on this score in my theses on affiliation to the Third Inter-national. 
 81 In my pamphlet I left the question open. 
82 However, after discussing the matter with a number ofcomrades, I have come to the conclusion that the decisionto remain within the Labour Party is the only correct tac-tic. 
 But here is Comrade Tanner, who declares, “Don’t be too dogmatic. 
” I consider his remark quite out of place here. 
 Comrade Ramsay says: “Please let us British Com-munists decide this question for ourselves. 
” What would /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR the International be like if every little group were to come along and say: “Some of us are in favour of this thing and some are against; leave it to us to decide the matter for ourselves”? What then would be the use of having an In-ternational, a congress, and all this discussion? ComradeMcLaine spoke only of the role of a political party. 
 Butthe same applies to the trade unions and to parliamentar-ianism. 
 It is quite true that a larger section of the finest revolutionaries are against affiliation to the Labour Party because they are opposed to parliamentarianism as a meansof struggle. 
 Perhaps it would be best to refer this questionto a commission, where it should be discussed and studied,and then decided at this very Congress of the CommunistInternational. 
 We cannot agree that it concerns only the British Communists. 
 We must say, in general, which are the correct tactics. 
 I will now deal with some of Comrade McLaine’s argu-ments concerning the question of the British Labour Party. 
We must say frankly that the Party of Communists canjoin the Labour Party only on condition that it preserves full freedom of criticism and is able to conduct its own policy. 
 This is of supreme importance. 
 When, in this con-nection Comrade Serrati speaks of class collaboration, Iaffirm that this will not be class collaboration. 
 When theItalian comrades tolerate, in their party, opportunists likeTurati and Co. 
, i. 
e. 
, bourgeois elements, that is indeed class collaboration. 
 In this instance, however, with regard to the British Labour Party, it is simply a matter of col-laboration between the advanced minority of the Britishworkers and their vast majority. 
 Members of the LabourParty are all members of trade unions. 
 It has a very unusualstructure, to be found in no other country. 
 It is an organisa-tion that embraces four million workers out of the six or seven million organised in trade unions. 
 They are notasked to state what their political opinions are. 
 Let Com-rade Serrati prove to me that anyone there will preventus from exercising our right of criticism. 
 Only by provingthat, will you prove Comrade McLaine wrong. 
 The British Socialist Party can quite freely call Henderson a traitor and yet remain in the Labour Party. 
 Here we have col-laboration between the vanguard of the working class and the rearguard, the backward workers. 
 This collaboration is so important to the entire movement that we categorically insist on the British Communists serving as a link between the Party, that is, the minority of the working class, andthe rest of the workers. 
 If the minority is unable to leadthe masses and establish close links with them, then it is nota party, and is worthless in general, even if it calls itselfa party or the National Shop Stewards’ Committee—as far as I know, the Shop Stewards’ Committees in Britain have a National Committee, a central body, and that is a steptowards a party. 
 Consequently, until it is refuted that theBritish Labour Party consists of proletarians, this is co-operation between the vanguard of the working class andthe backward workers; if this co-operation is not carried on systematically, the Communist Party will be worthless and there can be no question of the dictatorship of theproletariat at all. 
 If our Italian comrades cannot producemore convincing arguments, we shall have to definitelysettle the question later here, on the basis of what we know—and we shall come to the conclusion that affiliation is the correct tactic. 
 Comrades Tanner and Ramsay tell us that the majority of British Communists will not accept affiliation. 
 But mustwe always agree with the majority? Not at all. 
 If they havenot yet understood which are the correct tactics, then per-haps it would be better to wait. 
 Even the parallel existence for a time of two parties would be better than refusing to reply to the question as to which tactics are correct. 
 Of course,acting on the experience of all Congress delegates and onthe arguments that have been brought forward here, youwill not insist on passing a resolution here and now, callingfor the immediate formation of a single Communist Party in each country. 
 That is impossible. 
 But we can frankly express our opinion, and give directives. 
 We must studyin a special commission the question raised by the Brit-ish delegation and then we shall say: affiliation to theLabour Party is the correct tactic. 
 If the majority is againstit, we must organise a separate minority. 
 That will be of educational value. 
 If the masses of the British workers still believe in the old tactics, we shall verify our conclu-sions at the next congress. 
 We cannot, however, say that this question concerns Britain alone—that would mean copying the worst habits of the Second International. 
 We must express our opinion frankly. 
 If the British Commu-nists do not reach agreement, and if a mass party is notformed, a split is inevitable one way or another. 
 * *Issue No. 
 5 of the Bulletin of The Second Congress of the Commu-nist International gave the concluding sentences of this speech as follows: “We must express our opinion frankly, whatever it may be. 
 If the British Communists do not reach agreement on the questionof the organisation of the mass movement, and if a split takes place in this issue, then better a split than rejection of the organisation of the mass movement. 
 It is better to rise to definite and sufficientlyclear tactics and ideology than to go on remaining in the previous chaos. 
”— Ed. 
 3 REPORT OF THE COMMISSION ON THE NATIONAL AND THE COLONIAL QUESTIONS JULY 2683 Comrades, I shall confine myself to a brief introduction, after which Comrade Maring, who has been secretary to our commission, will give you a detailed account of thechanges we have made in the theses. 
 He will be followedby Comrade Roy, who has formulated the supplementarytheses. 
 Our commission have unanimously adopted boththe preliminary theses, as amended, and the supplementary theses. 
 We have thus reached complete unanimity on all major issues. 
 I shall now make a few brief remarks. 
 First, what is the cardinal idea underlying our theses? It is the distinction between oppressed and oppressor nations. 
Unlike the Second International and bourgeois democ-racy, we emphasise this distinction. 
 In this age of imperial-ism, it is particularly important for the proletariat and the Communist International to establish the concrete economicfacts and to proceed from concrete realities, not fromabstract postulates, in all colonial and national problems. 
 The characteristic feature of imperialism consists in the whole world, as we now see, being divided into a large number of oppressed nations and an insignificant number of oppressor nations, the latter possessing colossal wealthand powerful armed forces. 
 The vast majority of the world’spopulation, over a thousand million, perhaps even 1,250million people, if we take the total population of the worldas 1,750 million, in other words, about 70 per cent of the world’s population, belong to the oppressed nations, which are either in a state of direct colonial dependence or are semi-colonies, as, for example, Persia, Turkey and China, or else, conquered by some big imperialist power, have become greatly dependent on that power by virtue of peace treaties. 
 This idea of distinction, of dividing the nationsinto oppressor and oppressed, runs through the theses, notonly the first theses published earlier over my signature,but also those submitted by Comrade Roy. 
 The latter wereframed chiefly from the standpoint of the situation in India and other big Asian countries oppressed by Britain. 
 Herein lies their great importance to us. 
 The second basic idea in our theses is that, in the present world situation following the imperialist war, reciprocalrelations between peoples and the world political systemas a whole are determined by the struggle waged by a small group of imperialist nations against the Soviet movement and the Soviet states headed by Soviet Russia. 
 Unless webear that in mind, we shall not be able to pose a singlenational or colonial problem correctly, even if it concerns amost outlying part of the world. 
 The Communist parties,in civilised and backward countries alike, can pose and solve political problems correctly only if they make this postulate their starting-point. 
 Third, I should like especially to emphasise the question of the bourgeois-democratic movement in backward coun-tries. 
 This is a question that has given rise to certaindifferences. 
 We have discussed whether it would be right or wrong, in principle and in theory, to state that the Com-munist International and the Communist parties mustsupport the bourgeois-democratic movement in backwardcountries. 
 As a result of our discussion, we have arrivedat the unanimous decision to speak of the national-revolu-tionary movement rather than of the “bourgeois-democrat-ic” movement. 
 It is beyond doubt that any national move-ment can only be a bourgeois-democratic movement, sincethe overwhelming mass of the population in the backwardcountries consist of peasants who represent bourgeois-capitalist relationships. 
 It would be utopian to believethat proletarian parties in these backward countries, if indeed they can emerge in them, can pursue communist tactics and a communist policy, without establishingdefinite relations with the peasant movement and without giving it effective support. 
 However, the objections have been raised that, if we speak of the bourgeois-democratic movement, we shall be obliterating all distinctions between the reformist and the revolutionary movements. 
 Yet thatdistinction has been very clearly revealed of late in thebackward and colonial countries, since the imperialistbourgeoisie is doing everything in its power to implanta reformist movement among the oppressed nations too. 
 There has been a certain rapprochement between the bourgeoi-sie of the exploiting countries and that of the colonies,so that very often—perhaps even in most cases—the bour-geoisie of the oppressed countries, while it does support thenational movement, is in full accord with the imperialistbourgeoisie, i. 
e. 
, joins forces with it against all revolution-ary movements and revolutionary classes. 
 This was irref-utably proved in the commission, and we decided thatthe only correct attitude was to take this distinction intoaccount and, in nearly all cases, substitute the term “nation-al-revolutionary” for the term “bourgeois-democratic”. 
The significance of this change is that we, as Communists, should and will support bourgeois-liberation movements in the colonies only when they are genuinely revolutionary,and when their exponents do not hinder our work of educat-ing and organising in a revolutionary spirit the peasantryand the masses of the exploited. 
 If these conditions do notexist, the Communists in these countries must combat the reformist bourgeoisie, to whom the heroes of the Second International also belong. 
 Reformist parties already existin the colonial countries, and in some cases their spokesmencall themselves Social-Democrats and socialists. 
 The dis-tinction I have referred to has been made in all the theseswith the result, I think, that our view is now formulated much more precisely. 
 Next, I would like to make a remark on the subject of peasants’ Soviets. 
 The Russian Communists’ practicalactivities in the former tsarist colonies, in such backwardcountries as Turkestan, etc. 
, have confronted us with thequestion of how to apply the communist tactics and policy in pre-capitalist conditions. 
 The preponderance of pre-capitalist relationships is still the main determining fea-ture in these countries, so that there can be no question of a purely proletarian movement in them. 
 There is practi-cally no industrial proletariat in these countries. 
 Neverthe-less, we have assumed, we must assume, the role of leader even there. 
 Experience has shown us that tremendous dif-ficulties have to be surmounted in these countries. 
 However,the practical results of our work have also shown thatdespite these difficulties we are in a position to inspire in themasses an urge for independent political thinking and independent political action, even where a proletariat is practically non-existent. 
 This work has been more difficultfor us than it will be for comrades in the West-Europeancountries, because in Russia the proletariat is engrossedin the work of state administration. 
 It will readily be un-derstood that peasants living in conditions of semi-feudal dependence can easily assimilate and give effect to the idea of Soviet organisation. 
 It is also clear that theoppressed masses, those who are exploited, not only by mer-chant capital but also by the feudalists, and by a state basedon feudalism, can apply this weapon, this type of organi-sation, in their conditions too. 
 The idea of Soviet organisa-tion is a simple one, and is applicable, not only to prole-tarian, but also to peasant feudal and semi-feudal relations. 
Our experience in this respect is not as yet very consider-able. 
 However, the debate in the commission, in whichseveral representatives from colonial countries participated,demonstrated convincingly that the Communist Internation-al’s theses should point out that peasants’ Soviets, Soviets of the exploited, are a weapon which can be employed, notonly in capitalist countries but also in countries with pre-capitalist relations, and that it is the absolute duty ofCommunist parties and of elements prepared to formCommunist parties, everywhere to conduct propaganda in favour of peasants’ Soviets or of working people’s Soviets, this to include backward and colonial countries. 
 Whereverconditions permit, they should at once make attempts toset up Soviets of the working people. 
 This opens up a very interesting and very important field for our practical work. 
 So far our joint experience in this respect has not been extensive, but more and more data will gradually accumulate. 
 It is unquestionable thatthe proletariat of the advanced countries can and should give help to the working masses of the backward countries, and that the backward countries can emerge from their present stage of development when the victorious proletariat of the Soviet Republics extends a helping hand to thesemasses and is in a position to give them support. 
 There was quite a lively debate on this question in the commission, not only in connection with the theses I signed,but still more in connection with Comrade Roy’s theses, which he will defend here, and certain amendments to which were unanimously adopted. 
 The question was posed as follows: are we to consider as correct the assertion that the capitalist stage of economicdevelopment is inevitable for backward nations now onthe road to emancipation and among whom a certain advance towards progress is to be seen since the war? We replied in the negative. 
 If the victorious revolutionary prole-tariat conducts systematic propaganda among them, andthe Soviet governments come to their aid with all the meansat their disposal—in that event it will be mistaken to as-sume that the backward peoples must inevitably go through the capitalist stage of development. 
 Not only should we create independent contingents of fighters and party organ-isations in the colonies and the backward countries, notonly at once launch propaganda for the organisation ofpeasants’ Soviets and strive to adapt them to the pre-capi-talist conditions, but the Communist International should advance the proposition, with the appropriate theoretical grounding, that with the aid of the proletariat of the advancedcountries, backward countries can go over to the Sovietsystem and, through certain stages of development, to com-munism, without having to pass through the capitaliststage. 
 The necessary means for this cannot be indicated in advance. 
 These will be prompted by practical experience. 
It has, however, been definitely established that the ideaof the Soviets is understood by the mass of the workingpeople in even the most remote nations, that the Sovietsshould be adapted to the conditions of a pre-capitalist social system, and that the Communist parties should immediately begin work in this direction in all parts of theworld. 
 I would also like to emphasise the importance of revolu-tionary work by the Communist parties, not only in their own, but also in the colonial countries, and particularly among the troops employed by the exploiting nations tokeep the colonial peoples in subjection. 
 Comrade Quelch of the British Socialist Party spoke of this in our commission. 
 He said that the rank-and-fileBritish worker would consider it treasonable to help the enslaved nations in their uprisings against British rule. 
 True, the jingoist and chauvinist-minded labour aristocratsof Britain and America present a very great danger tosocialism, and are a bulwark of the Second International. 
Here we are confronted with the greatest treachery on thepart of leaders and workers belonging to this bourgeois International. 
 The colonial question has been discussed in the Second International as well. 
 The Basle Manifesto 84 i s quite clear on this point, too. 
 The parties of the SecondInternational have pledged themselves to revolutionary ac-tion, but they have given no sign of genuine revolutionarywork or of assistance to the exploited and dependent nations in their revolt against the oppressor nations. 
 This, I think, applies also to most of the parties that have withdrawnfrom the Second International and wish to join the ThirdInternational. 
 We must proclaim this publicly for all tohear, and it is irrefutable. 
 We shall see if any attemptis made to deny it. 
 All these considerations have formed the basis of our resolutions, which undoubtedly are too lengthy but willnevertheless, I am sure, prove of use and will promote thedevelopment and organisation of genuine revolutionarywork in connection with the national and the colonialquestions. 
 And that is our principal task. 
 4 SPEECH ON THE TERMS OF ADMISSION INTO THE COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL JULY 3085 Comrades, Serrati has said that we have not yet invented a sincerometer—meaning by this French neologism an in-strument for measuring sincerity. 
 No such instrument has been invented yet. 
 We have no need of one. 
 But we do already have an instrument for defining trends. 
 ComradeSerrati’s error, which I shall deal with later, consists inhis having failed to use this instrument, which has beenknown for a long time. 
 I would like to say only a few words about Comrade Crispien. 
 I am very sorry that he is not present. 
 ( Dittmann : “He is ill. 
”) I am very sorry to hear it. 
 His speech is a mostimportant document, and expresses explicitly the politicalline of the Right wing of the Independent Social-DemocraticParty. 
 I shall speak, not of personal circumstances or indi-vidual cases but only of the ideas clearly expressed in Crispien’s speech. 
 I think I shall be able to prove that the entire speech was thoroughly in the Kautskian spirit, andthat Comrade Crispien shares the Kautskian views on thedictatorship of the proletariat. 
 Replying to a rejoinder,Crispien said: “Dictatorship is nothing new, it was alreadymentioned in the Erfurt Programme. 
” 86 The Erfurt Pro-gramme says nothing about the dictatorship of the prole-tariat, and history has proved that this was not due to chance. 
When in 1902-03, we were drawing up our Party’s firstprogramme, we always had before us the example of theErfurt Programme; Plekhanov, that very Plekhanov whorightly said at the time, “Either Bernstein will bury So-cial-Democracy, or Social-Democracy will bury Bernstein”, laid special emphasis on the fact that the Erfurt Programme’s failure to mention the dictatorship of the proletariat was erroneous from the standpoint of theory and, in practice was a cowardly concession to the opportunists. 
 The dictator-ship of the proletariat has been in our programme since1903. 
 87 When Comrade Crispien now says that the dictatorship of the proletariat is nothing new, and goes on to say: “Wehave always stood for the conquest of political power”, he is evading the gist of the matter. 
 Conquest of political power is recognised, but not dictatorship. 
 All the socialistliterature—not only German, but French and British aswell—shows that the leaders of the opportunist parties,for instance, MacDonald in Britain, stand for the conquestof political power. 
 They are, in all conscience, sincere so-cialists, but they are against the dictatorship of the pro-letariat! Since we have a good revolutionary party worthyof the name of Communist, it should conduct propagandafor the dictatorship of the proletariat, as distinct fromthe old conception of the Second International. 
 This hasbeen glossed over and obscured by Comrade Crispien, which is the fundamental error common to all of Kautsky’s adherents. 
 “We are leaders elected by the masses,” Comrade Crispien continues. 
 This is a formal and erroneous point of view,since a struggle of trends was clearly to be seen at the latestParty congress of the German Independents. 
 There is no need to seek for a sincerometer and to wax humorous on the subject, as Comrade Serrati does, in order to establishthe simple fact that a struggle of trends must and doesexist: one trend is that of the revolutionary workers whohave just joined us and are opposed to the labour aristocracy;the other is that of the labour aristocracy, which in all civilised countries is headed by the old leaders. 
 Does Cris-pien belong to the trend of the old leaders and the labouraristocracy, or to that of the new revolutionary massesof workers, who are opposed to the labour aristocracy? Thatis a question Comrade Crispien has failed to clarify. 
 In what kind of tone does Comrade Crispien speak of the split? He has said that the split was a bitter necessity, and deplored the matter at length. 
 That is quite in theKautskian spirit. 
 Who did they break away from? Was it not from Scheidemann? Of course, it was. 
 Crispien has said: “We have split away. 
” In the first place, this was done too late. 
 Since we are on the subject, that has to be said. 
 Second, the Independents should not deplore this,but should say: “The international working class is stillunder the sway of the labour aristocracy and the opportun-ists. 
” Such is the position both in France and in GreatBritain. 
 Comrade Crispien does not regard the split like a Communist, but quite in the spirit of Kautsky, who is supposed to have no influence. 
 Then Crispien went on tospeak of high wages. 
 The position in Germany, he said, isthat the workers are quite well off compared with the work-ers in Russia or in general, in the East of Europe. 
 A revo-lution, as he sees it, can be made only if it does not worsen the workers’ conditions “too much”. 
 Is it permissible, in a Communist Party, to speak in a tone like this, I ask? Thisis the language of counter-revolution. 
 The standard ofliving in Russia is undoubtedly lower than in Germany,and when we established the dictatorship, this led to theworkers beginning to go more hungry and to their conditions becoming even worse. 
 The workers’ victory cannot be achieved without sacrifices, without a temporary deteriora-tion of their conditions. 
 We must tell the workers the veryopposite of what Crispien has said. 
 If, in desiring to preparethe workers for the dictatorship, one tells them that theirconditions will not be worsened “too much”, one is losing sight of the main thing, namely, that it was by helping their “own” bourgeoisie to conquer and strangle the wholeworld by imperialist methods, with the aim of therebyensuring better pay for themselves, that the labour aristoc-racy developed. 
 If the German workers now want to workfor the revolution they must make sacrifices, and not be afraid to do so. 
 In the general and world-historical sense, it is true that in a backward country like China, the coolie cannot bringabout a proletarian revolution; however, to tell the workersin the handful of rich countries where life is easier, thanksto imperialist pillage, that they must be afraid of “too great” impoverishment, is counter-revolutionary. 
 It is the reverse that they should be told. 
 The labour aristocracythat is afraid of sacrifices, afraid of “too great” impover-ishment during the revolutionary struggle, cannot belong to the Party. 
 Otherwise the dictatorship is impossible, especially in West-European countries. 
 What does Crispien say about terror and coercion? He has said that these are two different things. 
 Perhaps sucha distinction is possible in a manual of sociology, but itcannot be made in political practice, especially in theconditions of Germany. 
 We are forced to resort to coercion and terror against people who behave like the German of-ficers did when they murdered Liebknecht and RosaLuxemburg, or against people like Stinnes and Krupp, whobuy up the press. 
 Of course, there is no need to proclaimin advance that we shall positively resort to terror but ifthe German officers and the Kappists remain the same as they now are and if Krupp and Stinnes remain the same as they now are, the employment of terror will be inevit-able. 
 Not only Kautsky, but Ledebour and Crispien aswell, speak of coercion and terror in a wholly counter-revolutionary spirit. 
 A party that makes shift with suchideas cannot participate in the dictatorship. 
 That is self-evident. 
 Then there is the agrarian question. 
 Here Crispien has got very worked up and tried to impute a petty-bourgeois spiritto us: to do anything for the small peasant at the expenseof the big landowner is alleged to be petty-bourgeois action. 
He says the landed proprietors should be dispossessed and their land handed over to co-operative associations. 
 This is a pedantic viewpoint. 
 Even in highly developed countries,including Germany, there are a sufficient number of lati-fundia, landed estates that are cultivated by semi-feudal,not large-scale capitalist, methods. 
 Part of such land may becut off and turned over to the small peasants, without in-jury to farming. 
 Large-scale farming can be preserved, and yet the small peasants can be provided with somethingof considerable importance to them. 
 No thought is given tothis, unfortunately, but in practice that has to be done,for otherwise you will fall into error. 
 This has been borneout, for example, in a book by Varga (former People’s Com-missar for the National Economy in the Hungarian Soviet Republic), who writes that the establishment of the prole-tarian dictatorship hardly changed anything in the Hun-garian countryside, that the day-labourers saw no changes, and the small peasants got nothing. 
 There are large lati-fundia in Hungary, and a semi-feudal economy is conducted in large areas. 
 Sections of large estates can and must alwaysbe found, part of which can be turned over to the smallpeasants, perhaps not as their property, but on lease, sothat even the smallest peasant may get some part of theconfiscated estates. 
 Otherwise, the small peasant will see no difference between the old order and the dictatorship of the Soviets. 
 If the proletarian state authority does notact in this way, it will be unable to retain power. 
 Although Crispien did say: “You cannot deny that we have our revolutionary convictions”, I shall reply that Ido deny them. 
 I do not say that you would not like to act in revolutionary manner, but I do say that you are unable to reason in a revolutionary fashion. 
 I am willing to wagerthat if we chose any commission of educated people, andgave them a dozen Kautsky’s books and then Crispien’sspeech, the commission would say: “The whole speech isthoroughly Kautskian, is imbued through and through with Kautsky’s views. 
” The entire method of Crispien’s argu-mentation is fundamentally Kautskian, yet Crispien comesalong and says, “Kautsky no longer has any influence what-ever in our party. 
” No influence, perhaps, on the revolution-ary workers who have joined recently. 
 However, it mustbe accepted as absolutely proved that Kautsky has had and still has an enormous influence on Crispien, on his entire line of thought, all his ideas. 
 This is manifest in hisspeech. 
 That is why, without inventing any sincerometers,any instruments for measuring sincerity, we can say thatCrispien’s orientation is not that of the Communist Inter-national. 
 In saying this, we are defining the orientation of the entire Communist International. 
 Comrades Wijnkoop and Münzenberg have expressed dissatisfaction with the fact that we have invited the In-dependent Socialist Party and are holding talks with itsrepresentatives. 
 I think they are wrong. 
 When Kautskyattacks us and brings out books against us, we polemise with him as our class enemy. 
 But when the Independent Social-Democratic Party, which has expanded as a resultof an influx of revolutionary workers, comes here for negoti-ations, we must talk to its representatives, since they are a section of the revolutionary workers. 
 We cannot reach an immediate agreement with the German Independents, or with the French and the British, regarding the Inter-national. 
 In every speech he delivers, Comrade Wijnkoopreveals that he shares almost all the errors of ComradePannekoek. 
 Wijnkoop has stated that he does not sharePannekoek’s views; but his speeches prove the reverse. 
 Herein lies the main error of this “Left” group, but this, in general, is an error of a proletarian movement that isdeveloping. 
 The speeches of Comrades Crispien and Ditt-mann are imbued with a bourgeois spirit which will nothelp us prepare for the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 WhenComrades Wijnkoop and Münzenberg go still further on the subject of the Independent Social-Democratic Party, we are not in agreement with them. 
 Of course, we have no instrument for measuring sincerity, as Serrati has put it, for testing a man’s conscience; wequite agree that the matter is not one of forming an opinionof people, but of appraising a situation. 
 I am sorry to say that although Serrati did speak he said nothing new. 
 His was the sort of speech we used to hear in the Second Inter-national as well. 
 Serrati was wrong in saying: “In France the situation is not revolutionary; in Germany it is revolutionary; inItaly it is revolutionary. 
” Even if the situation is non-revolutionary, the Second International is in error and carries a heavy responsibilityif it is really unwilling to organise revolutionary propagan-da and agitation, since, as has been proved by the entirehistory of the Bolshevik Party, revolutionary propagandacan and should be conducted even in a situation that is not revolutionary. 
 The difference between the socialists and the Communists consists in the former refusing to actin the way we act in any situation, i. 
e. 
, conduct revolution-ary work. 
 Serrati merely repeats what Crispien has said. 
 We do not mean to say that Turati should be expelled on such and such a date. 
 That question has already been touched upon by the Executive Committee, and Serrati has said to us:“Not expulsions, but a Party purge. 
” We must simply tell the Italian comrades that it is the line of L’Ordine Nuovo members that corresponds to the line of the Communist International, and not that of the present majority of the Socialist Party’s leaders and their parliamentary group. 
They claim that they want to defend the proletariat againstthe reactionaries. 
 Chernov, the Mensheviks and many othersin Russia are also “defending” the proletariat against thereactionaries, but that is not sufficient reason for accept-ing them into our midst. 
 That is why we must say to the Italian comrades and all parties that have a Right wing: this reformist tendencyhas nothing in common with communism. 
 We ask our Italian comrades to call a congress and have our theses and resolutions submitted to it. 
 I am sure that the Italian workers will want to remain in the Communist International. 
 5 SPEECH ON PARLIAMENTARIANISM AUGUST 2 Comrade Bordiga seems to have wanted to defend the Italian Marxists’ point of view here, yet he has failed toreply to any of the arguments advanced by other Marxists in favour of parliamentary action. 
 Comrade Bordiga has admitted that historical experience is not created artificially. 
 He has just told us that the strug-gle must be carried into another sphere. 
 Is he not awarethat every revolutionary crisis has been attended by aparliamentary crisis? True, he has said that the struggle must be carried into another sphere, into the Soviets. 
 Bor-diga, however, has himself admitted that Soviets cannotbe created artificially. 
 The example of Russia shows thatSoviets can be organised either during a revolution or onthe eve of a revolution. 
 Even in the Kerensky period, theSoviets (which were Menshevik Soviets) were organised in such a way that they could not possibly constitute a prole-tarian government. 
 Parliament is a product of historicaldevelopment, and we cannot eliminate it until we are strongenough to disperse the bourgeois parliament. 
 It is only asa member of the bourgeois parliament that one can, in thegiven historical conditions, wage a struggle against bour-geois society and parliamentarianism. 
 The same weapon as the bourgeoisie employs in the struggle must also beused by the proletariat, of course, with entirely differentaims. 
 You cannot assert that that is not the case, and ifyou want to challenge it, you will have thereby to erase theexperience of all revolutionary developments in the world. 
 You have said that the trade unions are also opportunist, that they, too, constitute a danger. 
 On the other hand, however, you have said that an exception must be made in the case of trade unions, because they are workers’ organ-isations. 
 But that is true only up to a certain point. 
 There are very backward elements in the trade unions too: a sec-tion of the proletarianised petty bourgeoisie, the back-ward workers, and the small peasants. 
 All these elementsreally think that their interests are represented in parliaent. 
 This idea must be combated by work within parliament and by citing the facts, so as to show the masses the truth. 
 Theory will have no effect on the backward masses; theyneed practical experience. 
 This was to be seen in the case of Russia too. 
 We were obliged to convene the Constituent Assembly even afterthe victory of the proletariat, so as to prove to the backward proletarians that they had nothing to gain from that Assembly. 
 To bring home the difference between the two,we had to concretely contrapose the Soviets and the Con-stituent Assembly and to show the Soviets as the onlysolution. 
 Comrade Souchy, a revolutionary syndicalist, advocated the same theory, but he had no logic on his side. 
 He said that he was not a Marxist, so everything can be readilyunderstood. 
 But you, Comrade Bordiga, assert that you area Marxist, so we must expect more logic from you. 
 You mustknow how parliament can be smashed. 
 If you can do it by anarmed uprising in all countries, well and good. 
 You are aware that we in Russia proved our determination to destroy the bourgeois parliament, not only in theory, but in prac-tice as well. 
 You, however, have lost sight of the fact thatthis is impossible without fairly long preparations, andthat in most countries it is as yet impossible to destroyparliament at one stroke. 
 We are obliged to carry on a struggle within parliament for the destruction of parliament. 
 For the conditions determining the political line of allclasses in modern society you substitute your revolutionarydetermination; that is why you forget that to destroy thebourgeois parliament in Russia we were first obliged toconvene the Constituent Assembly, even after our victory. 
 You say: “It is a fact that the Russian revolution is a case that is not in accord with conditions in Western Europe”,but you have not produced a single weighty argument to prove that to us. 
 We went through a period of bourgeois democracy. 
 We went through it rapidly at a time when we had to agitate for elections to the Constituent Assembly. 
 Later, when the working class was able to seize power,the peasants still believed in the necessity of a bourgeoisparliament. 
 Taking account of these backward elements, we had to proclaim the elections and show the masses, by example and by facts, that the Constituent Assembly, which was elected at a time of dire and universal need, did not express theaspirations and demands of the exploited classes. 
 In thisway the conflict between Soviet and bourgeois governmentbecame quite clear, not only to us, the vanguard of theworking class, but also to the vast majority of the peasantry, to the petty office employees, the petty bourgeoisie, etc. 
 In all capitalist countries there are backward elementsin the working class who are convinced that parliament isthe true representative of the people and do not see theunscrupulous methods employed there. 
 You say that par-liament is an instrument with the aid of which the bour-geoisie deceive the masses. 
 But this argument should be turned against you, and it does turn against your theses. 
How will you reveal the true character of parliament to thereally backward masses, who are deceived by the bourgeoi-sie? How will you expose the various parliamentary manoeu-vres, or the positions of the various parties, if you are not in parliament, if you remain outside parliament? If you are Marxists, you must admit that, in capitalist society,there is a close link between the relations of classes and therelations of parties. 
 How, I repeat, will you show all thisif you are not members of parliament, and if you renounceparliamentary action? The history of the Russian revolution has clearly shown that the masses of the working class, the peasantry, and petty office employees could not have beenconvinced by any arguments, unless their own experiencehad convinced them. 
 It has been claimed here that it is a waste of time to participate in the parliamentary struggle. 
 Can one conceive of any other institution in which all classes are as interested as they are in parliament? This cannot be created arti-ficially. 
 If all classes are drawn into the parliamentary struggle, it is because the class interests and conflicts are reflected in parliament. 
 If it were possible everywhere and immediately to bring about, let us say, a decisive general strike so as to overthrow capitalism at a single stroke,the revolution would have already taken place in a numberof countries. 
 But we must reckon with the facts, and par-liament is a scene of the class struggle. 
 Comrade Bordigaand those who share his views must tell the masses the truth. 
 Germany provides the best example that a Com-munist group in parliament is possible. 
 That is why youshould have frankly said to the masses: “We are too weakto create a party with a strong organisation. 
” That wouldbe the truth that ought to be told. 
 But if you confessedyour weakness to the masses, they would become your op-ponents, not your supporters; they would become support-ers of parliamentarianism. 
 If you say: “Fellow workers, we are so weak that we cannot form a party disciplined enough to compel its mem-bers of parliament to submit to it”, the workers would aban-don you, for they would ask themselves: “How can we set up a dictatorship of the proletariat with such weaklings?” You are very naïve if you think that the intelligentsia, the middle class, and the petty bourgeoisie will turn Com-munist the day the proletariat is victorious. 
 If you do not harbour this illusion, you should begin right away to prepare the proletariat to pursue its own line. 
 You will find no exceptions to this rule in any branch of state affairs. 
 On the day following the revolution, youwill everywhere find advocates of opportunism who callthemselves-Communists, i. 
e. 
, petty bourgeois who refuse torecognise the discipline of the Communist Party or of theproletarian state. 
 Unless you prepare the workers for the creation of a really disciplined party, which will compel its members to submit to its discipline, you will neverprepare for the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 I thinkthat this accounts for your unwillingness to admit that therepudiation of parliamentary action by a great many of thenew Communist parties stems from their weakness. 
 I am convinced that the vast majority of the really revolutionary workers will follow us and speak up against your anti-parliamentary theses. 
 6 SPEEC H ON AFFILIATIO N TO THE BRITIS H LABOU R PAR TY88 AUGUST 6 Comrades, Comrade Gallacher began his speech by ex-pressing regret at our having been compelled to listen here for the hundredth and the thousandth time to sentences that Comrade McLaine and other British comrades have reiterated a thousand times in speeches, newspapers andmagazines. 
 I think there is no need for regret. 
 The oldInternational used the method of referring such questionsfor decision to the individual parties in the countries con-cerned. 
 That was a grave error. 
 We may not be fully famil-iar with the conditions in one country or another, but in this case we are dealing with the principles underlyinga Communist Party’s tactics. 
 That is very important and,in the name of the Third International, we must herewithclearly state the communist point of view. 
 First of all, I should like to mention a slight inac-curacy on the part of Comrade McLaine, which cannot beagreed to. 
 He called the Labour Party the political organ-isation of the trade union movement, and later repeatedthe statement when he said that the Labour Party is “thepolitical expression of the workers organised in trade unions”. 
I have met the same view several times in the paper of the British Socialist Party. 
 It is erroneous, and is partly the cause of the opposition, fully justified in some measure, comingfrom the British revolutionary workers. 
 Indeed, the concepts“political department of the trade unions” or “politicalexpression” of the trade union movement, are erroneous. 
Of course, most of the Labour Party’s members are working-men. 
 However, whether or not a party is really a political party of the workers does not depend solely upon a mem-bership of workers but also upon the men that lead it, and the content of its actions and its political tactics. 
 Only this latter determines whether we really have before us a political party of the proletariat. 
 Regarded from this,the only correct, point of view, the Labour Party is athoroughly bourgeois party, because, although made up ofworkers, it is led by reactionaries, and the worst kind ofreactionaries at that, who act quite in the spirit of the bourgeoisie. 
 It is an organisation of the bourgeoisie, which exists to systematically dupe the workers with the aid ofthe British Noskes and Scheidemanns. 
 We have also heard another point of view, defended by Comrade Sylvia Pankhurst and Comrade Gallacher,who have voiced their opinion in the matter. 
 What was the substance of the speeches delivered by Gallacher and many of his friends? They have told us that they are insufficientlylinked with the masses. 
 But take the instance of the BritishSocialist Party, they went on. 
 It is still less linked withthe masses and it is a very weak party. 
 Comrade Gallacherhas told us here how he and his comrades have organised, and done so really splendidly, the revolutionary movement in Glasgow, in Scotland, how in their wartime tactics theymanoeuvred skillfully, how they gave able support to thepetty-bourgeois pacifists Ramsay MacDonald and Snowdenwhen they came to Glasgow, and used this support toorganise a mass movement against the war. 
 It is our aim to integrate this new and excellent revolu-tionary movement—represented here by Comrade Gallacherand his friends—into a Communist Party with genuinelycommunist, i. 
e. 
, Marxist tactics. 
 That is our task today. 
On the one hand, the British Socialist Party is too weakand incapable of properly carrying on agitation among the masses; on the other hand, we have the younger revolutionary elements so well represented here by Comrade Gallacher,who, although in touch with the masses, are not a politicalparty, and in this sense are even weaker than the BritishSocialist Party and are totally unable to organise theirpolitical work. 
 Under these circumstances, we must express our frank opinion on the correct tactics. 
 When, in speaking of the British Socialist Party, Comrade Gallacher said thatit is “hopelessly reformist”, he was undoubtedly exaggerat-ing. 
 But the general tenor and content of all the resolutions we have adopted here show with absolute clarity that we demand a change, in this spirit, in the tactics of the British Socialist Party; the only correct tactics of Gallacher’sfriends will consist in their joining the Communist Partywithout delay, so as to modify its tactics in the spirit ofthe resolutions adopted here. 
 If you have so many supportersthat you are able to organise mass meetings in Glasgow, it will not be difficult for you to bring more than ten thousand new members into the Party. 
 The latest Conference of theBritish Socialist Party, held in London three or four daysago, decided to assume the name of the Communist Party andintroduced into its programme a clause providing for par-ticipation in parliamentary elections and affiliation to the Labour Party. 
 Ten thousand organised members were represented at the Conference. 
 It will therefore not beat all difficult for the Scottish comrades to bring into this“Communist Party of Great Britain” more than ten thousandrevolutionary workers who are better versed in the art of work-ing among the masses, and thus to modify the old tactics of the British Socialist Party in the sense of better agi-tation and more revolutionary action. 
 In the commission,Comrade Sylvia Pankhurst pointed out several times thatBritain needed “Lefts”. 
 I, of course, replied that this wasabsolutely true, but that one must not overdo this “Left-ism”. 
 Furthermore she said that they were better pioneers, but for the moment were rather noisy. 
 I do not take this in a bad sense, but rather in a good one, namely, that theyare better able to carry on revolutionary agitation. 
 Wedo and should value this. 
 We expressed this in all ourresolutions, for we always emphasise that we can considera party to be a workers’ party only when it is really linked up with the masses and fights against the old and quite corrupt leaders, against both the Right-wing chauvinistsand those who, like the Right Independents in Germany,take up an intermediate position. 
 We have asserted andreiterated this a dozen times and more in all our resolutions,which means that we demand a transformation of the old party, in the sense of bringing it closer to the masses. 
 Sylvia Pankhurst also asked: “Is it possible for a Com-munist Party to join another political party which still belongs to the Second International?” She replied that it was not. 
 It should, however, be borne in mind that the British Labour Party is in a very special position: it is a highly original type of party, or rather, it is not at alla party in the ordinary sense of the word. 
 It is made up ofmembers of all trade unions, and has a membership of aboutfour million, and allows sufficient freedom to all affiliatedpolitical parties. 
 It thus includes a vast number of British workers who follow the lead of the worst bourgeois elements, the social-traitors, who are even worse than Scheidemann,Noske and similar people. 
 At the same time, however, theLabour Party has let the British Socialist Party into itsranks, permitting it to have its own press organs, in whichmembers of the selfsame Labour Party can freely and openly declare that the party leaders are social-traitors. 
 Comrade McLaine has cited quotations from such statements by theBritish Socialist Party. 
 I, too, can certify that I haveseen in The Call , organ of the British Socialist Party, statements that the Labour Party leaders are social-patriotsand social-traitors. 
 This shows that a party affiliated to the Labour Party is able, not only to severely criticise but openly and specifically to mention the old leaders by name,and call them social-traitors. 
 This is a very original situa-tion: a party which unites enormous masses of workers,so that it might seem a political party, is nevertheless obligedto grant its members complete latitude. 
 Comrade McLaine has told us here that, at the Labour Party Conference, the British Scheidemanns were obliged to openly raise thequestion of affiliation to the Third International, and thatall party branches and sections were obliged to discuss thematter. 
 In such circumstances, it would be a mistake notto join this party. 
 In a private talk, Comrade Pankhurst said to me: “If we are real revolutionaries and join the Labour Party,these gentlemen will expel us. 
” But that would not be badat all. 
 Our resolution says that we favour affiliation inso-far as the Labour Party permits sufficient freedom of crit-icism. 
 On that point we are absolutely consistent. 
 Comrade McLaine has emphasised that the conditions now prevail-ing in Britain are such that, should it so desire, a politicalparty may remain a revolutionary workers’ party even if it is connected with a special kind of labour organisation of four million members, which is half trade union and half political and is headed by bourgeois leaders. 
 In such cir-cumstances it would be highly erroneous for the bestrevolutionary elements not to do everything possible toremain in such a party. 
 Let the Thomases and other social-traitors, whom you have called by that name, expel you. 
That will have an excellent effect upon the mass of the British workers. 
 The comrades have emphasised that the labour aristo-cracy is stronger in Britain than in any other country. 
That is true. 
 After all, the labour aristocracy has existedin Britain, not for decades but for centuries. 
 The Britishbourgeoisie, which has had far more experience—democratic experience—than that of any other country, has been able to buy workers over and to create among them a sizablestratum, greater than in any other country, but one thatis not so great compared with the masses of the workers. 
This stratum is thoroughly imbued with bourgeois preju-dices and pursues a definitely bourgeois reformist policy. 
 In Ireland, for instance, there are two hundred thousand British soldiers who are applying ferocious terror methodsto suppress the Irish. 
 The British Socialists are not con-ducting any revolutionary propaganda among these soldiers,though our resolutions clearly state that we can acceptinto the Communist International only those British parties that conduct genuinely revolutionary propaganda among the British workers and soldiers. 
 I emphasise that we haveheard no objections to this either here or in the commissions. 
 Comrades Gallacher and Sylvia Pankhurst cannot deny that. 
 They cannot refute the fact that, in the ranks of theLabour Party, the British Socialist Party enjoys sufficient freedom to write that certain leaders of the Labour Party are traitors; that these old leaders represent the interests ofthe bourgeoisie; that they are agents of the bourgeoisie in theworking-class movement. 
 They cannot deny all this becauseit is the absolute truth. 
 When Communists enjoy such freedom,it is their duty to join the Labour Party if they take due account of the experience of revolutionaries in all countries, not only of the Russian revolution (for here we are not at aRussian congress but at one that is international). 
 Comrade Gallacher has said ironically that in the present instance we are under the influence of the British Socialist Party. 
 That is not true; it is the experience of all revolutions in all countries that has convinced us. 
 We think thatwe must say that to the masses. 
 The British CommunistParty must retain the freedom necessary to exposeand criticise the betrayers of the working class, who aremuch more powerful in Britain than in any other country. 
 That is readily understandable. 
 Comrade Gallacher is wrong in asserting that by advocating affiliation to the LabourParty we shall repel the best elements among the Britishworkers. 
 We must test this by experience. 
 We are convincedthat all the resolutions and decisions that will be adoptedby our Congress will be published in all British revolution-ary socialist newspapers and that all the branches and sections will be able to discuss them. 
 The entire content ofour resolutions shows with crystal clarity that we arerepresentatives of working-class revolutionary tactics in allcountries and that our aim is to fight against the old reform-ism and opportunism. 
 The events reveal that our tactics are indeed defeating the old reformism. 
 In that case the finest revolutionary elements in the working class, who aredissatisfied with the slow progress being made—and prog-ress in Britain will perhaps be slower than in other coun-tries—will all come over to us. 
 Progress is slow because theBritish bourgeoisie are in a position to create better condi-tions for the labour aristocracy and thereby to retard the revolutionary movement in Britain. 
 That is why the Brit-ish comrades should strive, not only to revolutionise themasses—they are doing that splendidly (as Comrade Galla-cher has shown), but must at the same time strive to createa real working-class political party. 
 Comrade Gallacher and Comrade Sylvia Pankhurst, who have both spoken here, do not as yet belong to a revolutionary CommunistParty. 
 That excellent proletarian organisation, the ShopStewards’ movement, has not yet joined a political party. 
If you organise politically you will find that our tacticsare based on a correct understanding of political develop-ments in the past decades, and that a real revolutionary party can be created only when it absorbs the best elementsof the revolutionary class and uses every opportunity to fight the reactionary leaders, wherever they show them-selves. 
 If the British Communist Party starts by acting in a revolutionary manner in the Labour Party, and if theHendersons are obliged to expel this Party, that will be agreat victory for the communist and revolutionary working-class movement in Britain. 
 TELEGRAM TO J. 
 V. 
 STALIN To Stalin We have just decided, in the Political Bureau, that the Army Groups shall be separated, so that you will deal exclusively with Wrangel. 
 Following the uprisings, espe-cially in the Kuban and then in Siberia, the Wrangel dangeris becoming enormous, and the opinion is mounting in theCentral Committee that peace with bourgeois Poland shouldbe concluded immediately. 
 Please study the Wrangel situation very carefully and let us know your conclusions. 
 I have arranged with the Commander-in-Chief that youare to get more ammunition, reinforcements and aircraft. 
Together with his friends, Dzerzhinsky has set up a Polishrevolutionary committee and has issued a manifesto. 
 Lenin Written on August 2, 1920 First published in 1945 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany XXXV the manuscript TELEGRAM TO J. 
 V. 
 STALIN To Stalin A plenary session of the Central Committee has been called for 1800 hours tomorrow. 
 Try to send us, before that hour, your conclusions on the nature of the difficultiesencountered by Budyonny and those on the Wrangel front, aswell as the military prospects on both fronts. 
 Politicaldecisions of the utmost importance may depend on yourconclusions. 
 Lenin Written on August 4, 1920 First published in 1942 Published according to the manuscript TELEGRAM TO J. 
 V. 
 STALIN To Stalin We have just received a dispatch from the head of the Soviet delegation in London. 
 Great Britain has flinched from a general strike, and Lloyd George has declared thathe advises Poland to accept our armistice terms, includingdisarmament, the handing over of weapons to the workers,land distribution, etc. 
 Our victory is a great one, and willbe complete if we smash Wrangel. 
 Here we are taking all measures. 
 You, for your part, should make every effort to take the whole of the Crimea without fail, during thepresent offensive. 
 Everything now depends on that. 
 ThePoles are temporising, and have not arrived in time. 
 Thisis of tremendous advantage to us. 
 Lenin Written on August 11, 1920 First published in 1942 Published according to the manuscript LETTE R TO THE AUSTRIA N COMMUNIST S89 The Austrian Communist Party has decided to boycott the elections to the bourgeois-democratic parliament. 
 The Second Congress of the Communist International which ended recently recognised as the correct tactics Communist participation in elections to and the activities in bourgeois parliaments. 
 Judging by reports of the Austrian Communist Party’s delegates, I have no doubt that it will set a decision bythe Communist International above that of one of the parties. 
 Neither can it be doubted that the Austrian Social-Democrats, those traitors to socialism who have gone overto the bourgeoisie, will gloat over the Communist Interna-tional decision, which is at variance with the Austrian Com-munist Party’s boycott decision. 
 However, politically-con-scious workers will, of course, pay no heed to the malicious glee of people like the Austrian Social-Democrats, those confederates of the Scheidemanns and Noskes, Thomasesand Gomperses. 
 The Renners’ servility to the bourgeoisiehas revealed itself sufficiently, and in all countries the work-ers’ indignation at the heroes of the yellow Second Inter-national is ever mounting and spreading. 
 The Austrian Social-Democrats are behaving in the bour-geois parliament, as in all spheres of their “work”, includingtheir own press, in the manner of petty-bourgeois democratswho are capable only of spineless vacillation, while in factthey are totally dependent on the capitalist class. 
 We Com-munists enter bourgeois parliaments in order to unmask from their rostrums the deception practised by these thoroughly corrupt capitalist institutions, which dupe the workersand all working people. 
 One of the Austrian Communists’ arguments against participation in the bourgeois parliaments deserves some-what more careful consideration. 
 Here it is: “Parliament is of importance to Communists only as a platform for agitation. 
 We in Austria have the Council of Workers’ Deputies as a platform for agitation. 
 We therefore refuse to take part in electionsto the bourgeois parliament. 
 In Germany there is no Council of Work-ers’ Deputies which can be taken in earnest. 
 That is why the GermanCommunists pursue different tactics. 
” I consider this argument erroneous. 
 As long as we are unable to disband the bourgeois parliament, we must workagainst it both from without and within. 
 As long as a moreor less appreciable number of working people (not onlyproletarians, but also semi-proletarians and small peasants) still have confidence in the bourgeois-democratic instru-ments employed by the bourgeoisie for duping the workers,we must expose that deception from the very platform which the backward sections of the workers, particularly of thenon-proletarian working people, consider most important,and authoritative. 
 As long as we Communists are unable to take over state power and hold elections, with working people alone votingfor their Soviets against the bourgeoisie; as long as the bourgeoisie exercise state power and call upon the differentclasses of the population to take part in the elections,we are in duty bound to take part in the elections with the purpose of conducting agitation among all working people, not only among proletarians. 
 As long as the bourgeoisparliament remains a means of duping the workers, andphrases about “democracy” are used to cover up financialswindling and every kind of bribery (the particularly “subtle”brand of bribery the bourgeoisie practise with regard to writers, M. 
P. 
s, lawyers, and others is nowhere to be seen on so wide a scale as in the bourgeois parliament),we Communists are in duty bound to be in this very insti-tution (which is supposed to express the people ’s will but actually covers up the deception of the people by the wealthy ) to untiringly expose this deception, and expose each and every case of the Renners and Co. 
’s desertion to the capital-ists, against the workers. 
 It is in parliament that therelations between bourgeois parties and groups manifest themselves most frequently and reflect the relations between all the classes of bourgeois society. 
 That is why it is in the bourgeois parliament, from within it, that we Communists must tell the people the truth about the relation between classes and parties, and the attitude of the landowners tothe farm labourers, of the rich peasants to the poor peasants,of big capital to employees and petty proprietors, etc. 
 The proletariat must know all this, so as to learn to see through all the vile and refined machinations of the capi-talists, and to learn to influence the petty-bourgeois masses,the non-proletarian masses of the working people. 
 Withoutthis “schooling” the proletariat cannot cope successfullywith the tasks of the dictatorship of the proletariat , for even then the bourgeoisie, operating from its new position (that of a deposed class), will carry on, in different forms and in different fields, its policy of duping the peasants, ofbribing and intimidating employees, of covering up itsself-seeking and unsavoury aspirations with phrases about“democracy”. 
 No, the Austrian Communists will not be frightened by the malicious glee of the Renners and similar lackeys of the bourgeoisie. 
 The Austrian Communists will not be afraidto declare their open and forthright recognition of inter-national proletarian discipline. 
 We are proud that we settlethe great problems of the workers’ struggle for their emanci-pation by submitting to the international discipline of the revolutionary proletariat, with due account of the experience of the workers in different countries, reckoning with theirknowledge and their will, and thus giving effect in deed(and not in word, as the Renners, Fritz Adlers and OttoBauers do) to the unity of the workers’ class struggle forcommunism throughout the world. 
 N. 
 Lenin August 15, 1920 Published in German in Die Rote Fahne (Vienna) No. 
 396, August 31, 1920 First published in Russian Published according to in 1925 the manuscript THE SECOND CONGRESS OF THE COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL The Second Congress of the Communist International ended on August 7. 
 A little over a year has elapsed since its foundation, during which brief period immense and decisive successes have been achieved. 
 Held a year ago, the First Congress only unfurled the banner of communism, around which the forces of therevolutionary proletariat were to rally. 
 War was declaredon the yellow Second International, which unites the social-traitors, who have sided with the bourgeoisie against the proletariat and are in alliance with the capitalists againstthe workers’ revolution. 
 The huge measure of success achieved in a year can be seen, among other things, in the fact that the growingsympathy with communism among the masses of workers has compelled the withdrawal from the Second International of some of its leading European and American parties, namely,the French Socialist Party, the German and the British“Independent” parties, and the American Socialist Party. 
 In every country of the world the finest representatives of the revolutionary workers have already ranged themselves on the side of communism, Soviet rule and the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 In all the advanced countries of Europeand America, there already exist Communist parties ornumerous Communist groups. 
 At the Congress which endedon August 7, it was not only the heralds of the proletarianrevolution who joined forces, but delegates from strong and powerful organisations linked with the proletarian masses. 
 A world army of the revolutionary proletariat—that is whatnow stands for communism, and, at the Congress just ended, received organisational form and a clear, precise and detailed programme of action. 
 The Congress refused to admit immediately into the Communist International such parties that still retain intheir ranks influential representatives of “Menshevism”,social-treachery and opportunism, similar to the above-mentioned parties which have withdrawn from the yellowSecond International. 
 In a number of precisely worded resolutions, the Congress blocked every avenue of access for opportunism, anddemanded a total break with it. 
 The incontestable factsreported to the Congress showed that the working-class massesare with us, and that the opportunists shall now be utterlyrouted. 
 The Congress rectified the errors committed in certain countries by Communists who were bent on turning to the“Left” and denied the need to work in bourgeois parliaments,reactionary trade unions, and wherever there are millions ofworkers who are still being duped by the capitalists andby their lackeys from among the workers, i. 
e. 
, by members of the yellow Second International. 
 The Congress created a degree of unity and discipline among the world’s Communist parties such as has neverbefore existed and will make it possible for the vanguard ofthe workers’ revolution to march forward with giant stridesto its great goal, the overthrow of the yoke of capital. 
 Thanks to the international conference of working women which was organised simultaneously, the Congress willstrengthen ties with the communist women’s movement. 
 Communist parties and groups in the East, in the colonial and backward countries, which are so brutally robbed,oppressed and enslaved by the “civilised” league of preda-tory nations, were likewise represented at the Congress. 
 The revolutionary movement in the advanced countrieswould in fact be nothing but a sheer fraud if, in their strug-gle against capital, the workers of Europe and America werenot closely and completely united with the hundreds uponhundreds of millions of “colonial” slaves, who are oppressed by that capital. 
 Great are the military victories of the workers’ and peasants’ Soviet Republic over the landowners and the capitalists, over the Yudeniches, the Kolchaks, and the Denikins, the Polish Whites and their accomplices—France, Britain, America and Japan. 
 But greater still is our victory over the minds and hearts of the masses of the workers, of all those who toil and areoppressed by capital—the victory of the communist ideasand communist organisations all over the world. 
 The revolution of the proletariat, the overthrow of the yoke of capitalism, is on the march and shall come about in every country in the world. 
 Kommunistka No. 
 3-4, Published according to August -September 1920 the journal text Signed: V. 
 I. 
 Lenin REPLY TO MR. 
 SEGRUE, DAILY NEWS CORRESPONDENT With reference to your telegraphic inquiry of Septem-ber 3, 1920,90 I would like to inform you that the attacks on Bolshevism on the part of the German Independents’ Right wing, by people like Dittmann, for instance, do not surprise me. 
 In my speech at the Comintern Congress inMoscow, I showed that Crispien’s ideas are quite Kautskian. 
Kautskians like Crispien and Dittmann are, of course,dissatisfied with Bolshevism. 
 It would be deplorable ifsuch people were satisfied with us. 
 It is quite natural that, in the decisive struggle between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie, petty-bourgeois democrats like Dittmann, whois very similar to our Mensheviks, are often to be foundon the side of the bourgeoisie. 
 Dittmann is indignant atthe shootings, but it is natural that, in such cases, Menshe-viks are shot at by revolutionary workers, which cannot be altogether to Dittmann’s liking. 
 The Third, Communist International would not be worth much if it admitted intoits ranks Dittmanns of the German, French or any othervariety. 
 If, however, you consider that the reports by the French, the German and the British workers’ delegations have done more harm to Bolshevism than the entire anti-Bolshevik propaganda has done, I willingly accept theconclusion that logically follows. 
 Let the two of us reach an understanding—you on behalf of the anti-Bolshevik bourgeoisie of all countries, and Ion behalf of the Russian Soviet Republic. 
 Accordingly, let delegations consisting of workers and small peasants (i. 
e. 
, of working people, those whose labour creates profit oncapital) be sent to Russia from all countries, each delegation to stay here for about two months. 
 If these delegations’ reports are useful to the cause of anti-Bolshevik propaganda, the entire cost of their visit shall be borne by the interna-tional bourgeoisie. 
 However, as the bourgeoisie is veryweak and poor in all countries in the world, while we inRussia are rich and strong, I agree to secure the consent ofthe Soviet Government to defray three-quarters of theexpenses, a mere quarter to be borne by the millionaires of all lands. 
 I hope that you, who in your telegram call yourself an honest journalist, will not refuse always and everywhereto publicise this understanding between the Soviet Republicand the international bourgeoisie—of course, in the interestsof anti-Bolshevik propaganda. 
 Lenin September 8, 1920 Pravda No. 
 202 and Published according to Izvestia No. 
 202, the manuscript September 12, 1920 SPEECH DELIVERE D AT THE NINT H ALL-RUSSI A CONFERENCE OF THE RUSSIA N COMMUNIS T PART Y (BOLSHEVIK S)91 SEPTEMBER 22, 1920 NEWSPAPER REPORT The war against Poland, or, to be more precise, the July-August campaign, has radically changed the international political situation. 
 The Poles’ attack against us was preceded by an episode typical of the international relations existing at the time. 
When, in January, we offered Poland peace terms thatwere most favourable to her and most unfavourable tous, the diplomatists of all lands interpreted the fact intheir own way: since the Bolsheviks were making suchtremendous concessions, that should be taken to mean that they were very weak. 
 This was merely more confirmation of bourgeois diplomacy’s inability to understand the methodsemployed by our new diplomacy, that of direct and frankdeclarations. 
 That was why our proposals evoked merelyan outburst of savage chauvinism in Poland, France andother countries, and prompted Poland to attack us. 
 At first the Poles captured Kiev, but our forces’ counter-attack then brought them right up to Warsaw. 
 Then came a turnin the events, and we fell back for over a hundred versts. 
 The undoubtedly difficult situation that resulted has not been a total loss to us. 
 We have completely upset thediplomatists’ expectations to make use of our weakness and have proved that Poland cannot defeat us, whereas we have never been and are not far from victory over Poland. 
 Atpresent we still hold a hundred versts of captured territory. 
 Finally, our advance on Warsaw has had such a powerful effect on Western Europe and on the entire world situation that it has profoundly changed the alignment of the strug-gling internal and external political forces. 
 Our army’s close approach to Warsaw has incontestably shown that the centre of world imperialism’s entire system,which rests on the Treaty of Versailles, lies somewhere veryclose to the Polish capital. 
 Poland, the last anti-Bolshevik stronghold fully controlled by the Entente, is such an important element in that system that when the Red Armythreatened that stronghold the entire structure was shaken. 
The Soviet Republic has become a major factor in worldpolitics. 
 The new situation which has arisen has, in the first place, revealed the tremendously significant fact that the bourgeoi-sie of the Entente-oppressed countries is in the main forus, and these countries contain seventy per cent of theworld’s population. 
 We have already seen that the smallstates, which have had such a bad time under Ententetutelage (Estonia, Georgia, etc. 
), and have been hanging their Bolsheviks, have made peace with us, against the will of the Entente. 
 This has been manifesting itself withspecial force throughout the world. 
 All Germany began toseethe when our forces approached Warsaw. 
 In that countrya situation arose very much like that which could be seenin Russia in 1905, when the Black Hundreds aroused and involved in political life large and most backward sections of the peasantry, which were opposed to the Bolsheviksone day, and on the next were demanding all the landfrom the landed proprietors. 
 In Germany too we haveseen a similar unnatural bloc between the Black Hundredsand the Bolsheviks. 
 There has appeared a strange type of Black-Hundred revolutionary, like the backward rustic youth from East Prussia who, as I read in a German non-Bolshevik newspaper the other day, says that the Kaiserwill have to return because there is no order, but one has tofollow the Bolsheviks. 
 Our presence at the walls of Warsaw has had, as another consequence, a powerful effect on the revolutionary move-ment in Europe, particularly in Britain. 
 Though we havenot been able to affect the industrial proletariat of Poland beyond the Vistula and in Warsaw (this being one of the main reasons for our defeat), we have succeeded in influ-encing the British proletariat and in raising the movement there to an unprecedented level, to an absolutely new stagein the revolution. 
 When the British Government presentedan ultimatum to us, it transpired that it would first haveto consult the British workers. 
 The latter, nine-tenths ofwhose leaders are out-and-out Mensheviks, replied to the ultimatum by forming a Council of Action. 
 92 Alarmed by these developments, the British press raised a hullabaloo about what it called this “duality of govern-ment”. 
 It had every reason to say so. 
 Britain found herselfat the same stage of political relationships as Russia afterFebruary 1917, when the Soviets were obliged to scrutinise every step taken by the bourgeois government. 
 This Coun-cil of Action unites all workers, irrespective of party,just like our All-Russia Central Executive Committee ofthe period when Gotz, Dan and others were running things,a kind of association which runs parallel with the govern-ment, and in which the Mensheviks are forced to act in a semi-Bolshevik way. 
 Just as our Mensheviks finally got confounded and helped win over the masses to our side, theMensheviks in the Council of Action have been forcedby the inexorable course of events to clear the way to theBolshevist revolution for the worker masses of Britain. 
 Accord-ing to testimony by competent persons, the British Menshe-viks already consider themselves a government, and are prepared to replace the bourgeois government in the nearfuture. 
 This will be the next step in the general process ofthe British proletarian revolution. 
 These tremendous changes in the British working-class movement are exerting a powerful influence on the world working-class movement, and first and foremost on the working-class movement in France. 
 Such are the results of our recent Polish campaign in its effect on world politics and the relations emerging inWestern Europe. 
 We are now faced with the question of war or peace with Poland. 
 We want to avoid a winter campaign that will be hard on us, and are again offering Poland a peace that is toher advantage and our disadvantage. 
 However, the bourgeois diplomatists, following their old habit, may possibly interpret our frank statement as a sign of weakness. 
 They have probably decided on a winter campaign. 
 At this stage we have to ascertain the conditions in which we shallprobably have to enter a new period of the war. 
 In Western Europe our defeat has brought about certain changes and rallied against us heterogeneous elements thatare hostile to us. 
 However, we have on more than one occasion seen even more powerful groups and currents hostile to us, which nevertheless could not achieve anything. 
 We have against us a bloc consisting of Poland, France and Wrangel. 
 France pins her hopes on the latter. 
 However,this bloc suffers from the same old malady—the antagonismamong its elements, and the fear felt by the Polish petty bourgeoisie with regard to Black-Hundred Russia and to Wrangel, its typical representative. 
 Petty-bourgeois andpatriotic Poland, the Polish Socialist Party, the LudowaParty, i. 
e. 
, the well-to-do peasants—all of these want peace. 
Here is what spokesmen of these parties said to us in Minsk,“We know that it was not the Entente that saved Warsaw and Poland; it was unable to save us. 
 It was the upsurge of patriotism that saved us. 
” Such lessons are not to beforgotten. 
 The Poles realise very clearly that this war willruin them financially. 
 War has to be paid for, and Franceupholds the “sanctity of private property”. 
 The representa-tives of the petty-bourgeois parties are aware that Poland was on the eve of a crisis even before the war, and that a war will mean further ruination; that is why they preferpeace. 
 We want to make use of this by offering peace toPoland. 
 Another factor of the utmost importance has appeared— the change in the social composition of the Polish army. 
 We defeated Kolchak and Denikin only after the social composition of their armies had changed, when their basiccadres were watered down in the mass of mobilised peasants. 
The same kind of process is under way in the Polish army,the government has been obliged to call up workers andpeasants of the older age groups, who have gone through the even harsher imperialist war. 
 This army is now made up, not of youngsters, who can easily be “brain-washed”, butof older men, who will not let themselves be talked over. 
 Poland has passed the point which at first assured her total victory, and then total defeat. 
 If we have to wage a winter campaign, we shall win despite exhaustion and fatigue. 
 There can be no doubt onthat score. 
 Our economic situation also vouches for thatoutcome. 
 It has improved considerably. 
 Compared withlast year, we have acquired a firm economic basis. 
 In 1917-18we gathered in 30 million poods of grain, in 1918-19—110 million poods, and in 1919-20—260 million; next year we expect to collect 400 million poods. 
 These are far higherfigures than those of the time when we struggled desperatelyto make both ends meet. 
 No longer shall we look with suchhorror upon the multi-coloured banknotes that run intothe thousands of millions, and today clearly show us that they are the wreckage, the tatters, of the old bourgeois vestments. 
 We now have over a hundred million poods of oil. 
 The Donets Basin now provides us with between twenty andthirty million poods of coal a month. 
 The firewood situationhas greatly improved. 
 As recently as last year we had only firewood—no oil or coal. 
 All this gives us the right to say that, if we close our ranks and bend every effort, we shall win the victory. 
 Pravda No. 
 216, Published according to September 29, 1920 the Pravda text LETTE R TO THE GERMA N AND THE FRENCH WORKERS REGARDING THE DISCUSSIO N ON THE SECON D CONGRESS OF THE COMMUNIS T INTERNATIONA L93 Comrades, the bourgeois press of Germany and France is devoting much attention to the discussion within the German Independent Social-Democratic Party and theSocialist Party of France on affiliation to the CommunistInternational. 
 It is vigorously supporting the views of theRight-wing opportunist sections in the two parties. 
 That can be readily understood, for these Right-wing elements are in essence petty-bourgeois democrats, who,like Dittmann and Crispien, cannot think in terms ofrevolution, and are incapable of helping the working classprepare for and carry out the revolution. 
 A break with theseRight-wing and opportunist elements is necessary; it is the only way to rally all the genuinely revolutionary and genuinely proletarian masses. 
 All the clamour about Moscow’s “dictates”, etc. 
, is simply a red herring. 
 As a matter of fact, only five of thetwenty members of the Communist International’s Execu-tive Committee belong to the Russian Communist Party. 
 All this talk about “dictates”, etc. 
, is either self-deception or deception of the workers. 
 It serves to cover up the bank-ruptcy of certain opportunist leaders, just as similar talkin the K. 
A. 
P. 
D. 
 (Communist Workers ’ Party of Germany) has served to cover up the bankruptcy of several of itsleaders, who have abandoned the path of proletarian revo-lutionism. 
 The outcry that the “Moscow dictators”, making use of the terms of admission to the Communist International,are persecuting certain individuals is likewise self-deception or deception of others. 
 Article 20 of the terms of admission says clearly in black and white that “ exceptions ” (Ausnah-men ) to the strict rules in regard of Right-wing leaders and members of central bodies can be made with the consent of the Executive Committee of the Third International . 
 Since exceptions are expressly declared to be permissible, there can be no talk of an absolute bar against specificindividuals. 
 Consequently, there is full recognition of the need to take into account, not the past but the present, the change in the views and conduct of individuals, of individ-ual leaders. 
 Since exceptions are declared to be permissiblewith the consent of the Executive Committee of the ThirdInternational—in which Russians constitute only one-fourthof the membership—it follows that the clamour about “dictates”, etc. 
, is stuff and nonsense, sheer falsehood. 
 All this clamour is simply a red herring. 
 In fact, a struggle is going on between the revolutionary proletarian elements and the opportunist petty-bourgeois elements. 
 Today as in the past, the latter include the Hilferdings, the Ditt-manns, the Crispiens, numerous members of the parliamen-tary groups in Germany and France, etc. 
 A struggle between these two political trends is in progress in every country without exception. 
 This struggle has a long history. 
 It grewextremely acute everywhere during the imperialist war, andhas become aggravated since then. 
 Opportunism is represent-ed by elements of the “labour aristocracy”, the old bureauc-racy in the trade unions, co-operative societies, etc. 
, by the intellectualist petty-bourgeois strata, etc. 
 Without theelimination of this trend —which, by its vacillation and its “Menshevism” (the Dittmanns and Crispiens fully resembleour Mensheviks) in fact exerts the bourgeoisie’s influenceon the proletariat from within the working-class movement, from within the socialist parties—without the elimination of this trend, a break with it, and the expulsion of all itsprominent representatives, it will be impossible to rallythe revolutionary proletariat. 
 By their constant veering towards reformism and Menshe-vism, and their inability to think and act in terms of revolution, the Dittmanns, the Crispiens, etc. 
, without realising the fact, are actually carrying bourgeois influenceinto the proletariat from within the proletarian party—they subordinate the proletariat to bourgeois reformism . 
 Only a break with such and similar people can lead to interna-tional unity of the revolutionary proletariat, against the bourgeoisie, and for the overthrow of the bourgeoisie. 
 The events in Italy should open eyes most stubbornly closed to the harmfulness of “unity” and “peace” with theCrispiens and the Dittmanns. 
 The Italian Crispiens andDittmanns (Turati, Prampolini and D’Aragona) began at once to hinder the revolution in Italy as soon as things reached the stage of a real revolution . 
 Throughout Europe and the world things are moving in that direction more orless rapidly, and more or less arduously and painfully. 
 It is high time to discard, once and for all, these most harmful illusions about the possibility of “unity” or “peace” with the Dittmanns and the Crispiens, with the Right wing of the German Independent Social-Democratic Party, theBritish Independent Labour Party, the French SocialistParty, etc. 
 It is high time for all revolutionary workers topurge their parties of these trends, and form genuinelyunited Communist parties of the proletariat. 
 N. 
 Lenin September 24, 1920 Pravda No. 
 213, Published according to September 25, 1920 the manuscript THE TASK S OF THE YOUT H LEAGUE S* SPEEC H DELIVERED AT THE THIR D ALL-RUSSI A CONGRESS OF THE RUSSIA N YOUN G COMMUNIS T LEAGUE OCTOBE R 5, 192094 (The Congress greets Lenin with a tremendous ovation . 
) Comrades, today I would like to talk on the fundamental tasks of the Young Communist League and, in this connec-tion, on what the youth organisations in a socialist republicshould be like in general. 
 It is all the more necessary to dwell on this question because in a certain sense it may be said that it is the youth that will be faced with the actual task of creating a communist society. 
 For it is clear that the generation ofworking people brought up in capitalist society can, at best,accomplish the task of destroying the foundations of theold, the capitalist way of life, which was built on exploita-tion. 
 At best it will be able to accomplish the tasks of creat-ing a social system that will help the proletariat and the working classes retain power and lay a firm foundation,which can be built on only by a generation that is startingto work under the new conditions, in a situation in whichrelations based on the exploitation of man by man no longerexist. 
 And so, in dealing from this angle with the tasks confront-ing the youth, I must say that the tasks of the youth ingeneral, and of the Young Communist Leagues and allother organisations in particular, might be summed up ina single word: learn. 
 Of course, this is only a “single word”. 
 It does not reply to the principal and most essential questions: what to learn, *Revised translation by Julius Katzer. 
 and how to learn? And the whole point here is that, with the transformation of the old, capitalist society, the up-bringing, training and education of the new generations that will create the communist society cannot be conductedon the old lines. 
 The teaching, training and education ofthe youth must proceed from the material that has been leftto us by the old society. 
 We can build communism onlyon the basis of the totality of knowledge, organisations and institutions, only by using the stock of human forces and means that have been left to us by the old society. 
 Only byradically remoulding the teaching, organisation and train-ing of the youth shall we be able to ensure that the effortsof the younger generation will result in the creation of asociety that will be unlike the old society, i. 
e. 
, in the crea-tion of a communist society. 
 That is why we must deal in detail with the question of what we should teach theyouth and how the youth should learn if it really wants tojustify the name of communist youth, and how it shouldbe trained so as to be able to complete and consummatewhat we have started. 
 I must say that the first and most natural reply would seem to be that the Youth League, and the youth ingeneral, who want to advance to communism, should learncommunism. 
 But this reply—“learn communism”—is too general. 
 What do we need in order to learn communism? What must be singled out from the sum of general knowledge so as to acquire a knowledge of communism? Here a number of dan-gers arise, which very often manifest themselves wheneverthe task of learning communism is presented incorrectly, orwhen it is interpreted in too one-sided a manner. 
 Naturally, the first thought that enters one’s mind is that learning communism means assimilating the sum of knowledge that is contained in communist manuals, pam-phlets and books. 
 But such a definition of the study ofcommunism would be too crude and inadequate. 
 If the studyof communism consisted solely in assimilating what is con-tained in communist books and pamphlets, we might all too easily obtain communist text jugglers or braggarts, and this would very often do us harm, because such people,after learning by rote what is set forth in communist books and pamphlets, would prove incapable of combining the various branches of knowledge, and would be unable to act in the way communism really demands. 
 One of the greatest evils and misfortunes loft to us by the old, capitalist society is the complete rift between booksand practical life; we have had books explaining everythingin the best possible manner, yet in most cases these bookscontained the most pernicious and hypocritical lies, a false description of capitalist society. 
 That is why it would be most mistaken merely to assimi-late book knowledge about communism. 
 No longer doour speeches and articles merely reiterate what used to besaid about communism, because our speeches and articlesare connected with our daily work in all fields. 
 Without work and without struggle, book knowledge of communism obtained from communist pamphlets and works is abso-lutely worthless, for it would continue the old separationof theory and practice, the old rift which was the mostpernicious feature of the old, bourgeois society. 
 It would be still more dangerous to set about assimilating only communist slogans. 
 Had we not realised this danger in time, and had we not directed all our efforts to avertingthis danger, the half million or million young men andwomen who would have called themselves Communistsafter studying communism in this way would only greatlyprejudice the cause of communism. 
 The question arises: how is all this to be blended for the study of communism? What must we take from the oldschools, from the old kind of science? It was the declaredaim of the old type of school to produce men with an all-round education, to teach the sciences in general. 
 We knowthat this was utterly false, since the whole of society was based and maintained on the division of people into classes, into exploiters and oppressed. 
 Since they were thoroughlyimbued with the class spirit, the old schools naturally gaveknowledge only to the children of the bourgeoisie. 
 Everyword was falsified in the interests of the bourgeoisie. 
 Inthese schools the younger generation of workers and peasants were not so much educated as drilled in the interests of that bourgeoisie. 
 They were trained in such a way as to be usefulservants of the bourgeoisie, able to create profits for it without disturbing its peace and leisure. 
 That is why, while rejecting the old type of schools, we have made it our task to take from it only what we require for genuine communist education. 
 This brings me to the reproaches and accusations which we constantly hear levelled at the old schools, and whichoften lead to wholly wrong conclusions. 
 It is said that theold school was a school of purely book knowledge, of cease-less drilling and grinding. 
 That is true, but we must distin-guish between what was bad in the old schools and what isuseful to us, and we must be able to select from it what isnecessary for communism. 
 The old schools provided purely book knowledge; they compelled their pupils to assimilate a mass of useless, superfluous and barren knowledge, which cluttered up the brain and turned the younger generation into bureaucratsregimented according to a single pattern. 
 But it wouldmean falling into a grave error for you to try to draw theconclusion that one can become a Communist withoutassimilating the wealth of knowledge amassed by mankind. 
 It would be mistaken to think it sufficient to learn commu-nist slogans and the conclusions of communist science,without acquiring that sum of knowledge of which com-munism itself is a result. 
 Marxism is an example which showshow communism arose out of the sum of human knowledge. 
 You have read and heard that communist theory—the science of communism created in the main by Marx, this doctrine of Marxism—has ceased to be the work of a singlesocialist of the nineteenth century, even though he was agenius, and that it has become the doctrine of millions andtens of millions of proletarians all over the world, who areapplying it in their struggle against capitalism. 
 If you were to ask why the teachings of Marx have been able to win the hearts and minds of millions and tens of millions of themost revolutionary class, you would receive only one answer:it was because Marx based his work on the firm foundation ofthe human knowledge acquired under capitalism. 
 Aftermaking a study of the laws governing the development of human society, Marx realised the inevitability of capitalism developing towards communism. 
 What is most importantis that he proved this on the sole basis of a most precise, detailed and profound study of this capitalist society, by fully assimilating all that earlier science had produced. 
 He critically reshaped everything that had been created by human society, without ignoring a single detail. 
 He re-considered, subjected to criticism, and verified on theworking-class movement everything that human thinkinghad created, and therefrom formulated conclusions whichpeople hemmed in by bourgeois limitations or bound by bourgeois prejudices could not draw. 
 We must bear this in mind when, for example, we talk about proletarian culture. 
 95 We shall be unable to solve this problem unless we clearly realise that only a preciseknowledge and transformation of the culture created by theentire development of mankind will enable us to create a proletarian culture. 
 The latter is not clutched out of thin air; it is not an invention of those who call themselvesexperts in proletarian culture. 
 That is all nonsense. 
 Prole-tarian culture must be the logical development of the storeof knowledge mankind has accumulated under the yoke ofcapitalist, landowner and bureaucratic society. 
 All these roads have been leading, and will continue to lead up to proletarian culture, in the same way as political economy,as reshaped by Marx, has shown us what human societymust arrive at, shown us the passage to the class struggle, tothe beginning of the proletarian revolution. 
 When we so often hear representatives of the youth, as well as certain advocates of a new system of education, attacking the old schools, claiming that they used thesystem of cramming, we say to them that we must takewhat was good in the old schools. 
 We must not borrow thesystem of encumbering young people’s minds with animmense amount of knowledge, nine-tenths of which was useless and one-tenth distorted. 
 This, however, does not mean that we can restrict ourselves to communist conclu-sions and learn only communist slogans. 
 You will not createcommunism that way. 
 You can become a Communist onlywhen you enrich your mind with a knowledge of all thetreasures created by mankind. 
 We have no need of cramming, but we do need to develop and perfect the mind of every student with a knowledge offundamental facts. 
 Communism will become an empty word, a mere signboard, and a Communist a mere boaster, if all the knowledge he has acquired is not digested in his mind. 
 You should not merely assimilate this knowledge, but assimilate it critically, so as not to cram your mindwith useless lumber, but enrich it with all those facts that areindispensable to the well-educated man of today. 
 If a Com-munist took it into his head to boast about his communismbecause of the cut-and-dried conclusions he had acquired, without putting in a great deal of serious and hard work and without understanding facts he should examine criti-cally, he would be a deplorable Communist indeed. 
 Suchsuperficiality would be decidedly fatal. 
 If I know that Iknow little, I shall strive to learn more, but if a man saysthat he is a Communist and that he need not know anything thoroughly, he will never become anything like a Communist. 
 The old schools produced servants needed by the capi-talists; the old schools turned men of science into men whohad to write and say whatever pleased the capitalists. 
 Wemust therefore abolish them. 
 But does the fact that we must abolish them, destroy them, mean that we should not take from them everything mankind has accumulated thatis essential to man? Does it mean that we do not have todistinguish between what was necessary to capitalism andwhat is necessary to communism? We are replacing the old drill-sergeant methods practised in bourgeois society, against the will of the majority, with the class-conscious discipline of the workers and peasants,who combine hatred of the old society with a determination,ability and readiness to unite and organise their forcesfor this struggle so as to forge the wills of millions andhundreds of millions of people—disunited, and scattered over the territory of a huge country—into a single will, without which defeat is inevitable. 
 Without this solidarity,without this conscious discipline of the workers and peasants,our cause is hopeless. 
 Without this, we shall be unable tovanquish the capitalists and landowners of the whole world. 
We shall not even consolidate the foundation, let alone build a new, communist society on that foundation. 
 Like-wise, while condemning the old schools, while harbouringan absolutely justified and necessary hatred for the old schools, and appreciating the readiness to destroy them, we must realise that we must replace the old system of instruc-tion, the old cramming and the old drill, with an ability to acquire the sum total of human knowledge, and to acquireit in such a way that communism shall not be something tobe learned by rote, but something that you yourselves havethought over, something that will embody conclusionsinevitable from the standpoint of present-day education. 
 That is the way the main tasks should be presented when we speak of the aim: learn communism. 
 I shall take a practical example to make this clear to you, and to demonstrate the approach to the problem ofhow you must learn. 
 You all know that, following themilitary problems, those of defending the republic, we are now confronted with economic tasks. 
 Communist society, as we know, cannot be built unless we restore industry andagriculture, and that, not in the old way. 
 They must bere-established on a modern basis, in accordance with thelast word in science. 
 You know that electricity is thatbasis, and that only after electrification of the entire country, of all branches of industry and agriculture, only when you have achieved that aim, will you be able to buildfor yourselves the communist society which the oldergeneration will not be able to build. 
 Confronting you is thetask of economically reviving the whole country, of reorganis-ing and restoring both agriculture and industry on modern technical lines, based on modern science and technology, on electricity. 
 You realise perfectly well that illiteratepeople cannot tackle electrification, and that elementaryliteracy is not enough either. 
 It is insufficient to understandwhat electricity is; what is needed is the knowledge of howto apply it technically in industry and agriculture, and in the individual branches of industry and agriculture. 
 This has to be learnt for oneself, and it must be taught to theentire rising generation of working people. 
 That is the taskconfronting every class-conscious Communist, every youngperson who regards himself a Communist and who clearlyunderstands that, by joining the Young Communist League, he has pledged himself to help the Party build communism and to help the whole younger generation create a com-munist society. 
 He must realise that he can create it only on the basis of modern education, and if he does not acquire this education communism will remain merely a pious wish. 
 It was the task of the older generation to overthrow the bourgeoisie. 
 The main task then was to criticise the bourgeoi-sie, arouse hatred of the bourgeoisie among the masses, andfoster class-consciousness and the ability to unite theirforces. 
 The new generation is confronted with a far morecomplex task. 
 Your duty does not lie only in assembling your forces so as to uphold the workers’ and peasants’ government against an invasion instigated by the capital-ists. 
 Of course, you must do that; that is something youclearly realise, and is distinctly seen by the Communist. 
However, that is not enough. 
 You have to build up a com-munist society. 
 In many respects half of the work has been done. 
 The old order has been destroyed, just as it deserved, it has been turned into a heap of ruins, just as it deserved. 
The ground has been cleared, and on this ground the youngercommunist generation must build a communist society. 
You are faced with the task of construction, and you canaccomplish that task only by assimilating all modern knowl-edge, only if you are able to transform communism from cut-and-dried and memorised formulas, counsels, recipes,prescriptions and programmes into that living reality whichgives unity to your immediate work, and only if you areable to make communism a guide in all your practical work. 
 That is the task you should pursue in educating, training and rousing the entire younger generation. 
 You must be foremost among the millions of builders of a communistsociety in whose ranks every young man and young womanshould be. 
 You will not build a communist society unlessyou enlist the mass of young workers and peasants in thework of building communism. 
 This naturally brings me to the question of how we should teach communism and what the specific features of ourmethods should be. 
 I first of all shall deal here with the question of communist ethics. 
 You must train yourselves to be Communists. 
 It is the task of the Youth League to organise its practical activities in such a way that, by learning, organising, uniting andfighting, its members shall train both themselves and all those who look to it for leadership; it should train Communists. 
 The entire purpose of training, educating and teaching the youth of today should be to imbue them with communist ethics. 
 But is there such a thing as communist ethics? Is there such a thing as communist morality? Of course, there is. 
It is often suggested that we have no ethics of our own;very often the bourgeoisie accuse us Communists of rejecting all morality. 
 This is a method of confusing the issue, of throwing dust in the eyes of the workers and peasants. 
 In what sense do we reject ethics, reject morality?In the sense given to it by the bourgeoisie, who based ethics on God’s commandments. 
 On this point we, of course,say that we do not believe in God, and that we know perfectly well that the clergy, the landowners and the bour-geoisie invoked the name of God so as to further their owninterests as exploiters. 
 Or, instead of basing ethics on thecommandments of morality, on the commandments of God,they based it on idealist or semi-idealist phrases, whichalways amounted to something very similar to God’s commandments. 
 We reject any morality based on extra-human and extra-class concepts. 
 We say that this is deception, dupery,stultification of the workers and peasants in the interestsof the landowners and capitalists. 
 We say that our morality is entirely subordinated to the interests of the proletariat’s class struggle. 
 Our morality stems from the interests of the class struggle of the proletariat. 
 The old society was based on the oppression of all the workers and peasants by the landowners and capitalists. 
We had to destroy all that, and overthrow them but to dothat we had to create unity. 
 That is something that God cannot create. 
 This unity could be provided only by the factories, only by a proletariat trained and roused from its long slumber. 
Only when that class was formed did a mass movementarise which has led to what we have now—the victory ofthe proletarian revolution in one of the weakest of countries, which for three years has been repelling the onslaught of the bourgeoisie of the whole world. 
 We can see how theproletarian revolution is developing all over the world. 
 On the basis of experience, we now say that only the proletariat could have created the solid force which the disunited and scattered peasantry are following and which has withstood all onslaughts by the exploiters. 
 Only this class can helpthe working masses unite, rally their ranks and conclu-sively defend, conclusively consolidate and conclusivelybuild up a communist society. 
 That is why we say that to us there is no such thing as a morality that stands outside human society; that is a fraud. 
 To us morality is subordinated to the interests ofthe proletariat’s class struggle. 
 What does that class struggle consist in? It consists in overthrowing the tsar, overthrowing the capitalists, andabolishing the capitalist class. 
 What are classes in general? Classes are that which permits one section of society to appropriate the labour ofanother section. 
 If one section of society appropriates allthe land, we have a landowner class and a peasant class. 
If one section of society owns the factories, shares andcapital, while another section works in these factories, we have a capitalist class and a proletarian class. 
 It was not difficult to drive out the tsar—that required only a few days. 
 It was not very difficult to drive out thelandowners—that was done in a few months. 
 Nor was itvery difficult to drive out the capitalists. 
 But it is incom-parably more difficult to abolish classes; we still have the division into workers and peasants. 
 If the peasant is ins-talled on his plot of land and appropriates his surplus grain,that is, grain that he does not need for himself or for hiscattle, while the rest of the people have to go without bread,then the peasant becomes an exploiter. 
 The more grain heclings to, the more profitable he finds it; as for the rest, let them starve: “The more they starve, the dearer I can sell this grain. 
” All should work according to a singlecommon plan, on common land, in common factories and inaccordance with a common system. 
 Is that easy to attain?You see that it is not as easy as driving out the tsar, thelandowners and the capitalists. 
 What is required is that the proletariat re-educate a section of the peasantry; it must win over the working peasants in order to crush theresistance of those peasants who are rich and are profiting from the poverty and want of the rest. 
 Hence the task of the proletarian struggle is not quite completed after we have overthrown the tsar and driven out the landowners and capitalists; to accomplish that is the task of the systemwe call the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 The class struggle is continuing; it has merely changed its forms. 
 It is the class struggle of the proletariat to preventthe return of the old exploiters, to unite in a single union the scattered masses of unenlightened peasants. 
 The class struggle is continuing and it is our task to subordinateall interests to that struggle. 
 Our communist morality isalso subordinated to that task. 
 We say: morality is whatserves to destroy the old exploiting society and to uniteall the working people around the proletariat, which is building up a new, a communist society. 
 Communist morality is that which serves this struggle and unites the working people against all exploitation,against all petty private property; for petty property putsinto the hands of one person that which has been created bythe labour of the whole of society. 
 In our country the land is common property. 
 But suppose I take a piece of this common property and grow on it twice as much grain as I need, and profiteer onthe surplus? Suppose I argue that the more starving peoplethere are, the more they will pay? Would I then be behavinglike a Communist? No, I would be behaving like an exploit-er, like a proprietor. 
 That must be combated. 
 If that is allowed to go on, things will revert to the rule of thecapitalists, to the rule of the bourgeoisie, as has more thanonce happened in previous revolutions. 
 To prevent therestoration of the rule of the capitalists and the bourgeoi-sie, we must not allow profiteering; we must not allow indi-viduals to enrich themselves at the expense of the rest; the working people must unite with the proletariat andform a communist society. 
 This is the principal feature ofthe fundamental task of the League and the organisationof the communist youth. 
 The old society was based on the principle: rob or be robbed; work for others or make others work for you; be a slave-owner or a slave. 
 Naturally, people brought up insuch a society assimilate with their mother’s milk, one might say, the psychology, the habit, the concept which says: you are either a slave-owner or a slave, or else, a small owner, a petty employee, a petty official, or an intellectual— in short, a man who is concerned only with himself, anddoes not care a rap for anybody else. 
 If I work this plot of land, I do not care a rap for anybody else; if others starve, all the better, I shall get the morefor my grain. 
 If I have a job as a doctor, engineer, teacher, or clerk, I do not care a rap for anybody else. 
 If I toady to and please the powers that be, I may be able to keep my job,and even get on in life and become a bourgeois. 
 A Communistcannot harbour such a psychology and such sentiments. 
When the workers and peasants proved that they were able,by their own efforts, to defend themselves and create a new society—that was the beginning of the new and communist education, education in the struggle against the exploit-ers, education in alliance with the proletariat againstthe self-seekers and petty proprietors, against the psychol-ogy and habits which say: I seek my own profit and don’tcare a rap for anything else. 
 That is the reply to the question of how the young and rising generation should learn communism. 
 It can learn communism only by linking up every step in its studies, training and education with the continuousstruggle the proletarians and the working people are wagingagainst the old society of exploiters. 
 When people tell us about morality, we say: to a Communist all morality lies in this united discipline and conscious mass struggle againstthe exploiters. 
 We do not believe in an eternal morality,and we-expose the falseness of all the fables about morality. 
Morality serves the purpose of helping human society riseto a higher level and rid itself of the exploitation of labour. 
 To achieve this we need that generation of young people who began to reach political maturity in the midst of adisciplined and desperate struggle against the bourgeoisie. 
In this struggle that generation is training genuine Commu-nists; it must subordinate to this struggle, and link up withit, each step in its studies, education and training. 
 The education of the communist youth must consist, not in giving them suave talks and moral precepts. 
 This is not whateducation consists in. 
 When people have seen the way in which their fathers and mothers lived under the yoke of the landowners and capitalists; when they have themselves experienced the sufferings of those who began the struggle against the exploiters; when they have seen the sacrificesmade to keep what has been won, and seen what deadlyenemies the landowners and capitalists are—they aretaught by these conditions to become Communists. 
 Commu-nist morality is based on the struggle for the consolidation and completion of communism. 
 That is also the basis of communist training, education, and teaching. 
 That is thereply to the question of how communism should be learnt. 
 We could not believe in teaching, training and education if they were restricted only to the schoolroom and divorcedfrom the ferment of life. 
 As long as the workers and peasants are oppressed by the landowners and capitalists, and as long as the schools are controlled by the landowners andcapitalists, the young generation will remain blind andignorant. 
 Our schools must provide the youth with the fun-damentals of knowledge, the ability to evolve communistviews independently; they must make educated people of the youth. 
 While they are attending school, they must learn to become participants in the struggle for emancipa-tion from the exploiters. 
 The Young Communist Leaguewill justify its name as the League of the young communistgeneration only when every step in its teaching, trainingand education is linked up with participation in the common struggle of all working people against the exploiters. 
 You are well aware that, as long as Russia remains the onlyworkers’ republic and the old, bourgeois system exists inthe rest of the world, we shall be weaker than they are, andbe constantly threatened with a new attack; and that onlyif we learn to be solidly united shall we win in the further struggle and—having gained strength—become really invincible. 
 Thus, to be a Communist means that you mustorganise and unite the entire young generation and set anexample of training and discipline in this struggle. 
 Then youwill be able to start building the edifice of communistsociety and bring it to completion. 
 To make this clearer to you, I shall quote an example. 
 We call ourselves Communists. 
 What is a Communist?Communist is a Latin word. 
 Communis is the Latin for “common”. 
 Communist society is a society in which all things—the land, the factories—are owned in common and the people work in common. 
 That is communism. 
 Is it possible to work in common if each one works sepa-rately on his own plot of land? Work in common cannotbe brought about all at once. 
 That is impossible. 
 It doesnot drop from the skies. 
 It comes through toil and suffering;it is created in the course of struggle. 
 The old books are of no use here; no one will believe them. 
 One’s own experience of life is needed. 
 When Kolchak and Denikin were advanc-ing from Siberia and the South, the peasants were on theirside. 
 They did not like Bolshevism because the Bolshevikstook their grain at a fixed price. 
 But when the peasantsin Siberia and the Ukraine experienced the rule of Kolchak and Denikin, they realised that they had only one alterna-tive: either to go to the capitalists, who would at once handthem over into slavery under the landowners; or to followthe workers, who, it is true, did not promise a land flowingwith milk and honey, and demanded iron discipline andfirmness in an arduous struggle, but would lead them out of enslavement by the capitalists and landowners. 
 When even the ignorant peasants saw and realised this from theirown experience, they became conscious adherents of commu-nism, who had gone through a severe school. 
 It is suchexperience that must form the basis of all the activities ofthe Young Communist League. 
 I have replied to the questions of what we must learn, what we must take from the old schools and from the oldscience. 
 I shall now try to answer the question of howthis must be learnt. 
 The answer is: only by inseparablylinking each step in the activities of the schools, each stepin training, education and teaching, with the struggle of all the working people against the exploiters. 
 I shall quote a few examples from the experience of the work of some of the youth organisations so as to illus-trate how this training in communism should proceed. 
Everybody is talking about abolishing illiteracy. 
 Youknow that a communist society cannot be built in an illit-erate country. 
 It is not enough for the Soviet government to issue an order, or for the Party to issue a particular slogan,or to assign a certain number of the best workers to this task. 
 The young generation itself must take up this work. 
 Communism means that the youth, the young men and women who belong to the Youth League, should say: this is our job; we shall unite and go into the rural districts toabolish illiteracy, so that there shall be no illiterates amongour young people. 
 We are trying to get the rising generationto devote their activities to this work. 
 You know thatwe cannot rapidly transform an ignorant and illiterate Russia into a literate country. 
 But if the Youth League sets to work on the job, and if all young people work for thebenefit of all, the League, with a membership of 400,000young men and women, will be entitled to call itself a YoungCommunist League. 
 It is also a task of the League, not onlyto acquire knowledge itself, but to help those young people who are unable to extricate themselves by their own efforts from the toils of illiteracy. 
 Being a member of the YouthLeague means devoting one’s labour and efforts to thecommon cause. 
 That is what a communist education means. 
Only in the course of such work do young men and womenbecome real Communists. 
 Only if they achieve practical results in this work will they become Communists. 
 Take, for example, work in the suburban vegetable gar-dens. 
 Is that not a real job of work? It is one of the tasks ofthe Young Communist League. 
 People are starving; thereis hunger in the factories. 
 To save ourselves from starvation,vegetable gardens must be developed. 
 But farming is being carried on in the old way. 
 Therefore, more class-conscious elements should engage in this work, and then you willfind that the number of vegetable gardens will increase, theiracreage will grow, and the results will improve. 
 The YoungCommunist League must take an active part in this work. 
Every League and League branch should regard this as its duty. 
 The Young Communist League must be a shock force, helping in every job and displaying initiative and enter-prise. 
 The League should be an organisation enabling anyworker to see that it consists of people whose teachings heperhaps does not understand, and whose teachings he may not immediately believe, but from whose practical work and activity he can see that they are really people whoare showing him the right road. 
 If the Young Communist League fails to organise its work in this way in all fields, it will mean that it is reverting to the old bourgeois path. 
 We must combine our education with the struggle of the working people against the exploit-ers, so as to help the former accomplish the tasks set bythe teachings of communism. 
 The members of the League should use every spare hour to improve the vegetable gardens, or to organise the educa-tion of young people at some factory, ana so on. 
 We want to transform Russia from a poverty-stricken and wretchedcountry into one that is wealthy. 
 The Young CommunistLeague must combine its education, learning and trainingwith the labour of the workers and peasants, so as not toconfine itself to schools or to reading communist books and pamphlets. 
 Only by working side by side with the workers and peasants can one become a genuine Communist. 
 Ithas to be generally realised that all members of the YouthLeague are literate people and at the same time are keenat their jobs. 
 When everyone sees that we have ousted theold drill-ground methods from the old schools and have replaced them with conscious discipline, that all young men and women take part in subbotniks, and utilise everysuburban farm to help the population—people will ceaseto regard labour in the old way. 
 It is the task of the Young Communist League to organise assistance everywhere, in village or city block, in such matters as—and I shall take a small example—public hygiene or the distribution of food. 
 How was this done inthe old, capitalist society? Everybody worked only forhimself and nobody cared a straw for the aged and the sick,or whether housework was the concern only of the women,who, in consequence, were in a condition of oppression and servitude. 
 Whose business is it to combat this? It is the business of the Youth Leagues, which must say; we shallchange all this; we shall organise detachments of youngpeople who will help to assure public hygiene or distributefood, who will conduct systematic house-to-house inspec-tions, and work in an organised way for the benefit of the whole of society, distributing their forces properly and demonstrating that labour must be organised. 
 The generation of people who are now at the age of fifty cannot expect to see a communist society. 
 This generation will be gone before then. 
 But the generation of those who are now fifteen will see a communist society, and will itself build this society. 
 This generation should know that theentire purpose of their lives is to build a communist society. 
In the old society, each family worked separately andlabour was not organised by anybody except the landownersand capitalists, who oppressed the masses of the people. 
 We must organise all labour, no matter how toilsome or messy it may be, in such a way that every worker andpeasant will be able to say: I am part of the great army offree labour, and shall be able to build up my life withoutthe landowners and capitalists, able to help establish acommunist system. 
 The Young Communist League should teach all young people to engage in conscious and disciplined labour from an early age. 
 In this way we can be confidentthat the problems now confronting us will be solved. 
We must assume that no less than ten years will be requiredfor the electrification of the country, so that our impover-ished land may profit from the latest achievements of tech-nology. 
 And so, the generation of those who are now fifteen years old, and will be living in a communist society in tenor twenty years’ time, should tackle all its educationaltasks in such a way that every day, in every village andcity, the young people shall engage in the practical solu-tion of some problem of labour in common, even though the smallest or the simplest. 
 The success of communist construc-tion will be assured when this is done in every village, ascommunist emulation develops, and the youth prove thatthey can unite their labour. 
 Only by regarding your everystep from the standpoint of the success of that construction,and only by asking ourselves whether we have done all we can to be united and politically-conscious working people will the Young Communist League succeed in uniting itshalf a million members into a single army of labour andwin universal respect. 
 ( Stormy applause . 
) Pravda Nos. 
 221, 222 and 223, Published according to the Pravda October 5, 6 and 7, 1920 text, verified against the text of the pamphlet: N. 
 Lenin (V. 
 I. 
 Ulyanov), The Tasks of the Youth Leagues , 1920 SPEEC H DELIVERE D AT A CONGRESS OF LEATHE R INDUSTR Y WORKERS OCTOBE R 2, 192096 Comrades, in compliance with the wish expressed by the organisers of your congress, the political position of our Republic will be the subject of my report. 
 In thisrespect, the chief thing I have to deal with is undoubtedlyour war with Poland, the general course of events in con-nection with that war, and what has consequently become revealed concerning the domestic and international position of our Republic. 
 You are all, of course, aware of the present gravity of our position at the front. 
 In this connection it will be naturalif we examine the circumstances that have made the situa-tion so acute, and given it such a turn for the worse. 
 You will of course remember that last April, when the Polish offensive had not yet begun, the line of the front lay farthereastward, in many places very much farther eastward,than at present. 
 As it then was, the line left Minsk in Polishhands; the Poles held the whole of Byelorussia. 
 Not onlythe Council of People’s Commissars, but the Presidium of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee itself—the highest body in the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
—solemnly declared in amanifesto to the Polish people that they proposed peace,and rejected the idea of deciding by force of arms the fateof Byelorussia, which had never been Polish, and whose-peasant population had long suffered from the Polish land-owners and did not regard themselves as Poles. 
 Neverthe-less, we declared in the most official and solemn terms thatwe proposed peace on the basis of the then existing line, since we set so high a value on the workers who would have to lay down their lives in case of war that we considered no concessions too important by comparison. 
 We presumed that the question of Byelorussia would be settled, not byforce of arms, but exclusively through the development ofthe struggle within Poland. 
 We knew that we could contrib-ute to the liberation of Poland’s toilers, not so much bythe force of arms as through the force of our propaganda. 
 That was last April, and you know that at first Poland replied to our solemn offer of peace with a manoeuvre, aproposal that peace should be signed in Borisov, a highlyimportant strategic point, which was in their hands. 
 Nego-tiations in Polish-held Borisov would have meant that thePoles could advance in the south-west while we would have been prevented from advancing in the north-west. 
 Any other city but Borisov, was our reply. 
 The Poles refused. 
I remind you of this so that, whenever you have to speakon this subject, you may the more emphatically stress thepoint that at first we proposed peace on the basis of a linelying farther eastward than the present one, that is, we agreed to a peace which was most disadvantageous to ourselves. 
 The Poles have forced the war on us; we know that it was not even the Polish landowners or the Polish capital-ists that have played the chief role here, since Poland’sposition was as desperate then as it is now. 
 She has embarked on this venture in sheer desperation. 
 But, of course, inter-national capital, and in the first place French capital, wasthe chief force driving the Poles into a war with us. 
 It hasso far been established that hundreds of French officershave been serving with the Polish army, and that all theweapons, all the financial and military support Poland has received, have come from France. 
 Such are the conditions in which this war began. 
 It marked a new attempt by the Allies to destroy the SovietRepublic, an attempt, following the collapse of the Yude-nich plan, to crush the Soviet Republic, this time withthe help of Poland. 
 You are acquainted with the main events in this war with Poland, which began against our wish. 
 You know that at first the Poles were successful,and captured Kiev in the south-west. 
 Then there was a fairly long interval in which the Red Army was able to concentrate its forces and to start an offensive, whereupon the Poles began to lose one point after another. 
 They lost Polotsk, and so on. 
 But it was not until July that the Red Armybegan a decisive offensive, which proved so successfulthat we effected an advance almost unparalleled in mili-tary history. 
 The Red Army advanced 500, 600, and inmany cases even 800 versts without a stop, and almost reached Warsaw. 
 Warsaw was considered practically lost to Poland. 
 That, at least, was the opinion of the worldpress. 
 Then the tide turned. 
 By the time our troops had gotwithin reach of Warsaw they were too exhausted to presshome the victory, whereas the Polish troops supported bya wave of patriotism in Warsaw, and with a feeling that they were now on their own soil, found encouragement and a fresh opportunity to advance. 
 The war, as it turned out,had enabled us almost to rout Poland completely, but atthe decisive moment our strength failed us. 
 I could speak of this at greater length, but, in keeping with the topic of my report, I must dwell on the political situation that had developed at the time. 
 We have seen that when, before the April offensive, we proposed peace to thePolish Republic on terms that were most advantageousto the Poles and disadvantageous to us, the bourgeois pressall over the world raised a hullabaloo, and our outspokendeclaration was taken as a sign of weakness. 
 If the Bolshe-viks were proposing peace on the basis of the line then held by the Polish troops, and if the Bolsheviks were evensurrendering Minsk, then they must surely be weak. 
 On theoutbreak of the war, even the British monarch sent a messageof congratulations to the head of the Polish landownergovernment. 
 On July 12, as you very likely remember, we suddenly received a telegram from the Secretary of the League ofNations to the effect that the Polish Government werewilling to start negotiations for peace on the basis of ethno-graphic boundaries, and provided the whole of Galicia weregiven to Poland. 
 An unparalleled uproar was raised in the world press. 
 This time they were all for peace. 
 When we proposed peace in April, or even earlier, in the spring of1920, all these newspapers were silent, or else urged Poland /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR to fight. 
 But when we had defeated Poland and it was Poland that was asking for peace—to which we replied by clearly and frankly stating our opinion that the League of Nations did not represent any force and that we could not rely onany promise it made—they all raised a hullabaloo anddemanded that we should call a halt. 
 Now that the fortunesof war have changed, and we announced yesterday that wewere offering Poland peace on terms more favourable than the League of Nations had proposed, on condition peace was signed before October 5, the whole bourgeois press hasagain fallen silent. 
 They are silent about peace when theBolsheviks are attacked, but raise an outcry when it is theBolsheviks who are attacking. 
 And after all this, they wantus to believe that the bourgeois press wants peace. 
 At our Party’s conference, which ended a few days ago, we were able to hear a report by a Polish worker, representative ofone of the largest trade unions in Poland, 97 who managed to get through from Warsaw. 
 He told us of the persecutionof the workers in Poland, how the Warsaw workers lookedto the Red Army as their liberator, and how they were waiting for the coming of the Russian Red Army, which they regard, not as their enemy but, on the contrary, astheir friend in their struggle against the landowners andthe bourgeois oppressors of Poland. 
 It is quite clear thatPoland is the Entente’s cat’s-paw in a new attempt todestroy the Soviet Republic; however, when this attempt threatened to lead to a diametrically opposite result and we were on the point of helping the Polish workers overthrowtheir government, the entire European bourgeois pressturned on us. 
 Comrade Kamenev, who visited London,has told us here in the Bolshoi Theatre how he daily heardultimatums and threats from the British Government, which was already prepared to mobilise its whole navy against Petrograd and concentrate it at Kronstadt, alleg-edly to defend Poland against us. 
 Now that the fortunes ofwar have changed and we are withdrawing from our termseverything Poland has declared unacceptable, the bourgeoispress has fallen silent. 
 It is quite clear that French and British imperialism is inciting Poland to make a fresh attempt to overthrow the Soviets. 
 I think that this is a last attempt (and this is undoubtedly important) at an offensive against Soviet Russia. 
 It ap-pears that Poland is too closely bound up with the whole system of international imperialism. 
 You know that, after defeating Germany, the Allied imperialists—France, GreatBritain, America and Japan—signed the Peace of Versailles,which, to say the least, was far more brutal than theinfamous Peace of Brest-Litovsk, over which such an outcrywas raised. 
 But while the French, the Americans and the British proclaimed from the house-tops that this was a war of liberation, that its purpose was to save Europe and theworld from the barbarian Huns, as they called the Germans,to save the world from German militarism and the GermanKaiser, we now find that the Peace of Versailles outdoesin atrocity anything the Kaiser was capable of when he was victor. 
 The interference of British and French officers in economic life has proved to all the defeated countries,to Germany and to all the countries that made up the Austro-Hungarian Empire, that it is impossible to live under suchconditions. 
 One of the pillars of this monstrous peace isPoland’s cutting across Germany, since Polish territory stretches to the sea. 
 Relations between Germany and Poland are at present strained to the utmost. 
 In oppressingthe German population, the Poles have the support of theEntente troops and officers. 
 The Versailles Peace has turnedPoland into a buffer state which is to guard against Germancontact with Soviet communism and is regarded by the Entente as a weapon against the Bolsheviks. 
 Through Poland and with the help of Poland, the French are hopingto recover the tens of thousands of millions loaned to thetsarist government. 
 That is why, when the war with Polandbroke out, which we tried to avert even at the price of heavyconcessions, it proved to be a more direct war against the Entente than previous wars had been. 
 The latter, in which Kolchak, Denikin and Yudenich attacked us, werealso conducted with the aid of officers and hundreds ofmillions provided by the Allies, with the aid of their gunsand tanks. 
 The previous wars were also wars against theEntente, but they were fought on Russian territory against Russian whiteguard officers and the peasants they had mobilised and they could not become wars that could shakethe Peace of Versailles. 
 That is where they differed from the war against Poland. 
 The war against Yudenich, Kolchak and Denikin was also a war against the Entente, but at the same time it was a war of working-class Russia against the whole of bourgeois Russia. 
 When it ended in victoryand when we smashed Yudenich, Kolchak and Denikin,this was not a direct attack on the Peace of Versailles. 
The reverse is true of Poland; that is what distinguishesthe war against Poland, and constitutes Poland’s interna-tional significance. 
 When we were victoriously pressing our offensive on Poland, the whole of Europe began to vociferate that theywanted peace, that the whole world was tired of war, and thatit was time to make peace. 
 But now that the Poles areadvancing, there is no outcry that people are tired of war. 
 Why is that? It is because, by defeating Yudenich, Kolchak and Denikin, we could not destroy the Peace of Versailles;we were merely falling upon Yudenich, Kolchak and Deni-kin and driving them into the sea. 
 However, in attackingPoland we are thereby attacking the Entente itself; bydestroying the Polish army we are destroying the Peace of Versailles, on which the whole present system of interna-tional relations rests. 
 Had Poland turned Soviet, had the Warsaw workers received from Soviet Russia help they awaited and wel-comed, the Peace of Versailles would have been smashed,and the entire international system set up as a result of the victory over Germany would have collapsed. 
 France would then not have had a buffer protecting Germanyagainst Soviet Russia. 
 She would not have had a battering-ram against the Soviet Republic. 
 She would have had nohope of recovering her tens of thousands of millions, andwould be heading for disaster even more rapidly than she now is. 
 France is up to her ears in debt. 
 Once the wealthi-est of money-lenders, she now owes America three timesas much as other countries do. 
 She is heading for bankrupt-cy. 
 Her position is hopeless. 
 That is why the approach ofthe Red troops to Warsaw meant an international crisis;that is why the entire bourgeois press was so agitated by it. 
 Such was the position that, had the Red Army advanced victoriously another few days, not only would Warsawhave been captured (that would not have mattered so much), but the Peace of Versailles would have been destroyed. 
 Therein lies the international significance of this Polish war; You know that we harboured no plans of conquest. 
I said at the beginning of my speech that in April 1920 westood east of Minsk and proposed peace on those terms,if only we could save the workers and peasants of Russia froma new war. 
 But since war has been forced upon us, we must fight it to a victorious finish. 
 The Peace of Versailles is oppressing hundreds of millions of people. 
 It is robbingGermany of coal, robbing her of her milch herds, and isreducing her to an unparalleled and unprecedented stateof servitude. 
 Even the most backward sections of Germany’speasant population have declared that they are for the Bolsheviks, that they are allies of the Bolsheviks; that is quite natural, for, in its struggle for existence, the SovietRepublic is the only force in the world which is combatingimperialism—and imperialism now means an alliance ofFrance, Britain and America. 
 We are approaching the hubof the present international system. 
 When the Red troops approached the frontier of Poland, the Red Army’s victori-ous advance created an unprecedented political crisis. 
The main feature of this crisis was that, when the BritishGovernment threatened us with war, and told us that ifwe advanced any farther they would fight us and sendtheir warships against us, the British workers declared that they would not permit this war. 
 Let me tell you that Bolshevism is spreading among the British workers. 
 How-ever, the Communists there are just as weak today as we werein March, April and May 1917, when we had one-tenthof the votes at conferences and congresses. 
 At the FirstAll-Russia Congress of Soviets in June 1917, we had no more than 13 per cent of the votes. 
 A similar situation exists in Great Britain: there the Bolsheviks are in aninsignificant minority. 
 But the point is that the BritishMensheviks have always been opposed to Bolshevism anddirect revolution, and have favoured an alliance with thebourgeoisie. 
 Today, however, the old leaders of the British workers have begun to waver and have changed their minds: they were opposed to the dictatorship of the working class,but now they have come over to our side. 
 They have set up a Council of Action over there in Britain. 
 This is a radical change in British politics. 
 Alongside of Parliament, which in Great Britain is now elected by almost universal suffrage (since 1918), there has arisen a self-appointed Council ofAction which relies on support from the workers’ tradeunions with a membership of over six million. 
 When thegovernment wanted to begin a war against Soviet Russia,the workers declared that they would not allow it, and said they would not let the French fight either, because the French depend upon British coal, and should thisindustry come to a standstill it would be a severe blowto France. 
 I repeat that this was a tremendous turning-point in British politics. 
 Its significance to Great Britain is as great as the revolution of February 1917 was to us. 
 The revolution of February 1917 overthrew tsarism and setup a bourgeois republic in Russia. 
 There is no republicin Great Britain, but her thoroughly bourgeois monarchyhas existed for many centuries. 
 The workers can vote inthe parliamentary elections, but all foreign policy is con-ducted outside Parliament, for it is the province of the Cabinet. 
 We have long known that the British Governmentare waging an undercover war on Russia and are helpingYudenich, Kolchak and Denikin. 
 We have often met withstatements in the British press to the effect that GreatBritain has no right to send a single soldier to Russia. 
 Who, then, voted for this measure? What act of Parliament authorised war on Russia in aid of Yudenich and Kolchak?There have been no such acts, and by actions like thisGreat Britain has violated her own constitution. 
 What thenis this Council of Action? Independently of Parliament,this Council of Action has presented an ultimatum to the government on behalf of the workers. 
 This is a step towards dictatorship, and there is no other way out of the situation. 
This is taking place in Great Britain, which is an impe-rialist country with 400 or 500 million people enslaved inher colonies. 
 She is a most important country, which rulesthe greater part of the population of the earth. 
 The advance on Poland has led to such a turn of affairs that the British Mensheviks have entered into an alliance with the RussianBolsheviks. 
 That is what this offensive has done. 
 The entire British bourgeois press declared that the Council of Action meant the Soviets. 
 They were right. 
 It did not call itself by that name, but actually that is what it was. 
 It is the same kind of dual power as we hadunder Kerensky from March 1917 onwards, a time whenthe Provisional Government was considered the only gov-ernment, but actually could do nothing of significancewithout the Soviet of Workers’ and Peasants’ Deputies, a time when we said to the Soviets: “Take over all power. 
” A similar situation has now arisen in Britain, and theMensheviks on this “Council of Action” have been obligedto adopt an anti-constitutional course. 
 This will give yousome idea of what our war with Poland has meant. 
 Thoughthe international bourgeoisie are still immeasurably stronger than we are, and the British Government has put the whole blame on Kamenev, expelled him from GreatBritain, and will not let him return, this is but an emptyand ridiculous threat, for the best defenders of the Ameri-can and British capitalists, the moderate British labourleaders—those Right Mensheviks and Right Socialist-Revolutionaries—have joined the Council of Action, and Great Britain is now facing a new crisis. 
 She is now threat-ened with a coal miners’ general strike. 
 The strikers aredemanding, not only higher pay but a cut in coal prices. 
One wave of strikes is following another in Great Britain. 
The strikers are demanding higher wages. 
 However, if the workers win a 10 per cent wage rise today, prices go up 20 per cent tomorrow. 
 Prices are rising, and theworkers see that their struggle gets them nowhere andthat, despite wage increases, they are losing, because ofthe higher prices. 
 So the workers are demanding, not onlyhigher pay for the coal miners but lower coal prices as well. 
 This has led to the British bourgeois press panicking in even greater horror than when the Red Army enteredPoland. 
 You know how the European crisis has affected Italy. 
 Italy is one of the victor powers, and when the Red Army’ssuccesses led to a movement in Germany and a change in British policy, the struggle in Italy became so acute that the workers began to seize the factories, take over thefactory owners’ dwellings, and rouse the rural population. 
 The present situation in Italy is far removed from any form of class peace. 
 That was the course taken by the Polish war. 
 That is why, while realising that the Polish war was closely linked up withthe international imperialism’s entire position, we agreed tomake the greatest concessions to save the workers andpeasants from the hardships of war. 
 Then we clashed with thePeace of Versailles, and found that the bourgeoisie was just as incensed against us as ever; however, we also found that the workers were maturing daily and hourly, andthat the workers’ revolution was steadily approaching,although all too slowly as compared with the speed ofdevelopments in Russia. 
 It was possible to accomplishthe revolution so rapidly in Russia because it took place in wartime. 
 During the war tens of millions of Russian workers and peasants were armed, and against such a forcethe bourgeoisie and the officers were powerless. 
 During theOctober days they threatened to lead an army againstPetrograd. 
 We used to receive tens of thousands of tele-grams from all the fronts saying: “We are marching against you to wipe you out. 
” “Well have a try”, we said to our-selves. 
 When delegates arrived from each of the armies, athirty minutes’ talk was enough to show that the soldierswere with us, and the officers had to hold their tongues. 
The attempts at resistance, the plots of Yudenich, Kolchakand Denikin came later, after the army had been demobi-lised. 
 That is why the revolution could succeed so rapidly in Russia. 
 The people were armed. 
 The workers and peasantsproved to be on our side to a man. 
 In Europe, however,the war is over. 
 The armies have been demobilised; thesoldiers have returned to their homes; the workers andpeasants are disarmed. 
 Developments there are slow now, but they are on the move. 
 The international bourgeoisie has only to raise a hand against us to have it seized by itsown workers. 
 That is the international significance of thewar with Poland. 
 That is the source of the internationalcrisis. 
 That, too, is the source of our new difficulties now. 
It was when, as you know, we lacked just a little strength to reach Warsaw, hand over power to the Warsaw workers, convene Soviets of Workers’ and Peasants’ Deputies inWarsaw, and say to them “We have come to your aid”, when, after heroic efforts without parallel or precedent in the past, our army’s strength was spent, that the moment of our military defeat came. 
 We have now fallen back very far to the east. 
 In the north we have even lost the town of Lida; in the south weare almost on the line we held in April 1919—the Pilsud-ski line. 
 In the north we are retreating very rapidly, andin the meantime Wrangel is making ever new attempts to advance. 
 He recently threatened Ekaterinoslav, approached Sinelnikovo and got control of it. 
 He has now capturedSlavgorod. 
 In the east, he has captured Mariupol, is approach-ing Taganrog and threatening the Donets Basin. 
 Weare again in difficult straits, and again we see the interna-tional imperialists attempting to strangle the Soviet Repub-lic with both hands: the Polish offensive and the Wrangel offensive. 
 In fact, Poland and Wrangel are the two handsof the French imperialists, who are supplying the troopsboth of Poland and of Wrangel with munitions. 
 But thesethree forces are not getting along very well together. 
 Francetells the Poles that they should not grab too many resources, too much territory, because a tsarist Russia will never let them keep it. 
 Then she tells Wrangel that he must not actso as to restore the power of the old landowners, for theexample of Denikin, Kolchak and Yudenich shows thatwhen the old landowners direct the whiteguard armies,or when their officers command the armies, the more territory they seize, the sooner that leads to their ruin, because in the end the peasants rise up in revolt againstthem. 
 As long as Wrangel has a crack officer army he can rely on it; Wrangel’s strength lies in his possessing splendidweapons of the most up-to-date type and a crack officer army. 
 When he effected a landing in the Kuban region, his army was so selected that every company and regimentcould be developed into an entire division, because itconsisted entirely of officers. 
 But as soon as he attempts torepeat what Kolchak, Denikin and Yudenich did in thepast, i. 
e. 
, seize more territory, so as to mobilise a larger peasant population and create a mass army, his success will at once give way to defeat; just as the peasant armywas opposed to Kolchak, Denikin and Yudenich, so it will never march with Wrangel’s officer army. 
 The Warsaw worker who addressed the Party Conference formulated it as follows: the Polish army, which formerly consisted of youngsters (raw lads just called up for service), has beendestroyed. 
 Men up to the age of 35 have now been mobilised;these are adults who have been through the imperialistwar, and this army, as far as the Polish landownersand capitalists are concerned, is by no means as reliable as an army of youngsters. 
 That is how matters stand with regard to the internation-al situation. 
 In the war against the Entente, owing to thedefeat we have suffered at Warsaw and the offensive nowcontinuing on the Western and Wrangel fronts, our positionis again highly critical. 
 I must therefore conclude my brief report by appealing to our comrades in the leather industry and pointing out to them that we must once againbend every effort, for the defeat of Wrangel is now ourprincipal task. 
 This will call for tremendous effort andinitiative on the part of the workers, the trade unions,the proletarian masses, and first and foremost of those workers who are closely associated with the branches of industry that are connected with defence. 
 Our chief diffi-culty in the present war is not manpower—we have enoughof that—but supplies. 
 The chief difficulty on all the frontsis the shortage of supplies, the shortage of warm clothingand footwear. 
 Greatcoats and boots—that is the main thing our soldiers lack, and it is on that account that quite suc-cessful advances have so often failed. 
 That is the difficultywhich prevents us from rapidly utilising for a victoriousadvance the new units, which we possess in sufficientnumbers, but which, without sufficient supplies, cannot beformed and cannot be of any real combat value. 
 Both the leather workers’ union and this assembly, which represents the entire proletariat in this industry, mustgive their most serious attention to this. 
 Comrades, itdepends on you to make the forthcoming offensive againstWrangel, for which we are mustering all our forces, as rapidand successful as it can possibly be. 
 It depends on you, because the measures being taken by the Soviet Government and the Communist Party are not enough. 
 To give real helpto the Red Army men, to secure a decisive turn for the better, and to improve supplies, the assistance of Soviet institutions, the decrees of the Council of People’s Commis-sars and the Council of Defence,98 and Party decisions are not enough: what is required is help from the trade unions. 
The trade unions must realise that, despite our repeatedoffers of peace, the very existence of the workers’ andpeasants’ power is once more at stake. 
 You know how thispower gained in strength after the collapse of Denikin, Kolchak and Yudenich. 
 You know how the grain collections improved thanks to the recovery of Siberia and the Kubanregion; you know that the capture of Baku has now enabledus to secure over a hundred million poods of oil, and howour industry has at last begun to acquire the foundation onwhich it is possible to create stocks of grain and bring the workers back to the factories, accumulate raw material and provide fuel, so that the factories may be started andeconomic life restored at last. 
 But for all these possibilitiesto materialise, we must at all costs put an end to the war,and speed up the offensive against Wrangel. 
 The Crimeamust be recovered before winter comes in the south and that will depend on the energy and initiative of the workers themselves, and above all, perhaps, on the energy andinitiative of every Russian leather worker and of the LeatherWorkers’ Union. 
 I appeal to you to follow the example of our Petrograd workers, who recently, after a report by a representative of the Communist International on the situation at the fronts, once more began to make tremendous efforts to help thecause, again beginning with munitions for the Red Armymen, and building up the strength of the Red Army. 
 Youknow that each step taken in the rear to help the Red Armyhas an immediate effect on the morale of the Red Army men. 
 You know that the autumn cold affects the Red Army men, depresses them, creates new difficulties, increases thenumber of sick men and results in great hardships. 
 Allaid given by the rear to the Red Army men immediatelyhelps strengthen the Red Army, fortify its morale, bringdown the number of sick and increase its offensive power. 
 At every meeting and in every workshop, every worker must now make the slogan “Everything for the Red Army!”the chief topic of his talks, reports and meetings. 
 What we must ask ourselves is: have we done everything in our power to help the Red Army? On this help depends how soon we settle final accounts with Wrangel and fully ensure for ourselves peace and the possibility of construc-tive work in the economic field. 
 ( Applause . 
) Pravda Nos. 
 225 and 226, Published according to October 9 and 10, 1920 the Pravda text TO THE POOR PEASANTS OF THE UKRAINE Comrades, the tsarist general Wrangel is building up his offensive against the Ukraine and Russia. 
 With backing from the French capitalists, he is pushing forward, threat-ening the Donets Basin and Ekaterinoslav. 
 The dangeris grave. 
 Once again the landowners are trying to re-establish their power, get their estates back, and re-enslavethe peasants. 
 Comrades, the Ukrainian countryside has endured unparalleled sufferings under the yoke of the landowners. 
The latter have more than once been able to overthrow theSoviets, the workers’ and peasants’ power; more than oncethey have been helped by the kulaks, the rich peasants,who either went over openly to their side or hampered the poor and working peasants’ efforts to introduce the new order, the new way of life, the new organisation in thevillages. 
 Each such attempt to restore the rule of the land-owners has ended in a new victory for the workers and peasants. 
Today, all over the Ukraine, the poor villagers have begunto set up their committees so as to smash the resistance of the handful of the rich, and finally to establish the rule of the working people. 
 Wrangel, general of the landowners,is increasing his pressure with the intention of routingthese organisations of the working people. 
 Comrades, rise up to a man to hurl Wrangel back. 
 Let all committees of poor peasants bend every effort to help the Red Army crush Wrangel. 
 Not a single working peasant should stand aside in the struggle for the cause of the workersand peasants, or remain inactive or indifferent. 
 Comrades, remember that this is a matter of saving the lives of your families, of defending the peasants’ land and their rule. 
 Rally for aid to the Red Army!Death to the oppressor landowners! Lenin 2. 
10. 
1920 Kommunist (Kiev) No. 
 199, Published according to October 13, 1920 the manuscript ON PROLETARIA N CULTUR E99 We see from Izvestia of October 8 that, in his address to the Proletcult Congress, Comrade Lunacharsky said things that were diametrically opposite to what he and I had agreed upon yesterday. 
100 It is necessary that a draft resolution (of the Proletcult Congress) should be drawn up with the utmost urgency, and that it should be endorsed by the Central Committee, in time to have it put to the vote at this very session of the Prolet-cult. 
 On behalf of the Central Committee it should besubmitted not later than today, for endorsement both bythe Collegium of the People’s Commissariat of Educationand by the Proletcult Congress, because the Congress is closing today. 
 DRAFT RESOLUTION 1) All educational work in the Soviet Republic of workers and peasants, in the field of political education ingeneral and in the field of art in particular, should be imbued with the spirit of the class struggle being waged bythe proletariat for the successful achievement of the aimsof its dictatorship, i. 
e. 
, the overthrow of the bourgeoisie,the abolition of classes, and the elimination of all formsof exploitation of man by man. 
 2) Hence, the proletariat, both through its vanguard— the Communist Party—and through the many types of pro-letarian organisations in general, should display the utmostactivity and play the leading part in all the work of publiceducation. 
 3) All the experience of modern history and, particularly, the more than half-century-old revolutionary struggle ofthe proletariat of all countries since the appearance ofthe Communist Manifesto has unquestionably demonstrated that the Marxist world outlook is the only true expression of the interests, the viewpoint, and the culture of the revolutionary proletariat. 
 4) Marxism has won its historic significance as the ideol-ogy of the revolutionary proletariat because, far fromrejecting the most valuable achievements of the bourgeoisepoch, it has, on the contrary, assimilated and refashionedeverything of value in the more than two thousand years of the development of human thought and culture. 
 Only further work on this basis and in this direction, inspiredby the practical experience of the proletarian dictatorshipas the final stage in the struggle against every form ofexploitation, can be recognised as the development of agenuine proletarian culture. 
 5) Adhering unswervingly to this stand of principle, the All-Russia Proletcult Congress rejects in the mostresolute manner, as theoretically unsound and practicallyharmful, all attempts to invent one’s own particular brandof culture, to remain isolated in self-contained organisations,to draw a line dividing the field of work of the People’s Commissariat of Education and the Proletcult, or to set up a Proletcult “autonomy” within establishments under thePeople’s Commissariat of Education and so forth. 
 On thecontrary, the Congress enjoins all Proletcult organisationsto fully consider themselves in duty bound to act as aux-iliary bodies of the network of establishments under the People’s Commissariat of Education, and to accomplish their tasks under the general guidance of the Sovietauthorities (specifically, of the People’s Commissariat ofEducation) and of the Russian Communist Party, as partof the tasks of the proletarian dictatorship. 
 * * * Comrade Lunacharsky says that his words have been distorted. 
 In that case this resolution is needed all the more urgently. 
 Written on October 8, 1920 First published in 1926 Published according to the manuscript SPEEC H DELIVERE D AT A CONFERENCE OF CHAIRME N OF UYEZD , VOLOS T AND VILLAGE EXECUTIV E COMMITTEE S OF MOSCO W GUBERNIA OCTOBE R 15, 1920101 Comrades, in my report on the domestic and the external position of the Republic, which you wished to hear, I shall naturally have to devote most of my remarks to the war with Poland and its causes. 
 It was this war which in themain determined the Republic’s domestic and externalposition during the past six months. 
 Now that the prelimi-naries for a peace with Poland have just been signed, it ispossible and necessary to take a general look at this war and its significance and try to give thought to the lessons we have all learnt from the war which has just ended, thoughnobody knows whether it has ended for good. 
 I would there-fore like first to remind you that it was on April 26 of thisyear that the Poles began their offensive. 
 The Soviet Repub-lic solemnly and formally proposed a peace to the Poles, the Polish landowners and the Polish bourgeoisie, on terms more favourable than those we have offered them now,despite the tremendous reverses our troops suffered atWarsaw, and the even greater reverses during the retreatfrom Warsaw. 
 At the end of the April of this year, thePoles held a line between 50 and 150 versts to the east of the one they now regard as the line of a preliminary peace; though at that time the line was manifestly anunfair one, we solemnly proposed peace to them on behalfof the All-Russia Central Executive Committee, since,as you all of course know and remember, the Soviet govern-ment was mainly concerned at the time with ensuring the transition to peaceful construction. 
 We had no reason for wishing to resort to arms in settling questions in disputebetween ourselves and the Polish state. 
 We were fully aware that the Polish state was, and still is, a state of the land-owners and capitalists, and that it is fully dependant on the capitalists of the Entente countries, in particular on France. 
 Though at the time Poland controlled, not only thewhole of Lithuania but also Byelorussia, to say nothing ofEastern Galicia, we considered it our duty to do everythingpossible to avert a war, so as to give the working class andthe peasantry of Russia at least a brief respite from impe-rialist and civil wars, and at last enable them to get down in earnest to peaceful work. 
 The events that ensued havehappened all too frequently: our straightforward and publicoffer of peace on the line the Poles actually held was takenas a sign of weakness. 
 Bourgeois diplomats of all countriesare unaccustomed to such frank statements and our readiness to accept a peace along a line so disadvantageous to us was taken and interpreted as proof of our extreme weakness. 
The French capitalists succeeded in inciting the Polishcapitalists to go to war. 
 You will remember how, after abrief interval following upon the Polish offensive, wereplied by dealing a counter-blow and almost reached Warsaw, after which our troops suffered a heavy defeat, and were thrown back. 
 For over a month and right down to the present, our troops were retreating and suffered reverses, for they wereutterly worn out, exhausted by their unparalleled advancefrom Polotsk to Warsaw. 
 But, I repeat, despite this difficult situation, peace was signed on terms less advantageous to Poland than the earlier ones. 
 The earlier frontier lay 50versts to the east, whereas it is now 50 versts to the west. 
Thus, though we signed a peace at a time favourable onlyto the enemy, when our troops were on the retreat andWrangel was building up his offensive, we signed a peace treaty on more favourable terms. 
 This once again proves to you that when the Soviet Government proposes peace,its words and statements have to be treated seriously;otherwise what will happen is that we shall offer peace onterms less favourable to us, and get this peace on betterterms. 
 This is a lesson the Polish landowners and capitalists will not, of course, forget; they realise that they have gone too far; the peace terms now give them less territorythan was offered previously. 
 This is not the first lesson either. 
 You all probably remember that, in the spring of 1919, a representative of the U. 
S. 
 Government came to Moscow and proposed a preliminary peace with us and with all the whiteguard commanders at the time: Kolchak,Denikin and others, a peace which would have been ex-tremely unfavourable to us. 
 When he returned and reportedon our peace terms, they were not considered advantageous,and the war went on. 
 You are aware of the outcome of the war. 
 This is not the first time that the Soviet state has proved that it is considerably stronger than it appears,and that our diplomatic Notes do not contain the boastsand threats that are usual with all bourgeois governments;consequently, rejecting an offer of peace from Soviet Russiameans getting that peace some time later on terms that are far worse. 
 Such things are not forgotten in international politics; after proving to the Polish landowners that theyhave now obtained a peace worse than the one which weoriginally offered, we shall teach the Polish people, thePolish peasants and workers, to weigh and compare thestatements of their government and ours. 
 Many of you may have read in the newspapers the Ameri-can Government’s Note, in which it declares: “We do notwish to have any dealings with the Soviet Governmentbecause it does not honour its obligations. 
” 102 This does not surprise us, because it has been said for many years,the only outcome being that all their attempts to invade Soviet Russia have ended in disaster. 
 The Polish newspa-pers, nearly all of which are in the pay of the landownersand the capitalists—there this is called freedom of thepress—assert that the Soviet government cannot be trusted,since it is a government of tyrants and frauds. 
 All Polishnewspapers say the same thing, but the Polish workers and peasants compare these words with the facts, and the facts show that we demonstrated our attachment to peace thevery first time we made our peace offer; by concludingpeace in October we proved this again. 
 You will not findproof of this kind in the history of any bourgeois govern-ment, a fact that cannot but leave its impress on the minds of the Polish workers and peasants. 
 The Soviet Government signed a peace when it was not to its advantage to do so. 
It is only in this way that we shall teach the governments that are controlled by the landowners and capitalists to stop lying; only in this way shall we destroy the faith the workers and peasants have in them. 
 We must give more thought to this than to anything else. 
 Soviet power inRussia is surrounded by countless enemies, and yet theseenemies are impotent. 
 Think of the course and outcome ofthe Polish war. 
 We now know that the French capitalistsstood behind Poland, that they supplied Poland with money and munitions, and sent them French officers. 
 We quite recently received information that African troops, namelyFrench colonial troops, had appeared on the Polish front. 
This means that the war was waged by France with aidfrom Britain and America. 
 At the same time, France recog-nised the lawful government of Russia in the person of Wrangel—so Wrangel too was backed by France, who provided him with the means to equip and maintain an army. 
 Britainand America are also aiding Wrangel’s army. 
 Consequently,three allies stood against us: France, supported by theworld’s wealthy countries, Poland, and Wrangel—yet wehave emerged from this war by concluding a favourable peace. 
 In other words, we have won. 
 Anyone who examines the map will see that we have won, that we have emergedfrom this war with more territory than we had before itstarted. 
 But is the enemy weaker than we are? Is he weakerin the military sense? Has he got fewer men and munitions?No, he has more of everything. 
 This enemy is stronger than we are, and yet he has been beaten. 
 This is what we must give thought to in order to understand Soviet Russia’sposition with respect to all other countries. 
 When we Bolsheviks started the revolution, we said that h could and should be started, but at the same time we didnot forget that it could be successfully ended and brought to an absolutely victorious conclusion, without confining ourselves to Russia alone, but, in alliance with a numberof countries, after defeating international capital. 
 Russiancapital is linked up with international capital. 
 When ourenemies say to us: even if you were to win in Russia, yourcause will nevertheless perish because the other capitalist states will crush you, we now have an answer—the highly important experience of the war with Poland, which showshow things have actually turned out. 
 Indeed, why did it happen that, within six months and even less, if we take April as the beginning of the offensive, France, Poland and Wrangel, who were stronger than we are, were full of hatred of Bolshe-vism, and were determined to overthrow Soviet power,have been defeated, and the war has ended in our favour?How could it have happened that Soviet Russia, exhaustedby the imperialist and civil wars, surrounded by enemies,and cut off from every source of supplies and equipment— this Soviet Russia has proved the victor? We must reflect on this because, if we go deeper into this question, we beginto understand the mechanism, not only of the Russian butof the world revolution as well. 
 We see confirmation ofthe fact that the Russian revolution is but a single link inthe chain of the world revolution, and that our cause is strong and invincible because the cause of revolution is developing throughout the world; economic conditionsare evolving in a way that is making our enemies weakerand us stronger with every day. 
 The Polish war has againproved that this is neither exaggeration, boasting nor over-enthusiasm. 
 Three allies were fighting against us. 
 One might have thought that uniting these three allies should present no difficulty but it appeared that, taught by thegreat experience of Yudenich, Kolchak and Denikin cam-paigns, they were unable to unite against us and squabbledat every step. 
 In this connection, the history of the Polishwar, which has only just ended, is particularly instructive. 
 Our march on Warsaw—the Red Army’s march, in which weary, exhausted and poorly-clad soldiers covered over600 versts, inflicting one defeat after another on the Polishtroops, who were excellently trained, with hundreds of thebest French officer instructors—showed us the kind ofrelations that existed among our enemies. 
 On July 12, when the Red Army troops were approaching the Polish frontier, we received a telegram from Britain’s ForeignSecretary, Curzon, on behalf of the League of Nations, thatnotorious League of Nations, an alliance which professesto unite Britain, France, America, Italy and Japan, coun-tries with a tremendous military potential and possessing all the navies of the world, and against whom military resistance might seem perfectly impossible and absurd. 
On behalf of this League of Nations, Curzon proposed that we stop the war and enter into negotiations with the Poles in London. 
 According to this telegram, the boundary should pass near Grodno, Byelostok, Brest-Litovsk and along the River San in Eastern Galicia. 
 To this proposal we repliedthat we recognised no League of Nations, since we hadseen its insignificance and the disregard that even itsmembers had for its decisions. 
 The French Governmentconsidered our reply insolent, and one would have thought that this League of Nations would come out against us. 
 But what happened? The League of Nations fell apart atour very first declaration, and Britain and France fell oneach other. 
 For several years Britain’s Secretary for War Churchill has been employing every means, both lawful and more often unlawful from the viewpoint of British law, to help the whiteguards against Russia, so as to supply them withmilitary equipment. 
 He hates Soviet Russia bitterly, yetimmediately after our declaration Britain fell out withFrance, because France needs the forces of a whiteguardRussia to protect her against Germany, while Britain needs no such protection. 
 Britain, a naval power, fears no such action because she has a most powerful navy. 
 Thus, theLeague of Nations, which has sent such unprecedented threatsto Russia, was itself helpless from the very outset. 
 Atevery step the interests of the League’s member states arepatently in conflict. 
 France desires the defeat of Britain, and vice versa. 
 When Comrade Kamenev was negotiating with the British Government in London and asked theBritish Prime Minister, “Let us suppose that you willreally do what you say, what about France?”, the BritishPrime Minister had to reply that France would go her ownway. 
 He said that Britain could not take the same road as France. 
 It became plain that the League of Nations was non-existent, that the alliance of the capitalist powers issheer fraud, and that in actual fact it is an alliance ofrobbers, each trying to snatch something from the others. 
When at the conclusion of peace in Riga, we discoveredwhat divided Poland, Britain, France and Wrangel, and why they could not act in unison, we learnt that their in-terests differed: Britain wanted to have the small successionstates—Finland, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania—in her sphere of influence and was not interested in the restoration of tsarist or whiteguard or even bourgeois Russia; she even stood to lose from it. 
 That was why Britain was acting counter to France and could not unite with Poland andWrangel. 
’ France’s concern was to fight to the last Polishsoldier for her interests and the debts owed to her. 
 Shehoped we would pay her the 20-thousand-million debtincurred by the former tsar and recognised by the Keren-sky government. 
 Any sensible person will realise that the French capitalists will never see the colour of their money;the French capitalists realise that the French workers andpeasants cannot be made to fight, while Polish soldiersare plentiful and can be driven into battle—so let themdie that the French capitalists may get their millions back. 
 However, the Polish workers too can see that the French, British and other officers behave in Poland just as if theywere in a conquered country. 
 That was why, during theRiga negotiations, we saw that the party of the Polishworkers and peasants which is undoubtedly patriotic andundoubtedly hostile to Bolshevism, just like our Right-wing Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, stood for peace and was opposed to the government of the Polishlandowners and capitalists, who up to the last moment triedto wreck the peace treaty, and even now want to do so andwill go on doing so for a long time to come. 
 I shall have tospeak on this point when I come to the question of whether the preliminary peace we have just concluded will last. 
 The third ally, Wrangel, who fought for the return of the whole of Russia to the landowners and the capitalists,regards Poland as part of Russia. 
 All the Russian tsars,landowners and capitalists were accustomed to regardingPoland as their prey; they never forgot that Poland had long ago been crushed by the Russian serf army led to war by the tsar. 
 That meant that, had Wrangel been victorious,he would have used his victory in order to restore full power,both in Russia and in Poland, to the landowners. 
 Whathappened, however, was that, when the three allies stoodready to attack us, they began by falling out among them-selves. 
 France’s aims are alien to both the Polish peasant and the Polish worker, while Wrangel’s aims are alien evento any Polish landowner. 
 And now, when we hear Wrangel’s radio or the French Government radio from Paris, we learn that France and Wrangel are gnashing their teeth because they realise the implication of this peace which we have concluded with Poland, though they assert that this is nopeace, and that Poland cannot sign it. 
 We shall see whatwe shall see, but meanwhile a peace has been signed. 
 Actual-ly, neither Wrangel nor France understands how it couldhave come about. 
 They cannot stomach the miracle of a devastated Soviet Russia defeating civilised countries far stronger than she is. 
 They do not understand that thesevictories stem from the fundamental doctrine of the Com-munists, which says that property divides whereas labourunites. 
 Private property is robbery, and a state based onprivate property is a state of robbers, who are fighting for a share of the spoils. 
 Though they have not yet finished this war, they are already fighting among themselves. 
A year ago fourteen states were threatening us, yet thealliance of these fourteen states at once fell apart. 
 Whydid it fall apart? Simply because the agreement betweenthese states only existed on paper, and not one of them went to war. 
 When a war started and France, Poland and Wrangel joined forces, their alliance too fell apart,because they were trying to trip one another up. 
 As theRussian proverb says, they were trying to share out theskin of a bear they had not yet killed. 
 They were, in fact,squabbling over a bear they would never kill. 
 The experience of world politics has shown that the alliance against Soviet Russia is irretrievably doomed tofailure, because it is an imperialist alliance, an allianceof plunderers who are not united, and are bound by no genu-ine or permanent interests. 
 They lack that which unites theworking class; they have no common interests, which was again revealed during the Polish war. 
 When our Red Army crushed the resistance of the Poles, captured Byelostok andBrest-Litovsk and approached the Polish frontier, thissignified the collapse of the entire established systemof international politics, for it is based on the Treaty ofVersailles, which is a treaty of robbers and plunderers. 
 When the Peace of Brest-Litovsk was imposed on us, a burden we bore so long, there was a world-wide outcrythat is was a robber’s peace. 
 After Germany’s defeat, the League of Nations which had declared, during the war against Germany, that it was being fought for liberation and democracy, imposed a peace on the vanquished country, but it was a usurer’s peace, an oppressor’s peace, a butcher’speace, because Germany and Austria were looted andcarved up. 
 They deprived them of all means of subsistence,and left the children hungry and starving; this was a pred-atory peace, without any parallel. 
 What then is the Treaty of Versailles? It is an unparalleled and predatory peace, which has made slaves of tens of millions of people, includ-ing the most civilised. 
 This is no peace, but terms dictatedto a defenceless victim by armed robbers. 
 Through the Treatyof Versailles, Germany’s enemies have deprived her of allher colonies. 
 Turkey, Persia and China have been enslaved. 
 A situation has arisen wherein seven-tenths of the world’s population are in a condition of servitude. 
 These slavesare to be found throughout the world and are at the mercyof a handful of countries—Britain, France and Japan. 
That is why this international system in its entirety, theorder based on the Treaty of Versailles, stands on the brink of a volcano, for the enslaved seven-tenths of the world’s population are waiting impatiently for someone to givethem a lead in a struggle which will shake all these countries. 
France hopes that her loans will be repaid to her, but isherself in debt to America whom she cannot repay becauseshe has not the wherewithal, and private property is sacred over there. 
 What is the essence of this sacrosanct private property? It is that the tsars and capitalists borrow money,while the workers and the peasants have to repay the debtfor them. 
 They are on the verge of bankruptcy. 
 They cannotmeet their debts. 
 At that very moment, the Red Armybroke through the Polish frontier and approached the Ger-man borders. 
 At the time it was common talk in Germany, even among the reactionaries and the monarchists, that theBolsheviks would save them, it being evident that theVersailles peace was falling apart, that there existed aRed Army which had declared war on all capitalists. 
 Whathas come to pass? It has come to pass that the Peace of Versailles now hinges on Poland. 
 True, we lacked the strength to bring the war to an end. 
 It should, however,be remembered that our workers and peasants were ill-clad and practically barefooted, yet they marched on and overcame all difficulties, fighting in conditions never before experienced by any other army in the world. 
 We lacked the strength to take Warsaw and finish off the Polishlandowners, whiteguards and capitalists, but our armyshowed the whole world that the Treaty of Versailles isnot the force it is made out to be, that hundreds of millionsof people are condemned to repay loans for many years to come and have their grandchildren and great-grandchil-dren do the same in order that the French, British andother imperialists may be enriched. 
 The Red Army provedthat the Treaty of Versailles is not so very stable. 
 Afterthe Treaty of Versailles our army showed that in the summerof 1920, the Soviet land, devastated as it was, was on the eve of complete victory thanks to that Red Army. 
 The world saw that a force exists to which the Treaty of Ver-sailles holds no terror, and that no Versailles treaties willsubdue the power of the workers and peasants once theyhave learnt to deal with the landowners and capitalists. 
 Thus, the campaign against the Peace of Versailles, the campaign against all the capitalists and landowners of every country and against their oppression of other coun-tries, has not been in vain. 
 Millions upon millions of workersand peasants in all lands have been watching this andgiving it thought, and they now look upon the Soviet Repub-lic as their deliverer. 
 They say: the Red Army has shown that it can give blow for blow, though it was not strong enough for victory in the first year or, you might evensay, in the first month of its peaceful construction. 
 Thatfirst month of peaceful construction, however, will befollowed by many years, and with each passing year itsstrength will multiply tenfold. 
 It was thought that the Peace of Versailles was one of the all-powerful imperialists, but after the summer of 1920 it became clear that they wereweaker than the workers and peasants of even a weak coun-try who know how to unite their forces and repulse thecapitalists. 
 In the summer of 1920 Soviet Russia showedherself as a force that not only defended herself against attack, against the onslaught of the Polish whiteguards, but showed herself in fact as a world force capable of smashing theTreaty of Versailles and freeing hundreds of millions of people in most countries of the world. 
 That is the signifi-cance of the Red Army’s campaign of this summer. 
 That is why events took place in Britain during this war, which marked a turning-point in the whole of British policy. 
When we refused to halt our troops Britain replied by threat-ening to send her fleet against Petrograd. 
 The order wasgiven to attack Petrograd. 
 That is what the British PrimeMinister announced to Comrade Kamenev, and all countries were notified. 
 But on the day following the dispatch of this telegram, mass meetings were held throughout Britain,and Councils of Action sprang up. 
 The workers united. 
 Allthe British Mensheviks, who are even viler than the Russianbrand, and fawn upon the capitalists far more assiduous-ly—even they had to join in, because the workers were demanding it, because the British workers said they would not tolerate a war against Russia. 
 All over Britain Councilsof Action were formed, the British imperialists’ war planswere frustrated, and it once more turned out that, in herwar against the imperialists of all lands, Soviet Russia hasallies in each of them. 
 When we Bolsheviks said: “We are not alone in our revolt against the landowners and capi-talists of Russia, because in every country we have allies—the worker and peasant; moreover, those allies are to befound in most countries”, we were ridiculed and wereasked: “Where are these working people?” Yes, it istrue that in Western Europe, where the capitalists are far stronger and live by fleecing hundreds of millions in the colonies, it is far more difficult to rise up in revolt. 
 Therethe working-class revolution is developing incomparablymore slowly. 
 Nevertheless, it is developing. 
 When, in July1920, Britain threatened Russia with war, the Britishworkers prevented that war from taking place. 
 The British Mensheviks followed the lead of the British Bolsheviks. 
 They had to do so and come out against the Constitution,against the law declaring they would not tolerate the war. 
If the latter was declared on the morrow, they would calla strike and give no coal to Britain and to France as well. 
The British workers declared that they wanted to determine foreign policy; they are directing it in the same way as the Bolsheviks in Russia, and not like the capitalists in othercountries. 
 That is an example of what the Polish war has brought to light. 
 That is why we have emerged victorious within six months. 
 That is why devastated, weak and backward Soviet Russia is defeating an alliance of states infinitelymore powerful than she is. 
 That is because they lack strengthat home, and the workers, the working people in general,are against them. 
 This is apparent at every crisis. 
 This isapparent because they are robbers who attack each other and cannot unite against us; because, in the final analysis, private property divides people and brutalises them, where-as labour unites them. 
 Labour has not only united theworkers and peasants of Russia, it has united them withthe workers and peasants of all lands. 
 Consequently, in allthese countries the people can now see that Soviet Russia is a force that is smashing the Peace of Versailles. 
 Soviet Russia will become stronger, and the Treaty of Versailleswill collapse just as it all but collapsed at the first blowby the Red Army in July 1920. 
 That is why the Polish warhas ended in a manner no imperialist state had bargainedfor. 
 This is a lesson of the utmost importance to us, for it shows by the example and behaviour of all countries taking part in international politics that our cause is strong; thatno matter what attempts are made to invade Russia andno matter what military moves are made against us—andin all probability many more will be made—all theseattempts will go up in smoke as we know from our actual experience, which has steeled us. 
 After every such attempt by our enemies, we shall emerge stronger than ever. 
 I shall now turn from international politics, where the clash with the Peace of Versailles demonstrated ourstrength, to problems that are more immediate and practi-cal, to the situation which has arisen in connection with the Treaty of Versailles. 
 I shall not dwell on the signifi-cance of the Second Congress of the Communist Interna-tional, which took place in Moscow in July, a congress of theCommunists of the whole world, and also of the Congressof the Peoples of the East, which took place afterwardsin Baku. 
 103 These were international congresses which united the Communists and showed that in all civilised countries and in all the backward countries of the East,the banner of Bolshevism, the programme of Bolshevism, the line of Bolshevik action are an emblem of salvation, an emblem of struggle to the workers of all civilised coun-tries and the peasants of all the backward colonial coun-tries. 
 They showed that, during the past three years, SovietRussia not only beat off those who fell upon her in orderto throttle her, but won the sympathy of the working peopleof the whole world; that we not only defeated our enemies,but acquired and are still acquiring new allies daily and by the hour. 
 That which was achieved by the congress of Communists in Moscow and by the Baku congress of Commu-nist representatives of the peoples of the East cannot beimmediately assessed or directly calculated, but it has beenan achievement of greater significance than some mili-tary victories are, because it proves to us that the Bol-sheviks’ experience, their activities and programme, and their call for a revolutionary struggle against the capi-talists and imperialists have won world-wide recognition;that which was achieved in Moscow in July and in Bakuin September will for many months to come provide foodfor thought and assimilation by the workers and peasants of the world. 
 This is a force which, in any conflict or crisis, will come out for Soviet Russia, as we have seen on morethan one occasion. 
 Such is the fundamental lesson of thePolish war, from the angle of the alignment of world forces. 
 In dealing with events at home, I must say that Wrangel is the chief force in the field against us. 
 France, Poland and Wrangel joined forces against us. 
 While our forces were wholly engaged in the war on the Western front,Wrangel mustered his forces, aided by the French andBritish navies. 
 When Wrangel was approaching the Kuban,he was counting on support from the rich Cossack kulaks. 
Who helped Wrangel at the time? Who supplied him with fuel and a fleet to enable him to hold on to the Donets Basin? It was the British and the American navies. 
 Weknow, however, that this landing operation failed, becausethe Kuban Cossack, though he was rich in grain, saw perfectlythrough those promises of a constituent assembly,rule by the people and the other fine things that the Menshe-viks, the Socialist-Revolutionaries, etc. 
, try to fool simple-tons with. 
 Perhaps the Kuban peasants believed them whilethey were holding forth so eloquently, but in the long run they put their faith in action not words, and saw that though the Bolsheviks were severe people to deal with, they were to be preferred. 
 As a result, Wrangel fled from the Kuban, and many hundreds and thousands of his troopswere shot. 
 Despite this, Wrangel assembled more and moreof his forces in the Crimea, his troops consisting in the mainof officers. 
 He hoped that, at the first favourable moment,it would be possible to build up these forces, provided they had the backing of the peasants. 
 Wrangel’s troops are better equipped with guns, tanks, and aircraft than all the other armies that fought in Russia. 
Wrangel was assembling his forces when we were fightingthe Poles; that is why I say that the peace with Poland isunstable. 
 According to the preliminary peace signed on the 12th, the armistice will come into force only on the 18th, and the Poles still have two days in which they can repu-diate it. 
 104 The entire French press and the capitalists there are striving to get Poland to start a new war against SovietRussia; Wrangel is hastening to use all his connectionsin order to wreck this peace, because he can see that when the war with Poland is ended the Bolsheviks will turn against him. 
 The only practical conclusion for us, therefore,is to direct all our forces against Wrangel. 
 In April thisyear we proposed peace on terms which were unfavourableto us, only in order to spare tens of thousands of workersand peasants the carnage of a new war. 
 To us frontiers do not matter so much; we do not mind losing some territory in the frontier regions. 
 To us it is more important to preservethe lives of tens of thousands of workers and peasants andto retain the possibility of peaceful construction, than tokeep a small piece of territory. 
 That is why we submittedthis peace proposal and now repeat that Wrangel is the main threat, that his troops, which have meanwhile grown enor-mously in strength, are fighting desperately, at pointshave crossed the Dnieper and have assumed the offensive. 
The Wrangel front and the Polish front are one and the samething, and the question of the war against Wrangel is aquestion of the war against Poland; to convert the preliminary peace with Poland into a permanent peace we must crush Wrangel in the shortest possible space of time. 
If that is not done, we cannot be certain that the Polish landowners and capitalists, under pressure from the French landowners and capitalists and with their help, will not once again try to embroil us in war. 
 That is why I am taking advantage of this broadly representative meetingto draw your attention to this fundamental question andto ask you to make use of your position and authority inorder to influence the masses of workers and peasants andensure that the greatest possible efforts are made towards the full accomplishment of our immediate task—at all costs to crush Wrangel in the shortest space of time, becausethe possibility of our engaging in the work of peaceful con-struction depends only on this. 
 We know that in our devastated country the peasant economy has been destroyed, and that the peasant needs goods, and not the paper money which is being showered on him in such profusion. 
 However, to supply him with goodssuch as paraffin oil, salt, clothing, etc. 
, industry must berestored. 
 We are approaching a position in which that canbe done. 
 We know that we now have more grain than lastyear; we now have fuel for industry: over 100 million poods of oil from Baku; the Donets Basin, which provides an enor-mous quantity of fuel, has been rehabilitated, though someindustrial enterprises had to be evacuated during Wran-gel’s advance to the south of the Donets Basin. 
 Donetsindustry can be considered completely restored. 
 Suppliesof firewood are growing. 
 Last year they totalled seven million cubic metres; we now have considerably more. 
 Our indus-try is reviving. 
 In Ivanovo-Voznesensk Gubernia, wherefor a number of years the mills were at a standstill, puttingall the workers in low spirits, the mills are now being sup-plied with fuel and are beginning to operate. 
 Thanks tothe victories in Turkestan, they have received Turkestan cotton, and are starting to work. 
 We are now confronted with a vast field of productive work, and we must do every-thing possible to rehabilitate industry, and supply thepeasant with clothing, footwear and food and thus commencea fair exchange of the peasants’ grain for urban products. 
We must begin to give aid to agriculture. 
 Yesterday, in the Council of People’s Commissars, we decided to encour-age with extra rations the workers of the factory thatwill manufacture the first plough that proves best suited to our Russian conditions, so that we may restore our agriculture and raise it to a higher level, despite the shortage of cattle. 
 The workers and peasants are working together, without the landowners and the capitalists, and are achieving suc-cesses. 
 However, the main thing in tackling this problemin earnest is the need to remember firmly that tens of thou-sands of workers and peasants are giving up their lives on the Wrangel front that the enemy is better armed than we are, and that it is there, on the Wrangel front, that thelast desperate battle is being fought out; it is there that thematter is being decided whether Soviet Russia will be ableto strengthen herself for peaceful labour, so that no impe-rialist world-wide alliance, and not only the Polish white-guards, will be able to threaten her. 
 It is up to you, com-rades. 
 You must bend every effort, and remember that SovietRussia has been able to solve all the problems in her strug-gle, not because decrees have been issued from the centre,but because these decrees have met with the enthusiasticand ardent sympathy of the workers and peasants through-out the country. 
 Only when the workers and peasants saw that they were fighting against Kolchak, Denikin andWrangel for their own land, their own factories and work-shops, for their own interests and against the landownersand capitalists—only then did every one of them give theRed Army every possible support and assistance. 
 When the Red Army men saw that the people in the rear were doing all they could for them, they were filled with thespirit which led them to victory. 
 Everything depends onour defeating Wrangel, and I call on you to do everythingpossible in your organisations and factories, and your vil-lages, voluntarily and in accordance with the interests of the workers and peasants of the whole of Russia to come to the aid of the Wrangel front, and then we shall be victorious,both on the Wrangel and on the international fronts. 
 ( Stormy applause . 
) Published in 1920 in the book: Verba-Published according to tim Reports of the Plenary Sessions the text in the book of the Moscow Soviet of Workers ’, Peasants ’ and Red Army Deputies CONCLUDING REMARKS AT A CONFERENCE OF CHAIRMEN OF UYEZD, VOLOST AND VILLAGE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEES OF MOSCOW GUBERNIA OCTOBER 15, 1920 Comrades, I shall have to confine myself to some brief concluding remarks, because from the very beginning ofthe meeting it has been clear that there is quite a strongdesire, in fact a very strong desire, to upbraid the centralgovernment. 
 That would, of course, have been useful, and I have considered it my duty to listen to everything said in criticism of the government and its policy. 
 I think that thediscussion should not have been wound up. 
 ( Hear , hear! ) However, while listening to your remarks, I have been sur-prised to see how few precise and specific proposals youhave put forward. 
 Of the two questions—the foreign affairs and the home affairs of our Republic—I think that home affairs interest you more. 
 That is how it should be. 
 But,comrades, you forget that home affairs depend on foreignaffairs, and I therefore have thought it my duty to tell youhow and why the Polish war brought us up against theinternational imperialists and then led to peace; how and why this peace is precarious, and what has to be done to consolidate it. 
 I hope that, in this matter, after you havediscussed all the other questions and set forth all the prob-lems in a calm fashion, you will not behave like certainpersonages in the fable mentioned by one of the speakers, 105 about the lynx which waits for the goat and the ram to fall out, so as to devour them both. 
 You will not give that satisfaction to the lynx—of that I am sure. 
 Howeverfuriously the goat and the ram may clash, we shall give no satisfaction to the lynx. 
 ( Applause and cheers . 
) Comrades, if extreme dissatisfaction and impatience have been expressed here so often, we all know that freedom of speech is the primary rule of procedure at meetings. 
 At this meeting youhave broken this rule—it is because the majority of thepeasants are experiencing all too severely the effects ofthe very grave situation that has arisen in the localities. 
Most of the peasants are feeling all too severely the effects of famine, cold and excessive taxation. 
 (“ Hear , Hear! ” and applause . 
) It was, in the main, for this that most of the speakers upbraided the central government, directlyand indirectly. 
 One got a feeling that the comrades did noteven want to give a full hearing to speakers in whose speechesthey heard no replies to this acute problem. 
 One of the speakers, I do not remember which, said that in his opinion I had evaded this issue. 
 I consider this assertion groundless. 
 The position of the Soviet Republic is most grave, which made us hurry to conclude peace before the winter campaignset in. 
 That haste stemmed from a desire to avoid a wintercampaign, a realisation that it is better to have a worse frontier, that is to say, to get less Byelorussian territory and be in a position to wrest fewer Byelorussian peasantsfrom the yoke of the bourgeoisie, than to impose fresh hard-ships and another winter campaign on the peasants ofRussia. 
 Such were our reasons. 
 You know that the poorharvest of this year has aggravated the peasants’ need. 
 However, the measure in which this ties us in our home policy is not generally realised. 
 I think that you will allbe fully informed on the subject of taxation. 
 You will alsohear what the speaker on the food policy will have to say. 
And all I want is to draw your attention to the closeconnection between the internal situation and the external. 
 Let us take, for example, the sittings of our Council of Defence and the Council of People’s Commissars. 
 At thesemeetings we even have to deal with the question of therunning of each train, the grain-requisitioning quotas imposedupon the Great Russia gubernias—quotas that are oftenextremely rigorous. 
 Two or three weeks ago the Council of People’s Commissars considered the question of the excessively rigorous quotas, established by the centralauthorities; it decided that they should be reduced. 
 At whose expense is this to be done? There can be only one reply to this question: only at the expense of outlying regions that are richer in grain, namely, Siberia and the Kuban, and by making it possible to obtain grain from theUkraine. 
 We are getting grain from Siberia and from theKuban, but we cannot get grain from the Ukraine becausewarfare is raging there, and the Red Army has to fight thebands that infest that area. 
 We have to settle the problem of almost every train. 
 We have seen what this meeting has turned into, the dissatisfaction expressed here, andthe voices raised in loud protest. 
 We know the reason forall this. 
 We know that all those who have revealed suchemotion here are sick at heart because there is no fodder,livestock is perishing, and taxation is so heavy. 
 The com-rade who said that these cries of protest were something new to us was wrong. 
 Both from telegrams and reportsfrom the provinces we know of the heavy loss of cattle asa result of the grave fodder situation, and we all realise thedifficulties. 
 But we also know the solution. 
 There is onlyone solution—Siberia, the Kuban and the Ukraine. 
 From Siberia we had to bring up troops to the Wrangel front, and in the Council of Defence there were two or threevery painful meetings when comrades came with the demandthat we should cancel the special food trains. 
 After the mostbitter wrangling and bargaining, we ended by deciding tosomewhat curtail the number of food trains. 
 However, we would like to hear more weighty and serious criticism. 
 We know all about the outcries and lamentations that thefarms are being ruined. 
 That is why even the truce thatcomes into force on the 18th, even though the Poles areentitled to cancel it at forty-eight hours’ notice, will giveus some respite and relief; in any case there will be more trainloads of grain from Siberia and the Kuban in the next few weeks. 
 Of course, the need is so acute and thecrop shortage so severe that the relief this will provide willnot be very great. 
 We should not, of course, deceiveourselves and say that it will remove all our difficulties andenable us to discontinue the grain requisitioning quotas. 
 That is something I cannot and will not say. 
 State your views precisely, let us have your definite suggestions forrelieving the heavy taxation, and the representatives of the workers’ and peasants’ government will examine them with the closest attention; because we must find a way of easing this exceedingly painful situation. 
 There is no less grain in the Ukraine than in the Kuban; there is perhapseven more, but so far we have been able to get hardlyanything from the Ukraine under the grain quotas, whichhave been fixed at 600,000,000 poods, and which couldmeet all the needs of our industries and help restore them. 
 We have struck the Ukraine off our accounts: not a single pood can be expected from the Ukraine, because of thebandits there, and because the war with Wrangel compelsus to say that we cannot be sure of getting a single poodfrom the Ukraine. 
 Such is the situation, which, notwith-standing your legitimate impatience and quite justified indignation, makes us divert all our attention to the Polish and the Wrangel fronts. 
 That is why when comrades saythat they are not against giving help, but they want thathelp to be given freely, we say: “Go and help the front!” I shall conclude my brief remarks by reminding you of what I said at the end of my report, namely, that every time the Soviets have had to get out of a difficult situation— when Denikin was in Orel, or when Yudenich was withinfive versts of Petrograd—when the situation seemed notonly difficult, but desperate, a hundred times as difficultas it is now, the Soviet government got out of that situationby calling together meetings of workers and peasants like the present one and telling them the unvarnished truth. 
 That is why I say that whether or not Wrangel will soon becrushed depends, not on a decision of the central govern-ment but on the way in which the representatives from thelocalities, after giving vent to their dissatisfaction, afterfinishing the struggle which the above-mentioned comrade has called a clash between the goats and the rams—an indispensable thing—and after voicing their complaints,accusations and recriminations—the way in which localrepresentatives reply to the question whether they them-selves want freedom, quite apart from any decision by thecentral government. 
 Here we cannot give orders; it will depend on your own decisions, when you come to discuss the state of affairs, the grain-requisitioning quotas, taxa-tion, Wrangel, etc. 
—it will depend on you. 
 Let each man have his say; give vent to all your reproaches; censure us ten times more severely—that is your right and your duty. 
 You have come here to express your opinion plainly and bluntly. 
 But when you have done all that, just reflectcalmly what you want to contribute and do so as to finishwith Wrangel as quickly as possible. 
 I think that we shallreach such thorough agreement on this question that—I repeat in conclusion—never will the lynx benefit from our arguments, recriminations and accusations. 
 ( Applause . 
) Published in 1920 in the book: Ver-Published according to batim Reports of the Plenary Sessions the text in the book of the Moscow Soviet of Workers ’, Peasants ’ and Red Army Deputies TELEGRAM TO THE SOVIET GOVERNMENT OF THE UKRAINE AND THE GENERAL HEADQUARTERS OF THE SOUTHERN FRONT In reply to your telegram concerning the poor peasants I am informing you of my personal opinion. 
 If their temper is really revolutionary, the following should be regarded asa programme: 1) collective cultivation; 2) hiring sta-tions; 3) confiscation of the kulaks’ money over and abovethe labour norm; 4) grain surpluses to be collected in full, part of the grain to be turned over to the poor peasants; 5) the kulaks’ agricultural implements to be handed over to thehiring stations; 6) these measures to be applied only givensuccessful collective cultivation of the soil, and effectivecontrol. 
 The question of communes should be posed last,since nothing is more dangerous than the formation of pseudo-communes, with the participation of individual militants who thus become detached from the main body ofthe peasantry. 
 The greatest prudence should be exercisedin introducing innovations, and the possibility of achievingwhat is being undertaken should be triple-checked. 
 Lenin Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars Written on October 16, 1920 First published in 1942 Published according to the carbon copy A CONTRIBUTIO N TO THE HISTORY OF THE QUESTIO N OF THE DICTATORSHI P106 A NOTE The question of the dictatorship of the proletariat is the fundamental question of the modern working-class move-ment in all capitalist countries without exception. 
 Toelucidate this question fully, a knowledge of its historyis required. 
 On an international scale, the history of thedoctrine of revolutionary dictatorship in general, and ofthe dictatorship of the proletariat in particular, coincides with the history of revolutionary socialism, and especially with the history of Marxism. 
 Moreover—and this, of course,is the most important thing of all—the history of all revo-lutions by the oppressed and exploited classes, againstthe exploiters, provides the basic material and source ofour knowledge on the question of dictatorship. 
 Whoever has failed to understand that dictatorship is essential to the victory of any revolutionary class has no understandingof the history of revolutions, or else does not want to knowanything in this field. 
 With reference to Russia, special importance attaches, as far as theory is concerned, to the Programme of the Rus-sian Social-Democratic Labour Party as drafted in 1902-03 by the editorial board of Zarya and Iskra , or, more exactly, drafted by G. 
 Plekhanov, and edited, amended and endorsedby that editorial board. 
 In this Programme, the question ofthe dictatorship of the proletariat is stated in clear anddefinite terms, and, moreover, is linked up with the struggle against Bernstein, against opportunism. 
 Most important of all, however, is of course the experience of revolution,i. 
e. 
, in the case of Russia, the experience of the year 1905. 
 The last three months of that year—October, November and December—were a period of a remarkably vigorous and broad mass revolutionary struggle, a period that saw a combination of the two most powerful methods of that strug-gle: the mass political strike and an armed uprising. 
 (Let usnote parenthetically that as far back as May 1905 the Bol-shevik congress, the “Third Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party”, declared that “the task of organising the proletariat for direct struggle against the autocracy by means of the armed uprising” was “one of themajor and most urgent tasks of the Party”, and instructedall Party organisations to “explain the role of mass politicalstrikes, which may be of great importance at the beginningand during the progress of the uprising”. 
 107) For the first time in world history, the revolutionary strug-gle attained such a high stage of development and such animpetus that an armed uprising was combined with thatspecifically proletarian weapon—the mass strike. 
 Thisexperience is clearly of world significance to all proletarian revolutions. 
 It was studied by the Bolsheviks with the greatest attention and diligence in both its political and its economic aspects. 
 I shall mention an analysis of themonth-by-month statistics of economic and political strikesin 1905, of the relations between them, and the level ofdevelopment achieved by the strike struggle for the firsttime in world history. 
 This analysis was published by me in 1910 and 1911 in the Prosveshcheniye journal, a summary of it being given in Bolshevik periodicals brought out abroadat the time. 
 108 The mass strikes and the armed uprisings raised, as a matter of course, the question of the revolutionary powerand dictatorship, for these forms of struggle inevitably led—initially on a local scale—to the ejection of the old ruling authorities, to the seizure of power by the proletariatand the other revolutionary classes, to the expulsion of thelandowners, sometimes to the seizure of factories, and so onand so forth. 
 The revolutionary mass struggle of the timegave rise to organisations previously unknown in world history, such as the Soviets of Workers ’ Deputies , followed by the Soviets of Soldiers’ Deputies, Peasants’ Committees,and the like. 
 Thus the fundamental questions (Soviet power and the dictatorship of the proletariat) that are now engag-ing the minds of class-conscious workers all over the world were posed in a practical form at the end of 1905. 
 While such outstanding representatives of the revolutionaryproletariat and of unfalsified Marxism as Rosa Luxemburg,immediately realised the significance of this practical expe-rience and made a critical analysis of it at meetings and inthe press, the vast majority of the official representatives of the official Social-Democratic and socialist parties— including both the reformists and people of the type of thefuture “Kautskyites”, “Longuetists”, the followers of Hill-quit in America, etc. 
—proved absolutely incapable of grasp-ing the significance of this experience and of performingtheir duty as revolutionaries , i. 
e. 
, of setting to work to study and propagate the lessons of this experience. 
 In Russia, immediately after the defeat of the armed uprising of December 1905, both the Bolsheviks and theMensheviks set to work to sum up this experience. 
 Thiswork was especially expedited by what was called the UnityCongress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, held in Stockholm in April 1906, where both Mensheviks and Bolsheviks were represented, and formally united. 
The most energetic preparations for this Congress weremade by both these groups. 
 Early in 1906, prior to theCongress, both groups published drafts of their resolutionson all the most important questions. 
 These draft resolu-tions—reprinted in my pamphlet, Report on the Unity Congress of the R. 
 S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 (A Letter to the St. 
 Petersburg Workers ), Moscow, 1906 (110 pages, nearly half of which are taken up with the draft resolutions of both groups and withthe resolutions finally adopted by the Congress)—providethe most important material for a study of the question as it stood at the time. 
 By that time, the disputes as to the significance of the Soviets were already linked up with the question of dicta-torship. 
 The Bolsheviks had raised the question of thedictatorship even prior to the revolution of October 1905 (see my pamphlet Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution , Geneva, July 1905; reprinted in a volume of collected articles entitled Twelve Years ). 
 The Mensheviks took a negative stand with regard to the “dicta-torship” slogan; the Bolsheviks emphasised that the Soviets of Workers’ Deputies were “ actually an embryo of a new revolutionary power ”, as was literally said in the draft of the Bolshevik resolution (p. 
 92 of my Report ). 
 The Mensheviks acknowledged the importance of the Soviets; theywere in favour of “helping to organise” them, etc. 
, but theydid not regard them as embryos of revolutionary power,did not in general say anything about a “new revolutionary power” of this or some similar type, and flatly rejected the slogan of dictatorship. 
 It will easily be seen that thisattitude to the question already contained the seeds of allthe present disagreements with the Mensheviks. 
 It willalso be easily seen that, in their attitude to this question,the Mensheviks (both Russian and non-Russian, such as the Kautskyites, Longuetists and the like) have been behaving like reformists or opportunists, who recognisethe proletarian revolution in word, but in deed reject what is most essential and fundamental in the concept of“revolution ”. 
 Even before the revolution of 1905, I analysed, in the afore-mentioned pamphlet, Two Tactics , the arguments of the Mensheviks, who accused me of having “imperceptiblysubstituted ‘dictatorship’ for ‘revolution’” ( Twelve Years , p. 
 459). 
 I showed in detail that, by this very accusation,the Mensheviks revealed their opportunism, their true po-litical nature, as toadies to the liberal bourgeoisie and con-ductors of its influence in the ranks of the proletariat. 
 When the revolution becomes an unquestioned force, I said, evenits opponents begin to “recognise the revolution”; andI pointed (in the summer of 1905) to the example of theRussian liberals, who remained constitutional monarchists. 
At present, in 1920, one might add that in Germany and Italy the liberal bourgeois—or at least the most educated and adroit of them—are ready to “recognise the revolution”. 
But by “recognising” the revolution, and at the same timerefusing to recognise the dictatorship of a definite class (or of definite classes), the Russian liberals and theMensheviks of that time, and the present-day German and Italian liberals, Turatists and Kautskyites, have revealed their reformism , their absolute unfitness to be revolution-aries. 
 Indeed, when the revolution has already become an unquestioned force, when even the liberals “recognise” it, and when the ruling classes not only see but also feel the invincible might of the oppressed masses, then the entire question —both to the theoreticians and the leaders of prac-tical policy—reduces itself to an exact class definition of the revolution . 
 However, without the concept of “dictator-ship”, this precise class definition cannot be given. 
 One cannot be a revolutionary in fact unless one prepares for dictatorship. 
 This truth was not understood in 1905 bythe Mensheviks, and it is not understood in 1920 by theItalian, German, French and other socialists, who are afraidof the severe “conditions” of the Communist International;this truth is feared by people who are capable of recognising the dictatorship in word , but are incapable of preparing for it in deed . 
 It will therefore not be irrelevant to quote at length the explanation of Marx’s views, which Ipublished in July 1905 in opposition to the Russian Men-sheviks, but is equally applicable to the West-EuropeanMensheviks of 1920. 
 (Instead of giving titles of newspapers, etc. 
, I shall merely indicate whether Mensheviks or Bolsheviks are referred to. 
) “In his notes to Marx’s articles in Die Neue Rheinische Zeitung of 1848, Mehring tells us that one of the reproaches levelled at this newspaper by bourgeois publications wasthat it had allegedly demanded ‘the immediate introduction of a dictatorship as the sole means of achieving democracy’ (Marx, Nachlass , Vol. 
 III, p. 
 53). 
 From the vulgar bourgeois standpoint the terms of dictatorship and democracy aremutually exclusive. 
 Failing to understand the theory ofclass struggle and accustomed to seeing in the politicalarena the petty squabbling of the various bourgeois circles and coteries, the bourgeois understands by dictatorship the annulment of all liberties and guarantees of democracy,arbitrariness of every kind, and every sort of abuse ofpower, in a dictator’s personal interests. 
 In fact, it isprecisely this vulgar bourgeois view that is to be observedamong our Mensheviks, who attribute the partiality of the Bolsheviks for the slogan of ‘dictatorship’ to Lenin’s passionate desire to try his luck’ ( Iskra No. 
 103, p. 
 3, column 2). 
 In order to explain to the Mensheviks the mean-ing of the term class dictatorship as distinct from a per-sonal dictatorship, and the tasks of a democratic dictatorship as distinct from a socialist dictatorship, it would not be amiss to dwell on the views of Die Neue Rheinische Zeitung . 
109 “‘After a revolution,’ Die Neue Rheinische Zeitung wrote on September 14, 1848, ‘every provisional organisation ofthe state requires a dictatorship, and an energetic dictator-ship at that. 
 From the very beginning we have reproached Camphausen [the head of the Ministry after March 18, 1848] for not acting dictatorially, for not having immedi-ately smashed up and eliminated the remnants of the oldinstitutions. 
 And while Herr Camphausen was lulling him-self with constitutional illusions, the defeated party [i. 
e. 
,the party of reaction] strengthened its positions in the bureaucracy and in the army, and here and there even began to venture upon open struggle. 
’ 110 “These words, Mehring justly remarks, sum up in a few propositions all that was propounded in detail in Die Neue Rheinische Zeitung in long articles on the Camphausen Ministry. 
 What do these words of Marx tell us? That a provi-sional revolutionary government must act dictatorially (a proposition which the Mensheviks were totally unable tograsp since they were fighting shy of the slogan of dictator-ship), and that the task of such a dictatorship is to destroythe remnants of the old institutions (which is precisely whatwas clearly stated in the resolution of the Third Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party [Bolshe-viks] on the struggle against counter-revolution, and wasomitted in the Mensheviks’ resolution as shown above). 
Third, and last, it follows from these words that Marxcastigated the bourgeois democrats for entertaining ‘con-stitutional illusions’ in a period of revolution and open civil war. 
 The meaning of these words becomes particularly obvious from the article in Die Neue Rheinische Zeitung of June 6, 1848. 
 “‘A Constituent National Assembly’, Marx wrote, ‘must first of all be an active, revolutionary active assembly. 
The Frankfurt Assembly, 111 however, is busying itself with school exercises in parliamentarianism while allowing the government to act. 
 Let us assume that this learned assemblysucceeds, after mature consideration, in evolving the best possible agenda and the best constitution, but what is the use of the best possible agenda and of the best possible constitution, if the German governments have in the meantime placed the bayonet on the agenda?’112 “That is the meaning of the slogan: dictatorship.... 
“Major questions in the life of nations are settled only by force. 
 The reactionary classes themselves are usually thefirst to resort to violence, to civil war; they are the first to ‘place the bayonet on the agenda’, as the Russian autoc-racy has systematically and unswervingly been doingeverywhere ever since January 9. 
 113 And since such a situa-tion has arisen, since the bayonet has really become the mainpoint on the political agenda, since insurrection has provedimperative and urgent—the constitutional illusions and school exercises in parliamentarianism become merely a screen for the bourgeois betrayal of the revolution, a screento conceal the fact that the bourgeoisie is ‘recoiling’ fromthe revolution. 
 It is precisely the slogan of dictatorshipthat the genuinely revolutionary class must advance, in thatcase. 
” 114 That was how the Bolsheviks reasoned on the dictator-ship before the revolution of October 1905. 
 After the experience of this revolution, I made a detailed- study of the question of dictatorship in the pamphlet, The Victory of the Cadets and the Tasks of the Workers’ Party , St. 
 Petersburg, 1906 (the pamphlet is dated March 28, 1906). 
 I shall quote the most important arguments from this pam-phlet, only substituting for a number of proper names asimple indication as to whether the reference is to the Ca-dets or to the Mensheviks. 
 Generally speaking, this pamphletwas directed against the Cadets, and partly also against thenon-party liberals, the semi-Cadets, and the semi-Menshe-viks. 
 But, actually speaking, everything said therein about dictatorship applies in fact to the Mensheviks, who wereconstantly sliding to the Cadets’ position on this question. 
 “At the moment when the firing in Moscow was subsid-ing, and when the military and police dictatorship wasindulging in its savage orgies, when repressions and mass torture were raging all over Russia, voices were raised in the Cadet press against the use of force by the Left, andagainst the strike committees organised by the revolu- /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR tionary parties. 
 The Cadet professors on the Dubasovs’ pay-roll, who are peddling their science, went to the length of translating the word ‘dictatorship’ by the words ‘rein-forced security’. 
 These ‘men of science’ even distorted theirhigh-school Latin in order to discredit the revolutionarystruggle. 
 Please note once and for all, you Cadet gentlemen,that dictatorship means unlimited power, based on force,and not on law. 
 In civil war, any victorious power can only be a dictatorship. 
 The point is, however, that there is the dictatorship of a minority over the majority, the dictator-ship of a handful of police officials over the people; andthere is the dictatorship of the overwhelming majority ofthe people over a handful of tyrants, robbers and usurpersof the people’s power. 
 By their vulgar distortion of the scientific concept ‘dictatorship’, by their outcries against the violence of the Left at a time when the Right are resort-ing to the most lawless and outrageous violence the Cadetgentlemen have given striking evidence of the position the‘compromisers’ take in the intense revolutionary struggle. 
When the struggle flares up, the ‘compromiser’ cravenly runs for cover. 
 When the revolutionary people are victori-ous (October 17), the ‘compromiser’ creeps out of his hiding-place, boastfully preens himself, shouting and raving untilhe is hoarse: ‘That was a “glorious” political strike!’ Butwhen victory goes to the counter-revolution, the ‘compro-miser’ begins to heap hypocritical admonitions and edifying counsel on the vanquished. 
 The successful strike was ‘glo-rious’. 
 The defeated strikes were criminal, mad, senseless,and anarchistic. 
 The defeated insurrection was folly, a riotof surging elements, barbarity and stupidity. 
 In short, hispolitical conscience and political wisdom prompt the ‘com-promiser’ to cringe before the side that for the moment is the strongest, to get in the way of the combatants, hindering first one side and then the other, to tone down the struggleand to blunt the revolutionary consciousness of the peoplewho are waging a desperate struggle for freedom. 
” 115 To proceed. 
 It would be highly opportune at this point to quote the explanations on the question of dictatorship, directed against Mr. 
 R. 
 Blank. 
 In 1906, this R. 
 Blank, in a newspaper actually Menshevik though formally non-parti-san, 116 set forth the Mensheviks’ views and extolled their efforts “to direct the Russian Social-Democratic movement along the path that is being followed by the whole of the international Social-Democratic movement, led by the great Social-Democratic Party of Germany”. 
 In other words, like the Cadets, R. 
 Blank contraposed the Bolsheviks, as unreasonable, non-Marxist, rebel, etc. 
,revolutionaries, to the “reasonable” Mensheviks, and pre-sented the German Social-Democratic Party as a Menshevik party as well. 
 This is the usual method of the international trend of social-liberals, pacifists, etc. 
, who in all countriesextol the reformists and opportunists, the Kautskyites andthe Longuetists, as “reasonable” socialists in contrast withthe “madness” of the Bolsheviks. 
 This is how I answered Mr. 
 R. 
 Blank in the above-mentioned pamphlet of 1906: “Mr. 
 Blank compares two periods of the Russian revo-lution. 
 The first period covers approximately October-December 1905. 
 This is the period of the revolutionarywhirlwind. 
 The second is the present period, which, ofcourse, we have a right to call the period of Cadet victories in the Duma elections, or, perhaps, if we take the risk of running ahead somewhat, the period of a Cadet Duma. 
 “Regarding this period, Mr. 
 Blank says that the turn of intellect and reason has come again, and it is possibleto resume deliberate, methodical and systematic activities. 
On the other hand, Mr. 
 Blank describes the first period as a period in which theory diverged from practice. 
 All Social-Democratic principles and ideas vanished; the tactics thathad always been advocated by the founders of RussianSocial-Democracy were forgotten, and even the very pillarsof the Social-Democratic world outlook were uprooted. 
 “Mr. 
 Blank’s main assertion is merely a statement of fact: the whole theory of Marxism diverged from ‘practice’ in the period of the revolutionary whirlwind. 
 “Is that true? What is the first and main ‘pillar’ of Marx-ist theory? It is that the only thoroughly revolutionaryclass in modern society, and therefore, the advanced classin every revolution, is the proletariat. 
 The question is then: has the revolutionary whirlwind uprooted this ‘pillar’ of the Social-Democratic world outlook? On the contrary, thewhirlwind has vindicated it in the most brilliant fashion. 
 It was the proletariat that was the main and, at first, almost the only fighter in this period. 
 For the first time in history, perhaps, a bourgeois revolution was marked by the employ-ment of a purely proletarian weapon, i. 
e. 
, the mass politi-cal strike, on a scale unprecedented even in the mostdeveloped capitalist countries. 
 The proletariat marched intobattle that was definitely revolutionary, at a time whenthe Struves and the Blanks were calling for participation in the Bulygin Duma and when the Cadet professors were exhorting the students to keep to their studies. 
 With itsproletarian weapon, the proletariat won for Russia thewhole of that so-called ‘constitution’, which since thenhas only been mutilated, chopped about and curtailed. 
The proletariat in October 1905 employed those tactics of struggle that six months before had been laid down in the resolution of the Bolshevik Third Congress of the Rus-sian Social-Democratic Labour Party, which had stronglyemphasised the necessity of combining the mass politicalstrike with insurrection; and it is this combination thatcharacterises the whole period of the ‘revolutionary whirl-wind’, the whole of the last quarter of 1905. 
 Thus our ideol-ogist of petty bourgeoisie has distorted reality in the mostbrazen and glaring manner. 
 He has not cited a single factto prove that Marxist theory diverged from practicalexperience in the period of the ‘revolutionary whirlwind’;he has tried to obscure the main feature of this whirlwind, which most brilliantly confirmed the correctness of ‘all Social-Democratic principles and ideas’, of ‘all the pillarsof the Social-Democratic world outlook’. 
 “But what was the real reason that induced Mr. 
 Blank to come to the monstrously wrong conclusion that allMarxist principles and ideas vanished in the period of the ‘whirlwind’? It is very interesting to examine this circum-stance; it still further exposes the real nature of philistinismin politics. 
 “What is it that mainly distinguished the period of the ‘revolutionary whirlwind’ from the present ‘Cadet’ period,as regards the various forms of political activity and the various methods by which the people make history? First and mainly it is that during the period of the ‘whirlwind’certain special method~ of making history were employed which are foreign to other periods of political life. 
 The follow-ing were the most important of these methods: 1) the ‘ sei-zure ’ by the people of political liberty —its exercise without any rights and laws, and without any limitations (freedomof assembly, even if only in the universities, freedom of thepress, freedom of association, the holding of congresses,etc. 
); 2) the creation of new organs of revolutionary author-ity—Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’, Railwaymen’s and Peasants’ Deputies, new rural and urban authorities, and so on, and so forth. 
 These bodies were set up exclusivelyby the revolutionary sections of the people, they were formed irrespective of all laws and regulations, entirely in arevolutionary way , as a product of the native genius of thepeople, as a manifestation of the independent activity of the people which had rid itself, or was ridding itself, of its old police fetters. 
 Lastly, they were indeed organs ofauthority , for all their rudimentary, spontaneous, amorphous and diffuse character, in composition and in activity. 
 Theyacted as a government, when, for example, they seized print-ing plants (in St. 
 Petersburg), and arrested police officials who were preventing the revolutionary people from exercis-ing their rights (such cases also occurred in St. 
 Petersburg,where the new organ of authority concerned was weakest,and where the old government was strongest). 
 They actedas a government when they appealed to the whole peopleto withhold money from the old government. 
 They confis-cated the old government’s funds (the railway strike com-mittees in the South) and used them for the needs of the new,the people’s government. 
 Yes, these were undoubtedly theembryos of a new, people’s, or, if you will, revolutionarygovernment. 
 In their social and political character, theywere the rudiments of the dictatorship of the revolutionary elements of the people. 
 This surprises you, Mr. 
 Blank and Mr. 
 Kiesewetter! You do not see here the ‘reinforced securi-ty’, which for the bourgeois is tantamount to dictatorship?We have already told you that you have not the faintestnotion of the scientific concept ‘dictatorship’. 
 We willexplain it to you in a moment; but first we will deal with the third ‘method’ of activity in the period of the ‘revolu-tionary whirlwind’: the use by the people of force against those who used force against the people . 
 “The organs of authority that we have described repre-sented a dictatorship in embryo, for they recognised no other authority, no law and no standards, no matter by whom established. 
 Authority—unlimited, outside the law, andbased on force in the most direct sense of the word—isdictatorship. 
 But the force on which this new authority wasbased, and sought to base itself, was not the force ofbayonets usurped by a handful of militarists, not the power of the ‘police force’, not the power of money, nor the power of any previously established institutions. 
 It wasnothing of the kind. 
 The new organs of authority possessedneither arms, nor money, nor old institutions. 
 Their power—can you imagine it, Mr. 
 Blank and Mr. 
 Kiesewetter?—hadnothing in common with the old instruments of power, nothing in common with ‘reinforced security’, if we do not have in mind the reinforced security established to protectthe people from the tyranny of the police and of the otherorgans of the old regime. 
 “What was the power based on, then? It was based on the mass of the people. 
 That is the main feature that distin-guished this new authority from all preceding organs of the old regime. 
 The latter were the instruments of therule of the minority over the people, over the masses ofworkers and peasants. 
 The former was an instrument ofthe rule of the people, of the workers and peasants, overthe minority, over a handful of police bullies, over a hand-ful of privileged nobles and government officials. 
 That is the difference between dictatorship over the people and dictatorship of the revolutionary people: mark this well, Mr. 
 Blank and Mr. 
 Kiesewetter! As the dictatorship of aminority, the old regime was able to maintain itself solelywith the aid of police devices, solely by preventing the masses of the people from taking part in the government, and from supervising the government. 
 The old authority persist-ently distrusted the masses, feared the light, maintaineditself by deception. 
 As the dictatorship of the overwhelmingmajority, the new authority maintained itself and couldmaintain itself solely because it enjoyed the confidence of the vast masses, solely because it, in the freest, widest, and most resolute manner, enlisted all the masses in the taskof government. 
 It concealed nothing, it had no secrets, no regulations, no formalities. 
 It said, in effect: are you a working man? Do you want to fight to rid Russia of the gang of police bullies? You are our comrade. 
 Elect your deputy. 
 Elect him at once, immediately, whichever way you thinkbest. 
 We will willingly and gladly accept him as a fullmember of our Soviet of Workers’ Deputies, Peasant Com-mittee, Soviet of Soldiers’ Deputies, and so forth. 
 It wasan authority open to all, it carried out all its functions before the eyes of the masses, was accessible to the masses, sprang directly from the masses; and was a direct andimmediate instrument of the popular masses, of their will. 
Such was the new authority, or, to be exact, its embryo,for the victory of the old authority trampled down the shootsof this young plant very soon. 
 “Perhaps, Mr. 
 Blank or Mr. 
 Kiesewetter, you will ask: why ‘dictatorship’, why ‘force’? Is it necessary for a vastmass to use force against a handful? Can tens and hundredsof millions be dictators over a thousand or ten thousand? “That question is usually put by people who for the first time hear the term ‘dictatorship’ used in what to them is a new connotation. 
 People are accustomed to see only a police authority and only a police dictatorship. 
The idea that there can be government without any police,or that dictatorship need not be a police dictatorship,seems strange to them. 
 You say that millions need notresort to force against thousands? You are mistaken; and your mistake arises from the fact that you do not regard a phenomenon in its process of development. 
 You forgetthat the new authority does not drop from the skies, butgrows up, arises parallel with, and in opposition to the oldauthority, in struggle against it. 
 Unless force is used againsttyrants armed with the weapons and instruments of power, the people cannot be liberated from tyrants. 
 “Here is a very simple analogy, Mr. 
 Blank and Mr. 
 Kiese-wetter, which will help you to grasp this idea, whichseems so remote and ‘fantastic’ to the Cadet mind. 
 Let ussuppose that Avramov is injuring and torturing Spiridonova. 
On Spiridonova’s side, let us say, are tens and hundreds of unarmed people. 
 On Avramov’s side there is a handful of Cossacks. 
 What would the people do if Spiridonova werebeing tortured, not in a dungeon but in public? They would resort to force against Avramov and his body-guard. 
 Per-haps they would sacrifice a few of their comrades, shot down by Avramov; but in the long run they would forcibly disarm Avramov and his Cossacks, and in all probabilitywould kill on the spot some of these brutes in human form;they would clap the rest into some gaol to prevent themfrom committing any more outrages and to bring them tojudgement before the people. 
 “So you see, Mr. 
 Blank and Mr. 
 Kiesewetter, when Avra-mov and his Cossacks torture Spiridonova, that is militaryand police dictatorship over the people. 
 When a revolution-ary people (that is to say, a people capable of fightingthe tyrants, and not only of exhorting, admonishing,regretting, condemning, whining and whimpering; not a philistine narrow-minded, but a revolutionary people) resorts to force against Avramov and the Avramovs, thatis a dictatorship of the revolutionary people. 
 It is a dicta-torship , because it is the authority of the people over Avra-mov, an authority unrestricted by any laws (the philistines,perhaps, would be opposed to rescuing Spiridonova from Avramov by force, thinking it to be against the ‘law’. 
 They would no doubt ask: Is there a ‘law’ that permitsthe killing of Avramov? Have not some philistine ideolo-gists built up the ‘resist not evil’ theory?). 
 The scientificterm ‘dictatorship’ means nothing more nor less than author-ity untrammeled by any laws, absolutely unrestricted by any rules whatever, and based directly on force. 
 The term ‘dictatorship’ has no other meaning but this —mark this well, Cadet gentlemen. 
 Again, in the analogy we havedrawn, we see the dictatorship of the people , because the people, the mass of the population, unorganised, ‘casually’assembled at the given spot, itself appears on the scene, exer-cises justice and metes out punishment, exercises power and creates a new, revolutionary law. 
 Lastly, it is thedictatorship of the revolutionary people. 
 Why only of the revolutionary, and not of the whole people? Because amongthe whole people, constantly suffering, and most cruelly,from the brutalities of the Avramovs, there are some who are physically cowed and terrified; there are some who are morally degraded by the ‘resist not evil’ theory, for exam-ple, or simply degraded not by theory, but by prejudice, habit, routine; and there are indifferent people, whom we call philistines, petty-bourgeois people who are more inclined to hold aloof from intense struggle, to pass by or even to hide themselves (for fear of getting mixed up inthe fight and getting hurt). 
 That is why the dictatorshipis exercised, not by the whole people, but by the revolution-ary people who, however, do not shun the whole people,who explain to all the people the motives of their actions in all their details, and who willingly enlist the whole people not only in ‘administering’ the state, but in govern-ing it too, and indeed in organising the state. 
 “Thus our simple analogy contains all the elements of the scientific concept ‘dictatorship of the revolutionarypeople’, and also of the concept ‘military and police dictatorship’. 
 We can now pass from this simple analogy, which even a learned Cadet professor can grasp, to the morecomplex developments of social life. 
 “Revolution, in the strict and direct sense of the word, is a period in the life of a people when the anger accumu-lated during centuries of Avramov brutalities breaks forth into actions , not merely into words; and into the actions of millions of the people , not merely of individuals. 
 The people awaken and rise up to rid themselves of the Avra-movs. 
 The people rescue the countless numbers of Spiri-donovas in Russian life from the Avramovs, use forceagainst the Avramovs, and establish their authority over the Avramovs. 
 Of course, this does not take place so easily, and not ‘all at once’, as it did in our analogy, simplified forProfessor Kiesewetter. 
 This struggle of the people againstthe Avramovs, a struggle in the strict and direct sense ofthe word, this act of the people in throwing the Avramovsoff their backs, stretches over months and years of ‘revolu-tionary whirlwind’. 
 This act of the people in throwing the Avramovs off their backs is the real content of what iscalled the great Russian revolution. 
 This act, regarded fromthe standpoint of the methods of making history, takesplace in the forms we have just described in discussingthe revolutionary whirlwind, namely: the people seize political freedom, that is, the freedom which the Avramovs had prevented them from exercising; the people create anew, revolutionary authority, authority over the Avra-movs, over the tyrants of the old police regime; the people use force against the Avramovs in order to remove, disarm and make harmless these wild dogs, all the Avramovs, Durnovos, Dubasovs, Mins, etc. 
, etc. 
 “Is it good that the people should apply such unlawful, irregular, unmethodical and unsystematic methods of strug-gle as seizing their liberty and creating a new, formallyunrecognised and revolutionary authority, that it should use force against the oppressors of the people? Yes, it is very good. 
 It is the supreme manifestation of the people’sstruggle for liberty. 
 It marks that great period when thedreams of liberty cherished by the best men and womenof Russia come true , when liberty becomes the cause of the masses of the people, and not merely of individual heroes. 
 It is as good as the rescue by the crowd (in our analogy) of Spiridonova from Avramov, and the forcible disarmingof Avramov and making him harmless. 
 “But this brings us to the very pivot of the Cadets’ hidden thoughts and apprehensions. 
 A Cadet is the ideologistof the philistines precisely because he looks at politics, at the liberation of the whole people, at revolution, through the spectacles of that same philistine who, in our analogyof the torture of Spiridonova by Avramov, would try torestrain the crowd, advise it not to break the law, not tohasten to rescue the victim from the hands of the torturer,since he is acting in the name of the law. 
 In our analogy, of course, that philistine would be morally a monster; but in social life as a whole, we repeat, the philistine monsteris not an individual, but a social phenomenon, conditioned,perhaps, by the deep-rooted prejudices of the bourgeois-philistine theory of law. 
 “Why does Mr. 
 Blank hold it as self-evident that all Marxist principles were forgotten during the period of ‘whirlwind’? Because he distorts Marxism into Brentano-ism, 117 and thinks that such ‘principles’ as the seizure of liberty, the establishment of revolutionary authority andthe use of force by the people are not Marxist. 
 This idearuns through the whole of Mr. 
 Blank’s article; and not only Mr. 
 Blank’s, but the articles of all the Cadets, and of all the writers in the liberal and radical camp who, today,are praising Plekhanov for his love of the Cadets; all of them, right up to the Bernsteinians of Bez Zaglaviya ,118 the Prokopoviches, Kuskovas and tutti quanti . 
 “Let us see how this opinion arose and why it was bound to arise. 
 “It arose directly out of the Bernsteinian or, to put it more broadly, the opportunist concepts of the West-European Social-Democrats. 
 The fallacies of these concepts,which the ‘orthodox’ Marxists in Western Europe have been systematically exposing all along the line, are now being smuggled into Russia ‘on the sly’, in a differentdressing and on a different occasion. 
 The Bernsteiniansaccepted and accept Marxism minus its directly revolu-tionary aspect. 
 They do not regard the parliamentary strug-gle as one of the weapons particularly suitable for definite historical periods, but as the main and almost the sole form of struggle making ‘force’, ‘seizure’, ‘dictatorship’unnecessary. 
 It is this vulgar philistine distortion ofMarxism that the Blanks and other liberal eulogisers ofPlekhanov are now smuggling into Russia. 
 They have becomeso accustomed to this distortion that they do not even think it necessary to prove that Marxist principles and ideas were forgotten in the period of the revolutionary whirlwind. 
 “Why was such an opinion bound to arise? Because it accords very well with the class standing and interests ofthe petty bourgeoisie. 
 The ideologists of ‘purified’ bourgeoissociety agree with all the methods used by the Social-Democrats in their struggle except those to which the revolu-tionary people resort in the period of a ‘whirlwind ’, and which revolutionary Social-Democrats approve of and helpin using. 
 The interests of the bourgeoisie demand that theproletariat should take part in the struggle against the autoc-racy, but only in a way that does not lead to the supremacy of the proletariat and the peasantry, and does not com-pletely eliminate the old, feudal-autocratic and police organsof state power. 
 The bourgeoisie wants to preserve theseorgans, only establishing its direct control over them. 
 Itneeds them against the proletariat , whose struggle would be too greatly facilitated if they were completely abolished. 
 That is why the interests of the bourgeoisie as a class require both a monarchy and an Upper Chamber, and theprevention of the dictatorship of the revolutionary people. 
 Fight the autocracy, the bourgeoisie says to the proletariat, but do not touch the old organs of state power, for I need them. 
 Fight in a ‘parliamentary’ way, that is, within the limits that we will prescribe by agreement with the mon-archy. 
 Fight with the aid of organisations, only not organisa-tions like general strike committees, Soviets of Workers’,Soldiers ‘ Deputies, etc. 
, but organisations that are recognised,restricted and made safe for capital by a law that we shall pass by agreement with the monarchy. 
 “It is clear, therefore, why the bourgeoisie speaks with disdain, contempt, anger and hatred about the period ofthe ‘whirlwind’, and with rapture, ecstasy and boundlessphilistine infatuation for ... reaction, about the periodof constitutionalism as protected by Dubasov. 
 It is once again that constant, invariable quality of the Cadets: seeking to lean on the people and at the same time dreadingtheir revolutionary initiative. 
 “It is also clear why the bourgeoisie is in such mortal fear of a repetition of the ‘whirlwind’, why it ignores andobscures the elements of the new revolutionary crisis, why it fosters constitutional illusions and spreads them among the people. 
 “Now we have fully explained why Mr. 
 Blank and his like declare that in the period of the ‘whirlwind’ all Marxistprinciples and ideas were forgotten. 
 Like all philistines,Mr. 
 Blank accepts Marxism minus its revolutionary aspect; he accepts Social-Democratic methods of struggle minus the most revolutionary and directly revolutionary methods. 
 “Mr. 
 Blank’s attitude towards the period of ‘whirlwind’ is extremely characteristic as an illustration of bourgeoisfailure to understand proletarian movements, bourgeoishorror of acute and resolute struggle, bourgeois hatred for every manifestation of a radical and directly revolutionary method of solving social historical problems, a methodthat breaks up old institutions. 
 Mr. 
 Blank has betrayedhimself and all his bourgeois narrow-mindedness. 
 Somewherehe heard and read that during the period of whirlwind theSocial-Democrats made ‘mistakes’—and he had hastened to conclude, and to declare with self-assurance, in tones that brook no contradiction and require no proof, that allthe ‘principles’ of Marxism (of which he has not the least notion!) were forgotten. 
 As for these ‘mistakes’, we will remark: Has there been a period in the development of the working-class movement, in the development of Social-Democracy, when no mistakes were made, when therewas no deviation to the right or the left? Is not the historyof the parliamentary period of the struggle waged by theGerman Social-Democratic Party—the period which allnarrow-minded bourgeois all over the world regard as the utmost limit—filled with such mistakes? If Mr. 
 Blank were not an utter ignoramus on problems of socialism, hewould easily call to mind Mülberger, Dühring, the Damp-fersubvention 119 question, the ‘Youth’,120 and Bernsteiniad and many, many more. 
 But Mr. 
 Blank is not interested instudying the actual course of development of the Social-Democratic movement; all he wants is to minimise the scope of the proletarian struggle in order to exalt the bourgeoispaltriness of his Cadet Party. 
 “Indeed, if we examine the question in the light of the deviations that the Social-Democratic movement has madefrom its ordinary, ‘normal’ course, we shall see that even in this respect there was more and not less solidarity and ideological integrity among the Social-Democrats in theperiod of ‘revolutionary whirlwind’ than there was beforeit. 
 The tactics adopted in the period of ‘whirlwind’ did notfurther estrange the two wings of the Social-DemocraticParty, but brought them closer together. 
 Former disagree-ments gave way to unity of opinion on the question of armed uprising. 
 Social-Democrats of both factions were activein the Soviets of Workers’ Deputies, these peculiar instru-ments of embryonic revolutionary authority; they drew thesoldiers and peasants into these Soviets, they issuedrevolutionary manifestos jointly with the petty-bourgeois revolutionary parties. 
 Old controversies of the pre-revolutionary period gave way to unanimity on practicalquestions. 
 The upsurge of the revolutionary tide pushedaside disagreements, compelling Social-Democrats to adoptmilitant tactics; it swept the question of the Duma into thebackground and put the question of insurrection on the order of the day; and it brought closer together the Social-Democrats and revolutionary bourgeois democrats incarrying out immediate tasks. 
 In Severny Golos ,121 the Men-sheviks, jointly with the Bolsheviks, called for a general strike and insurrection; and they called upon the workers to continue this struggle until they had captured power. 
 The revolutionary situation itself suggested practicalslogans. 
 There were arguments only over matters of detailin the appraisal of events: for example, Nachalo 122 regarded the Soviets of Workers’ Deputies as organs of revolutionarylocal self-government, while Novaya Zhizn 123 regarded them as embryonic organs of revolutionary state power that unit-ed the proletariat with the revolutionary democrats. 
 Nachalo inclined towards the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 Novaya Zhizn advocated the democratic dictatorship of the pro-letariat and the peasantry. 
 But have not disagreementsof this kind been observed at every stage of development of every socialist party in Europe? “Mr. 
 Blank’s misrepresentation of the facts and his gross distortion of recent history are nothing more norless than a sample of the smug bourgeois banality, forwhich periods of revolutionary whirlwind seem folly (‘allprinciples are forgotten’, ‘even intellect and reason almost vanish’), while periods of suppression of revolution and philistine ‘progress’ (protected by the Dubasovs) seem tobe periods of reasonable, deliberate and methodical activity. 
This comparative appraisal of two periods (the period of‘whirlwind’ and the Cadet period) runs through the wholeof Mr. 
 Blank’s article. 
 When human history rushes forward with the speed of a locomotive, he calls it a ‘whirlwind’, a ‘torrent’, the ‘vanishing’ of all ‘principles and ideas’. 
When history plods along at dray-horse pace, it becomesthe very symbol of reason and method. 
 When the massesof the people themselves, with all their virgin primitivenessand simple, rough determination begin to make history, begin to put ‘principles and theories’ immediately and directly into practice, the bourgeois is terrified and howlsthat ‘intellect is retreating into the background’ (is notthe contrary the case, heroes of philistinism? Is it not theintellect of the masses, and not of individuals, that invadesthe sphere of history at such moments? Does not mass intellect at such a time become a verile, effective, and not an armchair force?). 
 When the direct movement of themasses has been crushed by shootings, repressive measures, floggings, unemployment and starvation, when all the parasites of professorial science financed by Dubasov come crawling out of their crevices and begin to administer affairs on behalf of the people, in the name of the masses , selling and betraying their interests to a privileged few—then theknights of philistinism think that an era of calm and peace-ful progress has set in and that ‘the turn of intellect andreason has come’. 
 The bourgeois always and everywhere remains true to himself: whether you take Polyarnaya Zvezda or Nasha Zhizn , 124 whether you read Struve or Blank, you will always find this same narrow-minded,professorially pedantic and bureaucratically lifeless appraisalof periods of revolution and periods of reform. 
 The formerare periods of madness, tolle Jahre , the disappearance of intellect and reason. 
 The latter are periods of ‘deliberate and systematic’ activities. 
 “Do not misinterpret what I am saying. 
 I am not arguing that the Blanks prefer some periods to others. 
 It is not amatter of preference; our subjective preferences do notdetermine the changes in historical periods. 
 The thing is that in analysing the characteristics of this or that period (quite apart from our preferences or sympathies), the Blanksshamelessly distort the truth . 
 The thing is that it is just the revolutionary periods which are distinguished by wider,richer, more deliberate, more methodical, more systematic,more courageous and more vivid making of history than periods of philistine, Cadet, reformist progress. 
 But the Blanks turn the truth inside out! They palm off paltrinessas magnificent making of history. 
 They regard the inac-tivity of the oppressed or downtrodden masses as the triumphof ‘system’ in the work of bureaucrats and bourgeois. 
 Theyshout about the disappearance of intellect and reason when, instead of the picking of draft laws to pieces by petty bureaucrats and liberal penny-a-liner * journalists, there begins a period of direct political activity of the ‘commonpeople’, who simply set to work without more ado to smashall the instruments for oppressing the people, seize powerand take what was regarded as belonging to all kinds of robbers of the people—in short, when the intellect and *In the original these words are in English. 
— Ed. 
 reason of millions of downtrodden people awaken not only to read books, but for action, vital human action, to make history. 
”125 Such was the controversy that was waged in Russia in the years 1905 and 1906 on the question of the dictatorship. 
 Actually, the Dittmanns, Kautskys, Crispiens, and Hilferdings in Germany, Longuet and Co. 
 in France,Turati and his friends in Italy, the MacDonalds and Snow-dens in Britain, etc. 
, argue about the dictatorship exactly as Mr. 
 R. 
 Blank and the Cadets did in Russia in 1905. 
 Theydo not understand what dictatorship means, do not knowhow to prepare for it, and are incapable of understandingit and implementing it. 
 20. 
10. 
1920 Published in 1920 Published according to the manuscript TELEGRAM TO J. 
 V. 
 STALIN To Stalin, Member of the Revolutionary Military Council of the Republic, Baku (wherever he may be) 29. 
10 I consider it beyond doubt that Georgia will hand Batum over to the Entente, probably secretly, and that the Ententewill march on Baku. 
 Study the matter and take urgentsteps to fortify the land and sea approaches to Baku, and tobring up heavy artillery, etc. 
 Communicate your decisions. 
 Lenin Written on October 29, 1920 First published in 1942 Published according to the manuscript SPEECH DELIVERE D AT AN ALL-RUSSI A CONFERENCE OF POLITICA L EDUCATIO N WORKER S OF GUBERNIA AND UYEZ D EDUCATIO N DEPARTMENTS NOVEMBE R 3, 1920126 Comrades, allow me to speak on several ideas, some of which were dealt with by the Central Committee of the Communist Party and by the Council of People’s Commis-sars in connection with the formation of the Chief Committeefor Political Education, while others came to me in connec-tion with the draft submitted to the Council of People’s Commissars. 
 This draft was adopted yesterday as a basis;its details have still to be discussed. 
 I shall permit myself only to say, for my part, that at first I was highly averse to any change in the name of yourinstitution. 
 In my opinion, the function of the People’s Commissariat of Education is to help people learn and teach others. 
 My Soviet experience has taught me to regardtitles as childish jokes; after all, any title is a joke in itsway. 
 Another name has now been endorsed: the ChiefCommittee for Political Education. 
 As this matter has already been decided, you must take this as nothing more than a personal remark. 
 If the matteris not limited merely to a change of label, it is only to bewelcomed. 
 If we succeed in drawing new people into cultural and educational work, it will not be just a change of title, andthen we can reconcile ourselves to the “Soviet” weakness of sticking a label on every new undertaking and every new institution. 
 If we succeed, we shall have achieved somethingmore than ever before. 
 The link between education and our policy should be the chief inducement in making people join us in our cultural and educational work. 
 A title may express something if there is a need for it, for along the whole line of oureducational work we have to abandon the old standpointthat education should be non-political; we cannot conducteducational work in isolation from politics. 
 That idea has always predominated in bourgeois society. 
 The very term “apolitical” or “non-political” education is a piece of bourgeois hypocrisy, nothing but humbuggerypractised on the masses, 99 per cent of whom are humiliatedand degraded by the rule of the church, private propertyand the like. 
 That, in fact, is the way the bourgeoisie, stillin the saddle in all bourgeois countries, is deceiving the masses. 
 The greater the importance of a political apparatus in such countries, the less its independence of capital and itspolicy. 
 In all bourgeois states the connection between the polit-ical apparatus and education is very strong, although bourgeois society cannot frankly acknowledge it. 
 Neverthe-less, this society indoctrinates the masses through thechurch and the institution of private property. 
 It is one of our basic tasks to contrapose our own truth to bourgeois “truth”, and win its recognition. 
 The transition from bourgeois society to the policy of the proletariat is a very difficult one, all the more so for the bourgeoisie incessantly slandering us through its entireapparatus of propaganda and agitation. 
 It bends everyeffort to play down an even more important mission of thedictatorship of the proletariat, its educational mission,which is particularly important in Russia, where the pro-letariat constitutes a minority of the population. 
 Yet in Russia this mission must be given priority, for we mustprepare the masses to build up socialism. 
 The dictatorshipof the proletariat would have been out of the question if,in the struggle against the bourgeoisie, the proletariat hadnot developed a keen class-consciousness, strict discipline and profound devotion, in other words, all the qualities required to assure the proletariat’s complete victory overits old enemy. 
 We do not hold the utopian view that the working masses are ready for a socialist society. 
 From precise facts pro-vided by the entire history of working-class socialism we know that this is not the case, and that preparedness forsocialism is created only by large-scale industry, by thestrike struggle and by political organisation. 
 To win thevictory and accomplish the socialist revolution, the prole-tariat must be capable of concerted action, of overthrowing the exploiters. 
 We now see that it has acquired all the necessary qualities, and that it translated them into actionwhen it won power. 
 Education workers, and the Communist Party as the vanguard in the struggle, should consider it their fundamen-tal task to help enlighten and instruct the working masses, in order to cast off the old ways and habituated routine we have inherited from the old system, the private propertyhabits the masses are thoroughly imbued with. 
 This funda-mental task of the entire socialist revolution should neverbe neglected during consideration of the particular problemsthat have demanded so much attention from the Party’s Central Committee and the Council of People’s Commis-sars. 
 What kind of structure should the Chief Committeefor Political Education have? How should it be linked upwith other institutions? How should it be linked up, notonly with the centre but with local bodies? These questionswill be answered by comrades who are more competent in the matter, have already gained considerable experience, and have made a special study of the matter. 
 I would likemerely to stress the main principles involved. 
 We mustput the matter frankly and openly affirm, despite all the olduntruths, that education cannot but be linked up withpolitics. 
 We are living in an historic period of struggle against the world bourgeoisie, which is far stronger than we are. 
At this stage of the struggle, we have to safeguard thedevelopment of the revolution and combat the bourgeoisie inthe military sense and still more by means of our ideologythrough education, so that the habits, usages and convic-tions acquired by the working class in the course of many decades of struggle for political liberty—the sum total ofthese habits, usages and ideas—should serve as an instru-ment for the education of all working people. 
 It is for the proletariat to decide how the latter are to be educated. 
 We must inculcate in the working people the realisation that it is impossible and inexcusable to stand aside in theproletariat’s struggle, which is now spreading more and moreto all capitalist countries in the world, and to stand asidein international politics. 
 An alliance of all the world’spowerful capitalist countries against Soviet Russia—such is the real basis of international politics today. 
 And it must, after all, be realised that on this will depend the fate ofhundreds of millions of working people in the capitalistcountries. 
 We know that, at the present moment, there isnot a corner of the earth which is not under the control ofa small group of capitalist countries. 
 Thus the situation is shaping in such a way that one is faced with the alternative of standing aloof from the present struggle and thereby prov-ing one’s utter lack of political consciousness, just likethose benighted people who have held aloof from therevolution and the war and do not see the bourgeoisie’s grossdeception of the masses, the deliberate way in which the bourgeoisie is keeping the masses in ignorance; or else of joining the struggle for the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 It is with absolute frankness that we speak of this struggle of the proletariat; each man must choose between joiningour side or the other side. 
 Any attempt to avoid takingsides in this issue must end in fiasco. 
 Observation of the many remnants of the Kerensky gang, the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Social-Democrats, asrepresented by the Yudeniches, Kolchaks, Petlyuras, Makh-nos and others, has shown us such a variety of forms andshades of counter-revolution in various parts of Russia thatwe have every reason to consider ourselves far more steeled in the struggle than anybody else is. 
 A glance at Western Europe shows the same thing happening there as in ourcountry—a repetition of our own history. 
 Almost every-where elements similar to the Kerensky gang are to be metalongside the bourgeoisie. 
 They predominate in a numberof countries, especially Germany. 
 One can see the same thing everywhere—the impossibility of taking an intermediate position, and a clear realisation that there must be eithera whiteguard dictatorship (for which the bourgeoisie of all the countries of Western Europe are preparing by arming against us), or the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 We have experienced this so acutely and profoundly that there is no need for me to talk at length about the Russian Commu-nists. 
 Hence there can be only a single conclusion, one thatshould be the corner-stone of all arguments and theoriesabout the Chief Committee for Political Education: theprimacy of the Communist Party’s policy must be frankly recognised in the work of that body. 
 We know of no other form of guidance, and no other has been evolved in anycountry. 
 Parties may represent the interests of their classin one degree or another; they may undergo changes ormodifications, but we do not yet know of any better form. 
 Theentire course of the struggle waged by Soviet Russia, which for three years has withstood the onslaught of world impe-rialism, is bound up with the fact that the Party has con-sciously set out to help the proletariat perform its functionof educator, organiser and leader, without which thecollapse of capitalism is impossible. 
 The working masses,the masses of peasants and workers, must oust the old intellectualist habits and re-educate themselves for the work of building communism. 
 Otherwise the work of con-struction cannot be undertaken. 
 Our entire experience showsthat this is a very serious matter, and we must thereforegive prominence to Party primacy and never lose sight of itwhen discussing our activities and our organisational development. 
 How this is to be done will still have to be discussed at length; it will have to be discussed in theParty’s Central Committee and in the Council of People’sCommissars. 
 The decree which was endorsed yesterday laiddown the fundamentals in respect of the Chief Committeefor Political Education, but it has not yet gone through all the stages in the Council of People’s Commissars. 
 The decree will be published within the next few days, and youwill see that its final form makes no direct mention ofrelations with the Party. 
 We must, however, know and remember that, in law and in practice, the Constitution of the Soviet Republic is based on the tenet that the Party rectifies, prescribes and builds according to a single principle—to enable the communistelements linked with the proletariat to imbue the proletariat with their own spirit, win its adherence, and open its eyes to the bourgeois deceit which we have been trying so long to eliminate. 
 The People’s Commissariat of Education has gone through a long struggle; for a long time the teachers’organisation resisted the socialist revolution. 
 Bourgeoisprejudices have struck very deep root among the teachers. 
There has been a long struggle in the form of direct sabo-tage and of tenacious bourgeois prejudices, and we have to fight for the communist positions slowly, step by step and win them. 
 The Chief Committee for Political Education, which isconcerned with extra-mural education, the work of educatingand enlightening the masses, is faced with the clear task ofcombining Party leadership with the effort to gain the adher-ence of, to imbue with its spirit and to animate with its initiative, this half-million strong army of teachers, this vast institution which is now in the service of the workers. 
Education workers—the teachers—were trained in the spiritof bourgeois prejudices and habits, in a spirit hostile to theproletariat, with which they have had no ties whatever. 
 Wemust now train a new army of teachers and instructors who must be in close touch with the Party and its ideas, be im-bued with its spirit, and attract the masses of workers,instilling the spirit of communism into them and arousingtheir interest in what is being done by the Communists. 
 Since the old customs, habits and ideas must be discard-ed, the Chief Committee for Political Education and its personnel are faced with a most important task, which they must keep uppermost in their minds. 
 Here we indeed havea dilemma: how can we establish a link between theteachers, most of whom are of the old school, with Partymembers, with the Communists? That is an extremelydifficult problem, one that will require a considerable amount of thought. 
 Let us consider the means of establishing organisational links between people who are so different. 
 In principle, wecannot for a moment doubt the need of the CommunistParty’s primacy. 
 Consequently, the purpose of politicalculture, of political instruction, is to train genuine Com-munists capable of stamping out falsehood and prejudices and helping the working masses to vanquish the old systemand build up a state without capitalists, without exploiters, and without landowners. 
 How can that be done? Only by acquiring the sum total of knowledge that the teachers have inherited from the bourgeoisie. 
 Without this the technical achievements of communism will be impossible, and allhopes for those achievements would be pipe dreams. 
 Sothe question arises: how are we to organise these people,who are not used to bringing politics into their work,especially the politics that is to our advantage, i. 
e. 
, politics essential to communism? That, as I have said, is a very difficult problem. 
 We have discussed the matter in theCentral Committee, and in discussing it have tried to takeinto account the lessons of experience. 
 We think that acongress like the one I am addressing today, a conferencelike yours, will be of great value in this respect. 
 Every Party Committee now has to look from a new angle upon every propagandist, who used to be regarded merelyas a man belonging to a definite circle, a definite organisa-tion. 
 Each of them belongs to a ruling party which directsthe whole state, and the Soviet Russia’s world struggleagainst the bourgeois system. 
 He is a representative of a fighting class and of a party which runs, and must run, an enormous machine of state. 
 Many a Communist whohas been through the splendid school of undergroundwork and has been tested and steeled in the struggle isunwilling or unable to understand the full significance ofthis change, of this transition, which turns the agitator and propagandist into a leader of agitators, a leader in a huge political organisation. 
 The kind of title he is given,even if it is an embarrassing one—such as superintendent ofgeneral schools—does not matter much; what is important isthat he should be capable of directing the mass of teachers. 
 It should be said that the hundreds of thousands of teachers constitute a body that must get the work moving, stimulate thought, and combat the prejudices that to thisday still persist among the masses. 
 The heritage of capitalistculture, the fact that the mass of the teachers are imbuedwith its defects, which prevent them from being Communists,should not deter us from admitting these teachers into the ranks of the political education workers, for these teachers possess the knowledge without which we cannot achieve ouraim. 
 We must put hundreds of thousands of useful people to work in the service of communist education. 
 That is a task that was accomplished at the front, in our Red Army, into which tens of thousands of representatives of the old armywere incorporated. 
 In the lengthy process of re-educa-tion, they became welded with the Red Army, as theyultimately proved by their victories. 
 This is an examplethat we must follow in our cultural and educational work. 
 True, this work is not so spectacular, but it is even more important. 
 We need every agitator and propagandist; hewill be doing his job if he works in a strictly Party spiritbut at the same time does not limit himself to Party work,and remembers that it is his duty to direct hundreds ofthousands of teachers, whet their interest, overcome their old bourgeois prejudices, enlist them in the work we are doing, and make them realise the immensity of our work. 
It is only by tackling that job that we can lead this massof people, whom capitalism suppressed and drew away fromus, along the right path. 
 Such are the aims that every agitator and propagandist working in the sphere of extra-mural education must pursue and constantly keep in sight. 
 A host of practical difficultieswill be encountered in the process, and you must help thecause of communism by becoming representatives and lead-ers, not only of Party study-circles, but of the entire stateadministration, which is now in the hands of the working class. 
 We must overcome resistance from the capitalists in all its forms, not only in the military and the political spheres,but also ideological resistance, which is the most deep-seatedand the strongest. 
 It is the duty of our educational workersto accomplish the re-education of the masses. 
 The interest, the thirst for education and knowledge of communism which are to be seen among them are a guarantee of our victoryin this field too, although, perhaps, not as rapid as atthe front and only after great difficulties and at times evenreverses. 
 However, we shall ultimately win. 
 Last, I should like to dwell on one more point. 
 Perhaps the title of Chief Committee for Political Education is not properly understood. 
 Inasmuch as it makes mention of thepolitical concept, politics is the main thing here. 
 But how is politics to be understood? If politics is understood in the old sense, one may fall into a grave and profound error. 
 Politics means a struggle between classes; means the relations of the proletariat in its strug-gle for its emancipation, against the world bourgeoisie. 
However, in our struggle two aspects of the matter standout: on the one hand, there is the task of destroying theheritage of the bourgeois system, of foiling the repeated attempts of the whole bourgeoisie to crush the Soviet state. 
 This task has absorbed most of our attentionhitherto and has prevented us from proceeding to the othertask, that of construction. 
 According to the bourgeois world-outlook, politics was divorced, as it were, from economics. 
The bourgeoisie said: peasants, you must work for your livelihood; workers, you must work to secure your means of subsistence on the market; as for economic policy,that is the business of your masters. 
 That, however, is notso; politics should be the business of the people, the busi-ness of the proletariat. 
 Here we must emphasise the factthat nine-tenths of our time and our work is devoted to the struggle against the bourgeoisie. 
 The victories over Wran-gel, of which we read yesterday, and of which you willread today and probably tomorrow, show that one stageof the struggle is coming to an end and that we have securedpeace with a number of Western countries; every victoryon the war front leaves our hands freer for the internal struggle, for the politics of state organisation. 
 Every step that brings us closer to victory over the whiteguards grad-ually shifts the focus of the struggle to economic policy. 
Propaganda of the old type describes and illustrates whatcommunism is. 
 This kind of propaganda is now useless,for we have to show in practice how socialism is to be built. 
 All our propaganda must be based on the political experi-ence of economic development. 
 That is our principal task;whoever interprets it in the old sense will show himselfto be a retrograde, one who is incapable of conductingpropaganda work among the masses of the peasants andworkers. 
 Our main policy must now be to develop the state economically, so as to gather in more poods of grain and mine more poods of coal, to decide how best to utilise thesepoods of grain and coal and preclude starvation—that is our policy. 
 All our agitation and propaganda must be focussed on this aim. 
 There must be less fine talk, for you cannot satisfy the working people with fine words. 
 As soon as the war enables us to shift the focus from the struggle againstthe bourgeoisie, from the struggle against Wrangel andthe whiteguards, we shall turn to economic policy. 
 Andthen agitation and propaganda will play a role of tremen-dous and ever growing importance. 
 Every agitator must be a state leader, a leader of all the peasants and workers in the work of economicdevelopment. 
 He must tell them what one should know,what pamphlets and books one should read to become aCommunist. 
 That is the way to improve our economic life and make it more secure, more social; that is the way to increase production, improve the food situation and distribution ofthe goods produced, increase coal output, and restore in-dustry without capitalism and without the capitalist spirit. 
 What does communism consist in? All propaganda for communism must be conducted in a way that will amount to practical guidance of the state’s development. 
 Communism must be made comprehensible to the masses of the workersso that they will regard it as their own cause. 
 That taskis being poorly accomplished, and thousands of mistakesare being made. 
 We make no secret of the fact. 
 However,the workers and the peasants must themselves build up and improve our apparatus, with our assistance, feeble and inadequate as it is. 
 To us, that is no longer a programme, atheory, or a task to be accomplished; it has become a matterof actual and practical development. 
 Although we sufferedsome cruel reverses in our war, we have at least learnt fromthese reverses and won complete victory. 
 Now, too, we must learn a lesson from every defeat and must remember that the workers and peasants have to be instructed by taking thework already performed as an example. 
 We must point outwhat is bad, so as to avoid it in future. 
 By taking constructive work as an example, by repeating it time and again, we shall succeed in turning inefficient communist managers into genuine builders, and, in the first place, into builders of our economic life. 
 We shallachieve our targets and overcome all the obstacles which we have inherited from the old system and cannot be elimi-nated at a single stroke. 
 We must re-educate the masses; they can be re-educated only by agitation and propaganda. 
 The masses must be brought, in the first place, into thework of building the entire economic life. 
 That must bethe principal and basic object in the work of each agitatorand propagandist, and when he realises this, the successof his work will be assured. 
 ( Loud applause . 
) Bulletin of the All-Russia Published according to Conference of Political the text of the Bulletin Education Workers (November 1-8, 1920 ), Moscow DRAF T RESOLUTION ON “THE TASK S OF THE TRAD E UNIONS, AND THE METHOD S OF THEI R ACCOMPLISHMEN T”127 In accordance with the decisions of the Ninth Congress of the Communist Party of Russia, the Conference once again draws the attention of the trade unions to the neces-sity of these decisions being scrupulously fulfilled, and pointsout in particular that the imperative need of a single eco-nomic plan establishing the order of priority of objectives in the general scheme of economic construction is indis-putable. 
 At the same time, as was recognised by the PartyConference of September 1920, a gradual but steady tran-sition must be effected from urgency procedures to a moreeven distribution of forces, particularly in the secondmentof the individual unions’ best organisers to the All-Russia Central Council of Trade Unions with a view to consolidat-ing that body as a whole, improving the functioning ofits apparatus, achieving greater system in the work ofall trade unions, and thereby strengthening the entire tradeunion movement. 
 This measure should be applied in particular to the Cen-tral Committee of the General Transport Workers’ Union(Tsektran ) 128; an end must be put to its disproportionate growth as compared with the other unions, and the bestelements thus released should extend to the entire tradeunion movement those methods of the broader applicationof democracy, the promotion of initiative, participation in the management of industry, the development of emulation, and so forth, which have yielded the bestpractical results. 
 In conformity with the decisions of the Ninth Congress of the Communist Party of Russia, and recognising as absolutely indispensable the development, extension and consolidation of trade union participation in productionmanagement, the Conference instructs the All-Russia CentralCouncil of Trade Unions to sum up immediately the practic-al experience gained in this respect by the leading unionsand enterprises, and to draw up detailed instructions, which will help all trade unions make use of that practical experi-ence and will enjoin them to utilise the latter in a moreenergetic and systematic fashion. 
 This refers especially to the utilisation of specialists. 
 Written in early November 1920 First published in the Published according to Fourth (Russian) edition the manuscript of the Collected Works ON THE STRUGGL E WITHI N THE ITALIAN SOCIALIS T PARTY129 Published in 1920 Published according to the manuscript ON THE STRUGGLE WITHIN THE ITALIAN SOCIALIST PARTY129 Published in 1920 Published according to the manuscript Pravda No. 
 213 of September 25, 1920, published a short letter of mine entitled: “Letter to the German and theFrench Workers Regarding the Discussion on the SecondCongress of the Communist International. 
” 130 In its issue of October 5, Avanti! , the central organ of the Italian Socialist Party, carried a reprint of this letter with comments of its own, which are worth examining since they strikinglyreveal the fallacy of the stand taken by Comrade Serrati,editor of Avanti! “Lenin’s explanation,” we read, “to some extent mitigates the draconic conditions dictated by comrades who are not quite in a position to correctly appraise men and circumstances at such a distance and in such a differentsituation.... 
” “...Lenin spared one of his victims: Modigliani.... 
”“...Lenin now says—whether on his own behalf or on behalf of the Executive Committee of the Communist International, we do not know—that ‘exceptions’ [to the general rule] are permissible [with the consent of theExecutive Committee]. 
” The ironical remark about the “victim”, which Modig-liani, one of the reformists, is supposed to be, is pointless. 
Despite Serrati’s opinion, my failure to mention the name of Modigliani (and of Longuet) was unintentional. 
 I took one name or another as an example, in order to characterise atrend , leaving aside, as I still do, the question of individu-als; I did not undertake to decide this question, consider-ing it of secondary importance, and spoke of the possibilityof exceptions. 
 Notwithstanding his statement, Serrati is fully aware (for he makes precise reference to my article in Pravda ) that I speak, and can do so, only on my own behalf, and in no way on behalf of the Executive Committee. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR By his remarks, Serrati distracts Avanti! readers from the principal, basic and vital question of whether reformists can now be tolerated in the ranks of the Italian party of the revolutionary proletariat. 
 Serrati covers up thefalseness of his stand by trying to divert attention fromthe essential to the secondary and insignificant. 
 That must be combated. 
 The essentials must be eluci-dated. 
 Both in the comment we are dealing with and in other articles, Serrati says that the Moscow Congress (the SecondCongress of the Communist International) was not ade-quately informed about Italian affairs. 
 One might think thatthe gist of the matter did not lie in the struggle between twofundamental trends, or in the answer to the fundamental question of whether “unity” with the reformists is permis-sible, but in differences over points that “Moscow” is notprecisely informed about! The glaring fallacy of this view—and of this attempt to distract attention from the main point—is best of allexposed in the official report of the discussion in the Central Committee of the Italian Socialist Party. 
 This discussion took place in Milan on September 28, 29 and 30 and October1, only a few days prior to the publication of the issue ofAvanti! referred to above. 
 The discussion closed with a vote on two resolutions, one of which may be called a communist, and the other a “Centrist” or evasive resolution, which in a masked form advocated an alliance (“unity”!) with the reformists. 
 Thefirst resolution was carried, seven voting for it (Terracini,Gennari, Regent, Tuntar, Casucci, Marziali, and Bellone);the second resolution was rejected (five in favour: Bara-tono, Zannerini, Bacci, Giacomini and Serrati). 
 The first resolution is of a remarkable clarity and precision. 
 It opens with a reference to the “presentconditions” of the revolutionary struggle in Italy callingfor “greater homogeneity” in the party. 
 It goes on to saythat the right to remain in the party was extended to all,on condition of submission to party discipline; however, this condition has not been observed. 
 It would be erroneous, it goes on to say, to expect submission to discipline fromthose whose convictions are opposed to the principles and tactics of the Third International; consequently, since the twenty-one points of the Moscow conditions have been accepted, a “radical purge” of the party is necessary so as to eliminate all reformist and opportunist elements. 
 Here no reference is made to names or particular instances. 
 A clear political line is laid down. 
 The grounds for thedecision are precisely stated, viz. 
, concrete facts from thehistory of the party in Italy, and concrete features in the revolutionary situation there. 
 The second resolution is a model of evasiveness and poor diplomacy: we accept the twenty-one points, but considerthat “these conditions leave a loop-hole for dubiousinterpretations”, and that “the political criterion of eachsection of the Third, Communist International should be adapted to the historical conditions and the actual specific features of its country, and submitted for approval to thisInternational”. 
 The resolution emphasises “the need topreserve the unity of the Italian Socialist Party on thebasis of the twenty-one points”; individual breaches ofdiscipline are to be sternly punished by the Central Committee of the Party. 
 The communist resolution says that the revolutionary situation calls for greater homogeneity in the party. 
 Thatis undeniable. 
 The resolution of those who advocate “unity”with the reformists attempts to evade this undeniable truth, without daring to dispute it. 
 The Communist resolution says that it is a feature of the situation in Italy that the condition demanding submis-sion to party decisions by the reformists has not been ob-served . 
 That is the gist of the matter. 
 That being so, it is not merely a mistake but a crime to allow the reformists to remain in the party at a time when the general revolution-ary situation is becoming acute , and the country may even be on the eve of decisive revolutionary battles. 
 Is this true or not? Have the reformists carried out party decisions? Have they in fact submitted to the party? Havethey pursued its policy? The resolution of the defendersof the reformists cannot give an affirmative answer; it cannot challenge the Communists’ negative answer, and avoids a reply. 
 It twists and turns, makes general referencesto the different specific features in the various countries, and does so in order to evade and to present in a false light the most important “specific feature” of Italy herself at the moment. 
 What constitutes this specific feature of Italy is the fact that the reformists have already provedincapable in practice of carrying out party decisions andpursuing party policy. 
 By evading this fundamental issue,the resolution of the advocates of unity with the reformistsutterly defeats itself. 
 By this fact alone, Serrati, Baratono, Zannerini, Bacci, and Giacomini have already shown quite clearly andirrefutably that they are fundamentally wrong, that their political line is fundamentally false . 
 The discussion in the Italian party’s Central Committee has ever more forcefully revealed the total falsity of Serrati’s line. 
 The Communists were right in saying that as long as the reformists remained what they were they couldnot but sabotage the revolution, as they had alreadysabotaged it during the recent revolutionary movement of theItalian workers who were taking over the factories. 
 That is the pith and marrow of the matter! How is it possible to prepare for revolution and advance towardsdecisive battles, when there are people in the party whosabotage the revolution? That is not merely a mistake buta crime. 
 If, as he frankly declared in his letter to l’Humanité 131 of October 14, Serrati counted on the expulsion of Turati alone, * this mistake of his has also already been revealed by the facts . 
 The Italian reformists not only held a factional congress of their own (in Reggio Emilia on October 11, 1920); at this congress they not only reiterated the essence oftheir reformist views; not only did they give a triumphantreception to Filippo Turati at the congress, but they also declared, through Trèves: “We shall either remain in the *Here is the principal passage in this letter: “We all stand for the Moscow conditions. 
 The question is how the are to be applied . 
 I assert that the party must be purged of harmful elements, and I pro-posed that Turati be expelled; but we must not lose the masses belong-ing to the syndicates [trade unions] and co-operative societies. 
 Others want a radical split . 
 That is where we differ. 
” ( l’Humanité , October 14, Serrati’s italics. 
) party, or to a man leave it. 
” Let us note in this connection that the bourgeois press and the reformists themselves did their utmost to play up the importance of their factional congress. 
 But in Avanti! of October 13 (the Milan edition) we find it frankly stated that the reformists were able to getrepresentatives from only two hundred branches of a partywith thousands of branches. 
 But let us dwell in greater detail on Serrati’s main argument on the essence of the question. 
 Serrati fears a split that may weaken the party and especially the tradeunions, the co-operative societies and the municipalities. 
These institutions, which are essential to the constructionof socialism, must not be destroyed—that is Serrati’s mainidea. 
 He asks ( Avanti! , October 2, 1920, the Milan edition): “Where shall we find enough ‘Communists’, even if only the most ardent new-fledged Communists, to fill the publicposts from which we shall drive their holders, as Terraciniproposes?” The same idea is expressed by Serrati in an articleon the Second Congress of the Third International, in thejournal Comunismo (No. 
 24, p. 
 1627), which he edits: “Picture to yourselves the Milan commune [i. 
e. 
, the Milan municipality] administered, not by competent people butby novices who only yesterday declared themselves ardentCommunists. 
” Serrati fears the destruction of the trade unions, the co-operative societies and municipalities, and the inefficiency and mistakes of the novices. 
 What the Communists fear is the reformists’ sabotage of the revolution. 
 This difference reveals Serrati’s error of principle. 
 He keeps reiterating a simple idea: the need for flexible tactics. 
This idea is incontestable. 
 The trouble is that Serrati leans to the right when, in the present-day conditions in Italy one should lean to the left . 
 To successfully accomplish the revolution and safeguard it, the Italian party musttake a definite step to the left (without in any way keeping its hands tied or forgetting that subsequent events maywell call for definite steps to the right). 
 Victory in the proletarian revolution cannot be achieved, and that revolution cannot be safeguarded, while there are reformists and Mensheviks in one’s ranks. 
 That is obvious in principle, and has been strikingly confirmed by the ex-perience both of Russia and of Hungary. 
 This is a decisive consideration. 
 It is simply ridiculous to compare with this danger the danger of “losing” the trade unions co-operative societies, municipalities, etc. 
, or of their failures,mistakes, or collapse. 
 It is not only ridiculous but criminal. 
Anyone who would subject the entire revolution to risk forfear of injuring the municipal affairs of Milan and so forth, has completely lost his head, has no idea of the fundamental task of the revolution, and is totally incapableof preparing its victory. 
 We in Russia made thousands of mistakes and suffered thousands of reverses, losses, etc. 
, owing to the inefficiencyof novices and incompetent people in the co-operative societies, municipalities, trade unions, etc. 
 We have no doubt that other and more civilised nations will makefewer mistakes of this kind. 
 Notwithstanding these mistakes, we have achieved what is most important, viz. 
, the conquestof power by the proletariat. 
 Moreover, we have maintainedthat power for three years. 
 The mistakes mentioned by Comrade Serrati are minor ones and are infinitely easier to rectify than the “mistake” ofallowing the sabotage of the revolution by the Mensheviksand the wrecking of the revolution itself. 
 That is self-evident. 
 It has been strikingly demonstrated in the caseof Hungary. 
 It has also been confirmed by our experience; during the three years of proletarian government in Russia difficult situations have arisen many times , when the Soviet regime would most certainly have been overthrown if Mensheviks, reformists, petty-bourgeois democrats hadremained in our Party, or even if they had remained in anyconsiderable numbers in the central Soviet bodies, such as the Central Executive Committee. 
 Serrati has failed to understand the specific features of the transitional situation that exists in Italy, where, asis generally admitted, decisive battles are in store bet-ween the proletariat and the bourgeoisie for possessionof state power. 
 At such a moment, it is not only absolutely essential to remove the Mensheviks, reformists, Turatists from the party, but it may even be useful to remove somevery good Communists too, to remove them from all responsible posts, if they are inclined to waver, and reveal a tendency to drift towards “unity” with the reformists. 
 Let me give a practical illustration. 
 On the eve of the October Revolution in Russia, and immediately after it,a number of very good Communists in Russia committed anerror, one which our people are now loth to recall. 
 Why arethey loth to recall it? Because, unless there is particularreason for it, it is wrong to recall mistakes which have been completely set right. 
 But it will be useful to recall this mistake for the benefit of the Italian workers. 
 At thetime mentioned, prominent Bolsheviks and Communists,such as Zinoviev, Kamenev, Rykov, Nogin and Milyutin,wavered and expressed the fear that the Bolsheviks wereisolating themselves excessively, were taking too much risk in heading for an uprising, and were too unyielding in their attitude towards a certain section of the Menshe-viks and Socialist-Revolutionaries. 
 The conflict became soacute that these comrades demonstratively resigned fromall responsible posts in Party and government, to the greatglee of the enemies of the Soviet revolution. 
 It developed so far that the Central Committee of our Party conducted a very heated controversy in the press with the comradeswho had resigned. 
 But a few weeks later—at most a fewmonths—all these comrades realised their mistake andreturned to their posts, some of the most responsible inthe Party and the Soviets. 
 Why this happened can readily be understood. 
 On the eve of revolution or at the height of the struggle for itsvictory, the slightest wavering in the ranks of the Partymay wreck everything , frustrate the revolution, and wrest power from the hands of the proletariat, for that power hasnot yet been consolidated, and the onslaught against it is still very strong. 
 If wavering leaders resign at such a time, that does not weaken the party, the working-class movementand the revolution, but strengthens them. 
 Italy is going through a similar period. 
 It is generally seen and admitted that a nation-wide revolutionary crisis ismaturing. 
 The proletariat has proved in deed that it is capable of rising spontaneously, and of rousing the masses for a mighty revolutionary movement. 
 The poor peasants,or semi-proletarians (it is a pity that Comrade Serrati has acquired the bad habit of putting a question mark after this word whenever he uses it; it is a correct Marxist term and expresses a correct idea, which has been confirmed by facts both in Russia and in Italy, viz. 
, that the poorpeasants are half property-owners and half proletarians)—the poor peasants in Italy have shown in deed that they arecapable of rising for a revolutionary struggle, in the wakeof the proletariat. 
 What is most essential now, in fact absolutely essential for the victory of the revolution in Italy, is that the Italian revolutionary proletariat should havea real vanguard in the shape of a truly Communist Party,one that is incapable of wavering and flinching at the decisive moment, a party that will concentrate within itselfthe utmost fervour, devotion to the revolution, energy and boundless courage and determination. 
 Victory has to be achieved in a very hard and painful struggle that willentail great sacrifice; when captured, power will have tobe upheld in the face of incredibly fierce attacks, intrigues,slander, calumny, intimidation and violence on the part of thebourgeoisie of the whole world , in the face of the most dange-rous waverings on the part of every petty-bourgeois democrat, every Turati supporter, every “Centrist”, every Social-Democrat, socialist and anarchist. 
 At such a time and insuch surroundings, the Party must be a hundred timesfirmer, bolder, more determined, devoted and ruthless thanin ordinary or in less difficult times. 
 At such a time and in such surroundings, the Party will become a hundred times stronger , not weaker, if Mensheviks, like those who fore-gathered in Reggio Emilia on October 11, 1920, withdrawfrom it altogether, and even if some excellent Commu-nists—such as Baratono, Zannerini, Bacci, Giacomini andSerrati, members of the present Central Committee of the party, probably are—withdraw from its leadership. 
 Even if the people of the latter category resigned now, most of them would undoubtedly very soon see their mis-take and return after the victory of the proletariat, afterits victory had been consolidated. 
 In all probability, evena section of the Italian Mensheviks, of the Turati supporters, would return, too, and be received into the party when the period of greatest difficulties had passed, just as asection of the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, who were on the other side of the barricades in 1917-18, have come over to us now (after we have been through three difficult years since the revolution). 
 The Italian revolutionary proletariat is about to face a period of battles that will be not merely extremely dif-ficult, as I have said, but truly the most difficult of all. 
The greatest trials lie ahead. 
 I would consider it frivolousand criminal to shrug off these difficulties. 
 It surprises me how Comrade Serrati could have published in his journal Comunismo (No. 
 24, September 15-30, 1920), without any comment, such a superficial article as that by G. 
 C. 
 entitled“Will We Be Blockaded?” Despite what the author of thisarticle says, I personally think that in the event of theproletariat’s victory in Italy, the blockade of that country by Great Britain, France and America is possible and probable. 
 In my opinion, Comrade Graziadei was much closerto the truth in his speech at the meeting of the Italianparty’s Central Committee ( Avanti! , October 1, 1920, the Mi-lan edition), when he admitted that the problem of a possibleblockade was “very grave” (“ problema gravissima ”). 
 He said that Russia had held out despite the blockade, partly because of the sparseness of her population and herenormous territory, but the revolution in Italy “could notresist ( resistere ) for long if it were not co-ordinated with a revolution in some other country in Central Europe”, andthat “such co-ordination is difficult but not impossible”, because the whole of continental Europe is passing through a revolutionary period. 
 Though put very cautiously, this is true. 
 I would merely add that Italy is assured of a certain amount of co-ordination—although that may as yet be inadequate andincomplete—and that complete co-ordination will have to be fought for. 
 When the reformists speak of the possibility of a blockade they do so in order to sabotage the revolution,instil apprehension of the revolution, and imbue the masseswith their own panic, fear, indecision and vacillation. 
 Revolutionaries and Communists must not deny the dangersand difficulties of the struggle in order to put greater firmness into the masses, purge the party of those that are weak, wavering and unstable, and inspire the entire move-ment with greater enthusiasm, a higher spirit of internation-alism, and a greater preparedness to make sacrifices for the sake of a great aim, namely, hastening the revolution in Great Britain, France and America should these countries dare to blockade the proletarian and Soviet Italianrepublic. 
 The question of replacing experienced reformist or “Centrist” leaders by novices is not a particular question, ofconcern to a single country in special circumstances. 
 It is a general question which arises in every proletarian revolution, and as such it is formulated and quite specifi-cally answered in the resolution of the Second Congressof the Communist International on “The FundamentalTasks of the Communist International”. 
 In point 8 we read:“Preparation for the dictatorship of the proletariat, not only entails explaining the bourgeois character of all reformism; ... it also entails replacing the old leaders byCommunists in proletarian organisations of absolutelyevery type—not only political, but also trade union, co-operative, educational, etc. 
 ...These representatives ofthe labour aristocracy, or the bourgeoisified workers, should be eliminated from all their posts a hundred times more boldly than hitherto, and replaced by workers, even ifwholly inexperienced, as long as they are connected withthe exploited masses and enjoy the latter’s confidence inthe struggle against the exploiters. 
 The dictatorship ofthe proletariat will require the appointment of such inex-perienced workers to the most responsible posts in the state; otherwise the workers’ government will be impotent,and will not have the support of the masses. 
” 132 Serrati is therefore wrong in saying that “all” in the Italian party agree to accept the decisions of the CommunistCongress. 
 In fact the reverse is to be seen. 
 In the above-mentioned letter to l’Humanité Serrati says among other things: “...As for the recent events, one should know that the leaders of the General Confederation of Labour (theItalian variant of the T. 
U. 
C. 
) proposed that the leadershipof the movement should be turned over to those who wanted to expand it to a revolution. 
 Our comrades of the General Confederation of Labour declared that they were willingto remain disciplined soldiers if the extremists assumed leadership of the insurrection. 
 But the latter did not assume leadership of the movement.... 
” It would be highly naïve on Serrati’s part to take at its face value this statement from the reformists in theGeneral Confederation of Labour. 
 In fact, threatening toresign at crucial moments is a variety of sabotage of therevolution. 
 This is in no way a question of loyalty, butsimply of the victory of the revolution being impossible if at every difficult turn the leaders are faced with hesita-tion, vacillation and resignations on the part of their “own”colleagues, those at the top, the “leaders”. 
 It may be usefulto Comrade Serrati to know that at the end of September1917, when the coalition of Russian Mensheviks andSocialist-Revolutionaries with the bourgeoisie had ob-viously fallen through politically, none other than our Socialist-Revolutionaries, Chernov’s party, wrote in theirnewspaper: “The Bolsheviks will be obliged to form acabinet.... 
 Let them not make futile attempts to hide behind ahastily concocted theory that it is impossible for them totake power. 
 The democracy will not accept these theories. 
 At the same time, the advocates of coalition must guarantee them full support” (the Socialist-Revolutionary newspa-per, the newspaper of their party, Chernov’s newspaper—Dyelo Naroda , September 21, 1917, quoted in my pamphlet Can the Bolsheviks Retain State Power? , Petrograd, 1917, p. 
 4)133 It would be just as fatal a mistake for the revolutionary workers to believe in the loyalty of such statements as itwas to believe the Hungarian Turatists, who promised BélaKun their help and joined the Communist Party, but,nevertheless, proved to be saboteurs of the revolution andwrecked it by their vacillation. 
 * * * To sum up: 1) The party of the revolutionary proletariat in Italy should display the utmost self-restraint, circumspectionand coolness for a correct appraisal of the conditions in general, and the appropriate moment in particular, in the impending decisive battles for political power between theItalian working class and the bourgeoisie. 
 2) At the same time, all propaganda and agitation conducted by that party should be imbued with the firmest determination to wage that struggle to a victorious conclusion, come what may, in a united and centralisedmanner, and with supreme heroism, ruthlessly eliminatingthe vacillation, indecision and wavering with which theTurati supporters are so thoroughly imbued. 
 3) The propaganda conducted by the Milan edition of Avanti! , which is edited by Serrati, does not prepare the proletariat for the struggle, but brings disintegration intoits ranks. 
 At a moment like the present, the party’s Cen-tral Committee should give the workers leadership, preparethem for the revolution, and challenge wrong views. 
 Thiscan (and should) be done, while allowing all trends to express themselves. 
 Serrati is giving leadership, but doing so in the wrong direction. 
 4) The expulsion from the party of all who attended the Reggio Emilia Congress on October 11, 1920, will not weakenthe party but strengthen it; such “leaders” are capableonly of wrecking the revolution in the “Hungarian style”, even if they do remain loyal . 
 The whiteguards and the bour-geoisie will be able to utilise the hesitation, vacillation,doubts, uncertainty, etc. 
, of even quite “loyal” socialists,Social -Democrats, etc. 
 5) If people such as Baratono, Zannerini, Bacci, Gia-comini and Serrati display vacillation and resign, they should not be asked to remain; their resignations should be immediately accepted. 
 They will return after the period ofdecisive battles and will then be of greater use to theproletariat. 
 6) Comrades, workers of Italy, do not forget the lessons of the history of all revolutions, the lessons of Russia and Hungary in 1917-20. 
 Great battles, great difficulties and great sacrifices await the proletariat in Italy. 
 Victory overthe bourgeoisie, the assumption of power by the proletariatand the consolidation of the Soviet Republic in Italy alldepend on the outcome of these battles, and on the soli-darity, discipline and devotion of the masses of the workers. 
 The bourgeoisie of Italy and of all countries of the world will do their utmost and resort to any crime and atrocityto prevent the proletariat from taking power, and to over-throw its power. 
 The hesitation, vacillation and irresolu-tion of the reformists and of all who attended the Reggio Emilia Congress on October 11, 1920, are inevitable, because, even though many of them are quite honest, suchpeople have always and in all countries, wrecked the causeof revolution by their vacillation. 
 It was such as these whowrecked the revolution (the first revolution; it will be fol-lowed by another ...) in Hungary, and would have wrecked the revolution in Russia had they not been removed from all responsible posts and surrounded by a wall of proletariandistrust, vigilance and surveillance. 
 The toiling and exploited masses of Italy will follow the revolutionary proletariat. 
 It will prove victorious inthe end, for its cause is that of the workers of the whole world, and there is no way to avoid the continuation of the present imperialist wars, the advent of the new imperialistwars that are being prepared, and the horrors of capitalistslavery and oppression, otherwise than in a SovietWorkers’ Republic. 
 4. 
11. 
1920 FALSE TALK ON FREEDOM (INSTEAD OF AN EPILOGUE) Comrade Nobs, editor of Volksrecht , the Swiss Left-Socialist newspaper in Zurich, recently published a letter by Zinoviev on the need to break with the opportunists,together with his own lengthy reply to this letter. 
 Nobs’sreply amounts to an emphatic rejection of the twenty-oneconditions and of affiliation to the Communist Internation-al, this, of course, being done in the name of “freedom”— the freedom to criticise, freedom from excessive demands or the dictatorship of Moscow (I have not kept Nobs’s articleand am therefore obliged to quote from memory; I can vouchfor the idea but not for the exact wording). 
 Incidentally, Comrade Nobs has enrolled Comrade Serrati as an ally, who is also known to be displeased with “Mos-cow”, i. 
e. 
, particularly with the Russian members of the Communist International’s Executive Committee and whoalso complains that Moscow violates the “freedom” of the constituent sections, the individual parties and individual members of the Communist International. 
 It will not be superfluous, therefore, to say a few words about freedom. 
 After three years of the dictatorship of the proletariat, we may safely say that the most common and popularobjection to it all over the world is its alleged violation offreedom and equality. 
 The entire bourgeois press in allcountries, including the press of the petty-bourgeois demo-crats, i. 
e. 
, of the Social-Democrats and socialists, among them Kautsky, Hilferding, Martov, Chernov, Longuet,etc. 
, etc. 
, rail against the Bolsheviks for the latter’s vio-lation of freedom and equality. 
 From the standpoint oftheory, this can be readily understood. 
 The reader willrecall Marx’s celebrated and sarcastic words in Capital : “This sphere [of the circulation or exchange of com-modities], within whose boundaries the sale and purchaseof labour power goes on, is in fact a very Eden of theinnate rights of man. 
 There alone rule Freedom, Equality,Property and Bentham. 
” ( Capital , Vol. 
 I, Part II, end of Chapter 4, Russian language edition, 1920, p. 
 152. 
) 134 This sarcastic remark has a profound historical and philosophical meaning. 
 It should be compared with thepopular explanation of the same question given by Engels inAnti-Dühring , particularly with what Engels said about the idea of equality being a prejudice or an absurdity, if it doesnot mean the abolition of classes. 
 135 The abolition of feudalism and of its vestiges, and the establishment of the foundations of the bourgeois order(one may quite correctly say: the bourgeois-democraticorder) occupied an entire epoch of world history. 
 It wasinevitable for freedom, equality, property and Bentham tobecome the slogans of this epoch of world history. 
 The abolition of capitalism and its vestiges, and the establish-ment of the fundamentals of the communist order comprisethe content of the new era of world history that has set in. 
It is inevitable that the slogans of our era are and mustbe: the abolition of classes; the dictatorship of the prole-tariat for the purpose of achieving that aim; the ruthless exposure of petty-bourgeois democratic prejudices concern-ing freedom and equality and ruthless war on theseprejudices. 
 Whoever does not understand this has no understanding of the dictatorship of the proletariat, Soviet government, and the fundamental principles of the Commu-nist International. 
 Until classes are abolished, all talk about freedom and equality in general is self-deception, or else deception ofthe workers and of all who toil and are exploited by capital;in any case, it is a defence of the interests of the bourgeoisie. 
Until classes are abolished, all arguments about freedom and equality should be accompanied by the questions: freedom for which class, and for what purpose; equalitybetween which classes, and in what respect? Any director indirect, witting or unwitting evasion of these questionsinevitably turns into a defence of the interests of the bour-geoisie, the interests of capital, the interests of the exploit-ers. 
 If these questions are glossed over, and nothing is said about the private ownership of the means of production,then the slogan of freedom and equality is merely the liesand humbug of bourgeois society, whose formal recognitionof freedom and equality conceals actual economic servitudeand inequality for the workers, for all who toil and are exploited by capital, i. 
e. 
, for the overwhelming majority of the population in all capitalist countries. 
 Thanks to the fact that, in present-day Russia, the dic-tatorship of the proletariat has posed in a practical mannerthe fundamental and final problems of capitalism, one can see with particular clarity whose interests are served (cui prodest ?—“who benefits? ”) by talk about freedom and equality in general. 
 When the Socialist-Revolutionariesand the Mensheviks, the Chernovs and the Martovs, favourus with arguments about freedom and equality within the limits of labour democracy (for, you see, they are never guilty of reasoning about freedom and equality in general! They never forget Marx!) we ask them: what about the distinction between the class of wage-workers and the classof small property-owners in the period of the dictatorshipof the proletariat? Freedom and equality within the limits of labour democ-racy mean freedom for the small peasant owner (even if he farms on nationalised land) to sell his surplus grain at profiteering prices, i. 
e. 
, to exploit the workers . 
 Anyone who talks about freedom and equality within the limits of labour democracy when the capitalists have been over-thrown but private property and freedom to trade still survive is a champion of the exploiters. 
 In exercising its dictator-ship, the proletariat must treat these champions as it doesthe exploiters, even though they say they are Social-Democrats or socialists, or admit that the Second Interna-tional is putrid, and so on and so forth. 
 As long as private ownership of the means of production (e. 
g. 
, of agricultural implements and livestock, even if private ownership of land has been abolished) and freedomto trade remain, so does the economic basis of capitalism. 
The dictatorship of the proletariat is the only means ofsuccessfully fighting for the demolition of that basis, theonly way to abolish classes (without which abolition there can be no question of genuine freedom for the individual— and not for the property-owner —of real equality, in the social and political sense, between man and man— and not the humbug of equality between those who possess property andthose who do not , between the well-fed and the hungry, between the exploiters and the exploited). 
 The dictatorship of the proletariat leads to the abolition of classes; it leads to that end, on the one hand, by the overthrow of theexploiters and the suppression of their resistance, and onthe other hand by neutralising and rendering harmlessthe small property-owner’s vacillation between the bour-geoisie and the proletariat. 
 The falsity of Comrade Nobs’s and Comrade Serrati’s statements does not, of course, consist in their beingfalsely or insincerely meant. 
 Nothing of the kind. 
 They arequite sincere, and there is nothing subjectively false in whatthey have said. 
 However, their statements are false objec-tively, in content, for they are a defence of the prejudices of petty-bourgeois democracy; they amount to a defence of the bourgeoisie. 
 The Communist International cannot under any circum-stances recognise freedom and equality for all who wish tosubscribe to certain statements, irrespective of their po-litical conduct. 
 To Communists this would be no less suicidal both as regards theory and practical politics than the recognition of freedom and equality “within the limitsof labour democracy”, etc. 
 To anyone able to read and willing to understand what he reads, it must be quite clear that none of the decisions, theses, resolutions and conditions of the Communist International recognise the absolute “freedom and equality” of those who desire to affiliate tothe Communist International. 
 What is our stipulation for recognising “freedom and equality”, the freedom and equality of members of theCommunist International? It is that no opportunists and “Centrists”, such as the well-known representatives of the Right wing of the Swissand Italian socialist parties, shall be able to become mem-bers. 
 No matter how these opportunists and “Centrists”may claim that they recognise the dictatorship of theproletariat, they actually remain advocates and defenders of the prejudices, weaknesses and vacillations of the petty-bourgeois democrats. 
 You must first break with these prejudices, weaknesses and vacillations, with those who preach, defend and givepractical expression to these views and qualities. 
 Then,and only on this condition, can you be “free” to join the Communist International, only then can the genuine Com-munist, a Communist in deed and not merely in word, bethe “equal” of any other Communist, of any other memberof the Communist International. 
 Comrade Nobs, you are “free” to defend the views you hold. 
 But we, too, are “free” to declare that these views are petty-bourgeois prejudices, which are injurious to the proletarian cause and of use to capitalism; we, too, are“free” to refuse to join in an alliance or league with peoplewho defend those views or a policy that corresponds tothem. 
 We have already condemned that policy and those views on behalf of the Second Congress of the Communist International as a whole. 
 We have already said that we absolutely demand a rupture with the opportunists as afirst and preliminary step. 
 Do not talk of freedom and equality in general, Comrade Nobs and Comrade Serrati! Talk of freedom not to carry out the decisions of the Communist International on the absolute duty of breaking with the opportunists and the “Centrists” (who cannot but undermine, cannot but sabotagethe dictatorship of the proletariat). 
 Talk of the equality of the opportunists and “Centrists” with the Communists. 
 Such freedom and such equality cannot be recognised by us for the Communist International; as for any other kind of freedom and equality—you may enjoy them to yourheart’s content! On the eve of the proletarian revolution, the liberation, the freedom, of the parties of the revolutionary proletariatfrom opportunists and “Centrists”, from their influence, their prejudices, their weaknesses and vacillations, is the main and essential condition of success. 
 11. 
12. 
1920 SPEECH AT A JOINT PLENUM OF THE MOSCOW SOVIET OF WORKERS ’, PEASANTS ’ AND RED ARMY DEPUTIES, THE MOSCOW COMMITTEE OF THE R. 
C. 
P. 
 (B. 
) AND THE MOSCOW CITY TRADE UNION COUNCIL, DEDICATED TO THE THIRD ANNIVERSARY OF THE OCTOBER REVOLUTION NOVEMBER 6, 1920 (Prolonged applause . 
) Comrades, we have gathered here today to commemorate our proletariat’s days of struggleand our revolutionary achievements. 
 Today we can cele-brate our victory. 
 Despite the unparalleled difficulties oflife and the unparalleled efforts of our enemies, we havewon. 
 We have been winning for three years. 
 This is a gigantic victory, one that previously none of us would have believed possible. 
 Three years ago, when we were at Smolny,the Petrograd workers’ uprising showed us that it wasmore unanimous than we could have expected, but had webeen told that night that, three years later, we would havewhat now exists, that we would have this victory of ours, nobody, not even the most incurable optimist, would have believed it. 
 We knew at that time that our victory wouldbe a lasting one only when our cause had triumphed theworld over, and so when we began working for our causewe counted exclusively on the world revolution. 
 The impe-rialist war changed all the forms of life we had lived in till then, and we had no way of knowing what forms would be assumed by the struggle, which had dragged on muchlonger than could have been expected. 
 Now, after three years, it turns out that we are immeasurably stronger than we were before, but the world bourgeoisie are still very strong, too; yet, despite the fact that they are far stronger than we are, we can say that we have won. 
 We have directedall our energies to disintegrating this bourgeoisie, and inthis respect our work has not been without success. 
 Thereason for this is that we staked our chances on world revo-lution, and were undoubtedly right in doing so. 
 We knew that the whole world was heading for destruction, we knew that, after the imperialist war, things could not go on inthe old way because the imperialist war had thoroughlydestroyed all the old economic and legal relations, allthe conditions of existence on which the old order had tillthen been based. 
 And if, at a time when the imperialist war had done a thousand times more than our propaganda did to pave the way for a débâcle , the proletariat in even a single country took action ending in victory, thiswould be sufficient to undermine the forces of the worldbourgeoisie. 
 If we now cast a glance at the international situation— and we have always stressed that we regard things from the international standpoint—and examine the history ofthe wars that have been waged against Soviet Russia, weshall see that we are at peace with almost all the littlebourgeois states bordering on us, states in which Bolshe-viks are persecuted and executed. 
 These states are servants and slaves to the Entente, and they want to ruin and destroy Soviet Russia, yet we have concluded peace withthem—against the Entente’s wishes. 
 Three such mightypowers as Britain, France and America could not uniteagainst us, and were defeated in a war they had begunagainst us with their joint forces. 
 Why has that been? It has been because their economies and life in their coun-tries have been undermined, because they are moribund,because they cannot go on living in the old way, andbecause the class at whose will they exist—the bourgeoisclass—has gone rotten. 
 That class drove over 10 millionpeople into the imperialist war and to destruction. 
 For what purpose? For the purpose of partitioning the world among a handful of capitalists. 
 In doing so, however, ithas come to the end of its strength, and has undermined the foundations of its own existence; however strong it may seem militarily, it is internally impotent. 
 This is no longer a proclamation in the Bolshevik spirit, but a fact that has been proved with fire and sword. 
 However rich andstrong that class may be, it is doomed, whereas we are aclass that is advancing towards victory. 
 Even thoughwe are weaker than our enemies, we have been winning forthree years, and we have the right to say, without the least boasting, that we have won. 
 In saying that, we should not forget another aspect of the matter. 
 We should not forget that we have won nomore than half of the victory. 
 We have won because we havebeen able to hold out against states that are stronger thanwe are, and moreover have joined forces with our émigré exploiters—the landowners and capitalists. 
 We have always known and shall never forget that ours is an inter-national cause, and until the revolution takes place in alllands, including the richest and most highly civilised ones,our victory will be only a half-victory, perhaps still less. 
At present we are gaining the upper hand in the fighting against Wrangel; we are expecting news that will bear out our expectations. 
 136 We are confident that if we do not succeed in capturing the Crimea within the next few days,we shall do so several days later, but we have no guaranteethat this is the last effort against us on the part of theworld bourgeoisie. 
 On the contrary, facts in our possession show that this effort will be repeated in the spring. 
 We know that their chances of success will be negligible, and weknow too that our military forces will be more powerfulthan those of any other country. 
 For all that, however,the danger is not yet over; it still exists and will continueto do so until the revolution is victorious in one or in several advanced countries. 
 We know that things are moving in that direction; we know that the Second Congress of the Third International,which was held in Moscow during the summer, did animmense job, one that has no precedent. 
 Some of you mayhave been present when Comrade Zinoviev delivered his report, in which he dealt in detail with the congress of German Independents at Halle. 
 137 Many of you may have heard his graphic description of developments in a country in which the chances of a revolution are the greatest. 
 Simi-lar things are taking place in all countries. 
 Communism has developed, grown strong, and created parties in all the leading countries. 
 During this period, the cause of theinternational revolution has suffered a number of reversesin some small countries, where assistance in crushing themovement has come from such huge predators as Germany,which helped to crush the Finnish revolution, or those giants of capitalism, Britain. 
 France and Austria, which crushed the revolution in Hungary. 
 By doing so, however,they have multiplied a thousandfold the elements of revo-lution in their own countries. 
 Today the main reason whythey have been weakened by the struggle is that their rearlines are not assured, because in all countries the workers and peasants do not want to fight against us, and heroic sailors have come to the fore, not only in our country, inKronstadt, but also in their countries. 
 Throughout Francethe names of the sailors who served in our Black Sea areassociated with recollections of the Russian revolution;the French workers know that those who are now serving terms of penal servitude in France mutinied in the Black Sea because they refused to become butchers of the Russianworkers and peasants. 
 138 That is why the Entente has grown weak; that is why we say with confidence that ourposition is secure in the international field. 
 However, our victory is far from complete, comrades; we have won less than half of it. 
 Yes, we have won a gigan-tic victory thanks to the self-sacrifice and enthusiasm ofthe Russian workers and peasants; we have been able toshow that Russia is capable of producing not only theindividual heroes who entered the struggle against tsarismand died at a time when the workers and peasants did not support them. 
 We were right when we said that Russia would produce such heroes from among the masses, that shewould be able to do so by the hundreds and thousands. 
We said that it would come about, and that then capitalismwould be a lost cause. 
 The main reason of our victory, itschief source, is the heroism, the self-sacrifice, and the unparalleled tenacity displayed by our Red Army men who have laid down their lives at the front, and by theworkers and peasants who have suffered so much, espe-cially the industrial workers, most of whom have suffered more during these three years than the workers did during the early years of capitalist slavery. 
 They have endured cold, hunger and suffering—all this in order to retainpower. 
 Thanks to this tenacity and this heroism, they havecreated a rear that has proved the only strong rear exist-ing at the moment among the belligerent forces. 
 Thatis why we are strong and firm, whereas the Entente is steadily disintegrating before our very eyes. 
 However, with this enthusiasm and heroism alone, the cause of the revolution cannot be completed, carried on tofull victory. 
 These qualities were sufficient to hurl backthe enemy when he flung himself on us and tried to strangleus; they were sufficient for victory in a bloody conflict, but not for the ultimate goal. 
 They are not enough because we are now faced with the second half of ourtask, the major and more difficult part. 
 Our triumph oftoday, our confidence that we shall win, must be imbuedwith a quality that will enable us to gain a victory justas decisive in the second half of the task. 
 Mere enthusiasm, the mere readiness of the workers and peasants to face death m accomplishing the second half of our task are not enough,because the second task is a most difficult one of construc-tive and creative work. 
 From capitalism we inherited notonly a ruined culture, not only wrecked factories, not onlya despairing intelligentsia; we inherited a disunited and backward mass of individual proprietors; we inherited inexperience, an absence of the team spirit and of an under-standing that the past must be buried. 
 Such are the problems we have to solve today. 
 We must remember that today’s temper has to be put to work fora long time to come, so that fragmentation of our economic life may be done away with. 
 We cannot return to the old ways. 
 By overthrowing the rule of the exploiters we havealready accomplished the greater part of the job. 
 We mustnow unite all working men and women and get them towork together. 
 We have come here like conquerors enteringnew territory, yet, despite difficult conditions we are work-ing in, we have been victorious at the front. 
 We see that our work is progressing today better than it did a year ago. 
We know that we cannot provide sufficient food for all, and we are not certain that hunger and cold will not knock at the doors of homes and cottages, but we do know that we have won. 
 We know that our productive power is enor-mous even now, after the severe imperialist and civil wars;we know that we shall not let the workers and peasantsstarve and freeze; however, to be able to do that, we mustcount all our resources and share them out properly. 
 We donot yet know how to do that because capitalism taught every petty proprietor to look after his own interests, to think of how to get rich, and become one of the money-bags as quickly as possible; it did not teach anybody howto wage a common struggle for some definite idea. 
 Wemust now be guided by another principle. 
 The other andmore difficult part of our task now faces us. 
 The enthusiasm that now fills us may last another year, perhaps even five years. 
 However we should remember that the struggle weshall have to wage is made up of ordinary workaday tasks. 
Around us are small-scale economic tasks. 
 Furthermore,you know that the little units that keep our economic lifegoing are the same that served in the past—petty officials, petty bureaucrats accustomed to the old and selfish way of doing things. 
 The struggle against such things must becomethe task of the hour. 
 On the occasion of these festivities,the occasion of this triumphant mood of ours, the occasionof the third anniversary of the establishment of Soviet rulewe must become imbued with the labour enthusiasm, the will to work, and the persistence on which the speedy salvation of the workers and peasants, the salvation of thenational economy now depends. 
 We shall then see that ourvictory in the accomplishment of this task will be moreeffective and lasting than in all bloody battles of the past. 
(Prolonged applause . 
) Published in 1920 in Verbatim Reports Published according to of the Plenums of the Moscow Soviet the text in the book of Workers ’, Peasants ’ and Red Army Deputies TELEGRAM TO J. 
 V. 
 STALIN To Stalin How is the struggle against the bands progressing? Is it true that they have over 20,000 rifles and sabres? Are the reinforcements designated for the Caucasus front suffi-cient? Do you consider a peaceful settlement of relationswith Georgia and Armenia possible, and on what basis?Then, is the work on the fortification of the approaches toBaku being conducted in real earnest? I also ask for infor-mation on Turkey and Persia, briefly by telegram, and in detail by letter. 
 Lenin Written on November 13, 1920 First published in Pravda No. 
 21, Published according to January 21, 1937 the manuscript THESE S ON PRODUCTIO N PROPAGAND A139 ROUGH DRAFT 1. 
 In connection with the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
’s military victories and its international position in general, production propaganda must now be given special prominence, and be accentuated and organised. 
 2. 
 The leading newspapers, Izvestia and Pravda in the first place, should: a) reduce the space devoted to politics,and increase space for production propaganda; b) influenceall the work of the Party and of Soviet institutions, in the sense of mobilising greater forces for production propaganda; c) endeavour to work systematically to placeproduction propaganda on a nation-wide footing, and evolveextensive measures for its encouragement and improvement,with a special view to verifying the successes actuallyachieved in practice. 
 3. 
 In just the same way, work should be systematised, extended and developed in selecting able administrators,organisers and inventors from the masses of workingmenand peasants. 
 4. 
 Throughout the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
 production propaganda should be placed under the direction of a single body, with the aim of economising forces and improving guidance of this work. 
 In this, the greatest autonomy, both local andwithin each trade, is indispensable. 
 Any marked successshould be systematically and judiciously rewarded (bonusesin kind, etc. 
). 
 Verification of successes to be organisedimpartially and competently. 
 5. 
 The editorial board of a mass newspaper with a cir-culation of between 500,000 and 1,000,000 should be madethe sole body guiding production propaganda. 
 Bednota140 is the right newspaper for the purpose. 
 It would be harmful to have a division into an industrial newspaper and an agricultural newspaper, since it is the aim of socialism to bring industry and agriculture closertogether and unite them. 
 In practice, the guiding role ofthe industrial proletariat both in the cities and in the ruralareas, particularly in the urbanisation of agriculture andthe electrification of the entire country, calls precisely for a single newspaper devoted to problems of production (and for a single body in charge of production propaganda) bothfor the workers and the peasants. 
 6. 
 This guiding collegiate body should consist of five members representing: 1) the All-Russia Central Councilof Trade Unions; 2) the Supreme Council of the National Economy; 3) the People’s Commissariat of Agriculture; 4) the Chief Committee for Political Education; 5) theCentral Committee of the R. 
C. 
P. 
 (or an editor-in-chief). 
This collegiate body and the newspaper should be attachedto the All-Russia Central Council of Trade Unions (perhapsthere should also be a representative of the Central Board for Vocational Training?). 
 7. 
 This newspaper, devoted to matters of production, should be a popular one, in the sense of being understoodby millions of readers, without falling into vulgarisation. 
The paper should not descend to the level of the uncultivat-ed reader, but should work steadily—and by very gradual degrees—to promote his development. 
 Little space—not exceeding a quarter of the total—should be devoted topolitics. 
 Top priority should be given to a single economicplan, to the labour front, production propaganda, the train-ing of workers and peasants in the work of administration,to seeing that Soviet laws and measures established by Soviet institutions are given due effect, and to an extensive and properly organised-exchange of opinions with the rank-and-file reader. 
 8. 
 Materials published in the newspaper or addressed to it, as well as all other kinds of material, should be systemati-cally and periodically brought out in pamphlet or leaflet form and compulsorily supplied to libraries, as well as to factories and enterprises in the given field of production(the pamphlets and leaflets should systematise all the material relating to each particular branch of production). 
 Together with manuals and reviews of foreign technology, this material should serve to spread vocational training and polytechnical education. 
 A more rational distribution of the newspaper, as well as of pamphlets and leaflets dealing with questions ofproduction, among all libraries in the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
 should,in particular, be the object of special attention. 
 9. 
 It is indispensable that engineers, agronomists, school-teachers, and also Soviet functionaries possessing definiteprofessional qualifications, should be drawn into systematicparticipation in production propaganda (this in connectionwith the liquidation of illiteracy). 
 The organisation of lectures, talks, reports, etc. 
 Compulsory labour service on the part of all those who are able to acquaint the population with problems of electri-fication, with the Taylor system, etc. 
 10. 
 The more extensive and systematic use of films for production propaganda. 
 Joint work with the cinema section. 
 Soviet gramophone records. 
 Displays of diagrams and cartograms at clubs, village reading-rooms, in streets, etc. 
 Bills and placards to be displayed near factories, work-shops, technical schools, etc. 
 11. 
 The organisation, jointly with the People’s Commis-sariat of Labour and other institutions, of an inspectorateof production. 
 The latter’s work to be co-ordinated with that of production propaganda, as well as with the work of instructors, exhibition trains and ships, and the like. 
 12. 
 Extensive publicity for exemplary enterprises. 
 Organisation of factory workers with foreign industrialexperience—this to be done in special workshops, sectionsor groups, etc. 
 Such workers to be utilised for the training of backward workingmen, for the dissemination of vocational-technical and polytechnical instruction, etc. 
 N. 
 Lenin 18. 
11. 
1920 Published in 1928 Published according to the manuscript EXTRACT DIRECT -LINE TALK BETWEEN V. 
 I. 
 LENIN AND J. 
 V. 
 STALIN I can give no reply without convening the Political Bureau. 
 I advise that you immediately submit a concrete proposal and at once table it for the Political Bureau, or act independently on the basis of the powers conferred onStalin, or else expedite your coming to Moscow to settlethe entire Caucasus question as a whole. 
 In any case, thebringing up of reinforcements should be intensified andspeeded up. 
 Communicate your exact opinion. 
 Lenin November 20, 1920 or earlier First published in 1945 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany XXXV the text of the telegraph tape OUR FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC POSITION AND THE TASKS OF THE PARTY SPEECH DELIVERED TO THE MOSCOW GUBERNIA CONFERENCE OF THE R. 
C. 
P. 
 (B. 
), NOVEMBER 21, 1920141 (Applause . 
) Comrades, in speaking of the international position of the Soviet Republic we naturally have to deal mainly with the Polish war and Wrangel’s defeat. 
 I thinkthat at a meeting of Party workers who have, of course,followed the Party press and have frequently heard majorreports on this question, there is no need and indeed it would be superfluous, for me to speak in detail on this period or on each phase of the war against Poland, on the characterof our offensives, or on the significance of our defeat atWarsaw. 
 I presume that most of the comrades are so famil-iar with this aspect of the matter that I would only berepeating myself, which would be unsatisfactory to these comrades. 
 I shall therefore speak, not on the various episodes and turns of our Polish campaign but on the resultswe now have before us. 
 After the Red Army’s brilliant victories in the summer, the serious defeat at Warsaw, and the conclusion of apreliminary peace with Poland, which at this very moment, in Riga, is being or at least should be turned a conclu-sive peace, the chances of that preliminary peace reallybecoming conclusive have greatly increased as a result ofWrangel’s débâcle . 
 Now that the latter has become an estab-lished fact the imperialist press in the Entente countriesis beginning to show its cards and disclose what it has most of all kept in the dark. 
 I do not know whether you noticed a brief news item published in the papers today or some days ago to the effect that the newspaper Temps , mouthpiece of the French imperialist bourgeoisie, now speaks of the peace with Poland having been signed against France’s advice. 
 There can be no doubt that the French bourgeoisie’s spokesmen areadmitting a truth they would have preferred to cover upand indeed have covered up for a very long time. 
 Despitethe unfavourable terms of the Polish peace (which aremore advantageous than those we ourselves offered to the Polish landowners this April in order to avoid any war), and they are indeed unfavourable as compared to what mighthave been achieved but for the extremely serious situation atWarsaw, we succeeded in getting terms that frustrate thegreater part of the imperialists’ over-all plan. 
 The Frenchbourgeoisie have now acknowledged that they insisted on Poland continuing the war, and were opposed to the conclusion of a peace, because they feared the rout ofWrangel’s army and wished to support a new interventionand campaign against the Soviet Republic. 
 Though Polishimperialism’s conditions have impelled it to go to waragainst Russia—despite this—the French imperialists’ plans have collapsed, and as a result we now have gained something more than a mere breathing-space. 
 Of the small states formerly belonging to the Russian Empire, Poland has been among those that have been mostof all at odds with the Great-Russian nation during the lastthree years, and made the greatest claims to a large slice of territory inhabited by non-Poles. 
 We concluded peace with Finland, Estonia and Latvia 142 also against the wishes of the imperialist Entente, but this was easier because thebourgeoisie of Finland, Estonia and Latvia entertained noimperialist aims that would call for a war against theSoviet Republic, whereas the Polish bourgeois republic had an eye, not only to Lithuania and Byelorussia but the Ukraine as well. 
 Furthermore, it was impelled along thesame direction by the age-old struggle of Poland, who usedto be a great power and is now pitting herself against anothergreat power—Russia. 
 Even at present, Poland cannothold back from this age-long struggle. 
 That is why Poland has been far more bellicose and stubborn in her war plans against our Republic, and why our present success inconcluding peace against the wishes of the Entente is so much more resounding. 
 Among the states which have preser-ved the bourgeois system and border on Russia, there is no other country but Poland on which the Entente can rely in a long-term plan of military intervention; that is why intheir common hate of the Soviets, all the bourgeois statesare directly interested in having Eastern Galicia underthe control of the Polish landed proprietors. 
 Moreover, Poland lays claim to the Ukraine and Lithuania. 
 This gives the campaign a particularly acute and stubborn character. 
 Keeping Poland supplied with war materialshas, naturally, been the main concern of France andcertain other powers, and it is quite impossible to estimatejust how much money has gone into this. 
 Therefore, theimportance of the Red Army’s final victory despite our defeat at Warsaw, is particularly great, for it has placed Poland in a position in which she is unable to prosecute the war. 
She has had to agree to peace terms that have given herless than those we proposed in April 1920, before the Polishoffensive, when we, unwilling to discontinue our work ofeconomic construction, proposed boundaries that were highly disadvantageous to us. 
 At that time, the press of the petty-bourgeois patriots, to whose number both ourSocialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks belong, accusedthe Bolsheviks of submissiveness, and an almost Tolstoyanattitude displayed by the Soviet government. 
 The latterterm was used to qualify our acceptance of peace along the proposed Pilsudski line, which left Minsk in Polish hands, the boundary lying some 50 vests and at placessome 100 vests east of the present line. 
 Of course,I do not have to tell a meeting of Party workers why weaccepted, and had to accept, worse boundaries if indeedour work of economic construction was to go on. 
 The out-come was that, by waging war, Poland, which had retained her bourgeois system, brought about an acute dislocationof her entire economy, a tremendous growth of discontent,and a bourgeois reign of terror, not only against the indus-trial workers but against the farm labourers as well. 
Poland’s entire position as a bourgeois state became so pre-carious that there could be no question of continuing the war. 
 The successes scored in this respect by the Soviets have been tremendous. 
 When, three years ago, we raised the question of the tasks and the conditions of the proletarian revolution’s victory in Russia, we always stated emphati-cally that victory could not be permanent unless it was followed up by a proletarian revolution in the West, andthat a correct appraisal of our revolution was possible onlyfrom the international point of view. 
 For victory to belasting, we must achieve the victory of the proletarian revo-lution in all, or at any rate in several, of the main capitalist countries. 
 After three years of desperate and stubborn struggle, we can see in what respect our predictions have orhave not materialised. 
 They have not materialised in thesense that there has been no rapid or simple solution of theproblem. 
 None of us, of course, expected that such an un-equal struggle as the one waged by Russia against the whole of the capitalist world could last for three years. 
 It has emerged that neither side—the Russian Soviet Republicor the capitalist world—has gained victory or suffereddefeat; at the same time it has turned out that, while ourforecasts did not materialise simply, rapidly and directly,they were fulfilled insofar as we achieved the main thing— the possibility has been maintained of the existence of proletarian rule and the Soviet Republic even in the eventof the world socialist revolution being delayed. 
 In thisrespect it must be said that the Republic’s internationalposition today provides the best and most precise confirma-tion of all our plans and all our policy. 
 Needless to say, there can be no question of comparing the military strength of the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
 with that of allthe capitalist powers. 
 In this respect we are incompara-bly weaker than they are, yet, after three yeas of war,we have forced almost all of these states to abandon theidea of further intervention. 
 This means that what we saw as possible three years ago, while the imperialist war was not yet over, i. 
e. 
, a highly protracted situation, withoutany final decision one way or the other, has come about. 
That has been, not because we have proved militarily strong-er and the Entente weaker, but because throughout thisperiod the disintegration in the Entente countries has intensified, whereas our inner strength has grown. 
 This has been confirmed and proved by the war. 
 The Entente wasunable to fight us with its own forces. 
 The workers and peasants of the capitalist countries could not be forced to fight us. 
 The bourgeois states were able to emerge from the imperialist war with their bourgeois regimes intact. 
 They were able to stave off and delay the crisis hanging overthem, but basically they so undermined their own positionthat, despite all their gigantic military forces, they hadto acknowledge, after three years, that they were unable tocrush the Soviet Republic with its almost non-existent military forces. 
 It has thus turned out that our policy and our predictions have proved fundamentally correct in all respectsand that the oppressed people in any capitalist countryhave indeed shown themselves our allies, for it was theywho stopped the war. 
 Without having gained an interna-tional victory, which we consider the only sure victory, we are in a position of having won conditions enabling us to exist side by side with capitalist powers, who are nowcompelled to enter into trade relations with us. 
 In the courseof this struggle we have won the right to an independentexistence. 
 Thus a glance at our international position as a whole will show that we have achieved tremendous successes and have won, not only a breathing-space but something muchmore significant. 
 By a breathing-space we understand abrief period during which the imperialist powers have hadmany opportunities to renew in greater force the waragainst us. 
 Today, too, we do not underestimate the danger and do not deny the possibility of future military intervention by the capitalist countries. 
 It is essential forus to maintain our military preparedness. 
 However, if wecast a glance at the conditions in which we defeated allattempts made by the Russian counter-revolutionaries andachieved a formal peace with all the Western states, it will be clear that we have something more than a breathing space: we have entered a new period, in which we have wonthe right to our fundamental international existence inthe network of capitalist states. 
 Domestic conditions havenot allowed a single powerful capitalist state to hurl itsarmy against Russia; this has been due to the revolution having matured within such countries, preventing them from overcoming us as quickly as they might have done. 
There were British, French and Japanese armies on Russian territory for three years. 
 There can be no doubt that the most insignificant concentration of forces by these three powers would have been quite enough to win a victory over us in a few months, if not in a few weeks. 
 We were able tocontain that attack only on account of the demoralisationamong the French troops and the unrest that set in amongthe British and Japanese. 
 We have made use of this diver-gence of imperialist interests all the time. 
 We defeated the interventionists only because their interests divided them, thereby enhancing our strength and unity. 
 This gave usa breathing-space and rendered impossible the completevictory of German imperialism at the time of the Peace ofBrest-Litovsk. 
 These dissensions have become more aggravated of late, especially because of the project of an agreement on conces-sions with a group of American capitalist sharks, with thetoughest of them, headed by a multimillionaire whoexpects to form a group of multimillionaires. 
 143 We know that almost all reports from the Far East bear witness tothe extreme resentment felt in Japan over the conclusion of this agreement, although so far there has been no agree-ment, but only the draft of one. 
 Japanese public opinion,however, is already seething, and today I read a communi-cation which said that Japan is accusing Soviet Russia ofwanting to set Japan against America. 
 We have correctly appraised the intensity of the impe-rialist rivalry and have told ourselves that we must make systematic use of the dissension between them so as tohamper their struggle against us. 
 Political dissension isalready apparent in the relations between Britain andFrance. 
 Today we can speak, not merely of a breathing-space, but of a real chance of a new and lengthy period of development. 
 Until now we have actually had no basis in the international sense. 
 We now have this basis, the reasonbeing the attitude of the smaller powers that are complete-ly dependent on the Great Powers both in the military andin the economic sense. 
 It now appears that, despite thepressure brought to bear by France, Poland has signed a peace with us. 
 The Polish capitalists have a hate of Soviet power; they crush the most ordinary strikes with unparal-leled ferocity. 
 They want war with Soviet Russia more than anything else, yet they prefer to make peace with us rather than carry out the conditions set by the Entente. 
 We see that the imperialist powers dominate the whole world although they comprise an insignificant part of theworld’s population. 
 The fact that a country has appearedthat for three years has resisted world imperialism hasconsiderably changed the international situation; theminor powers—and they form the majority of the world’s population—are therefore all inclined to make peace with us. 
 The entry of the socialist country into trade relations with capitalist countries is a most important factorensuring our existence in such a complex and absolutelyexceptional situation. 
 I have had occasion to observe a certain Spargo, an Amer-ican social-chauvinist close to our Right Socialist-Revo-lutionaries and Mensheviks, one of the leaders of the SecondInternational and member of the American Socialist Party,a kind of American Alexinsky, and author of a number ofanti-Bolshevik books, who has reproached us—and has quoted the fact as evidence of the complete collapse of communism—for speaking of transactions with capitalistpowers. 
 He has written that he cannot imagine better proofof the complete collapse of communism and the break-down of its programme. 
 I think that anybody who has giventhought to the matter will say the reverse. 
 No better proof of the Russian Soviet Republic’s material and moral vic-tory over the capitalists of the whole world can be foundthan the fact that the powers that took up arms against usbecause of our terror and our entire system have been com-pelled, against their will, to enter into trade relationswith us in the knowledge that by so doing they are strengthen-ing us. 
 This might have been advanced as proof of the collapse of communism only if we had promised, with theforces of Russia alone, to transform the whole world, or haddreamed of doing so. 
 However, we have never harbouredsuch crazy ideas and have always said that our revolutionwill be victorious when it is supported by the workers of all lands. 
 In fact, they went half-way in their support, for they weakened the hand raised against us, yet in doingso they were helping us. 
 I shall not dwell any further on this question but shall only remark that at the moment conditions in the Caucasus are becoming most complex and extremely difficult to ana-lyse, with the likelihood that war may be forced on us anyday. 
 But with the peace with Poland almost assured andWrangel wiped out, this war cannot be so alarming and, ifforced on us, only promises to strengthen and fortify ourposition even more. 
 Newspaper reports of events in Armenia and Turkey give us some idea of this. 
 144 An extremely confused situation has arisen, but I am absolutely confidentthat we shall emerge from it, preserving peace on the presentbasis, which in some respects is extremely favourable, ona basis that is satisfactory to us and permits our economicexistence. 
 We are doing all we can to ensure this. 
 It is, however, quite likely that circumstances may arise which will directly force war on us or indirectly lead to it. 
 Wecan view this prospect quite calmly—this will be a war ina distant region, with the balance of forces fully in ourfavour, probably ensuring greater advantages than thePolish war. 
 The Polish war was a war on two fronts, with a threat from Wrangel, and it could not be called peripheral, because the Pilsudski line did not run so far from Moscow. 
With this, I shall conclude my review of the internationalsituation. 
 I now turn to the state of affairs at home. 
 The failure of a number of attempts at military intervention has led to a considerable improvement in our economic position. 
 The main cause of our former desperate position was thatwe in Central Russia, industrial Russia, proletarianRussia—Petrograd, Moscow, and Ivanovo-Voznesensk—werecut off from all the main grain-producing areas such asSiberia, the South and the South-East; we were cut off from the Donets Basin, one of the main sources of fuel, and from the sources of oil, and it seemed absolutely impossiblefor the Republic to hold out. 
 You know what appallingdistress, what extreme privation, what grain shortagesand famine we experienced because we were cut off from therichest grain-producing areas and the most important economic regions. 
 The return of these territories is to a considerable extent responsible for the improvement nowto be seen. 
 Thanks to the possibility of drawing on Siberia and the Caucasus, and to the social changes developing in our favour in the Ukraine, there is promise that with the state food procurements in the forthcoming food campaign we shall not only emerge without an actual shortage as wedid this year, but shall have sufficient food for all indus-trial workers. 
 This is the first campaign when we can hopethat, as a result of the doubtless improvement in the trans-port system, the government will dispose of such food stocks—between 250 and 300 million poods of grain—that we shall not merely be talking about socialist constructionand doing precious little, as at present, but shall actuallyoperate with real armies of labour; we shall be able to trans-fer hundreds of thousands of industrial workers, or workersnow engaged in provisioning for industry, to really urgent and essential work, and to improve that work in the same way as the improved fuel situation made it possible torestore the textile industry. 
 The Ivanovo-Voznesensk Guber-nia mills have begun to work. 
 At first, not more than aquarter of a million spindles were operating but at presentthere are already half a million, perhaps 600,000, and by the end of the year we count on a million spindles in opera-tion. 
 We think the number will go up to four million nextyear. 
 Whereas quite recently we made both ends meetwith the greatest difficulty by using up old stocks, condi-tions have now set in in which we are starting to rehabili-tate Russia’s ruined industry, and shall be able, while collecting grain from the countryside, to supply the peasants in return with salt and paraffin oil, and, though in smallquantities, with textiles. 
 Without this it is useless to talkof socialist construction. 
 While in the international sense we have gained a foot-ing by concluding a series of military campaigns and by wresting peace treaties from a number of states, it has only now become economically possible for us to supplythe industrial workers with bread and to provide the breadof industry, namely fuel, on a scale enabling us to set aboutthe construction of socialism. 
 That is our main task, theroot of the problem, a transition we have several times tried to make. 
 I remember that at a meeting of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee in April 1918, I saidthat our military tasks appeared to be ending and that we had not only convinced Russia, not only won her from the exploiters, for the working people but had now to tackle other tasks in order to govern Russia in the interests of her economic construction. 
145 Our breathing-space at the time proved quite brief. 
 The war that was forced on us, startingwith the Czechoslovak revolt in the summer of 1918, wasmost ferocious. 
 However, we made several attempts, bothin the spring of 1918 and, on a broader scale, in the spring of this year when the question of labour armies was posed in practice. 
 We must now once again give top priority tothis transitional stage and exert every effort to achieve it. 
Regarded from the international point of view, from thestandpoint of victory over capitalism in general, this isa paramount task of the entire socialist revolution To defeat capitalism in general, it is necessary, in the first place, to defeat the exploiters and to uphold the power ofthe exploited, namely, to accomplish the task of overthrow-ing the exploiters by revolutionary forces; in the secondplace, to accomplish the constructive task, that of establish-ing new economic relations, of setting an example of how this should be done. 
 These two aspects of the task of accomplishing a socialist revolution are indissolublyconnected, and distinguish our revolution from all previousones, which never went beyond the destructive aspect. 
 If we do not accomplish this second task, nothing will follow from our successes, from our victories in overthrow-ing the exploiters, and from our military rebuff to interna-tional imperialism, and a return to the old system will beinevitable. 
 In the theoretical sense, that is beyond question. 
In this instance, the transitional stage is abrupt and mostdifficult, and calls for new methods, a different deploy-ment and use of forces, a different emphasis, a new psycho-logical approach, and so on. 
 In the place of methods of the revolutionary overthrow of the exploiters and of repellingthe tyrants, we must apply the methods of constructiveorganisation; we must prove to the whole world that we area force capable, not only of resisting any attempt to crushus by force of arms but of setting an example to others. 
 All the writings of the greatest socialists have always pro-vided guidance on these two aspects of the task of thesocialist revolution which, as two aspects of the same task, refer both to the outside world, to those states that have remained in capitalist hands, and to the non-proletar-ians of one’s own country. 
 We have convinced the peasants that the proletariat provides them with better conditionsof existence than the bourgeoisie did; we have convincedthem of this in practice. 
 When the peasants, though theywere dissatisfied with Bolshevik government, comparedit in practice with the rule of the Constituent Assembly, Kolchak and the others they drew the conclusion that the Bolsheviks guaranteed them a better existence and defendedthem militarily from violence by world imperialism. 
Yet, under conditions of bourgeois rule, half of the peasantrylived in a bourgeois fashion, and this could not have beenotherwise. 
 The proletariat must now solve the second problem: it must prove to the peasant that the proletariat can provide him with the example and practice of economicrelations of a higher level than those under which everypeasant family farms on its own. 
 The peasant still believesonly in this old system; he still considers this the normalstate of affairs. 
 That is beyond doubt. 
 It would be absurd to think that the peasant will change his attitude to vital economic problems, as a result of our propaganda. 
 His isa wait-and-see attitude. 
 From being neutrally hostile, hehas become neutrally sympathetic. 
 He prefers us to anyother form of government because he sees that the workers’,the proletarian state, the proletarian dictatorship, does not mean brute force or usurpation, as it has been described, but is a better defender of the peasants than Kolchak,Denikin, and the rest are. 
 But all that is not enough; we have not achieved the main object: to show that the proletariat will restorelarge-scale industry and the national economy so that the peasants can be transferred to a higher economic system. 
 After proving that, by revolutionary organisation, we canrepel any violence directed against the exploited, we mustprove the same thing in another field by setting an examplethat will convince the vast mass of the peasants and petty-bourgeois elements, and other countries as well, not in word but in deed, that a communist system and way of life, can be created by a proletariat which has won a war. 
This is a task of world-wide significance. 
 To achieve the second half of the victory in the international sense, we must accomplish the second half of the task, that which bears upon economic construction. 
 We discussed this at the last Party conference, so I think there is hardly any needor possibility to go into detail on the various points; thisis a task that embraces every aspect of economic construc-tion. 
 I have briefly described the conditions ensuring breadfor the industrial workers and fuel for industry. 
 These conditions are fundamental in providing the possibility of further construction. 
 I should add that, as you have seenfrom the agenda published in the newspapers, the questionof economic construction will be the main item to be discussedat the forthcoming Congress of Soviets. 
 The entire agendahas been drawn up so that the entire attention and concern of all delegates and of the whole mass of Government and Party workers throughout the Republic will be concentrated onthe economic aspect, on the restoration of transport andindustry, on what is cautiously termed “aid to the peasanteconomy” but which implies far more—a system of carefullythought-out measures to raise to the appropriate level the peasant economy, which will continue to exist for some time to come. 
 The Congress of Soviets will, therefore, discuss a report on the electrification of Russia, so that an all-over econom-ic plan for the rehabilitation of the national economy,of which we have spoken, can be drawn up in the techno-logical aspect. 
 There can be no question of rehabilitating the national economy or of communism unless Russia is put ona different and a higher technical basis than that which hasexisted up to now. 
 Communism is Soviet power plus theelectrification of the whole country, since industry cannotbe developed without electrification. 
 This is a long-term task which will take at least ten years to accomplish, provided a great number of technical experts are drawninto the work. 
 A number of printed documents in whichthis project 146 has been worked out in detail by technical experts will be presented to the Congress. 
 We cannotachieve the main objects of this plan—create so large regions of electric power stations which would enable us to modernise our industry—in less than ten years. 
 Withoutthis reconstruction of all industry on lines of large-scale machine production, socialist construction will obviously remain only a set of decrees, a political link between the working class and the peasantry, and a means of saving the peasants from the rule by Kolchak and Denikin; it willremain an example to all powers of the world, but it willnot have its own basis. 
 Communism implies Soviet power asa political organ, enabling the mass of the oppressed to runall state affairs—without that, communism is unthinkable. 
 We see proof of this throughout the world, because the idea of Soviet power and its programme are undoubtedly becom-ing victorious throughout the world. 
 We see this in everyphase of the struggle against the Second International, whichis living on support from the police, the church and the oldbourgeois functionaries in the working-class movement. 
 This guarantees political success. 
 Economic success, however, can be assured only when the Russian proletarianstate effectively controls a huge industrial machine builton up-to-day technology; that means electrification. 
 Forthis, we must know the basic conditions of the applicationof electricity, and accordingly understand both industry and agriculture. 
 This is an enormous task, to accomplish which will require a far longer period than was neededto defend our right to existence against invasion. 
 However,we are not afraid of such a period and we think we havewon a victory by attracting to this work tens and hundredsof engineers and scientists imbued with bourgeois ideas, whom we have given the mission of reorganising the entire economy, industry and agriculture, in whom we havearoused interest and from whom we have received a greatdeal of information being summarised in a number of pam-phlets. 
 Each region earmarked for electrification is dealtwith in a separate pamphlet. 
 The plan for the electrification of the Northern region is ready, and those interested may receive it. 
 Pamphlets dealing with each region, with theover-all plan for reorganisation, will be published by thetime the Congress of Soviets meets. 
 It is now our task tocarry on systematic work throughout the country, in allParty cells, in every Soviet institution, according to this all-over plan covering many years, so that we may in the near future have a clear idea of how and in what measurewe are progressing, without deceiving ourselves or conceal-ing the difficulties confronting us. 
 The entire Republic is faced with the task of accomplishing this single economic plan at any cost. 
 All the Communist Party’s activities, propaganda and agitation must be focussed on this task. 
From the angle of theory, it has been dealt with on morethan one occasion; nobody argues against it, but scarcely ahundredth part of what has to be done has been accomplished. 
 It is natural that we have grown used to a period of political warfare; we have all been steeled in the political and military struggle and, therefore, what has beenaccomplished by the present Soviet government is only anapproach to a task which demands that the train should beswitched over to other rails; this is a train which has tocarry tens of millions of people. 
 The switching of this heavy load on to other rails, along a track on which there are no rails at all in places, calls for concentrated attention,knowledge and very great persistence. 
 The cultural levelof the peasants and the workers has not been high enoughfor this task and, at the same time, we have become almosttotally accustomed to tackling political and military tasks; this has led to a revival of bureaucratic methods. 
 This is generally admitted. 
 It is the task of the Soviet governmentto completely destroy the old machinery of state as it wasdestroyed in October, and to transfer power to the Soviets. 
However, our Programme recognises that there has beena revival of bureaucratic methods and that at present no economic foundation yet exists for a genuinely socialist society. 
 A cultural background, literacy, and in generala higher standard of culture are lacking in the mass ofworkers and peasants. 
 That is because the best forces ofthe proletariat have been engaged with military tasks. 
The proletariat has made tremendous sacrifices to assure the success of military tasks into which tens of millions of peasants had to be drawn, and elements imbued with bourgeoisviews had to be put to work, because no others wereavailable. 
 That is why we had to state in the Programme—in a document like the Party Programme—that there hasbeen a revival of bureaucratic methods, against which a systematic struggle has to be waged. 
 It is natural that the bureaucratic methods that have reappeared in Sovietinstitutions were bound to have a pernicious effect even or Party organisations, since the upper ranks of the Party are at the same time the upper ranks of the state apparatus; they are one and the same thing. 
 Since we recognise that the evil consists in the old bureaucratic methods whichhave been able to appear in the Party apparatus, it is ob-vious and natural that all the symptoms of this evil haverevealed themselves in the Party organisations. 
 Since thatis so, the question has been placed on the agenda of the Congress of Soviets and has received a great deal of attention from this Conference. 
 That is how it should be, becausea disease that has affected the Party and has been acknowl-edged in the resolutions of the general Party Conference 147 exists, not in Moscow alone, but has spread throughoutthe entire republic. 
 It is a result of the need to carry on political and military work, when we had to involve the peasant masses and were unable to increase our demandsfor a broader plan to raise the level of the peasant economy,and that of the mass of peasants. 
 Allow me in conclusion to say a few words about the situation within the Party, about the struggle and the appearance of an opposition, of which all those present are fully aware and which took up a great deal of energy andattention at the Moscow City and Gubernia Conference,perhaps considerably more than we would have all liked. 
It is quite natural that the great transition now in progressat a time when all the forces drawn by the Republic from the proletariat and the Party during three years of struggle have been exhausted, has placed us in a difficult positionin the face of a task to accurately assess which is beyondour powers. 
 We have to acknowledge that we do not knowthe real extent of the evil, and that we cannot determinethe relationships and the exact groupings. 
 The Party Con-ference’s main task is to raise the question, not cover up the existing evil, but to draw the Party’s attention to it,and call on all Party members to work on remedying theevil. 
 From the point of view of the Central Committeeand also, I think, of the immense majority of Party com-rades, it is perfectly natural and beyond doubt (as far as I am aware of the views, which nobody has repudiated), that in connection with the crisis in the Party the opposi-tion which exists, not only in Moscow but throughout Russia, reveals many tendencies that are absolutely healthy, necessary and inevitable at a time of the Party’s natural growth and the transition from a situation in which all attention was concentrated on political and military tasksto a period of construction and organisation, when we have-to take care of dozens of bureaucratic institutions, this ata time when the cultural level of the majority of the prole-tariat and the peasants is unequal to the task. 
 After all, the Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection exists more as a pious wish; it has been impossible to set it in motion becausethe best workers have been sent to the front, and thecultural level of the peasant masses is such that they havebeen unable to produce a sufficient number of officials. 
 Of course the opposition, whose slogan urges a more speedy transition, the enlistment of the greatest number of fresh and young forces and the promotion of local workersto more responsible posts, has extremely sound aspirations,trend and programme. 
 No doubts on this score exist eitherin the Central Committee or among comrades who holdpositions of any responsibility, as far as can be seen from their statements. 
 It is, however, equally beyond doubt that, besides the sound elements which are united onthe platform of fulfilment of Conference decisions, othersalso exist. 
 At all meetings, including preliminary meetingsattended by a larger number of delegates than this Con-ference, opinions on this question were unanimous. 
 Our general Programme must be carried out—that is beyond doubt, and difficult work awaits us. 
 Of course, the impor-tant thing is not to confine ourselves to overthrowing theopponent and repelling him. 
 Here we have petty-bourgeoiselements surrounding us and numbering tens of millions. 
We are fewer in number; there are very few of us compared with this petty-bourgeois mass. 
 We must educate this mass and prepare it, but it has so happened that all the organisedforces engaged in such preparatory work have had tobe directed elsewhere and employed in an undertaking thatis essential, arduous and very risky, involving great sacri-fices, i. 
e. 
, warfare. 
 War calls for every ounce of effort, and there is no getting away from this fact. 
 The question we must ask ourselves in connection with this state of affairs is; is the Party quite healthy again? Have we a complete victory over bureaucratic methods so as to place economic construction on a more correct foundation, and get the Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection operating, not only in the sense of issuing decrees but byactually drawing the masses of workers into the work?This is a difficult matter, and our main task—if we are tospeak of Party tasks—must be the speediest possible elimi-nation of the so-called line of the opposition. 
 If this is a question of diverging views, differing interpretations of current events, different programmes or even of future activi-ties, the Central Committee must devote the greatest atten-tion to the matter at all meetings of the Political Bureauand at plenary meetings, where various shades of opinionare voiced. 
 Harmonious work by the entire Party will ensure the accomplishment of this task. 
 We regard this as a matter of the utmost importance. 
 We now face aneconomic effort that is more taxing than the military task wehave accomplished thanks to the enthusiasm of the peasants,who undoubtedly preferred the workers’ state to that ofKolchak. 
 Things are quite different today when the peasant masses have to be switched over to construction work that is quite unfamiliar to them, which they do not understandand cannot have any faith in. 
 This task calls for moresystematic work, greater perseverance, and greater organisingskill, and so far as the latter quality is concerned, theRussian is not in the picture. 
 This is our weakest point, so we must try rapidly to eliminate everything that hampers this work. 
 The opposition, which is a reflection of thisperiod of transition, no doubt contains a sound element,but when it turns into an opposition for the sake of opposi-tion, we should certainly put an end to it. 
 We have wasteda great deal of time on altercations, quarrels and recrimi-nation and we must put an end to all that, and try to come to some agreement to work more effectively. 
 We must makecertain concessions, better greater than smaller, to thosewho are dissatisfied, who call themselves the opposition,but we must succeed in making our work harmonious, forotherwise we cannot exist when we are surrounded by enemies at home and abroad. 
 There can be no doubt that the old petty-bourgeois elements—small property-owners—outnumber us. 
 They are stronger than the socialist sector of an economy geared to meet the requirements of the workers. 
 Anyone who has had contacts with the rural areas and has seen the specula-tion in the cities, realises perfectly well that this socialsector, which is based on small-scale economy units isstronger than we are: hence the necessity of absolutelyharmonious effort. 
 We must achieve it at all costs. 
 WhenI had occasion to observe the controversies and the struggle in the Moscow organisations, and saw the numerous debates at meetings, and the altercations, and quarrels there, I cameto the conclusion that it was high time to put an end toall this and to achieve general unity on the Conferenceplatform. 
 It should be said that we have paid a heavyprice for this. 
 It was sad, for example, to see hours wasted at Party meetings on altercation as to whether someone had arrived at the meeting punctually or not, or whethera particular individual had made his stand clear in one wayor another. 
 Do people attend meetings for this sort of thing?For that we have a special commission, which decides whet-her or not an individual on the list of delegates has made his stand clear in one way or another. 
 Here, however, it is a question of the content of the meeting. 
 For instance, takean experienced Party comrade like Bubnov. 
 I heard hisspeech on the platform proposed by the Conference. 
 Thisplatform boils down to greater freedom of criticism. 
 TheConference, however, was held in September, and it is now November. 
 Freedom of criticism is a splendid thing—but once we are agreed on this, it would be no bad thing toconcern ourselves with the content of criticism. 
 For a longtime the Mensheviks, Socialist-Revolutionaries and otherstried to scare us with freedom of criticism, but we werenot afraid of that. 
 If freedom of criticism means freedom to defend capitalism then we shall suppress it. 
 We have passed that stage. 
 Freedom of criticism has been proclaimed,but thought should be given to the content of criticism. 
 And here we have to admit something that is highly regrettable: criticism is devoid of content. 
 You visit adistrict and ask yourself what criticism actually contains. 
 The Party organisations cannot overcome illiteracy by using the old bureaucratic methods. 
 What methods of defeatingred tape are there other than bringing workers and peasants into the work? Meanwhile, criticism at district meetings is concerned with trifles, and I have not heard a single word about the Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection. 
 I have not heard of a single district encouraging workers andpeasants to take part in this work. 
 Genuine constructionwork means applying criticism which must be constructive. 
For instance, the management of every small block of flats,every large plant, every factory in Moscow must have its own experience. 
 If we wish to combat bureaucratic methods, we must draw people from below into this work. 
 We mustacquaint ourselves with the experience of certain facto-ries, learn what steps they have taken to remove theirbureaucrats, and study the experience of a house manage-ment or of a consumers’ society. 
 A most rapid functioning of the entire economic machine is needed, but meanwhile you do not hear a word about this, although there is plentyof altercation and recrimination. 
 Of course, such a giganticupheaval could not have taken place without a certainamount of dirt and some scum coming to the surface. 
It is time we posed the question, not only of freedom of criticism but also of its content. 
 It is time we said that, in view of our experience, we must make a number ofconcessions but that in future we shall not tolerate theslightest tendency to recrimination. 
 We must break withthe past, set about genuine economic construction, andcompletely overhaul all Party work so as to enable it to guide Soviet economic construction, ensure practical successes, and conduct propaganda more by example than byprecept. 
 Today neither the worker nor the peasant will beconvinced by words; that can be done only by example. 
They have to be persuaded that they can improve theeconomy without the capitalists, and that conflicts can be abolished without the policeman’s truncheon or capitalist starvation; for that they need Party leadership. 
 This is theattitude we must adopt; if we do so, we shall achievesuccesses in future economic construction which will leadto our complete victory on a world-wide scale. 
 Published in 1920 in the pamphlet Published according to Current Questions of the Party ’s the text of the pamphlet Present Work . 
 Published by the Moscow Committee, R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) SPEECH DELIVERED AT THE MOSCOW GUBERNIA CONFERENCE OF THE R. 
C. 
P. 
 (B. 
) ON ELECTIONS TO THE MOSCOW COMMITTEE NOVEMBER 21, 1920 Comrades, I have often—perhaps too often—had to take part in elections: in Party elections following on a strugglewaged by various groups, trends and even factions, and inconditions of a most furious struggle marked by mutualcontrol to such a degree that no voting at any Party cellwas considered valid unless conducted in the presence of scrutineers from both groups, who counted the votes cast. 
 Never, however, has the principle of proportional repre-sentation been practised in the election of guiding bodies—the Petrograd Committee, the Moscow Committee or theCentral Committee. 
 When two groups, two trends or fac-tions, are contesting elections, proportional representation is essential in calling a Party conference as a directing body, or a Party congress. 
 When, however, it is a question ofsetting up an executive body charged with the conduct ofpractical work, proportional representation has never beenapplied, and can hardly be considered justified. 
 I thinkthat, in this connection, the preceding speaker departed from the proportional principle when he declared, together with Ignatov, that it stood to the credit of the list present-ed by him that it proposed eleven candidates, as he said. 
I am not in a position to verify eleven out of the thirty-eight, but I think that the concession should be greater thanthat desired by the effective majority at this assembly, or by the group that consider themselves adherents of the Moscow Committee. 
 I have already elaborated on the motivesbehind this view, but what should stand first now is the selection of persons. 
 I do not know most of the comrades on these lists, but you, who have the decisive votes at this Conference, evidently know them all. 
 I think that, in choos-ing the comrades you know personally, you will no doubtbe guided exclusively by a desire to set up a group that willbe able to work harmoniously, a group that will give ex-pression to any Party trend with something healthy in it,whether or not it has assumed definite shape, or has perhaps remained indeterminate in some respects; however, it has to be a group that, on the whole, directs practicalpolitics, does not proportionally represent all the shadesof opinion at this assembly, but carries on militant work—the struggle against the internal and external enemies,in the spirit of Conference decisions, and in a way that leaves no room for discord or lack of harmony. 
 That is why the decisive consideration must be that you, members ofthis Conference, should have a personal knowledge of eachcandidate, and give preference to that group which may beexpected to work harmoniously, and not the principle ofproportionality in the election of an executive body, a principle that has never been applied, and to apply which would hardly be right at present. 
 Published for the first time Published according to in the Fourth (Russian) edition the verbatim report of the Collected Works SPEEC H DELIVERE D AT A CONFERENCE OF FACTOR Y TRAD E UNIO N COMMITTEES OF MOSCO W ENTERPRISES OF THE PRINTIN G AND PUBLISHIN G INDUSTRY NOVEMBE R 25, 1920148 BRIEF NEWSPAPER REPORT (Comrade Lenin , who was met with a storm of applause from all present , spoke on the first item on the agenda — the international and domestic situation of the Republic and the immediate tasks of the working class . 
) Comrade Lenin indicated the causes that have prevented world imperial-ism from carrying out its plan to crush the proletarianrepublic, causes stemming in the main from the decay of the capitalist system and the development of the revolution-ary movement among the workers of all lands. 
 The languageused by our Red Army is the one that is most convincingand comprehensible to the plunderers and robbers, and theyhave now been forced to talk to us about trade. 
 However,the Red Army’s victory will not be complete or lasting unless we cope with the next task, which is more formidable and gigantic, that of rehabilitating industry and improvingthe national economy. 
 Lenin touched on the question of electrification, without which the renascence of the country is impossible. 
 Afterdealing with the question of the invitation of foreign capi-tal and the granting of concessions, the speaker went on to the part played by the printing and publishing industryin the national economy as a whole, and concluded byexpressing the confidence that the workers and peasants ofRussia will show a splendid example of victory on the peacefront, just as they have done so often on the war fronts. 
 (Prolonged applause . 
) Pravda No. 
 269, Published according to November 30, 1920 the Pravda text SPEECH DELIVERE D AT A MEETIN G OF CELLS’ SECRETARIES OF THE MOSCO W ORGANISATIO N OF THE R. 
C. 
P . 
(B. 
) NOVEMBE R 26, 1920149 NEWSPAPER REPORT In the first written question submitted, a comrade asks whether it is true that all institutions of administration are to be transferred to Petrograd. 
 That is inaccurate. 
 Therumour has arisen from the fact that the Moscow Soviet has had the idea of transferring non-essential institutions from Moscow to Petrograd because of the housing shortagein the capital. 
 It appears that Petrograd can accept upto 10,000 Soviet office workers, who number 200,000 inMoscow. 
 To study all aspects of the matter, a committeehas been set up, which is now working. 
 Its findings will be submitted to the Council of People’s Commissars. 
 150 So you see that this rumour is inaccurate in some respects. 
 The second question and the third ask about concessions. 
 You will allow me to dwell on the subject. 
 In one of his books, Spargo, the American Socialist, a man who is something like our Alexinsky, and has a vin-dictive hate of the Bolsheviks, speaks of concessions asproof of the collapse of communism. 
 Our Mensheviks saythe same thing. 
 The challenge has been made, and we areready to take it up. 
 Let us consider the question in terms ofthe facts. 
 Who has got the worse of it, we or the European bourgeoisie? For three years they have been calumniat-ing us, calling us usurpers and bandits; they have hadrecourse to all and every means to overthrow us, but have now had to confess to failure, which is in itself a victory for us. 
 The Mensheviks assert that we are pledged to defeating the world bourgeoisie on our own. 
 We have, however, al-ways said that we are only a single link in the chain of theworld revolution, and have never set ourselves the aim ofachieving victory by our own means. 
 The world revolutionhas not yet come about, but then we have not yet beenovercome. 
 While militarism is decaying, we are growing stronger; not we, but they have had the worse of it. 
 They now want to subdue us by means of a treaty. 
 Until the revolution comes about, bourgeois capital will beuseful to us. 
 How can we speed up the development of oureconomy whilst we are an economically weaker country? Wecan do that with the aid of bourgeois capital. 
 We now have before us two drafts of concessions. 
 One of them is for a ten-year concession in Kamchatka. 
 We were recentlyvisited by an American multimillionaire, who told us veryfrankly of the reasons behind the treaty, viz. 
, that Americawants to have a base in Asia in case of a war against Japan. 
This multimillionaire said that if we sold Kamchatka to America, he could promise us such enthusiasm among the people of the United States that the American Govern-ment would immediately recognise the Soviets of Russia. 
If we gave them only the lease, there would be less enthu-siasm. 
 He is now on his way to America, where he will makeit known that Soviet Russia is a far cry from what people believed her to be. 
 We have till now been more than a match for the world bourgeoisie, because they are incapable of uniting. 
 TheTreaties of Brest-Litovsk and Versailles 151 have both divid-ed them. 
 An intense hostility is now developing betweenAmerica and Japan. 
 We are making use of this and are offering a lease of Kamchatka instead of giving it away gratis; after all, Japan has taken a huge expanse of our territoryin the Far East, 152 this by force of arms. 
 It is far more to our advantage to run no risk, grant a lease of Kamchat-ka, and receive part of its products, the more so for ourbeing unable, in any case, to run or exploit it. 
 The treaty has not been signed, but it is already being spoken of in Japan with the utmost anger. 
 Through this treaty we haveaggravated the differences between our enemies. 
 The second kind of concession is represented by our granting the lease of several million dessiatines * of timber-land in Archangel Gubernia which, despite all our efforts, we cannot fully exploit. 
 We are arranging a kind of checker-board pattern, with sections of timberland we shall beexploiting alternating with the leased sections, so that ourworkers will be able to learn the use of felling equipmentfrom their neighbours. 
 All this is very much to our advantage. 
 And now for the final aspect of the question. 
Concessions do not mean peace; they too are a kind of warfare, only in another form, one that is to our advantage. 
Previously war was waged with the aid of tanks, cannonand the like, which hindered our work; the war will now be conducted on the economic front. 
 They may perhaps try to restore the freedom to trade, but they cannot get alongwithout us. 
 Besides, they have to submit to all our laws,and our workers can learn from them; in case of war—andwe must always be prepared for war against the bourgeoi-sie—the property will remain in our hands by virtue of the laws of war. 
 I repeat: concessions are a continuation of war on the economic front, but here we do not destroy ourproductive forces, but develop them. 
 They will no doubttry to evade our laws and deceive us, but we have the appro-priate bodies to deal with that, such as the All-RussiaCheka, the Moscow Cheka, the Gubernia Cheka, and so on, and we are sure that we shall win. 
 Eighteen months ago we wanted to sign a peace that would have given Denikin and Kolchak a vast territory. 
 Theyturned this down and in consequence lost everything. 
 153 We have mapped out the right road to the world revolution, butthis road is not a straight one, but goes in zigzags. 
 We have weakened the bourgeoisie, so that it cannot overcome us by force of arms. 
 They used to ban our conduct of commu-nist propaganda; but there can be no question of that atpresent, and it would be ridiculous to demand such things. 
They are decaying from within, and that gives us strength. 
We do not imagine that we shall defeat the world bourgeoi-*Dessiatine —a Russian unit of land measure equal to 2. 
7 acres. 
— Ed. 
 sie by force of arms alone, and the Mensheviks are wrong in ascribing that intention to us. 
 I did not hear Comrade Kamenev’s report on the Confer-ence, but I shall say that the latter teaches us a lesson: nomatter how the struggle proceeded and whatever memoriesremain, we must put a complete end to everything. 
 Itshould be remembered that the consolidation of our forcesis the main and most important task. 
 Tasks of economic construction await us. 
 That transition will be difficult after six years of war, and we have to tackle the problemwith united forces, on the platform of the All-RussiaConference’s resolutions, which must be carried out. 
 Thestruggle against red-tape methods, and economic and adminis-trative work call for unity. 
 What is expected of us is propa-ganda by example; the non-Party masses have to be set an example. 
 It will be no easy matter to carry out the resolu-tions, but we must concentrate all our forces on that taskand set about working in all earnest. 
 I call upon you to dothat. 
 Pravda No. 
 269, Published according to November 30, 1920 the Pravda text checked against the verbatim report SPEECH DELIVERED AT A GENERAL MEETING OF COMMUNISTS OF ZAMOSKVORECHYE DISTRICT, MOSCOW NOVEMBER 29, 1920 BRIEF NEWSPAPER REPORT Comrade Lenin dwelt in detail on the problem of the struggle against bureaucratic methods which, in its differ-ences with the majority at the gubernia conference, ourso-called “opposition” is advancing almost as a matter ofprinciple. 
 Though he thought that the fact that the “oppo-sition” had raised this question was in itself a healthy sign, Lenin at the same time attacked the opposition for its frivo-lous attitude to the question. 
 Indicating the causes of therecrudescence of bureaucratic methods in our Soviet stateand the roots now nourishing them, Lenin very emphati-cally warned the comrades against the idea that this evil could be combated by resolutions on paper and by abstract criticism devoid of any substance. 
 The Mensheviks and theSocialist-Revolutionaries, who were out to make capitalout of this question, both reproached us with being unableto combat red tape in our Soviet apparatus. 
 There had beena time when these gentlemen had said that we would be unable to preserve our Soviet state; now they said: “They have preserved it, it is true, but bureaucratic methods remainin the Soviet institutions, even though Lenin said in such-and-such a book that red tape would be abolished underthe rule of the Soviets. 
” But that was not how the matter stood. 
 First of all, general living standards had to be raised, so that the worker would not have to go about in search offlour, with a sack on his back, and hundreds of thousands and millions of working people should pass through the school of the Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection and learn to administer the state (which was something nobody had taught us), so that they might replace hundreds of thousandsof bourgeois bureaucrats. 
 Incidentally, a reference to the Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection. 
 That body had been set up nearly a year before,but it had so far made itself felt very little as a school training people in the administration of the state. 
 It would not be amiss for comrades who really wanted to expeditethe fight against bureaucratic methods to work in thissphere and learn some useful lessons. 
 Lenin remarked that the question of combating red tape was particularly acute in Moscow, because there the com-rades came up against, not only Moscow bureaucrats but bureaucrats on a national scale, since central institutionswere concentrated there. 
 There were 200,000 Sovietfunctionaries in Moscow, of whom only 10,000 could betransferred with their institutions to Petrograd in the nearfuture. 
 It was only to be expected that red tape in the Soviet apparatus would penetrate into the Party apparatus, forthese apparatuses are interwoven most intimately. 
 The fightagainst the evil could and should be placed on the order ofthe day—not, however, in the sense of criticism for criti-cism’s sake, but of practical suggestions as to the methods of waging that struggle, and better still, of a real struggle in the institutions in which the criticising comrades wereworking, and of publicity for the results and lessons of thestruggle. 
 CONCLUDING REMARKS In his concluding remarks Comrade Lenin pointed out to his “opponents”, in sharp terms, that it was not befitting for Communists to indulge in such unsubstantiated criti-cism, such sweeping accusations against the Central Commit-tee, without citing a single fact, such bandying about of names even of experts, and lumping them all together as “bourgeois elements”, without even trying to find out what kind of people they were. 
 Lenin mentioned by name a number of workers who had been able to make a success of joint workwith experts, establish correct relations with the latter,and obtain from them what was needed. 
 Such workers didnot complain of the experts; the grumbling came from thosewho had not coped with the work. 
 An example was Shlyap-nikov (one of the opponents, who had presented himself as a member of the Workers’ Opposition 154), a man who was spar-ing no effort, as Lenin put it, “to hatch differences”, a manwho objected to what Lenin had said in his report aboutour deep debt to the peasantry, and went on to say thatthe “opposition disagrees with Comrade Lenin”. 
 The self-same Shlyapnikov would turn a blind eye to his own poor work, and was out to present his mission to Archangel asexile imposed by the Central Committee. 
 Another instancewas Comrade Bubnov, who spoke so much about the struggleagainst red tape, without saying a single word about theway he was combating the evil at least in the Central Administration of the Textile Industry which he headed, and where there was no less red tape, perhaps even more, thanin other institutions. 
 That was why Vladimir Ilyich warnedthe Zamoskvorechye comrades in the following terms:“When you hear such criticism, criticism without any con-tent, criticism for the sake of criticism, be on your guard; make inquiry to find out whether the criticising comrade’s vanity has not been injured in some way; perhaps he hasbeen offended or is irritated, which drives him towardsgroundless opposition, opposition for its own sake. 
” In conclusion, Comrade Lenin replied to written questions handed to him, and then dealt in detail with the question of concessions. 
 Pravda No. 
 273, Published according to December 4, 1920 the Pravda text TELEGRA M TO THE CHAIRMAN OF THE REVOLUTIONAR Y MILITAR Y COMMITTEE OF ARMEN IA155 To Comrade Kasyan, Chairman of the Revolutionary Military Committee of Armenia, Yerevan Through you I send greetings to the Soviet Armenia of the working people, liberated from the yoke of imperialism. 
 I have no doubt that you will exert every effort to establishfraternal solidarity between the working people of Armenia,Turkey and Azerbaijan. 
 Lenin Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars Moscow, December 2, 1920 Pravda No. 
 273, Published according to December 4, 1920 the Pravda text SPEECH DELIVERED AT A MEETING OF ACTIVISTS OF THE MOSCOW ORGANISATION OF THE R. 
C. 
P. 
 (B. 
) DECEMBER 6, 1920 Comrades, I have noticed with great pleasure, although, I must confess, with surprise, that the question of conces-sions is arousing enormous interest. 
 Cries are to be heard onall sides, mostly from the rank and file. 
 “How can that be?”they ask. 
 “We have driven out our own exploiters, and yetwe are inviting others from abroad. 
” It will readily be understood why these outcries give me pleasure. 
 The fact that a cry of alarm has gone up fromthe rank and file about the possibility of the old capitalistsreturning, and that this cry has gone up in connection withan act of such tenth-rate significance as the decree onconcessions, shows that there is a very keen consciousness of the danger of capitalism and the great danger of the struggle against it. 
 That is excellent, of course, and it is all the moreexcellent because, as I have already said, alarm is beingvoiced by the rank and file. 
 From the political point of view, the fundamental thing in the question of concessions—and here there are both political and economic considerations—is a rule we have not only assimilated in theory, but have also applied in prac-tice, a rule which will remain fundamental with us for a longtime until socialism finally triumphs all over the world:we must take advantage of the antagonisms and the con-tradictions that exist between the two imperialisms, the two groups of capitalist states, and play them off against each other. 
 Until we have conquered the whole world, andas long as we are economically and militarily weaker than the capitalist world, we must stick to the rule that we must be able to take advantage of the antagonisms and contradic-tions existing among the imperialists. 
 Had we not adhered to this rule, every one of us would have long ago been strungup by the neck, to the glee of the capitalists. 
 We gainedour chief experience in this respect when we concluded theTreaty of Brest-Litovsk. 
 It should not be inferred that alltreaties must be like that of Brest-Litovsk, or the Treaty of Versailles. 
 That is not true. 
 There may be a third kind of treaty, one that is advantageous to us. 
 Brest-Litovsk was significant in being the first time that we were able, on an immense scale and amidst vastdifficulties, to take advantage of the contradictions amongthe imperialists in such a way as to make socialism the ul-timate gainer. 
 During the Brest-Litovsk period there were two immensely powerful groups of imperialist predators—the Austro-German and the Anglo-Franco-American. 
 Theywere locked in a furious struggle which was to decide thefate of the world for the immediate future. 
 That we wereable to hold on—though from the military standpoint our forces were non-existent, we possessed nothing and were steadily sinking into the depths of economic chaos—the factthat we were able to hold on was a miracle that resultedfrom our having taken due advantage of the conflictbetween German and American imperialism. 
 We made atremendous concession to German imperialism; by doing so we at once safeguarded ourselves against persecution by both imperialisms. 
 Germany was unable to concentrate onstifling Soviet Russia either economically or politically;she was too busy for that. 
 We let her have the Ukraine,from which she could get all the grain and coal she wanted—provided, of course, she was able to get them, and had the strength for the purpose. 
 Anglo-Franco-American imperial-ism was unable to attack us because we first made an offerof peace. 
 A big book by Robins has just appeared in Amer-ica, in which the author describes the U. 
S. 
 talks with Leninand Trotsky, who gave their consent to the conclusionof peace. 
 Although the Americans were helping the Czechoslovaks and making them take part in the military intervention, they were unable to interfere because theywere busy with their own war. 
 The outcome might have seemed something like a bloc between the first Socialist Republic and German imperial-ism, against another imperialism. 
 However, we did not conclude a bloc of any kind; we nowhere exceeded the bor-derline that would undermine or defame the socialist state;we simply took advantage of the conflict between the twoimperialisms in such a way that both were ultimately thelosers. 
 Germany obtained nothing from the Brest Peace except several million poods of grain, but she brought the disintegrating force of Bolshevism into the country. 
 We,however, gained time, in the course of which the formationof the Red Army began. 
 Even the tremendous distress suf-fered by the Ukraine proved reparable, although at a heavyprice. 
 What our antagonists had counted on, namely, the rapid collapse of Soviet rule in Russia, did not come to pass. 
 We made use of the interval history had accorded us as abreathing-space in order to consolidate ourselves to adegree that would make it impossible to vanquish us by mili-tary force. 
 We gained time, a little time, but in return hadto sacrifice a great deal of territory. 
 In those days, I recall, people used to philosophise and say that to gain time we must surrender territory. 
 It was in accordance with the phi-losophers’ theory of time and space that we acted in practiceand in policy: we sacrificed a great deal of territory, butwon sufficient time to enable us to muster strength. 
 Then,when all the imperialists wanted to launch a full-scale war against us, that proved impossible: they had neither the means nor the forces for such a war. 
 At that time wesacrificed no fundamental interests; we conceded minorinterests and preserved what was fundamental. 
 This, incidentally, raises the question of opportunism. 
 Opportunism means sacrificing fundamental interests so as to gain temporary and partial advantages. 
 That is the gist of the matter, if we consider the theoretical definition ofopportunism. 
 Many people have gone astray on this point. 
In the case of the Brest-Litovsk Peace, we sacrificed Russia’sinterests, as understood in the patriotic sense, which were,in fact, secondary from the socialist point of view. 
 We made immense sacrifices, yet they were only minor ones. 
 The Germans hated Britain implacably. 
 They hated theBolsheviks too, but we held out a bait, and they fell for it. 
 They had all the time asserted that they would not go as far as Napoleon did. 
 Indeed, they did not reach Moscow, but they penetrated into the Ukraine where they came to grief. 
 They thought they had learnt a lot from Napoleon,but things worked out otherwise. 
 We, on the other hand,gained a great deal. 
 The example of the Peace of Brest-Litovsk has taught us a lot. 
 At present, we stand between two foes. 
 If we are unable to defeat both of them, we must be able to dis-pose our forces in such a way as to make them fall out amongthemselves; whenever thieves fall out, honest men come intotheir own. 
 However, as soon as we are strong enough toovercome capitalism as a whole, we shall immediately seizeit by the scruff of the neck. 
 Our strength is growing, and very rapidly. 
 The Peace of Brest-Litovsk was a lesson we shall never forget, one which, in respect of the conclusionsto be drawn from it, was worth more than any propagandaor preaching. 
 We have now won in the sense that we standon our own feet. 
 We are surrounded by imperialist states,which detest the Bolsheviks and are spending vast sums of money, using ideological means, the power of the press, and so on, and yet have been unable to defeat us in three yearsof war, although we are infinitely weak from the militaryand economic standpoint. 
 We do not possess one-hundredthof the forces of the combined imperialist states, yet theyare unable to stifle us. 
 They cannot crush us because their soldiers will not obey; their war-weary workers and peasants do not want a war against the Soviet Republic. 
 Such is theposition now, and that is what we must proceed from. 
 Wedo not know what the position will be like several yearsfrom now, since with every year the Western powers arerecovering from the war. 
 Since the Second Congress of the Third International we have secured a firm foothold in the imperialist countries,not only in the sphere of ideology but also in that of organ-isation. 
 In all countries there are groups which are carryingon independent work and will continue to do so. 
 That hasbeen accomplished. 
 But the rate, the tempo of development of the revolution in the capitalist countries is far slower than in our country. 
 It was evident that the revolutionarymovement would inevitably slow down when the nations secured peace. 
 Therefore, without surmising as to the future, we cannot now rely on this tempo becoming rapid. 
 We have to decide what we are to do at the present time. 
 Every people lives in a state, and every state belongs toa system of states, which are in a certain system ofpolitical equilibrium in relation to one another. 
 Let us bear in mind that all over the world the capital-ists have bought up the vast majority of the richest sources of raw materials, or, if they have not actually bought them, they have seized them politically; since there is abalance based on capitalism, that must be reckoned with andturned to account. 
 We cannot go to war with the present-day Entente. 
 Our agitation has been and is being conductedsplendidly—of that we are certain. 
 We must take political advantage of the differences among our opponents, but only of major differences that are due to profound economiccauses. 
 If we try to exploit minor and fortuitous differ-ences, we shall be behaving like petty politicians and cheapdiplomats. 
 There is nothing of value to be gained by that. 
There are swarms of diplomats who play this game; they do so for several months, make careers, and then come to grief. 
 Are there any radical antagonisms in the present-day capitalist world that must be utilised? Yes, there are threeprincipal ones, which I should like to enumerate. 
 The first,the one that affects us closest, is the relations betweenJapan and America. 
 War is brewing between them. 
 They cannot live together in peace on the shores of the Pacific, although those shores are three thousand versts apart. 
 Thisrivalry arises incontestably from the relation betweentheir capitalisms. 
 A vast literature exists on the futureJapanese-American war. 
 It is beyond doubt that war isbrewing, that it is inevitable. 
 The pacifists are trying to ignore the matter and obscure it with general phrases, but no student of the history of economic relations and diplo-macy can have the slightest doubt that war is ripe from theeconomic viewpoint and is being prepared politically. 
 Onecannot open a single book on this subject without seeingthat a war is brewing. 
 The world has been partitioned. 
 Japan has seized vast colonies. 
 Japan has a population of fifty million, and she is comparatively weak economically. 
America has a population of a hundred and ten million, /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR and although she is many times richer than Japan she has no colonies. 
 Japan has seized China, which has a popula-tion of four hundred million and the richest coal reserves in the world. 
 How can this plum be kept? It is absurd tothink that a stronger capitalism will not deprive a weakercapitalism of the latter’s spoils. 
 Can the Americans remainindifferent under such circumstances? Can strong capital-ists remain side by side with weak capitalists and not be expected to grab everything they can from the latter? What would they be good for if they did not? But that being thecase, can we, as Communists, remain indifferent and merelysay: “We shall carry on propaganda for communism inthese countries. 
” That is correct, but it is not everything. 
 Thepractical task of communist policy is to take advantage of this hostility and to play one side off against the other. 
 Here a new situation arises. 
 Take the two imperialist coun-tries, Japan and America. 
 They want to fight and will fightfor world supremacy, for the right to loot. 
 Japan willfight so as to continue to plunder Korea, which she is doingwith unprecedented brutality, combining all the latest tech-nical inventions with purely Asiatic tortures. 
 We recently received a Korean newspaper which gives an account ofwhat the Japanese are doing. 
 Here we find all the methodsof tsarism and all the latest technical perfections combinedwith a purely Asiatic system of torture and unparalleledbrutality. 
 But the Americans would like to grab this Ko-rean titbit. 
 Of course, defence of country in such a war would be a heinous crime, a betrayal of socialism. 
 Of course, to sup-port one of these countries against the other would be a crimeagainst communism; we Communists have to play one offagainst the other. 
 Are we not committing a crime againstcommunism? No, because we are doing that as a socialist state which is carrying on communist propaganda and is obliged to take advantage of every hour granted it by cir-cumstances in order to gain strength as rapidly as possible. 
We have begun to gain strength, but very slowly. 
 Americaand the other capitalist countries are growing in economicand military might at tremendous speed. 
 We shall develop far more slowly, however we muster our forces. 
 We must take advantage of the situation that has arisen. 
 That is the whole purpose of the Kamchatka concessions. 
 We have had a visit from Vanderlip, a distant relative of the well-known multimillionaire, if he is to be believed; but since our intelligence service in the Cheka, although splendidly organised, unfortunately does not yet extendto the United States of America, we have not yet estab-lished the exact kinship of these Vanderlips. 
 Some even saythere is no kinship at all. 
 I do not presume to judge: my knowl-edge is confined to having read a book by Vanderlip, not the one that was in our country and is said to be such a very important person that he has been received with all thehonours by kings and ministers—from which one mustinfer that his pocket is very well lined indeed: He spoke tothem in the way people discuss matters at meetings such asours, for instance, and told them in the calmest tones how Europe should be restored. 
 If ministers spoke to him with so much respect, it must mean that Vanderlip is in touchwith the multimillionaires. 
 His book reveals the outlookof a man of business who knows nothing else but businessand who, after observing Europe, says: “It looks as if noth-ing will come of it and everything will go to the devil. 
” The book is full of hatred of Bolshevism, but it does take up the matter of establishing business contacts. 
 It is a mostinteresting book from the point of view of agitation too,better than many a communist book, because its finalconclusion is: “I’m afraid this patient is incurable—thoughwe have lots of money and the means for his treatment. 
” Well, Vanderlip brought a letter to the Council of Peo-ple’s Commissars. 
 It was a very interesting letter, for, withthe utter frankness, cynicism and crudity of an Americantightfist, the writer of the letter said: “We are very strong nowin 1920, and in 1923 our navy will be still stronger. 
 However,Japan stands in the way of our growing might and we shall have to fight her, and you cannot fight without oil. 
 Sell us Kamchatka, and I can vouch that the enthusiasm of the Ame-rican people will be so great that we shall recognise you. 
The presidential elections in March will result in a victoryfor our party. 
 If, however, you let us have only the lease ofKamchatka, I assure you there will be no such enthusiasm. 
” That is almost literally what he said in his letter. 
 Here we have an unblushing imperialism, which does not evenconsider it necessary to veil itself in any way because it thinks it is magnificent just as it is. 
 When this letter was received, we said that we must grasp at the opportunity with both hands. 
 That he is right, economically speaking, is shown by the fact that in America the Republican Partyis on the eve of victory. 
 For the first time in the historyof America, people in the South have voted against theDemocrats. 
 It is therefore clear that here we have the eco-nomically correct reasoning of an imperialist. 
 Kamchatka belonged to the former Russian Empire. 
 That is true. 
 Who it belongs to at the present moment is not clear. 
 It seemsto be the property of a state called the Far Eastern Republic,but the boundaries of that state have not been preciselyfixed. 
 156 True, certain documents are being drawn up on the subject, but, first, they have not yet been drawn up, and, second, they have not yet been ratified. 
 The Far East is dominated by Japan, who can do anything she pleasesthere. 
 If we lease to America Kamchatka, which legallybelongs to us but has actually been seized by Japan, weshall clearly be the gainers. 
 That is the basis of mypolitical reasoning, and on that basis we at once decided to conclude an immediate agreement with America. 
 Of course, we have to bargain, as no businessman will respect us if wedo not. 
 Comrade Rykov accordingly began to bargain, andwe drafted an agreement. 
 But when it came to the actualsigning, we said: “Everybody knows who we are, but who areyou?” It transpired that Vanderlip could provide no guarantee, whereupon we said that we were ready to accommodate. 
 Why, we said, this is merely a draft, and you said yourselfthat it would come into force when your party gainedthe upper hand; it has not gained the upper hand as yet, sowe shall wait. 
 Things worked out as follows: we drew up adraft of the treaty, as yet unsigned, giving Kamchatka— a big slice of the territory of the Far East and North-East Siberia to America for a period of sixty years, with theright to build a naval harbour in a port that is ice-free theyear round, and has oil and coal. 
 A draft agreement is not binding in any way. 
 We can always say that it contains unclear passages, and back out at any moment. 
 In that case we shall only have lost time in negotiating with Vanderlip, and a few sheets of paper;yet we have already gained something. 
 One has only to take the reports from Europe to see that. 
 There is hardly a report from Japan which does not speak of the great concern caused by the expected concessions. 
 “We shall not toler-ate it,” Japan declares, “it infringes our interests. 
” Go aheadthen, and defeat America; we have no objections. 
 We havealready set Japan and America at loggerheads, to put itcrudely, and have thereby gained a point. 
 We have alsogained as far as the Americans are concerned. 
 Who is Vanderlip? We have not established who he is— but it is a fact that in the capitalist world telegrams arenot dispatched all over the world about rank-and-file citi-zens. 
 And when he left us, telegrams went to all corners ofthe earth. 
 Well, he went about saying that he had obtaineda good concession and, wherever he went, began to praise Lenin. 
 That was rather funny, but let me tell you that there is a bit of politics in this funny situation. 
 When Vanderliphad concluded all his negotiations here, he wanted to meetme. 
 I consulted representatives of the appropriate depart-ments and asked whether I should receive him. 
 They said,“Let him leave with a sense of satisfaction. 
” Vanderlip came to see me. 
 We talked about all these things, and when he began to tell me that he had been in Siberia, that he knewSiberia and came of a worker’s family, just like most Amer-ican multimillionaires, and so on, that they valued onlypractical things, and that they believed a thing only whenthey saw it, I replied, “Well, you are a practical people, and when you see the Soviet system you will introduce it in your own country. 
” He stared at me in amazement at thisturn in the conversation, and said to me in Russian (thewhole conversation had been in English), “Mozhet byt. 
” * I asked in surprise where he had got his knowledge of Rus-sian. 
 Why, I covered most of Siberia on horseback when I was twenty-five”. 
 I will tell you of a remark by Vanderlip which belongs to the sphere of the humorous. 
At parting he said: “I shall have to tell them in Americathat Mr. 
 Lenin has no horns. 
” I did not grasp his meaningat once, as I don’t understand English very well. 
 “Whatdid you say? Will you please repeat that?” He is a spry old fellow; pointing to his temple, he said, “No horns here. 
” *Perhaps. 
— Ed. 
 There was an interpreter present who said, “That is exactly what he says. 
” In America they are convinced that I have horns here, that is, the bourgeois say that I have been marked by the devil. 
 “And now I shall have to tell them thatyou have no horns,” said Vanderlip. 
 We parted very ami-cably. 
 I expressed the hope that friendly relations betweenthe two states would be a basis not only for the grantingof a concession, but also for the normal development of reciprocal economic assistance. 
 It all went off in that kind of vein. 
 Then telegrams came telling what Vanderlip hadsaid on arriving home from abroad. 
 Vanderlip had com-pared Lenin with Washington and Lincoln. 
 Vanderlip hadasked for my autographed portrait. 
 I had declined, be-cause when you present a portrait you write, “To Comrade So-and-so”, and I could not write, “To Comrade Vander-lip”. 
 Neither was it possible to write: “To the Vanderlipwe are signing a concession with” because that concessionagreement would be concluded by the Administrationwhen it took office. 
 I did not know what to write. 
 Itwould have been illogical to give my photograph to an out-and-out imperialist. 
 Yet these were the kind of telegrams that arrived; this affair has clearly played a certain partin imperialist politics. 
 When the news of the Vanderlipconcessions came out, Harding—the man who has been elect-ed President, but who will take office only next March is-sued an official denial, declaring that he knew nothing about it, had no dealings with the Bolsheviks and had heard noth-ing about any concessions. 
 That was during the elections,and, for all we know, to confess, during elections, that youhave dealings with the Bolsheviks may cost you votes. 
That was why he issued an official denial. 
 He had thisreport sent to all the newspapers that are hostile to the Bol-sheviks and are on the pay roll of the imperialist parties. 
 The political advantages we can gain in respect of Americaand Japan are perfectly clear to us. 
 This report is signifi-cant because it concretely shows the kind of concessions wewant to sign, and on what terms. 
 Of course this cannot betold to the press. 
 It can be told only to a Party meeting. 
 We must not be silent in the press about this agreement. 
 It is to our advantage, and we must not say a single word thatmay hamper the conclusion of such an agreement because it promises us tremendous advantages and a weakening of both U. 
S. 
 and Japanese imperialism with regard to us. 
 All this deal means deflecting the imperialist forces away from us—while the imperialists are sighing and waiting foran opportune moment to strangle the Bolsheviks, we aredeferring that moment. 
 When Japan was becoming involvedin the Korean venture, the Japanese said to the Amer-icans: “Of course we can beat the Bolsheviks, but what will you give us for it? China? We shall take her anyway, where-as here we have to go ten thousand versts to beat theBolsheviks, with you Americans in our rear. 
 No, that is notpolitics. 
” Even then the Japanese could have beaten us ina few weeks, had there been a double-track railway andAmerica’s aid in transport facilities. 
 What saved us was the fact that while Japan was busy gobbling up China she could not advance westward, through all of Siberia, withAmerica in her rear; moreover, she did not want to pullAmerica’s chestnuts out of the fire. 
 A war between the imperialist powers would have saved us even more. 
 If we are obliged to put up with such scoun-drels as the capitalist robbers, each of whom is ready to knife us, it is our prime duty to make them turn theirknives against each other. 
 Whenever thieves fall out, honestmen come into their own. 
 The second gain is purely politicalEven if this concession agreement does not materialise, itwill be to our advantage. 
 As for the economic gain, it will provide us with part of the products. 
 If the Americans received part of the products, it would be to our advantage. 
There is so much oil and ore in Kamchatka that we areobviously not in a position to work them. 
 I have shown you one of the imperialist antagonisms we must take advantage of—that which exists between Japan and America. 
 There is another—the antagonism between America and the rest of the capitalist world. 
 Prac-tically the entire capitalist world of “victors” emerged fromthe war tremendously enriched. 
 America is strong; she iseverybody’s creditor and everything depends on her; she isbeing more and more detested; she is robbing all and sun-dry and doing so in a unique fashion. 
 She has no colonies. 
 Britain emerged from the war with vast colonies. 
 So didFrance. 
 Britain offered America a mandate—that is the language they use nowadays—for one of the colonies she had seized, but America did not accept it. 
 U. 
S. 
 business-men evidently reason in some other way. 
 They have seen that, in the devastation it produces and the temper it arousesamong the workers, war has very definite consequences, andthey have come to the conclusion that there is nothingto be gained by accepting a mandate. 
 Naturally, however,they will not permit this colony to be used by any other state. 
 All bourgeois literature testifies to a rising hatred of America, while in America there is a growingdemand for an agreement with Russia. 
 America signed anagreement with Kolchak giving him recognition andsupport but here they have already come to grief, the onlyreward for their pains being losses and disgrace. 
 Thus we have before us the greatest state in the world, which by 1923 will have a navy stronger than the British, and this stateis meeting with growing enmity from the other capitalistcountries. 
 We must take this trend of things into account. 
America cannot come to terms with the rest of Europe—that is a fact proved by history. 
 Nowhere has the Versailles Treaty been analysed so well as in the book by Keynes, a British representative at Versailles. 
 In his book Keynesridicules Wilson and the part he played in the Treaty ofVersailles. 
 Here, Wilson proved to be an utter simpleton,whom Clemenceau and Lloyd George twisted round theirlittle fingers. 
 Thus everything goes to show that America cannot come to terms with the other countries because of the profound economic antagonism between them, sinceAmerica is richer than the rest. 
 We shall therefore examine all questions of concessions from this angle: if the least opportunity arises of aggrava-ting the differences between America and the other capitalist countries, it should be grasped with both hands. 
 America stands in inevitable contradiction with the colonies, andif she attempts to become more involved there she will behelping us ten times as much. 
 The colonies are seething withunrest, and when you touch them, whether or not you likeit, whether or not you are rich—and the richer you are the better—you will be helping us, and the Vanderlips will be sent packing. 
 That is why to us this antagonism is themain consideration. 
 The third antagonism is that between the Entente and Germany. 
 Germany has been vanquished, crushed by the Treaty of Versailles, but she possesses vast economic potentialities. 
 Germany is the world’s second country ineconomic development, if America is taken as the first. 
The experts even say that as far as the electrical industryis concerned she is superior to America, and you know thatthe electrical industry is tremendously important. 
 As re-gards the extent of the application of electricity, America is superior, but Germany has surpassed her in technicalperfection. 
 It is on such a country that the Treaty of Ver-sailles has been imposed, a treaty she cannot possibly liveunder. 
 Germany is one of the most powerful and advancedof the capitalist countries. 
 She cannot put up with the Treaty of Versailles. 
 Although she is herself imperial-ist, Germany is obliged to seek for an ally against world impe-rialism, because she has been crushed. 
 That is the situationwe must turn to our advantage. 
 Everything that increasesthe antagonism between America and the rest of the Ententeor between the entire Entente and Germany should be used by us from the viewpoint of the concessions. 
 That is why we must try and attract their interest; that is why thepamphlet Milyutin promised to bring, and has brought andwill distribute, contains the decrees of the Council ofPeople’s Commissars written in a way that will attractprospective concessionaires. 
 The booklet contains maps with explanations. 
 We shall get it translated into all languages and encourage its distribution with the aim of setting Germanyagainst Britain, because concessions will be a lifeline toGermany. 
 We shall likewise set America against Japan,the entire Entente against America, and all Germany againstthe Entente. 
 These, then, are the three antagonisms that are upsetting the imperialists’ apple-cart. 
 That is the crux of the matter;that is why, from the political standpoint, we should beheart and soul—or rather with all our wits—in favour ofconcessions. 
 I now go over to the economics. 
 When we were speaking of Germany we came up to the question of economics. 
 Ger-many cannot exist from the economic standpoint followingthe Peace of Versailles; neither can all the defeated coun-tries, such as Austria-Hungary in her former boundaries, for although parts of that country now belong to the victor states, she cannot exist under the Treaty of Versailles. 
 These countries form, in Central Europe, a vast group withenormous economic and technical might. 
 From the economicstandpoint they are all essential to the restoration of theworld economy. 
 If you carefully read and re-read theDecree on Concessions of November 23, you will find that we stress the significance of the world economy, and we do so intentionally. 
 That is undoubtedly correct. 
 For the worldeconomy to be restored, Russian raw materials must beutilised. 
 You cannot get along without them—that is eco-nomically true. 
 It is admitted even by a bourgeois of the firstwater, a student of economics, who regards things from a purely bourgeois standpoint. 
 That man is Keynes, author of The Economic Consequences of the Peace . 
 Vanderlip, who has travelled all over Europe as a financial magnate, alsoadmits that the world economy cannot be restored becauseit appears that there is very little raw material availablein the world, it having been dissipated in the war. 
 He says that Russia must be relied on. 
 And Russia now comes forward and declares to the world: we undertake to restorethe international economy—here is our plan. 
 That issound economics. 
 During this period Soviet governmenthas grown stronger; not only has it grown stronger, but ithas advanced a plan for the restoration of the entire world economy. 
 The rehabilitation of the international economy by means of a plan of electrification is scientifically sound. 
With our plan we shall most certainly attract the sympathy,not only of all the workers but of sensible capitalists aswell, regardless of the fact that in their eyes we are “thoseterrible Bolshevik terrorists”, and so forth. 
 Our economic plan is therefore correct; when they read this plan, all the petty-bourgeois democrats will swing over towards us, forwhile the imperialists have already fallen out among them-selves, here is a plan to which engineers and economists canoffer no objection. 
 We are entering the field of economicsand are offering the world a positive programme of con-struction; we are opening up prospects based on economic considerations, prospects which Russia regards not as aselfish plan to destroy the economies of other lands, as was the rule in the past, but as a way to restore those economies in the interests of the whole world. 
 We are shifting the question to the anti-capitalist plane. 
 We say that we undertake to build the whole world ona rational economic foundation; there can be no doubt thatthis idea is a correct one. 
 There can be no doubt that if weset to work properly, with modern machinery and the helpof science, the whole world economy can be restored at once. 
 We are conducting a kind of industrial propaganda when we say to the master class: “You capitalists are useless;while you are going to rack and ruin, we are building inour own way; so don’t you think, gentlemen, it is time tocome to terms with us?” To which all the capitalists of theworld will have to reply, though grudgingly: “Yes, per-haps it is. 
 Let us sign a trade agreement. 
 ” The British have already made a draft and sent it to us. 
 157 It is under discussion. 
 New times are setting in. 
 Their war schemes have miscarried and they nowhave to fight in the economic field. 
 We fully understandthat. 
 We never imagined that with the fighting over and the advent of peace, the capitalist wolf would lie down with the socialist lamb. 
 No, we did not. 
 Yet the fact that youhave to fight us in the economic field is a tremendous stepforward. 
 We have presented you with a world programme byregarding concessions from the standpoint of the worldeconomy. 
 That is indisputable from the viewpoint of eco-nomics. 
 No engineer or agronomist who has anything to do with the national economy will deny that. 
 Many capital-ists say there cannot be a stable system of capitalist stateswithout Russia. 
 Yet we have advanced such a programmein the capacity of builders of a world economy based on adifferent plan. 
 That is of tremendous propaganda value. 
 Even if they do not sign a single concession—which I regard as quite possible—even if the sole outcome of all this talkof concessions will be a certain number of Party meetingsand decrees, without a single concession being granted, weshall still have gained something. 
 Besides advancing aplan of economic reconstruction, we are winning over all states that have been ruined by the war. 
 At the congress of the Third, Communist International I said that the wholeworld is divided into oppressed and oppressor nations. 
 The oppressed nations constitute not less than seventy per cent of the population of the earth. 
 To these the Peace of Versailles has added another hundred or hundred and fifty million people. 
 We now stand, not only as representatives of the prole-tarians of all countries but as representatives of theoppressed peoples as well. 
 A journal of the Communist Inter-national recently appeared under the title of Narody Vostoka . 
 158 It carries the following slogan issued by the Communist International for the peoples of the East:“Workers of all countries and all oppressed peoples,unite!” “When did the Executive Committee give ordersfor slogans to be modified?” one of the comrades asked. 
Indeed, I do not remember that it ever did. 
 Of course, the modification is wrong from the standpoint of the Commu-nist Manifesto , but then the Communist Manifesto was written under entirely different conditions. 
 From the pointof view of present-day politics, however, the change is cor-rect. 
 Relations have become tense. 
 All Germany is seething;so is all of Asia. 
 You have read how the revolutionary movement is developing in India. 
 In China there is a fierce hatred of the Japanese, and also of the Americans. 
 In Germanythere is such seething hatred of the Entente as can onlybe understood by those who have seen the hatred of theGerman workers for their own capitalists. 
 As a result, theyhave made Russia the immediate representative of the entire mass of the oppressed population of the earth; the events are teaching the peoples to regard Russia as a centre ofattraction. 
 A Menshevik newspaper in Georgia recentlywrote: “There are two forces in the world: the Entente andSoviet Russia. 
” What are the Mensheviks? They are peoplewho trim their sails to the wind. 
 When we were weak inter-nationally, they cried, “Down with the Bolsheviks!” When we began to grow stronger, they cried, “We are neutral!”Now that we have beaten off the enemies, they say, “Yes,there are two forces. 
” In the concessions decree we come forward, on behalf of all humanity, with an economically irreproachable pro-gramme for the restoration of the world’s economic forces by utilising all raw materials, wherever they are to be found. 
What we consider important is that there should be no starvation anywhere. 
 You capitalists cannot eliminate it; we can. 
 We are speaking for seventy per cent of the population of the earth. 
 This is sure to exert an influence. 
 Whatever comes of the project, no exception can be takento it from the angle of economics. 
 The economic aspectof concessions is important, regardless of whether they aresigned or not. 
 As you see, I have been obliged to make a rather long introduction and to demonstrate the advantages of concessions. 
 Of course, concessions are important to us also as a meansof obtaining commodities. 
 That is unquestionably true, butthe chief thing is the political aspect. 
 By the time the Con-gress of Soviets meets you will receive a book of six hun-dred pages—the plan for the electrification of Russia. 
 This plan has been devised by the leading agronomists and engi-neers. 
 We cannot expedite its realisation without the helpof foreign capital and means of production. 
 But if we wantassistance, we must pay for it. 
 So far, we have beenfighting the capitalists, and they said that they would eitherstrangle us or compel us to pay up twenty thousand millions. 
 However they are in no position to strangle us, and we shall not pay the debts. 
 For the time being we are enjoy-ing a certain respite. 
 As long as we are in need of economicassistance we are willing to pay you—that is the way weput the matter, and any other way would be economicallyunsound. 
 Russia is in a state of industrial ruin; she is ten times or more worse off than before the war. 
 Had we been told three years ago that we would be fighting the entirecapitalist world for three years, we would not have believedit. 
 But now we shall be told that to restore the economy,with only one-tenth of the pre-war national wealth is astill more difficult task. 
 And indeed it is more difficult than fighting. 
 We could fight with the help of the enthusiasm of the working-class masses and the peasants, who weredefending themselves against the landowners. 
 At present itis not a question of defence against the landowners, but ofrestoring economic life along lines the peasants are notaccustomed to. 
 Here victory will not depend on enthusiasm, dash, or self-sacrifice, but on day-by-day, monotonous, petty and workaday effort. 
 That is undoubtedly a moredifficult matter. 
 Where are we to procure the means of production we need? To attract the Americans, we must pay: they are men of business. 
 And what are we to pay with? With gold? But we cannot throw gold about. 
 We have little gold left. 
 We have too little even to cover the programmeof electrification. 
 The engineer who drew up the programmehas estimated that we need at least a thousand and onehundred million rubles of gold to carry it out. 
 We do nothave such a stock of gold. 
 Neither can we pay in raw materi-als, because we have not yet fed all our own people. 
 When, in the Council of People’s Commissars, the question arisesof giving 100,000 poods of grain to the Italians, the People’sCommissar for Food gets up and objects. 
 We are bargainingfor every trainload of grain. 
 Without grain we cannotdevelop foreign trade. 
 What then shall we give? Rubbish? They have enough rubbish of their own. 
 They say, let us trade in grain; but we cannot give them grain. 
 Wetherefore propose to solve the problem by means ofconcessions. 
 I pass to the next point. 
 Concessions create new dangers. 
 I shall mention what I said at the beginning of my speech, namely, that an outcry is going up from the rank and file, from the working-class masses: “Don’t yield to thecapitalists; they are clever and crafty. 
” It is good to hearthat, because it is a sign of the development of that vastmass which will fight the capitalists tooth and nail. 
 Thereare some sound ideas in the articles of Comrade Stepanov, which he planned on pedagogical lines (first set forth all the arguments against concessions, and then say that theymust be accepted; but certain readers, before they getto the good part, may stop reading, convinced that conces-sions are unnecessary); but when he says that we mustnot give concessions to Britain because that will mean some Lockhart coming here, I cannot agree. 
 We coped with him at a time when the Cheka was still in its infancy, notas effective as it is now. 
 If we cannot catch spies after threeyears of war, then all that can be said is that such peopleshould not undertake to run the state. 
 We are solving farmore difficult problems. 
 For instance, there are at present 300,000 bourgeois in the Crimea. 
 These are a source of future profiteering, espionage and every kind of aid to thecapitalists. 
 However, we are not afraid of them. 
 We say that we shall take and distribute them, make them submit, and assimilate them. 
 To say after this that foreigners who will be attached to the various concessions will be a danger to us, or that weshall not be able to keep an eye on them, is ridiculous. 
Why, then, should we have started the whole business?Why, then, should we have undertaken to run the state?The task here is purely one of organisation, and it is not worth dwelling on at length. 
 It would, of course, be a great mistake to think that con-cessions imply peace. 
 Nothing of the kind. 
 Concessions arenothing but a new form of warfare. 
 Europe waged war onus, and now the war is shifting to a new sphere. 
 Previously,the war was conducted in a field in which the imperialists were infinitely stronger than we were—the military field. 
 If you count the number of cannon and machine-guns theyhave and the number we have, the number of soldiers theirgovernments can mobilise and the number our governmentcan mobilise, then we certainly ought to have been crushedin a fortnight. 
 Nevertheless, we held our own in this field, and we undertake to continue the fight and are going over to an economic war. 
 We definitely stipulate that next toa concession area, a concession square of territory, therewill be our square, and then again their square; we shalllearn from them how to organise model enterprises by plac-ing what is ours next to theirs. 
 If we are incapable of doing that, there is no use talking about anything. 
 Operating up-to-date equipment nowadays is no easy matter, and wehave to learn to do so, learn it in practice. 
 That is some-thing that no school, university or course will teach you. 
That is why we are granting concessions on the chequer-board system. 
 Come and learn on the job. 
 We shall get a tremendous economic gain from conces-sions. 
 Of course, when their dwelling areas are created theywill bring capitalist customs along with them and willtry to demoralise the peasantry. 
 We must be on the alertand exercise our communist counter-influence at everystep. 
 That too is a kind of war, a duel between two methods, two political and economic systems—the communist and the capitalist. 
 We shall prove that we are the stronger. 
 We aretold: “Very good, you have held your own on the external front; well, start construction, go ahead and build, and we shall see who wins.... 
” Of course, the task is a difficult one, but we have said, and still say, that socialism has the force of example. 
 Coercion is effective against those whowant to restore their rule. 
 But at this stage the significanceof force ends, and after that only influence and example areeffective. 
 We must show the significance of communism inpractice, by example. 
 We have no machinery; the war has impoverished us and deprived Russia of her economic resources. 
 Yet we do not fear this duel, because it will beadvantageous to us in all respects. 
 That, too, will be a war in which we will not yield an inch. 
 This war will be to our advantage in every respect;the transition from the old war to this new one will also be of advantage, to say nothing of the fact that there is a certain indirect guarantee of peace. 
 At the-meeting whichwas so poorly reported in Pravda , I said that we had passed from war to peace, but that we had not forgotten that warwill return. 
 While capitalism and socialism exist side byside, they cannot live in peace: one or the other will ultimate-ly triumph—the last obsequies will be observed either for the Soviet Republic or for world capitalism. 
 This is somerespite from war. 
 The capitalists will seek pretexts forgoing to war. 
 If they accept our proposal and agree to con-cessions, that will be harder for them. 
 On the one hand,we shall have the best conditions in the event of war; on the other hand, those who want to go to war will not agree to take concessions. 
 The existence of concessions is an eco-nomic and political argument against war. 
 States that mightgo to war with us will not be able to do so if they take con-cessions. 
 This will bind them. 
 We set such a high value bythis that we shall not be afraid to pay, the more so that we shall be paying from the means of production that we cannot develop. 
 For Kamchatka we shall pay in terms of100,000 poods of oil, taking only 2 per cent for ourselves. 
If we do not pay up we shall not get even two poods. 
 Thisis an exorbitant price, but while capitalism exists we cannotexpect a fair price from it. 
 Yet the advantages are beyond doubt. 
 From the angle of the danger of a collision between capitalism and Bolshevism, it can be said that concessionsare a continuation of the war, but in a different sphere. 
 Each step of the enemy will have to be watched. 
 Every means of administration, supervision, influence and action will be required. 
 And that is also warfare. 
 We have fought a much bigger war; in this war we shall mobilise evenlarger numbers of people than in the preceding. 
 In this warall working people will be mobilised to a man. 
 They willbe told and given to understand: “If capitalism does thisor that, you workers and peasants who have overthrown the capitalists must do no less. 
 You must learn!” I am convinced that the Soviets will overtake and out-strip the capitalists and that our gain will not be a purelyeconomic one. 
 We shall get the miserable two per cent—very little indeed, yet it is something. 
 But then we shallbe getting knowledge and training; no school or university is worth anything without practical knowledge. 
 You will see from the map appended to the pamphlet ComradeMilyutin will show you that we are granting concessionsprincipally in the outlying regions. 
 In European Russia thereare 70,000,000 dessiatines of northern forest land. 
 About17,000,000 dessiatines are being set aside for concessions. 
 Our timber enterprises are mapped out chequerwise: these forests are in West Siberia and in the Far North. 
 We havenothing to lose. 
 The principal enterprises are located inWest Siberia, whose wealth is immense. 
 We cannot developa hundredth part of it in ten years. 
 However, with the helpof foreign capitalists, by letting them have, say, a single mine, we shall be able to work our own mines. 
 In granting concessions, we do the choosing of the locations. 
 How are the concessions to be organised as regards super-vision? They will try to demoralise our peasantry, ourmasses. 
 A small master by his very nature, the peasant isinclined to freedom of trade, something we consider crimi-nal. 
 That is a matter for the state to combat. 
 Our task here is to contrapose the socialist system of economy to thecapitalist system. 
 That, too, will be a war in which we shallhave to fight a decisive battle. 
 We are suffering from a tre-mendous crop failure, lack of fodder and loss of livestock,yet at the same time vast areas of land are uncultivated. 
 In a few days a decree will be issued providing that every effort be exerted to achieve the largest possible sowing ofcrops and the greatest possible improvement of agriculture. 
 159 Next, we have a million dessiatines of virgin soil which we cannot bring under the plough because we have not enough draught animals and implements, whereas with trac-tors this land can be ploughed to any depth. 
 It is thereforeto our advantage to let out this land on lease. 
 Even if wesurrender half of the produce, or even three-quarters, we shallbe the gainers. 
 That is the policy we are guided by, and Ican say that our actions must be guided, not only by eco-nomic considerations and the trend of the world economy, but also by profound political considerations. 
 Any other approachto the matter would be short-sighted. 
 If it is a questionof whether concessions are economically advantageous ordisadvantageous, the reply is that the economic advantagesare beyond dispute. 
 Without concessions, we shall not be able to carry out our programme and the electrification of the country; without them, it will be impossible to restoreour economic life in ten years; once we have restored it weshall be invincible to capital. 
 Concessions do not meanpeace with capitalism, but war in a new sphere. 
 The war ofguns and tanks yields place to economic warfare. 
 True, it also holds out new difficulties and new dangers, but I am certain that we shall overcome them. 
 I am convinced thatif the question of concessions is posed in this way, we shalleasily be able to convince the vast majority of the Partycomrades of the necessity of concessions. 
 The instinctiveapprehension I have spoken of is a good and healthy senti-ment, which we shall convert into a driving force that will secure us a more rapid victory in the impending economicwar. 
 First published in 1923 Published according to the verbatim report MESSAG E OF GREETING S TO THE ALL-RUSSIA CONFERENC E OF GUBERNI A DEPARTMENTS FOR WOR K AMON G WOME N160 TELEPHONE MESSAGE Comrades, I very much regret that I have not been able to attend your conference. 
 Please convey to the delegates, both men and women, my sincere greetings and wishes forevery success. 
 The participation of women in Party and Soviet activities has acquired a gigantic significance today, when the war has ended, and the peaceful work of organisation has— for a long time to come, as I hope—advanced into the fore-ground. 
 In this work the women must play a leading part,and will of course do so. 
 V. 
 Ulyanov (Lenin ) Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars December 6, 1920 Pravda No. 
 286, Published according to December 19, 1920 the manuscript THE EIGHT H ALL-RUSSIA CONGRES S OF SOVIET S161 DECEMBER 22 -29, 1920 Report on concessions; speech to the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) group on December 24and draft resolutions of the Congress were first published in 1930 ; report on the work of the Council of Peo-ple’s Commissars, and reply to the debate were published in 1921 i n the book The Eighth All-Russia Congress of Soviets. 
 Verbatim ReportReport on concessions and speech to the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) group are publishedaccording to the verbatim report; report on the work of the Council of People’s Commissars, and replyto the debate—according to the text in the book THE EIGHTH ALL -RUSSIA CONGRESS OF SOVIETS161 DECEMBER 22 -29, 1920 Report on concessions; speech to the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) group on December 24 and draft resolutions of the Congresswere first published in 1930 ; report on the work of the Council of Peo-ple’s Commissars, and reply to thedebate were published in 1921 i n the book The Eighth All-Russia Congress of Soviets. 
 Verbatim ReportReport on concessions and speech to the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) group are published according to the verbatim report;report on the work of the Council of People’s Commissars, and reply to the debate—according to the text in the book 1 REPORT ON CONCESSIONS DELIVERED TO THE R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) GROUP AT THE EIGHTH CONGRESS OF SOVIETS DECEMBER 21 Comrades, I think you have made a fully correct decision by preferring the discussion on concessions to be held first inthe Party group. 
 To the best of our knowledge, the questionof concessions has everywhere aroused considerable concernand even anxiety, not only in Party circles and among theworking-class masses but also among the masses of the peasantry. 
 All comrades have pointed out that, since the decree of November 23 of this year, the questions mostfrequently raised and the written questions submitted atmost meetings held on a variety of subjects have dealtwith concessions, and the general tone of the questions,as well as of talk on the subject, has been one of apprehen-sion: we have driven out our own capitalists, and now we want to admit others. 
 I believe that this apprehension,this widespread interest in concessions—displayed, not onlyby Party comrades but by many others—is a good sign,which shows that in three years of incredibly hard strugglethe workers’ and peasants’ state power has become so strong and our experience of the capitalists has become so fixed in the mind that the broad masses consider the workers’and peasants’ state power stable enough to manage withoutconcessions; they also consider their lesson learnt well enoughto avoid any deals with the capitalists unless there is a direnecessity to do so. 
 This sort of supervision from below, this kind of apprehension emanating from the masses, and this kind of anxiety among non-Party circles show the highlyvigilant attention that is being paid to relations between us and the capitalists. 
 I believe that on this score we should absolutely welcome this apprehension as revealing the temper of the masses. 
 Yet I think that we shall come to the conclusion that, in the question of concessions, we cannot be guided by thisrevolutionary instinct alone. 
 When we have analysed allaspects of the question we shall see that the policy wehave adopted—the policy of offering concessions—is the correct one. 
 I can tell you briefly that the main subject of my report—or rather the repetition of a talk I had veryrecently in Moscow with several hundred leading execu-tives, 162 because I have not prepared a report and cannot present it to you—the main subject of this talk is to offerproof of two premises: first, that any war is merely the con-tinuation of peacetime politics by other means, and second, that the concessions which we are giving, which we areforced to give, are a continuation of war in another form,using other means. 
 To prove these two premises, or ratherto prove only the second because the first does not requireany special proof, I shall begin with the political aspect of the question. 
 I shall dwell on those relations existing between the present-day imperialist powers, which areimportant for an understanding of present-day foreignpolicy in its entirety, and of our reasons for adoptingthis policy. 
 The American Vanderlip sent a letter to the Council of People’s Commissars in which he said that the Republicans, members of the Republican Party of America, the party ofthe banking interests, which is linked with memories of thewar against the Southern States for liberation, were not inpower at the time. 
 He wrote this before the Novemberelections, which he hoped the Republicans would win (they have won them) and have their own president in March. 
 The Republicans’ policy, he went on, would not repeatthe follies that had involved America in European affairs,they would look after their own interests. 
 American inter-ests would lead them to a clash with Japan, and they wouldfight Japan. 
 It might interest you to know, he went on, that in 1923 the U. 
S. 
 navy would be stronger than Britain’s. 
 To fight, they needed control of oil, without which theycould not wage a modern war. 
 They not only needed oil, but also had to take steps to ensure that the enemy did not get any. 
 Japan was in a bad way in that respect. 
 Some-where near Kamchatka there is an inlet (whose name he had forgotten) with oil deposits, and they did not want theJapanese to get that oil. 
 If we sold them that land, Vander-lip could vouch that the Americans would grow so enthusi-astic that the U. 
S. 
 would immediately recognise ourgovernment. 
 If we offered a concession, and did not sell them the land, he could not say that they would refuse to examine the project, but he could not promise the enthusiasmthat would guarantee recognition of the Soviet Government. 
 Vanderlip’s letter is quite outspoken; with unparalleled cynicism he outlines the point of view of an imperialist whoclearly sees that a war with Japan is imminent, and poses the question openly and directly—enter into a deal with us and you will get certain advantages from it. 
 The issue is thefollowing: the Far East, Kamchatka and a piece of Siberiaare de facto in the possession of Japan insofar as her troops are in control there, and circumstances made necessary thecreation of a buffer state, the Far Eastern Republic. 
 We are well aware of the unbelievable sufferings that the Siberian peasants are enduring at the hands of the Japaneseimperialists and the atrocities the Japanese have committedin Siberia. 
 The comrades from Siberia know this; theirrecent publications have given details of it. 
 163 Neverthe-less, we cannot go to war with Japan and must make every effort, not only to put off a war with Japan but, if possible, to avert it because, for reasons known to you, it is beyondour strength. 
 At the same time Japan is causing us tremen-dous losses by depriving us of our links with world tradethrough the Pacific Ocean. 
 Under such conditions, whenwe are confronted with a growing conflict, an imminent clash between America and Japan—for a most stubborn struggle has been going on for many decades between Japanand America over the Pacific Ocean and the mastery ofits shores, and the entire diplomatic, economic and tradehistory of the Pacific Ocean and its shores is full of quitedefinite indications that the struggle is developing and making war between America and Japan inevitable—we return to a situation we were in for three years: we are aSocialist Republic surrounded by imperialist countries that are far stronger than us in the military sense, are using every means of agitation and propaganda to increase hatred for the Soviet Republic, and will never miss an opportunity for military intervention, as they put it, i. 
e. 
, to strangleSoviet power. 
 If, remembering this, we cast a glance over the history of the past three years from the point of view of the inter-national situation of the Soviet Republic, it becomes clear that we have been able to hold out and have been able to defeat the Entente powers—an alliance of unparalleledmight that was supported by our whiteguards—only becausethere has been no unity among these powers. 
 We have sofar been victorious only because of the most profound dis-cord among the imperialist powers, and only because that discord has not been a fortuitous and internal dissension between parties, but a most deep-seated and ineradicableconflict of economic interests among the imperialist coun-tries which, based on private property in land and capital,cannot but pursue a predatory policy which has stultifiedtheir efforts to unite their forces against the Soviets. 
 I take Japan, who controlled almost the whole of Siberia and could, of course, have helped Kolchak at any time. 
 Themain reason she did not do so was that her interests differradically from those of America, and she did not want topull chestnuts out of the fire for U. 
S. 
 capital. 
 Knowingthis weakness, we could of course pursue no other policy than that of taking advantage of this enmity between Amer-ica and Japan so as to strengthen ourselves and delay anypossibility of an agreement between Japan and Americaagainst us; we have had an instance of the possibility ofsuch an agreement: American newspapers carried the text ofan agreement between all countries who had promised to support Kolchak 164 That agreement fell through, of course, but it is not impossible that an attempt will be made to restore it atthe first opportunity. 
 The deeper and more formidable thecommunist movement grows, the greater will be the numberof new attempts to strangle our Republic. 
 Hence our policy of utilising the discord among the imperialist powers so as to hamper an agreement or to make one temporarily impos-sible. 
 This has been the fundamental line of our policy for three years; it necessitated the conclusion of the Peace of Brest-Litovsk, as well as the signing, with Bullitt, of a peace treaty and an armistice agreement most disadvanta-geous to us. 
 This political line of conduct enjoins us tograsp at a proposal on the granting of concessions. 
 Todaywe are giving America Kamchatka, which in any case isnot actually ours because it is held by Japanese troops. 
At the moment we are in no condition to fight Japan. 
 We are giving America, for economic exploitation, a territory where we have absolutely no naval or military forces, andwhere we cannot send them. 
 By doing so we are setting Amer-ican imperialism against Japanese imperialism and againstthe bourgeoisie closest to us, the Japanese bourgeoisie,which still maintains its hold on the Far Eastern Republic. 
 Thus, our main interests were political at the conces-sions negotiations. 
 Recent events, moreover, have shownwith the greatest clarity that we have been the gainersfrom the mere fact of negotiations on concessions. 
 We havenot yet granted any concessions, and shall not be able to doso until the American president takes office, which will not be before March; besides, we reserve the possibility of renouncing the agreement when the details are beingworked out. 
 It follows, therefore, that in this matter the economic interest is secondary, its real value lying in its politicalinterest. 
 The contents of the press we have received goes to show that we have been the gainers. 
 Vanderlip himself insisted that the concessions plan should be kept secret forthe time being, until the Republican Party had won theelections. 
 We agreed not to publish either his letter or theentire preliminary draft. 
 However, it appeared that sucha secret could not be kept for long. 
 No sooner had Vanderlip returned to America than exposures of various kinds began. 
 Before the elections Harding was candidate for the presi-dency; he has now been elected. 
 The selfsame Hardingpublished in the press a denial of the report that he was intouch with the Soviets through Vanderlip. 
 That denial wascategorical, almost in the following words: I don’t know Vanderlip and recognise no relations with the Soviets. 
 The reason behind this denial is quite obvious. 
 On the eve of theelections in bourgeois America, it might have meant losing several hundred thousand votes for Harding to become known as a supporter of an agreement with the Soviets, and so he hastened to announce in the press that he did not know any Vanderlip. 
 As soon as the elections were over,however, information of a quite different kind began tocome in from America. 
 In a number of newspaper articlesVanderlip came out in full support of an agreement withthe Soviets and even wrote in one article that he compared Lenin to Washington. 
 It turns out, therefore, that in the bourgeois countries we have propagandists for an agreementwith us, and have won these propagandists from amongrepresentatives of exploiters of the worst type, such asVanderlip, and not in the person of the Soviet ambassadoror among certain journalists. 
 When I told a meeting of leading executives what I am now telling you, a comrade just back from America where hehad worked in Vanderlip’s factories, said he had beenhorrified; nowhere had he seen such exploitation as atVanderlip’s factories. 
 And now in the person of this capitalistshark we have won a propagandist for trade relations with Soviet Russia, and even if we do not get anything except the proposed agreement on concessions we shall still be able tosay that we have gained something. 
 We have received anumber of reports, secret ones, of course, to the effect thatthe capitalist countries have not given up the idea of launch-ing a new war against Soviet Russia in the spring. 
 We have learnt that preliminary steps are being taken by some capi-talist states, while whiteguard elements are, it may be said,making preparations in all countries. 
 Our chief interesttherefore, lies in achieving the re-establishment of traderelations, and for that purpose we need to have at least asection of the capitalists on our side. 
 In Britain the struggle has been going on for a long time. 
 We have gained by the mere fact that among those whorepresent the worst capitalist exploitation we have peoplewho back the policy of restoring trade relations withRussia. 
 The agreement with Britain—a trade agreement—hasnot yet been signed. 
 Krasin is now actively negotiating it in London. 
 The British Government has submitted its draft to us and we have presented our counterdraft, but allthe same we see that the British Government is dragging out the negotiations and that there is a reactionary military group hard at work there which is hindering the conclusion of trade agreements and has so far been successful. 
 It is our prime interest and prime duty to support anything thatcan strengthen the parties and groups working for the con-clusion of this agreement with us. 
 In Vanderlip we havegained such a supporter, not by mere chance or becauseVanderlip is particularly enterprising or knows Siberia very well. 
 The causes here lie much deeper and are linked with the development of the interests of British imperialism,which possesses a huge number of colonies. 
 This rift bet-ween American and British imperialism is deep, and itis our imperative duty to base ourselves on it. 
 I have mentioned that Vanderlip is particularly knowl-edgeable in respect of Siberia. 
 When our talks were coming to a close, Comrade Chicherin pointed out that Vanderlipshould be received because it would have an excellent effecton his further actions in Western Europe. 
 Of course, theprospect of talking to such a capitalist shark was not of thepleasantest, but then I had had to talk very politely, by way of duty, even to the late Mirbach, so I was certainly not afraid of a talk with Vanderlip. 
 It is interesting thatwhen Vanderlip and I exchanged all sorts of pleasantriesand he started joking and telling me that the Americansare an extremely practical people and do not believe whatthey are told until they see it with their own eyes, I said to him, half in banter: “Now you can see how good things are in Soviet Russia and you can introduce the same inAmerica. 
” He answered me, not in English but in Russian:“Mozhet byt. 
” * Why, you even know Russian?” He answered: “A long time ago I travelled five thousand verststhrough Siberia and the country interested me greatly. 
” This humorous exchange of pleasantries with Vanderlip ended by his saying as he was leaving, “Yes, it is true Mr. 
Lenin has no horns and I must tell that to my friends inAmerica. 
” It would have seemed simply ridiculous had itnot been for the further reports in the European press to theeffect that the Soviets are a monster no relations can be established with. 
 We were given an opportunity to throw *Perhaps. 
— Ed. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR into that swamp a stone in the person of Vanderlip, who favours the re-establishment of trade relations with us. 
 There has not been a single report from Japan that has not spoken of the extraordinary alarm in Japanese commer-cial circles. 
 The Japanese public say that they will never goagainst their own interests, and are opposed to concessionsin Soviet Russia. 
 In short, we have a terrific aggravation ofthe enmity between Japan and America and thus an un-doubted slackening of both Japanese and American pressure on us. 
 At the meeting of executives in Moscow where I had to mention the fact, the following question was asked. 
 “Itappears,” one of the comrades wrote, “that we are drivingJapan and America to war, but it is the workers and peasants who will do the fighting. 
 Although these are imperialist powers, is it worthy of us socialists to drive two powers intoa war against each other, which will lead to the shedding ofworkers blood?” I replied that if we were really drivingworkers and peasants to war that would be a crime. 
 All ourpolitics and propaganda, however, are directed towards put-ting an end to war and in no way towards driving nations to war. 
 Experience has shown sufficiently that the socialistrevolution is the only way out of eternal warfare. 
 Ourpolicy, therefore, is not that of involving others in a war. 
We have not done anything justifying, directly or indi-rectly, a war between Japan and America. 
 All our propa-ganda and all our newspaper articles try to drive home the truth that a war between America and Japan wouldbe just as much an imperialist war as the one between theBritish and the German groups in 1914, and that socialistsshould think, not of defending their respective countriesbut of overthrowing the power of the capitalists; they should think of the workers’ revolution. 
 Is it the correct policy for us to use the discord between the imperialist banditsto make it more difficult for them to unite against us,who are doing everything in our power to accelerate thatrevolution, but are in the position of a weak socialistrepublic that is being attacked by imperialist bandits? Of course, it is the correct policy. 
 We have pursued that policy for four years. 
 The Treaty of Brest-Litovsk was the chiefexpression of this policy. 
 While the German imperialists were offering resistance, we were able to hold out even when the Red Army had not yet been formed, by using the contradictions existing between the imperialists. 
 Such was the situation in which our concessions policy in respect to Kamchatka emerged. 
 This type of concessionis quite exceptional. 
 I shall speak later of the way the otherconcessions are taking shape. 
 For the moment I shall con-fine myself to the political aspect of the question. 
 I want to point out that the relations between Japan and America show why it is to our advantage to offer concessions or to usethem as an inducement. 
 Concessions presume some kind ofre-establishment of peaceful agreements, the restoration oftrade relations; they presume the possibility for us to begindirect and extensive purchases of the machinery we need. 
 We must turn all our efforts to achieving this. 
 That has not yet been done. 
 The comrade who has asked about the resumption of trade relations with Britain wants to know why the signing of theagreement with that country has been held up. 
 My answeris that it is being delayed because the British Government is hesitant. 
 Most of the trade and industrial bourgeoisie in Britain are in favour of relations being resumed and clearlyrealise that any action for war means taking enormous risksand speeding up the revolution. 
 You will remember thatduring our drive on Warsaw the British Government pre-sented us with an ultimatum, threatening to order its navy to sail against Petrograd. 
 You will remember that Councils of Action sprang up all over Britain at the time and the Men-shevik leaders of the British working class declared thatthey were against war and would not permit one. 
 On theother hand, the reactionary section of the British bourgeoi-sie and the military clique at court are in favour of the war continuing. 
 The delay in signing the trade agreement must undoubtedly be ascribed to their influence. 
 I shallnot go into all the details of these trade relations withBritain, or of this agreement on trade relations with Brit-ain, because it would take me too far afield. 
 This delicateproblem had recently to be very thoroughly discussed by the Central Committee of the Party. 
 We have returned to it again and again, and our policy in this matter has beenmarked by the greatest degree of accommodation. 
 Our aim now is to obtain a trade agreement with Britain so as to start more regular trade and be able to buy as soon as pos-sible the machinery necessary for our extensive plan to rehabilitate the national economy. 
 The sooner we do this thegreater will be the basis ensuring our economic independenceof the capitalist countries. 
 At present, after having burnttheir fingers in the armed invasion of Russia, they cannotthink of an immediate resumption of the war. 
 We must seize the opportunity and bend every effort to achieve trade relations even at the cost of maximum concessions, forwe cannot for a moment believe in lasting trade relationswith the imperialist powers; the respite will be temporary. 
The experience of the history of revolutions and great con-flicts teaches us that wars, a series of wars, are inevitable. 
 The existence of a Soviet Republic alongside of capitalist countries—a Soviet Republic surrounded by capitalistcountries—is so intolerable to the capitalists that theywill seize any opportunity to resume the war. 
 The peoplesare weary of the imperialist war and threaten to maketheir indignation felt if war continues, but the possibility of the capitalists being able to resume it in a few years is not precluded. 
 That is why we must exert every effort to utilisethe opportunity, since it exists, and conclude trade agree-ments. 
 I can say the following here (this is not for the record). 
I think that we shall ultimately emerge on top as a result ofour firm stand that the Communist International is not a governmental institution. 
 That is the more probable for the British bourgeoisie having to realise the ridiculousness ofrising up against the Third International. 
 The Third Inter-national was formed in March 1919. 
 Its Second Congresswas held in July 1920, following which the terms pro-posed in Moscow were made publicly known in all countries. 
 An open struggle is going on for adhesion to the Communist International. 
 The organisational foundations for the for-mation of Communist parties exist everywhere. 
 In thesecircumstances, any attempt to present us seriously withan ultimatum that we get rid of the Communist Internation-al is inexcusable. 
 However, the emphasis laid on the matter shows where the shoe pinches and what displeases them in our policy. 
 Even without that, we have known whatit is in our policy that is not to their liking. 
 The East is nother question that can be spoken of at a Party meeting, and is alarming Britain. 
 The latter wants us to give assur-ances that we will do nothing against Britain’s interests in the East. 
 We are willing and ready to give such an under-taking. 
 As an example I might mention that the Congressof Peoples of the East, a Communist congress, took place,not in the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
 but in Baku, in the independentrepublic of Azerbaijan. 
 The British Government will have no reason to accuse us of doing anything against British interests. 
 In their ignorance of our Constitution, they some-times confuse the Azerbaijan Republic with the RussianSoviet Republic. 
 Our laws are definite and precise on thatscore, and it will be easy to refute the false interpretationsof the British ministers. 
 However, there are still differences on this subject, and Krasin is engaged with the ministers in talks on these two sore points. 
 In July, when Poland was threatened with utter defeat, and the Red Army was about to crush her, the completetext of an agreement was presented by Britain, which ineffect said that we had to declare as a matter of principle that we would not carry on official propaganda or do any-thing contrary to British interests in the East. 
 That was tobe laid down at a subsequent political conference, but atthe moment they were concluding a definite trade agree-ment. 
 They asked whether we would like to sign it. 
 We repliedthat we would. 
 Today we say again that we will sign such an agreement. 
 The political conference will specify Brit-ain’s interests in the East. 
 We also have certain interestsin the East, and we shall set them forth in detail whenthe need arises. 
 Britain cannot say outright that she isabandoning her July proposal and so she is dragging thingsout and concealing from her own people the truth about the negotiations. 
 The outcome of the negotiations is uncertain and we cannot guarantee that an agreement will be signed. 
The very powerful court and military circles in Britain areopposed to the agreement. 
 We are, however, proposingmaximum concessions, and we believe it to be in our intereststo sign a trade pact and purchase with all possible dispatch some of the essentials for the restoration of the railways (i. 
e. 
, locomotives), for the rehabilitation of industry, andfor electrification. 
 This is more important to us than anything else. 
 If we achieve that, we shall become so strong in a few years that even, if the worst comes to the worst and there is armed intervention in a few years’ time, it will fail because we shall be stronger than we are now. 
 The line we inthe Central Committee are following is one of maximumconcessions to Britain. 
 If these gentlemen think they willcatch us breaking promises, we declare that our govern-ment will not carry on any official propaganda and that we have no intention of infringing on any of Britain’s interests in the East. 
 If they hope to derive some advantagefrom this, let them try; we shall not be the losers. 
 I now come to the question of the relations between Britain and France. 
 These are confused. 
 On the one hand,Britain and France belong to the League of Nations and are obliged to act jointly; on the other hand, whenever any tension arises they fail to do so. 
 When Comrade Kamenevwas in London conducting negotiations together with Kra-sin, this became quite obvious. 
 France was in favour ofsupporting Poland and Wrangel, but the British Govern-ment declared it would not support France. 
 Concessions are more acceptable to Britain than to France, which still aspires to get her debts paid back, while in Britaincapitalists with any business sense no longer think aboutit. 
 From that angle, too, it is to our advantage to use thedissension between Britain and France, and we must there-fore insist on the political proposal of concessions to Britain. 
 We now have a draft agreement on timber concessions in the Far North. 
 Since there is no political unity betweenBritain and France, our position imposes on us the dutyof even incurring a certain risk, if only we succeed inhampering a military alliance between Britain and Franceagainst us. 
 A new war that Britain and France will support against us will be an immense burden on us (even if it ends, as the war with Wrangel has done, in our complete victory);it will hinder our economic development and worsen thecondition of the workers and peasants. 
 We must thereforebe ready to do whatever involves the least loss. 
 Obviously,the losses from concessions are negligible compared with those that would arise from a delay in our economic devel-opment and the loss of thousands of workers and peasantsthat would ensue were we unable to withstand the alliance of the imperialists. 
 Negotiations on concessions with Britain are one of the means of standing up to their alliance. 
 That is the political aspect of the issue. 
 Last, the final aspect of the matter is the attitude of Britain and the entire Entente to Germany. 
 If we excludeAmerica, Germany is the most advanced country. 
 In thedevelopment of electricity her technical level is even higherthan America’s. 
 The conditions obtaining in Germany in consequence of the Treaty of Versailles make her existence impossible. 
 Because of that situation it is natural for Ger-many to be prompted towards an alliance with Russia. 
 Whenthe Russian troops were approaching Warsaw, all Germanywas seething. 
 An alliance between Russia and Germany,a country that has been strangled, a country that is able to set gigantic productive forces in motion—this situation has led to a political mix up in Germany: the German BlackHundreds sympathise with the Russian Bolsheviks in thesame way as the Spartacus League does. 
 This can well beunderstood because it derives from economic causes, andis the basis of the entire economic situation and of our foreign policy. 
 While we stand alone and the capitalist world is strong, our foreign policy consists, on the one hand, in our having toutilise disagreements (to vanquish all the imperialist powerswould, of course, be a most pleasant thing, but for a fairlylong time we shall not be in a position to do so). 
 On the one hand, our existence depends on the presence of radical differences between the imperialist powers, and, on the other,on the Entente’s victory and the Peace of Versailles havingthrown the vast majority of the German nation into asituation it is impossible for them to live in. 
 The Peace ofVersailles has created a situation in which Germany cannot even dream of a breathing-space, or of not being plundered, of not having the means of subsistence taken away fromher, of her people not being doomed to starvation and extinc-tion; Germany cannot even dream of any of these things,so that, naturally, her only means of salvation lies in analliance with Soviet Russia, a country towards which her eyes are therefore turning. 
 They are furiously opposing Soviet Russia; they detest the Bolsheviks, and shoot down theirown Communists in the manner of real whiteguards. 
 The German bourgeois government has an implacable hatred of the Bolsheviks, but such is its international position that, against its own desires, the government is driven towards peace with Soviet Russia. 
 That, comrades, is thesecond corner-stone of our international policy, our foreignpolicy; it is to show peoples that are conscious of the bour-geois yoke that there is no salvation for them without theSoviet Republic. 
 Since the Soviet Republic withstood the onslaught of the imperialists for three years, this goes to show that one country, and that country alone, has beensuccessful in hurling back this imperialist yoke. 
 That coun-try has been called a country of “robbers”, “plunderers”,“bandits”, Bolsheviks, etc. 
—let that be so, but still it isimpossible to improve the economic situation without that country. 
 In a situation such as this, the question of concessions acquires still another aspect. 
 The pamphlet I have in myhands is the Decree on Concessions of November 23. 
 It willbe distributed to all members of the Congress. 
 We intend topublish this pamphlet abroad, in several languages. 
 165 It is our immediate object to do everything possible to arouse interest in concessions among the population of the greatestnumber of countries, to interest those countries that are themost oppressed. 
 The divergence of interests between Japanand America is very great. 
 They are unable to agree bet-ween themselves over China, a number of islands, etc. 
 The divergence of interests between Germany and the Entente is of another kind. 
 Germany’s existence has been madeimpossible by the conditions in which the Entente hasplaced her. 
 People are dying there because the Entente hasbeen requisitioning their motors and their cattle. 
 Such asituation urges Germany towards a rapprochement with Soviet Russia. 
 I do not know the details of the treaty between Germany and the Entente, but in any case the treaty isknown to ban direct trade relations between Germany andSoviet Russia. 
 When we arranged for the purchase of Ger-man locomotives, that was done through the agency ofSweden. 
 Germany will hardly be able to restore direct trade relations with us before April 1921. 
 However, progress in restoring our trade relations with Germany is more rapidthan with the Entente. 
 The conditions of existence in Germany are compelling the German people as a whole, including the Black Hundreds and the capitalists, to seek relations with Soviet Russia. 
 Germany is already linked with us by certain trade relations. 
 These links can become closerinasmuch as we are offering Germany agricultural conces-sions. 
 It is therefore clear that we must advance concessionsas an economic method, even irrespective of the measure inwhich we are able to put the project into effect. 
 The interest in concessions is so obvious that even if we do not succeed in granting a single concession, or none of our agreementsare put into effect (and even that is quite possible)—even inthat case we shall still have gained something, and we stillhave to pursue our policy because by so doing we make itmore difficult for the imperialist countries to attack us. 
 Irrespective of this, we must tell all the oppressed peoples that a handful of countries are overtly or covertly, consci-ously or unconsciously, strangling other peoples—this derivesfrom the Treaty of Versailles—and these peoples are turningto us for help, and are becoming more and more aware ofthe economic necessity of an alliance with Soviet Russia against international imperialism. 
 Agricultural concessions, therefore, are of a wider scope than the old bourgeois con-cessions; they are different from the old capitalist conces-sions. 
 They remain capitalist in character inasmuch as wetell the German capitalists to bring so many tractors intoour country, in exchange for which we shall give them so much excellent virgin land and grain. 
 We are attracting capital with the prospect of tremendous profits. 
 In thisrespect the concessions are a purely capitalist undertaking,but they acquire an immeasurably greater significancebecause Germany as a nation, Austria and other countriescannot exist because they need aid in food and because the entire people, irrespective of whether the capitalists make a profit of a hundred or two hundred per cent, can,despite anti-Bolshevik prejudices, see that the Bolsheviksare establishing completely different international relationswhich make it possible for all oppressed peoples to rid them-selves of the imperialist yoke. 
 That is why our successes of the last three years will lead to still greater successes in foreign policy during the coming year. 
 Our policy isgrouping around the Soviet Republic those capitalist countries which are being strangled by imperialism. 
 That is why our concessions proposal has more than a capitalist significance; that is why it is a hand held out, not only to the German capitalists with the offer, “Bring us hundreds oftractors and make as much as three hundred per cent on eachruble if you like”; it is a hand held out to oppressed peoples,an alliance of the oppressed masses, which is a factor in thefuture proletarian revolution. 
 The doubts and fears that still exist in the advanced countries, which assert that Russia could risk a socialist revolution because she is a vast countrywith her own means of subsistence while they, the industrialcountries of Europe, cannot do so because they have noallies—these doubts and fears are groundless. 
 We say: “Younow have an ally, Soviet Russia. 
” Since we are granting concessions, this will be an alliance that will consolidate the alliance against world imperialism. 
 This is a postulatethat must not be lost sight of, it justifies our concessionspolicy and proves the need to grant concessions. 
 And now for several purely economic considerations. 
 I shall now go on to these considerations and read out the stipu-lations of the law, although I hope that the comrades present here have read the law of November 23. 
 I shall,however, remind you briefly that it says that concession-aires shall be paid with part of the products, that whenspecial technical improvements have been introduced, we areprepared to offer trade advantages, and that the term of concessions will be more or less prolonged, depending on the volume and character of the expenditures involved. 
 Weguarantee that property invested in an enterprise shall notbe confiscated or requisitioned. 
 Without such a guarantee owners of private capital and private property will not, of course, enter into relations with us. 
 The question of courts, which was at first raised in the draft agreement, was subsequently removed, since wesaw that this was not to our advantage. 
 Thus the judicialauthority on our territory remains in our hands. 
 In theevent of a dispute, the issue will be settled by our judges. 
This will be not requisitioning but the lawful exercise of jurisprudence by our judicial bodies. 
 The fifth clause in the agreement deals with the code of labour laws. 
 In the original draft of the agreement, which was discussed with Vanderlip, provision was made for the withdrawal of the application of the labour code in localities inhabited by underdeveloped tribes, we cannot say which. 
 In such places no code of labour laws is possible. 
 The labourcode was to be replaced in such areas by a special agreementon guarantees for the workers. 
 In the final clause we guarantee the concessionaire against any unilateral changes. 
 Without this guarantee, there can, of course, be no question of granting concessions. 
 The question of what is meant by non-unilateral changeshas, however, been left open. 
 That will depend on the textof the agreement on each individual concession. 
 Arbitrationmay be possible through some of the neutral powers. 
 This isa point that may lead to differences, and leaves a certain latitude in determining the actual terms of a concession. 
 It should, incidentally, be pointed out that in the capitalistcountries the Menshevik leaders of the working class areconsidered reliable people. 
 They enter bourgeois govern-ments, and it is very difficult for bourgeois governmentsto challenge such mediators or arbitrators as the Mensheviks or social-traitors of the European countries. 
 Experience has shown, however, that when any serious tension arises, theAmerican and European Mensheviks behave just like theRussian Mensheviks do, i. 
e. 
, they do not know how tobehave, and are obliged to yield to the pressure of the revo-lutionary masses, though they themselves remain opposed to the revolution. 
 The question remains open; we shall not decide it in advance. 
 From the terms that I have read out to you, you will see that economic relations between the capitalist conces-sionaires and the Socialist Republic are far from stableor durable. 
 It is obvious that a capitalist who retains pri-vate property and exploitation relations cannot be anything but a foreign body in a socialist republic. 
 Hence one of themain themes in my report: concessions are a continuation ofwar by other means. 
 I shall deal with that in detail in amoment, but first I want to mention the three main formsor kinds of the concessions. 
 In this pamphlet we have given a list of the chief concessions; the comrades from the Supreme Council of theNational Economy who provided the material for the pam-phlet and edited it, have appended maps showing these objects. 
 These maps show that the concessions fall into three main groups—first, timber concessions in the Far North, second, agricultural concessions and third, mining conces-sions in Siberia. 
 Our economic interest in timber concessions in the Far North of European Russia is obvious; there are tens andeven hundreds of millions of dessiatines of forest land which we are quite unable to exploit because we lack the railways, the means of production and the possibility of providingthe workers there with food, but which could be exploited bya country that owns a big merchant fleet and could fell andsaw timber properly and export it in tremendous quantities. 
 If we want to trade with foreign countries—and we do want to, because we realise its necessity—our chief interest is in obtaining as quickly as possible, from the capitalistcountries, the means of production (locomotives, machinery,and electrical equipment) without which we cannot more orless seriously rehabilitate our industry, or perhaps may evenbe unable to do so at all, because the machinery needed by our factories cannot be made available. 
 It is with the motive of extra profit that we must attract the capitalist. 
 Hewill get surplus profit—well, let him have that surplusprofit; we shall obtain the fundamentals that will helpstrengthen us; we shall stand firmly on our own feet, andshall win in the economic field. 
 We shall have to pay up if we want to get the best machinery, etc. 
 What are we to pay with? We still dispose of gold reserves totalling severalmillions. 
 You will see from the special plan for the electri-fication of Russia, drawn up for several decades, that thisplan, together with the additional work for the rehabilita-tion of industry, will involve an approximate expenditure of something like 17,000 million gold rubles. 
 Electrification alone will require the direct expenditure of more than1,000 million rubles in gold. 
 We cannot cover this withour gold reserves; it is extremely undesirable and dangerousfor us to export foodstuffs because we have not got sufficientfor our own industry, and yet this need has to be met. 
 In this case there is no concession project economically more suitable for us than the forests of the Far North which coveran enormous area, and where the timber is rotting away and a total loss because we are economically unable to exploit these timber reserves. 
 Timber, however, is of tremen-dous value on the world market. 
 Besides, the Far North is also convenient politically because it is an outlying borderarea. 
 This concession is convenient to us both politicallyand economically, and we must make the best possibleuse of it. 
 At the Moscow Conference I have told you about, 166 Milyutin said that negotiations with Britain about conces-sions in the north of European Russia are progressing. 
 There are several scores of millions of dessiatines of standing timberthere. 
 If we grant three or five million dessiatines disposedchequerwise, we shall get an opportunity to derive advantagefrom up-to-date enterprises, an opportunity to learn, bystipulating that our technicians take part in the work; we shall thus gain a lot and make it difficult for capitalist powers that enter into deals with us to take part in militaryaction against us, because war cancels everything, andshould one break out we shall get possession of all the build-ings, installations and railways. 
 Any possible action againstus by new Kolchaks, Denikins and others will not be made the easier. 
 The second type is agricultural concessions. 
 With the exception of West Siberia with its vast expanses of ex-cellent land, inaccessible to us because of its great distancefrom railways, there are in European Russia and along theRiver Ural alone (our Commissariat of Agriculture has taken the necessary steps and has calculated the amount of land we cannot cultivate, which is no less than 3,000,000 des-siatines along the River Ural, abandoned by entire Cossackvillages as a result of the victorious culmination of theCivil War) excellent lands that must be brought under theplough, but which we cannot cultivate because of the short-age of draught animals and our weakened productive forces. 
 The state farms of the Don Region have about 800,000 dessiatines which we cannot cultivate; to cultivate thisland we shall need a tremendous number of draught animalsor entire tractor columns that we cannot put on the fields,while some capitalist countries, including those that urgently need foodstuffs—Austria, Germany and Bohemia— could put tractors to work and obtain excellent wheat ingood season. 
 We do not know to what extent we shall be able to carry that out. 
 At present we have two tractor plants functioning, in Moscow and Petrograd, but in consequence of the difficult conditions that obtain they cannot produce tractors in large numbers. 
 We could ease the situation bypurchasing a greater number of tractors. 
 Tractors are themost important means of effecting a radical change in theold farming methods and of extending the area cultivated. 
By such concessions we shall show a large number of countries that we are able to develop the world economy on a gigantic scale. 
 If our propaganda and our proposal do not meet with success, and if our proposal is not accepted, we shall stillreap an advantage that is not only political but socialistas well. 
 What is going on in the capitalist world is not only a waste of wealth, but madness and a crime, for in some countries there is a food surplus that cannot be sold becauseof currency revolutions, since money has depreciated in anumber of countries that have suffered defeat. 
 Huge stocksof foodstuffs are rotting away, while tens of millions ofpeople in countries like Germany are actually starving. 
 This absurdity, this crime of capitalism, is becoming obvious to all capitalist countries and to the small countriesthat surround Russia. 
 To the capitalist countries theSoviet Republic says: “We have hundreds of thousands ofdessiatines of excellent land that can be ploughed withtractors; you have the tractors, the petrol and the trained technicians; we propose to all peoples, including the peoples of the capitalist countries, to make the rehabilitation ofthe economy and the salvation of all peoples from hungertheir main object. 
” If the capitalists do not understandthis, it is an argument demonstrating the corruption, mad-ness and criminal nature of the capitalist system. 
 That will be of more than mere propaganda value: it will be a communist call for revolution, for it shows beyond doubtthat capitalism is falling apart and cannot satisfy the peo-ple’s needs, a fact that is more and more penetrating intothe consciousness of all peoples. 
 An insignificant minorityof imperialist countries are growing rich, while a large number of other countries are actually on the verge of ruin. 
 The world economy needs reorganisation, and the SovietRepublic comes forward with a plan of reconstruction, with the following incontestable business-like, and realisable proposal: “You are starving under capitalism, despite the fabulous wealth of machinery. 
 We can solve the crisis by bringing together your machinery and our raw materials,but the capitalists are in the way. 
 We have proposed tothem that they should accept our offer, but they are holdingback and wrecking our plan. 
” That is the second type ofconcession, the agricultural or tractor type. 
 Mining concessions are the third type. 
 These are indicated on the map of Siberia, with details of each area in whichconcessions are being considered. 
 Siberia’s mineral wealthis literally boundless, and at best, even given significantprogress, we cannot exploit even a hundredth part of itfor many years. 
 The minerals are to be found in conditions that demand the best machinery. 
 There are such products as copper ore, which the capitalists need badly for theirelectrical industry because it is in such short supply. 
 Itis possible to rehabilitate the world economy and improvethe world’s technology if they enter into regular relationswith us. 
 It is, of course, more difficult to implement these concessions, i. 
e. 
, they present greater difficulties thantimber or agricultural concessions do. 
 As far as agriculturalconcessions are concerned, it is only a matter of a briefworking period with tractors being used. 
 Timber conces-sions are also easier, especially as they concern an area we cannot avail ourselves of; but mining concessions are frequently at no great distance from the railways, frequent-ly in densely populated areas. 
 Here the danger is seriousand we shall weigh the pros and cons very carefully to seewhether or not they should be granted; we shall do so ondefinite terms, for there is no doubt that concessions are a new kind of war. 
 The capitalists are coming to us to wage a new kind of war—the very existence of the capitalistsis in itself a war against the socialist world surroundingthem. 
 Capitalist enterprises in a socialist state are in theeconomic sense a war for freedom of trade, against the policyof compulsory deliveries, a war for private property against a republic that has abolished that property. 
 On this econo-mic basis there develop a variety of relationships (similarto the hostility between the Sukharevka Market 167 and our institutions). 
 We may be told that we are closing down the Sukharevka black market but opening up a number of ot-her “Sukharevkas” by letting the capitalists in. 
 We have not closed our eyes to this, and say: if we have been victorioustill now, if we were victorious when our enemies used everymeans to disrupt our enterprises, when there was disruptionfrom within combined with that from without, then we mustsurely be able to deal with such things, to keep an eye on them when they are in certain limited areas and there are definite conditions and relations. 
 We have practical expe-rience of the struggle against military espionage and againstcapitalist sabotage. 
 We fought against them when theywere under cover in our own institutions; surely we shallbe able to handle them when the capitalists have been let in according to a definite list and under definite conditions. 
 We know, of course, that they will try to break theseconditions, and we shall combat such infractions. 
 But, com-rades, concessions on a capitalist foundation means war. 
Until we have overthrown capital in other countries, andwhile capital is much stronger than we are, its forces can be sent against us at any time and it can start another war against us. 
 For this reason we have to make ourselves strong-er, and to do that we must develop large-scale industry andget our transport going. 
 In carrying this out, we are takinga risk; here we again have relations of warfare, of struggle,and if they try to undermine our policy, we shall fight them. 
 It would be grossly mistaken to think that a peaceful agree-ment on concessions is a peaceful agreement with capitalists. 
It is an agreement concerning war, but an agreement thatis less dangerous to us, besides being less burdensome forthe workers and peasants, less burdensome than at the timewhen the best tanks and guns were being thrown into action against us; we must therefore use all methods, and, at the cost of economic concessions, develop our economic forcesand facilitate our economic rehabilitation. 
 The capitalistswill, of course, not honour their agreements, say com-rades who are afraid of concessions. 
 It is quite impossible,of course, to be sure that the capitalists will honour agree-ments. 
 It will be a war, and war is the ultimate argument, which in general remains an argument entering the relations-of the socialist republic. 
 War threatens us at any hour. 
 We are conducting peace negotiations with Poland, and there is every chance that peace will be concluded, or at least, to be more exact, the vast majority of chances are that peace will be concluded. 
There is no doubt, however, that the Savinkovs and theFrench capitalists are working to prevent the treaty frombeing signed. 
 To the capitalists war is possible tomorrowif not today, and they would willingly start a war today if they had not learnt something from three years’ experience. 
 Concessions constitute a certain risk; they are a loss; theyare the continuation of war. 
 There is no doubt of this, butit is a war that is more to our advantage. 
 When we haveobtained a certain minimum of the means of production,locomotives and machines, then we shall be different, in the economic sense, from what we have been till now, and the imperialist countries will be still less dangerous to us. 
 We have been told that the concessionaires will create exclusive conditions for their workers, and supply them withbetter clothes, better footwear, and better food. 
 That willbe their propaganda among our workers, who are suffering privation and will have to suffer privation for a long time to come. 
 We shall then have a socialist republic in whichthe workers are poverty-stricken and next to it a capitalistisland, in which the workers get an excellent livelihood. 
This apprehension is frequently voiced at our Party meet-ings. 
 Of course, there is a danger of that kind, and it shows that concessions are a continuation of war and do not constitute peace. 
 We have, however, experienced far greaterdeprivations and have seen that workers from capitalistcountries nevertheless come to our country, knowing thatthe economic conditions awaiting them in Russia are farworse; surely, then, we ought to be able to defend ourselves against such propaganda with counter-propaganda; surely we should be able to show the workers that capitalism can,of course, provide better conditions for certain groups ofits workers, but that this does not improve the conditionsof the rest of the workers. 
 And lastly, why is it that at everycontact with bourgeois Europe and America we, not they, have always won? Why is it that to this day it is they who fear to send delegations to us, and not we to them? To thisday we have always managed to win over to our side at least a small part of the delegations, despite the fact that such delegations consisted in the main of Menshevik elements, and that they were people who came to us for short periods. 
 Should we be afraid of being unable to explain the truthto the workers?! We should be in a bad way if we had suchfears, if we were to place such considerations above thedirect interest which is a matter of the greatest significanceas far as concessions are concerned. 
 The position of our peasants and workers remains a difficult one. 
 It must be improved. 
 We cannot have any doubt on that score. 
 I thinkwe shall agree that the concessions policy is a policy ofcontinuation of the war, but we must also agree that it isour task to ensure the continued existence of an isolatedsocialist republic surrounded by capitalist enemies, to preserve a republic that is infinitely weaker than the capital-ist enemies surrounding it, thereby eliminating any pos-sibility of our enemies forming an alliance among themselvesfor the struggle against us, and to hamper their policies andnot give them an opportunity to win a victory. 
 It is our taskto secure for Russia the necessary machinery and funds for the restoration of the economy; when we have obtained that, we shall stand so firmly on our own feet that nocapitalist enemies can overawe us. 
 That is the point of viewwhich has guided us in our policy on concessions, the policyI have outlined. 
 2 REPORT ON THE WORK OF THE COUNCIL OF PEOPLE’S COMMISSARS DECEMBER 22 (Shouts from the hall : “Long live Comrade Lenin!” Storm of applause . 
 An ovation . 
) Comrades, I have to present a report on the home and foreign policy of the government. 
I do not think it is the purpose of my report to give youa list of at least the most outstanding or most importantlaws and measures adopted by the workers’ and peasants’government. 
 Nor do I think that you would be interested in an account of the events of this period, or that it is very important that I should give one. 
 As I see it, general con-clusions should be drawn from the principal lessons we havelearnt during this year, which was no less abundant inabrupt political changes than the preceding years of therevolution were. 
 From the general lessons of this year’s experience we must deduce the most urgent political and economic tasks that face us, tasks to which the Sovietgovernment—both through the legislative acts which arebeing submitted for your examination and endorsementand through the sum total of its measures—at presentattaches the greatest hopes and significance, and from the fulfilment of which it expects important progress in our economic development. 
 Permit me, therefore, toconfine myself to brief comments on the Republic’s inter-national situation and on the chief results of our foreignpolicy during the past year. 
 You all know, of course, how the Polish landowners and capitalists forced a war on us under the pressure and at the insistence of the capitalist countries of Western Europe,and not of Western Europe alone. 
 You know that in April of this year we made peace proposals to the Polish Govern-ment, on terms which were incomparably more advanta-geous to it than the present terms, and that it was only under pressure of dire necessity, after our negotiationsfor an armistice with Poland had ended in a complete break-down, that we were obliged to fight. 
 Despite the heavydefeat our forces suffered near Warsaw, as a result of theirundoubted exhaustion, this war has ended in a peace that is far more favourable to us than the one we proposed to Poland in April. 
 A preliminary treaty with Poland hasbeen signed, and negotiations are now under way for theconclusion of a final peace treaty. 
 We certainly do notconceal from ourselves the danger presented by the pressurebeing exerted by some of the more stubborn capitalist countries and by certain Russian whiteguard circles with the aim of preventing these negotiations from ending in a peace. 
It should, however, be said that the Entente’s policy, whichaims at military intervention and the armed suppressionof the Soviets, is steadily coming to nought, and that weare winning over to our policy of peace a steadily increas-ing number of states which are undoubtedly hostile towards the Soviets. 
 The number of countries that have signed peacetreaties is increasing, and there is every probability thata final peace treaty with Poland will be signed in the imme-diate future. 
 Thus, another severe blow will be struck atthe alliance of the capitalist forces which are trying to wrench the power of government from us by means of war. 
 Comrades, you also know, of course, that the temporary setbacks we suffered in the war with Poland and the dif-ficulty of our position at certain moments of the war weredue to our being obliged to fight Wrangel, who was of-ficially recognised by one imperialist power, 168 and received vast material, military and other aid. 
 To end the war asquickly as possible, we had to effect a rapid concentrationof troops so as to strike a decisive blow at Wrangel. 
 You,of course, know what dauntless heroism was displayed bythe Red Army in surmounting obstacles and fortifications which even military experts and military authorities con-sidered impregnable. 
 The complete, decisive and remarkablyswift victory the Red Army gained over Wrangel is one of the most brilliant pages in its history. 
 That was how the war forced on us by the whiteguards and the imperialists ended. 
 It is with far greater assurance and determination that we can now set about a task that is dear to us, an essentialtask, one that has long been attracting us—that of economicdevelopment. 
 We can do so with the assurance that thecapitalist tycoons will not find it as easy to frustrate this work as in the past. 
 Of course, we must be on our guard. 
 In no case can we say that we are already guaranteed againstwar. 
 It is not because of the absence of formal peace treatiesthat we are still without that guarantee. 
 We are very wellaware that the remnants of Wrangel’s army have not beendestroyed, that they are lying low close at hand, that they are under ward and tutelage, and are being re-formed with the aid of the capitalist powers. 
 We know that the white-guard Russian organisations are working actively to re-createcertain military units and, together with Wrangel’s forces,to prepare them for a new onslaught on Russia at afavourable moment. 
 That is why we must maintain our military preparedness under all circumstances. 
 Irrespective of the blows alreadystruck at imperialism, we must keep our Red Army ina state of combat readiness at all costs, and increase itsfighting efficiency. 
 The release of a certain section ofthe army and its rapid demobilisation does not, of course, militate against this. 
 We rely on the tremendous ex-perience gained by the Red Army and its leaders duringthe war to enable us now to improve its quality. 
 And weshall see to it that although the army is reduced we shallretain a cadre whose maintenance will not entail an undueburden on the Republic, while at the same time, with the reduction in the number of effectives, we shall be in a better position than before, in case of need, to mobilise and equipa still larger military force. 
 We are certain that all the neighbouring states, which have already lost a great deal by supporting the whiteguardconspiracies against us, have learnt the hard lesson of experience and have duly appreciated our conciliatory spirit, which was generally considered as weakness on ourpart. 
 Three years of experience have no doubt shown them that, while we are persistently striving for peace, we are prepared from the military point of view. 
 Any attempt to start a war against us will mean, to the states involved, that the terms they will get following such a war will beworse than those they could have obtained without a war orprior to it. 
 This has been proved in respect of severalcountries. 
 This is an achievement we shall not forego, onethat will not be forgotten by any of the powers surrounding us or in political contact with Russia. 
 Thanks to this, our relations with neighbouring countries are steadily im-proving. 
 You know that a final peace has been signed witha number of states bordering on the Western frontiers ofRussia. 
 These were part of the former Russian Empire, andthe Soviet government has unequivocally recognised their independence and sovereignty, in conformity with the fun-damental principles of our policy. 
 Peace on such a basishas every chance of being far more durable than is to theliking of the capitalists and certain West-European states. 
 As regards the Latvian Government, I must say that at one time there was a danger of our relations becoming strained, so much so that the idea even arose of severing diplomatic relations. 
 But the latest report from our representativein Latvia indicates that a change of policy has already takenplace, and that many misunderstandings and legitimatecauses of dissatisfaction have been removed. 
 There is goodreason to hope that in the near future we shall have close economic ties with Latvia, which will naturally be even more useful to us in our trade with Western Europe thanEstonia and the other states bordering on the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
 I must also say, comrades, that during this year our policy in the East has been very successful. 
 We mustwelcome the formation and consolidation of the Soviet Republics of Bokhara, Azerbaijan and Armenia, which have not only recovered their complete independence, but haveplaced the power of government in the hands of the workersand peasants. 
 These republics are proof and corroboration ofthe fact that the ideas and principles of Soviet governmentare understood and immediately applicable, not only in the industrially developed countries, not only in those which have a social basis like the proletariat, but alsoin those which have the peasantry as their basis. 
 The idea of peasants’ Soviets has triumphed. 
 The peasants’ power has been assured: they own the land and the means of pro-duction. 
 The friendly relations between the peasant Soviet Republics and the Russian Socialist Republic have alreadybeen consolidated by the practical results of our policy. 
 We can also welcome the forthcoming signing of a treaty with Persia, 169 friendly relations with whom are assured by the fact that the fundamental interests of all peoples suffering from the yoke of imperialism coincide. 
 We must also note that friendly relations with Afghan-istan, and still more so with Turkey, are being steadilyestablished and strengthened. 
 As for the latter power, theEntente countries have done everything they could to renderimpossible any more or less normal relations between her and the West-European countries. 
 This circumstance, coupled with consolidation of the Soviets, is steadilystrengthening the alliance and the friendly relationsbetween Russia and the oppressed nations of the East,despite the bourgeoisie’s resistance and intrigues and thecontinuing encirclement of Russia by bourgeois countries. 
 The chief factor in politics today is the violence being used by the imperialists against peoples which have nothad the good fortune to be among the victors; this worldpolicy of imperialism is leading to closer relations, allianceand friendship among all the oppressed nations. 
 The suc-cess we have achieved in this respect in the West as well, in relation to more Europeanised states, goes to show that the present principles of our foreign policy are correct andthat the improvement in our international position restson a firm basis. 
 We are confident that, by continuing ourpeace policy and by making concessions (and we must doso if we wish to avoid war), the basic line of our policy and the fundamental interests which stem from the very nature of imperialist policy will come into their own and willmake it more and more imperative for the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
 toestablish closer relations with a growing number of neigh-bouring states, despite the intrigues and machinations ofthe imperialists, who, of course, are always capable of pro-voking a quarrel between us and some other state. 
 Such relations are our guarantee that we shall be able to devoteourselves whole-heartedly to economic development and that we shall be able, for a longer period, to work calmly, steadfastly and confidently. 
 I must add that negotiations for the conclusion of a trade agreement with Great Britain are now under way. 
 Unfor-tunately, these negotiations have been dragging out muchlonger than we would wish, but we are not at all to blamefor that. 
 When, as far back as July—at the moment theSoviet troops were achieving their greatest successes—the British Government officially submitted to us the text of an agreement assuring the establishment of trade relations,we replied by giving our full consent, but since then theconflict of the various trends within the British Govern-ment and the British state has held this up. 
 We see how theBritish Government is vacillating, and is threatening to sever relations with us and immediately to dispatch warships to Petrograd. 
 We have seen all this, but at the same time wehave seen that, in reply to this threat, Councils of Actionhave sprung up all over Great Britain. 
 We have seen how,under pressure from the workers, the most extreme adherentsof the opportunist trend and their leaders have been obliged to resort to this quite “unconstitutional” policy, one that they had themselves condemned a short while before. 
 Itappears that, despite the Menshevik prejudices which havehitherto prevailed in the British trade union movement, thepressure brought to bear by the working people and theirpolitical consciousness have become strong enough to blunt the edge of the imperialists’ bellicose policy. 
 Continuing our policy of peace, we have taken our stand on the pro-posals made by the British Government in July. 
 We areprepared to sign a trade agreement at once; if it has not yetbeen signed, the blame rests wholly with those trends andtendencies in British ruling circles that are anxious to frustrate the trade agreement and, against the will of the majority, not only of the workers but even of the Britishbourgeoisie, want a free hand to attack Soviet Russia again. 
That is their affair. 
 The longer this policy is pursued by certain influential circles in Great Britain, by financial and imperialist circles there, the more it will aggravate the financial situation, the longer it will delay the semi-agreement which has nowbecome essential between bourgeois Britain and the Soviet Republic, and the nearer it will bring the imperialists to a situation that will oblige them to accept a full agreement, not merely a semi-agreement. 
 Comrades, I must say that this trade agreement with Great Britain is connected with one of the most importantquestions in our economic policy, that of concessions. 
 Oneof the important acts passed by the Soviet government dur-ing the period under review is the law on concessions of November 23, this year. 
 You are, of course, all familiar with the text of this law. 
 You all know that we havenow published additional material, from which delegatesto the Congress of Soviets can obtain full information onthis question. 
 We have published a special pamphlet con-taining, not only the text of the decree but also a list of the chief concessions we are offering: agricultural, timber and mining. 
 We have taken steps to make the published text ofthis decree available in the West-European countries asearly as possible, and we hope that our concessions policywill also be a practical success. 
 We do not in the least closeour eyes to the dangers this policy presents to the Socialist Soviet Republic, a country that, moreover, is weak and backward. 
 While our Soviet Republic remains the isolatedborderland of the capitalist world, it would be absolutelyridiculous, fantastic and utopian to hope that we can achievecomplete economic independence and that all dangers willvanish. 
 Of course, as long as the radical contrasts remain, the dangers will also remain, and there is no escaping them. 
 What we have to do is to get firmly on our feet in orderto survive these dangers; we must be able to distinguishbetween big dangers and little dangers, and incur the lesserdangers rather than the greater. 
 We were recently informed that, at a Congress of Soviets of Arzamas Uyezd in Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia, a peasant, not a member of the Party, said on the subject of conces-sions: “Comrades, we are delegating you to the All-RussiaCongress and declare that we peasants are prepared to endurehunger and cold and do our duty for another three years,but don’t sell Mother Russia in the form of concessions. 
” I heartily welcome such sentiments, which are very wide-spread. 
 I think it is highly indicative that during these threeyears the masses of non-Party working people—not only industrial workers but peasants as well—have acquired the political and economic experience which enables and com-pels them to value their liberation from the capitalists above all else, which compels them to exercise redoubled cautionand to treat with extreme suspicion every step that involvesthe possibility of new dangers of the restoration of capital-ism. 
 Of course, we give the greatest consideration to alldeclarations of this kind, but we must say that there is no question of selling out Russia to the capitalists. 
 It is a question of concessions; any concessions agreement is limi-ted to a definite period and by definite terms. 
 It is hedgedaround with all possible guarantees, by guarantees thathave been carefully considered and will be considered anddiscussed with you again and again, at the present Con-gress and at various other conferences. 
 These temporary agreements have nothing to do with any selling out. 
 Thereis not a hint in them of selling Russia. 
 What they dorepresent is a certain economic concession to the capitalists,the purpose of which is to enable us, as soon as possible,to secure the necessary machinery and locomotives without which we cannot effect the restoration of our economy. 
 We have no right to neglect anything that may, in however smalla measure, help us to improve the conditions of the workersand peasants. 
 We must do all we possibly can to bring about the rapid restoration of trade relations, and negotiations are at present being carried on in a semi-legal framework. 
 We are ordering locomotives and machines in far from adequatenumbers, but we have begun to order them. 
 When we conductthese negotiations officially, the possibilities will be vastlyexpanded. 
 With the aid of industry we shall achieve agreat deal, and in a shorter period; but even if the achieve-ments are very great, the period will cover years, a number of years. 
 It must be borne in mind that although wehave now gained a military victory and have secured peace,history teaches us that no big question has ever beensettled, and no revolution accomplished, without a series ofwars. 
 And we shall not forget this lesson. 
 We have already taught a number of powerful countries not to wage war on us, but we cannot guarantee that this will be for long. 
 Theimperialist predators will attack us again if there is the slightest change in the situation. 
 We must be prepared for it. 
 Hence, the first thing is to restore the economy and place it firmly on its feet. 
 Without equipment, without machinery obtained from capitalist countries, we cannot dothis rapidly. 
 And we should not grudge the capitalist alittle extra profit if only we can effect this restoration. 
The workers and peasants must share the sentiments ofthose non-Party peasants who have declared that they are not afraid to face sacrifice and privation. 
 Realising the danger of capitalist intervention, they do not regard con-cessions from a sentimental point of view, but as a continua-tion of the war, as the transfer of the ruthless struggle toanother plane; they see in them the possibility of freshattempts on the part of the bourgeoisie to restore the old capitalism. 
 That is splendid; it is a guarantee that not only the organs of Soviet power but all the workers andpeasants will make it their business to keep watch and wardover our interests. 
 We are, therefore, confident that weshall be able to place the protection of our interests onsuch a basis that the restoration of the power of the capi-talists will be totally out of the question even in carrying out the concessions agreements; we shall do everythingto reduce the danger to a minimum, and make it less thanthe danger of war, so that it will be difficult to resume thewar and easier for us to restore and develop our economyin a shorter period, in fewer years (and it is a matter of a good many years). 
 Comrades, economic tasks, the economic front, are again and again assuming prominence as the chief and fundamentalfactor. 
 While studying the texts of the various laws onwhich I have to report to you, I saw that the vast majorityof the measures and decisions of the Council of People’s Commissars and the Council of Defence consist at present of specific, detailed and frequently minute measures connectedwith this economic activity. 
 You, of course, do not expect meto give you a list of these measures. 
 It would be extremelytedious and quite uninteresting. 
 I should only like toremind you that this is by no means the first time that we are attaching primary importance to the labour front. 
 Let us recall the resolution passed by the All-Russia CentralExecutive Committee on April 29, 1918. 
 170 That was a time when Russia was economically dismembered by the Peace of Brest-Litovsk that was forced upon us, and when this extremely rapacious treaty had placed us in an extremely difficult position. 
 It then appeared possible to count on arespite which would create conditions for the restoration ofpeaceful economic activities, and—although we now knowthat this respite was a very brief one—the All-Russia CentralExecutive Committee, in its resolution of April 29, at once focussed all attention on economic development. 
 This reso-lution, which has not been rescinded and remains one ofour laws, provides a proper perspective, enabling us tojudge how we approached this task and to what we must nowdevote greater attention in the interests of our work andin order to complete it successfully. 
 An examination of this resolution clearly shows that many of the problems we now have to tackle were presentedin a clear-cut, firm and sufficiently decisive way as far backas April 1918. 
 Remembering this, we say that repetition isthe mother of learning. 
 We are not dismayed by our havingto repeat the basic axioms of economic development. 
 We shall repeat them time and again, but see what a difference there is between the declaration of abstract principles in1918 and the practical economic work that has already beenbegun. 
 Despite the tremendous difficulties and the constantinterruptions in our work, we are approaching closer andcloser lo a concrete and practical solution of our economic problems. 
 We shall repeat things over and over again. 
 In constructive work you cannot avoid a vast number ofrepetitions, or avoid turning back every now and again,testing what you have done, making certain corrections,adopting new methods, and bending every effort to con-vince the backward and the untrained. 
 The essential feature of the present political situation is that we are now passing through a crucial period of tran-sition, something of a zigzag transition from war to economicdevelopment. 
 This has occurred before, but not on sucha wide scale. 
 This should constantly remind us of whatthe general political tasks of the Soviet government are, and what constitutes the particular feature of this tran-sition. 
 The dictatorship of the proletariat has been success-ful because it has been able to combine compulsion with persuasion. 
 The dictatorship of the proletariat does not fear any resort to compulsion and to the most severe, decisive and ruthless forms of coercion by the state. 
 The advanced class, the class most oppressed by capitalism, is entitledto use compulsion, because it is doing so in the interests ofthe working and exploited people, and because it possessesmeans of compulsion and persuasion such as no former classesever possessed, although they had incomparably greater material facilities for propaganda and agitation than we have. 
 If we ask ourselves what the results of our experience in these three years have been (for it is difficult, on certainfundamental points, to sum up the results of a single year),if we ask ourselves how, after all, our victory over an enemy much stronger than ourselves is to be explained, it must be said that it was because the organisation of the RedArmy splendidly embodied the consistency and firmnessof proletarian leadership in the alliance of the workersand the working peasantry against all exploiters. 
 Whatwas the reason? Why did the vast masses of the peasantry willingly consent to this? Because they were convinced, though their vast majority were not Party members, thatthere was no way of salvation except by supporting theSoviet government. 
 It was, of course, not books that con-vinced them of this, nor was it propaganda. 
 It was all throughexperience. 
 They were convinced by the experience of the Civil War, in particular by the alliance between our Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, which is moreclosely akin to certain fundamental features of small-scalepeasant economy. 
 Their experience of the alliance betweenthese parties of the small property-owners and the land-owners and the capitalists, and their experience of Kolchak and Denikin, convinced the peasant masses that no middle course was possible, that the plain and straightforwardSoviet policy was the right one, and that the ironleadership of the proletariat was their only means ofsalvation from exploitation and violence. 
 It has beenonly because of our ability to convince the peasants of this that our policy of coercion, which is based on this firm and absolute conviction, has met with such tremendoussuccess. 
 We must now bear in mind that, in going over to the labour front, we are faced with the same problem, under new conditions and on a much wider scale, that confronted us when we were fighting the whiteguards and witnessed a degreeof enthusiasm and concentration of energy on the part of theworker and peasant masses such as has never been, and nevercould have been, displayed in any war in any other state. 
From their own observations and their knowledge of life, the non-Party peasants, like the Arzamas peasant whose words I have just quoted, did really come to the conclusion thatthe exploiters are ruthless enemies and that a ruthless statepower is required to crush them. 
 We succeeded in rousingunprecedented numbers of people to display an intelligentattitude towards the war, and to support it actively. 
 Never before, under any political regime, has there been even one-tenth of the sympathy with a war and an understandingof it as that unanimously displayed by our Party and non-Party workers and non-Party peasants (and the mass of thepeasants are non-Party) under Soviet power. 
 That is themain reason for our having ultimately defeated a powerful enemy. 
 That is corroboration of one of the most profound and at the same time most simple and comprehensible prec-epts of Marxism. 
 The greater the scope and extent of histor-ical events, the greater is the number of people participatingin them, and, contrariwise, the more profound the changewe wish to bring about, the more must we rouse an interest and an intelligent attitude towards it, and convince more millions and tens of millions of people that it is necessary. 
In the final analysis, the reason our revolution has leftall other revolutions far behind is that, through the Sovietform of government, it has aroused tens of millions of peo-ple, formerly uninterested in state development, to take an active part in the work of building up the state. 
 Let us now consider, from this aspect, the new tasks which confrontedus and were expressed in tens and hundreds of decisionspassed by the Soviet government during this period; theyaccounted for nine-tenths of the work of the Council of La-bour and Defence (we shall speak of this later), and probably more than half of the work of the Council of People’s Com-missars, namely, the economic tasks, the elaboration ofa single economic plan, the reorganisation of the very foundations of the economy of Russia, the very foundations of small-scale peasant economy. 
 These tasks require that all members of trade unions, without exception, should be drawn into this absolutely new work, something that wasalien to them under capitalism. 
 Now ask yourselves whetherwe at present have the condition for the rapid and unequiv-ocal success that we had during the war, the condition ofthe masses being drawn into the work. 
 Are the members of the trade unions and the majority of the non-Party people convinced that our new methods and our great tasks of econo-mic development are necessary? Are they as convinced of thisas they were of the necessity of devoting everything to thewar, of sacrificing everything for the sake of victory onthe war front? If the question is presented in that way, you will be compelled to answer that they are certainly not. 
 They are far from being as fully convinced of this as theyshould be. 
 War was a matter which people understood and were used to for hundreds and thousands of years. 
 The acts ofviolence and brutality formerly committed by the landowners were so obvious that it was easy to convince the people; it was not difficult to convince even the peasants of thericher grain regions, who are least connected with industry,that we were waging war in the interests of the workingpeople, and it was therefore possible to arouse almostuniversal enthusiasm. 
 It will be more difficult to get the peasant masses and the members of the trade unions to understand these tasks now, to get them to understandthat we cannot go on living in the old way, that howeverfirmly capitalist exploitation has been implanted in thecourse of decades, it must be overcome. 
 We must get eve-rybody to understand that Russia belongs to us, and that only we, the masses of workers and peasants, can by our activities and our strict labour discipline remould the oldeconomic conditions of existence and put a great econo-mic plan into practice. 
 There can be no salvation apartfrom this. 
 We are lagging behind the capitalist powers andshall continue to lag behind them; we shall be defeated if we do not succeed in restoring our economy. 
 That is why we must repeat the old truths I have just reminded you of, theold truths regarding the importance of organisational problems, of labour discipline, regarding the immense role of the trade unions—an absolutely exclusive role in this sphere, because there is no other organisation which unites the broad masses; that is why we must not only repeat theseold truths, but must with every fibre of our being realisethat the transition from military tasks to economic tasks hasbegun. 
 We have been completely successful in the military sphere, and we must now prepare to achieve similar successes in tasks which are more difficult and which demand enthusi-asm and self-sacrifice from the vast majority of workersand peasants. 
 The conviction that the new tasks are neces-sary must be instilled in hundreds of millions of peoplewho from generation to generation have lived in a state of slavery and oppression and whose every initiative has been suppressed. 
 We must convince the millions of workerswho belong to trade unions but who are still not politicallyconscious and are unaccustomed to regarding themselvesas masters. 
 They must be organised, not to resist thegovernment but to support and develop the measures of their workers’ government and to carry them out to the full. 
 This transition will be accompanied by difficulties. 
Regarded merely as a formulation, it is not a new task;it is a new task insofar as the economic problem is beingraised on such a vast scale for the first time; we must realiseand remember that the war on the economic front will be more difficult and prolonged. 
 To achieve success on this front, a larger number of workers and peasants must beeducated to be self-reliant, active and devoted. 
 This canbe done, as is borne out by the experience we have gainedin economic development, because the masses fully realisethat the misfortunes, cold, hunger and privation have been caused by the inadequacy of our productive forces. 
 We must now transfer all our agitation and propaganda frompolitical and military interests to economic development. 
We have proclaimed this many times, but insufficiently;it seems to me that the most outstanding measures adoptedby the Soviet government during the past year are the creation of the Central Bureau for Production Propaganda of the All-Russia Central Council of Trade Unions, 171 the amalgamation of its work with that of the Chief Committee for Political Education, and the publication of additional newspapers for the respective industries, which are to devote attention, not only to production propaganda but also to its organisation on a country-wide scale. 
 The necessity of organising production propaganda on a nation-wide scale follows from the special features of thepolitical situation. 
 It is equally necessary to the workingclass, the trade unions, and the peasantry. 
 It is absolutely essential to our state apparatus, which we have used far from enough for this purpose. 
 We have a thousand timesmore knowledge, book knowledge, of how to run industryand how to interest the masses than is being applied inpractice. 
 We must see to it that literally every member ofthe trade unions becomes interested in production, and remembers that only by increasing production and raising labour productivity will Soviet Russia be in a state to win. 
Only in this way will Soviet Russia be able to shorten byabout ten years the period of the frightful conditions sheis now experiencing, the hunger and cold she is now suffer-ing. 
 If we do not understand this task, we may all perish, because we shall have to retreat owing to the weakness of our apparatus, since, after a short respite, the capitalistsmay at any moment renew the war, while we shall not be ina state to continue it. 
 We shall not be able to bring thepressure of the millions of our masses to bear, and inthis last war we shall be smashed. 
 That is how the matter stands. 
 Hitherto, the fate of all revolutions, of all great revolutions, has been decided by a long series of wars. 
 Ourrevolution too is such a great revolution. 
 We have passedthrough one period of wars, and we must prepare for anot-her. 
 We do not know when it will come, but we must seeto it that when it does come we shall be prepared for all contingencies. 
 That is why we must not give up measures of compulsion, and not merely because we are preserving thedictatorship of the proletariat, which the mass of peasantsand non-Party workers already understand. 
 They know allabout our dictatorship, and it holds out no terrors to them. 
 Itdoes not frighten them. 
 They regard it as a bulwark and a stronghold, that is, something with which they can resist the landowners and capitalists, and without which victoryis impossible. 
 This realisation, this conviction, which has already become deep-rooted among the peasant masses as far as military and political tasks are concerned, must now be extended to economic problems. 
 We may not, perhaps,succeed in bringing about this transition at once. 
 It may,possibly, not be effected without certain vacillations andreversions to the old flabbiness and petty-bourgeois ideology. 
We must tackle this work with still greater energy and zeal, remembering that we can convince the non-Party peasants and insufficiently class-conscious trade union members,because the truth is on our side, and because it cannot bedenied that in the second period of wars we shall not be able todefeat our enemies unless the country’s economy is restored. 
Let us only see to it that the millions take a more enlight-ened attitude towards the war on the economic front. 
 This is the task of the Central Bureau of Production Propaganda,the task of the All-Russia Central Council of Trade Unions,the task of all Party workers, the task of all the departmentsof the Soviet government, the task of all our propaganda,with the help of which we have secured successes of world-wide significance, because our propaganda throughout the world has always told the workers and peasants the truth,while all other propaganda tells them lies. 
 We must nowswitch our propaganda over to something which is far moredifficult and concerns the everyday work of the workers inthe factory shop, no matter how difficult the conditions of this work may be, and no matter how strong the memories of the old capitalist system may be, which taught the workersand peasants to mistrust governments. 
 We must convinceboth workers and peasants that, without a new combinationof forces, new forms of state amalgamation, and the newforms associated with compulsion, we shall not cope with our difficulties, and we shall not escape the abyss of econo-mic collapse on the brink of which we are standing—andwe have already begun to cope with the situation. 
 Comrades, I shall now deal with certain facts of our economic policy and the economic problems which seem tome to be characteristic of the present political situation and of the transition now confronting us. 
 I must first men-tion our agrarian bill, the bill of the Council of People’sCommissars for the consolidation and development of agricultural production and for assistance to peasant farms. 
 This bill was published on December 14 of this year, and before that date the substance and principles of it were communicated to all local officials by wireless. 
 Arrangements should at once be made to have this bill thoroughly discussed—in the light of local experience (onwhich it is actually based), and this is being done inthe localities—by the Congress and also by the representa-tives of the local Executive Committees and the departments of the latter. 
 I think that no comrade now doubts the neces-sity of specific and very energetic measures of assistance—not only in the form of encouragement but also in the formof compulsion—to improve our agricultural production. 
 Our country has been and still is a country of small peas-ants, and the transition to communism is far more difficult for us than it would be under any other conditions. 
 Toaccomplish this transition, the peasants’ participationin it must be ten times as much as in the war. 
 The war coulddemand, and was bound to demand, part of the adult malepopulation. 
 However, our country, a land of peasants which is still in a state of exhaustion, has to mobilise the entire male and female population of workers and peasants with-out exception. 
 It is not difficult to convince us Commu-nists, workers in the Land Departments, that state labourconscription is necessary. 
 In the discussion of the bill ofDecember 14, which has been submitted for your consider-ation, I hope that on this point there will not be even a shadow of difference in principle. 
 We must realise thatthere is another difficulty, that of convincing the non-Party peasants. 
 The peasants are not socialists. 
 To baseour socialist plans on the assumption that they are would bebuilding on sand; it would mean that we do not understand our tasks and that, during these three years, we have not learnt to adjust our programmes and carry out our newundertakings with due account of the poverty and oftensqualor that surround us. 
 We must have a clear picture ofthe problems that face us. 
 The first task is to unite theCommunists working in the Land Departments, draw general conclusions from their experience, grasp what has been done in the localities, and embody it in the legislative acts whichwill be promulgated at the centre, by government departments, and by the All-Russia Congress of Soviets. 
 We hope that we shall be able to do that. 
 However, that is only the first step. 
 The second step is to convince the non-Party peasants, yes, the non-Party peasants, becausethey form the majority and because what we are in a po-sition to do can be done only by making this mass, whichis in itself active and full of initiative, realise to a greaterdegree that the task must be tackled. 
 Peasant farming cannot continue in the old way. 
 While we were able to extricate ourselves from the first period of wars, we shallnot extricate ourselves so easily from the second period,and must therefore pay special attention to this aspect. 
 Every non-Party peasant must be made to understand this undoubted truth, and we are sure that he will under-stand it. 
 He has not lived through these last six painful and difficult years in vain. 
 He is not like the pre-war muzhik. 
He has suffered severely, has done a lot of thinking, andhas borne many political and economic hardships that haveinduced him to give up a good deal of their old habits. 
 Itseems to me that he already realises that he cannot live in the old way, that he must live in a different way. 
 All our means of propaganda, all the resources of the state, all our education-al facilities and all our Party resources and reserves mustbe devoted in full force to convincing the non-Party peas-ant. 
 Only then will our agrarian bill—which I hope youwill adopt unanimously, with necessary amendments and addenda, of course—be placed on a sound basis. 
 Only when we convince the majority of the peasants and draw theminto this work will this measure become just as firm as ourpolicy is. 
 That is because—as Comrade Kurayev has rightlysaid in an article based on the experience of the TatarRepublic—the working middle peasant and poor peasant are friends of the Soviet government, while the idlers are its enemies. 
 That is the real truth, a truth in which there isnothing socialist, but which is so indisputable and obviousthat any village assembly and any meeting of non-Partypeasants will understand it, and it will become the convic-tion of the overwhelming majority of the working peasants. 
 Comrades, here is what I particularly want to bring home to you now that we have turned from the phase of war to economic development. 
 In a country of small peasants, our chief and basic task is to be able to resort to state compulsion in order to raise the level of peasant farming, beginning with measures that are absolutely essential, urgentand fully intelligible and comprehensible to the peasant. 
 We shallbe able to achieve this only when we are able to convincemore millions of people who are not yet ready for it. 
We must devote all our forces to this and see to it that the apparatus of compulsion, activated and reinforced, shall be adapted and developed for a new drive of persuasion. 
Another campaign in the war will then end in victory. 
 We arenow declaring war on the relics of inertness, ignorance andmistrust that prevail among the peasant masses. 
 We shallachieve nothing by the old methods, but we shall achieve victory by the methods of propaganda, agitation and organ-ised influence which we have learnt. 
 We shall also see to itthat, besides decrees being adopted, institutions createdand documents written—it is not enough to send ordersflying all over the country—all the fields are sown betterthan before by the spring, and a definite improvement is achieved in small peasant farming. 
 Let it be even the most elementary improvement—the more cautious we are thebetter—but it must be achieved at all costs and on a massscale. 
 If we correctly understand the task that faces us,and if we devote our whole attention to the non-Party peas-ant, and concentrate on this all the skill and experience we have gained during these three years, we shall succeed. 
 And unless we succeed, unless we achieve a practical and massiveimprovement in small-scale peasant farming, there is nosalvation for us. 
 Unless this basis is created, no economicdevelopment will be possible and the most ambitious planswill be valueless. 
 The comrades must remember this and must bring it home to the peasants. 
 They must tell the non-Party peasants of Arzamas—and there are about ten orfifteen million of them—that we cannot go on starving andfreezing endlessly, for then we shall be overthrown in thenext period of wars. 
 This is a state matter; it concerns theinterests of our state. 
 Whoever reveals the least weakness, the least slackness in this matter, is an out-and-out criminal towards the workers’ and peasants’ government; he is help-ing the landowner and the capitalist. 
 And the landowner and the capitalist have their armies nearby, holding them in readiness to launch against us the instant they see us weak-ening. 
 There is no way to strengthen ourselves otherwise than by building up our main bulwark—agriculture andurban industry. 
 These cannot be improved except byconvincing the non-Party peasant of the need to do so, bymobilising all our forces to help him, and by actuallyhelping him in practice. 
 We admit that we are in debt to the peasant. 
 We have had grain from him in return for paper money, and havetaken it from him on credit. 
 We must repay that debt, andwe shall do so when we have restored our industry. 
 Torestore it we need a surplus of agricultural products. 
 Thatis why the agrarian bill is important, not only because we must secure practical results, but also because around it, as on a focal point, are grouped hundreds of decisions andlegislative measures of the Soviet government. 
 I now pass on to the question of how the basis for our industrial development is being created to enable us to beginrestoring Russia’s economic forces. 
 In this connection I must first draw your attention—from among the mass of reports which you have received or will receive in the nextfew days from all the Commissariats—to a passage in thereport of our Commissariat of Food. 
 In the next few dayseach Commissariat will present you with a profusion offigures and reports, which taken together are overwhelming in their abundance. 
 We must extract from them what is most essential to success, however modest it may be, andwhat is fundamental for the realisation of our economicplan, for the restoration of our economy and our industry. 
One of these essentials is the state of our food procurements. 
In the booklet which has been distributed to you—the report of the Commissariat of Food for three years—you will find a table from which I shall read only the totals, and eventhose in round figures, because reading figures, and par-ticularly listening to figures, is a difficult matter. 
 Theseare the figures showing the total procurements for eachyear. 
 From August 1, 1916 to August 1, 1917, 320,000,000 poods were procured; 50,000,000 were procured in the fol-lowing year, then 100,000,000 and then 200,000,000 poods. 
These figures—320, 50, 100 and 200—give you the basis of the economic history of Soviet government, of the work of the Soviet government in the economic field, the prepa-rations for that foundation which, when laid down, will enable us to really start developing. 
 The pre-revolutionary320,000,000 poods is the approximate minimum withoutwhich development is impossible. 
 In the first year of therevolution, with only 50,000,000 poods, there was starvation,cold and poverty. 
 In the second year we had 100,000,000 poods; in the third year, 200,000,000 poods. 
 The total has doubled with each year. 
 According to figures I receivedyesterday from Svidersky, we had 155,000,000 poods onDecember 15. 
 We are beginning to stand on our feet forthe first time, but with the utmost efforts, with unparal-leled difficulties, very often having to accomplish the task without any supplies from Siberia, the Caucasus and the South. 
 At present, with a procurement of over 150,000,000poods, we can say without any exaggeration that despitethe tremendous difficulties, this task has been accomplished. 
We shall have a total of about 300,000,000 poods, perhapsmore. 
 Without such a supply, however, it will be impossible to restore the country’s industry; it will be hopeless to expect the revival of the transport system and it will be impos-sible even to approach the great task of electrifying Russia. 
There can be no socialist country, no state with a workers’and peasants’ government unless, by the joint efforts of theworkers and peasants, it can accumulate a stock of food sufficient to guarantee the subsistence of the workers engaged in industry and to make it possible to send tens andhundreds of thousands of workers wherever the Sovietgovernment deems it necessary. 
 Without this there canbe nothing but empty talk. 
 Food stocks are the real basisof the economic system. 
 In this we have achieved a signal success. 
 Having achieved this success and with such a reserve, we can set about restoring our economy. 
 We knowthat these successes have been achieved at the cost oftremendous privation, hunger and lack of cattle fodderamong the peasants, which may become still more acute. 
We know that the year of drought increased the hardships and privations of the peasants to an unparalleled extent. 
 We therefore lay prime stress on the measures of assistancecontained in the bill I have referred to. 
 We regard stocks of food as a fund for the restoration of industry, as a fund for helping the peasants. 
 Without such a fund the state power is nothing. 
 Without such a fund socialist policy is but a pious wish. 
 We must remember that the production propaganda which we have firmly decided to launch will be supplemented with adifferent kind of persuasion, namely, bonuses in kind. 
 172 The law on bonuses in kind has been one of the most impor-tant decrees and decisions of the Council of People’s Commissars and the Council of Defence. 
 We were not able topass this law immediately. 
 If you examine the matter, youwill find that ever since April there has been a long chain ofdecisions and resolutions, and that this law was passed onlywhen, as the result of strenuous efforts on the part of our transport system, we were able to accumulate a food reserve of 500,000 poods. 
 Five hundred thousand poods is a verymodest figure. 
 The reports which you no doubt read inIzvestia yesterday show that out of these 500,000 poods 170,000 poods have already been expended. 
 As you see thereserve is nothing to boast of, and is far from adequate; nevertheless, we have entered on a road along which we shall advance. 
 It is proof that we are not relying on persuasionalone in the transition to new methods of work. 
 It is notenough to tell the peasants and the workers to maintainthe utmost labour discipline. 
 We must also help them; wemust reward those who, after suffering tremendous hardships, continue to display heroism on the labour front. 
 We have already created a reserve fund, but it is being utilisedin a way that is far from satisfactory. 
 We in the Councilof People’s Commissars have numerous indications that inpractice a bonus in kind often amounts simply to an in-crease in wages. 
 A good deal still remains to be done in this respect. 
 The work of conferences and of drafting supplementary schemes at the centre must be coupled withvery important work of another kind, namely, on the spotand among the masses. 
 When the state not only persuades,but also rewards good workers by creating better livingconditions for them, that is something that is not hard to understand; one does not have to be a socialist to under-stand it, and here we are assured in advance of the sympathyof the non-Party masses of workers and peasants. 
 We have only to make this idea much more widely known and to organise this work in a more practical way in the localities. 
 Now with regard to fuel; you will find in Comrade Rykov’s theses figures that show the improvement that hasbeen achieved, not only in firewood, but also in oil supplies. 
Thanks to the great zeal displayed by the workers in theAzerbaijan Republic, the friendly relations we have estab-lished with them and the capable managers provided by the Supreme Council of the National Economy, the oil situation is now favourable, so that we are beginning tostand on our own feet in the matter of fuel as well. 
 Coaldeliveries from the Donets Basin are being increased from25,000,000 poods to 50,000,000 poods per month, thanksto the work of the authorised commission which was sent there under the chairmanship of Comrade Trotsky. 
 This commission has decided to send responsible and experiencedmen to the Donets Basin, and Comrade Pyatakov has nowbeen sent there to take charge. 
 Thus, to achieve success, we have adopted certain measures with regard to fuel. 
 The Donets Basin, one of the largest sources, is already under our control. 
 In the minutes of the Council of People’s Commissars and the Councilof Defence, decisions may be found relating to the DonetsBasin. 
 These make reference to the dispatch of commissionsinvested with considerable powers and consisting of repre-sentatives of the central government and of local officials. 
 We must stimulate work in the localities, and it appears to me that we can do so with the help of these commissions. 
You will see the results of the work of these commissions,which we shall continue to set up in the future. 
 We mustgive a definite boost to fuel production, the principal branchof our industry. 
 I must say that, in the matter of fuel, the hydraulic method of extracting peat is a great achievement. 
 Peat is afuel we possess in very large quantities, but which we havebeen unable to utilise till now because of the deplorableworking conditions. 
 This new method will enable us toovercome the fuel shortage, which presents one of the great-est dangers on our economic front. 
 We shall not be able to get out of this impasse for many years to come, if westick to the old methods and do not restore our industry and transport. 
 The members of our Peat Committee have helped two Russian engineers to perfect this new invention, with the result that the new method is on the verge of com-pletion. 
 We are thus on the eve of a great revolution, whichwill be an important aid to us economically. 
 It must notbe forgotten that we possess vast deposits of peat, whichwe cannot utilise because we cannot send people to do suchback-breaking work. 
 The capitalist system could send people to work under such harsh conditions. 
 In the capitalist state people were driven to work there by hunger, but inthe socialist state we cannot consign people to such intol-erable work, and nobody will go there voluntarily. 
 Thecapitalist system did everything for the upper crust. 
 Itwas not concerned with the lower classes. 
 We must introduce more machines everywhere, and resort to machine technology as widely as possible. 
 The extractionof peat by the hydraulic method, which has been so success-fully promoted by the Supreme Council of the NationalEconomy, makes it possible to extract fuel in vast quantitiesand eliminates the need for skilled workers, since even unskil-led workers can perform the work under this method. 
 We have produced these machines; I would advise the delegates tosee the cinema film on peat extraction which has been shownin Moscow and which can be demonstrated for the Congressdelegates. 
 It will give you a definite idea of one of the meansfor coping with the fuel shortage. 
 We have made the ma-chines required for the new method, but we have made them badly. 
 If we send our people abroad, with the establishmentof trade with foreign countries, with even the existing semi-legal trade relations, the machines designed by ourinventors could be made properly there. 
 The number of thesemachines and the success gained in this field by the Chief Peat Committee and the Supreme Council of the National Economy will serve as a measure of all our economicachievements. 
 Unless we overcome the fuel shortage, it willbe impossible to win on the economic front. 
 Vital success inrestoring the transport system will also depend on this. 
 Incidentally, you have already seen from the theses of Comrades Yemshanov and Trotsky that in this field we have a real plan worked out for a number of years. 
 Order No. 
 1042was designed for a period of five years 173; in five years we can restore our transport and reduce the number of broken-down locomotives. 
 I should like to stress as probably the most difficult problem the statement made in the ninth thesis, to the effect that this period has already been reduced. 
 When extensive plans appear, designed for a number of years, sceptics are frequently to be found who say: how canwe plan for a number of years ahead? The best we can hopefor is to do what is required at the moment. 
 Comrades, we must be able to combine the two things; we cannot work without a long-term plan that envisages important achieve-ments. 
 The truth of this is borne out by the undoubtedimprovement in the work of the transport system. 
 I drawyour attention to the passage in the ninth thesis which saysthat the period for the restoration of transport was fixed at five years, but it has already been reduced because we are ahead of the schedule. 
 The period is now being fixed atthree and a half years. 
 That is the way to work in the otherbranches of economic activity too. 
 The real and practicaltask of the Council of Labour and Defence is being steadilyreduced to that. 
 We must avail ourselves of the progress of science and practice, and must steadfastly strive to get the plan fulfilled in the localities ahead of schedule, sothat the masses will see that the long period separating usfrom the complete restoration of industry can be reduced inpractice. 
 It depends on us. 
 Let us improve our methods inevery workshop, in every railway depot, in every sphere, and we shall shorten this period. 
 It is already being reduced. 
 Do not be afraid of long-term plans, for without them youcannot achieve an economic revival; let us devote all ourenergies in the localities to their fulfilment. 
 Economic plans must be carried out in accordance with a definite programme, and the increasing fulfilment of this programme must be noted and encouraged. 
 The masses must not only realise, but also feel that the shortening of theperiod of hunger, cold and poverty depends entirely uponhow quickly they fulfil our economic plans. 
 The plans ofthe various branches of production must be soundly co-ordinated, and linked up so as to constitute the single econo-mic plan we stand in such great need of. 
 In this connection, we are confronted with the task of unifying the People’s Commissariats for the various branches of the economy under a single economic centre. 
 We have begun to tackle this task and we are submitting for your consideration a decision of the Council of People’s Com-missars and the Council of Labour and Defence regardingthe reorganisation of the latter body. 
 You will examine this project, and I trust that with the necessary amendments it will be adopted unanimously. 
 Itscontents are very modest but its significance is great, because we need a body which definitely knows what its position is and unites all economic work; it is on economicwork that the chief stress is now being laid. 
 This has been dealt with in the literature which appeared before and in connection with the Congress, in a pamphletby Comrade Gusev, which, incidentally, is not as well written as his earlier one. 
 The pamphlet contains a sweep-ing plan for the organisation of the Council of Labour andDefence, to which it is proposed to transfer many prominentworkers, among whom we find the names of Trotsky andRykov. 
 I would say that we need somewhat fewer flights offancy like this. 
 We cannot burst out of an apparatus which it has taken three years to build up. 
 We realise its im-mense shortcomings, of which we shall speak in detail atthis Congress. 
 This question has been placed on the agenda;it is one of the most important questions. 
 I am referring tothe question of improving the Soviet apparatus. 
 But wemust at present act with circumspection, confine ourselves to what is essential, and change our apparatus on the basis of practical experience. 
 Comrade Gusev has derided the projectwe have submitted and says that we are proposing to add thePeople’s Commissariat of Agriculture to the Council ofLabour and Defence. 
 Quite right, we are proposing such aproject. 
 In it we assign a very modest place to the Council of Labour and Defence, making it a Commission of Labour and Defence under the Council of People’s Commissars. 
Until now we have been working in the Council of Labourand Defence without any constitution. 
 The powers of theCouncil of People’s Commissars and the Council of Labourand Defence have been poorly defined; we have sometimes exceeded these powers and acted as a legislative body. 
 But there has never been any conflict on these grounds. 
 Suchcases have been settled by immediately referring them to /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR the Council of People’s Commissars. 
 When it became apparent that the Council of Labour and Defence must be converted into a body for the closer co-ordination of eco-nomic policy, the question arose how to give legal definitionto these relations. 
 There are two plans before us. 
 One ofthem calls for the demarcation of the competence of theCouncil of People’s Commissars and that of the Council ofLabour and Defence. 
 To do this, numerous codifiers must be engaged and reams of paper used, and even then there will be no guarantee that mistakes will not be made. 
 Let us set about it in a different way. 
 The Council of Labour and Defence has been regarded as something almostequal to the Council of People’s Commissars. 
 Let us abandonthat idea. 
 Let it be a commission of the Council of People’s Commissars. 
 We shall avoid a great deal of friction and shall achieve more rapid practical realisation. 
 If any mem-ber of the Council of People’s Commissars is dissatisfied, lethim bring his complaint before the Council of People’sCommissars; it can be summoned in a few hours, as youknow. 
 In this way we shall avoid friction between depart-ments and will make the Council of Labour and Defence a rapidly acting body. 
 That is no easy problem. 
 It is boundup with the actual creation of a single economic plan. 
 Theproblem, for the solution of which we have done somethingand for which we have been preparing for two years, is toachieve the unification of the Commissariats for the various branches of the economy. 
 That is why I draw your atten-tion to this bill on the Council of Labour and Defence, andI hope that, with the necessary amendments, you willendorse it. 
 The work of uniting these Commissariatswill then proceed more smoothly, rapidly, firmly andenergetically. 
 I now come to the last item—the question of electrifica-tion, which stands on the agenda of the Congress. 
 You are tohear a report on this subject. 
 I think that we are witnessinga momentous change, one which in any case marks thebeginning of important successes for the Soviets. 
 Henceforththe rostrum at All-Russia Congresses will be mounted, not only by politicians and administrators but also by engineers and agronomists. 
 This marks the beginning of thatvery happy time when politics will recede into the background, when politics will be discussed less often and at shorter length, and engineers and agronomists will do most of the talking. 
 To really proceed with the work of economic development, this custom must be initiated at the All-Russia Congress of Soviets and in all Soviets and organisa-tions, newspapers, organs of propaganda and agitation,and all institutions, from top to bottom. 
 We have, no doubt, learnt politics; here we stand as firm as a rock. 
 But things are bad as far as economic matters are concerned. 
 Henceforth, less politics will be the bestpolitics. 
 Bring more engineers and agronomists to the fore,learn from them, keep an eye on their work, and turn ourcongresses and conferences, not into propaganda meetingsbut into bodies that will verify our economic achievements, bodies in which we can really learn the business of economic development. 
 You will hear the report of the State Electrification Commission, which was set up in conformity with the deci-sion of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee ofFebruary 7, 1920. 
 On February 21, the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the National Economy signed the final ordinance determining the composition of the commission,and a number of leading experts and workers, mainly fromthe Supreme Council of the National Economy, over ahundred of them, and also from the People’s Commissariatof Railways and the People’s Commissariat of Agriculture, are devoting their entire energy to this work. 
 We have before us the results of the work of the State Commissionfor the Electrification of Russia in the shape of this smallvolume which will be distributed to you today or tomor-row. 
 174 I trust you will not be scared by this little volume. 
 I think I shall have no difficulty in convincing you of the particular importance of this book. 
 In my opinion it is the second programme of our Party. 
 We have a Party programmewhich has been excellently explained by Comrades Pre-obrazhensky and Bukharin in the form of a book which isless voluminous, but extremely useful. 
 That is the politicalprogramme; it is an enumeration of our objectives, an explanation of the relations between classes and masses. 
 It must, however, also be realised that the time has cometo take this road in actual fact and to measure the practical results achieved. 
 Our Party programme must not remain solely a programme of the Party. 
 It must become a pro-gramme of our economic development, or otherwise it will be valueless even as a programme of the Party. 
 It mustbe supplemented with a second Party programme, a planof work aimed at restoring our entire economy and raisingit to the level of up-to-date technical development. 
 Withouta plan of electrification, we cannot undertake any real constructive work. 
 When we discuss the restoration of agriculture, industry and transport, and their harmoniousco-ordination, we are obliged to discuss a broad economicplan. 
 We must adopt a definite plan. 
 Of course, it willbe a plan adopted as a first approximation. 
 This Party pro-gramme will not be as invariable as our real Party programme is, which can be modified by Party congresses alone. 
 No, day by day this programme will be improved,elaborated, perfected and modified, in every workshop andin every volost. 
 We need it as a first draft, which will besubmitted to the whole of Russia as a great economic plandesigned for a period of not less than ten years and indicat-ing how Russia is to be placed on the real economic basis required for communism. 
 What was one of the most power-ful incentives that multiplied our strength and our energiesto a tremendous degree when we fought and won on thewar front? It was the realisation of danger. 
 Everybodyasked whether it was possible that the landowners and capitalists might return to Russia. 
 And the reply was that it was. 
 We therefore multiplied our efforts a hundredfold,and we were victorious. 
 Take the economic front, and ask whether capitalism can be restored economically in Russia. 
 We have combated theSukharevka black market. 
 The other day, just prior to the opening of the All-Russia Congress of Soviets, this not very pleasant institution was closed down by the Moscow Sovietof Workers’ and Red Army Deputies. 
 ( Applause . 
) The Sukharevka black market has been closed but it is notthat market that is so sinister. 
 The old Sukharevka market onSukharevskaya Square has been closed down, an act that presented no difficulty. 
 The sinister thing is the “Sukha-revka” that resides in the heart and behaviour of everypetty proprietor. 
 This is the “Sukharevka” that must be closed down. 
 That “Sukharevka” is the basis of capitalism. 
 While it exists, the capitalists may return to Russia and may grow stronger than we are. 
 That must be clearly real-ised. 
 It must serve as the mainspring of our work and asa condition and yardstick of our real success. 
 While welive in a small-peasant country, there is a firmer economicbasis for capitalism in Russia than for communism. 
 Thatmust be borne in mind. 
 Anyone who has carefully observed life in the countryside, as compared with life in the cities, knows that we have not torn up the roots of capitalism andhave not undermined the foundation, the basis, of theinternal enemy. 
 The latter depends on small-scale production,and there is only one way of undermining it, namely, toplace the economy of the country, including agriculture, on a new technical basis, that of modern large-scale pro-duction. 
 Only electricity provides that basis. 
 Communism is Soviet power plus the electrification of the whole country . 
 Otherwise the country will remain a small-peasant country, and we must clearly realise that. 
 We areweaker than capitalism, not only on the world scale, but also within the country. 
 That is common knowledge. 
 We have realised it, and we shall see to it that the economicbasis is transformed from a small-peasant basis into a large-scale industrial basis. 
 Only when the country has beenelectrified, and industry, agriculture and transport havebeen placed on the technical basis of modern large-scale industry, only then shall we be fully victorious. 
 We have already drawn up a preliminary plan for the electrification of the country; two hundred of our bestscientific and technical men have worked on it. 
 We have aplan which gives us estimates of materials and financescovering a long period of years, not less than a decade. 
 This plan indicates how many million barrels of cement and how many million bricks we shall require for the purpose ofelectrification. 
 To accomplish the task of electrificationfrom the financial point of view, the estimates are between1,000 and 1,200 million gold rubles. 
 You know that we arefar from being able to meet this sum from our gold reserves. 
 Our stock of foodstuffs is not very large either. 
 We must therefore meet the expenditure indicated in these estimatesby means of concessions, in accordance with the plan I have mentioned. 
 You will see the calculation showing how the restoration of our industry and our transport is being planned on this basis. 
 I recently had occasion to attend a peasant festival held in Volokolamsk Uyezd, a remote part of Moscow Gubernia,where the peasants have electric lighting. 
 175 A meeting was arranged in the street, and one of the peasants came forwardand began to make a speech welcoming this new event in the lives of the peasants. 
 “We peasants were unenlightened,” he said, “and now light has appeared among us, an ‘unnaturallight, which will light up our peasant darkness’. 
” For mypart, these words did not surprise me. 
 Of course, to thenon-Party peasant masses electric light is an “unnatural”light; but what we consider unnatural is that the peasants and workers should have lived for hundreds and thousands of years in such backwardness, poverty and oppression underthe yoke of the landowners and the capitalists. 
 You cannotemerge from this darkness very rapidly. 
 What we mustnow try is to convert every electric power station webuild into a stronghold of enlightenment to be used to make the masses electricity-conscious, so to speak. 
 All should be made aware of the reason why these smallelectric power stations, whose numbers run into the dozens,are linked up with the restoration of industry. 
 We have anestablished plan of electrification, but the fulfilment ofthis plan is designed to cover a number of years. 
 We must fulfil this plan at all costs, and the period of its fulfilment must be reduced. 
 Here we must have the same thing as wasthe case with one of our first economic plans, the plan forthe restoration of transport—Order No. 
 1042—which wasdesigned to cover a period of five years, but has now beenreduced to three and a half years because we are ahead of the schedule. 
 To carry out the electrification plan we may need a period of ten or twenty years to effect the changesthat will preclude any return to capitalism. 
 This will be anexample of rapid social development without precedentanywhere in the world. 
 The plan must be carried out at allcosts, and its deadline brought nearer. 
 This is the first time that we have set about economic work in such a fashion that, besides separate plans whichhave arisen in separate sections of industry as, for instance, in the transport system and have been brought into other branches of industry, we now have an all-over plan calcu-lated for a number of years. 
 This is hard work, designed to bring about the victory of communism. 
 It should, however, be realised and remembered that we cannot carry out electrification with the illiterates we have. 
Our commission will endeavour to stamp out illiteracy—but that is not enough. 
 It has done a good deal compared with the past, but it has done little compared with what has to be done. 
 Besides literacy, we need cultured, enlight-ened and educated working people; the majority of thepeasants must be made fully aware of the tasks awaitingus. 
 This programme of the Party must be a basic book to beused in every school. 
 You will find in it, in addition to the general plan of electrification, separate plans for every district of Russia. 
 Thus every comrade who goes to theprovinces will have a definite scheme of electrification forhis district, a scheme for transition from darkness andignorance to a normal life. 
 And, comrades, you can and mustcompare the theses you have been presented with, elaborate and check them on the spot; you must see to it that when the question “What is communism?” is asked in any schooland in any study circle, the answer should contain not onlywhat is written in the Party programme but should alsosay how we can emerge from the state of ignorance. 
 Our best men, our economic experts, have accomplished the task we set them of drawing up a plan for the electri-fication of Russia and the restoration of her economy. 
 Wemust now see to it that the workers and peasants shouldrealise how great and difficult this task is, how it mustbe approached and tackled. 
 We must see to it that every factory and every electric power station becomes a centre of enlightenment; if Russia is covered with a dense network of electric power stationsand powerful technical installations, our communist econ-omic development will become a model for a future socialistEurope and Asia. 
 ( Stormy and prolonged applause . 
) 3 REPLY TO THE DEBATE ON THE REPORT ON THE WORK OF THE COUNCIL OF PEOPLE’S COMMISSARS DECEMBER 23 (Applause . 
) Comrades, I must confine myself to a few remarks on the speeches and declarations you have justheard. 
 One of the notes I have received expresses perplexityand asks what is the use of the Congress of Soviets hearingsuch declarations and speeches. 
 I think most of you will disagree with this opinion. 
 It is no doubt always very useful to have a reminder of what some catchwords, now perhapsquite popular—as set forth by certain parties, sectionsof which have just made their declarations—may lead toin the present political situation. 
 Take for example thereasoning of the representative of the Menshevik Party, or to be more exact, a certain section of that party. 
 It is not our fault that the Menshevik Party and the Socialist-Revolutionaries, which still preserve their old titles, con-stitute a conglomeration of heterogeneous parts that areconstantly changing camps, which turns them into volun-tary or involuntary, conscious or unconscious, accomplices of international imperialism. 
 This is evident from their declarations and speeches at this Congress. 
 For example, I have been reproached for advancing a new theory about an impending new period of wars. 
 I neednot go far back into history to show what my statementswere based upon. 
 We have only just finished with Wrangel; but Wrangel’s troops exist somewhere, not very far from the frontiers of our Republic, and are biding their time. 
Therefore, whoever forgets about the danger that is con-stantly threatening us and will never cease as long as world imperialism exists, whoever forgets about this forgets about our working people’s republic. 
 To say to us that we are conducting secret diplomacy; to say that we must wage onlya war of defence, at a time when the sword still hangs overus, when to this day, despite the hundreds of offers we havemade and the incredible concessions we are prepared tomake, not a single big power has concluded peace with us— to say such things means repeating the old phrases of petty-bourgeois pacifism which have long become meaningless. 
If, in the face of these ever actively hostile forces, we pledgedourselves—as we have been advised to do—never to resortto certain actions which from a military-strategical pointof view may prove to be aggressive, we would be, not only fools but criminals. 
 This is whet these pacifist phrases and resolutions lead to. 
 They lead to a situation wherein theSoviets, surrounded by enemies, will be tied hand and footand thrown to the predators of world imperialism to betorn to pieces. 
 When, further, we hear talk about the unity of the pro-letariat and about our disrupting that unity, it is hard not to smile. 
 We in this country have heard about theunity of the proletariat and now see in fact that the unityof the proletariat in the epoch of social revolution canbe achieved only by the extreme revolutionary party ofMarxism, and only through a relentless struggle against all other parties. 
 ( Stormy applause . 
) Further, we are told about the arming of the whole people; we hear the ABC of the old bourgeois-democratic sloganrepeated at a time when a most decisive class struggle israging among the people. 
 Yesterday I had the pleasure of being present—regret-tably, for only a short while—at a small private conference of non-Party peasant delegates to our Congress and I learneda great deal from their discussion of some of the mostburning questions of rural life, the questions of foodsupplies, of their destitution and want, of which you allknow. 
 176 The most striking impression that I obtained from this discussion was the depth of the struggle between the poor peasants—the real toilers—and the kulaks andidlers. 
 The supreme significance of our revolution lies in our having helped the lowest sections in the rural districts, the mass of politically the least educated, the mass of the non-Party peasantry, to raise this fundamental question of the social revolution, not only from the theoreticalbut also from the broad and practical point of view. 
 Inall the villages and hamlets throughout our boundlessSoviet Russia, people are discussing and finding out whobenefits from our political and economic measures. 
 Every-where, even in the most remote villages, people under-stand the problem of the working peasantry and the kulaks. 
Sometimes they accuse each other too heatedly andpassionately, but at any rate they look into the matter andrealise that it is necessary, imperatively necessary, to helpthe working peasant and put him on his feet and to repulse all sorties by the insolent kulaks. 
 The class struggle has become a reality in the rural districts, deep down among the masses of the peasantry;we have been doing all we can to make this struggle a con-scious one. 
 And when, after all this, the leaders of a certainspecial “International” come before us and talk about arming the people, one feels as if one has been transformed into a pupil of a preparatory class on questions of Marx-ism and socialism. 
 To forget about the class strugglewhich is raging all over the world means involuntarilyaiding the imperialists of the whole world against thefighting proletariat. 
 The arming of the people is the slogan of our enemies; we stand on the basis of an armed class; we have achieved victory on this basis, and on it we willalways win. 
 ( Stormy applause . 
) The representatives of the Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries asked how we could think of such a thingas granting concessions without a special referendum, and why we did not make labour equality the corner-stone of our economic policy (in the Socialist-Revolutionaries’resolution this labour equality was called “rule of labour”,while in the Mensheviks’ resolution it was paraphrased andcalled equality between toilers of town and countryside). 
But what else are these phrases about the “rule of labour” but agitation for the trade unions’ independence of the class rule of the proletariat? Jointly with the Mensheviks andSocialist-Revolutionaries, the whole of the West-European bourgeois press is showing concern for, and wailing about, this “independence” of the trade unions. 
 What happened when Martov appeared at the Congress of the Independent Social-Democrats in Halle, where,free of any constraint from the dictatorship of the Bolshe-viks, which he dislikes, he said everything he wanted tosay? A few days later Martov’s speech was published inits entirety, as a titbit, in the most reactionary and impe-rialist newspapers in Britain. 
 These newspapers thanked Citizen Martov for having disclosed the designs of the Bol-sheviks. 
 (Incidentally, over there they use Mr. 
, not Citizenas the form of address. 
) When such speeches are made inthe thick of a world-wide struggle against us, what arethey but a piece of Entente politics? You may, of course, say that such a presentation of your ideas of the rule of labour, etc. 
, is petty-bourgeois nonsense, but in actualfact, I repeat, it is nothing more and nothing less than apiece of Entente politics. 
 Tomorrow, if there is an agentof the Entente present here, your speech will be sent toall the capitalist countries and there printed in millions of copies, so that your speech, Citizen Dan, may mislead and dupe the politically unintelligent section of theEuropean workers. 
 Citizen Dan argued that when I spoke about labour discipline, I was advocating only coercion. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionary Party’s representative was more explicit and said that I advocated compulsion based on persuasion. 
 Our entire policy is a clear reply to this. 
 We do not claimthat we make no mistakes; but please point out these mis-takes and show us better ways of doing things. 
 We have heardnothing like that here. 
 Neither the Mensheviks nor theSocialist-Revolutionaries say: “Here there is want, here there is destitution among the peasants and workers; here is the way to get rid of this poverty. 
” No, they do not sayanything of the kind. 
 They only say that what we are doingis compulsion. 
 Yes, that cannot be denied. 
 But we askyou, Citizen Dan: Are you for or against? That is the es-sence, the crux of the matter. 
 Answer categorically: yes or no? “Neither yes nor no,” is the reply. 
 You see, they only want to talk about the rule of labour, to say that we areencroaching on the freedom of the peasants. 
 But who are the peasants? Does not our Soviet Constitution say that the peasants are toilers, working people? We respect such peasants and regard them as the equals and brothers of the workers. 
 Without such a peasantry we could not take asingle step in our Soviet policy. 
 Between the working peas-antry and the workers there is a fraternal understanding,embodied in our Constitution. 
 But there is another elementin the peasantry, the element that constitutes a vast “Sukharevka”. 
 I hope that any assembly, even of non-Party people, will be able to see that after careful examination. 
Do the profiteering peasants represent the working people?This is the crux of the economic problems in the ruraldistricts. 
 The peasants, as petty proprietors, and the workersare two different classes, and we shall abolish the difference between them when we abolish the basis of small-scale production, and create a new basis of gigantic, large-scale,machine production, as I have already pointed out in myreport. 
 This is economically inevitable, but the Mensheviksand Socialist-Revolutionaries who spoke here came outwith incoherent talk of some kind of labour equality between all the peasants and the workers. 
 These are mere phrases, which are fallacious in terms of economics and arerefuted by scientific Marxism. 
 Take our revolution in Sibe-ria and in Georgia, take the experience of the internationalrevolution, and you will see for yourselves that these reso-nant words about labour equality are false. 
 They are part and parcel of the policy the bourgeoisie is pursuing against us, and nothing more. 
 Dan has asserted here that, in the offices of the Cheka, there is a document to the effect that the Mensheviks are notto come under the October amnesty; from this Citizen Dandraws the conclusion that the Cheka instructs and controls the Presidium of the All-Russia Central Executive Commit-tee. 
 Can we, who are in power, believe a thing like that?Do not the Communists here, who constitute 70 to 80 percent of all delegates, know that the Cheka is headed byComrade Dzerzhinsky, a member of the Central ExecutiveCommittee and of the Central Committee of the Party, and that in the Presidium of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee there are six members of the CentralCommittee of our Party? There are no grounds whatever for believing that, under these circumstances, the Presidium of the Cheka or its Operations Department instructs and runs the Presidium of the Central Executive Committee. 
 That is simply ridiculous. 
 Of course, there is nothing ofinterest in this, and the representative of the MenshevikParty was simply putting on a comedy. 
 I would, however,like you to take up, in a few days’ time, any bourgeoisnewspaper published in Western Europe or America in half a million or a million copies. 
 There you will find printed in the boldest type that Citizen Dan has disclosedthat the Cheka instructs and controls the Presidium ofthe All-Russia Central Executive Committee. 
 4 SPEECH DELIVERE D AT A MEETIN G OF THE R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
 ) GROUP OF THE EIGHT H CONGRES S OF SOVIETS DECEMBE R 24177 Comrades, in the first place I will say a word or two about the wrong construction that has been put on the question of force. 
 To bring out this wrong construction,I shall read three lines from the minutes of the EighthCongress. 
 178 The whole argument against force was connected with the question of the communes. 
 I think that the slightestuse of force in this sphere will be harmful. 
 Attempts havebeen made to apply this argument—i. 
e. 
, that it is foolishto resort to force in establishing communes—to the entirequestion of persuasion and compulsion in general. 
 This is obviously stretching the point, and is wrong. 
 As regards the bill we are introducing and the exchange of opinionsthat has commenced, I must say that I think that the effortto give the question a more Leftist bias is the least business-like. 
 I saw nothing concrete or business-like in the proposalmade by Comrade Khanov, who claimed to belong to the extreme Left. 
 I considered that Comrade Schlichter’s advice to refrain from passing the bill, and leave it to the nextsession of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee todo so, was most reprehensible. 
 We in the Council of People’sCommissars tried to lick the bill into shape as quickly aspossible so that the Congress of Soviets, consisting in the main of representatives from the localities, might adopt a final decision. 
 We are threatened with the danger of beingtoo late in conducting this campaign at district level. 
 To conduct the campaign instructions are needed. 
 It must take at least two or three weeks to draw up such instructions. 
 There can be nothing more injurious than the advice given by Schlichter in his speech on another item of the agenda,regarding the rights of the Gubernia Executive Committees. 
In substance, the bill proposes that practical measures shouldat once be taken to assist individual peasant farming,which is the predominating system, and that this assistance should take the form, not only of encouragement but of compulsion as well. 
 I must say that the bill definitely indicates the meas-ures we have in mind. 
 Clause 11, the most important one,states that the Gubernia Sowing Committees may, underthe direction and control of the People’s Commissariat of Agriculture, issue “compulsory regulations governing the principal methods of mechanical cultivation of the fieldsand of improving meadows, sowing, and the methodsof preserving the natural fertility of the soil”. 
 Where arethese compulsory regulations to come from? The bill goeson to say that the methods mainly employed by the more efficient farmers should be adopted. 
 What methods should we make compulsory by law? Well-known methods ofimproving agriculture—these must be made compulsoryby law and popularised. 
 At the end we read the following:“It is forbidden to introduce regulations and demands:1) that will cause a radical change in peasant farming, unless such regulations and demands are proposed by volost congresses, or unless the state supplies the given localitywith improved implements and means of production;2) that are difficult of fulfilment by the household ofaverage means, and 3) that involve risks. 
” A comrade expressed the opinion that the shortcoming in Comrade Osinsky’s report consisted in its being too practical and specific; this, he said, prevented him frompresenting the problem properly. 
 On the contrary, the mostvaluable feature of Comrade Osinsky’s report was that hetook the bull by the horns and called upon you to set towork and discuss immediate practical questions, such as the question of seeds, of taking measures to prevent seed grain from being consumed. 
 In European Russia this willbe much more difficult than in the extremely rich Altai Region, where, it appears, it is so easy to issue orders. 
 If it is so easy to issue orders there, and if you can achieve practical results by issuing orders, then every gubernia land department—the Altai or any other—will deservethe utmost encouragement. 
 Unfortunately, this is far from being the case in the poorer gubernias of European Russia. 
 Here, the whole taskof the present campaign, like the whole task of our Congress, is to keep this question as far away as possible from all arguments of a general character, which Schlichter andother comrades called upon us to indulge in. 
 I would liketo call for a more practical and business-like presentationof questions, and I welcome the turn which Osinsky hasgiven to the matter. 
 Let us discuss the question of seeds. 
 They will be consumed, unless we do something about preserving them. 
 What is the most practical method of doingthat? They must be stored in the public granaries, and thepeasants must be given guarantees that they will not betied up by red tape and improperly distributed. 
 We mustconvince them that our object at present is to put in the safekeeping of the state the quantity of seeds required to sow all the fields. 
 We shall certainly convince the middlepeasant of this, because it is an obvious necessity. 
 If anyobjection is raised, and if some say that they cannot workfor Tsyurupa, and try to depict him as some sort of beast ofprey, we will say: “Stop joking; give us a straight reply to the question: How do you propose to restore industry?” The peasants must be supplied with agricultural machineryand implements. 
 If the state is to be in a position to meetall requirements and to provide all the necessary agricultu-ral and technical equipment it will need a steadily growingfund. 
 But we are reaching this position very slowly. 
 That is why I think it is wrong to confuse the issue with the tasks of the state farms and collective farms. 
 The collectivefarms are not an immediate problem. 
 I know that the col-lective farms are still in such a state of disorganisation, insuch a deplorable position, that they deserve the nameof alms-houses. 
 I have no objection to the delegates of the Eighth All-Russia Congress impressing on the Council of People’s Commissars or the All-Russia Central ExecutiveCommittee, the necessity of taking special measures to im-prove the work of the All-Russia Union of Land and Forest Workers. 
 In this respect, this union is a bulwark, if only it unites in its ranks real semi-proletarian elements who are capable of helping us to become real business-likeorganisers. 
 I have no objection to that whatever. 
 However, the object of the present bill is a different one. 
 The present condition of the overwhelming majorityof the state farms is below the average. 
 We must base our-selves on the individual peasant; we must take him as he is, and he will remain what he is for some time to come,and so it is no use dreaming about going over to socialismand collectivisation at present. 
 We must drop generalarguments and discuss the first practical steps we musttake this very spring, and no later; only such a presentation of the question will be business-like. 
 To do that, we must at once pass this bill in the form it has been drafted bythe Council of People’s Commissars, introduce the necessarychanges and amendments at once, and not delay mattersfor a moment. 
 As for the socialisation of agricultural implements, I think you are best able to judge what compulsory regula-tions may be issued in the name of the state. 
 I would warnyou against that. 
 We already have a law which grantsthe right to socialise the implements of the rich peasants. 
 179 In the districts where this can be successfully carried out,complete freedom to municipalise these implements is allowed by this law; however, the methods to be used are not always and everywhere fully established. 
 Therefore, tointroduce that into an act whose immediate object is differ-ent would create the danger of scattering our forces insteadof concentrating on the most urgent tasks and whereverpressure may be needed. 
 Let us rather concentrate all our efforts on what is absolutely urgent, on collecting a suffi-cient quantity of seeds at all costs so as to ensure that theentire plan of sowing is carried out, and on introducing,on a mass scale, and wherever the toilers, the poor andmiddle peasants, predominate, improved methods of farm-ing that have been tested by experience. 
 That is the point. 
 The fewer measures of this kind we draw up now, the better, because, by making sure of carrying out a few measures, weshall put on the proper basis the entire machinery for impro-ving agriculture, and thoroughly convince the peasants that the road we have taken is the right one. 
 If, however, we un-dertake more than we can do we shall discredit ourselves in the eyes of the peasants. 
 If there are gubernias where morecan be done by issuing orders, there is nothing to prohibitthat. 
 The bill says: take into account your own peasantexperience; consider what you are able to do in the way ofcollecting livestock and implements. 
 If agricultural imple-ments in good condition are still available in the gubernia, that will be done successfully. 
 However, to apply thelaw in gubernias where the situation in this respect is farworse and where the peasants are unable to carry out suchorders means that the orders will remain a dead letter andwill be left hanging in mid-air, as it were; instead of under-standing the importance of these measures, the peasants will be disappointed, and that is what I fear most of allfor the future. 
 That is why we must first of all start withwhat is absolutely essential, that is, with preserving theseeds. 
 Let us now go over to the measures for improving small-peasant individual farming, which are quite feasible and must be discussed immediately, in detail, and here decreedand made compulsory by law, to be enforced by order andcompulsion, so that what is passed after repeated discus-sion shall be carried out without fail. 
 I would propose thatwe at once set up committees, without waiting until the committees are formed officially at the plenary session of the Congress after the report. 
 This unofficial committeecan be set up at once, or at all events some time today. 
The official committee can be set up later, but it wouldbe a mistake to put this off for a day, or even half a day. 
We have a total of 2,500 delegates, and I think that at least one-tenth of this number have a practical knowledge of this question, after several years of work; if we have 250,that is, over 25 for each district, since our Republic is divid-ed up into nine agricultural districts, I think this numberof representatives is sufficient to enable us to proceed atonce to a discussion of the practical questions, the concrete measures we should adopt. 
 What measures to improve agriculture should be adopted in the various districts? In one district, perhaps, steps may be taken towards compulsory sowing; in another, perhaps, the ground may be prepared for a more vigorous order, like the one proposed by the comrade who investi-gated conditions in the Altai Gubernia only this spring. 
In still another district, perhaps, measures could be taken,with the help of agronomists and non-Party peasants, formore timely ploughing and harrowing. 
 I think we ought atonce to form committees and divide the regions into districts, since the same measures cannot be employed in all districts, and devote a half a day or a day to the discussion of questionsthat are not directly mentioned in the decree, but consti-tute the most important part of the bill. 
 This bill says:appropriate measures should be taken to convince the non-Party peasants. 
 If we are lagging behind in this respect, then, with the mass agitation which we are developing and will develop a hundred times more vigorously andwidely than we have done up to now, we can draw up meas-ures for each district and each gubernia; we shall endeavourto make them successful, and do that no less strenuouslythan we did when we strove to achieve success in our food policy. 
 In the latter case the task was not so complex: we demanded that the peasants yield up a certain quantityof foodstuffs. 
 Here, however, we are demanding that thepeasants introduce on their own farms the changes whichthe state regards as necessary. 
 The chief thing is to makeno mistake in defining these changes. 
 That is the most important thing. 
 The fact that Comrade Kurayev put these questions concretely indicates that he is on the right track;however to go over from this to arguments about the generalplan of collectivisation, the role of the state farms, whichsometimes play a very nasty role, and the Marxist method ofapproach to purchases, means dragging us away from the immediately practical affairs, back to general arguments which may be useful, but not at a Congress of Soviets whichis to pass a law of supreme importance. 
 To prepare theground for this step, we must carefully consider what theactivities and role of the village Soviets should be. 
 Wemust carefully consider whether the chairman of a village Soviet is the person to be consulted, since he is mainly responsible for carrying out these measures among the peas-ants. 
 Will it be useful to combine the functions of chairman of the village Soviet and of chairman of the Committee of Assistance in one person? I am throwing this out as a sug-gestion. 
 I would like the comrades who are familiar with the work at district level to pay careful attention to thisquestion. 
 The Committees of Assistance ought to discusswhat measures should be made compulsory by law. 
 Indiscussing this question there is no need to be afraid ofnon-Party people. 
 We shall carefully weigh all their pro-posals, and we shall know definitely who is for us and who is against us. 
 Clarity must be achieved in every volost andevery village. 
 The demands proposed are quite feasible and,with a certain amount of effort, they can be carried out thisspring. 
 I would propose that this conference of the groupnow adjourn. 
 When you consider that the general debate has ended, we should form committees for the various districts with specific agricultural conditions, and imme-diately proceed to discuss the question. 
 That will be theproper thing to do from the practical point of view, and willensure the success of the bill. 
 5 DRAFT RESOLUTION OF THE EIGHTH CONGRESS OF SOVIETS ON THE REPORT ON ELECTRIFICATION The Eighth All-Russia Congress of Soviets, after hearing the report of the Chairman of the State Commission for the Electrification of Russia, expresses itsthanks, in the first place, to the Presidium of the SupremeCouncil of the National Economy and also to the People’sCommissariat of Agriculture and the People’s Commis-sariat of Railways, and particularly to the Commission for the Electrification of Russia for their work in drawing upthe plan for the electrification of Russia. 
 The Congress instructs the All-Russia Central Executive Committee, the Council of People’s Commissars, the Coun-cil of Labour and Defence, the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the National Economy and also the other People’s Commissariats to complete the elaboration of this plan andto endorse it without fail at the earliest date. 
 The Congress further instructs the government and re-quests the All-Russia Central Council of Trade Unions andthe All-Russia Congress of Trade Unions to take all measures to conduct the widest possible propaganda for this plan and to make the broadest sections of the population intown and countryside familiar with it. 
 The study of thisplan must be introduced into all educational establishmentsin the Republic without exception; every electric powerstation and every tolerably well organised factory and state farm must become a centre for teaching the principles of electricity and modern industry, a centre of propagandafor the plan of electrification, and of its systematic study. 
 All persons possessing sufficient scientific or practical knowledge must be mobilised for the purpose of conducting propaganda for the electrification plan and for imparting to others the knowledge necessary to understand it. 
 The Congress expresses its firm conviction that all Soviet institutions, all Soviets, and all industrial workers andworking peasants will exert every effort and shrink from nosacrifice to carry out the plan for the electrification of Russia at all costs, and despite all obstacles. 
 Published according to the manuscript 6 DRAFT RESOLUTION OF THE R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) GROUP OF THE EIGHTH CONGRESS OF SOVIETS It is obligatory upon all members of the R. 
C. 
P. 
, by the time the Tenth Congress of the R. 
C. 
P. 
 is held (February 6, 1921): 1) to make the fullest possible study of the plan of elec-trification; 2) to take measures to ensure the widest and most detailed study of the local plan in every district; 3) to draw up, for the Tenth Congress of the R. 
C. 
P. 
, practical proposals: for methods of making all working people more widely familiar with the plan of electrification, as well as for ways and means of immediately proceeding with the practical fulfilment of this plan in all its aspects. 
 Published according to the manuscript LETTER TO THE WORKERS OF RED PRESNYA DISTRICT OF MOSCOW DECEMBER 25, 1920 Fifteen years ago the proletariat of Moscow raised the banner of revolt against tsarism. 
180 This was the culmination in the development of the first working-class revolutionagainst tsarism. 
 The workers suffered defeat and workers’blood was shed in Presnya District. 
 The unmatched heroismof the Moscow workers provided the toiling masses of Russia with a model in the struggle. 
 However, the masses were then as yet too unprepared and too divided, and did notgive support to the heroes of Presnya District and Moscow,who had risen up in an armed struggle against the tsaristmonarchy of landowners. 
 The defeat of the Moscow workers was followed by the defeat of the first revolution. 
 For twelve long years the most ferocious reaction maintained by the landownerstormented all the workers and peasants, all the peoples ofRussia. 
 The exploit of the Presnya workers was not useless. 
 Their sacrifices were not in vain. 
 The first breach was made in the edifice of the tsarist monarchy, a breach that slowly but steadily grew wider and undermined the old andmedieval order. 
 The exploit of the Moscow workers deeply agitated the urban and rural working masses, a frame of mind whoseimpress has persisted despite all persecution. 
 Prior to the armed uprising of December 1905, the people of Russia had proved incapable of a mass armed struggleagainst the exploiters. 
 The December events brought about profound changes in the people. 
 It became transformed. 
 It had gone through its baptism of fire. 
 It had become steeled in the insurrection, and brought forth numerous fighters who triumphed in1917 and today—despite immense difficulties, the tormentsof famine, and the destruction caused by the imperialistwar—are defending the cause of socialism’s world-widevictory. 
 Long live the workers of Red Presnya District, a detachment in the vanguard of the world working-class revolution! N. 
 Lenin Daily Bulletin of the Eighth Published according to All-Russia Congress of Soviets the Bulletin text No. 
 5, December 25, 1920 NOTES 1 2 3 4“Left-Wing ” Communism—an Infantile Disorder was written by Lenin in April, and the appendix—on May 12, 1920. 
 It came out on June 8-10, in Russian and almost simultaneously in July in German, English and French. 
 Lenin gave personal attention to the book’s type-setting and printing schedule so that it should be published before the opening of the Second Congress of the Communist International, each delegate receiving a copy. 
 Between July and November 1920, the book was re-published in Leipzig, Paris and London, in the German, French and English languages respectively. 
 The manuscript of the book is subtitled: “An Attempt to Con-. 
 duct a Popular Discussion on Marxist Strategy and Tactics. 
” This subtitle was deleted in all editions published in Lenin’s lifetime. 
 In the fourth (Russian) edition of Lenin’s Works , “Left-Wing ” Communism—an Infantile Disorder is published according to the first edition, the proofs of which were read by Lenin him-self. 
 p. 
 17 The old Iskra —the first illegal Marxist newspaper in Russia. 
 It was founded by V. 
 I. 
 Lenin in 1900, and played a decisive role in the formation of revolutionary Marxist party of the working class in Russia. 
 Iskra ’s first issue appeared in Leipzig in December 1900, the following issues being brought out in Munich, and then beginning with July 1902—in London, and after the spring of 1903—in Geneva. 
 On Lenin’s initiative and with his participation, the editorial staff drew up a draft of the Party’s Programme (published in Iskra No. 
 21), and prepared the Second Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, at which the Russian revolutionary Marxist party was actually founded. 
 Soon after the Second Congress, the Mensheviks, supported by Plekhanov, won control of Iskra . 
 Beginning with issue No. 
 52, Iskra ceased to be an organ of the revolutionary Marxists. 
 p. 
 22 The reference is to the Mensheviks (who formed the Right and opportunist wing of Social-Democracy in the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
), and to the Socialist-Revolutionaries. 
 p. 
 26 The reference is to the Bolshevik deputies to the Fourth Duma, namely, A. 
 Y. 
 Badayev, M. 
 K. 
 Muranov, G. 
 I. 
 Petrovsky, F. 
 N. 
 Samoilov and N. 
 R. 
 Shagov. 
 At the Duma’s session of July 26 (August 8), 1914, at which the representatives of all the bour-geois-landowner Duma groups approved tsarist Russia’s entry into the imperialist war, the Bolshevik Duma group declared firm protest: they refused to vote for war credits and launched revolutionary propaganda among the people. 
 In November 1914 the Bolshevik deputies were arrested, in February 1915 they were brought to trial, and exiled for life to Turukhansk Territory in Eastern Siberia. 
 The courageous speeches made by the Bolshevik deputies at their trial, exposing the autocracy, played an im-portant part in anti-war propaganda and in revolutionising the toiling masses. 
 p. 
 29 Longuetism —the Centrist trend within the French Socialist Party, headed by Jean Longuet. 
 During the First World War of 1914-18, the Longuetists conducted a policy of conciliation with the social-chauvinists. 
 They rejected the revolutionary struggle and came out for “defence of country” in the imperialist war. 
 Lenin called them petty-bourgeois nationalists. 
 After the victory of the October Socialist Revolution in Russia, the Longuetists called themselves supporters of the proletarian dictatorship, but in fact they remained opposed to it. 
 In December 1920 the Longuetists, together with the avowed reformists, broke away from the Party and joined the so-called Two-and-a-Half International. 
 p. 
 29 Fabians —members of the Fabian Society, a British reformist organisation founded in 1884. 
 The membership consisted, in the main, of bourgeois intellectuals. 
 The Fabians denied the necessity of the proletariat’s class struggle and the socialist revolution, and contended that the transition from capitalism to socialism was possible only through petty reforms and the gradual reorgani-sation of society. 
 In 1900 the Fabian Society joined the Labour Party. 
 The Fabians are characterised by Lenin in “British Paci-ism and British Dislike of Theory” (see present edition, Vol. 
 21, pp. 
 260-65) and elsewhere. 
 p. 
 29 The Independent Labour Party of Britain (I. 
L. 
P. 
)—a reformist organisation founded in 1893 by leaders of the “new trade unions”, in conditions of a revival of the strike struggle and the mounting movement for British working-class independence of the bourgeois parties. 
 The I. 
L. 
P. 
 included members of the “new trade unions” and those of a number of the old trade unions, as well as intellec-tuals and Petty bourgeoisie who were under the influence of the Fabians. 
 The I. 
L. 
P. 
 was headed by James Keir Hardie and Ram-say MacDonald. 
 From its very inception, the I. 
L. 
P. 
 took a bour-geois-reformist stand, laying particular stress on parliamentary forms of struggle and parliamentary deals with the Liberals. 
 Lenin wrote of the I. 
L. 
P. 
 that “in reality it is an opportunist party always dependent on the bourgeoisie”. 
 p. 
 29 Ministerialism (or “ministerial socialism”, or else Millerandism)— the opportunist tactic of socialists’ participation in reactionary bourgeois governments. 
 The term appeared when in 1899, the5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13French socialist Millerand joined the bourgeois government of Waldeck-Rousseau. 
 p. 
 30 The Independent Social-Democratic Party of Germany —a Centrist party founded in April 1917. 
 A split took place at the Congress of the Independent Social-Democratic Party, held in Halls in October 1920, the majority joining the Communist Party of Germany in December 1920. 
 The Right wing formed a separate party, retaining the old name of the Independent Social-Democratic Party. 
 In 1922 the “Inde-pendents” rejoined the German Social-Democratic Party. 
 p. 
 30 Lenin is referring probably to his article “What Should Not Be Copied from the German Labour Movement”, published in the Bolshevik magazine Prosveshcheniye in April 1914 (see present edition, Vol. 
 20, pp. 
 254-58). 
 Here Lenin exposed the treacherous behaviour of Karl Legien, the German Social-Democrat who in 1912, in addressing the Congress of the U. 
S. 
A. 
, praised U. 
S. 
 official circles and bourgeois parties. 
 p. 
 34 Spartacists —members of the Spartacus League founded in January 1916, during the First World War, under the leadership of Karl Liebknecht, Rosa Luxemburg, Franz Mehring and Clara Zetkin. 
 The Spartacists conducted revolutionary anti-war propa-ganda among the masses, and exposed the expansionist policy of German imperialism and the treachery of the Social-Democratic leaders. 
 However, the Spartacists—the German Left wing—did not get rid of their semi-Menshevik errors on the most important questions of theory and tactics. 
 A criticism of the German Left-wing’s mistakes is given in Lenin’s works “On Junius’s Pamphlet” (see present edition, Vol. 
 22, pp. 
 297-305), “A Carica-ture of Marxism and Imperialist Economism” (see Vol. 
 23, pp. 
 28-76) and elsewhere. 
 In April 1917, the Spartacists joined the Centrist Independent Social-Democratic Party of Germany, preserving their organisa-tional independence. 
 After the November 1918 revolution in Germany, the Spartacists broke away from the “Independents”, and in December of the same year founded the Communist Party of Germany. 
 p. 
 34 The reference is to Frederick Engels’s letter to August Bebel, written on March 18-28, 1875. 
 p. 
 34 The Treaty of Brest-Litovsk was signed between Soviet Russia and the powers of the Quadruple Alliance (Germany, Austria-Hungary, Bulgaria and Turkey) on March 3, 1918, at Brest-Litovsk and ratified on March 15 by the Fourth (Extraordinary) All-Russia Congress of Soviets. 
 The peace terms were very harsh for Soviet Russia. 
 According to the treaty, Poland, almost all the Baltic states, and part of Byelorussia were placed under the control of Germany and Austria-Hungary. 
 The Ukraine was 14 *separated from Soviet Russia, becoming a state dependent on Germany. 
 Turkey gained control of the cities of Kars, Batum and Ardagan. 
 In August 1918, Germany imposed on Soviet Russia a supplementary treaty and a financial agreement containing now and exorbitant demands. 
 The signing of the Peace of Brest-Litovsk was linked with a persistent struggle against Trotsky and the anti-Party group of “Left-wing Communists”. 
 It was only through great efforts on the part of Lenin that the peace treaty with Germany was signed. 
 The Peace of Brest-Litovsk was a splendid instance of the wisdom and flexibility of Lenin’s tactics and skill in working out the only correct policy in an extremely complex situation. 
 The treaty was a reasonable political compromise. 
 It gave the Soviet state a breathing-space, an opportunity to disband the old decaying army and create the new Red Army, develop socialist construction, and muster strength for the struggle against the counter-revolution at home and military intervention by other countries. 
 The signing of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk promoted the struggle for peace among the broad masses of all the warring nati-ons. 
 On November 13, 1918, following the November revolution in Germany, which overthrew the monarchist regime, the All-Russia Central Executive Committee annulled the predatory Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. 
 p. 
 35 The reference is to the otzovists * and ultimatumists, the struggle against whom developed in 1908, and in 1909 resulted in the expulsion of A. 
 Bogdanov, the otzovist leader, from the Bolshe-vik Party. 
 Behind a screen of revolutionary phrases, the otzovists demanded the recall of the Social-Democrat deputies from the Third Duma and the cessation of activities in legal organisations such as the trade unions, the co-operatives, etc. 
 Ultimatumism was a variety of otzovism. 
 The ultimatumists did not realise the necessity of conducting persistent day-by-day work with the Social-Democrat deputies, so as to make them consistent revolu-tionary parliamentarians. 
 They proposed that an ultimatum should be presented to the Social-Democratic group in the Duma, demand-ing their absolute subordination to decisions of the Party’s Cen-tral Committee, should the deputies fail to comply, they were to be recalled from the Duma. 
 A conference of the enlarged editorial board of the Bolshevik paper Proletary , held in June 1909, pointed out in its decision that “Bolshevism, as a definite trend in the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, had nothing in common either with otzovism or with ultimatumism”. 
 The conference urged the Bolsheviks “to wage a most resolute struggle against these deviations from the path of revolutionary Marxism” ( KPSS v rezolutsiyakh i resheniyakk syezdou , konferentsii i plenumov TsK [The C. 
P. 
 S. 
U. 
 in the Resolutions and Decisions of Its Congresses , Conferences and Ple-nums of the Central Committee ], Part I, 1954, p. 
 221). 
 p. 
 35 The term otzorist derives from the Russian verb “otozvat”, meaning “to re-call”. 
— Ed. 
 15 16 17On August 6 (19), 1905, tsar’s manifesto was made public, proclaiming the law on the setting up of the Duma and the elec-tion procedures. 
 This body was known as the Bulygin Duma, after A. 
 G. 
 Bulygin, the Minister of the Interior, whom the tsar entrusted with drawing up the Duma draft. 
 According to the latter, the Duma had no legislative functions, but could merely discuss certain questions as a consultative body under the tsar. 
 The Bolsheviks called upon the workers and peasants to actively boycott the Bulygin Duma, and concentrate all agitation on the slogans of an armed uprising, a revolutionary army, and a provi-sional revolutionary government. 
 The boycott campaign against the Bulygin Duma was used by the Bolsheviks to mobilise all the revolutionary forces, organise mass political strikes, and prepare for an armed uprising. 
 Elections to the Bulygin Duma were not held and the government was unable to convene it. 
 The Duma was swept away by the mounting tide of the revolution and the all-Russia October political strike of 1905. 
 p. 
 35 Lenin is referring to the all-Russia October political strike of 1905 , during the first Russian revolution. 
 This strike, which involved over two million people, was conducted under the slogan of the overthrow of the tsarist autocracy, an active boycott of the Bulygin Duma, the summoning of a Constituent Assembly and the establishment of a democratic republic. 
 The all-Russia political strike showed the strength of the working-class move-ment, fostered the development of the revolutionary struggle in the countryside, the army and the navy. 
 The October strike led the proletariat to the December armed uprising. 
 Concerning the October strike, see the article by V. 
 I. 
 Lenin “The All-Russia Political Strike” (present edition, Vol. 
 9, pp. 
 392-95). 
 p. 
 35 The “ opposition on principle ”—a group of German Left-wing Communists advocating anarcho-syndicalist views. 
 When the Second Congress of the Communist Party of Germany, which was held in Heidelberg in October 1919, expelled the opposition, the latter formed the so-called Communist Workers’ Party of Germany, in April 1920. 
 To facilitate the unification of all Ger-man communist forces and win over the finest proletarian elements in the C. 
W. 
P. 
G. 
, the opposition was temporarily admitted into the Communist International in November 1920 with the rights of a sympathising member. 
 However, the Executive Committee of the Communist Inter-national still considered the United Communist Party of Germany to be the only authoritative section of the Comintern. 
 C. 
W. 
P. 
G. 
’s representatives were admitted into the Comintern on the condition that they merged with the United Communist Party of Germany and supported all its activities. 
 The C. 
W. 
P. 
G. 
 leaders, however, failed to observe these conditions. 
 The Third Congress of the Communist International, which was held in June-July 1921, and wanted solidarity with workers who still followed the C. 
W. 
P. 
G. 
 leaders, resolved to give the C. 
W. 
P. 
G. 
 two months to 18 19 20 21call a congress and settle the question of affiliation. 
 The C. 
W. 
P. 
G. 
 leaders did not obey the Third Congress’s resolution and thus placed themselves outside the Communist International. 
 Later the C. 
W. 
P. 
G. 
 degenerated into a small sectarian group without any support in the working class. 
 p. 
 39 Horner , Karl —Anton Pannekoek. 
 p. 
 43 Kommunistische Arbeiterzeitung (The Communist Workers’ Newspaper)—organ of the anarcho-syndicalist group of the German Left-wing Communists (see Note 17). 
 The newspaper was published in Hamburg from 1919 till 1927. 
 Karl Erler, who is mentioned by V. 
 I. 
 Lenin, was Heinrich Laufenberg’s pen-name. 
 p. 
 43 The reference is to the League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class organised by V. 
 I. 
 Lenin in the autumn of 1895. 
 The League of Struggle united about twenty Marxist circles in St. 
 Petersburg. 
 It was headed by the Central Group including V. 
 I. 
 Lenin, A. 
 A. 
 Vaneyev, P. 
 K. 
 Zaporozhets, G. 
 M. 
 Krzhizhanovsky, N. 
 K. 
 Krupskaya, L. 
 Martov, M. 
 A. 
 Silvin, V. 
 V. 
 Starkov, and others; five mernbers headed by V. 
 I. 
 Lenin directed the League’s activities. 
 The organisation was divided into district groups. 
 Progressive workers such as I. 
 V. 
 Babushkin, V. 
 A. 
 Shelgunov and others linked these groups with the factories. 
 The St. 
 Petersburg League of Struggre far the Emancipation of the Working Class was, in V. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s words, the embryo of a revolutionary party based on the working-class movement and giving leadership to the class struggle of the proletariat. 
 p. 
 45 The Congress was held in Moscow from March 29 to April 5, 1920. 
 The Ninth Congress was more numerous than any previous Party congresses. 
 It was attended by 715 delegates—553 of them with full votes, and 162 with deliberative votes representing a mem-bership of 611,978. 
 Represented were the Party organisations of Central Russia, the Ukraine, the Urals, Siberia and other regions recently liberated by the Red Army. 
 Many of the delegates came to the Congress straight from the front. 
 The agenda of the Congress was as follows: 1. 
 The report of the Central Committee. 
 2. 
 The immediate tasks of economic construction. 
 3. 
 The trade union movement. 
 4. 
 Organisational questions. 
 5. 
 The tasks of the Communist International. 
 6. 
 The attitude towards the co-operatives. 
 7. 
 The change-over to the militia system. 
 8. 
 Elections to the Central Committee. 
 9. 
 Miscellaneous. 
 The Congress was held under the guidance of V. 
 I. 
 Lenin, who was the main speaker on the political work of the Central Commit-tee and replied to the debate on the report. 
 He also spoke on economic construction and co-operation, made the speech at the closing of the Congress, and submitted a proposal on the list of candidates to the Party’s Central Committee. 
 In the resolution “The Immediate Tasks of Economic Devel-opment” the Congress noted that “the basic condition of eco-nomic rehabilitation of the country is a steady implementa-tion of the single economic plan for the coming historical epoch” (KPSS v rezolutsiyakh i resheniyakh syezdov , konferentsii i plenu-mov TsK [The C. 
P. 
 S. 
U. 
 in the Resolutions and Decisions of Its Congresses , Conferences and Plenums of the Central Committee ], Part I, 1954, p. 
 478). 
 The kingpin of the single economic plan was electrification, which V. 
 I. 
 Lenin considered a great pro-gramme for a period of 10 to 20 years. 
 The directives of the Ninth Congress were the basis of the plan conclusively drawn up by the State Commission for the Electrification of Russia (the GOELRO plan) and approved by the All-Russia Congress of Soviets in December 1920. 
 The Congress paid particular attention to the organisation of industrial management. 
 The resolution on this question called for the establishment of competent, firm and energetic one-man management. 
 Taking its guidance from Lenin, the Congress especially stressed the necessity to extensively enlist old and experienced experts. 
 The anti-Party group of Democratic Centralists, consisting of Sapronov, Osinsky, V. 
 Smirnov and others, came out against the Party line. 
 Behind a cover of phrases about Democratic Cen-tralism but in fact distorting that principle, they denied the need for one-man management at factories, came out against strict Party and state discipline, and alleged that the Central Committee did not give effect to the principle of collective leadership. 
 The group of Democratic Centralists was supported at the Con-gress br Rykov, Tomsky, Milyutin and Lomov. 
 The Congress rebuffed the Democratic Centralists and rejected their proposals. 
 The Congress gave special attention to labour emulation and communist Subbotniks . 
 To stimulate such emulation, the exten-sive application of the bonus system of wages was recommended. 
 The Congress resolved that May 1, the international proletarian holiday, which in 1920 fell on Saturday, should be a mass Subbot-nik organised throughout Russia An important place in the work of the Congress was held by the question of trade unions, which was considered from the viewpoint of adapting the entire work of the trade unions to the accomplish-ment of the economic tasks. 
 In a resolution on this question, the Congress distinctly defined the trade unions’ role, their rela-tions with the state and the Party, forms and methods of guidance of trade unions by the Communist Party, as well as forms of their participation in commumst construction. 
 The Congress decisively rebuffed the anarcho-syndicalist elements (Shlyapnikov, Lozov-sky, Tomsky and Lutovinov), who advocated the “independence” of the trade unions and contraposed them to the Communist Party and the Soviet government. 
 At a closed meeting held on April 4, the Congress elected a new Central Committee of 19 members and 12 candidate members. 
 The former included V. 
 I. 
 Lenin, A. 
 A. 
 Andreyev, F. 
 E. 
 Dzerzhin-sky, M. 
 I. 
 Kalinin, Y. 
 E. 
 Rudzutak, F. 
 A. 
 Sergeyev (Artyom), and J. 
 V. 
 Stalin. 
 On April 5 the Congress concluded its work. 
 p. 
 45 22 23 24 25Between the February 1917 Revolution and 1919 inclusively, the Party’s membership changed as follows: by the Seventh All-Russia Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
) (April 1917) the Party numbered 80,000 members; by the Sixth R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
) Congress in July-August 1917—about 240,000; by the Seventh Congress of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) in March 1918—not less than 270,000; by the Eighth Congress of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) in March 1919— 313,766 members. 
 p. 
 47 The reference is to Party Week , which was held in accordance with the resolution of the Eighth Congress of thc R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) on building up the Party’s membership. 
 The Party Week was conducted in conditions of the bitter struggle waged by the Soviet state against the foreign intervention and domestic counter-revo-lution. 
 Party Week was first held in the Petrograd organisation of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
), August 10-17, 1919 (the second Party Week was held in Petrograd in October-November 1919); between Sep-tember 20 and 28 a Party Week was held in the Moscow Gubernia organisation. 
 Summarising the experience of the first Party Weeks, the Plenum of the Central Committee of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
), held on September 26, 1919, resolved that Party Weeks should be held in cities, the countryside and the army. 
 At the end of September, the Central Committee addressed a circular to all Party organi-sations pointing out that, as the re-registration and purge of the membership had been accomplished in almost all Party organisa-tions, new members might be enrolled. 
 The Central Committeestressed that during Party Weeks only industrial workers, peasants, and Red Army and Navy men should be admitted into the Party. 
 As a result of Party Weeks, over 200,000 joined the Party in 38 gubernias of the European part of the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
, more than a half of them being industrial workers. 
 Over 25 per cent of the armed forces’ strength joined the Party at the fronts. 
 p. 
 47 See present edition, Vol. 
 30, pp. 
 253-75. 
 p. 
 52The Communist International —a journal, organ of the Executive Committee of the Communist International. 
 It was published in Russian, German, French, English, Spanish and Chinese, the first issue appearing on May 1, 1919. 
 The journal published theoretical articles and documents of the Comintern, including a number of articles by Lenin. 
 It eluci-dated the fundamental questions of Marxist-Leninist theory in connection with problems confronting the international ~orking-class and communist movement and the experience of socialist construction in the Soviet Union. 
 It also waged a struggle against various anti-Leninist tendencies. 
 Publication of the journal ceased in June 1943 in connection with the resolution adopted by the Presidium of the Comintern’s Executive Committee on May 15, 1943, on the dissolution of the Communist International. 
 p. 
 52 26 27 28See Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1965, p. 
 110. 
 p. 
 53 The Industrial Workers of the World (I. 
W. 
W. 
 )—a workers’ trade union organisation, founded in the U. 
S. 
A. 
 in 1905, and in the main organising unskilled and low-paid workers of various trades. 
 Among its founders were such working-class leaders as Daniel De Leon, Eugene Debs and William Haywood. 
 I. 
W. 
W. 
 organisa-tions were also set up in Canada, Australia, Britain, Latin Amer-ica and South Africa. 
 In conditions of the mass strike movement in the U. 
S. 
A. 
, which developed under the influence of the Russian revolution of 1905-07, the I. 
W. 
W. 
 organised a number of success-ful mass strikes, waged a struggle against the policy of class collaboration conducted by reformist leaders of the American Federation of Labor and Right-wing socialists. 
 During the First World War of 1914-18, the organisation led a number of mass anti-war actions by the American working class. 
 Some I. 
W. 
W. 
 leaders, among them William Haywood, welcomed the Great October Socialist Revolution and joined the Communist Party of the U. 
S. 
A. 
 At the same time, anarcho-syndicalist features showed up in I. 
W. 
W. 
 activities: it did not recognise the proletariat’s political struggle, denied the Party’s leading role and the necessity of the proletarian dictatorship, and refused to carry on work among the membership of the American Federation of Labor. 
 In 1920 the organisation’s anarcho-syndicalist leaders took advantage of the imprisonment of many revolutionaries and, against the will of the trade union masses, rejected appeal by the Comintern’s Executive Committee that they join the Communist International. 
 As a result of the leaders’ opportunist policy, the I. 
W. 
W. 
 degener-ated into a sectarian organisation, which soon lost all influence on the working-class movement. 
 p. 
 54 From its foundation in 1892, the Italian Socialist Party saw a bitter ideological struggle between the opportunist and the revolutionary trends within it. 
 At the Reggio Emilia Congress of 1912, the most outspoken reformists who supported the war and collaboration with the government and the bourgeoisie (Ivanoe Bonomi, Leonida Bissorati and others) were expelled from the party under pressure from the Left wing. 
 After the outbreak of the First World War and prior to Italy’s entry into it, the I. 
S. 
P. 
 came out against the war and advanced the slogan: “Against war, for neutrality!” In December 1914, a group of renegades including Benito Mussolini, who advocated the bourgeoisie’s imperialist policy and supported the war, were expelled from the party. 
 When Italy entered the war on the Entente’s side (May 1915), three distinct trends emerged in the Italian Socialist Party: 1) the Right wing, which aided the bourgeoisie in the conduct of the war; 2) the Centre, which united most of party members and came out under the slogan: “No part in the war, and no sabotage of the war” and 3) the Left wing, which took a firmer anti-war stand, but could not organise a consistent struggle 29against the war. 
 Tho Left wing did not realise the necessity of converting the imperialist war into a civil war, and of a decisive break with the reformists. 
 After the October Socialist Revolution in Russia, the Left wing of the I. 
S. 
P. 
 grew stronger, and the 16th Party Congress held on October 5-8, 1919, in Bologna, adopted a resolution on affiliation to the Third International. 
 I. 
S. 
P. 
 representatives took part in the work of the Second Congress of the Comintern. 
 After the Congress Centrist Serrati, head of the delegation, declared against a break with the reformists. 
 At the 17th Party Congress in Leghorn in January 1921, the Centrists, who were in the majority, refused to break with the reformists and to accept all the terms of admission into the Comintern. 
 On January 21, 1921, the Left-wing delegates walked out of the Congress and founded the Communist Party of Italy. 
 p. 
 66 Soviet rule was established in Hungary on March 21, 1919. 
 The socialist revolution in Hungary was a peaceful one, the Hungar-ian bourgeoisie being unable to resist the people. 
 Incapable of overcoming its internal and external difficulties, it decided to hand over power for a while to the Right-wing Social-Democrats so as to prevent the development of the revolution. 
 However, the Hungarian Communist Party’s prestige had grown so great, and the demands of rank-and-file Social-Democrats for unity with the Communists had become so insistent that the leaders of the Social-Democratic Party proposed to the arrested Commu-nist leaders the formation of a joint government. 
 The Social-Demo-cratic leaders were obliged to accept the terms advanced by the Communists during the negotiations, i. 
e. 
, the formation of a Soviet government, disarmament of the bourgeoisie, the creation of a Red Army and people’smilitia, confiscation of the landed estates, the nationalisation of industry, an alliance with Soviet Russia, etc. 
 An agreement was simultaneously signed on the merging of the two parties to form the Hungarian Socialist Party. 
 While the two parties were being merged, errors were made which later became clear. 
 The merger was carried out mechanically, without isolation of the reformist elements. 
 At its first meeting, the Revolutionary Governmental Council adopted a resolution on the formation of the Red Army. 
 On March 26, the Soviet Government of Hungary issued decrees on the nation-alisation of industrial enterprises, transport, and the banks; on April 2, a decree was published on the monopoly of foreign trade. 
 Workers’ wages were increased by an average of 25 per cent, and an 8-hour working day was introduced. 
 On April 3, land-reform law was issued, by which all estates exceeding 57 hectares in area were confiscated. 
 The confiscated land, however, was not distributed among the land-starved and landless peasants, but was turned over to agricultural producers’ co-operatives and state farms organised after the reform. 
 The poor peasants, who had hoped to get land, were disappointed. 
 This prevented the estab-30 31 32 33lishment of a firm alliance between the proletariat and the peasantry, and weakened Soviet power in Hungary. 
 The Entente imperialists instituted an economic blockade of the Soviet Republic. 
 Armed intervention against the Hungarian Soviet RepubIic was organised, the advance of interventionist troops stirring up the Hungarian counter-revolutionaries. 
 The treachery of the Right-wing Social-Democrats, who entered into an alliance with international imperialism, was one of the causes of the Hungarian Soviet Republic’s downfall. 
 The unfavourable international situation in the summer of 1919, when Soviet Russia was encircled by enemies and therefore could not help the Hungarian Soviet Republic, also played a definite role. 
 On August 1, 1919, as a result of joint actions by the foreign imierialist interventionists and the domestic counter-revolutionaries, Soviet power in Hungary was overthrown. 
 p. 
 66 See Marx/Engels, Werke , Dietz Verlag, Berlin, 1962, Bd. 
 18, S. 
 533. 
 p. 
 67 The League of Nations was an international body which existed between the First and the Second World Wars. 
 It was founded in 1919 at the Paris Peace Conference of the victor powers of the First World War. 
 The Covenant of the League of Nations formed part of the Treaty of Versailles of 1919, and was signed by 44 nations. 
 The Covenant was designed to produce the impression that this organisation’s aim was to combat aggression, reduce armaments, and consolidate peace and security. 
 In practice, however, its leaders shielded the aggressors, fostered the arms race and prepa-rations for the Second World War. 
 Between 1920 and 1934, the League’s activities were hostile towards the Soviet Union. 
 It was one of the centres for the organis-ing of armed intervention against the Soviet state in 1920-21. 
 On September 15, 1934, on French initiative, 34 member states invited the Soviet Union to join the League of Nations, which the U. 
S. 
S. 
R. 
 did, with the aim of strengthening peace. 
 However, the Soviet Union’s attempts to form a peace front met with resis-tance from reactionary circles in the Western powers. 
 With the out-break of the Second World War the League’s activities came to an end, the formal dissolution taking place in April 1946, accord-ing to a decision by the specially summoned Assembly. 
 p. 
 69 Lenin is referring to a passage from Frederick Engels’s letter to F. 
 A. 
 Sorge of November 29, 1886, in which, criticising German Social-Democrat political exiles living in America, Engels wrote that for them the theory was “a credo, not a guide to action” (see Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1965, p. 
 395). 
 p. 
 71 The reference is to the international socialist conferences in Zimmerwald and Kienthal (Switzerland). 
 34 35The Zimmerwald Conference , the first international socialist conference, was held on September 5-8, 1915. 
 The Kienthal Con-ference , the second international socialist conference, was held in the small town of Kienthal on April 24-30, 1916. 
 The Zimmerwald and Kienthal conferences contributed to the ideological unity, on the basis of Marxism-Leninism, of the Left-wing elements in West-European Social-Democracy, who later played an active part in the formation of Communist parties in their countries and the establishment of the Third, Communist International. 
 p. 
 72 “Revolutionary Communists ”—a Narodnik group which broke away from the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries after the latter’s mutiny in July 1918. 
 In September 1918, they formed the “Party of Revolutionary Communism”, which favoured co-operation with the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
), and pledged support for Soviet power. 
 Their programme, which remained on the platform of Narodnik utopianism, was muddled and eclectic. 
 While recognising that Soviet rule created preconditions for the establishment of a social-ist system, the “revolutionary communists” denied the neccssity of the proletarian dictatorship during the transitional period from capitalism to socialism. 
 Throughout the lifetime of the “Party of Revolutionary Communism ”, certain of its groups broke away from it, some of them joining the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) (A. 
 Ko-legayev, A. 
 Bitsenko, M. 
 Dobrokhotov and others), and others, the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries. 
 Two representatives of the “Party of Revolutionary Communism” were allowed to attend the Second Congress of the Comintern, in a deliberative capacity, but with no votes. 
 In September 1920, following the Congress decision that there must be a single Communist Party in each country, the “Party of Revolutionary Communism” decided to join the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
). 
 In October of the same year, the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) Cen-tral Committee permitted Party organisations to enrol members of the former “Party of Revolutionary Communism” in the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
). 
 p. 
 72 The British Socialist Party was founded in 1911, in Manchester, as a result of a merger of the Social-Democratic Party and other socialist groups. 
 The B. 
S. 
P. 
 conducted agitation in the spirit of Marxism; it was “not opportunist and was really independent of the Liberals” (see present edition, Vol. 
 19, p. 
 273). 
 However, its small membership and its poor links with the masses gave the B. 
S. 
P. 
 a somewhat sectarian character. 
 During the First World War, a bitter struggle developed within the British Socialist Party between the internationalists (William Gallacher, Albert Inkpin, John Maclean, Theodore Rothstein and others), and the social-chauvinists, headed by Hyndman. 
 Within the inter-nationalist trend were inconsistent elements that took a Centrist stand on a number of issues. 
 In February 1916, a group of B. 
S. 
P. 
 leaders founded the newspaper The Call , which played an impor-tant role in uniting the internationalists. 
 The B. 
S. 
P. 
’s annual 36 37 38conference, held in Salford in April 1916, condemned the social-chauvinist stand of Hyndman and his supporters, who, after the conference, left the party. 
 The British Socialist Party welcomed the Great October Social-ist Revolution, its members playing an important part in the “Hands Off Russia” movement. 
 In 1919, the overwhelming majority of its organisations (98 against 4) declared for affiliation to the Communist International. 
 The British Socialist Party, together with the Communist Unity Group formed the core of the Commu-nist Party of Great Britain. 
 At the First (Unity) Congress, held in 1920, the vast majority of B. 
S. 
P. 
 local organisations entered the Communist Party. 
 p. 
 77 The Socialist Labour Party was organised in 1903 by a group of the Left-wing Social-Democrats who had broken away from the Social-Democratic Federation. 
 The South Wales Socialist Society was a small group consisting mostly of Welsh coal miners. 
 The Workers ’ Socialist Federation was a small organisation which emerged from the Women’s Suffrage League and consisted mostly of women. 
 The Leftist organisations did not join the Communist Party of Great Britain when it was formed (its Inaugural Congress was held on July 31-August 1, 1920) since the Party’s programme contained a clause on the Party participation in parliamentary elections and on affiliation to the Labour Party. 
 At the Communist Party’s Congress in January 1921, the South Wales Socialist Society and the Workers’ Socialist Federation, which had assumed the names of the Communist Workers’ Party and the Commu-nist Party respectively, united with the Communist Party of Great Britain under the name of the United Communist Party of Great Britain. 
 The leaders of the Socialist Labour Party refused to join. 
 p. 
 77 This refers to the counter-revolutionary mutiny organised in August 1917 by the bourgeoisie and the landowners, under the Supreme Commander-in-Chief, the tsarist General Kornilov. 
 The conspirators hoped to seize Petrograd, smash the Bolshevik Party, break up the Soviets, establish a military dictatorship in the country, and prepare the restoration of the monarchy. 
 The mutiny began on August 25 (September 7), Kornilov send-ing the 3rd Cavalry Corps against Petrograd, where Kornilov counter-revolutionary organisations were ready to act. 
 The Kornilov mutiny was crushed by the workers and peasants led by the Bolshevik Party. 
 Under pressure from the masses, the Provisional Government was forced to order that Kornilov and his accomplices be arrested and brought to trial. 
 p. 
 93 The reference is to the military-monarchist coup d’état, the so-called Kapp putsch organised by the German reactionary militarists. 
 It was headed by the monarchist landowner Kapp and Generals Ludendorff, Seeckt and Lüttwitz. 
 The conspirators 39 40 41 42prepared the coup with the connivance of the Social-Democratic government. 
 On March 13, 1920, the mutinous generals moved troops against Berlin and, meeting with no resistance from the government, proclaimed a military dictatorship. 
 The German workers replied with a general strike. 
 Under pressure from the proletariat, the Kapp government was overthrown on March 17, and the Social-Democrats again took power. 
 p. 
 93 The Dreyfus Case —a provocative trial organised in 1894 by the reactionary-monarchist circles of the French militarists. 
 On trial was Dreyfus, a Jewish officer of the French General Staff, falsely accused of espionage and high treason. 
 Dreyfus’s conviction—he was condemned to life imprisonment—was used by the French reac-tionaries to rouse anti-Semitism and to attack the republican regime and democratic liberties. 
 When, in 1898, socialists and progressive bourgeois democrats such as Emile Zola, Jean Jaurès, and Anatole France launched a campaign for Dreyfus’s re-trial, the case became a major political issue and split the country into two camps—the republicans and democrats on the one hand, and a bloc of monarchists, clericals, anti-Semites and nationalists, on the other. 
 Under the pressure of public opinion, Dreyfus was released in 1899, and in 1906 was acquitted by the Court of Cassation and reinstated in the Army. 
 p. 
 98 “Soviet pleaders ”—collegiums of advocates established in Feb-ruary 1918, under the Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’, Peasants’ and Cossacks’ Deputies. 
 In October 1920, these collegiums were abolished. 
 p. 
 115 On the basis of this directive from Lenin the words “certain mem-bers of the Communist Party of Holland” have been substituted everywhere in this volume, in the text of “ Left-Wing ” Commu-nism—an Infantile Disorder for the expression “Dutch Tribu-nists”. 
 p. 
 117 The first communist subbotnik was held on April 12, 1919, by rail-waymen of the Sortirovochnaya marshalling yards of the Moscow-Kazan Railway. 
 Subbotniks were soon being held at many other enterprises in various cities. 
 The experience of the first communist subbotniks was summed up by V. 
 I. 
 Lenin in A Great Beginning (Heroism of the Workers of the Rear . 
 “Communist Subbotniks ”) An all-Russia subbotnik was held on May 1, 1920, with over 425,000 people in Moscow alone participating, including V. 
 I. 
 Lenin, who, together with Kremlin army cadets, worked on clearing away building rubble on the territory of the Kremlin. 
 Lenin’s article “From the First Subbotnik on the Moscow-Kazan Railway to the All-Russia May Day Subbotnik” was brought out on May 2, 1920, in a specially published handbill Pervomaisky Subbotnik , which was drawn up, set and printed during the May Day subbotnik by the staff of the newspapers Pravda , Izvestia , Ekonomicheskaya Zhizn , Bednota , the ROSTA Telegraph Agency,(see present edition, Vol. 
 29, pp. 
 409-34). 
 43 44 45 46 47 48and by workers at the printing-house of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee. 
 p. 
 123 This speech was made by V. 
 I. 
 Lenin on May 5, 1920, in Teatral-naya Square (now Sverdlov Square), where a parade of the Moscow Garrison troops took place. 
 Petrograd Communists leaving for the Polish front were also present at the parade. 
 p. 
 127 The joint session of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee , the Moscow Soviet , and representatives of Moscow trade unions and factory committees , held on May 5, 1920, was called in connec-tion with the offensive launched by the whiteguard Poles against Soviet Russia. 
 The session was also attended by 300 worker Communists from Petrograd who were going to the Polish front. 
 A single item was discussed—the position on the Polish front. 
 The session unanimously adopted a resolution calling upon the workers and peasants to bend every effort for the defeat of bourgeois-landowner Poland. 
 p. 
 129 The reference is to the Conference of the Entente Powers held at San Remo (Italy) in April 1920. 
 Among questions discussed at the Conference were the draft peace treaty with Turkey, and Germany’s observation of the Treaty of Versailles. 
 p. 
 131 The use of Red Army regular units as labour detachments for construction work was occasioned by the situation in the country during the peaceful respite early in 1920, when any day could bring a resumption of the imperialists’ armed intervention. 
 In February 1920, in connection with the formation of the labour army, Lenin pointed out, “The task of the transition from war to peaceful development arises in such peculiar conditions that we cannot disband the army, since we have to allow, say for the possibility of an attack by that selfsame Poland or any of the powers which the Entente continues to incite against us” (see present edition, Vol. 
 30, pp. 
 331-32). 
 The war that broke out against bourgeois-landowner Poland and Wrangel made necessary the transfer of the labour detach-ments to a wartime footing. 
 p. 
 133 Lenin has in view the arrival in Moscow, in March 1919, of Bullitt, on instructions from U. 
S. 
 President Wilson and British Prime Minister Lloyd George, with the proposal that the Soviet Govern-ment should sign a peace with the whiteguard Governments exist-ing at the time on the territory of Russia. 
 A draft of the treaty was drawn up, but then the imperialists, who, in view of the temporary successes of Kolchak’s army, hoped that the Soviet Republic would be crushed, refused to continue peace talks. 
 p. 
 137 The British trade union delegation was sent to Russia by decision of the British Trade Unions Congress held in December 1919, for a first-hand study of the economic and political situation in Soviet Russia. 
 The delegation consisted of: Ben Turner (head of the dele-gation), Ethel Snowden, Tom Shaw, Robert Williams—from the Labour Party, and Margaret Bondfield, A. 
 Purcell, and H. 
 Skin-ner, from the trade unions; Charles Roden Buxton and Haden L. 
 Guest were secretaries to the delegation. 
 R. 
 C. 
 Wallhead and Allen Clifford, representing the Independent Labour Party, came to Russia together with the delegation, but were not official members. 
 V. 
 I. 
 Lenin attached great importance to the delegation’s visit to Russia. 
 He instructed the All-Russia Central Council of Trade Unions to give the delegation a hearty welcome and acquaint them with the life of the Soviet people, so that they could tell the truth about Soviet Russia when they returned home. 
 The delegation arrived in Petrograd on May 12, 1920, and went to Moscow on May 17. 
 They were warmly welcomed by the work-ing people of Soviet Russia, as representatives of the British working masses. 
 Meetings were held in their honour, as well as a great rally in the Bolshoi Theatre and a parade of the Moscow Garrison. 
 The delegation became acquainted in detail with the life of the Soviet Republic, visited a number of cities along the Volga, went to the front, and took part in Subbotniks . 
 The dele-gation members expressed their determination to strengthen fra-ternal solidarity between British and Soviet working people, and voiced a protest against any aid, whether overt, or covert, given by Britain to the Polish Government in the new offensive, and against any threat to force Russia to meet Polish de-mands. 
 The delegation were received by V. 
 I. 
 Lenin on May 26. 
 On their return home, the British workers’ delegation published a report on the situation in Russia (see “British Labour Delega-tion to Russia. 
 1920. 
 Report”. 
 London, 1920). 
 p. 
 137 Lenin’s message of greetings “To the Indian Revolutionary Association” was broadcasted on May 10, 1920, in reply to the resolution of the Assembly of Indian Revolutionaries held in Kabul on February 17, 1920. 
 The Assembly’s resolution, which was addressed to Lenin, read as follows: “The Indian revo-lutionaries express their deep gratitude and their admiration of the great struggle carried on by Soviet Russia for the liberation of all oppressed classes and peoples, and especially for the libera-tion of India. 
 Great thanks to Soviet Russia for her having heard the cries of agony from the 315,000,000 people suffering under the yoke of imperialism. 
 The mass meeting accepts with joy the hand of friendship and help extended to oppressed India” ( Pravda No. 
 108, May 20, 1920). 
 p. 
 138 “Letter to the British Workers” was published on June 17, 1920, in Pravda , Izvestia , Kommuniitichesky Trud , and Gudok ; on the same day it was published in Britain in The Call , the weekly of the British Socialist Party. 
 On June 19, the letter was published in The Workers ’ Dreadnought , organ of the Workers’ Socialist Federation of England and in the journal The Russia Outlook ,49 50 and on June 22, in the Labour The Daily Herald . 
 Later the “Letter to the British Workers” was repeatedly published both in Russia and abroad. 
 p. 
 139 Notes to “Preliminary Draft Theses on the National and the Colo-nial Questions” were received by Lenin from G. 
 V. 
 Chicherin, N. 
 N. 
 Krestinsky, J. 
 V. 
 Stalin, M. 
 G. 
 Rafes, Y. 
 A. 
 Preobrazhen-sky, N. 
 D. 
 Lapinsky, and I. 
 Nedelkov (N. 
 Shablin), representative of the Bulgarian Communists, as well as from a number of leaders in Bashkiria, Kirghizia, and Turkestan. 
 Along with correct ideas, the notes contained certain grave errors. 
 Thus, Chicherin gave a wrong interpretation to Lenin’s theses on the necessity of sup-port for national liberation movements and on agreements with the national bourgeoisie, without due regard for Lenin’s distinc-tion between the bourgeoisie and the peasantry. 
 With regard to this Lenin wrote: “I lay greater stress on the alliance with the peasantry (which does not quite mean the bourgeoisie)” (Central Party Archives of the Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the C. 
C. 
 C. 
P. 
S. 
U. 
). 
 Referring to the relations between the future social-ist Europe and the economically underdeveloped and dependent countries, Preobrazhensky wrote: “... if it proves impossible to reach economic agreement with the leading national groups, the latter will inevitably be suppressed by force and economically important regions will be compelled to join a union of European Republics. 
” Lenin decisively objected to this remark: “... it goes too far. 
 It cannot be proved, and it is wrong to say that sup-pression by force is “inevitable”. 
 That is radically wrong” (see Voprosy Istorii KP SS [Problems of the C. 
P. 
 S. 
U. 
 History ] 1958, No. 
 2, p. 
 16). 
 A grave error was made by Stalin, who did not agree with Lenin’s proposition on the difference between federal relations among the Soviet republics based on autonomy, and federal rela-tions among independent republics. 
 In a letter to Lenin, dated June 12, 1920, he declared that in reality “there is no difference between these two types of federal relations, or else it is so small as to be negligible”. 
 Stalin continued to advocate this later, when, in 1922, he proposed the “autonomisation” of the independent Soviet republics. 
 These ideas were criticised in detail by Lenin in his article “The Question of Nationalities or ‘Autonomisation’”, and in his letter to members of the Political Bureau “On the Formation of the U. 
S. 
S. 
R” (see present edition, Vol. 
 36, and Lenin Miscellany XXXVI , pp. 
 496-98). 
 p. 
 144 As a result of the revolution which commenced in Finland on January 27, 1918, the bourgeois government of Svinhufvud was overthrown and the working class assumed power. 
 On January 29, the revolutionary government of Finland, the Council of People’s Representatives was formed by Edvard Gylling, Yrjö Sirola, Otto Kuusinen, A. 
 Taimi and others. 
 The following were among the most important measures taken by the workers’ government: the law on the transfer to landless peasants, without indemnification,51 52 of the land they actually tilled; tax-exemption for the poorest sections of the population; the expropriation of enterprises whose owners had fled the country; the establishment of state control over private banks (their functions being assumed by the State Bank). 
 On March 1, 1918, a treaty between the Finnish Socialist Workers’ Republic and the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
 was signed in Petrograd. 
 Based on the principle of complete equality and respect for the sovereignty of the two sides, this was the first treaty in world history to be signed between two socialist countries. 
 The proletarian revolution, however, was victorious only in the south of Finland. 
 The Svinhufvud government concentrated all counter-revolutionary forces in the north of the country, and appealed to the German Kaiser’s government for help. 
 As a result of German armed intervention, the Finnish revolution was put down in May 1918, after a desperate civil war. 
 White terror reigned in the country, thousands of revolutionary workers and peasants were executed or tortured to death in the prisons. 
 p. 
 147 As a result of mass action by the Lettish proletariat and peasantry against the German invaders and the counter-revolutionary government of Ulmanis, a provisional Soviet government was established in Latvia on December 17, 1918, which issued a Manifesto on the assumption of state power by the Soviets. 
 Soviet Russia gave fraternal help to the Lettish people in their struggle to establish Soviet rule and strengthen the Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic. 
 Under the leadership of the Latvian Communist Party and the Latvian Soviet Government, a Red Army was formed, the landed estates were confiscated, the banks and big commercial and industrial enterprises were nationalised, social insurance and an eight-hour working day were introduced, and a system of public catering for working people was organised. 
 In March 1919, German troops and the whiteguards, armed and equipped by the U. 
S. 
 and the Entente imperialists, attacked Soviet Latvia. 
 In May they captured Riga, the capital of Soviet Latvia. 
 After fierce fighting the entire territory of Latvia had been overrun by the interventionists by the beginning of 1920. 
 The counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie established a regime of bloody terror, thousands of revolutionary workers and peasants being killed or thrown into prison. 
 p. 
 147 Lenin is referring to the article by J. 
 Marchlewski “The Agrarian Question and World Revolution” published in the journal The Communist International No. 
 12, July 20, 1920. 
 Lenin read the article before the issue appeared. 
 p. 
 152 G. 
 L. 
 —György Lukács (b. 
 1885). 
 After 1919 he was several times elected member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Hungary. 
 In the early twenties made Left-sectarian53 54 55 mistakes. 
 Author of a number of works on philosophy, aesthetics, history, and the theory of literature. 
 p. 
 165 B. 
 K. 
 —Béla Kun (1886-1939), an outstanding figure in the Hungarian and the international working-class movoment; one of the founders and leaders of the Communist Party of Hungary. 
 p. 
 165 Called by the Central Committee of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
), the Second All-Russia Conference of Organisers Responsible for Rural Work was held in Moscow from June 10 to 15, 1920. 
 It was attended by gubernia, uyezd and volost organisers for rural work, a total of over 300 delegates from 61 gubernias. 
 The third meeting of the Conference, held on June 12, was addressed by Lenin. 
 M. 
 I. 
 Kalinin greeted the delegates on behalf of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee. 
 A report on the activities of the Department for Rural Work under the Party’s Central Committee was made by V. 
 I. 
 Nevsky. 
 The Conference adopted a resolution on this report; it stressed the importance of Party work in the countryside, and expressed the firm confidence that “the Department for Rural Work will unswervingly carry out the directive of the Party’s Ninth Con-gress, on improving agitation and propaganda work among the peasantry” (see Rezolutsii Vtorogo Vserossiiskogo Soveshchaniya rabotnikov v derevne . 
 [Resolutions of the Second All-Russia Con-ference of Party Rural Workers ], Moscow, 1920, pp. 
 4-5). 
 Reports from the various localities were also heard, and organisational and other matters discussed. 
 The Conference adopted an appeal “To All Workers of the World”, greeting the British, Hungarian, Italian and other workers who had decided to prevent the dispatch of troops and military supplies to help bourgeois-landowner Poland in her war against Soviet Russia. 
 p. 
 168 Lenin is referring to the Declaration by the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
 Council of People’s Commissars addressed to the Government of Poland and the Polish people, made on January 28, 1920, and the Appeal of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee to the Polish people on February 2, 1920. 
 p. 
 168 The reference is to the declaration of the Entente’s Supreme Council “On the Temporary Eastern Borders of Poland”, made on December 8, 1919, and published on June 11, 1920, in the newspaper Izvestia No. 
 125. 
 p. 
 169 National Democrats ( “Narodowa Democracya ”)—the main reac-tionary and nationalist party of the Polish landowners and bour-geoisie, founded in 1897 and closely connected with the Catholic church. 
 The National Democrats advanced the slogans of “class harmony” and “the national interests”, trying to influence the masses and draw them into the wake of their reactionary policy. 
 They propagated extreme militant nationalism and chauvinism56 57 58 59 60 as a means of struggle against the socialist and democratic movement of the Polish people, which they strove to isolate from the Russian revolutionary movement. 
 During the First World War (1914-18) the National Democrats unreservedly supported the Entente, counting on the victory of tsarist Russia, the unifi-cation of the Polish territories then under the yoke of Austria and Germany, and autonomy for Poland within the framework of the Russian Empire. 
 The downfall of tsarism drove the National Democrats towards a pro-French orientation. 
 Though bitterly opposed to the October Socialist Revolution and the Soviet state, the National Democrats, following their traditional anti-German policy, did not always support the adventurist anti-Soviet foreign policy of the Pilsudski clique, which ruled the country after 1926. 
 At present, separate National-Democrat groups are carrying on their activities among reactionary émigré elements . 
 p. 
 173 The Polish Socialist Part y (Polska Partia Socjalistyczn a, the P. 
S. 
P. 
)— a reformist nationalist party founded in 1892. 
 Through-out its history, Left-wing groups arose in it under the influence of the worker rank and file in the party. 
 Some of these groups subsequently joined the revolutionary wing of the Polish working-class movement . 
 p. 
 173 Vsevobuc h—the universal military training of the population of the Soviet Republic. 
 The question of organising the Vsevobuch was raised in the resolution “On War and Peace” adopted by the Seventh Congress of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
), which was held in March 1918. 
 The resolution said that one of the most important and urgent tasks of the Party was the all-round, systematic and uni-versal military training of the adult population, irrespective of sex. 
 The Decree of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee of April 22, 1918, authorised the calling up of all citizens between the ages of 18 and 40, who did not exploit the labour of others. 
 The Vsevobuc h bodies were entrusted with the registration of all working people of military age, their unified military training, and the formation army units. 
 On June 5-25 1918, the first programme for the training and testing of Vsevobuc h instructor s and discussed the organisation of Vsevobuc h departments, the calling of conferences on the military training and the registratio n of the population. 
 The conference also adopted a resolution on permanent bureaus of Vsevobuc h conferences and the statute of inspections . 
 p. 
 178 Lenin is referring to the resolution adopted by the Ninth Con-gress of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) “On the Attitude to the Co-operatives ” of Its Congresse s, Conferences and Plenums of the Central Com-mitte e], Part I, 1940, pp. 
 340-42) . 
 p. 
 18161 62 63 (see KPSS v rezolutsiyakh i resheniyakh syezdov , konferentsiiconference on universal military training was held; it drew up a i plenumov TsK [The C . 
 P. 
S. 
U . 
 in the Resolutions and Decisions Lenin is quoting from Marx’s work “Zur Kritik der Hegelschen Rechtsphilosophie” (see Marx/Engels, Werke , Bd. 
 1, S. 
 385). 
 p. 
 190 The American Socialist Party was formed in July 1901 at a con-gress held in Indianapolis, as the result of a merger of groups that had broken away from the Socialist Workers’ Party and the Social-Democratic Party of the U. 
S. 
A. 
 Among the new party’s organisers was Eugene Debs, a popular figure in the U. 
S. 
 labour movement. 
 The social composition of the party was not uniform, it contained native-born and immigrant workers, as well as small farmers and people of petty-bourgeois origin. 
 The Centrist and the Right-wing opportunist leaders of the party (Victor Berger, Morris Hillquit and others) denied the necessity of the proletarian dictatorship, renounced revolutionary methods of struggle, and reduced all party activities to participation in election campaigns. 
 During the First World War (1914-18) three trends appeared in the Socialist Party: the social-chauvinists, who supported the imperialist policy of the Administration, the Centrists, who opposed the imperialist war only in word, and the revolutionary minority, who took an internationalist stand and struggled against the war. 
 The Socialist Party’s Left wing, headed by Charles Ruthen-berg, William Foster, William Haywood and others, relying on the proletarian elements, waged a struggle against the party’s opportunist leadership, for independent proletarian action and the formation of industrial trade unions based on the principles of the class struggle. 
 In 1919 a split took place in the Socialist Party. 
 The party’s Left wing broke away, bccoming the initiator and nucleus of the Communist Party of the U. 
S. 
A. 
 At present the Socialist Party is a small sectarian organisation. 
 p. 
 197 The Social-Democratic Party of Switzerland (known as the Swiss Socialist Party ) was formed in the seventies of the last century and affiliated to the First International. 
 The party was re-formed in 1888. 
 The opportunists were very influential in the party, and during the First World War took a social-chauvinist stand. 
 In the autumn of 1916, the Party’s Right wing broke away to form their own organisation. 
 The majority, headed by Robert Grimm, took a Centrist, social-pacifist stand, while the Left wing of the party adhered to an internationalist stand. 
 The Great October Socialist Revolution in Russia influenced and strengthened the Left wing which, in December 1920, broke away and joined the Communist Party of Switzerland in 1921 (see Note 69). 
 p. 
 197 “Draft (or the Theses) of the R. 
C. 
P. 
’s Reply to a Letter from the German Independent Social-Democratic Party” (see present edition, Vol. 
 30, pp. 
 337-44). 
 p. 
 198 The Turin section accused the Italian Socialist Party with its conciliatory leadership, of failing to give a correct analysis of events, in the conditions of the revolutionary upsurge in Italy64 65 66 67 68 (1919-20) that had created the possibility of the seizure of political power by the proletariat, and of having failed to advance any slogan acceptable to the revolutionary masses, and expel the reformists from its ranks. 
 The section made a number of practical proposals: the expulsion of the opportunists from the party; the formation of communist groups in each factory, in the trade unions, co-operatives, and army barracks, the setting-up of factory T. 
U. 
 committees to organise control of production in industry and agriculture. 
 The section demanded that work to prepare the working masses for the creation of Soviets should be begun at once. 
 p. 
 199 In October 1918, part of the Social-Democrat Left wing united to form the Communist Party of Switzerland . 
 It was not a big party at the time, being represented by two delegates at the Second Congress of the Comintern. 
 In December 1920, the Left wing of the Swiss Social-Democratic Party broke away from it, and raised the question of forming a strong section of the Communist International in Switzerland. 
 At a congress held in Zurich in March 1921, attended by 28 dele-gates from the Communist Party and 145 delegates representing the former Left wing of the Social-Democratic Party, the two groups officially united to form a single Communist Party of Switzerland. 
 p. 
 200 “Reply to a Letter from the Joint Provisional Committee for the Commlmist Party of Britain” was broadcasted and published in English in The Call (No. 
 224, July 22, 1920), organ of the British Socialist Party. 
 The reply was also read to the Congress of British Communists, which took place on July 31-August 1 1920. 
 p. 
 202 The reference is to the Paris Peace Conference called after the First World War of 1914-18. 
 Its deliberations ended in the signing of the Treaty of Versailles. 
 Among the questions discussed was that of Poland’s boundaries. 
 The temporary eastern frontiers of Poland were arbitrarily established by decision of the Allies’ Supreme Council on December 8, 1919. 
 p. 
 203 The reference is to Lenin’s proposals regarding the reply to the Curzon Note of July 12, 1920. 
 These proposals were accepted by the Central Committee Plenum on July 16, 1920. 
 p. 
 205 The First Congress of the Communist International was held on March 2-6, 1919, in Moscow. 
 Fifty-two delegates attended, 34 with the right to vote and 18—with voice but no vote. 
 The following Communist and Socialist parties, organisations and groups were represented: the Communist Parties of Russia, Germany, German Austria, Hungary, Poland, Finland, the Ukraine, Latvia, Lithua-nia and Byelorussia, Estonia, Armenia, of the German colonies in Russia, the Swedish Left Social-Democratic Party, the Nor-69 70 71 72 73 wegian Social-Democratic Party, the Swiss Social-Democratic Party (Opposition), the Revolutionary Balkan Federation, the United Group of the Eastern Tribes of Russia, the French Zim-merwaldian Left, the Czech, Bulgarian, Yugoslav, British, French, and Swiss Communist groups, the Dutch Social-Democratic Party, the American League of Socialist Propaganda, the American Socialist Labour Party, the Chinese Socialist Labour Party, the Korean Workers’ League, the Turkestan, Turkish, Georgian, Azerbaijan and Persian Sections of the Central Bureau of Eastern Nations and the Zimmerwald Commission. 
 The first meeting of the Comintern passed a decision “to con-sider this meeting as an international communist conference”, and adopted the following agenda: 1) the inauguration, 2) reports, 3) the platform of the international communist conference, 4) bourgeois democracy and prolotarian dictatorship, 5) the Berne Conference and the attitude towards socialist trends, 6) the international situation and the policy of the Entente, 7) the Manifesto, 8) the White terror, 9) elections to the Bureau, and various organisational questions. 
 The conference, whose work centred on Lenin’s theses and report on bourgeois democracy and proletarian dictatorship, unanimously expressed solidarity with Lenin’s theses and adopted a decision to refer them to the Bureau for dissemination in the various countries. 
 The conference also adopted a resolution tabled by Lenin, in addition to the theses. 
 On March 4, after the theses and the resolution on Lenin’s report had been adopted, the conference decided to constitute itself as the Third International, and to take the name of the Communist International. 
 On the same day a rosolution was unanimously passed to consider the Zimmerwald Left dissolved, and the Comintern platform was approved, on the following main principles: 1) the inevitability of the capitalist social system being replaced by a communist system; 2) the necessity of the proletar-iat’s revolutionary struggle to overthrow bourgeois governments; 3) the abolition of the bourgeois state and its replacement by a state of a new type, i. 
e. 
, the state of the proletariat, of the So-viet type, which will ensure the transition to a communist society. 
 One of the most important documents of the Congress was the Manifesto to the world proletariat, which declared that the Commu-nist International was the successor of Marx’s and Engels’s ideas as expressed in the Communist Manifesto. 
 The Congress called upon the workers of the world to support Soviet Russia, and demanded non-interference by the Entente in the internal affairs of the Soviet Republic, the withdrawal of the interventionist troops from Russian territory, recognition of the Soviet state, the raising of the economic blockade, and the resumption of trade relations. 
 In its resolution on “The Attitude Towards the ‘Socialist’ Parties and the Berne Conference”, the Congress condemned the attempts to re-establish the Second International, which was “an instru-ment of the bourgeoisle only”, and declared that the revolu-tionary proletariat had nothing in common with that conference. 
 The establishment of the Third, Communist International played a tremendous part in restoring links between the working people of many countries, in forming and consolidating Communist partles, and in exposing opportunism in the working-class movement. 
 p. 
 206 The Amsterdam “International ” of yellow trade unions (the International Federation of Trade Unions) was established by reformist trade union leaders of a number of countries, at a conference held in Amsterdam on July 26-August 2, 1919. 
 The trade union organisations of 14 countries merged to form this federation, viz. 
, Britain, France, Germany, the U. 
S. 
A. 
, Belgium, Denmark, Holland, Luxemburg, Norway, Sweden, Austria, Czechoslovakia, Switzerland and Spain. 
 The reactionary trade union leaders of Britain and France were predominant in the Amsterdam International of trade unions, whose entire activities were connected with the policies of the opportunist parties of the Second International. 
 The Amsterdam International came out in favour of the proletariat’s collaboration with the bourgeoisie, and rejected revolutionary forms of the proletariat’s struggle. 
 The leaders of the Amsterdam International pursued a policy of splitting the working-class movement, excluded Left-wing trade unions from the organisation, and rejected all proposals by the Red International of Labour Unions for joint action against capital, the threat of war, reaction and fascism, and to establish world-wide trade union unity. 
 The leaders of the Amsterdam International supported the anti-Soviet policy of the ruling circles of the imperialist states. 
 During the Second World War the Amsterdam International’s activities ceased. 
 p. 
 209 The Red International of Labour Unions (the Profintern )—an in-ternational organisation of revolutionary trade unions. 
 It was organised in 1921, and existed till the end of 1937. 
 It amalgam-ated trade union centres which had not entered the reformist Amsterdam International of trade unions, i. 
e. 
, the All-Russia Central Council of Trade Unions, the Unitary General Confed-eration of Labour of France, the national revolutionary trade union centres of Australia, Belgium, Holland, Indonesia, Ireland, Canada, China, Colombia, Korea, Lithuania, Mongolia, Iran, Peru, Uruguay, Czechoslovakia, Chile and Estonia, as well as opposition groups and trends within the reformist trade unions in a number of capitalist countries. 
 The Red Trade Union Inter-national waged a struggle for unity in the trade union movement, on the basis of a revolutionary struggle, in defence of the demands of the working class, against capital and fascism, against the danger of imperialist war, and for solidarity with the working class of Soviet Russia. 
 p. 
 210 This article was proposed by Lenin at a sitting of the commission of the Comintern Second Congress on July 25, 1920, during74 75 76 the discussion of his theses on the terms of admission into the Communist International. 
 Both the commission and the Congress approved the article. 
 Lenin’s theses entitled “The Terms of Admis-sion into the Communist International” and published before the Congress met contained 19 articles. 
 The Congress adopted 21 articres, the last article reading as follows: “Party members who reject in principle the obligations and theses laid down by the Communist International shall be expelled from the Party. 
 “This shall also apply to delegates to extraordinary Party congresses. 
” p. 
 212 The Second Congress of the Communist International met from July 19 to August 7, 1920. 
 The opening session was held in Petro-grad and the subsequent sessions in Moscow. 
 It was attended by over 200 delegates who represented workers ‘ organisations of 37 countries. 
 Apart from delegates representing the Communist parties and organisations of 31 countries, there were delegates from the Independent Social-Democratic Party of Germany, the Socialist parties of Italy and France, Industrial Workers of the World (Australia, Britain and Ireland), the National Confeder-ation of Labour of Spain and other organisations. 
 Lenin directed all the preparatory work before the Congress. 
 At its first session he made a report on the international situation and the fundamental tasks of the Communist International. 
 Throughout the Congress, in his reports and speeches, Lenin fought uncompromisingly against the opportunist Centrist parties, who were attempting to penetrate into the Third International, and levelled sharp criticism at the anarcho-syndicalist trends and “Left” sectarianism of a number of communist organisations. 
 Lenin took part in the work of various commissions and delivered reports and speeches on the international situation and the funda-mental tasks of the Communist International, the national and the colonial questions, the agrarian question and the terms of admission into the Communist International. 
 Lenin’s theses on the fundamental tasks of the Second Congress of the Communist International, the national and the colonial questions, the agrar-ian question and the terms of admission into the Communist International were endorsed as Congress decisions. 
 The Second Congress laid the foundations of the programme, organisational principles, strategy and tactics of the Communist International. 
 p. 
 213 This international organisation was being set up at the time by the Centrist socialist parties and groups which had left the Second International under pressure from the revolutionary masses. 
 The International Union of the Socialist Parties, as the new organisation was officially called was formed at a conference in Vienna in February 1921 and; was also known as the Two-and-a-Half or Vienna International. 
 Professing opposition to the Second International, the leaders of the Two-and-a-Half International actually pursued the same opportunist and splitting77 78 policy on the most important questions of the proletarian movement and tried to make the new organisation a counter-balance to the growing innuence of the Communists among the workers. 
 Lenin wrote, “The gentlemen of the Two-and-a-Half International pose as revolutionaries; but in every serious situation they prove to be counter-revolutionaries because they shrink from the violent destruction of the old state machine; they have no faith in the forces of the working class” (see present edition, Vol. 
 33, “New Times and Old Mistakes in a New Guise”). 
 In May 1923 the Second International and the Two-and-a-Half International united to form the so-called Labour and Socialist International. 
 p. 
 223 Guild socialists —a reformist trend in the British trade unions, which arose before the First World War. 
 They denied the class character of the state and sowed illusions among the workers that it was possible to get rid of exploitation without the class struggle, by establishing, on the basis of the existing trade unions, special associations of producers, so-called guilds whose federation was to take over industrial management. 
 In this way the guild socialists hoped to build socialism. 
 After the October Socialist Revolution the Guild socialists stepped up their propaganda, contraposing the “theory” of guild socialism to the ideas of the class struggle and the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 In the 1920s guild socialism lost all its influ-ence on the British workers. 
 p. 
 233 The reference is to the American Federation of Labor and the British Labour Party. 
 The American Federation of Labor was formed in 1881, on the guild principle. 
 In the main it organised the labour aristocracy. 
 The reformist A. 
F. 
L. 
 Ieaders denied the principles of socialism and the class struggle, preached “class co-operation” and cham-pioned the capitalist system. 
 They followed a splitting policy in the international working-class movement, giving active support to the aggressive policy of the U. 
S. 
 imperialists. 
 In 1955 the A. 
F. 
L. 
 merged with the C. 
I. 
O. 
 p. 
 236 See pp. 
 198-99 in this volume. 
 p. 
 236 See p. 
 89 in this volume. 
 p. 
 236The commission on the national and the colonial questions, formed by the Second Congress of the Communist International, included representatives of the Communist parties of Russia, Bulgaria, France, Holland, Germany, Hungary, the U. 
S. 
A. 
, India, Persia, China, Korea and Britain. 
 The work of the commission was guided by Lenin, whose theses on the national and the colonial questions were discussed at the fourth and fifth sessions of the Congress, and were adopted on July 28. 
 p. 
 24079 80 81 8283 The Basle Manifesto was adopted by the Extraordinary Interna-tional Socialist Congress held in Basle on November 24-25, 1912. 
 It gave a warning against the imminent world imperialist war, whose predatory aims it unmasked, and called upon the workers of all countries to wage a determined fight for peace and “to pit against the might of capitalist imperialism the international solidarity of the proletariat”. 
 The Manifesto denounced the ex-pansionist policy of the imperialist countries and urged socialists to fight against all oppression of small nations and manifestations of chauvinism. 
 p. 
 245 The terms of admission into the Communist International were first discussed by a commission appointed by the Congress. 
 The commission included representatives of the Communist parties of Russia, Germany, Bulgaria, the U. 
S. 
A. 
, Hungary, Austria, Holland, the Irish I. 
W. 
W. 
, the Left wing of the Socialist Party of Switzerland and the French Communist group. 
 In its work the commission proceeded from Lenin’s theses “The Terms of Admission into the Communist International”. 
 Lenin also worked on the commission. 
 The terms of admission into the Communist International were discussed at three Congress sessions, July 29 and 30, and were adopted on August 6. 
 p. 
 246 Lenin is referring to the German Social-Democratic Party’s pro-gramme which was adopted at its congress in Erfurt in October 1891. 
 This programme marked an advance over the Gotha Pro-gramme of 1875, since it was based on the Marsist thesis that the capitalist mode of production was doomed and would be inevitably replaced by the socialist mode of production; it stressed the need for the working class to wage a political struggle and defined the party’s role as leader in that struggle, but it too made serious con-cessions to opportunism. 
 Engels gave a profound criticism of the draft of the programme in his work “ Zur Kritik des sozialdemokrati-schen Programmentwurfes 1891 ” (see Marx/Engels, Werke , Dietz Verlag, Berlin, 1963, Bd. 
 22, S. 
 225-40). 
 In fact, Engels criti-cised the opportunism of the entire Second International. 
 However, in working out the final version of the programme, the German Social-Democratic leaders concealed Engels’s criticism from the Party rank and file and disregarded his most impor-tant remarks. 
 According to Lenin, the fact that the Erfurt Programme made no mention of the dictatorship of the proletariat was the main defect in the programme, and a cowardly conces-sion to opportunism. 
 p. 
 246 See KPSS v rezolutsiyakh i resheniyakh syezdov , konferentsii i plenumov TsK (The C. 
P. 
 S. 
U. 
 in the Resolutions and Decisions of Its Congresses , Conferences and Plenums of the Central Committee ), Part I, 1954, p. 
 39. 
 p. 
 247 The question of the Communist Party’s affiliation to the Labour Party was dealt with during the discussion on Lenin’s theses on84 85 86 87 88 the fundamental tasks of the Communist International, at the closing session of the Congress on August 6. 
 Following Lenin’sspeech the majority (58 votes against 24, with 2 abstentions)approved affiliation. 
 The Labour leaders, however, refused to grant membership to the Communist Party. 
 p. 
 257 Lenin wrote this letter in connection with the Austrian Communist Party’s decision to boycott parliamentary elections. 
 On Septem-ber 1,1920, the Party Conference decided to participate in theelections. 
 The Party’s election campaign was conducted under the slogan of the revolutionary unity of the working class. 
 p. 
 267 The radio message of the correspondent of the London Daily News Mr. 
 Segrue was published in Pravda No. 
 202, September 12, 1920, along with Lenin’s reply. 
 In his message, Segrue pointedout that some socialists who had visited Soviet Russia had pub-lished anti-Soviet articles, and asked Lenin to comment on this. 
 p. 
 273 The Ninth All-Russia Conference of the R. 
C. 
P. 
 (B. 
), held in Mos-cow from September 22 to September 25, 1920, was attended by241 delegates (116 with the right to vote and 125 with voice butno vote). 
 Among the items on the agenda were: the political and organisational reports of the Central Committee; the immediate tasks of Party development; a report of the commission in chargeof the Party history studies, and a report on the Second Congressof the Communist International. 
 The Conference also heard areport from the Polish Communists’ delegate. 
 Lenin opened theConference, delivered the Central Committee’s political report, and took the floor during the debate on the immediate tasks of Party development. 
 The political report dealt mainly with the twosubjects—the question of war and peace with Poland, and theorganisation of Wrangel’s defeat. 
 The Conference passed a unani-mous resolution on the conditions of peace with Poland, andapproved the statement by the All-Russia Central Executive Com-mittee on the specific peace terms drawn up on Lenin’s instruc-tions and edited by Lenin. 
 The resolution on “The Immediate Tasksof Party Development” provided for practical measures to extendinner-Party democracy, strengthen Party unity and discipline,combat red tape in government and economic bodies and improvethe communist training of young Party members. 
 The Conference deemed it necessary to set up a Control Commission, to be elected at Party congresses, and Party commissions under gubernia Partycommittees, to be elected at gubernia Party conferences. 
 TheConference gave a rebuff to the “Democratic Centralism” group,who denied Party discipline and the Party’s guiding role in theSoviets and the trade unions. 
 p. 
 275 The Council of Action was set up at a joint conference of repre-sentatives from the Parliamentary Committee of the trade unions,the Labour Party Executive Committee and the Parliamentary89 90 91 92 Labour Party on August 9, 1920. 
 Its aim was to prevent Britain making war on Russia. 
 Besides the Central Council of Action inLondon, local councils of action were also set up. 
 There were 150councils by the end of August, the figure doubling within the next month. 
 The Communist Party was largely instrumental in getting councils organised. 
 It called upon its members to extendCommunist representation in the councils and to win key positionson the strike committees in order to “withstand any attempts bytrade union and Labour leaders to frustrate the desires of therank and file, by capitulating at the crucial moment” ( The Communist No. 
 2, London, August 12, 1920). 
 p. 
 277 The letter was published in Die Rote Fahne , organ of the Com-munist Party of Germany, l’Humanité , organ of the Socialist Party of France and The Communist , organ of the Communist Party of Great Britain, in the period from September to Novem-ber 1920. 
 p. 
 280 The Third All-Russia Congress of the Russian Young Communist League took place in Moscow between October 2 and 10, and was attended by some 600 delegates. 
 Lenin addressed the Congressat the first session in the evening of October 2. 
 p. 
 283 Lenin is referring to Proletcult , a cultural and educational or-ganisation which arose in September 1917 as an independentworkers’ organisation. 
 After the October Revolution Proletcult,whose leadership fell into the hands of Bogdanov and his sup-porters, continued to insist on independence, thus setting itself in opposition to the proletarian state. 
 This led to the infiltra-tion of bourgeois intellectuals, who began to exert a decisiveinfluence on Proletcult. 
 Its members actually denied the culturallegacy of the past, neglected cultural and educational workamong the masses, isolated themselves from life and aimed atsetting up a special “proletarian culture”. 
 Bogdanov, the chief Proletcult ideologist, paid lip service to Marxism, but actually preached subjective idealism, Machism. 
 Besides bourgeois intel-lectuals who held leading positions in many organisations, Prolet-cult also included young workers who sincerely wished to promotecultural development in the Soviet state. 
 Proletcult organisationshad their heyday in 1919. 
 In the early 1920s they began to decline, ceasing to exist in 1932. 
 p. 
 287 This was the Third All-Russia Congress of Leather Industry Work-ers. 
 It was held in Moscow between October 2 and 6, 1920, and was attended by some 300 delegates. 
 It discussed the tasks of thetrade unions, a report by the Central Committee of the Leather Industry Workers’ Union, the organisation of management in leather industry, wages policy, labour protection, the culturaland educational work of the union, organisational questions, etc. 
Lenin spoke at the first sitting of the Congress. 
 p. 
 30093 94 95 96 Lenin is referring to the speech made by the Polish Communist Uljanowski at the Ninth All-Russia Conference of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
). 
 p. 
 303 The Council of Workers ’ and Peasants ’ Defence was formed by the All-Russia Central Executive Committee on November 30, 1918. 
 Its task was to implement the decree of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee of September 2, 1918, which proclaimed the country a military camp. 
 The Council of Defence was an extraordinary organ brought into being by the extremely difficult situation in the country. 
 It was vested with full powers to mobi-lise manpower and resources for the country’s defence. 
 Lenin was appointed Chairman of the Council. 
 Decisions of the Council were binding on all central and local bodies and all citizens of the Soviet Republic. 
 The Council became the main military, economic and planning body of the Republic during the foreign intervention and the Civil War. 
 The Revolu-tionary Military Council and other military bodies were brought under its control. 
 Early in April 1920, it was reorganised as the Council of Labour and Defence. 
 By a decision of the Eighth All-Russia Congress of Soviets, adopted in December 1920, it was vested with the rights of a commission of the Council of People’s Commissars and set the task of co-ordinating the work of all departments in the shere of economic development. 
 It existed until 1937. 
 p. 
 312 Lenin drew up this draft resolution for the First All-Russia Con-gress of Proletcult, which met in Moscow from October 5 to Octo-ber 12, 1920. 
 When the Political Bureau of the Central Committee of the Party discussed the question of Proletcult on October 9 and 11, it proceeded from Lenin’s draft resolution. 
 It was proposed to the Communist group of the Congress that it pass a resolution putting central and local Proletcult organisations under the control of the People’s Commissariat of Education. 
 The resolu-tion was in keeping with Lenin’s ideas and was unanimously approved by the Congress. 
 However, after the Congress, some Proletcult leaders began to voice disagreement with the resolution and misinterpreted it to the rank and file, alleging that the Central Committee of the Communist Party was hamstringing the workers in the sphere of the arts and aiming at dissolving Proletcult. 
 The Central Committee of the Party refuted these demagogical insinuations in its letter “On Proletcult Organisations” which gave a detailed analysis of Proletcult mistakes. 
 The letter was published in Pravda No. 
 270 on December 1, 1920. 
 p. 
 316 On October 8, 1920, Izvestia reported Lunacharsky as saying in his speech at the Proletcult Congress that Proletcult must be assured a special status and complete autonomy. 
 Recalling this episode, Lunacharsky wrote in his reminiscences: “At the time of the Proletcult Congress in October 1920, Vladimir Ilyich instructed me to attend it and pointed out quite definitely that97 98 99 100 Proletcult should be subordinated to the People’s Commissariat of Education, should regard itself as one of its institutions, and so on. 
 In short, he wanted us to bring Proletcult closer to the state. 
 At the same time, he took steps to bring it closer to the Party. 
 I spoke at the Congress in a rather non-committal and concilia-tory way, and the version sent to Vladimir Ilyich was even milder. 
 He summoned me and gave me a good talking-to. 
” p. 
 316 The conference was held between October 15 and 17, 1920, and was attended by some 3,000 delegates. 
 Following Lenin’s report a resolution was passed expressing satisfaction with the signing of a peace with Finland and a preliminary truce with Poland. 
 It also recognised as correct the peaceful policy of the Soviet Government which “has set out to save the lives of hundreds of thousands of Russian and Polish workers and peasants and to spare the Russian and Polish working people the hardships and privations of a winter campaign”. 
 The conference went on record that “the immediate task in winning a lasting peace is the com-plete rout of surviving bands in the South” and urged the working people of Russia “to give all possible help to the fronts and to bend every effort to wipe out Wrangel” ( Pravda No. 
 231, October 16, 1920). 
 The conference also discussed the organisation of aid for the Western front, the food situation, labour and cart service, and educa-tion. 
 p. 
 318 Lenin is referring to a Note from the U. 
S. 
 Secretary of State B. 
 Colby to the Italian Government, on the attitude of the U. 
S. 
 Administration towards Soviet Russia. 
 The Note was published in Izvestia No. 
 198 of September 8, 1920. 
 p. 
 320 Lenin is referring to the First Congress of the Peoples of the East , which was held in Baku between September 1 and 7, 1920, and attended by 1,891 delegates representing 37 nationalities (1,273 delegates were Communists). 
 On the national and the colonial questions the Congress expressed solidarity with the relevant resolution of the Second Congress of the Communist Interna-tional. 
 p. 
 329 Under the armistice and the preliminary conditions of peace signed in Riga on October 12, 1920, between the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
 and the Ukraine, on the one hand, and Poland on the other, the latter received the western regions of the Ukraine and Byelorus-sia. 
 The parties to the treaty undertook to abstain from giving support to hostile activities directed against any of the parties, and disclaimed indemnities. 
 The Soviet Government also agreed to return to Poland the cultural treasures appropriated by the tsarist government. 
 p. 
 331 The reference is to a speech made by the peasant Belayev, who said that the lynx (world capital) was lying low waiting for a clash between the goat and the ram (the workers and the peasants). 
 p. 
 334101 102 103 104 105 Lenin sent the manuscript of this article to the editors of the journal The Communist International in Petrograd. 
 On the next day he informed the editors that he had sent the article, and re-quested them to register, check up and set the material (everything to be returned to me)” (Central Party Archives at the Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the C. 
C. 
 C. 
P. 
S. 
U. 
). 
 He himself read and made a number of corrections in the proofs, which he had received from Petrograd. 
 A large part of the article was taken by Lenin from his pamphlet which he wrote in 1906 (see present edition, Vol. 
 10, pp. 
 199-276). 
He used Chapter V of the pamphlet entitled “A Sample of Cadet Smugness”. 
 p. 
 340 See present edition, Vol. 
 8, pp. 
 373-74. 
 p. 
 341See present edition, Vol. 
 16, pp. 
 374-92 and 393-421. 
 p. 
341 Die Neue Rheinische Zeitung was a daily published in Cologne under the editorship of Marx, from June 1, 1848 to May 19, 1849. 
 The editorial board consisted of Frederick Engels, Wilhelm Wolff, Georg Weerth, Ferdinand Wolff, Ernst Dronke, Ferdinand Frei-ligrath and Heinrich Burgers. 
 This militant organ of the prole-tarian wing of democracy did much to educate the masses and rouse them for struggle against the counter-revolution. 
 Most of the leading articles defining the newspaper’s stand on the key problems of the German and European revolution were written by Marx and Engels. 
 Despite police persecution, the newspaper boldly championed the interests of revolutionary democracy and the proletariat. 
 Publication of the newspaper was discontinued following Marx’s deportation from Prussia in May 1849 and reprisals against other editors. 
 p. 
 345 Karl Marx, “Die Krisis und die Konterrevolution” (see Marx/ Engels, Werke , Dietz Verlag, Berlin, 1959, Bd. 
 5, S. 
 402). 
 p. 
 345 This refers to the All-Germany National Agsembly convened after the March 1848 revolution in Germany in Frankfort-on-the-Main in May of the same year. 
 The Assembly faced the task of putting an end to the political fragmentation of Germany and of drawing up a constitution for all Germany. 
 Due to the cowardice and the vacillation of its Liberal majority, and the irresoluteness and inconsistency of the petty-bourgeois Left wing, the Assembly did not dare to assume supreme power in the country and failed to take a resolute stand on the major questions of the German revolution of 1848-49. 
 It did nothing to alleviate the position of the workers and peasants and did not support the national liberation movement in Poland and Bohemia, but approved the policy of oppression of subject peoples pursued by Austria and Prussia. 
 The deputies did not have the courage to mobilise the106 107 108 109 110 111The Victory of the Cadets and the Tasks of the Workers ’ Party people for the defeat of the counter-revolutionary offensive and the defence of the Imperial Constitution which they had framed in March 1849. 
 Shortly afterwards the Austrian and then the Prussian govern-ments recalled their deputies, and the Liberal deputies of other German states followed suit. 
 The remaining deputies,who belonged to the petty-bourgeois Left wing, had the Assembly moved to Stuttgart. 
 In June 1849 the Assembly was disbanded by the troops of the Württemberg Government. 
 p. 
 345 See Marx/Engels, Werke , Dietz Verlag, Berlin, 1959, Bd. 
 5, S 40. 
 p. 
 346 On January 9, 1905, over 140,000 St. 
 Petersburg workers carrying gonfalons and icons, marched to the Winter Palace to submit a petition to the tsar. 
 The march was staged by the priest Gapon, an agent of the secret police, at a time when the strike of the Putilov workers, which began on January 3 (16), had already spread to the other factories in the city. 
 The Bolsheviks exposed Gapon’s venture, warning the workers that the tsar might unleash a massacre. 
 The Bolsheviks were right. 
 On orders from the tsar, the troops met the demonstrating workers, their wives and children with rifle shots, sabres and Cossack whips. 
 More than a thousand workers were killed and five thousand wounded. 
 January 9, or Bloody Sunday as it came to be known, sparked off the 1905 Revolution. 
 p. 
 346 See present edition, Vol. 
 9, pp. 
 131-32. 
 p. 
 346See present edition, Vol. 
 10, pp. 
 216-17. 
 p. 
 347Lenin is referring to the daily newspaper Nasha Zhizn (Our Life) which was published at intervals in St. 
 Petersburg, from Novem-ber 6 (19), 1904 to July 11 (24), 1906. 
 p. 
 347 Brentanoism —a political trend originated by the German bourgeois economist Lujo Brentano (1844-1931), who preached “class peace” in capitalist society and maintained that it was possible to eliminate social contradictions without the class struggle and that the labour question could be settled and the interests of the workers and the capitalists reconciled through the establishment of reformist trade unions, and factory legislation. 
 p. 
 355 Bez Zaglaviya (Without a Title)—political weekly published in St. 
 Petersburg from January 24 (February 6) to May 14 (27), 1906. 
 It was edited by Prokopovich, who worked in close co-operation with Kuskova, Bogucharsky, Khizhnyakov and others. 
 The Bez Zaglaviya supporters formed a semi-Cadet, semi-Menshe-vik group of Russian bourgeois intellectuals who, under the guise of non-partisanship, propagated the ideas of bourgeois liberalism112 113 114 115116 117 118 and opportunism, and supported revisionists in tho Russian and international Social-Democratic movement. 
 p. 
 356 Lenin is referring to the disagreements in the Social-Democrat group of the German Reichstag over the shipping subsidies ( Damp-fersubvention ). 
 Late in 1884 Bismarck, in pursuance of the expan-sionist colonial policy, demanded from the Reichstag that it approve subsidies to shipping companies for establishing regular shipping routes to East Asia, Australia and Africa. 
 The Left wing of the Social-Democratic group led by Bebel and Liebknecht rejected the subsidies, but the Right wing, under Auer, Dietz and others, which constituted the majority, declared themselves in favour of granting subsidies, even before the official debate on the question. 
 During the Reichstag debate in March 1885, the Social-Democratic Right wing voted for subsidies for shipping lines to East Asia and Australia, making a number of reservations, in particular that the ships for the new lines should be built at German shipyards. 
 Only after the Reichstag declined this demand did the whole group unanimously come out against the govern-ment bill. 
 The behaviour of the majority of the group came in for criticism from the newspaper Sozialdemokrat and Social-Democratic organisations. 
 At one time the disagreements within the group were so acute that they threatened to lead to a split in the Party. 
 Engels sharply criticised the opportunist stand taken by the group’s Right wing (see Marx/Engels, Werke , Dietz Verlag, Berlin, Bd. 
 36). 
 p. 
 358 The “ Youth ” group in the German Social-Democratic Party—a petty-bourgeois, semi-anarchist opposition which took shape in 1890. 
 The nucleus of the opposition was made up of young writers and students, who posed as Party theoreticians and leaders. 
 Blind to the changes brought about by the abrogation of the Anti-Socialist Law in 1878, they denied the need for the Party to make use of legal forms of struggle, opposed the participation of Social-Democrats in parliament, and accused the Party of opportunism and defending the interests of the petty bourgeoisie. 
 Engels wrote that the theoretical views and tactics of the opposition were “‘Marxism’ distorted beyond recognition”. 
 Their unrealistic and adventurist tactics, he said, might “ruin even the strongest party numbering millions of members” (see Marx/Engels, Werke , Dietz Verlag, Berlin, 1963, Bd. 
 22, S. 
 69). 
 Some leaders of the “Left” opposition were expelled from the Party at the Erfurt Congress in October 1891. 
 p. 
 358 Severny Golos (Voice of the North)—a legal daily newspaper, organ of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, which appeared in St. 
 Petersburg from Decem-ber 6 (19), 1905 and was edited jointly by the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks. 
 It was closed down after its third issue had appeared, on December 8 (21), 1905. 
 p. 
 358 Nachalo (The Beginning)—a legal daily Menshevik newspaper, published in St. 
 Petersburg from November to December 1905. 
 p. 
 359119 120 121 122 Novaya Zhizn (New Life)—the first legal Bolshevik newspaper pub-lished daily in St. 
 Petersburg from October 27 (November 9) to December 3 (16), 1905. 
 From the beginning of November, after Lenin’s return to St. 
 Petersburg from abroad, it was published under his direct guidance. 
 The paper was actually the Central Organ of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 p. 
 359 Polyarnaya Zvezda (The Pole Star)—a weekly journal, mouthpiece of the Right wing of the Constitutional-Democratic Party. 
 It was edited by P. 
 B. 
 Struve and appeared in St. 
 Petersburg in 1905-06. 
 Nasha Zhizn (Our Life)—a daily newspaper that was close to the Left wing of the Constitutional-Democratic Party; appeared in St. 
 Petersburg at intervals, from 1904 to 1906. 
 p. 
 360 See present edition, Vol. 
 10, pp. 
 241-54. 
 p. 
 361The Conference met in Moscow from November 2 to 8, 1920, with 283 delegates attending. 
 The main question discussed was the establishment of the Chief Committee for Political Education. 
 A. 
 V. 
 Lunacharsky delivered the opening address, in which he dealt with the work done in the sphere of political education. 
 The Conference also heard a report by N. 
 K. 
 Krupskaya on the current plan of work of the Chief Committee for Political Educa-tion, and Y. 
 A. 
 Litkens’s report on the organisation of local polit-ical education departments. 
 Other items on the agenda concerned the food campaign and political education, production propaganda in the light of the rehabilitation of economic activity, and the elimination of illiteracy. 
 Lenin spoke after Krupskaya at the third session of the Conference, on the second day of the proceed-ings. 
 p. 
 363 This document formed the basis of the resolution on the tasks of the trade union movement, which was passed by the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) group of the Fifth All-Russia Conference of Trade Unions on November 8, 1920, and published in Pravda on November 13. 
 200 delegates supported the resolution, with 12 delegates abstaining. 
 At the Conference, which took place in Moscow between Novem-ber 2 and 6, the Party raised the question of reorganising the work of the trade unions in keeping with the tasks of peaceful socialist construction, extending democracy and abandoning purely administrative methods. 
 Trotsky came out against the proposed reorganisation. 
 At a sitting of the Communist group on November 3, he spoke “fine word”, as Lenin said, about “shaking up” the trade unions, “tightening the screws” and immediate “govern-mentalisation of trade unions”. 
 Trotsky’s speech, which sparked off a discussion in the Party, was duly rebuffed by the Communist delegates. 
 Disagreement with Trotsky over trade unions concerned the methods of approaching the masses, of winning over and establishing ties with them. 
 Had Trotsky had his way, the trade unions would have been ruined and the dictatorship of the proletariat123 124 125 126 127 undermined. 
 The Central Committee of the Party, therefore, could not leave the matter at that. 
 On November 8 Lenin read his theses at a plenary meeting of the Central Committee, in which he opposed Trotsky’s views. 
 Trotsky’s theses won 7 votes, and Lenin’s, 8 votes. 
 Lenin’s theses formed the basis of his draft resolution on “The Tasks of the Trade Unions, and the Methods of Their Accomplish-ment”, which was passed by 10 votes against 4, with 1 abstention. 
 p. 
 374 The Central Committee of the Ceneral Transport Workers ’ Union was formed in September 1920. 
 The amalgamation was necessi-tated by the need to provide a stable centralised leadership capable of coping with the speedy rehabilitation of transport, whose dislocation threatened to disrupt the country’s economy. 
 This called for temporary extraordinary measures, and made it neces-sary to put the trade unions on a wartime footing. 
 The new body did much to rehabilitate the transport facilities, but then lost its ties with the trade union rank and file. 
 The red tape and the purely administrative methods of the Trotskyite union leaders who made arbitrary appointments and abandoned democratic meth-ods of work—all this set the transport workers against the Party and tended to create a split among them. 
 The Central Committee of the Party condemned these reprehensible methods, and the plenary meetings of the Central Committee held on November 8 and December 7, 1920, decided to incorporate the union in the system of the All-Russia Central Council of Trade Unions on an equal footing with the other trade unions, recommending to the union leaders that they change their methods of work: extend democracy within the union, apply the principle of election of trade union bodies on a broad scale, discontinue the practice of arbitrary appointments, etc. 
 The First All-Russia Congress of Transport Workers, which was called by the Central Committee of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) in March 1921, expelled the Trotskyites from the union leadeship and defined various measures to improve the work of the union. 
 p. 
 374 This work consists of two articles on a single subject. 
 The first article, whose title covers the two articles in the present edition, was written on November 4, 1920, and first published in Pravda No. 
 250 on November 7, 1920. 
 In the note to the article, the editors wrote: “Comrade Lenin wrote the article before he received the news of the despicable behaviour of D’Aragona and the oppor-tunist trade unionists, Party members, who insisted on their policy in opposition to the Central Committee of their own Party and, acting in collusion with Minister Giolitti, frustrated an immense movement of the working class. 
 These facts, of which we shall speak in greater detail in one of our next issues, confirm still more strikingly that Lenin is right. 
” The second article, which Lenin entitled “False Talk on Freedom (Instead of an Epi-logue)” was written on December 11, 1920. 
 The following note128 129 is to be found in the MS: “NB: if you are going to publish it at all, then publish it as an epilogue to the article on the struggle in the Italian Socialist Party. 
 NB” (Central Party Archives at the Insti-tute of Marxism-Leninism of the C. 
C. 
 C. 
P. 
S. 
U. 
). 
 Both articles were published in issue No. 
 15 of the journal The Communist International in December 1920 under a common title “False Talk on Freedom”. 
 p. 
 377 See pp. 
 280-82 in this volume. 
 p. 
 379l’Humanité —French daily founded by Jean Jaurès in 1904 as organ of the French Socialist Party. 
 During the First World War it was the mouthpiece of the extreme Right wing of the Party and took a social-chauvinist stand. 
 Shortly after the split in the Party at the congress in December 1920 and the formation of the Communist Party, it became the organ of the latter and has since then been published as such. 
 p. 
 382 See p. 
 191 in this volume. 
 p. 
 388See present edition, Vol. 
 26, pp. 
 91-92. 
 p. 
 389See Karl Marx, Capital , Moscow, Vol. 
 I, 1962, p. 
 176. 
 p. 
 392 See Frederick Engels, Anti-Dühring , Moscow, 1959, p. 
 148. 
 p. 
 392 The Red Army’s drive against Wrangel began at the end of Octo-ber 1920. 
 After heavy fighting Wrangel was hurled back into the Crimea. 
 On the night of November 7 the Red Army troops launched an offensive on the Perekop Isthmus and by November 16 cleared the Crimea of the whiteguards. 
 Thus the period of the Civil war and foreign intervention was in the main brought to an end. 
 p. 
 399 The extraordinary congress of the Independent Social-Democratic Party of Germany met in Halle on October 12-17, 1920. 
 The main question on the agenda was the terms of admission into the Communist International. 
 The fierce struggle over this question caused a split in the party, 237 delegates voting for affiliation to the Comintern, and 156 against. 
 The Right wing called its own congress and elected an executive committee, retaining the old name of the party. 
 The Left wing and the Communist Party (the Spartacists) formed the United Communist Party of Germany. 
 p. 
 399 The mutiny in the Second Black Sea squadron of the French navy,which broke out in April-May 1919, was directed against the French Government’s policy in sending 300,000 soldiers and sailors to Russia to crush Soviet power. 
 The interventionists’ troops in the South numbered over 130,000 men. 
 The Odessa underground committee of the Bolshevik Party headed by Smirnov (Lastoch-130 131 132 133134135 136 137 138 kin), and its Foreign Collegium with Jeanne Labourbe as a member of its Bureau, played an important role in fostering the revolu-tionary spirit of the soldiers and sailors of the interventionist troops. 
 The Collegium included such experienced Communist agitators as Yakov Yelin, Vladimir Dyogot and others, who established contacts with soldiers and the crews of a number of ships. 
 The mutiny began on April 20 on the battleships France and Jean Bart , which were riding off Sevastopol harbour. 
 Other ship crews and soldiers of the 175th French Infantry Regiment supported their action. 
 Then the mutiny spread to the ships in Odessa harbour. 
 The mutineers demanded that the intervention should be stopped at once and the troops sent home, threatening to join the Red Army if their demands were not granted. 
 The French command arrestet the mutineers’ leaders and sent them off to France, where they were treated most harshly. 
 The mutiny was defeated because the mutineers did not have a clear revolutionary aim or capable leadership, and no Communigt Party yet existed in France. 
 However, the action of the French soldiers and sailors, who gave revo-lutionary support to the world’s first working people’s state stimulated the growth of the revolutionary movement in France. 
 The successes of the Red Army, revolutionary action in the French army and navy, and the workers’ pressure compelled the French Government to withdraw its troops from Russia. 
 p. 
 400 This document served as a basis for the draft theses of the Chief Committee for Political Education, which were published in Pravda No. 
 267 on November 27, 1920, under the heading “Production Propaganda (Draft Theses of the Chief Committee for Political Education)”. 
 The question of production propaganda was first raised in connection with the discussion of the immediate tasks of economic development, at the Ninth Party Congress held from March 29 to April 5, 1920. 
 But after Poland’s attack on the Soviet Republic, the brief respite came to an end and the questions of economic development receded into the background. 
 Only at the end of 1920, after the signing of a preliminary peace with Poland and the defeat of Wrangel, did the question of production propaganda aimed at drawing the masses into the work of economic rehabilitati-on come up again with renewed urgency. 
 Production propaganda, first suggested by Lenin, remains to this day one of the main tasks of the political, cultural and educational activities of the Party and the Soviet state. 
 p. 
 404 Bednota (The Poor)—a daily newspaper published by the C. 
C. 
 C. 
P. 
S. 
U. 
(B. 
) from March 27, 1918 to January 31, 1931. 
 On Feb-ruary 1, 1931 it merged with Sotsialisticheskoye Zemledeliye (Socialist Farming), which is published to this day. 
 p. 
 405 The Conference was held in the Kremlin between November 20 and 22, 1920, during the discussion on trade unions, which had begun139 140 141 in the Party. 
 The acute struggle waged by opposition groups against the Party’s policy created a tense atmosphere at the Con-ference. 
 The anti-Party “Democratic Centralism”, “Workers’ Opposition” and Ignatov’s groups demagogically attacked the Party’s policy. 
 Before and during the Conference they tried to gain decisive influence in the Party’s Moscow organisation. 
 In an attempt to get the maximum number of their supporters elected to the Moscow Committee the “Workers’ Opposition” group held a special conference of their supporters from among the worker delegates. 
 Directed by Lenin, the Conference repulsed the anti-Party attacks and pointed to the need of combating the unscrupulous groups bred by an atmosphere of recriminations. 
 After hearing the report of the Moscow Committee, the Conference passed a resolution reflecting the viewpoint of the Central Committee. 
 The list of candidate members of the Moscow Committee, drawn up by the opposition at the private conference was blackballed, and only those delegates were elected who had been nominated by the Political Bureau of the Central Committee. 
 p. 
 408 Peace between the R. 
 S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
 and Finland was signed on October 14, 1920. 
 The treaty terminated the state of war, confirmed Fin-land’s independence and sovereignty as granted by the Soviet Government in 1917, and laid down the state frontiers between the two countries. 
 Peace between the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
 and Estonia was signed in Yuryev (now Tartu) on February 2, 1920. 
 Under the treaty Soviet Russia recognised Estonia’s independence. 
 Latvian ruling circles were also compelled to sign peace with the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
, following the defeat of the foreign interventionists and the whiteguards in 1919 and the resulting consolidation of Soviet Russia’s international position. 
 On March 25, 1920, the Latvian Foreign Ministry approached the Soviet Government suggesting that peace talks be started. 
 On April 16, the Soviet and Latvian representatives started peace talks in Moscow and on August 11 a treaty was signed with Latvia in Riga. 
 p. 
 409 In the autumn of 1920 Washington Vanderlip, who represented the U. 
S. 
 Vanderlip Syndicate, arrived in Moscow to negotiate a concession for fishing, prospecting and extracting oil and coal in Kamchatka and elsewhere in Siberia, east of the 160th meridian. 
 In agreeing to the concession, the Soviet Government intended not only to establish mutually advantageous co-operation with American businessmen but also to normalise relations between Soviet Russia and the United States. 
 Vanderlip’s move, however, did not get the support of the U. 
S. 
 Administration and financial tycoons, and the agreement was never signed. 
 p. 
 413 To incite Turkey against Soviet Russia and torpedo the talks between the two countries on the establishment of friendly142 143 144 relations, the Entente diplomats provoked Dashnak Armenia’s attack on Turkey. 
 The Dashnak nationalist party, then in power in Armenia (1918-20), pursued an aggressive policy with regard to Turkey and aimed at establishing a “Greater Armenia” that would include nearly half of Asia Minor. 
 On September 24, 1920 the Dashnak government began hostilities against Turkey, but five days later the Turkish troops checked the Dashnak offensive and, in a counter-offensive lasting from September to November occupied Sarykamysh, Kars and Alexandropol. 
 The Turkish Gov-ernment decided to take advantage of the adventurist Dashnak policy and occupy the whole of Armenia. 
 On November 11 the People’s Commissariat for Foreign Affairs of the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
 offered its mediation to the warring parties. 
 Turkey rejected Soviet mediation, and the Dashnak government had to agree to a shackling treaty which made Armenia a Turkish protectorate. 
 The treaty, however, did not go into force, because by November 29, when it was to be signed, the Dashnak govern-ment bad been overthrown and Soviet power proclaimed in Armenia. 
 Claiming that the treaty was still valid, the Turkish Government held up the evacuation of Alexandropol district. 
 Only after the Soviet Government had, in the middle of May 1921, firmly demanded the evacuation of the district, were the Turkish forces withdrawn. 
 p. 
 415 Lenin is referring to his “Report on the Immediate Tasks of the Soviet Government” which he delivered at a session of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee on April 29, 1918 (see present edition, Vol. 
 27, pp. 
 281-305). 
 p. 
 417 The reference is to the book Plan for the Electrification of the R. 
 S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
 Report of the State Commission for the Electrification of Russia to the Eighth Congress of Soviets published in Moscow in 1920. 
 The outcome of collective work by leading scientists and specialists, the plan was the first long-term plan for the creation of the material foundation of socialism on the basis of the coun-try’s electrification. 
 Lenin called this plan “the Party’s second programme”. 
 p. 
 419 Lenin is referring to the resolutions of the Ninth All-Russia Con-ference of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) (see VKP (B) v rezolutsiyakh i resheniyakh syezdov , konferentsii i plenumov TsK [the C. 
P. 
 S. 
U. 
(B. 
) in the Resolutions and Decisions of Its Congresses , Conferences and Plenums of the Central Committee ], Part. 
 I, 1940, pp. 
 349-54). 
 p. 
 422 This Conference was held in the Hall of Columns, the House of Trade Unions, on November 25, 1920, and was attended by more than 2,000 delegates. 
 Lenin delivered a report on the interna-tional and domestic position of the Soviet Republic and the immediate tasks of the working class. 
 p. 
 429145 146 147 148 Held in the Hall of Columns, the House of Trade Unions, on November 26, 1920, this meeting discussed reports on the Mos-cow Gubernia Conference of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) and the war situation. 
 Lenin spoke at the meeting in connection with the publication of the decree on concessions, on November 25. 
 p. 
 430 The Council of People ’s Commissars , with Lenin as chairman, was formed by the Second All-Russia Congress of Soviets in Octo-ber 1917. 
 It was occasionally called the great, or full, Council to distinguish it from the small, or limited, Council, which functioned under its auspices from December 1917 to 1926 as a commission dealing with minor questions and preparing various questions for consideration by the full Council of People’s Commissars. 
 p. 
 430 The Peace Treaty of Versailles which concluded the First World War, was signed on June 28, 1919, by the U. 
S. 
A. 
, the British Empire, France, Italy, Japan and other Allied Powers, on the one hand, and Germany, on the other. 
 Lenin wrote, “this is an unparalleled and predatory peace, which has made slaves of tens of millions of people, including the most civilised”, (see p. 
 326 in this volume). 
 The treaty con-solidated the re-partition of thc capitalist world in favour of the victors, and established a system of relationships between coun-tries which was aimed at strangling Soviet Russia and suppressing the world revolutionary movement. 
 p. 
 431 The imperialist government of Japan, in collusion with U. 
S. 
 and British ruling circles, invaded the Far East in the spring of 1918 in an attempt to seize Soviet territory east of Lake Baikal. 
 On April 5, Japanese troops landed in Vladivostok. 
 Operating from their main strategic base in Vladivostok, they occupied the Maritime Province, Northern Sakhalin and the Trans-Baikal region. 
 The rout of Kolchak at the end of 1919, the growing guerilla movement and the economic crisis in Japan in 1920-21, which was aggravated by the Japanese-American contradictions, spelled the doom of the interventionists. 
 By the autumn of 1922 their rout was complete and on October 25 the last interventionists left Vladivostok. 
 p. 
 431 The reference is to the talks with Bullitt (see Note 47). 
 p. 
 432The Workers ’ Opposition was an anti-Party anarcho-syndicalist factional group led by Shlyapnikov, Medvedev, Kollontai, Kutu-zov, Lutovinov and others. 
 Demagogically calling itself the “Work-ers’ Opposition”, the group came out into the open for the first time at the Ninth All-Russia Conference of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) in September 1920. 
 In November, during the Moscow Gubernia Conference of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
), the group called a special confer-ence, thus taking the path of factional struggle and the subversion of the Party’s unity. 
 The “Workers’ Opposition” group was149 150 151 152 153 154 finally constituted during the discussion on the trade unions in 1920-21. 
 The views of the group, as an anarcho-syndicalist de-viation in the Party, were most fully set forth in the pamphlet by Kollontai entitled Workers ’ Opposition , published on the eve of the Tenth Congress of the Party. 
 The opposition suggested that the management of the economy should be entrusted to “the All-Russia Congress of Producers” united in producers’ trade unions, which were to elect their central organ to manage the economy. 
 The opposition demanded that all economic management bodies be elected by the respective trade unions, whose candidates could not be revoked by Party or government bodies. 
 This amounted to the denial of the Party’s leading role and the dictatorship of the proletariat as the main instrument in socialist construction. 
 The opposition set the trade unions against the Soviet state and the Communist Party, regarding trade unions, and not the Party, as the highest form of the organisation of the working class. 
 On inner-Party questions the platform of the Workers’ Oppo-sition amounted to slanderous accusations that the Party leadership had “lost links with the Party rank and file”, “under-estimated the creative power of the proletariat”, and “degenerated”. 
 There was a time when the Workers’ Opposition had some support from backward sections of the workers, who more than any others succumbed to the influence of the petty-bourgeois environment. 
 The opposition took advantage of the vacillation in this unstable section of the workers to further their ends. 
 The opposition got support from a number of central and local Party organisations, its platform gaining 21 per cent of the votes at the Moscow Gubernia Conference of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) in November 1920 and 30 per cent at a meeting of the Communist group of the Second All-Russia Congress of Mine Workers at the beginning of 1921. 
 As a result of the Party’s explanatory work exposing the demagogical anti-Party slogans of the opposition, the number of its supporters declined. 
 Less than 8 per cent of the delegates to the Tenth Party Congress voted for its platform. 
 The Congress dealt a crushing blow at the opposition’s views. 
 The resolution “On the Syndicalist and Anarchist Deviation in Our Party” tabled by Lenin pointed out that these views were incorrect theoretically and “in practice weakened the sustained guiding line of the Com-munist Party and served the interests of the class enemies of the proletarian revolution” ( KPSS v rezolutsiyakh i resheniyakh syezdov , konferentsii i plenumov TsK [The C. 
P. 
 S. 
U. 
 in the Resolutions and Decisions of Its Congresses , Conferences and Plenums of the Central Committee ], Part I, 1954, p. 
 532). 
 The Congress recognised propaganda of the views of the Workers’ Oppo-sition to be incompatible with Party membership. 
 The resolution on Party unity adopted by the Congress demanded the immediate dissolution of all groups without exception, which had a political platform of their own. 
 After the Congress most of the Party rank and file broke with the Workers’ Opposition and unreservedly supported the line of the Party. 
 Under Shlyapnikov and Medve-dev, the remnants of the opposition, however, retained their illegal organisation and continued their anti-Party propaganda under cover of arch-revolutionary phrases. 
 In February 1922 they sent “a statement of 22” to the Executive Committee of the Comintern, which was nothing short of a slanderous lampoon against the Party. 
 After a thorough study of the statement, the Executive Committee condemned the group’s actions and warned them that, if continued, their actions would place the group outside the Third International. 
 At the Eleventh Party Congress held in 1922 the group was defeated organisationally. 
 p. 
 436 This telegram was sent in reply to greetings from the Revolu-tionary Military Committee of Armenia on the occasion of the establishment of Soviet power there. 
 The Committee sent its greetings on November 30, 1920. 
 p. 
 437 The Far Eastern Republic was set up in April 1920 and included the Trans-Baikal, Amur, Maritime and Kamchatka regions and Northern Sakhalin. 
 Formally a bourgeois-democratic state, it actually pursued a Soviet policy. 
 Its formation was in keeping with the interests of Soviet Russia, which needed a prolonged respite from war in the Far East and wanted to stave off war with Japan. 
 At the same time, however, its creation was a step the Soviet Government had been compelled to take by the pressure of circumstances (see p. 
 465 in this volume). 
 After the interventionists and whiteguards were driven out of the Soviet Far East (except Northern Sakhalin), the People’s Assembly of the Republic voted for entry into the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
 on November 14, 1922. 
 p. 
 445 This refers to the draft of a trade agreement between Great Brit-ain and the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
, which President of the Board of Trade Edward F. 
 Wise presented to L. 
 B. 
 Krasin, head of the Soviet trade delegation in London, on November 29, 1920. 
 The talks to normalise economic and political contacts, which had started in May 1920, dragged on and nearly broke down on several occasions. 
 On March 16, 1921, they ended in the signing of a trade agreement. 
 p. 
 452 Narody Vostoka (Peoples of the East)—a monthly journal, organ of the Council for Propaganda and Guiding the Activities of the Peoples of the East, published by a decision of the First Congress of the Peoples of the East, which was held in Baku from Septem-ber 1 to September 7, 1920. 
 Only one issue appeared—in October 1920. 
 It came out in Russian, Turkish, Persian and Arabic. 
 p. 
 453 Lenin is referring to the bill “On Measures to Strengthen and Develop Peasant Farming” which the Council of People’s Com-missars submitted to the Presidium of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee for consideration by the Eighth All-Russia Congress of Soviets. 
 It was published in Izvestia No. 
 281 on December 14, 1920). 
155 156 157 158 159 The bill combined measures for the state regulation of agri-cultural development and incentives for the peasants to raise output on their farms. 
 The Eighth Congress of Soviets passed the bill by a unanimous vote. 
 p. 
 458 The Conference met in Moscow from December 1 to 6, 1920, with over 200 women delegates participating, representing 5 republics, 65 gubernias and 5 administrative regions. 
 The Conference discussed a report on the foreign and domestic, situation of the country, a report of the C. 
C. 
’s Department on work among women, the immediate tasks of departments’ for work among women, and the question of mother and child protection. 
 The Conference emphasised the need to boost production and extend production propaganda and the enrolment of working women in the trade unions and the Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection. 
 Lenin’s message of greetings, conveyed by telephone, was read at a sitting of the Conference on December 6. 
 p. 
 460 The Congress was held in Moscow from December 22 to 29, 1920. 
 There was a record attendance of 2,537 delegates, of whom 1,728 had full voting rights, and 809 had deliberative votes. 
 The Congress met at a time when the Soviet Republic had won victory over the foreign interventionists and internal counter-revolution, and the economic front, as Lenin said, had become “the main, the principal front”. 
 The Congress was guided by Lenin, who delivered a report on the work of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee and the Council of People’s Commissars, and a speech closing the debate on his report at plenary sessions of the Congress on December 22 and 23. 
 He also took the floor six times at sittings of the Commu-nist group of the Congress on December 21, 22, 24 and 27 to deal with the question of concessions and the bill on measures to strengthen and develop peasant farming. 
 After the debate on Lenin’s report, the Congress passed a resolution by an overwhelming majority, approving the activities of the Soviet Government. 
 The delegates gave a concerted rebuff to representatives of the petty-bourgeois parties who made a num-ber of anti-Soviet declarations at the Congress and tabled a draft resolution of their own. 
 The Congress adopted the plan for the electrification of Russia which was drawn up on Lenin’s initiative and in keeping with his directions. 
 This was the first long-term economic plan of the Soviet state, which Lenin called “the Party’s second programme”. 
 The Lenin (see p. 
 532 in this volume). 
 One of the most important questions on the agenda was the bill on measures to strengthen and develop peasant farming, passed by the Council of People’s Commissars on December 1-4, 1920. 
 Lenin participated in the discussion of the main clauses of the law at a private meeting of non-Party peasant delegates on160 161 resolution adopted on Krzhizhanovsky’s report was drafted by December 22 and in the Communist group of the Congress on December 24 and 27. 
 The Congress unanimously approved the bill. 
 The transition to peaceful construction called for the improve-ment and reorganisation of the entire Soviet apparatus. 
 The Con-gress passed a detailed resolution on the question, setting up proper relations between central and local administrative bodies. 
 The Congress dealt extensively with questions relating to the reorganisation of the entire system of economic management to meet the new tasks. 
 The delegates discussed and approved a new statute of the Council of Labour and Defence. 
 The Congress instituted the Order of the Red Banner of Labour to be awarded for labour heroism, initiative and organisation in solving economic tasks. 
 p. 
 461 Lenin is referring to his speech at the meeting of activists of the Moscow organisation of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) on December 6, 1920 (see pp. 
 438-59 in this volume). 
 p. 
 464 Lenin is apparently referring to the collection Red Calvary put out in memory of the victims of the Japanese intervention. 
 p. 
 465 On May 26, 1919, the Supreme Council sent a Note to Kolchak over the signatures of Wilson, Lloyd George, Clemenceau, Orlando and Saionji informing him of the Allies’ readiness to recognise Kolchak and supply him with food and munitions to enable him to become ruler of all Russia. 
 In return Kolchak was to convene a constituent assembly after he took Moscow, recognise the in-dependence of Poland and Finland and, unless agreement could be reached on the relations between Russia, on the one hand, and Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, the Caucasian and Trans-Caspian territories, on the other, to submit this question to the League of Nations and to recognise their autonomy pending a decision by the League, etc. 
 In his reply Kolchak accepted a number of conditions. 
 On July 12 Britain, France, the U. 
S. 
A. 
 and Italy, considering Kolchak’s reply satisfactory, reaffirmed their readi-ness to give him help. 
 p. 
 466 The decree of the Council of People’s Commissars on concessions, the accompanying maps of forest, agricultural and mining concessions and several articles by leading Soviet specialists were published in the journal Russische Korrespondenz No. 
 1-2 for 1921. 
 p. 
 476 The reference is to a meeting of activists of the Moscow organisa-tion of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) on December 6, 1920. 
 p. 
 481 “Sukharevka” was the name of a market-place near the Sukharev Tower built under Peter I in 1692. 
 At the time of the foreign military intervention and the Civil War it became a centre and symbol of black marketeering. 
 In December 1920 the Moscow Soviet decided to close the market. 
162 163 164 165 166 167 When the New Economic Policy was introduced, the market reappeared and existed till 1932. 
 In 1934 the Sukharev Tower was demolished as a hindrance to traffic. 
 p. 
 483 On August 10, 1920, the French Government officially recognised Wrangel as the ruler of South Russia. 
 p. 
 488 This agreement, which established friendly relations between the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
 and Persia was signed in Moscow on February 26, 1921, despite opposition from British ruling circles. 
 It was based on the principles of peaceful coexistence and co-operation—equal-ity, respect for the sovereignty of the two-countries, non-inter-ference in internal affairs, and mutual advantage. 
 All the treaties concluded by tsarist Russia with Persia and third parties which infringed on the sovereignty of the Persian people were revoked. 
 Persia got back all the concessions of the tsarist government on her territory. 
 The Soviet Government renounced claims to the loans granted to Persia by the tsarist government. 
 Especially important were the articles pledging both parties to preclude the formation or the existence on their respective territories of organ-isations or groups with aims subversive to Russia or Persia. 
 This was the first equal treaty in the history of Persia. 
 p. 
 491 See present edition, Vol. 
 27, pp. 
 314-17. 
 p. 
 495The All-Russia Bureau for Production Propaganda of the All-Russia Central Council of Trade Unions was set up by a decision of the C. 
C. 
 R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) on December 8, 1920. 
 It consisted of representatives of the Central Committee of the Communist Party (Bolsheviks), the All-Russia Central Council of Trade Unions, the Supreme Council of the National Economy, the Chief Com-mittee for Political Education, the Central Board for Vocational Training, and the Commissariat of Agriculture. 
 On January 21, 1921, the Organising Bureau of the Party’s Central Committee approved the statute of the bureau which defined the aims and tasks of central and local bodies in charge of production propa-ganda and their structure. 
 The bureau was instructed to work out a general plan of propaganda, and direct and supervise various organs and bodies in carrying out their production propaganda. 
 p. 
 500 The decree of the Council of People’s Commissars on “Provisional Rules on Bonuses in Kind” was published on October 23, 1920. 
 p. 
 508 Order No. 
 1042 was issued by the Chief Department of Railways on May 22, 1920. 
 It dealt with the repair of locomotives damaged during the First World War and the Civil War. 
 Railway depots were ordered to lower the percentage of locomotives under repair from 60 to 20 per cent in four and a half years, beginning from July 1, 1920. 
 p. 
 510168 169 170 171 172 173 The first session of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee of the seventh convocation held on February 2-7, 1920, instructed the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the National Economy and the People’s Commissariat of Agriculture to work out a plan for the construction of a network of power stations. 
 On February 21, 1920, the Supreme Council of the National Economy, by agreement with the People’s Commissariat of Agriculture, appoint-ed a State Commission for the Electrification of Russia. 
 The Commission began its work on March 20 and by the time the Eighth Congress of Soviets met it had compiled an over-all plan for the electrification of the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
 The State Commission was set up on Lenin’s initiative and in keeping with his direc-tives. 
 p. 
 514 On November 14, 1920, Lenin attended the ceremony of the opening of an electric power station in the village of Kashino, Yaropolets Volost, Volokolamsk Uyezd, where he had been invited by the local peasants. 
 Lenin spoke to the latter and then gave an address on the importance of electrification for the national economy. 
 p. 
 517 On December 22, 1920, Lenin attended a private conference of non-Party peasant delegates to the Eighth Congress of Soviets, which was called on Lenin’s request by M. 
 I. 
 Kalinin, then Chairman of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee. 
 The conference discussed the bill on measures to strengthen and develop agriculture adopted by the Council of People’s Commissars on December 14, andsubmitted for consideration by the Congress. 
 Lenin closely followed the debate, and took notes of the speeches. 
 p. 
 520 The meeting of the Communist group of the Congress, called in the morning of December 24, 1920, was devoted to a discussion of the bill presented by the Council of People’s Commissars on measures to promote peasant farming. 
 p. 
 525 Lenin is referring to the following passage in his report on work in the countryside, which he delivered at the Eighth Congress of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) on March 23, 1919: “Coercion applied to the middle peasants would cause untold harm” (see present edition, Vol. 
 29, p. 
 210). 
 p. 
 525 The reference is to the law on the socialisation of the land passed on January 18 (31), 1918, by the Third All-Russia Congress of Soviets which was held on January 10-18 (23-31), 1918. 
 Clause 6 of the law read: “All livestock and agricultural im-plements in private possession shall pass, without indemnification, from the hands of the non-working farmers exploiting the labour of others into the hands of uyezd, gubernia, regional and federa-tive Soviets, depending on the importance of the implements and livestock transferred. 
” p. 
 528 The reference is to the armed uprising in Moscow in December 1905, during the first Russian revolution. 
 In December 1905 and174 175 176 177 178 179 180 January 1906 the uprising spread to Nizhni-Novgorod, Rostov-on-Don, Novorossiisk, the Donets coal basin, Ekaterinoslav,Perm (Motovilikha Plant), Ufa, Krasnoyarsk, and Chita. 
 Large-scale armed uprisings took place in the Trans-Caucasus, Poland, the Baltic provinces and Finland, which were ruthlessly suppressed by the tsarist government. 
 The December armed uprising was the peak of the first Russian revolution. 
 Lenin wrote about the uprising in his article“Lessons of the Moscow Uprising” (see present edition, Vol. 
 11,pp. 
 171-78). 
 p. 
 535 THE LIFE AND WORK OF V. 
 I. 
 LENIN Outstanding Dates (!pril –December 19/FL00340) April -May April 29 May 1 May 2 May 419/FL00340 Lenin writes “ Left-Wing ” Communism—an Infan -tile Disorder . 
 In a letter to K. 
 A. 
 Timiryazev Lenin gives a high appraisal of the latter’s book Science and Democracy . 
 Lenin speaks on the foreign and domestic situation of the Soviet Republic at the Fourth All -Russia Congress of glass and porcelain workers. 
 In the morning Lenin participates in a subbotnik in the Kremlin. 
 At 2 p. 
m. 
 Lenin speaks at a meeting dedicated to the laying of the foundation stone of a monument to Karl Marx in Teatralnaya Square (now Sverdlov Square). 
 At 3 p. 
m. 
 Lenin speaks at a meeting dedicated to the laying of the foundation stone of a monument to Liberated Labour on the Moskva River em -bankment, visits an exhibition of the designsfor the future monument at the Museum of Fine Arts (now the Pushkin Museum of Fine Arts). 
 Lenin speaks at meetings in Zamoskvorechye and Baumansky districts in Moscow at the inaugura -tion of the Zagorsky Workers’ Palace of Blagusha -Lefortovo district and at the meeting of workers of the Prokhorov manufacture in Red Presnya district. 
 Lenin’s article “From the First Subbotnik on the Moscow -Kazan Railway to the All -Russia May Day Subbotnik” is published in the handbill Pervo -maisky Subbotnik. 
 Lenin presides over a meeting of the Council of People’s Commissars; submits for approval the message of greetings to the Government of the Azerbaijan Soviet Republic, which is endorsed May 4 or 5 May 5 May 7 May 10 May 12 May 13by the Council. 
 The meeting also discusses the measures to help the Western front, the composi -tion of a commission to be appointed to preparematerials on the formation of the Tatar Autono -mous Soviet Socialist Republic, and other ques -tions. 
 Lenin sends a telegram to all gubernia executive committees, the Moscow and the Petrograd city executive committees and gubernia revolutionary committees, instructing them to assist the Central Statistical Board and its local branches in taking an all -Russia census of the population. 
 Lenin addresses a parade of troops leaving for the Polish front, in Teatralnaya Square. 
 Lenin speaks on the tasks in the defence of the Soviet Republic against the attack of bourgeois -landowner Poland, at a joint session of the All -Russia Central Executive Committee, the Moscow Soviet and representatives of the trade unions and factory committees of Moscow. 
 Lenin sends a message of greetings to the Soviet Socialist Government of Azerbaijan on the formation of an independent Soviet Republic of Azerbaijan. 
 In a letter to M. 
 N. 
 Pokrovsky, Lenin writes about the need to publish a dictionary of present -day Russian. 
 In a letter to the 30th Regiment of Red Com -munards of the Turkestan front Lenin thanks them for the macaroni and flour sent to him. 
 The products were given to the children of Moscow. 
 Lenin directs an emergency session of the Council of Labour and Defence to discuss the supply of the armies on the Western front with munitions and clothing. 
 Lenin writes the Appendix to his “ Left-Wing ” Com-munism—an Infantile Disorder . 
 Lenin sends a directive to the Revolutionary Mili -tary Council of the Caucasus front demanding the immediate dispatch of divisions to help the Western front. 
 Lenin delivers a speech on the international situa -tion at an enlarged conference of workers and Red Army men of Rogozhsko -Simonovsky district. 
 May 14 May 18 May 20 May 21 May 23 May 25 May 26 May 27 May 30Lenin directs a session of the Council of Labour and Defence, which discusses the supply of armies on the Western front with clothes, the food situa -tion in the Donets Basin, and production ofcartridges, rifles and machine -guns. 
 Lenin raises the question of building narrow -gauge railway lines for the transportation of timber. 
 Lenin presides over a session of the Council of People’s Commissars, reports on Stalin’s appoint -ment as member of the Revolutionary MilitaryCouncil of the Republic, Y. 
 S. 
 Hanecki’s co -optation into the Central Union of Consumers’Societies and the extension of the sphere of activity of the Caucasian Soviet Labour Army to include the Don region and the whole of the Soviet Caucasus. 
 Lenin’s reply to the Indian Revolutionary Asso -ciation is published. 
Lenin writes a letter to Serafimovich conveying his condolences on the death of the latter’s son. 
 Lenin directs a session of the Council of Labour and Defence which discusses the supply of the army with cartridges, rifles and machine -guns the shipment of motor vehicles for the army, food supplies for the workers of the Chief Leather Committee, and of the oilfields in Baku and Astrakhan, supply of fuel to Petrograd, etc. 
 Lenin writes his letter “To Petrograd Party Workers” containing instructions on the publication of “Left-Wing ” Communism—an Infantile Disorder . 
 Lenin writes his comments on the draft decree on measures for proper distribution of housing accommodations among working people. 
 Lenin writes a draft decision of the Council of People’s Commissars on food procurements. 
 Lenin talks with a delegation of British workers. 
 Lenin writes amendments and addenda to the draft decision of the Council of People’s Commis -sars on higher technical educational establishments. 
 Lenin writes his “Letter to the British Workers”. 
 June 1 June 2 June 4 June 5 Beginning of June June 8 -10 June 12 June 13 June 18Lenin draws up a plan of theses on the national and the colonial questions for the Second Congress of the Communist International. 
 Lenin sends a telegram to Stalin, member of the Revolutionary Military Council of the South -Western front, informing him of the situationon the Western and the Caucasus fronts and indicat -ing the need of vigorously prosecuting the offen -sive to Kiev, and of sensing reinforcements there from the Crimea. 
 Lenin receives Mr. 
 Fuse, correspondent of the Japanese newspapers Osaka Mainichi and Tokyo Nichi -Nichi . 
 Lenin writes a note to the State Publishing House and the Supreme Council of the National Economy asking that comrades from Kirghizia be provided with a typefoundry, a printing press and stocks of paper. 
 Lenin writes “Preliminary Draft Theses on the National and the Colonial Questions (For the Second Congress of the Communist International)”. 
 Lenin writes “Preliminary Draft Theses on the Agrarian Question (For the Second Congress of the Communist International)”. 
 “Left-Wing ” Communism—an Infantile Disorder is published. 
 Lenin writes a review of issues Nos. 
 1 -18 of the journal Kommunismus , organ of the Communist International for the countries of South -Eastern Europe, published in German in Vienna Lenin speaks on the international situation of the Soviet Republic and the current tasks of the Party in the countryside, at the Second All -Russia Conference of organisers responsible for rural work. 
 Lenin writes amendments and addenda to the draft decision of the C. 
C. 
, R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) on the tasks of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) in Turkestan. 
 Lenin directs a meeting of the Council of Labour and Defence, which discusses the defence of the country against the Polish offensive, revision of the list of militarised enterprises and other questions. 
 June 19 June 20 June 29 June July 2 July 4 July 6 July 8 July 10 Between July 10 and 19 Not later than July 18 July 18Speaking at a meeting of the Executive Committee of the Communist International, Lenin criticises the policy of the French Socialist Party and of the Right wing of the Italian Socialist Party. 
 Lenin instructs the Deputy People’s Commissar of Education to give help to the Pulkovo Observatory. 
 Lenin writes a note to the Secretariat of the C. 
C. 
 R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) proposing to obligate the State Publishing House to arrange for the translation and publication of new economic works and a number of works by materialist philosophers of the seven -teenth and eighteenth centuries. 
 Lenin writes “The Plan of the Resolution on the Content of the Concept ‘Dictatorship of the Proletariat’ and on the Struggle Against the ‘Fashionable’ Distortion of This Slogan”. 
 Lenin writes the appeal “Aid the Wounded of the Red Army!” Lenin writes his “Theses on the Fundamental Tasks of the Second Congress of the Communist Inter -national”. 
 Lenin writes the preface to the French and German editions of his Imperialism , the Latest Stage of Capitalism . 
 Lenin gives directives on checking the English, French and German translations of the pamphlet “Left-Wing ” Communism—an Infantile Disorder . 
 Lenin writes a letter to Chicherin concerning the text of the treaty with Lithuania. 
 Lenin prepares his report on the international situation and the fundamental tasks of the Communist International for the Second Congress of the Communist International. 
 In a letter to the Communist International Executive Committee, Lenin sets forth his plan of theses on the economic and political situation in the world for the Second Congress of the Third, Communist International. 
 Lenin leaves for Petrograd to take part in the proceedings of the Second Congress of the Commu -nist International. 
 July 19 -August 7 July 19 July 20 July 23 July 24 July 25 July 26The Second Congress of the Communist Internation -al is held. 
 Its work is directed by Lenin. 
 At the first session of the Congress, Lenin is elected to the Presidium; he delivers a report on the international situation and the fundamental tasks of the Communist International. 
 Lenin speaks at a meeting dedicated to the laying of the foundation stone of a monument to Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg on Uritsky Square in Petrograd. 
 The meeting is attended by delegates to the Congress. 
 Lenin and Congress delegates lay wreaths on the graves of revolutionary fighters on the Mars Field in Petrograd. 
 Lenin returns to Moscow. 
Lenin presides over the second session of the Second Congress of the Comintern, which has moved to Moscow; he speaks on the role of the Communist Party. 
 The third session of the Congress elects Lenin to the commission on the international situation and the fundamental tasks of the CommunistInternational, the commission on the national and the colonial questions, and the commission on the agrarian question. 
 Lenin directs the work of the commission on the national and the colonial questions and delivers a speech. 
 Lenin’s theses on the terms of admission into the Communist International and his proposal concerning the formation of the leading bodies of the parties applying for admission (Article 20 of the terms of admission into the Comintern) are discussed and approved at a meeting of the commission of the Congress. 
 Lenin writes critical remarks on Levi’s theses on the national and the colonial questions, exposing his nationalist stand. 
 Lenin directs the work of the Congress commissions on the agrarian question and the fundamental tasks of the Communist International. 
 The com -missions approve Lenin’s theses on the questionsunder discussion. 
 July 28 July 30 July August 2 August 3 August 4 August 6Lenin addresses the fourth session of the Congress on behalf of the commission on the national and the colonial questions and submits his theses approved by the commission. 
 Lenin’s theses on the national and the colonial questions are unanimously adopted at the fifth session of the Second Congress of the Communist International. 
 Lenin addresses the eighth session of the Congress during the debate on the terms of admission into the Communist International. 
 Lenin’s theses are approved by the Congress. 
 Lenin writes a note to Kursky asking him if steps have been taken to establish Soviet power without delay, drive out the landowners and transfer their lands to the poor peasants and the Soviets of farm labourers in the areas liberated by the Red Army. 
 Lenin writes his critical comments on the French Socialist Party’s declaration to the Second Congress of the Communist International. 
 Lenin sends a telegram to Stalin informing him of the decision of the Political Bureau of the Party C. 
C. 
 to constitute a separate Southern front, in view of the increased threat from Wrangel. 
 Lenin addresses the tenth session of the Congress during the debate on parliamentarianism. 
 Lenin replies to the telegram by Stalin who expressed his dissatisfaction with the Party C:C. 
’s decision to constitute a separate Southern front, emphasising the correctness of the C. 
C. 
 decision. 
 The thirteenth session of the Second Congress of the Communist International discusses and unani -mously approves Lenin’s theses on the agrarianquestion. 
 Lenin sends a telegram to Stalin asking for the appraisal of the situation on the South -Western and the Wrangel fronts. 
 Lenin addresses the sixteenth session of the Second Congress of the Communist International on the British Communist Party’s affiliation to the Labour Party. 
 August 7 August 11 August 16 August 18 August 19 August 20 August 28 September 1Lenin attends the first sitting of the newly elected Executive Committee of the Communist Inter -national. 
 Lenin writes to the State Publishing House, indicat -ing the need to translate the material appearing in Soviet newspapers, as well as in Communist and bourgeois newspapers of various countries and publish monthly pamphlets in foreign languages exposing the imperialist policy of the Entente. 
 Lenin sends a telegram to Stalin informing him of the progress of the peace talks with Poland and instructing him to intensify the offensive on the Crimean front in order to complete the rout of Wrangel and liberate the whole of the Crimea. 
 Lenin writes his “Letter to the Austrian Commu -nists”. 
Lenin sends a telegram to the Revolutionary Military Council of the Western front instructing it to intensify the offensive against the Poles. 
 Lenin forwards to the “small” Council of People’s Commissars Gorky’s request that the Petrograd scientists be provided with increased food rations,proposing that the request be granted. 
 Lenin sends a telegram to the Revolutionary Military Council of the Western front, instructing it to send without delay reinforcements of Byelorus -sian workers and peasants to the front. 
 Lenin directs a meeting of the Council of Labour and Defence which discusses the Kashira power project, special measures to be taken in the case of the retreat of the Soviet troops on the Wrangel front, the supplying of Moscow with firewood and other questions. 
 Lenin fills in a registration form of the all -Russia census of the population. 
 In a note to the Rumyantsev Museum library (now the Lenin Library) Lenin asks to be lent two best available Greek -German, Greek -French, Greek -Russian or Greek -English dictionaries, the best philosophical dictionaries, dictionaries of philo -sophical terms in German, French, English orRussian and books on the history of Greek philosophy. 
 Lenin reports to the Second All -Russia Congress of the Union of Workers of Education and Social -ist Culture on the current situation. 
 Lenin writes the preface to the second edition of Materialism and Empirio -Criticism . 
 Lenin sends on to the Podolsk Uyezd Food Com -mittee an appeal by the peasants of the village of Bogdanovo to cut down the food requi -sitioning quotas and writes a telephone messageordering an immediate consideration of the appeal and reducing the quotas as much as possible. 
 Lenin directs a meeting of the Council of People’s Commissars which discusses grain requisitioning, the establishment of the Turkestan Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic, etc. 
 Lenin receives a peasant delegate from Siberia and in the course of the talk makes notes on the measures to improve the condition of the peasants in Siberia. 
 Lenin directs a plenary meeting of the Party C. 
C. 
 which discusses the peace talks with Poland, the All -Russia Conference of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) and other questions. 
 Lenin directs the work of the Ninth All -Russia Conference of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
). 
 Lenin opens the Conference and is elected to the Presidium; he delivers the political report of the C. 
C. 
 and, makes amendments to the resolution on the Polish question. 
 At the evening session of the Conference Lenin closes the debate on the political report of the C. 
C. 
 Lenin edits the draft declaration of the All -Russia Central Executive Committee on the terms of peace with Poland. 
 Lenin writes the draft resolution “The Immediate Tasks of Party Development” for the All -Russia Conference of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
). 
 Lenin addresses the evening session of the Conference during the debate on the report on the immediate tasks of Party development. 
September 2 September 6 September 14 September 17 September 20September 22 - 25 September 22 Before September 23 September 24 Not later than September 28 September 29 October 2 October 8 October 12 The middle of October October 15 October 16 October 19 October 20 October 21Lenin writes the “Letter to the German and the French Workers. 
 Regarding the Discussion on the Second Congress of the Communist International” Lenin writes a letter to the Congress of the Czecho -slovak Communist Party. 
Lenin writes proposals for the Conference resolution “The Immediate Tasks of Party Development”. 
 Lenin speaks on the tasks of the youth leagues, at the Third All -Russia Congress of the Russian Young Communist League. 
 Lenin speaks on the foreign and domestic situa -tion of the Soviet Republic at the Congress of leather industry workers. 
 Lenin writes an appeal “To the Poor Peasants of the Ukraine”. 
 Lenin writes a draft resolution for the Proletcult congress and submits it for consideration by the Party’s C. 
C. 
 Lenin takes part in the funeral of Inessa Armand on Red Square. 
 Lenin receives H. 
 G. 
 Wells, the British writer. 
 Lenin reports on the foreign and domestic situa -tion of the Soviet Republic, at a conference of chairmen of uyezd, volost and village Executive Committees of the Soviets of Moscow Gubernia. 
 Lenin telegraphs instructions to Frunze on prepa -rations for capture of the Crimea. 
Lenin writes notes on the immediate tasks of the Party after the termination of the war against Wrangel. 
 Lenin writes the article “A Contribution to the History of the Question of the Dictatorship”. 
 In a letter to the Presidium of the Petrograd Soviet, Lenin directs that scientists would be provided with additional accommodation (for study rooms and laboratories) in the distribution of flats. 
 October 24 October 27 October 28 October 29 Before November 1 Beginning of November November 3Lenin receives a delegation of Stavropol peasants who have brought grain for Moscow children, discusses their needs and addresses a letter to the People’s Commissariat of Food asking it to pre -pare, by the next morning, its conclusions as tothe possibility of meeting the peasants’ requests. 
 Lenin telegraphs a directive to the Revolutionary Military Council of the First Cavalry Army for steps to be taken for the speedy defeat of Wrangel. 
 Lenin talks to a delegation of the Party Conference of Alexandrov Uyezd, Vladimir Gubernia, after learning of abuses at the Troitsky Factory, he writes a letter to the Vladimir Gubernia Com -mittee of the Party and directs the delegationto Dzerzhinsky, head of the Central Control Commission. 
 Lenin attends a show of a film about the operation of a new hydraulic peat -suction machine designed by engineer Klasson and then calls a conference to discuss the invention. 
 In a telegram to Frunze, Lenin gives directives for measures to be immediately taken for the dispatch of heavy artillery to the Crimean front -line, so as to ensure the success of the operationaimed at the liberation of the Crimea. 
 Lenin sends a telegram to Stalin in Baku instruct -ing him to take urgent steps to fortify the approaches to Baku from the land and the sea. 
 Lenin writes amendments and addenda to the draft decree on the centralisation of libraries in the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
 Lenin writes his theses for the resolution “The Tasks of the Trade Unions, and the Methods of Their Accomplishment” and a draft resolution for the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) group of the Fifth All -Russia Con -ference of Trade Unions. 
 Lenin delivers a speech on the main tasks of the Chief Committee for Political Education and local political education departments at an All -Russia Conference of Political Education Workers of Gubernia and Uyezd Education Departments. 
 November 4 November 6 November 7 November 9 November 12 November 13 November 14 November 16Lenin writes the article “On the Struggle Within the Italian Socialist Party”. 
 Lenin writes to Krzhizhanovsky on the tasks of the State Commission for the Electrification of Russia. 
 Lenin delivers a speech on the third anniversary of the October Revolution, at a joint plenum of the Moscow Soviet, the Moscow Committee of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
). 
 and the Moscow City Trade Union Council. 
 Lenin delivers a speech on the third anniversary of the October Revolution, at a plenary meeting of the Sokolniki District Soviet attended by representatives of factory trade union committees. 
 Lenin directs a plenary meeting of the Party C. 
C. 
 which discusses and approves in a preliminary way the draft theses on the tasks of trade unions, drawn up by Lenin. 
 Lenin sends a telegram to the Revolutionary Military Council of the Southern front, in which he formulates the conditions of Wrangel’s capitulation. 
 In a telegram to Stalin, Lenin asks about the progress of the struggle against the bands in the Caucasus and the fortification of the approaches to Baku; he also asks Stalin’s opinion as to the prospects of a peaceful settlement of relations between the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
, and Georgia and Armenia. 
 Lenin receives the chairman of the group commit -tee of the Grozny oilfields, who has brought a message of greetings from the workers. 
 Lenin attends the commissioning of a power elec -tric station in the village of Kashino in Voloko -lamsk Uyezd of Moscow Gubernia, talks to the peasants, and makes a speech on the importance of electrification for the country’s economy; in the evening, Lenin addresses a meeting of peasants in the People’s House in the village of Yaropolets. 
 Lenin has a talk with a peasant delegate from Mosalsk Uyezd of Kaluga Gubernia, makes notes of the peasants’ needs and writes to the People’s Com -November 18 November 19 November 20 November 20 - 22 November 21 November 25 November 26 November 29 December 2missariat of Food and the People’s Commissariat of Agriculture, asking for information on the possibility of satisfying the peasants’ needs. 
 Lenin writes his “Theses on Production Propa -ganda (Rough Draft)”. 
 Lenin speaks at a meeting of delegates of Party organisations of Baumansky district in Moscow. 
 Lenin directs and addresses a meeting of delegates to the Moscow Gubernia Party Conference, which discusses nominations for the Moscow Committee of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
). 
 Lenin writes notes on the electrification of Yaropolets Volost, Volokolamsk Uyezd, Moscow Gubernia. 
 Lenin takes part in the Moscow Gubernia Party Conference. 
 Lenin delivers a speech on “Our Foreign and Domestic Position and the Tasks of the Party” at the Conference. 
 Lenin speaks on the elections to the Moscow Committee of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
). 
 Lenin speaks on the foreign and domestic -situa -tion of the Soviet Republic, at a conference of factory T. 
U. 
 committees of Moscow printing and publishing enterprises. 
 Lenin speaks on concessions at a meeting of cells’ secretaries of the Moscow organisation of the R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
). 
 Lenin writes to Lunacharsky on the reorganisation of the People’s Commissariat of Education. 
 Lenin reports on the results of the work of the Moscow Gubernia Party Conference at a general meeting of Communists of Zamoskvorechye district and closes the debate on his report. 
 Lenin sends a telegram to the Chairman of the Revolutionary Military Committee of Armenia conveying greetings to Soviet Armenia on her liberation from the imperialist yoke. 
 December 6 December 8 December 11 December 16 Between December 19 and 21 December 21 December 22 - 29Lenin speaks on concessions at a meeting of activists of the Moscow Party organisation. 
 Lenin sends greetings to the All -Russia Conference of Gubernia Departments for Work Among Women. 
 Lenin directs a plenary meeting of the Party C. 
C. 
 which discusses the conflict between water transport workers and the Central Committee of the Railway and Water Transport Union. 
 The meeting approves Lenin’s proposal for calling the Tenth Party Congress on February 6, 1921. 
 Lenin directs a plenary meeting of the Party C. 
C. 
, submits his theses on production propaganda, and writes a draft decision of the C. 
C. 
 “Statute of the People’s Commissariat of Education”. 
 Lenin writes the epilogue “False Talk on Free -dom” to his article “On the Struggle Within the Italian Socialist Party”. 
 Lenin reports on the foreign and domestic situa -tion of the Soviet Republic, at a meeting of the peasants of the village of Modenovo, Bogorodsk Volost, Vereya Uyezd, Moscow Gubernia. 
 Lenin sends a telegram to the Vladikavkaz Revolutionary Committee instructing it to take urgent steps to provide Civil War refugees with permanent housing. 
 At Gorki Lenin works on the plan of his report on the work of the Council of People’s Commissars for the Eighth All -Russia Congress of Soviets. 
 In a letter to Krzhizhanovsky, Lenin outlines practical measures for the electrification of Russia. 
 Lenin reports on concessions at a meeting of the Communist group of the Eighth All -Russia Congress of Soviets. 
 After the report, he replies to the questions from delegates. 
 The Eighth All -Russia Congress of Soviets is held. 
 Its work is directed by Lenin. 
 The first session of the Congress elects Lenin to the Presidium; Lenin reports on the work of the Council of People’s Commissars. 
 Lenin speaks on the foreign and home policy of the Soviet Government, at a meeting of the Communist group of the Congress. 
 Lenin attends a conference of non -Party peasant delegates to the Eighth Congress of Soviets. 
 Lenin closes the debate on his report on the work of the Council of People’s Commissars, at the second session of the Congress. 
 Lenin addresses the Communist group of the Congress. 
 Lenin addresses the Communist group of the Congress during the debate on the draft law on measures to strengthen and develop peasant farming and replies to the questions of delegates. 
 The seventh session of the Congress adopts Lenin’s resolution on the report on electrification. 
 The seventh session of the Congress elects Lenin member of the All -Russia Central Executive Committee (Eighth Convocation). 
 Lenin delivers a speech on the trade unions, the current situation, and Trotsky’s mistakes, at a joint meeting of R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) members elected dele -gates to the Eighth Congress of Soviets, membersof the All -Russia Central Council of Trade Unions, and the Moscow City Council of Trade Unions. 
 The plenary meeting of the All -Russia Central Executive Committee (Eighth Convocation) elects Lenin Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars. 
 Lenin writes to Krzhizhanovsky on the drawing up of a plan for supplying electricity to every house in the R. 
S. 
F. 
S. 
R. 
December 22 December 23 December 24 December 27 December 29 December 30 December 31 December B. 
 n. 
 leHnH coЧnHeHnr TOM 31 На английскот языке Printed in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics