L E N I N COLLECTED WORKS /FL0075h A IN ACCORDANCE WITH A DECISION OF THE NINTH CONGRESS OF THE R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) AND THE SECOND CONGRESS OF SOVIETS OF THE U. 
S. 
S. 
R. 
 B. 
 n. 
 l d H n H С О Ч И Н E Н И Я И з д a н u е ч е m в е p m o e ГОСУДАРСТВ ЕНН ОЕ ИЗ ДАТ ЕЛЬ СТВО ПОЛИТИЧЕ СКОЙ ЛИ ТЕРАТУ РЫ M О С К В А V. 
 I. 
 L E N I N cOLLEcTED WORKS VOLUME /FL0075h )une –September 191U PROGRESS PUBLISHERS MOSCOW TRANSLATED THE RUSSIAN EDITED BY S T E P A N A P R E S Y A N AND J I M R I O R D A N First printing 1964 Second printing 1974 Printed in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics l 10102 –036 ÇÜà èÇõÄÉå. 
 014(01) –74 From Marx to Mao M L © Digital Reprints 2011 www. 
marx 2mao. 
com 13 15 17 29 43 46 48 51 54 55 57 59 60 63 65 67 68 70 73 75 76CONTENTS PREFACE ...................... 
. 
 JUNE -SEPTEMBER 1917 FIR ST ALL-RU SSIA CONGRE SS OF SOVIET S OF WORKER S’ AND SOLDIER S’ DEPUTIE S. 
 JUNE 3 -24 (JUNE 16 -JULY 7 ), 1917 ......................... 
 1. 
SPEECH ON THE ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE PROVI-SIONAL GOVERNMENT, June 4 (17)......... 2. 
SPEECH ON THE WAR, June 9 (22)......... ECONOMIC DISLOCATION AND THE PROLETARIAT’S STRUG-GLE AGAINST IT ................... 
. 
 THE THOUSAND AND FIRST LIE OF THE CAPITALISTS .... 
. 
 THE DIEHARDS OF JUNE 3 FAVOUR AN IMMEDIATE OFFENSIVE AN ALLIANCE TO STOP THE REVOLUTION .......... 
 GRATITUDE ...................... 
 IS THERE A WAY TO A JUST PEACE? .......... 
. 
 THE ENEMIES OF THE PEOPLE . 
 ............. 
. 
 NOTE ......................... 
 “THE GREAT WITHDRAWAL” ............... THE USE OF STICKING TO THE POINT IN POLEMICS .... 
. 
 AN EPIDEMIC OF CREDULITY ............... A BIRD IN THE HAND OR TWO IN THE BUSH ....... 
. 
 INTRODUCTION OF SOCIALISM OR EXPOSURE OF PLUNDER OF THE STATE? ................... 
. 
 CONFUSED AND FRIGHTENED ............... INSINUATIONS ..................... “RUMOURS AGITATING THE POPULATION” .......... 
 A RIDDLE ...................... 
. 
 DRAFT STATEMENT BY THE C . 
C. 
 R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
) AND THE BUREAU OF THE BOLSHEVIK GROUP TO THE ALL-RUSSIACONGRESS OF SOVIETS REGARDING THE BAN ON THE DEM-ONSTRATION ...................... 
 SPEECH ON THE CANCELLATION OF THE DEMONSTRATION,DELIVERED AT A MEETING OF THE PETROGRAD COMMITTEE OF THE R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
), June 11 (24), 1917 ......... THE TURNING-POINT .................. LETTER TO THE EDITOR ................ 
. 
 THE FOREIGN POLICY OF THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION .... 
. 
 A CONTRADICTORY STAND ................ 
 THE UKRAINE ..................... THE CLASS ORIGINS OF PRESENT-DAY AND “FUTURE” CAVAIGNACS ...................... 
 HOW TO FIGHT COUNTER-REVOLUTION .......... 
. 
 THE UKRAINE AND THE DEFEAT OF THE RULING PARTIESOF RUSSIA...................... 
 PROSECUTE RODZYANKO AND JUNKOVSKY FOR CONCEALINGAN AGENT PROVOCATEUR!................ 
 STRANGE MISQUOTATIONS ................ 
 RULING AND RESPONSIBLE PARTIES ............ ANOTHER COMMISSION .................. THE EIGHTEENTH OF JUNE ................ 
 THE REVOLUTION, THE OFFENSIVE, AND OUR PARTY .... 
. 
 IN WHAT WAY DO YOU SOCIALIST-REVOLUTIONARY ANDMENSHEVIK GENTLEMEN DIFFER PLEKHANOV?.... 
. 
 HOW RODZYANKO IS TRYING TO JUSTIFY HIMSELF ...... TO WHAT STATE HAVE THE SOCIALIST-REVOLUTIONARIESAND THE MENSHEVIKS BROUGHT THE REVOLUTION?.... 
. 
 CAN “JACOBINISM” FRIGHTEN THE WORKING CLASS? .... 
. 
 THE NEED FOR AN AGRICULTURAL LABOURERS’ UNION IN RUSSIA ........................ Article One ................... 
 Article Two ................... 
 A DISORDERLY REVOLUTION ............... A CLASS SHIFT ..................... MIRACLES OF REVOLUTIONARY ENERGY .......... 
. 
77 79 82 84858891 93 97 99 103 104 105 108 110113 116 117 118 121 123 123 125 128 131 134 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR PHRASES AND FACTS .................. HOW THE CAPITALISTS CONCEAL THEIR PROFITS, Concerning the Issue of Control ................... 
 CRISIS IS APPROACHING, DISLOCATION IS INCREASING .... 
 JUST HOW IS IT TO BE DONE? ............. 
. 
 HOW AND WHY THE PEASANTS WERE DECEIVED ....... 
 WHO IS RESPONSIBLE? ................ 
. 
 WHAT COULD THE CADETS HAVE COUNTED ON WHEN THEYWITHDREW THE CABINET?............. 
 ALL POWER TO THE SOVIETS! ............. 
. 
 WHERE IS STATE POWER AND WHERE IS COUNTER-REVO-LUTION?...................... 
. 
 FOUL SLANDER BY ULTRA-REACTIONARY NEWSPAPERS ANDALEXINSKY...................... 
 SLANDER AND FACTS .................. CLOSE TO THE TRUTH .................. A NEW DREYFUS CASE? ................ 
. 
 APPEAL OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMISSION OF THE PETROGRADCOMMITTEE OF THE R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
)............. 
 DREYFUSIAD ...................... 
 IN REFUTATION OF SINISTER RUMOURS .......... 
. 
 THREE CRISES ..................... THE QUESTION OF THE BOLSHEVIK LEADERS APPEARINGIN COURT...................... 
. 
 THE POLITICAL SITUATION ................ 
 LETTER TO THE EDITORS OF NOVAYA ZHIZN ....... 
. 
 LETTER TO THE EDITORS OF PROLETAR SKOYE DYELO .... 
 ON SLOGANS ...................... 
 OUR THANKS TO PRINCE G . 
 Y. 
 LVOV ............ CONSTITUTIONAL ILLUSIONS ............... I...................... 
. 
 II...................... 
. 
 III...................... 
. 
 AN ANSWER ...................... 
 I...................... 
. 
 II...................... 
. 
 III...................... 
. 
137 140 142 145148 151 153 155 157 162 163 165 166 167 168 170 171 176 178 181 183185 193 196 197 201204 211 211 219221 THE BEGINNING OF BONAPARTISM ............. 
 LESSONS OF THE REVOLUTION ............. 
. 
 I........................ II........................ III........................ IV........................ V........................ VI........................ VII........................ VIII ........................ IX........................ Afterword ...................... 
. 
 KAMENEV’S SPEECH IN THE C . 
E. 
C. 
 ON THE STOCKHOLM CONFERENCE ..................... RUMOURS OF A CONSPIRACY ............... THEY DO NOT SEE THE WOOD FOR THE TREES ....... 
 POLITICAL BLACKMAIL .................. PAPER RESOLUTIONS .................. THE STOCKHOLM CONFERENCE ............. 
. 
 A PUBLICIST’S DIARY . 
 Peasants and Workers .... 
. 
 SLANDERERS ...................... 
 TO THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF THE R . 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P....... 
 A PUBLICIST’S DIARY ................ 
 1. 
 The Root of the Evil ............. 
. 
 2. 
 Corvée and Socialism ............. 
. 
 CONCERNING THE PARTY PROGRAMME .......... 
. 
 ON ZIMMERWALD ................... 
. 
 VIOLATIONS OF DEMOCRACY IN MASS ORGANISATIONS .... 
. 
 ON COMPROMISES ................... 
 DRAFT RESOLUTION ON THE PRESENT POLITICAL SITUATION THE IM PENDING CATASTROPHE AND HOW TO COM BAT IT Famine Is Approaching ............. 
. 
 Complete Government Inactivity .......... 
. 
 Control Measures Are Known to All and Easy to Take223 227 229 231232234234236 239 241242 243 244 247 255 261265 269 278287 289 294 294 302 305 307 308309 315 323 327 329 331 Nationalisation of the Banks ............ Nationalisation of the Syndicates .......... 
 Abolition of Commercial Secrecy .......... 
. 
 Compulsory Association ............. 
. 
 Regulation of Consumption ............. 
 Government Disruption of the Work of the Democratic Organisations .................. Financial Collapse and Measures to Combat It .... 
 Can We Go Forward If We Fear to Advance Towards Socialism? ................... 
 The Struggle Against Economic Chaos—and the War . 
. 
 The Revolutionary Democrats and the Revolutionary Proletariat ................... 
 ONE OF THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS OF THE REVOLU-TION ......................... 
 HOW TO GUARANTEE THE SUCCESS OF THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY . 
 On Freedom of the Press .......... 
. 
 THE STATE AND REVOLUTION . 
 The Marxist Theory of the State and the Tasks of the Proletariat in the Revolution ... Preface to the First Edition ............. 
 Chapter I . 
Class Society and the State ....... 
. 
 1. 
The State—a Product of the Irreconcilability of Class Antagonisms ............ 2. 
Special Bodies of Armed Men, Prisons, etc . 
 3. 
The State—an Instrument for the Exploita -tion of the Oppressed Class ....... 
. 
 4. 
The “Withering Away” of the State, andViolent Revolution............ Chapter II . 
The State and Revolution . 
 The Experience of 1848-51 ................... 
. 
 1. 
The Eve of the Revolution ......... 2. 
The Revolution Summed Up ....... 
. 
 3. 
The Presentation of the Question by Marxin 1852................ 
. 
 Chapter III . 
The State and Revolution. 
 Experience of the Paris Commune of 1871 . 
 Marx’s Analysis ....... 
 1. 
What Made the Communards’ Attempt Heroic? 2. 
What Is to Replace t h e S m ashed State Machine? ................ 
 3. 
Abolition of Parliamentarism ....... 
. 
333 339342 346 350 353 357 360 364 367 370 378 385 387 390 390 393 396 400 406 406 410 416 418 418 422 427389 Preface to the Second Edition ............. 
 4. 
Organisation of National Unity ....... 
 5. 
Abolition of the Parasite State ....... 
 Chapter IV . 
Continuation . 
 Supplementary Explanations by Engels ................... 
. 
 1. 
The Housing Question .......... 
. 
 2. 
Controversy with the Anarchists ...... 3. 
Letter to Bebel ............. 
 4. 
Criticism of the Draft of the Erfurt Prog-ramme ................ 
. 
 5. 
The 1891 Preface to Marx’s The Civil War in France ................ 
. 
 6. 
Engels on the Overcoming of Democracy ... Chapter V . 
The Economic Basis of the Withering Away of the State ................... 
 1. 
Presentation of the Question by Marx .... 
 2. 
The Transition from Capitalism to Communism 3. 
The First Phase of Communist Society .... 
 4. 
The Higher Phase of Communist Society ... Chapter VI . 
The Vulgarisation of Marxism by the Oppor-tunists ..................... 1. 
Plekhanov’s Controversy with the Anarchists 2. 
Kautsky’s Controversy with the Opportunists 3. 
Kautsky’s Controversy with Pannekoek ... Postscript to the First Edition .......... 
. 
 Notes ........................ The Life and Work of V . 
 I. 
 Lenin . 
 Outstanding Dates .... 
 I L L U S T R A T I O N S First page of the manuscript “Rumours of a Conspiracy”, August 1917 ...................... 
 First page of the letter to the Central Committee of theR. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, August 30 (September 12), 1917 ....... 
. 
 First page of the manuscript The Impending Catastrophe and How to Combat It , September 10 -14 (23 -27), 1917 ...... First page of the manuscript The State and Revolution , August-September 1917 ................... 
432 435 437 438 440 444 447 454 459 461 462 464 469473 480 480 481488 497 499 541 249 291 325 386 -387 PREFACE Volume 25 contains works Lenin wrote between June and September 1917, during preparations for the Great OctoberSocialist Revolution. 
 The volume opens with Lenin’s speeches at the First All-Russia Congress of Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Depu-ties. 
 In these speeches and in his articles “Confused and Fright-ened”, “A Contradictory Stand”, “The Eighteenth of June”,“The Revolution, the Offensive, and Our Party”, “To WhatState Have the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Menshe-viks Brought the Revolution?”, and “A Class Shift”, Leninexposes the counter-revolutionary policy of the Provisional Government and the conciliatory tactics of the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries. 
 He expounds the Bolshe-vik programme of the struggle to resolve the fundamentalissues of the revolution, and explains that only Soviet powercan lift the country out of war and ruin, win peace and giveland to the peasants. 
 In a number of articles—”The Political Situation”, “On Slogans”, “Constitutional Illusions” and “Lessons of theRevolution”—Lenin outlines new tactics for the BolshevikParty in view of the drastic change which occurred in thepolitical situation in the country following the events ofJuly 3-5. 
 In his work The Impending Catastrophe and How to Com-bat It , Lenin sets forth the economic policy of the Bolshevik Party and draws the conclusion that the proletarian revolu-tian is the only means of saving the country from the approaching disaster. 
 This volume includes the well-known The State and Rev-olution , in which Lenin develops the Marxist theory of the state and defends it from distortion and vulgarisation by theopportunists. 
 Also included are seven articles absent from earlier editions of Lenin’s Collected Works . 
 In his articles “An Alliance to Stop the Revolution”, “The Foreign Policy of the Russian Revolution” and “Ruling and Responsible Parties”, Leninexplains that the Provisional Government is an alliance ofthe capitalists on the one hand and the Mensheviks andSocialist-Revolutionaries on the other to stop the revolution. 
He blames the ruling conciliatory parties for the counter-revolutionary home and foreign policy and for the disaster threatening the country. 
 In the article “How Rodzyanko IsTrying to Justify Himself”, Lenin shows up the former Chair-man of the Fourth Duma, Rodzyanko, as a man who protectedthe agent provocateur Malinovsky. 
 The articles “A NewDreyfus Case?” and “Our Thanks to Prince G. 
 Y. 
 Lvov” expose the provocative methods used by the Kerensky Govern-ment against the Bolsheviks. 
 In his article “All Power to theSoviets!” Lenin justifies the Bolshevik Party’s slogan of thetransfer of all state power to the Soviets. 
 All works in this volume dating from the period after the events of July 1917 were written by Lenin when he was in hiding from persecution by the Provisional Government. 
 FIRST ALL-RUSSIA CONGRESS AND SOLDIER S’ DEPUTIE S1 JUNE 3-24 (JUNE 6-JULY 7), 1917OF SOVIETS OF WORKERS ’ FIRST ALL-RUSSIA CONGRESS OF SOVIETS OF WORKERS’ AND SOLDIERS ’ DEPUTIES1 JUNE 3-24 (JUNE 6-JULY 7), 1917 1 SPEECH ON THE ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT JUNE 4 (17) Comrades, in the brief time at my disposal, I can dwell— and I think this best—only on the main questions of prin-ciple raised by the Executive Committee rapporteur and by subsequent speakers. 
 The first and fundamental issue before us was: what is this assembly we are attending, what are these Soviets now gathered at the All-Russia Congress, and what is this revo-lutionary democracy that people here speak so much about to conceal their utter misunderstanding and complete repu-diation of it? To talk about revolutionary democracy at theAll-Russia Congress of Soviets and obscure this institution’scharacter, its class composition and its role in the revolution—not to say a word about this and yet lay claim to the titleof democrats really is peculiar. 
 They map out a pro-gramme to us for a bourgeois parliamentary republic, the sort of programme that has existed all over Western Europe;they map out a programme to us for reforms which are nowrecognised by all bourgeois governments, including our own,and yet they talk to us about revolutionary democracy. 
Whom are they talking to? To the Soviets. 
 But I ask you, is there a country in Europe, a bourgeois, democratic, republi-can country, where anything like these Soviets exists?You have to admit there isn’t. 
 Nowhere is there, nor can therebe, a similar institution because you must have one or theother: either a bourgeois government with “plans” for reforms like those just mapped out to us and proposed dozens of times in every country but remaining on paper, or the insti-tution to which they are now referring, the new type of“government” created by the revolution, examples of which can be found only at a time of greatest revolutionary upsurge, as in France, 1792 and 1871, or in Russia, 1905. 
 The Soviets are an institution which does not exist in any ordinary bour-geois-parliamentary state and cannot exist side by side with abourgeois government. 
 They are the new, more democratictype of state which we in our Party resolutions call a peasant-proletarian democratic republic, with power belongingsolely to the Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies. 
 People are wrong in thinking that this is a theoretical issue. 
 They are wrong in pretending that it can be evaded and inprotesting that at present certain institutions exist side byside with the Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies. 
Yes, they do exist side by side. 
 But this is what breeds count-less misunderstandings, conflicts and friction. 
 And this is why the original upswing, the original advance, of the Rus-sian revolution is giving way to stagnation and to thosesteps backwards which we can now see in our coalition govern-ment, 2 in its entire home and foreign policy, in connection with preparations for an imperialist offensive. 
 One or the other: either the usual bourgeois government, in which case the peasants’, workers’, soldiers’ and other Soviets are useless and will either be broken up by thegenerals, the counter-revolutionary generals, who keep ahold on the armed forces and pay no heed to Minister Keren-sky’s fancy speeches, or they will die an inglorious death. 
They have no other choice. 
 They can neither retreat nor stand still. 
 They can exist only by advancing. 
 This is a type of state not invented by the Russians but advanced by therevolution because the revolution can win in no other way. 
Within the All-Russia Congress, friction and the struggle ofparties for power are inevitable. 
 But this will be the elimi-nation of possible mistakes and illusions through the politi-cal experience of the masses themselves ( commotion ), and not through the reports of Ministers who refer to whatthey said yesterday, what they will write tomorrow and whatthey will promise the day after tomorrow. 
 This, comrades, isridiculous from the point of view of the institution createdby the Russian revolution and now faced with the question: to be or not to be? The Soviets cannot continue to exist as they do now. 
 Grown people, workers and peasants, are madeto meet, adopt resolutions and listen to reports that cannot be subjected to any documentary verification! This kind of institution is a transition to a republic which will estab-lish a stable power without a police and a standing army, not in words alone but in action, a power which cannot yet existin Western Europe and without which the Russian revolu-tion cannot win in the sense of victory over the landownersand over imperialism. 
 Without this power there can be no question of our gain-ing such a victory by ourselves. 
 And the deeper we go into the programme recommended to us here, and into the factswith which we are confronted, the more glaringly the funda-mental contradiction stands out. 
 We are told by the rappor-teur and by other speakers that the first Provisional Govern-ment 3 was a bad one! But when the Bolsheviks, those wretch-ed Bolsheviks, said, “No support for and no confidence in this government”, how often we were accused of “anarchism”!Now everybody says that the previous government was a badone. 
 But how does the coalition government with its near-socialist Ministers differ from the previous one? Haven’twe had enough talk about programmes and drafts? Haven’t we had enough of them? Isn’t it time to get down to busi-ness? A month has passed since May 6 when the coalitiongovernment was formed. 
 Look at the facts, look at the ruinprevailing in Russia and other countries involved in theimperialist war. 
 What is the reason for the ruin? The preda-tory nature of the capitalists. 
 There’s your real anarchy. 
 And this is admitted in statements published, not in our newspa-per, not in any Bolshevik newspaper—Heaven forbid!—but inthe ministerial Rabochaya Gazeta , 4 which has reported that industrial coal prices were raised by the “revolutionary” government!! The coalition government hasn’t changed athing in this respect. 
 We are asked whether socialism can be introduced in Russia, and whether, generally speaking, radical changes can be made at once. 
 That is all empty talkcomrades. 
 The doctrine of Marx and Engels, as they alwaysexplained, says: “Our doctrine is not a dogma, but a guideto action. 
” 5 Nowhere in the world is there pure capitalism developing into pure socialism, nor can there be in war-time. 
 But there is something in between, something new and un-precedented, because hundreds of millions of people who havebeen involved in the criminal war among the capitalists are losing their lives. 
 It is not a question of promising re-forms—that is mere talk. 
 It is a question of taking the step we now need. 
 If you want to talk of “ revolutionary ” democracy, then you must distinguish this concept from reformist democracy under a capitalist Ministry, because it is high time to stoptalking about “revolutionary democracy”, handing out mutu-al congratulations on “revolutionary democracy”, and get on with a class definition, as we have been taught by Marxism, and by scientific socialism generally. 
 It is being proposedthat we should pass to reformist democracy under a capital-ist Ministry. 
 That may be all well and good from the stand-point of the usual West-European models. 
 A number ofcountries, however, are today on the brink of destruction, and we can clearly see the practical measures said to be too com-plicated to carry out easily, and in need of special elaboration,according to the previous speaker, the Minister of Posts andTelegraphs. 
 He said there was no political party in Russiaexpressing its readiness to assume full power. 
 I reply: “Yes,there is. 
 No party can refuse this, and our Party certainly doesn’t. 
 It is ready to take over full power at any moment. 
” (Applause and laughter . 
) You can laugh as much as you please, but if the Minister confronts us with this question sideby side with a party of the Right, he will receive a suitablereply. 
 No party can refuse this. 
 And at a time when libertystill prevails, when threats of arrest and exile to Siberia— threats from the counter-revolutionaries with whom our near-socialist Ministers are sharing government—are still nomore than threats, every party says: give us your confidenceand we shall give you our programme. 
 This programme was given by our conference on April 29. 
 6 Unfortunately, it is being ignored and not taken as a guide. 
 It seems to need a popular exposition. 
 I shall try to give the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs a popular expositionof our resolution and our programme. 
 With regard to theeconomic crisis, our programme is immediately—it need notbe put off—to demand the publication of all the fabulousprofits—running as high as 500 and 800 per cent—which the capitalists are making on war supplies, and not as capitalists in the open market under “pure” capitalism. 
 This is whereworkers’ control really is necessary and possible. 
 This is a measure which, if you call yourselves “revolutionary” demo-crats, you should carry out in the name of the Congress, a mea-sure which can be carried out overnight. 
 It is not socialism. 
 It is opening the people’s eyes to the real anarchy and the realplaying with imperialism, the playing with the property ofthe people, with the hundreds of thousands of lives that to-morrow will be lost because we continue to throttle Greece. 
Make the profits of the capitalists public, arrest fifty or a hundred of the biggest millionaires. 
 Just keep them in cus-tody for a few weeks, if only in the same privileged condi-tions in which Nicholas Romanov is being held, for the simplepurpose of making them reveal the hidden springs, the fraud-ulent practices, the filth and greed which even under thenew government are costing our country thousands and mil-lions every day. 
 That is the chief cause of anarchy and ruin. 
 That is why we say that everything remains as of old, thatthe coalition government hasn’t changed a thing and hasonly added a heap of declarations, of pompous statements. 
However sincere people may be, however sincerely they maywish the working people well, things have not changed— the same class remains in power. 
 The policy they are pursuing is not a democratic policy. 
 You talk to us about “democratisation of the central and local power”. 
 Don’t you know that these words are a noveltyonly in Russia, and that elsewhere dozens of near-socialistMinisters have given their countries similar promises? What are they worth when we are faced by the real, concrete fact that while the population elects the authorities locally, theelementary principles of democracy are violated by the centreclaiming the right to appoint or confirm the local authori-ties? The capitalists continue to plunder the people’s proper-ty. 
 The imperialist war continues. 
 And yet we are promised reforms, reforms and more reforms, which cannot be accom-plished at all under these circumstances, because the warcrushes and determines everything. 
 Why do you disagreewith those who say the war is not being waged over capital-ist profits? What is the criterion? It is, first of all, whichclass is in power, which class continues to be the master, which class continues to make hundreds of thousands of millions from banking and financial operations. 
 It is thesame capitalist class and the war therefore continues to be imperialist. 
 Neither the first Provisional Government nor the government with the near-socialist Ministers has changed anything. 
 The secret treaties remain secret. 
 Russia is fight-ing for the Straits, fighting to continue Lyakhov’s policy inPersia, 7 and so on. 
 I know you don’t want this, that most of you don’t want it, and that the Ministers don’t want it, because no one canwant it, for it means the slaughter of hundreds of millions of people. 
 But take the offensive which the Milyukovs and Maklakovs are now talking about so much. 
 They know fullwell what that means. 
 They know it is linked with the ques-tion of power, with the question of revolution. 
 We are toldwe must distinguish between political and strategic issues. 
It is ridiculous to raise this question at all. 
 The Cadets 8 perfectly understand that the point at issue is a politicalone. 
 It is slander to say the revolutionary struggle for peace that has begun from below might lead to a separate peacetreaty. 
 The first step we should take if we had power wouldbe to arrest the biggest capitalists and cut all the threads of their intrigues. 
 Without this, all talk about peace without annexations and indemnities is utterly meaningless. 
 Oursecond step would be to declare to all people over the headof their governments that we regard all capitalists as rob-bers—Tereshchenko, who is not a bit better than Milyukov,just a little less stupid, the French capitalists, the British capitalists, and all the rest. 
 Your own Izvestia 9 has got into a muddle and proposes to keep the status quo instead of peace without annexationsand indemnities. 
 Our idea of peace “without annexations” isdifferent. 
 Even the Peasant Congress 10 comes nearer the truth when it speaks of a “federal” republic, thereby express-ing the idea that the Russian republic does not want to oppress any nation, either in the new or in the old way, anddoes not want to force any nation, either Finland or theUkraine, with both of whom the War Minister is trying sohard to find fault and with whom impermissible and intoler-able conflicts are being created. 
 We want a single and undivid-ed republic of Russia with a firm government. 
 But a firm gov-ernment can be secured only by the voluntary agreement ofall people concerned. 
 “Revolutionary democracy” are big words, but they are being applied to a government that by its petty fault-finding is complicating the problem of the Ukraine and Finland, which do not even want to secede. 
 They only say, “Don’t postpone the application of the elementary prin-ciples of democracy until the Constituent Assembly!” A peace treaty without annexations and indemnities can-not be concluded until you have renounced your own annex-ations. 
 It is ridiculous, a comedy, every worker in Europe is laughing at us, saying: You talk very eloquently and call on the people to overthrow the bankers, but you send yourown bankers into the Ministry. 
 Arrest them, expose theirtricks, get to know the hidden springs! But that you don’t doalthough you have powerful organisations which cannot beresisted. 
 You have gone through 1905 and 1917. 
 You know that revolution is not made to order, that revolutions in other countries were made by the hard and bloody method ofinsurrection, and in Russia there is no group, no class, thatwould resist the power of the Soviets. 
 In Russia, this revo-lution can, by way of exception, be a peaceful one. 
 Werethis revolution to propose peace to all peoples today or to-morrow, by breaking with all the capitalist classes, both France and Germany, their people, that is, would accept verysoon, because these countries are perishing, because Ger-many’s position is hopeless, because she cannot save herself,and because France—( Chairman : “Your time is up. 
”) I shall finish in half a minute. 
 ( Commotion ; requests from the audience that the speaker continue ; protests and applause . 
) (Chairman : “I inform the Congress that the Steering Com-mittee proposes the speaker’s time be extended. 
 Any objec-tions? The majority are in favour of an extension. 
”) I stopped at the point that if the revolutionary democrats in Russia were democrats in fact and not merely in words, they would further the revolution and not compromise withthe capitalists, not talk about peace without annexationsand indemnities but abolish annexations by Russia, anddeclare in so many words that they consider all annexationscriminal and predatory. 
 It would then be possible to avert the imperialist offensive which is threatening death to thousands and millions of people over the partitioning of Persia and theBalkans. 
 The way to peace would then be open, not an easy way—we do not say it is easy—and one which does not pre-clude a truly revolutionary war. 
 We do not put this question as Bazarov does in today’s Novaya Zhizn . 
11 All we say is that Russia has been placed in such a position that at the end of the imperialist war hertasks are easier than might have been expected. 
 And hergeographical position is such that any power would have ahard job on its hands if it risked using capital and its preda-tory interests and risked rising against the Russian working class and the semi-proletariat associated with it, i. 
e. 
, thepoor peasants. 
 Germany is on the brink of defeat, and sincethe war was joined by the United States, which wants toswallow up Mexico and which tomorrow will probably startfighting Japan, Germany’s position has become hopeless, and she will be destroyed. 
 France, who suffers more than the others because of her geographical position and whose stateof exhaustion is reaching the limit—this country, whilenot starving as much as Germany, has lost infinitely morepeople than Germany. 
 Now if the first step were to restrictthe profits of the Russian capitalists and deprive them of all possibility of raking in hundreds of millions in profits, if you were to propose to all nations a peace treaty directed against the capitalists of all countries and openly declare that you will not enter into any negotiations or relationswith the German capitalists and with those who abet themdirectly or indirectly or are involved with them, and that you refuse to speak with the French and British capitalists, then you would be acting to condemn them in the eyes ofthe workers. 
 You would not regard it as a victory that a pass-port has been issued to MacDonald, 12 a man who has never waged a revolutionary struggle against capital and whois being allowed to come because he has never expressed the ideas, principles, practice or experience of the revolutionary struggle against the British capitalists, a struggle for whichour Comrade MacLean and hundreds of other British social-ists are in prison, and for which our Comrade Liebknecht isconfined to a convict prison because he said, “German sol-diers, fire on your Kaiser!” Wouldn’t it be more proper to consign the imperialist capitalists to that penal servitude which most of the Pro-visional Government members in an expressly reconstituted Third Duma—I don’t know, incidentally, whether it is the Third or the Fourth Duma—are daily preparing for us and promising us and about which the Ministry of Justice is already drafting new Bills? MacLean and Liebknecht—thoseare the names of socialists who are putting the idea of arevolutionary struggle against imperialism into practice. 
That is what we must say to all governments if we want tofight for peace. 
 We must condemn them before their people. 
 You will then put all the imperialist governments in a dif-ficult position. 
 But now you have complicated your ownposition by addressing your Peace Manifesto of March 14 13 to the people and saying, “Overthrow your tsars, your kingsand your bankers!” while we who possess an organisationunprecedentedly rich in number, experience and material strength, the Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, join a bloc with our bankers, institute a coalition, near-social-ist government, and draft the kind of reforms that have beendrafted in Europe for decades. 
 People there in Europe laughat this kind of peace struggle. 
 There they will understandit only when the Soviets take power and act in a revolution-ary way. 
 Only one country in the world can at the moment take steps to stop the imperialist war on a class scale, in theface of the capitalists and without a bloody revolution. 
 Onlyone country can do it, and that country is Russia. 
 And shewill remain the only one as long as the Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies exists. 
 The Soviet cannot exist long side by side with the ordinary type of Provisional Govern-ment, and will remain what it is only until the offensive istaken. 
 The offensive will be a turning-point in the wholepolicy of the Russian revolution, that is, it will be a transi-tion from waiting, from paving the way for peace by means of a revolutionary uprising from below, to the resumption of the war. 
 The path that opened up was transition from frater-nisation on one front to fraternisation on every front, fromspontaneous fraternisation, such as the exchange of a crustof bread with a hungry German worker for a penknife—whichis punishable by penal servitude—to conscious fraternisation. 
 When we take power into our own hands, we shall curb the capitalists, and then the war will not be the kind of war that is being waged now, because the nature of a war is determined by what class wages it, not by what is written on paper. 
 You can write on paper anything you like. 
 But as long as the capitalist class has a majority in the government the war will remain an imperialist war no matter what youwrite, no matter how eloquent you are, no matter how manynear-socialist Ministers you have. 
 Everyone knows that, andeveryone can see it. 
 And the cases of Albania, Greece andPersia 14 have shown this so clearly and graphically that I am surprised everyone is attacking our written declaration about the offensive,15 and no one says a word about specific cases! It is easy to promise Bills, but specific measures arebeing postponed time and again. 
 It is easy to write a declar-ation about peace without annexations, but the Albanian,Greek and Persian events took place after the coalition Min-istry was formed. 
 After all, it was Dyelo Naroda , 16 not an organ of our Party, but a government organ, a ministerialorgan, which said that it is Russian democracy that is beingsubjected to this humiliation, and that Greece is beingstrangled. 
 And this very same Milyukov, whom you imagineto be heaven knows who, although he is just an ordinary mem-ber of his party—Tereshchenko in no way differs from him— wrote that the pressure exerted on Greece came from Allieddiplomats. 
 The war remains an imperialist war, and howevermuch you may desire peace, however sincere your sympathyfor the working people and your desire for peace—I am fullyconvinced that by and large it must be sincere—you are powerless, because the war can only be ended by taking the revolution further. 
 When the revolution began in Russia, arevolutionary struggle for peace from below also began. 
 Ifyou were to take power into your hands, if power were topass to the revolutionary organisations to be used for com-bating the Russian capitalists, then the working people of some countries would believe you and you could propose peace. 
 Then our peace would be ensured at least from twosides, by the two nations who are being bled white and whosecause is hopeless—Germany and France. 
 And if cir-cumstances then obliged us to wage a revolutionary war—noone knows, and we do not rule out the possibility—we should say: “We are not pacifists, we do not renounce war when the revolutionary class is in power and has actuallydeprived the capitalists of the opportunity to influence things in any way, to exacerbate the economic dislocation which enables them to make hundreds of millions. 
” The revolution-ary government would explain to absolutely every nation that every nation must be free, and that just as the Germannation must not fight to retain Alsace and Lorraine, so theFrench nation must not fight for its colonies. 
 For, whileFrance is fighting for her colonies, Russia has Khiva andBokhara, which are also something like colonies. 
 Then the division of colonies will begin. 
 And how are they to be divid-ed? On what basis? According to strength. 
 But strength haschanged. 
 The capitalists are in a situation where their onlyway out is war. 
 When you take over revolutionary power,you will have a revolutionary way of securing peace, namely,by addressing a revolutionary appeal to all nations and ex-plaining your tactics by your own example. 
 Then the way to peace secured by revolutionary means will be open to you,and you will most probably be able to avert the deaths ofhundreds of thousands of people. 
 Then you may be certainthat the German and French people will declare in your fa-vour. 
 As for the British, American and Japanese capitalists, even if they wanted a war against the revolutionary working class—whose strength will grow tenfold once the capitalistshave been curbed and put down and control has passed intothe hands of the working class—even if the American, Britishand Japanese capitalists wanted a war, the chances would bea hundred to one against them being able to wage it. 
 For peace to be ensured, you will only have to declare that you are not pacifists, that you will defend your republic, your work-ers’, proletarian democracy, against the German, French andother capitalists. 
 That is why we attached such fundamental importance to our declaration about the offensive. 
 The time has come for a radical turn in the whole history of the Russian revolution. 
 When the Russian revolution began it was assisted by theimperialist bourgeoisie of Britain who imagined Russia to besomething like China or India. 
 Yet, side by side with a gov-ernment in which the landowners and capitalists now havea majority, the Soviets arose, a representative institution unparalleled and unprecedented anywhere in the world in strength, an institution which you are killing by taking partin a coalition Ministry of the bourgeoisie. 
 In reality, the Russian revolution has made the revolutionary struggle from below against the capitalist governments welcome every-where, in all countries, with three times as much sympathy as before. 
 The question is one of advance or retreat. 
 No onecan stand still during a revolution. 
 That is why the offensiveis a turn in the Russian revolution, in the political and eco-nomic rather than the strategic sense. 
 An offensive now meansthe continuation of the imperialist slaughter and the death of more hundreds of thousands, of millions of people—objec-tively, irrespective of the will or awareness of this or thatMinister, with the aim of strangling Persia and other weaknations. 
 Power transferred to the revolutionary proletariat,supported by the poor peasants, means a transition to revo-lutionary struggle for peace in the surest and most painless forms ever known to mankind, a transition to a state of affairs under which the power and victory of the revolutiona-ry workers will be ensured in Russia and throughout theworld. 
 ( Applause from part of the audience . 
) Pravda Nos. 
 82 and 83, Published according to June 28 and 29 (15 and 16), the Pravda text checked 1917 with the verbatim report edited by Lenin 2 SPEEC H ON THE WAR JUNE 9 (22) Comrades, allow me, by way of an introduction to an anal-ysis of the war issue, to remind you of two passages in the Manifesto to all countries published by the Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies on March 14. 
 “The time has come,” said the Manifesto, “to begin a resolute struggle against the predatory designs of the governments of all countries. 
 The time has come for the people to take the decision on war and peace into their own hands. 
” Another passage in the Manifesto, addressed to the workers of the Austro-German coalition, reads: “Refuse to serve as tools of conquest and violence in the hands of kings, landowners and bankers. 
” These are the two passages that have been repeated in different wordings in dozens, hundreds and, I should even imagine, thousands of resolutions by Russia’s workers and peasants. 
 I am sure these two passages show best of all the contradic-tory and hopelessly complicated position in which the revo-lutionary workers and peasants find themselves owing to the present policy of the Mensheviks and Narodniks . 
17 On the one hand, they support the war. 
 On the other, they belong to classes which have no interest in the predatory designs of the government of any country, and they cannothelp saying so. 
 This psychology and ideology, much as it maybe vague, is unusually deep-rooted in every worker andpeasant. 
 It is realisation that the war is being waged becauseof the predatory designs of the governments of all countries. 
 But, together with this, it is very vaguely understood, or even not understood at all, that a government, whatever itsform, expresses the interests of definite classes and that, therefore, to contrast the government to the people, as the first passage I quoted does, is an awful theoretical muddle, utter political helplessness, and means condemning yourself and the whole of your policy to the shakiest and most un-stable position and trend. 
 By exactly the same token, theclosing words in the second passage I have quoted—that ex-cellent call, “Refuse to serve as tools of conquest and violencein the hands of kings, landowners and bankers”—are splen-did. 
 Only including your own, because if you Russian workers and peasants turn to the workers and peasants ofAustria and Germany, whose governments and ruling classesare waging the same kind of predatory war of plunder as theRussian capitalists and bankers, and as those of Britain andFrance—if you say: “Refuse to serve as tools in the hands of your bankers” but admit your own bankers into the Ministry and give them a seat next to socialist Ministers, you arereducing all your appeals to nothing, and in fact you arerefuting your whole policy. 
 Your excellent aspirations orwishes might just as well not exist, for you are helping Russiato wage the very same imperialist war, the very same preda-tory war. 
 You are coming into conflict with the masses you represent, because these masses will never adopt the capital-ist point of view, openly expressed by Milyukov, Maklakovand others, who say: “No idea could be more criminal thanthat the war is being waged in the interests of capital. 
” I wonder whether that idea is criminal. 
 I have no doubt that from the point of view of those who half-exist today and will perhaps no longer exist tomorrow, the idea actually iscriminal. 
 But it is the only correct idea. 
 It alone expressesour conception of this war. 
 It alone expresses the interestsof the oppressed classes as a struggle against their oppressors. 
And when we say the war is capitalist and predatory, we must have no illusions—there is not the slightest hint that the crimes of individuals, of individual kings, could haveprovoked this kind of war. 
 Imperialism is a definite stage in the development of world capital. 
 Capitalism, which has been developing for decades,created a situation in which a small group of immensely rich countries—there are no more than four: Britain, France, Germany and the U. 
S. 
A. 
—amassed wealthamounting to hundreds of thousands of millions, and concentrated vast power in the hands of the big banks and big capitalists—there are only a couple or half a dozen of them at most in each of these countries—immense power encompassing the whole world, and literally divided thewhole globe territorially by setting up colonies. 
 Thesepowers had colonies in every country of the world. 
 Theyredivided the globe among themselves economically as well,because concessions, and the threads of finance capital, penetrated into every single part of the globe. 
 This is the basis for annexations. 
 Annexations are not a figment of theimagination. 
 They did not arrive because people who lovedliberty unexpectedly became reactionaries. 
 Annexationsare nothing but a political expression and political form ofthe domination of giant banks that has arisen inevitably from capitalism, through no one’s fault, because shares are the basis of banks and because the accumulation of shares isthe basis of imperialism. 
 And the big banks, which dominatethe whole world through hundreds and thousands of millionsin capital and link entire industries with capitalist and mo-nopoly alliances—that is where we have imperialism, which has split the whole world into three groups of immensely rich plunderers. 
 One group—the first, which is closer to us in Europe— is headed by Britain, and the other two, by Germany and theU. 
S. 
A. 
 The other accomplices are compelled to help whilecapitalist relations persist. 
 Therefore, if you have a clear idea of the essence of the matter, which every oppressed person realises instinctively and which every Russian workerand the vast majority of peasants realise instinctively—ifyou have a clear idea of it, you will see how laughable is theidea of fighting the war with words, manifestoes, leaflets andsocialist congresses. 
 It is laughable because the banks are still omnipotent no matter how many declarations you issue, no matter how many political revolutions you carry out—youhave overthrown Nicholas Romanov in Russia and have tosome extent made her a republic; Russia has taken a giganticstride forward, and may be said to have overtaken, almostovernight, France, which in different conditions required a hundred years to do as much and yet remained a capitalist country. 
 And the capitalists are still there. 
 They have lostsome ground. 
 They did so in 1905 as well, but did that under-mine their strength? While this may be new to Russians, in Europe every revolution showed that with every upswing of the revolutionary movement the workers achieved something more than they had before, but capitalist power remained. 
The struggle against the imperialist war is impossible un-less it is a struggle waged by the revolutionary classesagainst the ruling classes on a world scale. 
 It is not a questionof landowners in general. 
 There are landowners in Russia and they play a greater role in Russia than in any other country but they are not the class which brought imperialism intobeing. 
 It is a question of the capitalist class led by the big-gest finance magnates and banks, and there will be no wayout of this war until this class, which dominates the oppressedworkers allied with the poor peasants, the semi-proletarians, as our programme calls them, until this class is overthrown. 
 The illusion that you can unite the working people of theworld by leaflets and appeals to other nations can only comefrom the narrow Russian outlook, ignorant of how the pressin Western Europe, where the workers and peasants are usedto political revolutions and have seen dozens of them, laughs at such phrases and appeals. 
 They don’t know that the mass of workers has actually risen in Russia, where most of theworkers are absolutely sincere in their faith and condemn thepredatory designs of the capitalists of every country andwant to see the people freed from the bankers. 
 But they, theEuropeans, cannot understand why you, who have an orga-nisation which no one else on earth has, the Soviets of Work-ers’, Peasants’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, which are armed—why you make Ministers of your socialists. 
 After all, you arehanding power to the bankers. 
 People abroad accuse you notonly of naïveté—this is not the worst—Europeans can no long-er understand naïveté in politics, they cannot understand that there are tens of millions of people in Russia who are stirring to life for the first time, and that people in Russiaknow nothing of the link between the classes and the govern-ment, of the link between the government and war. 
 War isa continuation of bourgeois politics, nothing else. 
 The rulingclass shapes the country’s policy in war-time as well. 
 War is politics from beginning to end. 
 It is pursuit of the same old aims by these classes using a different method. 
 That is why,when you write in your workers’ and peasants’ appeals “overthrow your bankers”, every politically-conscious worker in a European country either laughs at you or cries bitterly over you, saying to himself: “What can we do since people there have overthrown a half-savage idiot and monster of amonarch, the kind we did away with a long time ago—thisis the only crime we have committed—and now, with their‘near-socialist’ Ministers, they back the Russian bankers?!” The bankers remain in power. 
 They pursue a foreign policy through an imperialist war, fully supporting the treaties concluded by Nicholas II in Russia. 
 This is particularly evi-dent in our country. 
 All the principles of Russia’s imperi-alist foreign policy were predetermined not by the present-day capitalists, but by the previous government and NicholasRomanov whom we have overthrown. 
 He concluded those treaties, they remain secret, and the capitalists cannot pub-lish them because they are capitalists. 
 But no worker orpeasant can see his way clear of this tangle because he tellshimself: “Since we call for the overthrow of the capitalistsin other countries, we must first of all get rid of our ownbankers, otherwise nobody will believe in us and nobody will take us seriously. 
 People will say we are naïve Russian savages who put on paper words that are excellent in them-selves but lack political substance, or, worse still, they willthink us hypocrites. 
 You would see these things in the foreignpress if that press, every shade of it, passed freely into Russiaacross the frontier instead of being stopped by the British and French authorities at Torneå. 
 You would see from a mere selection of quotations from foreign newspapers the glaringcontradiction in which you find yourselves. 
 You would seehow incredibly ridiculous and erroneous is this idea of fight-ing the war with socialist-conferences, with agreements withthe socialists at congresses. 
 Had imperialism been the fault or crime of individuals, socialism could remain socialism. 
 Imperialism is the final stage of capitalism’s development,a stage at which it has gone as far as to divide the wholeworld, and two gigantic groups are locked in a life-and-deathstruggle. 
 You must serve one group or the other, or overthrowboth groups. 
 There is no other way. 
 When you reject a sepa-rate peace treaty, saying you don’t want to serve the German imperialists, you are perfectly right, and that is why we,too, are against a separate peace treaty. 
 Yet in effect, and in spite of yourselves, you continue to serve the Anglo-French imperialists, who have predatory designs of the kind that the Russian capitalists have translated into treaties with the aid of Nicholas Romanov. 
 We do not know the texts of thosetreaties, but anyone who has followed political writing andhas glanced through at least one book on economics or diplo-macy must be familiar with the content of the treaties. 
Moreover, as far as I can remember, Milyukov wrote in his books about those treaties and promises that they would plunder Galicia, the Straits and Armenia, retain what theyhad annexed earlier and get plenty of other territories. 
Everyone knows that, but still the treaties are kept secret,and we are told that if we annul them it will mean breakingwith our Allies. 
 With regard to a separate peace treaty, I have already said there can be no separate peace treaty for us, and ourParty resolution leaves not the slightest room for doubtthat we reject it as we reject all agreement with the capital-ists. 
 To us, a separate peace treaty means coming to termswith the German plunderers, because they are plundering in the same way as the others. 
 Coming to terms with Russian capital within the Russian Provisional Government is thesame kind of separate peace treaty. 
 The tsarist treaties remain,and they, too, help to plunder and strangle other peoples. 
When it is said, “Peace without annexations and indemnities”,as every worker and every peasant in Russia should say because life teaches him so, because he has no interest in bank profits and because he wants to live, I reply: Yourleaders in the present Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’Deputies from the Narodnik and Menshevik parties havebecome tangled up in that slogan. 
 They have said in theirIzvestia that it means retaining the status quo, that is, the pre-war state of affairs, going back to what existed before the war. 
 Isn’t that capitalist peace? And what capitalist peace,too! Since you are putting forward that slogan, you mustremember that the course of events may bring your partiesto power. 
 That is possible during a revolution, and you willhave to do what you say. 
 But if you propose peace without annexations now, the Germans will accept and the British will not, because the British capitalists have not lost an inchof territory but have grabbed plenty in every part of the world. 
 The Germans grabbed a lot too, but they also lost a lot, and not only lost a lot but found themselves up against the U. 
S. 
A. 
, a most formidable enemy. 
 If you who propose peace without annexations mean retaining the status quo,you are drifting into a situation in which your proposal willproduce a separate peace treaty with the capitalists, because,if you propose that, the German capitalists, being faced bythe U. 
S. 
A. 
 and Italy with whom they signed treaties in the past, will say: “We shall accept that peace treaty without annexations. 
 It will not be a defeat for us, it will be victoryover the U. 
S. 
A. 
 and Italy. 
” Objectively, you are drifting intothe same kind of separate peace treaty with the capitalistswhich you accuse us of, because fundamentally you are notbreaking—in your policy, in reality, in your practical moves—with those bankers expressing imperialist domina-tion all over the world whom you and your “socialist” Min-isters support in the Provisional Government. 
 You are thereby creating a contradictory and precarious situation for yourselves in which the masses misunderstandyou. 
 The masses, who have no interest in annexations, say: “We refuse to fight for any capitalist’s sake. 
” When we are told that this sort of policy can be ended by means of con-gresses and agreements among the socialists of the world, wereply: “It probably could, if only imperialism were the handi-work of individual criminals; but imperialism is an out-growth of world capitalism with which the working-class movement is connected. 
” Imperialism’s victory is the beginning of an inevitable, unavoidable split of the socialists of all countries into twocamps. 
 Anyone who keeps on talking about the socialistsas an integral body, as something that can be integral, isdeceiving himself and others. 
 The entire course of the war, the two and a half years of it, has been leading to this split—ever since the Basle Manifesto, 18 signed unanimously, which said that imperialist capitalism was at the root ofthis war. 
 The Basle Manifesto does not say a word about“defence of the fatherland”. 
 No other manifesto could havebeen written before the war, just as today no socialist would propose writing a manifesto about “defence of the fatherland” in the war between Japan and the U. 
S. 
A. 
, in which it is nota matter of risking his own skin, his own capitalists and his own Ministers. 
 Draft a resolution for international congresses! You know that war between Japan and the U. 
S. 
A. 
 is a foregone conclusion. 
 This war has been brewing for decades. 
 It is no accident. 
 Tactics do not depend on who fires thefirst shot. 
 That is ridiculous. 
 You know very well that Japa-nese and U. 
S. 
 capitalism are equally predatory. 
 There willbe talk about “defence of the fatherland” on both sides. 
 Itwill be a crime or an indication of terrible weakness due to the “defence” of the interests of our capitalist enemies. 
 That is why we say that socialism has been split irrevocably. 
 Thesocialists have completely departed from socialism—orrather, those who have deserted to their government, theirbankers and their capitalists, no matter what they may sayagainst them and however much they may condemn them. 
 Condemnation is beside the point. 
 Sometimes, however, condemnation of the Germans’ backing for their capitalistscovers up defence of the same “sin” by the Russians! If youaccuse the German social-chauvinists, i. 
e. 
, people who aresocialists in words—many of them may well be socialistsat heart—but chauvinists in fact, people who actually defend the dirty, selfish and predatory German capitalists rather than the German people, then don’t defend the British,French and Russian capitalists. 
 The German social-chauv-inists are no worse than those in our Ministry who continuethe policy of secret treaties, of plunder, and cover this upwith pious wishes in which there is much that is kind, and which I admit are absolutely sincere from the point of view of the masses, but in which I do not and cannot see a singleword of political truth. 
 It is merely your wish, while thewar remains as imperialist and is being waged for the samesecret treaties as ever! You are calling on other peoples tooverthrow the bankers, yet you are backing your own! When you spoke of peace, you did not say what peace. 
 No one answered us when we pointed out the glaring contradic-tion in a peace treaty on the basis of the status quo. 
 Inyour resolution, speaking of peace without annexations, youcannot say that it will not mean retaining the status quo. 
You cannot say that it will mean retaining the status quo, that is, restoration of the pre-war state of affairs. 
 What will it be, then? Taking the German colonies away from Britain?Try that through peaceful agreements! Everyone will laugh at you. 
 Try to take away from Japan, without a revolution, Kiaochow or the Pacific islands she has grabbed! You have got yourselves mixed up in hopeless contradic-tions. 
 When we say “without annexations”, we mean thatthis slogan is only a subordinate part of the struggle againstworld imperialism. 
 We say we want to liberate all peoplesand begin with our own. 
 You talk of war against annexationsand of peace without annexations, but in Russia you con-tinue the policy of annexations. 
 That’s simply ridiculous. 
 You and your government, your new Ministers, actuallycontinue the policy of annexations in regard to Finland andthe Ukraine. 
 You find fault with the Ukrainian congressand, through your Ministers, prohibit its sittings. 
 19 Isn’t that annexation? It amounts to a mockery of the rights of a nationality which was tormented by the tsars because its children wanted to speak their mother tongue. 
 That meansbeing afraid of separate republics. 
 From the point of viewof the workers and peasants, there is nothing terrible aboutthat. 
 Let Russia be a union of free republics. 
 The workersand peasants will not fight to prevent that. 
 Let every nation be free, and first of all let all the nationalities with which you are making the revolution in Russia be free. 
 By not tak-ing that step, you are condemning yourselves to being “rev-olutionary democrats” in words while your entire policy isin fact counter-revolutionary. 
 Your foreign policy is anti-democratic and counter-revo-lutionary. 
 A revolutionary policy may mean you have to wage a revolutionary war. 
 But that is not inevitable. 
 Thispoint has been dealt with at length by the main speaker, andlately by the newspapers as well. 
 I should very much like todwell on this point. 
 What is the practical way out of this war as we see it? We say: the way out of this war lies only through revolution. 
 Support the revolution of the classes oppressed by the capi-talists, overthrow the capitalist class in your country andthereby set an example to other countries. 
 That alone issocialism. 
 That alone means fighting the war. 
 Everythingelse is empty promises, phrase-mongering or pious wishes. 
 Socialism has been split all over the world. 
 You continue to confuse things by associating with socialists who back theirgovernments. 
 You forget that in Britain and Germany, the true socialists, who express the socialism of the masses, are isolated and have been thrown into gaol. 
 Yet they alone express the interests of the proletarian movement. 
 But what if in Russia the oppressed class found itself in power? Whenasked how we shall break out of the war by ourselves, weanswer: you cannot break out of it by yourself. 
 All our Partyresolutions and all speakers at our public meetings call itabsurd to say you can break out of this war by yourself. 
 This war involves hundreds of millions of people and hun-dreds of thousands of millions in capital. 
 The only way out isthe transfer of power to the revolutionary class which mustreally break imperialism, its financial, banking and annexa-tionist threads. 
 Until this happens nothing will have beendone. 
 The revolution was limited to your getting, in place of tsarism and imperialism, a near-republic which is imperi-alist through and through and which cannot treat Finlandand the Ukraine democratically, i. 
e. 
, without being afraidof division, even through revolutionary worker and peasantrepresentatives. 
 It is untrue to say that we are seeking a separate peace treaty. 
 We say: No separate peace treaty with any capital-ists, least of all with the Russian capitalists. 
 But the Provi-sional Government has a separate peace treaty with the Rus-sian capitalists. 
 Down with that separate peace treaty!(Applause . 
) We recognise no separate peace treaty with the German capitalists and we shall not enter into any negotia-tions. 
 Nor must there be a separate peace treaty with the British and French imperialists. 
 We are told that to breakwith them would mean coming to terms with the German im-perialists. 
 That is not true. 
 We must break with them imme-diately because it is an alliance for plunder. 
 It is said thatthe treaties cannot be published because that would mean showing up the whole of our government and the whole of our policy in the eyes of every worker and peasant. 
 If we wereto publish these treaties and plainly tell the Russian workersand peasants at meetings, especially in every remote hamlet:“What you are now fighting for is the Straits, and becausethey want to keep Armenia,” they would all say: “We want no such war. 
” ( The Chairman : “Your time is up. 
” Voices : “Let him speak. 
 ”) I ask for ten minutes more. 
 ( Voices : “Let him speak. 
 ”) I say that this contrast—“either with the British or with the German imperialists”—is wrong. 
 It implies that if we make peace with the German imperialists we must fight the British, and vice versa. 
 This contrasting suits those whoare not breaking with their capitalists and bankers, and whoaccept any alliance with them. 
 But it doesn’t suit us. 
 Wespeak of our defending the alliance with the oppressed class,with the oppressed people. 
 Remain loyal to this alliance, and then you will be revolutionary democrats. 
 It’s no easy task. 
 This task will not let you forget that under certain circum-stances we shall be unable to do without a revolutionary war. 
No revolutionary class can rule out revolutionary war, or itwill doom itself to ridiculous pacifism. 
 We are not Tolstoy-ans. 
 If the revolutionary class takes power, if its state keeps no annexed territories, and if no power is left to the banks and big capital, which is not easy to do in Russia, then that classwill be waging a revolutionary war in reality and not merelyin words. 
 You cannot rule out this kind of war. 
 That wouldmean succumbing to the Tolstoyan philosophy and to phi-listinism, forgetting the whole of Marxist science and the experience of all European revolutions. 
 You cannot pull Russia alone out of the war. 
 But she is winning more and more great allies who do not believe younow because your attitude is contradictory or naïve, andbecause you advise other peoples to “end annexations” whileintroducing them in your own country. 
 You tell other peoples to overthrow the bankers. 
 Yet you do not overthrow your own. 
 Try another policy. 
 Publish the treaties and show themup in front of every worker and peasant and at public meet-ings Say: No peace with the German capitalists, and a com-plete break with the Anglo-French capitalists. 
 Let the Britishget out of Turkey and stop fighting for Baghdad. 
 Let them get out of India and Egypt. 
 We refuse to fight for the reten-tion of booty that has been seized, just as we shall not put anounce of energy into helping the German plunderers to keeptheir booty. 
 If you do that—so far you have only talked about it, and in politics words are not credited, which is just aswell—if you do that, and talk about it, then the allies you now have will show what they can do. 
 Think of the mood of every oppressed worker and peasant. 
 They sympathisewith you and regret that you are so weak you leave the bank ers alone even though you have arms. 
 It is the oppressed workers of the world that are your allies. 
 It will be just what the revolution of 1905 showed in practice. 
 It was tremendous-ly weak at first. 
 But what is its international effect? Howdid that policy, and the history of 1905, shape the foreignpolicy of the Russian revolution? Today you are conductingthe Russian revolution’s whole foreign policy with the capi-talists. 
 Yet 1905 showed what the Russian revolution’s foreign policy should be like. 
 It is an indisputable fact that October 17, 1905, 20 was followed by mass unrest and barri-cade-building in the streets of Vienna and Prague. 
 After1905 came 1908 in Turkey, 1909 in Persia and 1910 in Chi-na. 
 21 If, instead of compromising with the capitalists, you call on the truly revolutionary democrats, the working class, the oppressed, you will have as allies the oppressed classes instead of the oppressors, and the nationalities which arenow being rent to pieces instead of the nationalities in whichthe oppressing classes now temporarily predominate. 
 We have been reminded of the German front where the only change we proposed is the unrestricted dissemination of our appeals written in Russian on one side of the sheet and German on the reverse. 
 In them we say: The capitalistsof both countries are robbers. 
 To get them out of the waywould be merely a step towards peace. 
 But there are otherfronts. 
 I don’t know how strong our army is on the Turkishfront. 
 Let us assume it is roughly three million strong. 
 It would be better if that army, which is now kept in Armenia and is carrying out annexations that you tolerate whilepreaching peace without annexations to other peoples,although you have strength and authority—if that armyadopted this programme, and if it made Armenia an inde-pendent Armenian republic and gave her the money which the financiers of Britain and France take from us. 
 It is said that we cannot do without the financial support of Britain and France. 
 But this support “supports” us likethe rope supporting a hanged man. 
 Let the Russian revolu-tionary class say: down with that support, I refuse to recog-nise debts contracted with the French and British capitalists, and I call for a general revolt against the capitalists. 
 No peace treaty with the German capitalists and no alliance withthe British and French! If this policy were actually pursued, our army fighting the Turks could be released and sent to other fronts, because all Asian peoples would see that the Russian people do not merely proclaim peace without anne-xations on the basis of self-determination but that the Rus-sian worker and peasant are in fact placing themselves at thehead of all oppressed nationalities, and that with them, thestruggle against imperialism is not a pious wish nor a high-flown ministerial phrase but a matter of vital concern to the revolution. 
 As we stand now, a revolutionary war may threaten us, but this war is not bound to take place, since the Britishimperialists will hardly be able to wage war against us ifyou act as a practical example to the peoples surroundingRussia. 
 Prove that you are liberating the Armenian republic and reaching agreement with the Soviets of Workers’ and Peasants’ Deputies in every country, that you are for a freerepublic, and then the Russian revolution’s foreign policywill become really revolutionary and really democratic. 
 Atpresent it is that only in words. 
 In reality it is counter-revo-lutionary, because you are bound hand and foot by the Anglo-French imperialists and refuse to say so openly, you are afraid to admit it. 
 Instead of issuing that appeal “to over-throw foreign bankers”, you would have done better to tell theRussian people, the workers and peasants, in so many words:“We are too weak, we cannot throw off the tyranny of theAnglo-French imperialists, we are their slaves and are there-fore fighting. 
” It would have been a bitter truth that would have been of revolutionary significance. 
 It would actuallyhave brought this predatory war closer to its end. 
 Thatmeans a thousand times more than an agreement with theFrench and British social-chauvinists, than the convening ofcongresses which they would agree to attend, than the con-tinuation of this policy by which you are actually afraid to break with the imperialists of one country while remainingthe allies of another. 
 You can draw on the support of theoppressed classes of Europe, of the oppressed people of theweaker countries which Russia strangled under the tsars andwhich she is still strangling now, as she is strangling Arme-nia. 
 With their support, you can bring freedom by helping their workers’ and peasants’ committees. 
 You would putyourselves at the head of all the oppressed classes, all op-pressed peoples, in the war against the German and British imperialists, who cannot join forces against you because they are locked in a life-and-death struggle against each other, and because they are in a hopeless position, in whichthe Russian revolution’s foreign policy, a sincere and realalliance with the oppressed classes, the oppressed peoples,can be successful—it has 99 chances in 100 of being suc-cessful! Recently we read in our Moscow Party newspaper a letter from a peasant commenting on our programme. 
 I should liketo bring my speech to a close with a brief quotation fromthat letter, showing what a peasant makes of our programme. 
The letter was printed in No. 
 59 of Sotsial-Demokrat ,22 our Moscow Party newspaper, and was reprinted in Pravda No. 
 68. 
23 “We must,” says the letter, “press the bourgeoisie harder to make them burst at the seams. 
 Then the war will be over. 
But things will turn out badly if we don’t press the bour-geoisie hard enough. 
” ( Applause . 
) Pravda Nos. 
 95, 96 and 97, Published according to July 13, 14 and 15 (June 30, the Pravda text checked July 1 and 2), 1917 with the verbatim report edited by Lenin ECONOMIC DISLOCATION AND THE PROLETARIAT’S STRUGGLE AGAINST IT We are publishing in this issue the resolution on economic measures for combating dislocation, passed by the Conference of Factory Committees. 
24 The main idea of the resolution is to indicate the condi-tions for actual control over the capitalists and production in contrast to the empty phrases about control used by the bour-geoisie and the petty-bourgeois officials. 
 The bourgeoisieare lying when they allege that the systematic measures taken by the state to ensure threefold or even tenfold profits for the capitalists are “control”. 
 The petty bourgeoisie,partly out of naïveté, partly out of economic interest, trustthe capitalists and the capitalist state, and content them-selves with the most meaningless bureaucratic projects forcontrol. 
 The resolution passed by the workers lays special emphasis on the all-important thing, that is, on what is to be done 1) to prevent the actual “preservation” of capitalistprofits; 2) to tear off the veil of commercial secrecy; 3) to givethe workers a majority in the control agencies; 4) to ensurethat the organisation (of control and direction), being “na-tion-wide” organisation, is directed by the Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies and not by the capitalists . 
 Without this, all talk of control and regulation is either sheer bunkum or outright deception of the people. 
 Now it is against this truth, as plain as can be to every politically-conscious and thinking worker, that the leadersof our petty bourgeoisie, the Narodniks and Mensheviks ( Izve-stia, Rabochaya Gazeta ), are up in arms. 
 Unfortunately, those who write for Novaya Zhizn , and who have repeatedly wavered between us and them, have this time sunk to the same level. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR Comrades Avilov and Bazarov try to cover up their descent into the swamp of petty-bourgeois credulity, compromise, and bureaucratic project-making by Marxist-sounding argu-ments. 
 Let us look into these arguments. 
We Pravda people are said to be deviating from Marxism to syndicalism just because we defend the resolution of theOrganising Bureau (approved by the Conference). 
 Shame on you, Comrades Avilov and Bazarov! Such carelessness (or such trickery) is fit only for Rech 25 and Yedinstvo26! We suggest nothing like the ridiculous transfer of the railways tothe railwaymen, or the tanneries to the tanners. 
 What we dosuggest is workers ’ control , which should develop into com-plete regulation of production and distribution by the work-ers, into “nation-wide organisation” of the exchange of grain for manufactured goods, etc. 
 (with “extensive use of urbanand rural co-operatives”). 
 What we suggest is “the transferof all state power to the Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies”. 
 Only people who had not read the resolution right through, or who cannot read at all, could, with clear conscience, find any syndicalism in it. 
 And only pedants, who understand Marxism as Struve and all liberal bureaucrats “understood” it, can assert that“skipping state capitalism is utopian” and that “in our coun-try, too, the very type of regulation should retain its state-capitalist character ”. 
 Take the sugar syndicate or the state railways in Russia or the oil barons, etc. 
 What is that but state capitalism?How can you “skip” what already exists ? The point is that people who have turned Marxism into a kind of stiffly bourgeois doctrine evade the specific issues posed by reality, which in Russia has in practice produced a combination of the syndicates in industry and the small-peasant farms in the countryside. 
 They evade these specificissues by advancing pseudo-intellectual, and in fact utterlymeaningless, arguments about a “permanent revolution”,about “introducing” socialism, and other nonsense. 
 Let us get down to business! Let us have fewer excuses and keep closer to practical matters! Are the profits madefrom war supplies, profits amounting to 500 per cent or more, to be left intact! Yes or no? Is commercial secrecy to be left intact? Yes or no? Are the workers to be enabled to exercise control? Yes or no? Comrades Avilov and Bazarov give no answer to these practical questions. 
 By using “Struvean”27 arguments sound-ing “near-Marxist”, they unwittingly stoop to the level ofaccomplices of the bourgeoisie. 
 The bourgeoisie want nothingbetter than to answer the people’s queries about the scandal-ous profits of the war supplies deliverers, and about eco-nomic dislocation, with “learned” arguments about the“utopian” character of socialism. 
 These arguments are ridiculously stupid, for what makes socialism objectively impossible is the small-scale economy which we by no means presume to expropriate, or even to regulate or control. 
 What we are trying to make something real instead of a bluff is the “state regulation” of which the Mensheviks, the Narodniks and all bureaucrats (who have carried ComradesAvilov and Bazarov with them) talk in order to dismiss thematter, making projects to safeguard capitalist profits and orating to preserve commercial secrecy. 
 This is the point, worthy near-Marxists, and not the “introduction” of social-ism! Not regulation of and control over the workers by the capitalist class, but vice versa . 
 This is the point. 
 Not con-fidence in the “state”, fit for a Louis Blanc, but demand for a state led by the proletarians and semi-proletarians—that is how we must combat economic dislocation . 
 Any other solu-tion is sheer bunkum and deception. 
 Pravda No. 
 73, Published according to June 17 (4), 1917 the Pravda text THE THOUSAND AND FIRST LIE OF THE CAPITALISTS In today’s leader, Rech writes: “If Germany had her own Lenin acting with the kind foreign collaboration of the Robert Grimms and the Rakovskys, one couldonly suppose that the International did not wish to prevent thegreat Russian revolution from consolidating its position, and, more important still, from growing in depth. 
 But so far the Germans have politely replied that they do not need a republic and are satisfiedwith their Wilhelm. 
 Vorwärts , 28 for example, is even more amiable in arguing that the Russian democrats ought not to tolerate secrettreaties. 
 And the socialist organ modestly fails to mention the Germandemocrats. 
” It is a lie to say that “the Robert Grimms and the Rakov-skys” have “collaborated” with the Bolsheviks (with whom they have never agreed) in any way. 
 To confuse the “German” Plekhanovs (it is they and only they who are writing for Vorwärts ) with the German revolu-tionary internationalists , who (like Karl Liebknecht) are thrown into German prisons by the hundred , is the thousand and first, and the most infamous and brazen, lie of Rech and the capitalists generally. 
 There are two Internationals: 1) the International of the Plekhanovs , i. 
e. 
, of those who have betrayed socialism, i. 
e. 
, of people who have deserted to their governments: Plekha-nov, Guesde, Scheidemann, Sembat, Thomas, Henderson,Vandervelde, Bissolati and Co. 
; and 2) the International of the revolutionary internationalists who even in war-time fight everywhere in a revolutionary mood against their governments, against their bourgeoisie. 
 “The great Russian revolution” can become “great”, can “consolidate its position” and “grow in depth” only if it stops supporting the imperialist “coalition” government, the imperialist war which that government is waging, and thecapitalist class as a whole. 
 Pravda No. 
 73, Published according to June 17 (4), 1917 the Pravda text THE DIEHARD S OF JUN E 329 FAVOUR AN IMMEDIATE OFFENSIVE The gentlemen of June 3, who after 1905 helped Nicholas Romanov drench our country in blood, strangle the revolu-tionaries and re-establish the unlimited power of the land-owners and capitalists, are holding their meetings simultane-ously with the Congress of Soviets. 
 30 While Tsereteli, who found himself in bourgeois captivity, tried by a thousand tricks to hush up the vital importanceand urgency of the political question of an immediateoffensive, the diehards of June 3, companions-in-arms ofNicholas the Bloody and Stolypin the Hangman, landownersand capitalists, did not hesitate to put the question straight-forwardly and openly. 
 Here is the latest and most essential resolution on the offensive which they adopted unanimously : “The Duma (??) considers that only an immediate offensive and close co-operation with the Allies will guarantee a speedy termination of the war and consolidation of the liberties won by the people”. 
 That is clear enough. 
 These people are real politicians, men of action, faithful servants of their class, of the landowners and capitalists. 
 And how do Tsereteli, Chernov and the rest serve their class? They offer pious wishes in words and support the capitalists in actions. 
 Tsereteli asserted that the question of an immediate offen-sive could not even be raised, for were he, Minister Tsereteli,to know anything about an “immediate” offensive, he, aMinister, would say nothing about it to anyone. 
 In saying that, Tsereteli had no inkling (poor innocent man) that he was refuted by the diehards of June 3, refuted by actions , for they did not hesitate to speak, even in a resolution, and in everyone ’s hearing , about an offensive—not an offen-sive in general, but an immediate offensive. 
 And they were right, for this is a political issue, an issue bearing on thedestiny of our revolution as a whole. 
 There is no middle course. 
 You must either be for or against an “immediate offensive”. 
 You cannot abstain from express-ing an opinion. 
 In this situation, to evade the issue byreferring or alluding to military secrecy would be positivelyunworthy of a responsible politician. 
 To favour an immediate offensive means being in favour of continuing the imperialist war, slaughtering Russian workers and peasants in order to strangle Persia, Greece, Galicia, the Balkan peoples, etc. 
, reviving and strengtheningthe counter-revolution, completely nullifying all the phrasesabout “peace without annexations”, and waging war for annexations. 
 To be against an immediate offensive means being in favour of all power passing to the Soviets, of arousing the revolutionary initiative of the oppressed classes, of animmediate offer by the oppressed classes of all countries of “peace without annexations”, peace based on the precisecondition of overthrowing the tyranny of capital and liberat-ing all colonies, all the oppressed nationalities, or nation-alities not enjoying full rights, bar none. 
 The former way is, together with the capitalists, in the interests of the capitalists and for attaining the aims ofthe capitalists. 
 It is the way of confidence in the capital-ists, who for more than two years have been promising ev-erything under the sun and many things besides, provided the war is “carried on to victory ”. 
 The latter way is one of breaking with the capitalists, of distrusting them, of curbing their vile self-interest, ofputting an end to their business of making hundreds ofmillions in profits from contracts. 
 It is the way of confidencein the oppressed classes, primarily in the workers of all countries, the way of confidence in a world workers ’ revo-lution against capital , the way of supporting it in full meas-ure. 
 You must choose the one or the other. 
 Tsereteli, Chernov and the rest prefer a middle course. 
 But there is no middle course. 
 If they vacillate or try to get away with mere talk, they, Tsereteli, Chernov and the rest, will completely makethemselves tools in the hands of the counter-revolutionarybourgeoisie. 
 Pravda No. 
 74, Published according to June 19 (6), 1917 the Pravda text AN ALLIANCE TO STOP THE REVOLUTION That the new coalition government is precisely this sort of alliance between the capitalists and the Narodnik and Menshevik leaders is far from obvious to all. 
 Perhaps it is not obvious even to the Ministers belonging to these parties. 
Yet it is a fact. 
 This fact became all the more evident on Sunday, June 4, when the morning papers carried reports on speeches madeby Milyukov and Maklakov at the meeting of the counter-revolutionaries of the Third Duma (called the “State Duma”, by tradition of Nicholas Romanov and Stolypin the Hang-man), and when, in the evening, Tsereteli and other Minis-ters made speeches in defence of the government and of thepolicy of an offensive at the All-Russia Congress of Soviets ofSoldiers’ and Workers’ Deputies. 
 Milyukov and Maklakov, like all capitalist and counter-revolutionary leaders of any merit, are men of action whoappreciate full well the meaning of the class struggle whenit concerns their class. 
 That is why they put the question of an offensive with such perfect clarity, without wastinga single minute on utterly meaningless talk about the offen-sive from the strategic point of view—the kind of talk with which Tsereteli deceived himself and others. 
 The Cadets certainly know their business. 
 They know that the question of an offensive is now posed by reality as a political and not a strategic question, as the question of a radical turn in the Russian revolution as a whole . 
 It is from the political point of view that the Cadets raised it in the “State Duma”, just as the Bolsheviks, and internationalistsgenerally, raised it on Saturday evening in their written statement to the Steering Committee of the Congress of Soviets. 
 “Russia’s fate is in her own hands,” announced Maklakov, the well-known accomplice of Stolypin the Hangman, “and it will be decidedvery soon [hear, hear!]. 
 If we do succeed in launching an offensive andwaging the war, not only by means of resolutions, not only by speeches at public meetings and by banners borne through the city, but by waging the war as intently as we have been waging it so far [listento this—it is a capitalist leader speaking these historic words: “as we have been waging it so far”!], then it will not be long before Russiarecovers completely. 
” These are remarkable words which should be learned by heart and thought about time and again. 
 They are remark-able because they tell the class truth . 
 This was repeated, in a slightly different way, by Milyukov, who reproached thePetrograd Soviet: “Why is it that its [the Soviet’s] statementsays nothing about an offensive?”, and stressed that theItalian imperialists had put “a modest [Mr. 
 Milyukov’s irony!] question: ‘Are you going to take the offensive or not?’ Moreover, no specific answer was given [by the PetrogradSoviet] to this question of theirs, either”. 
 Maklakov voicedhis “profound respect” for Kerensky, and Milyukov explained: “I have a very uneasy feeling that what our War Minister [“our is right, meaning one who is in the hands of the capitalists!] has orga-nised may again be disorganised from here and that we shall missthe last opportunity we still have [mark the “still”] of answering our Allies, who are asking whether we are going to attack or not, in a manner satisfactory both to ourselves and to them. 
” “Both to ourselves and to them”, meaning both to the Russian and to the Anglo-French and other imperialists! An offensive can “still” “satisfy” them, i. 
e. 
, help them finish off Persia, Albania, Greece and Mesopotamia, and ensurethat they retain all the booty snatched from the Germans andtake away the booty seized by the German plunderers. 
 Thisis the point. 
 This is the class truth concerning the offensive’spolitical significance. 
 It is to satisfy the appetites of the imperialists of Russia, Britain, etc. 
, protract the imperial-ist, predatory war, and take the road not of peace without annexations (this road is possible only if the revolution con-tinues), but of war for annexations . 
 That is the meaning of an offensive from the standpoint of foreign policy. 
 Maklakov defined its meaning, in the historic phrase quoted above, from the standpoint of home policy. 
 What Maklakov means by “Russia’s complete recov-ery” is the complete victory of the counter-revolution. 
Those who have not forgotten Maklakov’s excellent speeches about the period of 1905 and 1907-13 see almost his every speech reaffirm this appraisal. 
 To wage the war “ as we have been waging it so far ”—“we” being the capitalists with the tsar at the head!—to wage this imperialist war means enabling Russia to “recover”, i. 
e. 
, ensuring the victory of the capitalists and the land-owners. 
 This is the class truth. 
An offensive, whatever its outcome may be from the military point of view, means politically strengtheningimperialist morale, imperialist sentiments, and infatuationwith imperialism. 
 It means strengthening the old, unchanged army officers (“waging the war as we have been waging it so far”), and strengthening the main position of the counter-revolution . 
 Quite independently of whether they wish it or not, and whether they are aware of it or not, Tsereteli and Kerensky,Skobelev and Chernov, as leaders of the Narodnik and Men-shevik parties, not as individuals, have given their sup-port to the counter-revolution, gone over, at this decisive moment , to its side, and taken a stand inside the alliance for stopping the revolution and continuing the war “ as we have been waging it so far ”. 
 There must be no illusions on this score. 
 Pravda No. 
 74, Published according to June 19 (6), 1917 the Pravda text GRATITUDE We are very grateful to the chauvinist newspaper, Volya Naroda ,31 for publishing (in its issue of June 4) our documents relating to our passage through Germany. 
 It is evident from these documents that even at that time we found Grimm’s behaviour “ambiguous” and declined his services. 
 That is a fact, and facts cannot be talked away. 
Our answer to the vague insinuations of Volya Naroda is: don’t be cowards, gentlemen, accuse us openly of such-and-such a crime or misdemeanour! Have a go! Is it really hard to understand that it is dishonest to make vague insinu-ations because of a fear to come out with an accusation overone’s signature? Pravda No. 
 74, Published according to June 19 (6), 1917 the Pravda text IS THERE A WAY TO A JUST PEACE? Is there a way to peace without an exchange of annexations, without the division of spoils among the capitalist robbers? There is: through a workers’ revolution against the capi-talists of the world. 
 Russia today is nearer to the beginning of such a revolution than any other country. 
 Only in Russia can power pass to existing institutions, to the Soviets, immediately, peacefully, without an uprising, for the capitalists can not resist the Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies. 
 With such a transfer of power it would be possible to curb the capitalists, now making thousands of millions in profitsfrom contracts, to expose all their tricks, arrest the million-aire embezzlers of public property, break their unlimited power. 
 Only after the transfer of power to the oppressed classes could Russia approach the oppressed classes of other coun-tries, not with empty words, not with mere appeals, but call-ing their attention to her example, and immediately andexplicitly proposing clear-cut terms for universal peace . 
 “Comrade workers and toilers of the world,” she would say in the proposal for an immediate peace. 
 “Enough of thebloodshed. 
 Peace is possible. 
 A just peace means peacewithout annexations, without seizures. 
 Let the Germancapitalist robbers and their crowned robber Wilhelm knowthat we shall not come to terms with them, that we regard as robbery on their part not only what they have grabbed since the war, but also Alsace and Lorraine, and the Danishand Polish areas of Prussia. 
 “We also consider that Poland, Finland, the Ukraine, and other non-Great-Russian lands were seized by the Russian tsars and capitalists. 
 “We consider that all colonies, Ireland, and so on, were seized by the British, French and other capitalists. 
 “We Russian workers and peasants shall not hold any of the non-Great-Russian lands or colonies (such as Turke-stan, Mongolia, or Persia) by force. 
 Down with war for the division of colonies , for the division of annexed (seized) lands, for the division of capitalist spoils!” The example of the Russian workers will be followed inevitably, perhaps not tomorrow (revolutions are notmade to order), but inevitably all the same by the workersand all the working people of at least two great countries , Germany and France. 
 For both are perishing , the first of hunger, the second of depopulation. 
 Both will conclude peace on our terms, whichare just, in defiance of their capitalist governments . 
 The road to peace lies before us. 
Should the capitalists of England, Japan and America try to resist this peace, the oppressed classes of Russia and other countries will not shrink from a revolutionary war against the capitalists . 
 In this war they will defeat the capitalists of the whole world , not just those of the three countries lying far from Russia and taken up with their own rivalries. 
 The road to a just peace lies before us. 
 Let us not be afraid to take it. 
 Pravda No. 
 75, Published according to June 20 (7), 1917 the Pravda text THE ENEMIES OF THE PEOPLE Plekhanov’s Yedinstvo (which even the Socialist-Revolu-tionary Dyelo Naroda justly calls a newspaper at one with the liberal bourgeoisie) has recently recalled the law of the French Republic of 1793 relating to enemies of the people. 
 A very timely recollection. 
The Jacobins of 1793 belonged to the most revolutionary class of the eighteenth century, the town and country poor. 
It was against this class, which had in fact (and not just in words) done away with its monarch, its landowners and its moderate bourgeoisie by the most revolutionary measures,including the guillotine—against this truly revolutionaryclass of the eighteenth century—that the monarchs of Europecombined to wage war. 
 The Jacobins proclaimed enemies of the people those “pro-moting the schemes of the allied tyrants directed against the Republic”. 
 The Jacobins’ example is instructive. 
 It has not become obsolete to this day, except that it must be applied to therevolutionary class of the twentieth century, to the workersand semi-proletarians. 
 To this class, the enemies of the people in the twentieth century are not the monarchs, but the landowners and capitalists as a class. 
 If the “Jacobins” of the twentieth century, the workers and semi-proletarians, assumed power, they would proclaimenemies of the people the capitalists who are making thou-sands of millions in profits from the imperialist war, that is , a war for the division of capitalist spoils and profits. 
 The “Jacobins” of the twentieth century would not guillo-tine the capitalists—to follow a good example does not mean copying it. 
 It would be enough to arrest fifty to a hundred financial magnates and bigwigs, the chief knights of embez-zlement and of robbery by the banks. 
 It would be enough to arrest them for a few weeks to expose their frauds and show all exploited people “who needs the war”. 
 Upon exposing thefrauds of the banking barons, we could release them, plac-ing the banks, the capitalist syndicates, and all the contrac-tors “working” for the government under workers’ control. 
 The Jacobins of 1793 have gone down in history for their great example of a truly revolutionary struggle againstthe class of the exploiters by the class of the working peopleand the oppressed who had taken all state power into their own hands. 
 The miserable Yedinstvo (with which the Menshevik defencists were ashamed to form a bloc) wants to borrow Jaco-binism in letter and not in spirit, its exterior trappings and not the content of its policy. 
 This amounts in effect to a betrayal of the revolution of the twentieth century, a betrayal disguised by spurious reference to the revolution-aries of the eighteenth century. 
 Pravda No. 
 75, Published according to June 20 (7), 1917 the Pravda text NOTE On June 6 Novoye Vremya32 said: “Why is it that in these days of freedom this black hand has reached out from somewhere and is moving the puppets of Russian democracy? Lenin! But his name is legion. 
 At all cross-roads, a Lenin pops up. 
 Andit is quite obvious that strength lies not in Lenin himself but in thereceptiveness of the soil to the seeds of anarchy and madness. 
” Anarchy, as we see it, is the making of scandalous profits from war supplies by the capitalists. 
 Madness, as we see it, is the waging of a war for the division of annexed terri-tories, for the division of capitalist profits. 
 And if these views find sympathy “at all cross-roads”, it is because theyproperly express the interests of the proletariat, the interestsof all working people and all the exploited. 
 Pravda No. 
 75, Published according to June 20 (7), 1917 the Pravda text “THE GREAT WITHDRAWAL ” “The great withdrawal of the bourgeoisie from the govern-ment. 
” This is what the main speaker of the Executive Committee, in a report he submitted last Sunday, called the formation of the coalition government and the entry of for-mer socialists into the Ministry. 
 Only the first three words in this phrase are correct. 
 “The great withdrawal” does indeed characterise and explainMay 6 (the formation of the coalition government). 
 It was on that day that “the great withdrawal” really began, or, to be exact, manifested itself most clearly. 
 Only, it was nota great withdrawal of the bourgeoisie from the governmentbut a great withdrawal of the Menshevik and Narodnik lead-ers from the revolution. 
 The significance of the Congress of Soviets of Soldiers’ and Workers’ Deputies now in session lies in the fact that it has made this circumstance clearer than ever. 
 May 6 was a triumph for the bourgeoisie. 
 The bourgeois government was on the verge of defeat. 
 The masses weredefinitely and absolutely, sharply and irreconcilably opposedto it. 
 One word from the Narodnik and Menshevik leaders of the Soviet would have sufficed to induce the government to relinquish its power unquestioningly. 
 Lvov had to admitthat openly at the sitting in the Mariinsky Palace. 
 The bourgeoisie resorted to a skilful manoeuvre which was new to the Russian petty bourgeoisie and to Russia’smasses in general, which intoxicated the intellectual Menshe-vik and Narodnik leaders, and which took proper account of their Louis Blanc nature. 
 The reader may recall that LouisBlanc was a renowned petty-bourgeois socialist who entered the French Government in 1848 and became as sadly famed in 1871. 
 Louis Blanc imagined himself to be the leader of the “labour democrats” or “socialist democrats” (the term “democracy” was used in the France of 1848 as frequently . 
asin Socialist-Revolutionary33 and Menshevik writing in 1917), but in reality he was the tail-end of the bourgeoisie, a play-thing in their hands. 
 During the almost seventy years that have elapsed since then, that manoeuvre, which is a novelty in Russia, has been made many times by the bourgeoisie in the West. 
 The pur-pose of this manoeuvre is to make the “socialist democratic”leaders who “withdraw” from socialism and from the revolu-tion harmless appendages of a bourgeois government, to shield this government from the people by means of near-socialist Ministers, to cover up the counter-revolutionary nature of the bourgeoisie by a glittering, spectacular facade of“socialist” ministerialism. 
 This method has been developed to a veritable art in France. 
 It has also been tested on many occasions in Anglo-Saxon,Scandinavian, and many of the Latin countries. 
 It is this manoeuvre that was made in Russia on May 6, 1917. 
 “Our” near-socialist Ministers found themselves in a sit-uation in which the bourgeoisie began to use them as their cat’s paw, to do through them what the bourgeoisie could never have done without them. 
 Through Guchkov it would have been impossible to lure the people into continuing the imperialist , predatory war, a war for redivision of the colonies and annexed territories in general. 
 Through Kerensky (and Tsereteli, who was busierdefending Tereshchenko than defending the post and tele-graph workers), the bourgeoisie were able, as correctly ad-mitted by Milyukov and Maklakov, to begin “organising” the continuation of this kind of war. 
 Through Shingaryov it would have been impossible to ensure the preservation of the landed estates system at leastuntil; the convocation of the Constituent Assembly (if anoffensive were to take place, it would “enable Russia to re-cover completely”, said Maklakov. 
 That means that the Constituent Assembly itself would be “healthier”). 
 Through Chernov, this can be brought about. 
 The peasants have beentold, although they have not been very glad to hear it, that to rent land from the landowners by agreement with each individual owner is “order”, while to abolish the landed estates at one stroke and rent from the people , pending the convocation of the Constituent Assembly, land formerlyowned by the landowners is ”anarchy”. 
 This counter-revolu-tionary idea of the land owners could only be put into effectthrough Chernov. 
 Through Konovalov it would have been impossible to en-sure the safeguarding ( and the increase —see what the minis-terial newspaper, Rabochaya Gazeta , writes about the coal industrialists) of the scandalous profits from war contracts. 
Through Skobelev, or with his participation, this safeguard-ing can be ensured by allegedly preserving the old order, bynear -“Marxist” rejection of the possibility of “introducing” socialism. 
 Because socialism cannot be introduced the scandalously high profits made by the capitalists not from their purelycapitalist business but from supplies to the armed forces , to the state —these profits can be both concealed from the people and retained!—this is the wonderful Struvean argu-ment which has brought together Tereshchenko and Lvov, on the one hand, and the “Marxist” Skobelev, on the other. 
 Popular meetings and the Soviets cannot be influenced through Lvov, Milyukov, Tereshchenko, Shingaryov and therest. 
 But they can be influenced through Tsereteli, Chernovand Co. 
 in the same old bourgeois direction. 
 And one can pursue the same old bourgeois -imperialist policy by means of particularly, impressive, particularly “nice” -sounding phra-ses, to the point of denying the people the elementary demo-cratic right to elect local authorities and prevent both their appointment and confirmation from above. 
 By denying this right, Tsereteli, Chernov and Co. 
 have unwittingly turned from ex-socialists into ex-democrats. 
 A “great withdrawal”, all right! Pravda No. 
 76, Published according to June 21 (8), 1917 the Pravda text THE USE OF STICKING TO THE POINT IN POLEMICS Dear comrades writing for Novaya Zhizn , you resent our criticism, which you call angry. 
 We shall try to be mild and kind. 
 To begin with, we wish to take up the two questions you raised. 
 Can one seriously speak of control over production, to say nothing of regulating it, without ending the “inviolability ofcommercial secrecy”? We have maintained that Novaya Zhizn has not answered this “practical” question. 
 Novaya Zhizn objects, saying that we can “find” the answer “even” in Rabochaya Gazeta . 
 We cannot find it, dear comrades! Nor can you ever find it. 
 Look more carefully and you will see you cannotfind it. 
 You will pardon us for saying so, but Novaya Zhizn has sinned because, while holding forth about “control”, it hasnot raised the practical question of the inviolability of com-mercial secrecy in a practical way. 
 Second question: can one confuse the immediate introduc-tion of socialism (which Novaya Zhizn has been arguing against and which we have never suggested) with the immediate assumption of actual control over the banks and trusts?When, in answer to that, we pointed out that we did notpropose to expropriate, regulate, or exercise control oversmall-scale economy, Novaya Zhizn commented that we had made a “valuable confession”, a “legitimate” one, but had done it “overhastily”. 
 Have a heart, dear comrades, how can you call it “over-hasty” when it is just a brief paraphrase of the long and detailed resolution passed by our conference? Or didn’t you care enough to read that resolution? In polemics, one should stick to the point. 
 It is harmful in this kind of polemics to try to quibble the issue away. 
 Pravda No. 
 76, Published according to June 21 (8), 1917 the Pravda text AN EPIDEMIC OF CREDULITY “Comrades, the resistance of the capitalists has apparently been broken. 
” We gather this pleasant news from a speech by Minister Peshekhonov. 
 It is staggering news! “The resistance of thecapitalists has been broken. 
” And such ministerial speeches are heard and applauded! What is this but an epidemic of credulity? On the one hand, they use “the dictatorship of the prole-tariat” more than anything else to scare themselves and other people. 
 On the other hand, what is the difference betweenthe idea of the “dictatorship of the proletariat” and breakingthe resistance of the capitalists? None whatsoever. 
 The dic-tatorship of the proletariat is a scientific term indicatingthe class which plays the leading role in it and the special form of state power called dictatorship, i. 
e. 
, power based not on law or elections, but directly on the armed force of aparticular section of the population. 
 What is the purpose and significance of the dictatorship of the proletariat? To break the resistance of the capitalists!And if “the resistance of the capitalists has apparently been broken” in Russia, it is as much as saying “the dictatorship of the proletariat has apparently been realised” here. 
 The “only” trouble is that this is no more than a ministe-rial phrase. 
 Something like Skobelev’s brave exclamation:“I shall take 100 per cent profit!” 34 It is one of the gems of the “revolutionary-democratic” eloquence that is now over-whelming Russia, intoxicating the petty bourgeoisie, befog-ging and corrupting the people, and spreading by the handfulthe germs of an epidemic of credulity. 
 A scene in a certain French comedy—the French seem to excel at the game of socialist ministries—has a gramophone record that repeats, before audiences of voters in every part of France, a speech full of promises by a “socialist” Minister. 
We think Citizen Peshekhonov should pass on his historicphrase, “Comrades, the resistance of the capitalists has appar-ently been broken”, to a record company. 
 It would be veryconvenient and useful (for the capitalists) to spread this phrase throughout the world, in every language. 
 Here we have, it would say, the splendid achievements of the Rus-sian experiment in having a bourgeois and socialist coalitionMinistry. 
 Still, it would be a good idea if Minister Peshekhonov, whom both the Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries (who in 1906 dissociated themselves from him in their press, regarding him as a petty bourgeois who had moved too far tothe right) call a socialist now that he has entered the Ministry together with Tsereteli and Chernov , answered the following simple and modest question: Isn’t it too much for us to try to break the resistance of the capitalists? Shouldn’t we rather try to expose before the labour unions and all the major parties the fantasticprofits made by the capitalists? Shouldn’t we try to abolishcommercial secrecy? Isn’t it too much for us to speak of the “dictatorship of the proletariat” (“breaking the resistance of the capitalists”)? Shouldn’t we rather try to expose embezzlement and misap-propriation ? If the price of coal supplies has been raised by the revolu-tionary government, as reported by the ministerial “Rabo-chaya Gazeta ”, doesn’t it look like plunder of the state? Hadn’t we better publish, at least once a week, the “letters of guarantee” of the banks, and other documents relating to war contracts and to the prices paid under those contracts,rather than make speeches about “the resistance of the capi-talists having been broken”? Pravda No. 
 76, Published according to June 21 (8), 1917 the Pravda text A BIRD IN THE HAND OR TWO IN THE BUSH Minister Peshekhonov uttered many beautiful and high-sounding phrases in his speech. 
 He said that “we must divide equitably all we have”, that “the resistance of the capital-ists has apparently been broken”, and many more phrases ofthat kind. 
 But he cited only one exact figure, only one exact fact in his speech, devoting six lines to it out of eight columns. 
Here it is: nails leave the factory at 20 kopeks a pound, but they reach the consumer at 2 rubles a pound. 
 Isn’t it possible, since “the resistance of the capitalists has been broken”, to pass a law on publishing (1) all letters ofguarantee concerning prices of supplies under the war con-tracts; (2) all prices of supplies to the state in general; (3)the cost price of products delivered to the state; (4) isn’t it possible to give the workers’ organisations an opportunity to verify all these facts? Pravda No. 
 76, Published according to June 21 (8), 1917 the Pravda text INTRODUCTION OF SOCIALISM OR EXPOSURE OF PLUNDER OF THE STATE? It has been decided and laid down that socialism cannot be introduced in Russia. 
 This was proved, in near-Marxistfashion, by Mr. 
 Milyukov at a meeting of the June 3 diehards,following the ministerial Menshevik Rabochaya Gazeta . 
 And it was subscribed to by the largest party in Russia in general and in the Congress of Soviets in particular, theSocialist-Revolutionary Party, which, besides being thelargest party, is also the party with the greatest ideological(disinterested) fear of seeing the revolution develop towardssocialism. 
 Strictly speaking, a mere glance at the resolution passed by the Bolshevik Conference held from April 24 to 29, 1917,reveals that the Bolsheviks, too, recognise the impossibilityof immediately “introducing” socialism in Russia. 
 What is the argument about, then? Why the fuss?By the hue and cry against the “introduction” of socialism in Russia, some people are sustaining (many of them unwit-tingly) the efforts of those who are opposed to the exposure of plunder of the state . 
 Let us not quibble over words, citizens! It is unworthy of “revolutionary democrats” and, indeed, of grown-ups ingeneral. 
 Let’s not talk about the “introduction” of socialism, which “everybody” rejects. 
 Let’s talk about the exposure of plunder. 
 When capitalists work for defence, i. 
e. 
, for the state, it is obviously no longer “pure” capitalism but a special form ofnational economy. 
 Pure capitalism means commodity pro-duction. 
 And commodity production means work for an unknown and free market. 
 But the capitalist “working” for defence does not “work” for the market at all—he works ongovernment orders , very often with money loaned by the state. 
 We believe that to conceal the amount of profit made on this peculiar operation and to appropriate the profit in ex-cess of what is necessary to cover the living expenses of a person actually participating in production is embezzlement . 
 If you disagree, then you are clearly out of step with the overwhelming majority of the population. 
 There is noshadow of doubt that by far most of the workers and peasantsof Russia agree with us and would say so in plain language were the question put to them without evasions, excuses or diplomatic tricks. 
 But if you do agree, then let us fight together against ex-cuses and tricks. 
 To make the greatest possible concessions on a common undertaking such as this fight and to show a maximum of tractability, we are proposing the following draft resolution to the Congress of Soviets: “The first step towards any regulation of, or even simple control over, production and distribution [note that does notbelong to the text of the draft: even Minister Peshekhonovpromised to strive to ensure “that all we have is divided equi-tably”], the first step in any serious struggle against economic dislocation and the catastrophe threatening the country,must be a decree abolishing commercial (including banking)secrecy in all transactions arising from supplies to the stateor for defence in general. 
 Such a decree should be supplement-ed immediately by a law treating as criminal offences all direct or indirect attempts to conceal pertinent documents or facts from persons or groups who have mandates from: “(a) any Soviet of Workers’ or Soldiers’ or Peasants’ Deputies; “(b) any trade union of industrial workers or office employ-ees, etc. 
; “(c) any major political party (the idea of ‘major’ should be defined specifically, at least on the basis of votes received). 
” Everybody agrees that the immediate introduction of socialism in Russia is impossible. 
 Does everybody agree that the exposure of plunder of the state is an immediate necessity? Pravda No. 
 77, Published according to June 22 (9), 1917 the Pravda text CONFUSED AND FRIGHTENED The atmosphere in Petrograd is one of fright and confusion reaching truly unparalleled dimensions. 
 This was illustrated by a small incident prior to the big incident of banning the demonstration fixed by our Party forSaturday. 
 35 This small incident was the seizure of Durnovo’s country-house. 
 Minister Pereverzev first ordered the house cleared, but then declared at the Congress that he was letting thepeople use the garden and that the trade unions were not tobe evicted from the house! All that was necessary, he said,was to arrest certain anarchists. 
 36 If the seizure of Durnovo’s country-house was unlawful, then it was wrong either to leave the garden for the people’s use or to allow the trade unions to remain in the house. 
 Ifthere were lawful grounds for arrest, the arrest had no bearing on the house, for it could have occurred either in the house or outside it. 
 As it happened, the house was not “vacated”, nor were any arrests made. 
 The government found itself confused and frightened. 
 Had they not become nervous, there would have been no “incident”, for nothing haschanged anyway. 
 The big incident was the demonstration. 
 Our Party’s Central Committee, together with a number of other organi-sations, including the Trade Union Bureau, resolved to call a peaceful demonstration, a march through the streets of the capital. 
 In all constitutional countries, the holding of such ademonstration is an absolutely incontestable civil right. 
 A peaceful street demonstration calling, incidentally, for an amendment of the Constitution or a change in the govern-ment is in no way regarded as unlawful by the legislation of any free country. 
 People who were confused and frightened, including, in particular, the majority at the Congress of Soviets, made anawful “fuss” over the demonstration. 
 The Congress majorityadopted a devastating resolution against the demonstration, full of abuse against our Party, and prohibited all demonstra-tions, including peaceful ones, for three days. 
 When this formal decision had been adopted, the Central Committee of our Party, as early as 2 a. 
m. 
 on Saturday,resolved to cancel the demonstration. 
 The cancellation waseffected on Saturday morning at an emergency meeting with district representatives. 
 The question remains: how does our second “government”, the Congress of Soviets, explain its ban? Agreed that every party in a free country has the right to hold demonstrations,and every government can, after proclaiming a state ofemergency, prohibit them. 
 But the political question remains: why was the demonstration banned? Here is the only political motive, clearly stated in the resolution of the Congress of Soviets: “We know that concealed counter-revolutionaries want to take advantage of your demonstration [i. 
e. 
, the one planned by our Par-ty].... 
” That is the reason why the peaceful demonstration was banned. 
 The Congress of Soviets “knows” that there are “con-cealed counter-revolutionaries” and that they wanted to“take advantage” of the action which our Party had planned. 
 This statement by the Congress of Soviets is highly signif-icant. 
 And we must re-emphasise this factual statement, which by virtue of its factualness stands out from the spateof abuse levelled at us. 
 What measures is our second govern-ment taking against the “concealed counter-revolutionaries”?What exactly does this government “know”? How exactlydid the counter-revolutionaries wart to take advantage of one pretext or another? The people cannot and will not wait patiently and pas-sively until those concealed counter-revolutionaries act. 
 If our second government does not want to remain like people who by bans and torrents of abuse try to cover up their confusion and the fact that they have allowed them-selves to be frightened by the Right, it will have to tell the people a great deal about the “concealed counter-revolution-aries” and do a great deal to combat them seriously. 
 Pravda No. 
 79, Published according to June 24 (11), 1917 the Pravda text INSINUATIONS Those who rant and rage and fulminate, who gnash their teeth and pour a ceaseless torrent of abusive and riot-raisingwords upon our Party, do not accuse us of anything directly. 
They merely “insinuate”. 
 Insinuate what?There is only one thing they can insinuate: the Bolsheviks wanted to effect a coup d’état, they are Catilines, 37 and consequently they are monsters deserving to be torn to pieces. 
 Our enemies cannot bring themselves to make this foolish statement openly, and so they are compelled to “insinuate”and rage in “rhetorics”. 
 For this accusation is exceedinglystupid. 
 A coup d’état through a peaceful demonstration, decided upon on Thursday, planned for Saturday and announced on Saturday morning! Now, gentlemen, whomare you trying to fool with your ridiculous insinuations? “A demand for the overthrow of the Provisional Govern-ment,” says the resolution of the Congress of Soviets. 
 So theremoval of some of the Ministers from the Provisional Gov-ernment (one of the inscriptions on the planned streamers was to have read: “Down with the bourgeois members of thegovernment!”) is a coup d’état, eh? Why, then, has no one tried, or even threatened, to insti-tute proceedings against those who have repeatedly appearedin the Petrograd streets carrying the banner: “All power to the Soviet”? Those who rage have been frightened by their own shadow. 
A government which knows that it is supported in its entirety by the will of the majority of the people should not fear demonstrations announced in advance. 
 It would not ban such demonstrations. 
 Only those who realise they have no majority to back them, and who lack popular approval, can behave so savagelyand make such insinuations in malicious articles. 
 Pravda No. 
 79, Published according to June 24 (11), 1917 the Pravda text “RUMOURS AGITATING THE POPULATION ” The Provisional Government is calling upon the “popula-tion” today to stay calm in face of “the rumours that are beingspread in the city and are agitating the population”. 
 Doesn’t the Provisional Government think that one sen-tence in the resolution passed by the Congress of Soviets is, and should be, a thousand times more agitating than all“rumours”? That sentence reads: “We know that concealed counter-revolutionaries want to take advantage of your [Bolshevik] demonstration. 
” This is “more than rumours”. 
 How can they fail to agitate the population? Pravda No. 
 79, Published according to June 24 (11), 1917 the Pravda text A RIDDLE What is the difference between an ordinary bourgeois government and a government which is extraordinary, revo-lutionary, and which does not regard itself as bourgeois? Answer:An ordinary bourgeois government can ban demonstra-tions only on constitutional grounds and after declaringmartial law. 
 An extraordinary and near-socialist government can ban demonstrations without any grounds and on the strength of “facts” known to it alone. 
 Pravda No. 
 79, Published according to June 24 (11), 1917 the Pravda text DRAF T STATEMENT BY THE C. 
C. 
 R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P . 
(B. 
) AND THE BUREAU OF THE BOLSHEVIK GROUP TO THE ALL-RUSSIA CONGRESS OF SOVIETS REGARDING TH E BAN ON THE DEMONSTRATIO N38 We hold that the unique institution known as the Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies is the nearest approach to a popular body expressing the will of the major-ity of the people, to a revolutionary parliament. 
 On principle we have been, and are, in favour of all power passing into the hands of such a body, despite the fact thatat present it is in the hands of the defencist Mensheviksand Socialist-Revolutionaries, who are hostile to the party of the proletariat. 
 The fact that the position of the Soviets is internally con-tradictory, shaky and unstable, and powerless in regard to the counter-revolution, is due to their tolerating a nestof counter-revolution—the ten bourgeois Ministers—and totheir not breaking with Anglo-French imperialist capital. 
 The shakiness of their position accounts for the nervousness of the present majority of the Soviets and their touchinesstowards those who point out this shakiness. 
 We refuse to co-ordinate our struggle against the counter-revolution with the “struggle” of the defencist and ministe-rialist parties. 
 We cannot recognise the decisions of the Soviets as proper decisions taken by a proper government as long as thereremain the ten bourgeois, counter-revolutionary Ministerswho are part and parcel of the Milyukov spirit and the Milyu-kov class. 
 But even if the Soviets seized all power (which wewant and would always support), and even if they became an omnipotent revolutionary parliament, we would not submit to decisions that restrained our freedom of propa-ganda, for instance, prohibiting leaflets at the front or in the rear, banning peaceful demonstrations, and so on. 
 In that event we would prefer to become an illegal, officially per-secuted party, rather than give up our Marxist, internation-alist principles. 
 We shall act similarly if the Congress of Soviets sees fit to brand us officially before the entire population of Russiaas “enemies of the people” or as “enemies of the revolution”. 
 We regard only one of the motives given for banning the demonstration for three days as conditionally valid, namely, that concealed counter-revolutionaries lying in wait wantedto take advantage of the demonstration. 
 If the facts underly-ing this motive are correct, and if the names of the counter-revolutionaries are known to the entire Soviet (as they areknown to us privately from the verbal information given by Lieber and others on the Executive Committee), then these counter-revolutionaries should be immediately proclaimedenemies of the people and arrested, and their followers andhelpers tried in court. 
 As long as the Soviet does not take such measures, even its valid motive is only conditionally valid, or altogether in-valid. 
 Written on June 11 (24), 1917 First published in 1924 , Published according to in Byloye No. 
 24 the manuscript SPEECH ON THE CANCELLATION OF THE DEMONSTRATION, DELIVERED AT A MEETING OF THE PETROGRAD COMMITTEE OF THE R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 (B. 
), JUNE 11 (24), 1917 The dissatisfaction voiced by most comrades over the cancellation of the demonstration is quite natural, but theCentral Committee had no alternative for two reasons:first, we were formally banned from holding the demonstra-tion by the semi-organ of power; secondly, the motive for the ban was stated as follows: “We know that concealed forcesof the counter-revolution want to take advantage of yourdemonstration. 
” In support of this motive, we were givennames, such as that of a general, whom they promised to ar-rest within three days, and others. 
 And they declared that a demonstration of the Black Hundreds 39 had been arranged for June 10 with the intention of breaking into our demonstra-tion and turning it into a skirmish. 
 Even in ordinary warfare, it sometimes happens that a planned offensive has to be cancelled for strategic reasons. 
This is all the more likely to occur in class warfare, depending on the vacillation of the middle, petty-bourgeois groups. 
 We must be able to take account of the situation and be boldin adopting decisions. 
 The cancellation was absolutely necessary, as subsequent developments proved. 
 Today Tsereteli has delivered his his-torical and hysterical speech. 
 40 Today the revolution has entered a new phase of its development. 
 They began by ban-ning our peaceful demonstration for three days, and now theywant to ban it for the entire duration of the Congress. 
 They demand that we obey the decision of the Congress under threat of expulsion from the Congress. 
 But we have declared that we prefer arrest rather than renounce freedom of propa-ganda. 
 Tsereteli, whose speech showed him up as a blatant counter-revolutionary, declared that the Bolsheviks must notbe fought by words and resolutions, but must be deprived ofall the technical means they have at their disposal. 
 The result of all bourgeois revolutions is: first arm the proletariat and then disarm it to prevent it from going any further. 
 Thefact that a peaceful demonstration had to be banned showsthat the situation must be very serious. 
 Tsereteli, who emerged from the depths of the Provisional Government to attend the Congress, clearly expressed a desire to disarm the workers. 
 He was savagely furious in demanding that the Bolshevik Party be ousted from theranks of the revolutionary democrats. 
 The workers mustclearly realise that there can now be no question of a peacefuldemonstration. 
 The situation is far more serious than wethought. 
 We were going to hold a peaceful demonstration in order to exercise maximum pressure on the decisions of the Congress—that is our right—but we are accused of hatchinga plot to arrest the government. 
 Tsereteli says that there are no counter-revolutionaries apart from the Bolsheviks. 
 The meeting that passed judge-ment on us was organised with particular solemnity. 
 It consisted of the Congress Steering Committee, the Executive Committee of the Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputiesin full force and the bureaus of the groups of all the partiesattending the Congress. 
 At that meeting they blurted outthe whole truth, namely, that they are calling an offensiveagainst us. 
 The proletariat must reply by showing the maximum calmness, caution, restraint and organisation, and mustremember that peaceful processions are a thing of thepast. 
 We must give them no pretext for attack. 
 Let them attack, and the workers will realise that it is an attack on the very existence of the proletariat. 
 But reality is on our side, and it is a moot point whether their attack will succeed—atthe front there are the troops, among whom discontent is very strong, and in the rear there is the high cost of living, economic dislocation and so on. 
 The Central Committee does not want to force your deci-sion. 
 Your right, the right to protest against the actions ofthe Central Committee, is a legitimate one, and your deci-sion must be a free one. 
 First published in 1923 , Published according to in Krasnaya Letopis No. 
 9 the minutes of the meetings of the Petrograd Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
), 1917 THE TURNING -POINT At the first stage of its development the Russian revolu-tion transferred power to the imperialist bourgeoisie, and created, alongside of that power, the Soviets of Deputies, with the petty-bourgeois democrats in the majority. 
 Thesecond stage of the revolution (May 6) formally removedfrom power the cynically frank spokesmen of imperialism,Milyukov and Guchkov, and virtually transformed themajority parties in the Soviets into governing parties. 
 Our Party remained, before and after May 6, a minority op-position. 
 This was inevitable, for we are the party of thesocialist proletariat, a party holding an internationalistposition. 
 A socialist proletariat whose outlook during animperialist war is internationalist cannot but be in opposi-tion to any power waging that war, regardless of whether that power is a monarchy or republic, or is held by defencist “so-cialists”. 
 And the party of the socialist proletariat is bound toattract an increasingly large mass of people who are beingruined by the protracted war and are growing distrustful of“socialists” committed to the service of imperialism, in thesame way as they previously grew distrustful of imperialists themselves. 
 The struggle against our Party, therefore, began in the very first days of the revolution. 
 And however infamous andabominable the forms of struggle carried on by the Cadetsand the Plekhanov people against the party of the proleta-riat, the meaning of the struggle is quite clear. 
 It is the same struggle as the imperialists and the Scheidemann people waged against Liebknecht and Adler (both of whom were,in fact, declared “mad” by the Central organ of the German “socialists”, to say nothing of the bourgeois press, which described these comrades simply as “traitors” working for Britain). 
 This is a struggle of the whole of bourgeois society, including the petty-bourgeois democrats , however r-r-revolu-tionary they may be, against the socialist, internationalistproletariat. 
 In Russia, this struggle has reached a stage where the im-perialists are trying, through the petty-bourgeois-democratic leaders, the Tseretelis, Chernovs, etc. 
, to destroy the grow-ing power of the workers’ party at a single hard and decisiveblow. 
 As a pretext for this decisive blow, Minister Tseretelihas struck upon a method repeatedly used by counter-revo-lutionaries: the charge of conspiracy . 
 This charge is a mere pretext. 
 The point is that the petty-bourgeois democrats, who take their cue from the Russian and the Allied imperial-ists, need to do away with the internationalist socialists onceand for all. 
 They think that the moment is ripe for the blow. 
They are agitated and frightened, and under the whip oftheir masters they have made up their minds: now or never. 
 The socialist proletariat and our Party must be as cool and collected as possible, must show the greatest staunchness and vigilance. 
 Let the future Cavaignacs 41 begin first. 
 Our Party conference has already given warning of their arrival. 
The workers of Petrograd will give them no opportunity todisclaim responsibility. 
 They will bide their time, gather-ing their forces and preparing for resistance when those gen-tlemen decide to turn from words to action. 
 Pravda No. 
 80, Published according to June 26 (13), 1917 the Pravda text LETTER TO THE EDITOR I am being asked about the reason for my absence at the meeting held on Sunday evening by the Executive Commit-tee, the Steering Committee of the Congress and the bureaus of all groups. 
 The reason is that I upheld the refusal of theBolsheviks, as a matter of principle, to participate in themeeting, and urged that they present a written statementto the effect that they refuse to participate in any meetingson such questions (the ban on demonstrations). 
 N. 
 Lenin Pravda No. 
 80, Published according to June 26 (13), 1917 the Pravda text THE FOREIGN POLICY OF THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION No idea could be more erroneous or harmful than to separate foreign from home policy. 
 The monstrous falsity of this separation becomes even more monstrous in war-time. 
 Yet the bourgeoisie are doing everything possible and impossibleto suggest and promote this idea. 
 Popular ignorance offoreign policy is incomparably greater than of home policy. 
The “secrecy” of diplomatic relations is sacredly observedin the freest of capitalist countries, in the most democratic republics. 
 Popular deception has become a real art in foreign “affairs”, and our revolution suffers very badly from this deception. 
The poison of deception is spread far and wide by the mil-lions of copies of bourgeois newspapers. 
 You must side with one of the two immensely wealthy and immensely powerful groups of imperialist predators—that is how capitalist reality poses the basic issue of present-dayforeign policy. 
 That is how this issue is posed by the capi-talist class. 
 And that, it goes without saying, is how it isposed by the broad mass of the petty bourgeoisie who haveretained their old, capitalist views and prejudices. 
 Those whose thinking does not go beyond capitalist rela-tions cannot understand why the workers, if they are polit-ically conscious, cannot side with either group of imperial-ist plunderers. 
 Conversely, the worker cannot understandwhy socialists who remain true to the fraternal alliance ofthe workers of the world against the capitalists of the world are accused of being inclined towards a separate peace treaty with the Germans, or of virtually serving such a peace treaty. 
Under no circumstances can these socialists (and hence the Bolsheviks) agree to a separate peace treaty between the capitalists. 
 The basis for the foreign policy of the political-ly-conscious proletariat is no separate peace treaty with the German capitalists and no alliance with the Anglo-Frenchcapitalists. 
 By rising up in arms against that programme because they fear a break with “Britain and France”, our Mensheviksand Socialist-Revolutionaries are virtually carrying out a capitalist foreign policy programme, while embellishing it with florid and innocent phrases about “revision of treaties”,declarations in support of “peace without annexations”,etc. 
 All these pious wishes are doomed to remain hollowphrases, for capitalist reality puts the issue bluntly: either submit to the imperialists of one of the two groups, or wage a revolutionary struggle against all imperialists. 
 Have we any allies for this struggle? Yes. 
 The oppressed classes of Europe, primarily the proletariat. 
 The peoplesoppressed by imperialism, primarily our neighbours in Asia. 
 The Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, who call themselves “revolutionary democrats”, are in fact pursuing a counter-revolutionary and anti-democratic foreign policy. 
 Were they revolutionaries, they would advise the workersand peasants of Russia to march at the head of all peoplesoppressed by imperialism and of all the oppressed classes. 
 “But in that event the capitalists of all other countries would rally against Russia,” the frightened philistines object. 
 That is not impossible. 
 No “ revolutionary ” democrat has the right to renounce revolutionary war in advance. 
 Butthe practical likelihood of such a war is not very great. 
The British and German imperialists will not be able to“come to terms” against revolutionary Russia. 
 The Russian revolution, which as early as 1905 led to revolutions in Turkey, Persia and China, would have placed the German and British imperialists in a very difficultposition if it had begun to establish a truly revolutionaryalliance of the workers and peasants of the colonies and semi-colonies against the despots, against the khans, for expul-sion of the Germans from Turkey, the British from Turkey, Persia, India, Egypt, etc. 
 Social-chauvinists, both French and Russian, like to refer to 1793. 
 By this spectacular reference they try to cover up their betrayal of the revolution. 
 But people here refuse to think that the truly “revolutionary democrats in Russia could and should act in the spirit of 1793 towards the oppressed and backward nations. 
 The foreign policy of the capitalists and the petty bour-geoisie is “alliance” with the imperialists, that is, disgrace-ful dependence on them. 
 The foreign policy of the proleta-riat is alliance with the revolutionaries of the advanced countries and with all the oppressed nations against all and any imperialists. 
 Pravda No. 
 81, Published according to June 27 (14), 1917 the Pravda text A CONTRADICTORY STAND The Congress resolution in today’s papers condemning our Party will no doubt be compared by every class-con-scious worker and soldier with our Party’s statement addres-sed to the All-Russia Congress of Soviets, a statement made public on the 11th, and printed in today’s Pravda . 
 42 The contradictory nature of the stand taken by the Con-gress leaders has been revealed by their resolution and par-ticularly by our statement. 
 “The basis for the success and strength of the Russian revo-lution is the unity of all revolutionary democrats—the work-ers, soldiers, and peasants,” reads the first and cardinalclause of the Congress resolution. 
 And, of course, this pointwould undoubtedly be correct if what it meant by “unity”were unity in the struggle against the counter-revolution . 
 But what if through their leaders a certain number of the “workers, soldiers and peasants” form a bloc and unite with the counter-revolution? Isn’t it clear that this section of the “democrats” is in reality no longer “revolutionary”? The Narodniks (Socialist-Revolutionaries) and the Men-sheviks will probably be indignant at the mere fact thatwe think it possible, that we think it conceivable, for any section of the “workers, soldiers and peasants” to “unite” with the counter-revolution. 
 To those who attempted to obscure our arguments and hush up the issue by indignation, we would reply by simplyreferring them to the third clause of the same resolution:“...the resistance of the counter-revolutionary groups of the propertied classes is growing ”. 
 This is an important state-ment. 
 It would have bean perfectly correct if it had said:the bourgeoisie, or capitalists, and landowners (instead /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR of the “propertied classes”, which include the well-to-do section of the petty bourgeoisie). 
 Unquestionably, the resistance of the bourgeoisie is growing. 
 But then it is the bourgeoisie that control the majority in the Provisional Government with whom the Socialist-Revolutionary and the Menshevik leaders have united , not only in general political terms, but also organisationally, in one institution, the Ministry! This is the pivot of the contradictory stand taken by the leaders of the Congress, this is the fundamental source of theinstability of their entire policy. 
 They are allied with thebourgeoisie via the government, where they are controlledby the bourgeois Ministers forming the majority. 
 At the same time, they are forced to admit that “the resistance of the coun-ter-revolutionary groups of the propertied classes is growing”! It is obvious that, under the circumstances, the party of the revolutionary proletariat can accept “unity” with the“revolutionary” democrats (revolutionary in word but notdeed) only up to a certain point. 
 We are for unity with them as long as they fight against the counter-revolution. 
 We are against unity with them as long as they ally themselves with the counter-revolution. 
 The “growing resistance” of the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie is an urgent problem posed by reality. 
 To evade this main and fundamental issue through non-committal phrases about “the unity and co-ordinated actions of the revolutionary democrats”, thereby glossing over the unity orco-ordination between a section of the revolutionary demo-crats and the counter-revolution, would be illogical andfoolish. 
 Hence, all the arguments in the Congress resolution con-demning our demonstration as “clandestine” and maintaining that mass actions and demonstrations are permissible onlywith the knowledge or consent of the Soviets, fall to theground as a matter of principle. 
 These arguments are of noconsequence at all. 
 The workers’ party will never accept them,as we have already said in our statement to the All-Russia Congress. 
 For every demonstration is merely a means of agi-tation as long as it is peaceful, and you can neither banagitation nor impose uniformity on it. 
 On the formal side, the resolution is even weaker. 
 To ban or decree you must be vested with state power. 
 First achieve that, you gentlemen who now lead the Congress—we are in favour of it, although you are our opponents—and then youwill have the right to ban or decree. 
 At the moment youdo not wield state power, at the moment you allow your-selves to be swayed by the ten bourgeois Ministers—you arecaught in the meshes of your own weakness and indecision. 
 Phrases like a “clearly expressed will”, and so on, will not do. 
 A will, if it is the will of the state, must be expressed inthe form of a law established by the state . 
 Otherwise the word “will” is an empty sound. 
 The moment you thought of law, gentlemen, you would have been certain to recall that theConstitution of a free republic cannot ban peaceful demon-strations or any mass actions by any party or group. 
 A contradictory stand has bred very strange revolutionary ideas—ideas as to the struggle against the counter-revolu-tion, ideas about the state (Constitution), and ideas of lawin general. 
 With the furious abuse against our Party refuted,nothing is left, nothing whatsoever! Despite the furious abuse against our proposed demonstra-tion, the demonstration is to be held a week later. 
 Pravda No. 
 81, Published according to June 27 (14), 1917 the Pravda text THE UKRAINE The new, coalition Provisional Government’s policy failure is becoming more and more obvious. 
 The Universal Act on the organisation of the Ukraine, issued by the Ukrai-nian Central Rada43 and adopted on June 11, 1917, by the All-Ukraine Army Congress, plainly exposes that policyand furnishes documentary proof of its failure. 
 “Without seceding from Russia, without breaking away from the Russian State,” reads the Act, “let the Ukrainian people have the rightto shape their own life on their own soil .... 
 All laws by w hich order is to be established here in the Ukraine shall be passed solely by this Ukrainian Assembly. 
 And laws establishing order throughout the Russian State must be passed by the All-Russia Parliament. 
” These are perfectly clear words. 
 They state very spe-cifically that the Ukrainian people do not wish to secede from Russia at present. 
 They demand autonomy without denying the need for the supreme authority of the “All-Russia Par-liament”. 
 No democrat, let alone a socialist, will ventureto deny the complete legitimacy of the Ukraine’s demands. 
And no democrat can deny the Ukraine’s right to freely se-cede from Russia. 
 Only unqualified recognition of this right makes it possible to advocate a free union of the Ukrainians and the Great Russians, a voluntary association of the two peoples in one state. 
 Only unqualified recognition of thisright can actually break completely and irrevocably with theaccursed tsarist past, when everything was done to bring about a mutual estrangement of the two peoples so close to each other in language, territory, character and history. 
 Accursed tsarism made the Great Russians executioners ofthe Ukrainian people, and fomented in them a hatred for those who even forbade Ukrainian children to speak and study in their native tongue. 
 Russia’s revolutionary democrats, if they want to be truly revolutionary and truly democratic, must break with thatpast, must regain for themselves, for the workers and peas-ants of Russia, the brotherly trust of the Ukrainian workersand peasants. 
 This cannot be done without full recognitionof the Ukraine’s rights, including the right to free secession. 
 We do not favour the existence of small states. 
 We stand for the closest union of the workers of the world against“their own” capitalists and those of all other countries. 
 Butfor this union to be voluntary, the Russian worker, who doesnot for a moment trust the Russian or the Ukrainian bour-geoisie in anything, now stands for the right of the Ukraini-ans to secede, without imposing his friendship upon them, but striving to win their friendship by treating them as an equal, as an ally and brother in the struggle for socialism. 
 * * * Rech , the paper of the embittered bourgeois counter-revolutionaries, who are half demented with rage, savagelyattacks the Ukrainians for their “unauthorised” decision. 
“That act by the Ukrainians,” it says, “is a downright crimeunder the law, and calls for the immediate application ofsevere legitimate punitive measures. 
” There is nothing to add to this attack by the savage bourgeois counter-revo-lutionaries. 
 Down with the counter-revolutionary bourgeoi-sie! Long live the free union of free peasants and workersof a free Ukraine with the workers and peasants of revolu-tionary Russia! Pravda No. 
 82, Published according to June 28 (15), 1917 the Pravda text THE CLASS ORIGINS OF PRESENT -DAY AND “FUTURE ” CAVAIGNACS “When a real Cavaignac comes, we shall fight in the same ranks with you,” we were told in No. 
 80 of Rabochaya Ga-zeta, organ of the very same Menshevik party whose member, Minister Tsereteli, in his notorious speech, went to such lengths as to threaten to disarm the Petrograd workers. 
 The above-quoted statement clearly brings out the funda-mental errors of Russia’s two ruling parties, the Mensheviksand Socialist-Revolutionaries, and therefore deserves atten-tion. 
 The ministerial organ’s arguments mean that you are looking for Cavaignacs at the wrong time and in the wrong place. 
 Remember the class role played by Cavaignac. 
 In February 1848 the French monarchy was overthrown. 
 The bourgeoisrepublicans came to power. 
 Like our Cadets, they wanted“order”, by which they meant the restoration and strengthen-ing of monarchic instruments for oppressing the masses: the police, the standing army and the privileged bureau-cracy. 
 Like our Cadets, they wanted to put an end to therevolution, for they hated the revolutionary workers withtheir “social” (i. 
e. 
, socialist) aspirations, at that time veryhazy. 
 Like our Cadets, they were implacably hostile to the policy of extending the French Revolution to the rest of Europe, the policy of transforming it into a world proleta-rian revolution. 
 Like our Cadets, they skilfully used the pet-ty-bourgeois “socialism” of Louis Blanc by making him aMinister and so transforming him from leader of the social-ist workers, which he had wanted to be, into an appendage, a hanger-on, of the bourgeoisie. 
 These were the class interests, the position and policy of the ruling class. 
 The petty bourgeoisie, vacillating, frightened by the red spectre, and falling for the outcries against the “anarchists”, were another basic social force. 
 Dreamily and bombastically “socialist” in their aspirations, and readily calling themselves“socialist democrats” (even this term is now taken upby the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks!),the petty bourgeoisie were afraid to entrust themselves tothe leadership of the revolutionary proletariat, and did not realise that fear condemned them to entrusting themselves to the bourgeoisie. 
 For there can be no “middle” course in a society rent by bitter class struggle between the bourgeoi-sie and the proletariat, particularly when this struggle isinevitably aggravated by a revolution. 
 And the whole essenceof the class position and aspirations of the petty bour-geoisie is that they want the impossible, that they aspire to the impossible, i. 
e. 
, to a “middle course”. 
 The third decisive class force was the proletariat, which aspired not to “reconcile itself” with the bourgeoisie, butto defeat them, to fearlessly promote the revolution, doingso, moreover, on an international scale. 
 That was the objective historical soil which brought forth Cavaignac. 
 The vacillation of the petty bourgeoisie “debarred”them from an active role, and the French Cadet, GeneralCavaignac, taking advantage of the petty bourgeoisie’sfear of entrusting themselves to the proletariat, decided todisarm the Paris workers and shoot them down en masse . 
 The revolution ended in that historic shooting. 
 The petty bourgeoisie, while numerically superior, had been andremained the politically impotent tail of the bourgeoisie,and three years later France saw the restoration of a par-ticularly vile form of Caesarist monarchy. 
 Tsereteli’s historic speech on June 11, clearly inspired by the Cadet Cavaignacs (perhaps directly inspired by the bourgeois Ministers, or perhaps indirectly prompted by thebourgeois press and bourgeois public opinion—it does notmatter which), was remarkable and historic in that Tsere-teli let out , with inimitable naïveté, the “secret malady” of the entire petty bourgeoisie, both Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik. 
 This “secret malady” consists, first, in a complete inability to pursue an independent policy; second-ly, in the fear to entrust themselves to the revolutionary pro-letariat and wholeheartedly support the independent policy of the latter ; thirdly, in a drift—inevitably following from this—towards submitting to the Cadets or to the bourgeoisie in general ( i. 
e. 
, submitting to the Cavaignacs ). 
 This is the heart of the matter. 
 Tsereteli, Chernov and even Kerensky are not destined as individuals to play the roleof Cavaignacs. 
 There will be other people to do that, peoplewho at the right moment will tell the Russian Louis Blancs: “Step aside. 
” But the Tseretelis and Chernovs are leaders pursuing a petty-bourgeois policy that makes the appearanceof Cavaignacs possible and necessary. 
 “When a real Cavaignac comes, we shall be with you”— an excellent promise, a splendid intention! Only, it is apity that it reveals a misunderstanding of the class struggle, typical of the sentimental or timid petty bourgeoisie. 
 For a Cavaignac is not an accident, his “advent” is not an iso-lated development. 
 A Cavaignac represents a class (the coun-ter-revolutionary bourgeoisie) and carries out the policiesof that class. 
 And it is that class and those policies that youSocialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik gentlemen support today . 
 It is to that class and its policies that you, who at the moment admittedly command a majority in the country,give predominance in the government, i. 
e. 
, an excellent basis on which to work. 
 Indeed, the All-Russia Peasant Congress was almost entirely dominated by the Socialist-Revolutionaries. 
 At the All-Russia Congress of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik bloc had a vastmajority. 
 The same is true of the elections to the Petrograddistrict councils. 
 The fact is there: the Socialist-Revolution-aries and Mensheviks are the ruling party now. 
 And thisruling party is voluntarily ceding power (the majority in the government) to the party of the Cavaignacs !! Wherever there’s a swamp there’s sure to be the devil. 
 Once there is a shaky, vacillating petty bourgeoisie dreadingthe revolution’s progress, the Cavaignacs are sure to appear. 
 In Russia there are many things now that make our revo-lution different from the French Revolution of 1848: the imperialist war, the proximity of more advanced countries (and not of more backward ones, as was the case of Franceat the time), an agrarian and a national movement. 
 But all this may modify only the form in which the Cavaignacs come forward, the moment, the external causes, etc. 
 It cannot change the essence of the matter, for the essence lies in the class relationships . 
 In words, Louis Blanc, too, was as far removed from Cavaignac as heaven is from earth. 
 Louis Blanc, too,made countless promises “to fight in the same ranks” asthe revolutionary workers against the bourgeois counter-revolutionaries. 
 Nevertheless, no Marxist historian, no socialist, would venture to doubt that it was the weakness,the instability, the credulity of the Louis Blancs withregard to the bourgeoisie that brought forth Cavaignac andassured his success. 
 The Russian Cavaignacs are inevitable products of the counter-revolutionary character of the Russian bourgeoisie led by the Cadets and of the instability, timidity andvacillation of the petty-bourgeois parties of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks. 
 Whether the RussianCavaignacs will win or lose the battle depends solely on thestaunchness, vigilance, and strength of Russia’s revolu-tionary workers. 
 Pravda No. 
 83, Published according to June 29 (16), 1917 the Pravda text HOW TO FIGHT COUNTER -REVOLUTION Only a few days ago, Minister Tsereteli declared in his “historic” speech that there was no counter-revolution. 
 Today the ministerial Rabochaya Gazeta strikes an entirely different note in the article “Dangerous Symptoms”. 
 “There are clear indications that a counter-revolution is afoot . 
” Thanks for finally admitting the fact at least. 
But the ministerial organ goes on to say: “We do not know where it [the counter-revolution] has its headquarters, nor to what extent it is organised. 
” Is that so? You don’t know where the counter-revolution has its headquarters! Permit us to help you out of your ig-norance. 
 The counter-revolution which is afoot has its head-quarters in the Provisional Government, in the very samecoalition Ministry in which you gentlemen have six of your colleagues! The counter-revolution has its headquarters within the walls of the conference hall of the Fourth Duma,where Milyukov, Rodzyanko, Shulgin, Guchkov, A. 
 Shin-garyov, Manuilov and Co. 
 rule, for the Cadets in the coalitionMinistry are the right hand of Milyukov and Co. 
 The staffof the counter-revolution is recruited from among the reac-tionary generals. 
 In includes certain retired high-ranking of-ficers. 
 If you want to do more than merely complain about the counter-revolution, if you want to fight it, you must joinus in saying: Down with the ten capitalist Ministers! Rabochaya Gazeta later points out that the counter-revo-lution’s chief instrument is the press, which is fomenting anti-semitism, inciting the masses against the Jews. 
 That iscorrect. 
 But what is the conclusion? You are a ministerial party, gentlemen, aren’t you? What have you done to curb the infamous counter-revolutionary press? Do you think you can, while calling yourselves “revolutionary democrats”, refuse to take revolutionary measures against the unbridled,blatantly counter-revolutionary press? And then, why don’tyou start a government organ that would publish advertise-ments and deprive the infamous counter-revolutionary pressof its chief source of income and hence of its main chance to deceive the people? What evidence is there, indeed, that thou-sands upon thousands of people must now be kept away fromproductive labour in order to publish Novoye Vremya , Malenkaya Gazeta , 44 Russkaya Volya45 and other reptiles? What have you done to fight the counter-revolutionary press which is doing all it can to bait our Party? Nothing! You yourselves have supplied material for that baiting. 
 You have been busy fighting the danger on the Left. 
 You are reaping what you have sown, gentlemen. 
So it was, so it will be—as long as you continue to vacil-late between the bourgeoisie and the revolutionary prole-tariat. 
 Pravda No. 
 84, Published according to June 30 (17), 1917 the Pravda text THE UKRAINE AND THE DEFEAT OF THE RULING PARTIES OF RUSSIA The ruling parties of Russia, i. 
e. 
, the Cadets, who have a majority in the government and the omnipotence of capital in the economy, and the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Men-sheviks, who now have an obvious majority in the country(but who are powerless in the government and in the country’s capitalist economy), have all suffered an obvious defeat over the Ukrainian issue, and what is more, a nation-wide defeatover an issue of vast importance. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks put up with the fact that the Provisional Government of theCadets, i. 
e. 
, of the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie, had not done its elementary democratic duty, had not declared itself in favour of the Ukraine’s autonomy and of her right to freely secede. 
 According to Minister Chernov’s report intoday’s Dyelo Naroda , the Ukrainians demanded far less than that. 
 They only wanted the Provisional Government“to declare by a special act that it is not opposed to the Ukrai-nian people’s right to autonomy”. 
 This is a most modest and legitimate demand. 
 The other two demands are just asmodest: (1) The Ukraine should through her own people electone representative to the central Russian Government. 
 Themodesty of this demand can be seen from the fact that in 1897the Great Russians in Russia were estimated at 43 per cent, and the Ukrainians at 17 per cent of the population. 
 In other words, the Ukrainians could have insisted on having notone but six Ministers out of the sixteen!! (2) In the Ukraine there should be “one representative of the central Russian Government elected by the local population”. 
 What could be more legitimate than this? By what right does a democrat make free to depart from the principle, proved in theory and confirmed by the experience of democratic revolutions, that “no officials for the local population should be appointed from above”?? The Provisional Government’s rejection of these very modest and legitimate demands was an instance of utter shamelessness, of savage impertinence, on the part of the counter-revolutionaries, and a true manifestation of the policy of Derzhimord a46. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks made a mockery of their own party pro-grammes by tolerating that in the government, and are now defending it in their papers!! To what a disgraceful level the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks have fallen! How pitiful the subterfuges of their organs, Dyelo Naroda and Rabochaya Gazeta , are today! Chaos, confusion, “Leninism over the national question” anarchy—these are a wild landowner’s outcrie s47 that the two newspapers are hurling at the Ukrainians. 
 Let us ignore their outcries. 
 What is the substance of their argument? Their only argument is that until a Constituent Assembly is convened it will be impossible to settle in a “regular” man-ner the issue of the Ukraine’s boundaries, her freedom, her right to collect taxes, and so on and so forth. 
 They insist on a “guarantee of regularity”—this expression used in Ra-bochaya Gazet a’s editorial gives the whole gist of their argu-ment. 
 But that is an obvious lie, gentlemen, it is a manifestly shameless thing on the part of the counter-revolutionaries. 
 For to advance such an argument means actually helping real traitors to the revolution!! “Guarantees of regularity” ... stop and think for a second. 
 Nowhere in Russia, neither in the central government nor in any local department (except in a very small institution, the Petrograd district councils), is there any guarantee of regularity. 
 In fact, there is admittedly no regularity. 
 There is admittedly no “regularity” in the existence of the Duma or of the Council of State. 
48 There is admittedly no “regularity” in the composition of the Provisional Government, for its composition is a mockery of the will and intelligence of the majority of Rus-sia’s workers, soldiers and peasants. 
 There is admittedlyno “regularity” in the composition of the Soviets (of Work-ers’, Peasants’ and Soldiers’ Deputies), for these institu-tions have not yet worked out any guarantees of really com-plete and strictly democratic elections. 
 Still, this does not prevent either our Party or the mass of the workers and peas-ants from regarding the Soviets as the best exponent of the will of the majority of the population so far. 
 Nowhere inRussia are there, can there be , or have there ever been at a revolutionary time like the present any “guarantees of regu-larity”. 
 Everyone realises that, no one asks anything differ-ent, everyone is aware that it is inevitable. 
 It is only for the Ukraine that “we” demand “guarantees of regularity ”! You are paralysed with fear, Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik gentlemen, having yielded to the counter-revolutionary howls of the Great-Russian landowners and capitalists led by Rodzyanko, Milyukov, Lvov, Tereshchen-ko, Nekrasov, Shingaryov and Co. 
 You are already the per-fect picture of people overawed by the rising Cavaignacs(and those “lying low ”). 
 There is absolutely nothing terrible, not the shadow of anarchy or chaos, either in the resolutions or in the demands of the Ukrainians. 
 Accede to their most legitimate and most modest demands and authority will be just as effective inthe Ukraine as it is everywhere in Russia, where the Soviets(which have no “guarantees of regularity”!!) are the sole authority. 
 You and all the peoples of Russia will be given a“guarantee of regularity” by the future Diets, by the future Constituent Assembly, not only in regard to the Ukrainian issue, but in regard to all issues. 
 For at this moment there is admittedly no “regularity” in Russia about any issue . 
 Accede to the Ukrainians—common sense demands it. 
 For,unless you do, things will be worse. 
 Force will not check theUkrainians. 
 It will only embitter them. 
 Accede to the Ukrai-nians, and you will open the way to mutual confidence and brotherly union between the two nations on the basis ofequality! The Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks, who constitute ruling parties, have been defeated over the Ukrai-nian issue by yielding to the counter-revolutionary Cadet Cavaignacs. 
 Pravda No. 
 84, Published according to June 30 (17), 1917 the Pravda text PROSECUTE RODZYANKO AND JUNKOVSKY FOR CONCEALING AN AGENT PROVOCATEUR! The findings of the committee of inquiry into the case of the agent provocateur Malinovsky indicate that the fol-lowing fact has been established: Both Junkovsky and Rodzyanko knew , not later than May 7, 1914, that Malinovsky was an agent provocateur. 
49 Neither of the two leaders warned the political parties in the Duma, primarily the Bolsheviks, of the agent provocateuroperating in their midst!! Isn’t that a crime? How can Junkovsky and Rodzyanko be tolerated after that among honest citizens? Let all political parties think it over, and let them voice their opinion! Pravda No. 
 84, Published according to June 30 (17), 1917 the Pravda text STRANGE MISQUOTATIONS The newspapers Dyen50 and Novaya Zhizn , which yester-day published a more detailed report of the findings of thecommittee of inquiry, 51 have quoted a passage from my tes-timony that is missing in Birzhevka ,52 which in certain respects has published an even more complete report of the findings. 
 Both of the first-mentioned papers printed a quotation from my testimony that begins with the words: “I do notbelieve there are any agents provocateurs involved here. 
”There are no dots before the quotation, and the perfectlyabsurd inference is that now “I do not believe”. 
 Only an extremely strange misquotation by both papers could result in such nonsense. 
 What I did testify was this:“I personally have often had to (before Malinovsky was found to be an agent provocateur) reason as follows: after theAzef 53 case nothing can surprise me. 
 But I do not believe there are any agents provocateurs involved here, not only because I see neither proof nor evidence, but also because” (and so on, as quoted by Dyen : had Malinovsky been an agent provocateur, the secret police would not have gainedas much as they had expected, for we have been doingeverything through two legal posts, etc. 
). 
 And so, my testimony concerned the past. 
 Dyen and Novaya Zhizn * have by a strange misquotation attributed to me an absurdity implying that I spoke of the present. 
 The result is the direct opposite of what I actually said. 
 Pravda No. 
 84, Published according to June 30 (17), 1917 the Pravda text Signed: N. 
 Lenin *Both newspapers contain another misprint: “The Bolsheviks will not organise an armed rising. 
” The word not should be taken out. 
 RULING AND RESPONSIBLE PARTIES The formation of a united or federal Central Committee by the Congress of Soviets and the Executive Committee ofthe Peasant Congress is due to take place in the next fewdays. 
 This question is up for discussion and will be settledin a matter of days. 
 The petty squabble between the Social-ist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks over the forms in which the Central Committee should be constituted deservesno attention whatsoever, for this fight between two parties,both of which advocate defencism (i. 
e. 
, support for thepredatory war) and ministerialism, i. 
e. 
, support for thegovernment of the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie, is much too petty. 
 The formation of a Central Committee is of vast importance as the ultimate feature showing the distinction betweenthe latest political situation and previous ones. 
 Typical ofthe new political situation is the final establishment thatmost people today follow the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties, which, as we know, form a bloc. 
 The All-Russia Peasant Congress and the All-Russia Con-gress of Soviets of Soldiers’ and Workers’ Deputies, now insession, have finally established, after the elections to thePetrograd district councils, that the Socialist-Revolutionaryand Menshevik bloc is the ruling party in Russia. 
 That bloc admittedly has a majority now among the people. 
 There can be no doubt that it will also have a majo-rity in the united or federal Central Committee of Soviets (orthe Council of Soviets—no decision seems to have beentaken on the name so far) now being formed. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks are ruling and responsible parties. 
 This is the fundamental fact about the new political situation. 
 Prior to the elections in Petrograd, and prior to the Peasant Congress and the Congress of Soviets, the Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries were in a posi-tion to take refuge, at least with a hint of plausibility, in the argument that the will of the majority was unknown,that the Cadets were probably likewise close to the majority,and so on and so forth. 
 But these subterfuges cannot beused any longer. 
 The fog which some people artificiallyworked up has dispersed. 
 You have a majority, gentlemen of the Socialist-Revolu-tionary and Menshevik parties, you are the ruling parties,or rather the ruling bloc. 
 You are responsible . 
 In propaganda and agitation in general, and in the Consti-tuent Assembly election campaign in particular, our chieftask now is to explain to the mass of the workers and peasants, as carefully, efficiently and clearly as possible, that it is the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties, theruling parties, that are responsible for our country’s policytoday. 
 The situation was different before, because they hadnot yet revealed their majority as parties, and readily posedas an “opposition” to the ruling Cadets. 
 But now it is beyond doubt that the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks command a majority. 
 They are responsible for the entire policy of the country. 
They are now responsible for the results of the six weeks’ rule of the “coalition Ministry”. 
 They are responsible for the fact that most of the cabinet Ministers represent the party of the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie. 
 Everyone knows, sees and feels that theseMinisters could not have kept their posts for a single daywithout the consent of the Congress of Soviets and the All-Russia Peasant Congress. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks are responsible for the fundamental policy contradictions that are making themselves felt more and more sharply and pain-fully, and are imposing themselves on the people more andmore obviously. 
 In words, they “condemn” the predatory war, and “demand” peace without annexations. 
 In reality they continue the predatory war in alliance with notorious predators, the imperialists of Britain, France, etc. 
 In reality they are pre-paring for an offensive at the instance of these allies, in keeping with the secret predatory treaties which Nicholas II concluded with a view to enriching the Russian landowners and capitalists. 
 In reality their policy is one of annexation, i. 
e. 
, the for-cible incorporation of nations (Albania, Greece) in onecountry or one group of imperialists, a policy of annexationalso inside “revolutionary” Russia (which is, however, fol-lowing a counter-revolutionary course), and treating Fin-land and the Ukraine as if they were annexed nations and not really free, really equal nations having an indisputableright both to autonomy and to secession. 
 In words, “the resistance of the capitalists has apparently been broken”, as Peshekhonov, a Minister of the bloc,boasted. 
 In reality, even the resolution of the Congress of Soviets had to admit that “the resistance of the propertied classes [i. 
e. 
, the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie, who have10 capitalist Ministers out of the 16 and are virtually all-powerful in the country’s economy] is mounting”. 
 In words, they promise to establish control and regulation and to take away 100 per cent of the profits (Minister Sko-belev). 
 In reality, nothing of the sort has happened in six weeks! Positively not a single effective and important stephas been taken against the capitalists who resort to lock-outs, against the profiteering marauders, the knights whocapitalise on war contracts, or the big bankers!! Don’t let us go on listing these crying contradictions. 
 We have indicated enough. 
 Economic dislocation is getting worse. 
 A crisis is imminent. 
 Disaster is drawing irresistibly near. 
 The Mensheviks andSocialist-Revolutionaries reason with the capitalists, threat-ening to take away 100 per cent. 
 They boast that the capi-talists’ resistance is broken, they draft resolutions and make plans, make plans and draft resolutions. 
 Disaster is on the way. 
 The entire responsibility for it will fall on the ruling Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshe-vik bloc. 
 Pravda No. 
 85, Published according to July 1 (June 18), 1917 the Pravda text ANOTHER COMMISSION Economic disintegration has begun. 
 The bourgeoisie are attacking all along the line. 
 Decisive measures must betaken. 
 What does the Provisional Government intend to do? To save Russia, to combat economic disintegration, to normalise the economy, it has a project for a new organisa-tion, a detailed plan for combating economic ruin. 
 The business of “organising the national economy and labour” is to be the concern of an Economic Council . 
 At last they are taking measures, passing from words to deeds. 
 Excellent, they are long overdue! But what is the composition of this Economic Council ? Who is going to fight economic ruin? Who is going to carry on the struggle against the criminal policy of thecapitalists, the employers, the factory owners? It turns out that the overwhelming majority of the Coun-cil will be capitalists. 
 Isn’t that a mockery?! Here is the composition of that worthy body: Bourgeois Ministers .................. 6 Capitalist representatives (Bank Council, the Stock Exchange,agriculture, etc. 
)................... 
. 
 9 Total ............. 
 15 From the workers (Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies) 3 From the trade unions ................ 
. 
 3 From the peasant deputies ............... 3 Total ............. 
 9 The Council membership includes the Ministers of War and of Labour, and three members of the co-operatives. 
 It is clearly the capitalists who will take decisions. 
 Another body is to be set up that at best will benefit no one. 
 Further, there are to be, as usual, countless commissions, sub-commissions, committees, etc. 
 That is how they intend to combat economic disintegra-tion. 
 A shark has been thrown into the water. 
 Pravda No. 
 85, Published according to July 1 (June 18), 1917 the Pravda text THE EIGHTEENTH OF JUNE In one way or another, June 18 will go down as a turning-point in the history of the Russian revolution. 
 The mutual position of the classes, their correlation in the struggle against each other, their strength, particularly in comparison with the strength of the parties, were all revealed so distinctly, so strikingly, so impressively by last Sunday’sdemonstration that, whatever the course and pace of furtherdevelopment, the gain in political awareness and clarityhas been tremendous. 
 The demonstration in a few hours scattered to the winds, like a handful of dust, the empty talk about Bolshevik conspirators and showed with the utmost clarity that thevanguard of the working people of Russia, the industrialproletariat of the capital, and the overwhelming majorityof the troops support slogans that our Party has alwaysadvocated. 
 The measured step of the battalions of workers and sol-diers. 
 Nearly half a million demonstrators. 
 A concertedonslaught. 
 Unity around the slogans, among which over-whelmingly predominated: “All power to the Soviets”,“Down with the ten capitalist Ministers”, “Neither a separatepeace treaty with the Germans nor secret treaties with the Anglo-French capitalists”, etc. 
 No one who saw the demonstration has any doubt left about the victory of theseslogans among the organised vanguard of Russia’s workersand soldiers. 
 The demonstration of June 18 was a demonstration of the strength and policy of the revolutionary proletariat, which is showing the direction for the revolution and indi-cating the way out of the impasse. 
 This is the tremendoushistorical significance of last Sunday’s demonstration, and its essential difference from the demonstrations during the funeral of the victims of the revolution and on May Day. 
 Then it was a universal tribute to the revolution’s first victory and to its heroes. 
 The people looked back over thefirst stage of the road to freedom, which they had passedvery rapidly and very successfully. 
 May Day was a holiday of hopes and aspirations linked with the history of the worldlabour movement and with its ideal of peace and socialism. 
 Neither of the two demonstrations was intended to point the direction for the revolution’s further development, nor could it do so. 
 Neither demonstration put before the people,or raised in the name of the people, specific, definite andurgent questions as to how and in what direction the revo-lution should proceed. 
 In this sense, June 18 was the first political demonstra-tion of action , an explanation of how the various classes act, how they want to and will act, in order to further the revo-lution—an explanation not given in a book or newspaper,but on the streets, not through leaders, but through thepeople. 
 The bourgeoisie kept out of the way. 
 They refused to par-ticipate in that peaceful demonstration of a clear majorityof the people, in which there was freedom of party slogans,and the chief aim of which was to protest against counter-revolution. 
 That is natural. 
 The bourgeoisie are the coun-ter-revolution. 
 They hide from the people. 
 They organise real counter-revolutionary conspiracies against the people. 
 The parties now ruling Russia, the Socialist-Revolutionariesand Mensheviks, clearly showed themselves on that historicday, June 18, as waverers. 
 Their slogans spoke of wavering,and it was obvious to all that the supporters of their sloganswere in a minority. 
 By their slogans and wavering they advised the people to remain where they were, to leave everything unchanged for the time being. 
 And the peoplefelt, and they themselves felt, that that was impossible. 
 Enough of wavering, said the vanguard of the proletariat, the vanguard of Russia’s workers and soldiers. 
 Enough ofwavering. 
 The policy of trust in the capitalists, in their government, in their vain attempts at reform, in their war , in their policy of an offensive, is a hopeless policy. 
 Its col-lapse is imminent. 
 Its collapse is inevitable. 
 And that col-lapse will also be the collapse of the ruling parties, the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks. 
 Economic disruption is coming nearer. 
 There is no escaping it except by the revolutionary measures of the revolutionary classwhich has taken power. 
 Let the people break with the policy of trust in the capi-talists. 
 Let them put their trust in the revolutionary class—the proletariat. 
 The source of power lies in it and only in it. 
 It alone is the pledge that the interests of the majority will be served, the interests of the working and exploited people,who, though held down by war and capital, are capable ofdefeating war and capital! A crisis of unprecedented scale has descended upon Russia and the whole of humanity. 
 The only way out is to put trust in the most organised and advanced contingent of the work-ing and exploited people, and support its policy. 
 We do not know whether the people will grasp this lesson soon or how they will put it into effect. 
 But we do know forcertain that apart from this lesson there is no way out of theimpasse, that possible waverings or brutalities on the part of the counter-revolutionaries will lead nowhere. 
 There is no way out unless the masses put complete confi-dence in their leader, the proletariat. 
 Pravda No. 
 86, Published according to July 3 (June 20), 1917 the Pravda text THE REVOLUTION, THE OFFENSIVE, AND OUR PARTY “The Russian revolution has reached a turning-point,” said Tsereteli informing the Congress of Soviets that theoffensive 54 had begun. 
 Yes, the whole course of the world war as well as the Russian revolution has reached a turning-point. 
 After three months of vacillation the Russian Gov-ernment has actually come to the decision demanded by the “Allied” governments. 
 The offensive has been declared in the name of peace. 
 And it is also “in the name of peace” that the imperialists of theworld send their troops into battle. 
 Every time there is anoffensive the generals in every belligerent country try to raise their troops’ morale by holding out the real hope of that particular offensive leading to early peace. 
 The Russian “socialist” Ministers have garnished this common imperialist method with very high-sounding phrasesin which words about socialism, democracy, and revolutionsound like rattles in the hands of a clever juggler. 
 But no high-sounding phrases can conceal the fact that the revolu-tionary armies of Russia have been sent into battle in thename of the imperialist designs of Britain, France, Italy,Japan, and America. 
 No arguments from Chernov, once aZimmerwaldist 55 and now Lloyd George’s partner, can conceal the fact that while the Russian Army and the Rus-sian proletariat do not really pursue any annexationist aims, this does not in the least change the imperialist, pred-atory nature of the struggle between the two world trusts. 
 Until the secret treaties binding Russia to the imperialists of other countries are revised, and as long as Ribot, Lloyd George and Sonnino, Russia’s allies, continue to talk about the annexationist aims of their foreign policy, the offen-sive of the Russian troops will continue to serve the impe-rialists. 
 Tsereteli and Chernov object, however, that they have repeatedly declared their renunciation of all annexations. 
 So much the worse, we reply. 
 That means your actions do not accord with your words, for your actions serve bothRussian and foreign imperialism. 
 And when you begin toco-operate actively with the imperialist “Allies” you rendersplendid service to the Russian counter-revolution. 
 Thejoy of all the Black Hundreds and all counter-revolutiona-ries over the decisive turn in your policy is the best evidence of that. 
 Yes, the Russian revolution has come to a turning-point. 
 Through its “socialist” Ministers, the Russian Govern-ment has done something which the imperialist Ministers,Guchkov and Milyukov, could not do. 
 It has put the Rus-sian Army at the disposal of the general staffs and the dip-lomats who act in the name and on the basis of unabrogated secret treaties, in the name of designs frankly proclaimedby Ribot and Lloyd George. 
 The government could onlyfulfil its task, however, because the army trusted and fol-lowed it. 
 The army marched to death because it believed itwas making sacrifices for freedom, the revolution and early peace. 
 But the army did so because it is only a part of the people, who at this stage of the revolution are following the Social-ist-Revolutionary and the Menshevik parties. 
 This generaland basic fact, the trust of the majority in the petty-bour-geois policy of the Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revolution-aries which is dependent on the capitalists, determines our Party’s stand and conduct. 
 We shall keep up our efforts to expose government policy, resolutely warning the workers and soldiers, as in the past,against pinning their hopes on unco-ordinated and dis-organised actions. 
 It is a question of a phase in the people’s revolution. 
 The Tseretelis and Chernovs, having become dependent onimperialism, are putting into effect a phase of petty-bour-geois illusions and petty-bourgeois phrases, which serve to disguise the same old cynical imperialism. 
 This phase must be brought to an end. 
 Let us help to end it as speedily and as painlessly as possible. 
 This willrid the people of the last petty-bourgeois illusions and bringabout the transfer of power to the revolutionary class. 
 Pravda No. 
 87, Published according to July 4 (June 21), 1917 the Pravda text IN WHAT WAY DO YOU SOCIALIST-REVOLUTIONARY AND MENSHEVIK GENTLEMEN DIFFER PLEKHANOV? Dyelo Naroda repeatedly called Yedinstvo social-imperi-alist. 
 Rabochaya Gazeta officially condemned the election bloc with Yedinstvo (after elections had taken place to almost all the district councils). 
 Today, the offensive that has begun is clearing away the fog of empty phrases, showing the people the naked truth. 
 Everyone sees that Plekhanov and the Socialist-Revolution-ary and Menshevik leaders are at one over the serious and important issue of the current offensive. 
 It means, therefore, that you— Yedinstvo , Kerensky and Chernov, Tsereteli and Skobelev—are all “social-imperial-ists” (to use Dyelo Naroda ’s expression). 
 Pravda No. 
 87, Published according to July 4 (June 21), 1917 the Pravda text HOW RODZYANKO IS TRYING TO JUSTIFY HIMSELF Russkaya Volya No. 
 143 has published an interview with Rodzyanko, who regards as “unfair” the charge (made byPravda and Rabochaya Gazeta ) that he sheltered Malinovsky. 
 It appears that as early as April 22 , 1914 , Junkovsky told Rodzyanko that Malinovsky was an agent provocateur butmade Rodzyanko give his “word of honour” (!!!) that he would say nothing about it to anyone. 
 Incredible, but there it is. 
 Rodzyanko pledged his “word of honour” to a member of the secret police and told the Duma members nothing about the agent provocateur. 
 And our Party and the whole of society, among whom the agentprovocateur Malinovsky was still operating, continued to labour under a delusion —because Rodzyanko had given the secret police his “word of honour” that he would not betray the agent provocateur . 
 How can we tolerate that?How can we fail to consider Rodzyanko a criminal? Pravda No. 
 87, Published according to July 4 (June 21), 1917 the Pravda text TO WHAT STATE HAVE THE SOCIALIST-REVOLUTIONARIES AND THE MENSHEVIKS BROUGHT THE REVOLUTION? They have brought it to a state of subjection to the imperialists. 
 The offensive is a renewal of the imperialist war. 
 Nothing essential has changed in the relations between the two gigan-tic capitalist blocs waging war on one another. 
 Even afterthe revolution of February 27, Russia remains under thecomplete sway of the capitalists, who are bound to Anglo-French imperialist capital by alliance and by the old, tsarist, secret treaties. 
 Both the economics and politicsof the continuing war are the same as before: the same oldimperialist banking capital dominating economic life, thesame old secret treaties, and the same old foreign policy ofalliances of one group of imperialists against another. 
 The empty phrases of the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revo-lutionaries are still empty phrases, in practice only servingto adorn the resumption of the imperialist war, which quitenaturally meets with enthusiastic howls of approval fromall the counter-revolutionaries, the whole bourgeoisie, andPlekhanov, “who tails after the bourgeois press”, as the Men-shevik Rabochaya Gazeta put it, which itself tails after the whole horde of social-chauvinists. 
 But we must not overlook the distinguishing features of this particular resumption of the imperialist war. 
 Theresumption came after three months of hesitation, duringwhich time the mass of workers and peasants thousands of times expressed their condemnation of a war of conquest (while continuing in practice to support the governmentof the predatory Russian bourgeoisie bent on conquest). 
 The masses hesitated, as though they were about to carry out at home the advice which the March 14 appeal to the peoples of the world gave other peoples, namely, “Refuse to serve as tools of conquest and violence in the hands of the bankers !” But here at home, in “revolutionary-democratic” Russia,the masses have remained in effect an instrument of conquestand violence in “the hands of the bankers”. 
 A distinguishing feature of this situation is that it was created by the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik par-ties at a time when the people enjoyed a comparativelylarge measure of freedom of-organisation. 
 It is these par-ties that have gained the majority at the moment: the All-Russia Congress of Soviets and the All-Russia Peasants’Congress have undoubtedly proved this. 
 It is these parties that are at present responsible for Rus-sia’s policy. 
 It is these parties that are responsible for the resumption of the imperialist war, for more hundreds of thousands oflives sacrificed virtually with the aim of enabling certaincapitalists to “overcome” other capitalists, and for the further aggravation of the economic dislocation inevitably resulting from the offensive. 
 Here we had, in the purest form, the self-deception of the petty-bourgeois masses and the deception of them bythe bourgeoisie with the aid of the Socialist-Revolutionariesand Mensheviks. 
 These parties both claim to be “revolution-ary democrats”. 
 But in fact it was they who placed the people’s fate in the hands of the counter-revolutionarybourgeoisie, the Cadets; it was they who deserted the revo-lution to continue the imperialist war, who deserted democ-racy to make “concessions” to the Cadets on the issue ofpower (take, for instance, the “confirmation” from above of the election of authorities by the local population), on the land issue (the Mensheviks’ and Socialist-Revolution-aries’ renunciation of their own programme, namely, to sup-port the revolutionary actions of the peasants, including confiscation of the landed estates), and on the national question (defence of the undemocratic attitude of the Cadets towards the Ukraine and Finland). 
 The petty-bourgeois masses cannot help vacillating between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. 
 This has been the case in all countries, especially between 1789 and 1871. 
 And it is also the case in Russia. 
 The Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries have induced the masses to submit to the policy of the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie. 
 That is the heart of the matter. 
 That is the meaning of the offensive. 
 That is the peculiarity of the situation: itwas not violence, but trust in the Socialist-Revolutionariesand Mensheviks that led the people astray. 
 Will it be for long? No, not long. 
 The masses will learn from their own expe-rience. 
 The sad experience of the new stage of the war (astage already begun), of further ruin accentuated by theoffensive, will inevitably lead to the political downfall of the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties The task of the workers’ party is, first of all, to help the masses realise and take proper account of this experience,to prepare properly for this great downfall, which willshow the masses their true leader—the organised urbanproletariat. 
 Pravda No. 
 88, Published according to July 5 (June 22), 1917 the Pravda text CAN “JACOBINISM ” FRIGHTEN THE WORKING CLASS? The bourgeois and chauvinistic Dyen , an organ of “social-ist thought” (don’t laugh!), returns in issue No. 
 91 to Rech ’s really interesting editorial of June 18. 
 Dyen has completely failed to understand that editorial, in which a historian speaks out alongside an embittered counter-revolutionarybourgeois. 
 Dyen reads into the editorial “the Cadets’ inten-tion—which has become a firm resolve—to withdraw fromthe coalition government”. 
 That is nonsense. 
 The Cadets threaten so as to frighten the Tseretelis and Chernovs. 
 That is not serious. 
 What is serious and interesting is how the Rech editorial on June 18 posed the question of power from a historian’sstandpoint. 
 “Whereas,” he wrote, “with the previous government composition it was possible, at least to some extent, to direct the course of the Russian revolution, from now on it is apparently destined to developin accordance with the spontaneous laws of all revolutions .... 
 The inadvisability of the further existence of a government arrangementthat has not justified itself is a question already being put not onlyby the Bolsheviks [note this: not only by the Bolsheviks!] ... and not only by the majority in the Soviet .... 
 It is a question which the capi-talist Ministers themselves must raise. 
” The historian is correct in admitting that not only the Bolsheviks, but the entire interrelation of classes, the lifeof society as a whole, has brought to the fore the questionof “the inadvisability of the further existence of a govern-ment arrangement that has not justified itself”. 
 What weactually have is vacillation. 
 The offensive is a possible road to victory for the imperialist bourgeoisie. 
 Is there any other possible road? The historian in Rech answers this question as follows: “Once they have got ‘all power’ the Soviets will soon see that they have very little power. 
 And they will have to make up for lack of power by resorting to the historically tested methods of the Young Turks56 or the Jacobins .... 
 W ill they, once the whole issue has again been raised, be willing to stoop to Jacobinism and terrorism, or will they attempt to wash their hands of it? This is the pressing question that will be answered in a few days. 
” The historian is right. 
 In a few days or not in a few days, that is the question that will soon be answered. 
 Either the offensive, a turn to counter-revolution, a success (for how long?) for the cause of the imperialist bourgeoisie, “a washing of hands” by the Chernovs and Tseretelis, or “Jacobinism”. 
 Bourgeois historians see Jacobinism as a fall (“to stoop”). 
 Proletarian historians see Jacobinism as one of the highestpeaks in the emancipation struggle of an oppressed class. 
 The Jacobins gave France the best models of a democratic revolution and of resistance to a coalition of monarchs against a republic. 
 The Jacobins were not destined to win completevictory, chiefly because eighteenth-century France wassurrounded on the continent by much too backward coun-tries, and because France herself lacked the material basisfor socialism, there being no banks, no capitalist syndicates, no machine industry and no railways. 
 “Jacobinism” in Europe or on the boundary line between Europe and Asia in the twentieth century would be the ruleof the revolutionary class, of the proletariat, which, supportedby the peasant poor and taking advantage of the existingmaterial basis for advancing to socialism, could not only provide all the great, ineradicable, unforgettable things provided by the Jacobins in the eighteenth century, butbring about a lasting world-wide victory for the workingpeople. 
 It is natural for the bourgeoisie to hate Jacobinism. 
 It is natural for the petty bourgeoisie to dread it. 
 The class-conscious workers and working people generally put their trust in the transfer of power to the revolutionary, oppressedclass, for that is the essence of Jacobinism, the only way out of the present crisis, and the only remedy for economicdislocation and the war. 
 Pravda No. 
 90, Published according to July 7 (June 24), 1917 the Pravda text THE NEED FOR AN AGRICULTURAL LABOURERS ’ UNION IN RUSSIA ARTICLE ONE There is a highly important question which the All-Russia Trade Union Conference now in session in Petrograd57 should consider. 
 It is the question of founding an all-Russia union of agricultural labourers . 
 All classes in Russia are organising. 
 Only the class which is the most exploited and the poorest of all, the most dis-united and downtrodden—the class of Russia’s agricultural wage-labourers—seems to have been forgotten. 
 In some non-Russian border regions, such as the Latvian territory, thereare organisations of agricultural wage-labourers. 
 The ruralproletariat in the vast majority of the Great-Russian andUkrainian gubernias has no class organisations. 
 It is the indisputable and paramount duty of the vanguard of Russia’s proletariat, the industrial workers’ trade unions, to come to the aid of their brothers, the rural workers. 
 Thedifficulties involved in organising the rural workers areclearly enormous, as is borne out by the experience of othercapitalist countries. 
 This makes it all the more necessary to set about using political liberty in Russia as speedily and vigorously as possible and to immediately found a country-wide unionof agricultural labourers. 
 This can and must be done by thetrade union conference. 
 It is the more experienced, moredeveloped, more class-conscious representatives of the pro-letariat gathered at this conference who can and must issue a call to the rural workers, urging the latter to join them in the ranks of the independently organising workers, in theranks of their trade unions. 
 It is the wage-workers at the factories who must take the initiative and use the trade union cells, groups and branches scattered all over Russia to awaken the rural worker to independent action and to active participation in the struggle to improve his positionand uphold his class interests. 
 It may seem to many, and perhaps even to most at the moment, that with the peasants organising throughout Rus-sia and calling for the abolition of private ownership of land and for “equalised” land tenure, this is not the right time to set up a rural workers’ union. 
 Quite the contrary. 
 This is precisely the time when it is particularly opportune and urgent. 
 Those who share theproletarian class point of view can have no doubt as to thecorrectness of the proposition which the Mensheviks approved at the Stockholm Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party in 1906 on the initiative of the Bolsheviks,and which has ever since been part of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 pro-gramme. 
 That proposition reads: “The Party should in all eventualities, and whatever the situation with regard to democratic agrarian reforms, consider it as its taskto steadfastly strive for independent class organisation of the rural proletariat and explain to it the irreconcilable antithesis between its interests and the interests of the peasant bourgeoisie, to warn it against illusions about the small-holding system, which can never, as long ascommodity production exists, do away with the poverty of the masses,and, lastly, to point to the need for a complete socialist revolutionas the only means of abolishing all poverty and exploitation. 
” Every class-conscious worker, every union member, would agree that these propositions are correct. 
 They must becarried out by the trade unions, since it is a question ofindependent class organisation of the rural workers. 
 We hope that at this revolutionary moment, when the urge to express themselves, to chart their own path, to see that life is not shaped anew without the workers themselvesindependently deciding labour issues, is making itself feltamong the working people in general and the workers inparticular—that at this time the trade unions will notconfine themselves to narrow craft interests and forget their weaker brethren, the rural workers, but will exert all their energy to help them by founding a union of Russia’s ruralworkers. 
 In the next article, we shall try to outline some practical steps in this direction. 
 ARTICLE TWO In the previous article we dealt with the fundamental significance of a rural workers’ union in Russia. 
 Here weshall touch upon certain practical aspects of the question. 
 A union of Russia’s rural workers should group all who are engaged mainly, or even partly , as labourers at agricul-tural undertakings. 
 Experience will show whether or not it will be necessary to subdivide these unions into those of pure agriculturallabourers and those of part-time labourers. 
 At any rate,this is not the main thing. 
 The main thing is that the funda-mental class interests of all who sell their labour power are identical and that the unity of all who gain at least part of their livelihood by hiring themselves out is absolutelynecessary. 
 The wage-workers in the cities, in the factories, are bound by thousands and millions of ties with the wage-workers in the countryside. 
 A call issued by the former to the latter cannot go unheeded. 
 But issuing a call is not the only thingto be done. 
 The urban workers have far more experience,knowledge, means and forces. 
 Some of their forces should be directly used to help the rural workers on to their feet . 
 All organised workers should give one day’s wages to promote and strengthen the unity of town and country wage-workers. 
 Let a certain part of this sum be fully used asa contribution from the urban workers to the class unity ofthe rural workers. 
 Let this fund be drawn on to cover theexpenses of putting out a series of the most popular leaflets,of publishing a rural workers’ newspaper—at least a weekly to begin with—and of sending at least a few agitators and organisers to the countryside to immediately set up unions of agricultural labourers in the various localities. 
 Only the experience gained by those unions themselves will help find the right method of furthering this workEach union should first of all try to improve the condition of those who sell their labour power to agricultural under-takings and to secure higher pay, better housing conditions,better food, etc. 
 A most determined war must be declared on the precon-ceived notion that the coming abolition of private land-ownership can “give land” to every farm-hand and day-labourer and undermine the very foundations of wage-labourin agriculture. 
 This is a preconceived notion and, moreover,an extremely harmful one. 
 The abolition of private land-ownership is a tremendous and unquestionably progressivereform that unquestionably meets the interests of economic development and the interests of the proletariat, a reform which every wage-worker will back to the utmost but whichin no way eliminates wage-labour. 
 You cannot eat land. 
 You cannot farm without livestock, implements, seed, a reserve of produce, or money. 
 To relyon “promises” from anyone—that the wage-workers in the countryside will be “helped” to acquire livestock, imple-ments, etc. 
—would be the worst kind of error, unpardonablenaïveté. 
 The basic rule, the first commandment, of any trade union movement is not to rely on the “state” but to relyonly on the strength of one ’s own class . 
 The state is an orga-nisation of the ruling class. 
 Don’t rely on promises. 
 Rely only on the strength of the unity and political consciousness of your class! That is why it must be made the immediate task of the rural workers’ trade union not only to fight for better con-ditions for the workers in general, but in particular to de-fend their interests as a class during the coming great land reform. 
 Many peasants and Socialist-Revolutionaries maintain that “labour power must be put at the disposal of the volostcommittees”. 
 The class of agricultural labourers holds theopposite view—it wants the volost committees to be put at the disposal of labour power! It is clear enough where the master and the labourer stand. 
 “Land for the whole people. 
” This is correct. 
 But the people are divided into classes . 
 Every worker knows, sees, feels, experiences this truth which the bourgeoisie deliber-ately obscure and the petty bourgeoisie always forget . 
 When alone, a poor man is helpless. 
 No “state” will help the rural wage-worker, the farm-hand, the day-labourer,the poor peasant, the semi-proletarian, if he does not help himself . 
 The first step in this direction is independent class organisation of the rural proletariat. 
 We hope the all-Russia trade union conference will tackle this task with the greatest energy, will issue a call to allRussia and hold out a helping hand, the mighty hand of theorganised vanguard of the proletariat, to the rural workers. 
 Pravda Nos. 
 90 and 91, Published according to July 7 (June 24) and July 8 the Pravda text (June 25), 1917 Signed: N. 
 Lenin A DISORDERLY REVOLUTION “The Bolsheviks are to blame for everything”—this is agreed on both by the Cadets, who are leading the counter-revolution, and by the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Men-sheviks, who call themselves “revolutionary democrats”,probably because of their pretty little bloc’s daily depar-tures from the principles of democracy and revolution. 
 “The Bolsheviks are to blame for everything”—for the growing economic dislocation, against which no measuresare being taken, for the poor state of food supplies, and forthe “failure” of the Provisional Government over the Ukraineand Finland. 
 You might well imagine that an evil Bolshe-vik had wormed his way into the midst of the modest, mod-erate, prudent Finns and “misled” the whole people! The universal howl of anger and fury against the Bolshe-viks, the dirty slander campaign carried on by the dirtyZaslavskys and the anonymous writers of Rech and Rabo-chaya Gazeta all indicate a desire, inevitable with represent-atives of a disorderly revolution, to vent their anger on someone over certain of their policy “failures”. 
 The Cadets are the party of the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie. 
 This has even been admitted by the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik ruling bloc, which declaredin a resolution passed by the Congress of Soviets that the resistance of the propertied classes is growing and that it constitutes the backbone of the counter-revolution. 
 Yetthis bloc, which Rech accuses daily of lack of character, has in turn formed a bloc with the Cadets and, moreover, amost original bloc, confirmed by the composition of theProvisional Government! Russia is ruled by two blocs: the bloc of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, and the bloc of this blocwith the Cadets, who constitute a bloc with all the political parties to the right of them. 
 The inevitable result is a disor-derly revolution, for all parts of this ruling “bloc of blocs” are loose. 
 The Cadets have no faith in their own republicanism, and this applies even more to the Octobrists58 and the monar-chists of other shades who are now hiding behind the Cadets and voting for them. 
 The Cadets have no faith in the “social-bloc people”, and they willingly use the Ministers of that bloc as errand boys for all kinds of “pacification” even as they hiss in anger and indignation at the “excessive demands”of the mass of peasants and the section of workers who havenow entrusted themselves to the Socialist-Revolutionariesand Mensheviks in response to pompous promises (“to satisfythe working people without offending the capitalists”) but who are impudent enough to expect and demand the actual fulfilment of these promises! The social-bloc people have no faith in each other: the Socialist-Revolutionaries have no faith in the Mensheviks,and vice versa. 
 So far neither “spouse” has ventured anexplicit and frank public statement, made officially and in a principled manner, as to how, why, for what purpose and to what extent the adherents of a Struvean, emasculated“Marxism” and the advocates of the “right to the land”have united. 
 Unity is bursting at the seams even withineach of the two “spouses”; the Socialist-RevolutionaryCongress blackballed Kerensky by a vote of 136 to 134, which led to the withdrawal of “Grandmother” 59 herself from the Central Committee and to the Central Committee clarification saying that Kerensky had not been elected onlybecause he was overburdened (unlike Chernov) with mini-sterial duties. 
 The “Right” Socialist-Revolutionaries ofVolya Naroda revile their party and its congress, and the Lefts, who have taken refuge in Zemlya i Volya , 60 have the audacity to maintain that the masses do not want this war,which they continue to regard as an imperialist war. 
 The Right wing of the Mensheviks has migrated to Dyen ; it is headed by Potresov, at whom “love’s tender glances”are cast by Yedinstvo itself (which only recently, during the Petrograd elections, was in a bloc with the whole Menshevikparty). 
 The Left-wing is sympathetic to internationalismand is founding its own paper. 
 A bloc of the banks and the Potresovs through Dyen ; a bloc of all the Mensheviks, in-cluding Potresov and Martov, through a “united” Menshevik party. 
 Surely that is loose enough. 
“Defencism” is doing a poor job of concealing this dis-orderly revolution, for even now, even after the resumptionof the imperialist war, even amid the ecstatic cries evokedby the offensive, the “offensive” of Potresov’s followers against his opponents in one alliance, and of Kerensky’s followers against his opponents in the other alliance, hasgained in intensity. 
 The “revolutionary democrats” no longer believe in the revolution. 
 They are afraid of democracy. 
 They fear a breakwith the Anglo-French capitalists more than anything else and they fear the displeasure of the Russian capitalists. 
 (“Our revolution is a bourgeois revolution”—Minister Cher-nov “himself” has come to believe in this “truth”, so amus-ingly distorted by Dan, Tsereteli, and Skobelev. 
) TheCadets hate the revolution and democracy. 
 Surely that is loose enough. 
 The universal savage howl of anger and fury against the Bolsheviks is a common complaint by the Cadets, Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks about their own looseness. 
 They are in the majority. 
 They are in power. 
 They have formed a bloc with one another. 
 And they see that nothingcomes of their efforts!! How can they help raging against the Bolsheviks? The revolution has posed problems of unusual difficulty, of colossal importance, of world-wide scope. 
 It is impossibleeither to cope with economic dislocation or to break freefrom the terrible grip of the imperialist war without takingthe most drastic revolutionary measures that will be backed by the unbounded heroism of the oppressed and exploited and without them trusting and supporting their organisedvanguard, the proletariat. 
 The masses are still looking for the “easiest” way out— through the bloc of the Cadets with the bloc of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks. 
 But there is no way out. 
 Pravda No. 
 91, Published according to July 8 (June 25), 1917 the Pravda text A CLASS SHIFT Every revolution, if it is a real revolution, amounts to a class shift. 
 Therefore, the best way of enlightening the people, and of fighting those who deceive the people by invoking the revolution, is to analyse the class shift thathas taken or is taking place in the present revolution. 
 From 1904 to 1916, in the last years of tsarism, the relative positions of the classes in Russia became particularlyclear. 
 A handful of semi-feudal landowners, headed by Nicholas II, was in power and maintained the closest alli-ance with the financial magnates who were reaping profitsunheard of in Europe and for whose benefit predatory trea-ties were concluded with foreign countries. 
 The liberal bourgeoisie, led by the Cadets, were in opposi-tion. 
 They were more afraid of the people than of reaction and were moving closer and closer to power by compromising with the monarchy. 
 The people, i. 
e. 
, the workers and peasants, whose leaders had been driven underground, were revolutionary. 
 Theyconstituted the “revolutionary democrats”—proletarian andpetty-bourgeois. 
 The revolution of February 27, 1917, swept away the monarchy and put the liberal bourgeoisie in power, who,operating in direct concord with the Anglo-French imperial-ists, had wanted a minor court revolution. 
 Under nocircumstances were they willing to go beyond a constitu-tional monarchy with an electoral system conditioned by various qualifications. 
 And when the revolution actually went further, completely abolishing the monarchy andestablishing Soviets (of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR Deputies), the entire liberal bourgeoisie became counter-revolutionary. 
 Now, four months after the revolution, the counter-revo-lutionary character of the Cadets, the main party of the lib-eral bourgeoisie, is as clear as day. 
 Everyone sees that. 
 Andeveryone is compelled to admit it. 
 But not nearly everyoneis willing to face up to it and think about what itimplies. 
 Russia today is a democratic republic governed by a free agreement between political parties which are freely advocating their views among the people. 
 The four monthssince February 27 have fully consolidated and given finalshape to all parties of any importance, showed them up during the elections (to the Soviets and to local bodies), and revealed their links with the various classes. 
 In Russia, the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie are in power today, while the petty-bourgeois democrats, namely,the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties, havebecome “His Majesty’s opposition”. 
 61 The policy of these parties is essentially one of compromise with the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie. 
 The petty-bourgeois democrats are rising to power by filling local bodies to begin with(just as the liberals did under tsarism—by first winningplaces in the zemstvos 62). 
 These petty-bourgeois democrats want to share power with the bourgeoisie but not overthrow them, in exactly the same way as the Cadets wanted to share power with the monarchy but not overthrow it. 
 The petty-bourgeois democrats (the Socialist-Revolutionaries and theMensheviks) compromise with the Cadets because of theclose class kinship between the petty and the big bourgeoisie,just as the class kinship between the capitalist and the land-owner, living in the twentieth century, made them embrace each other at the feet of their “adored” monarch. 
 It is the form of compromise that has changed. 
 Under the monarchy it was crude, and the tsar allowed a Cadet nofurther than the Duma backyard. 
 In a democratic republic,compromise has become as refined as in Europe, the pettybourgeoisie being permitted, in a harmless minority, to occupy harmless (for capital) posts in the Ministry. 
 The Cadets have taken the place of the monarchy. 
 The Tseretelis and Chernovs have taken the place of the Cadets. 
 Proletarian democracy has taken the place of a truly revo-lutionary democracy. 
 The imperialist war has hastened developments fantasti-cally. 
 Had it not been for this war, the Socialist-Revolution-aries and Mensheviks might have sighed for decades forministerial posts. 
 The same war, however, is hastening fur-ther developments. 
 For it poses problems in a revolutionary rather than a reformist manner. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties could have given Russia many a reform by agreement with thebourgeoisie. 
 But the objective situation in world politicsis revolutionary and it cannot be dealt with by reforms. 
 The imperialist war is crushing the peoples and threatens to crush them completely. 
 The petty-bourgeois democrats can perhaps stave off disaster for a while. 
 But it is only the revolutionary proletariat that can prevent a tragic end. 
 Pravda No. 
 92, Published according to July 10 (June 27), 1917 the Pravda text MIRACLES OF REVOLUTIONARY ENERGY Our near-socialist Ministers are developing near-incred-ible energy. 
 Peshekhonov has declared that “the resistance of the capitalists has apparently been broken” and that everything we have here in Holy Russia will be “equitably”distributed. 
 Skobelev has declared that the capitalistswill have to give up 100 per cent of their profits. 
 Tseretelihas declared that the offensive in this imperialist war isthe most righteous thing from the point of view of both democracy and socialism. 
 But Minister Chernov has without a doubt outdone everyone in these manifestations of miraculous energy. 
 Atthe last meeting of the Provisional Government, Chernovmade the Cadet gentlemen hear his report on the generalpolicy of the department entrusted to him, and said he was introducing as many as ten Bills! Surely that was a miracle of revolutionary energy. 
 Less than six weeks have passed since May 6, and yet as many asten Bills have been promised in this short period! And what Bills! The ministerial Dyelo Naroda reports that these Bills “in their totality encompass all the principal aspects of the economic activity of the countryside”. 
 “All aspects”—no more no less. 
 What a whopper!The only suspicious thing is that the ministerial news-paper devotes more than one hundred lines to a descriptionof some of those splendid Bills without saying anything definite about any of them. 
 “Suspension of certain legislative acts concerning the peasants”—we are not told which. 
 The Bill on the “courts of conciliation” is the most inter-esting. 
 We are not told who are to be conciliated and how. 
 “The regulation of rent relations”—we are kept completely in the dark; we are not even told whether it is a question of leasing the landed estates, which are expected to be expro-priated without compensation. 
 “A reform in the sense of greater democratisation of the local land committees. 
” Wouldn’t it be better if youauthors of sweeping promises immediately listed at least adozen local land committees, giving, in exact terms, their present, post-revolutionary, yet, according to your own ad-mission, not fully democratic composition? The point is that the tireless activity of Minister Chernov, as well as of the other Ministers mentioned above, is thebest illustration of the difference between a liberal bureau-crat and a revolutionary democrat. 
 The liberal bureaucrat submits to his “higher-ups”, i. 
e. 
, Lvov, Shingaryov and Co. 
, voluminous reports on hundredsof Bills that are supposed to benefit mankind. 
 All he offersthe people is palaver, fine promises, Nozdrev 63 phrases (such as the one about 100 per cent profit or a “socialist” offensiveat the front, and so on). 
 The revolutionary democrat, while submitting a report to his “higher-ups”, or even before submitting it, revealsand exposes every evil and every shortcoming before thepeople to arouse their activity. 
 “Peasants, expose the landowners, expose how much they take from you by way of ‘rent’, how much they have had adjudged to them in the ‘courts of conciliation’ or the local land committees, how much cavilling or interference theyhave been guilty of as regards cultivating all the landsand using the landowners’ implements and livestock to meetthe needs of the people, particularly the poorest sections!Expose it yourselves, peasants, and I, ‘a minister of revo-lutionary Russia’, ‘a minister of the revolutionary demo-crats’, shall help you to publish all such exposures and to remove all oppression through your pressure from the bottomand mine from the top!!!” Surely, this is how a true “revolu-tionary democrat” would speak and act. 
 Nothing of the kind here! Nothing at all! Here is the language used by the ministerial newspaper in regard to Chernov’s “report” to Lvov and Co. 
 “While he does not denythat there are a number of agrarian excesses in some gubernias, V. 
 M. 
 Chernov thinks that, on the whole, rural Russia has proved to be much more balanced than one would have expected.... 
” Yet not a word was said about the hold-up of the only Bill named specifically—the one about “suspending the saleand purchase of land”. 
 For the peasants had long sincebeen promised the immediate suspension of sale and purchase. 
It was promised as early as May, but on June 25 we read in the papers that Chernov had presented a “report” and that the Provisional Government “has not yet taken a finaldecision”!!! Pravda No. 
 92, Published according to July 10 (June 27), 1917 the Pravda text PHRASES AND FACTS Minister Skobelev has published an appeal to all workers of Russia. 
 In the name of “our” (that is what it says: our) socialist ideal, in the name of the revolution, on behalf of revolutionary democrats, and so on, and so forth, he urgesthe workers to accept “courts of conciliation” and severelycondemns all “unauthorised” actions. 
 This is how well the near-socialist Minister Skobelev the Menshevik sings his part: “You [workers] have every reason to be outraged by the enrichment of the propertied classes that has been taking place during this war,The tsar’s government has wasted thousands of millions of the people’smoney. 
 The revolutionary government must restore this money to thepeople’s treasury. 
” He sings well, but where will he alight? Mr. 
 Skobelev’s appeal was published on June 28. 
 The coalition Ministry was formed on May 6. 
 But during allthis time, in which economic dislocation and an unprece-dented catastrophe have been advancing on the country with seven-league strides, the government has not taken a single real step against the capitalists who have made “ thousands of millions ”. 
 To “ restore ” these thousands of millions “ to the people ’s treasury ”, a law should have been enacted on May 7 abolishing all commercial and bank secrecy and establishing immediate control over the capitalist banks and syndicates, for otherwise it is impossible to find , let alone “restore”, these thousands of millions. 
 Does the Menshevik Minister Skobelev really imagine that the workers are babes in the wood whom one can feedwith promises of the impossible (for it is impossible to “restore” the “thousands of millions”—may God help us to end plunder of the state and to restore at least one or two hundred millions) without doing the possible and the necessary for weeks on end? As luck would have it, on the very same day the Menshevik Minister Skobelev presented the workers withanother basketful of the most florid republican, revolutionaryand “socialist” phrases, Comrade Avilov, who wants to “unite” the defencists (i. 
e. 
, the chauvinists) with the workers, hit on the unusually, extraordinarily fortunate idea of con-tributing an article to Novaya Zhizn in which he gave facts without making deductions. 
 Nothing on earth could be more eloquent than these simple facts. 
 On May 5, the coalition Ministry was formed. 
 In a solemn declaration it promised control , and even “organisation of production”. 
 On May 16, the Executive Committee of the Petrograd Soviet adopted “directions” for its Ministers, demanding“the immediate [listen to this!] and most energetic reali-sation [this is how it reads, believe it or not!] of government regulation of production”, and so on, and so forth. 
 Energetic realisation began. 
On May 19, Konovalov resigned, making a very “energetic” statement against “the extreme socialists”! On June 1, theAll-Russia conference of representatives of industry and commerce took place. 
 The conference declared emphatically against control. 
 The three Deputy Ministers remaining after Konovalov’s resignation began to “realise energetically”:in the conflict of the Donets mine owners (who are wreckingthe industry by a “go-slow strike”), Stepanov, the firstDeputy Minister, backed the employers . 
 After that the employers rejected all Skobelev’s conciliatory proposals. 
 Palchinsky, the second Deputy Minister, sabotaged the “fuel conference”. 
 Savvin, the third Deputy Minister, instituted “a crude and even silly caricature” of regulation in the form of an“inter-departmental conference”. 
 On June 10, first Deputy Minister Stepanov presented a “report” to the Provisional Government taking issue with the Executive Committee’s programme. 
 On June 21, the Congress of Soviets passed another resolution. 
 The people began to set up supply committees on their own initiative, from below. 
 From above, a chief “EconomicCouncil” was promised. 
 Second Deputy Minister Palchinskyexplained: “It is hard to say when it [the Economic Council]will begin to function. 
” It sounds like mockery, but these are the facts. 
 The capitalists mock at the workers, at the people, by continuing the policy of secret lock-outs and of concealingtheir outrageous profits, and send the Skobelevs, Tseretelisand Chernovs to “reassure” the workers with empty phrases. 
 Pravda No. 
 94, Published according to July 12 (June 29), 1917 the Pravda text HOW THE CAPITALISTS CONCEAL THEIR PROFITS CONCERNING THE ISSUE OF CONTROL How much they talk about control! And how little it all means. 
 How they dodge the issue by resorting to general phrases, grandiloquent turns of speech, and solemn “projects”doomed for ever to remain projects only. 
 Now the issue is that unless commercial and bank secrecy is abolished, and unless a law is immediately passed makingthe books of commercial firms open to the trade unions, all phrases on control and all projects for it will be so much meaningless verbiage. 
 Here is a small but instructive illustration. 
 A comrade who is a bank employee has sent us the following infor-mation showing how profits are concealed in official reports. 
 On May 7, 1917, Vestnik Finansov 64 No. 
 18 published a report of the Petrograd Loan and Discount Bank. 
 The report gives the bank’s net profit as 13,000,000 rubles (theexact figure is 12,960,000; we shall use round numbers inthe text and give exact figures in parentheses). 
 On closer scrutiny, a well-informed person will see at once that that is not the whole profit at all and that a consid-erable part of the profit is cleverly concealed under other items, so that no “tax”, “compulsory loan” and, in general,no financial measure will ever bring it out unless commercialand bank secrecy is completely abolished. 
 Indeed, the amountof 5,500,000 rubles is given as reserve capital. 
 Profits arequite often entered for concealment as so-called reserves, or reserve capital. 
 If I am a millionaire who has made a profit of 17,000,000 rubles and wants to reserve 5,000,000, I onlyhave to enter this 5,000,000 as “reserve capital” to do the trick! In this way I dodge all the various laws on “state con-trol”, “state taxation of profits” and so on. 
 Again, the report indicates slightly less than 1,000,000 rubles (825,000) as money made in interest and commissions. 
“The question is,” writes the bank employee, “what are thesums that generally constitute the bank’s profit, since themoney made in interest is not listed under profits??” Moreover, the sum of 300,000 rubles, listed as remaining profit made in previous years, is not included in the total profits ! Together, then, with the foregoing item, we have more than another sweet million in profit hidden away. 
Similarly, the sum of 224,000 rubles of “unpaid dividendsto shareholders” is missing in the total profit, although everyone knows that dividends are paid out of net profits. 
 Furthermore, the report lists the sum of 3,800,000 rubles as “carry-overs”. 
 “Whoever has not taken a direct part inthe business will find it hard to establish what these carry-overs are,” the comrade writes. 
 “One thing is certain: inpreparing a report, one can easily conceal a part of the profitby listing it under ‘carry-overs’ and then transferring it to ‘where it belongs’. 
” To sum up. 
 The profit has been listed as 13,000,000 rubles, but, in point of fact, it must be somewhere between19 and 24 million, or almost 80 per cent profit on a basiccapital of 30 million. 
 Isn’t it obvious that the government’s threats to the capi-talists, the government’s promises to the workers, the government’s Bills and laws aimed at taking 90 per cent ofthe profits of the big capitalists are useless, absolutely use-less, as long as there is commercial and bank secrecy? Pravda No. 
 94, Published according to July 12 (June 29), 1917 the Pravda text CRISIS IS APPROACHING, DISLOCATION IS INCREASING We are compelled to sound the alarm daily. 
 All kinds of foolish people have accused us of being “too much in a hurry”to transfer all state power to the Soviets of Soldiers’, Work-ers’ and Peasants’ Deputies. 
 They think it would be more “moderate and proper” 65 to “wait” with dignity for a dignified Constituent Assembly. 
 Today, even the most foolish of those petty-bourgeois fools can see that reality will not wait and that it is notwe but economic dislocation that is “ in a hurry ”. 
 Petty-bourgeois cowardice, as typified by the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties, has resolved: let usfor the time being leave all affairs in the hands of the capital-ists. 
 Perhaps dislocation will “wait” until the ConstituentAssembly meets! Day by day facts prove that dislocation will probably not wait until the Constituent Assembly meets and that the crash will come earlier. 
 Take, for example, facts published today. 
 The Economic Department of the Executive Committee of the PetrogradSoviet of Soldiers’ and Workers’ Deputies has resolved “toinform the Provisional Government” that “the metal indus-try of the Moscow area (fifteen gubernias) is in an extremely critical state”, that “ the Goujon works management is clearly disorganising production , deliberately trying to bring the works to a standstill ”, and that for this reason “state power [left by the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks inthe hands of the party of the Goujons , the party of the counter-revolutionary capitalists who resort to lock-outs] must take over the management of the works ... and provide operatingfunds”. 
 Operating funds to the tune of up to five million rubles are required urgently. 
 The meeting (of the Economic Department and a delega-tion from the Department of Supplies of the Moscow Sovietof Workers’ Deputies) “calls the attention of the ProvisionalGovernment [poor, innocent, childishly-uninformed Pro-visional Government! It knew nothing about it! It is blame-less! It will learn; the Dans and Cherevanins, the Avksen-tyevs and Chernovs will exhort and persuade it!] to the fact that the Moscow Factory Meeting and the ProvisionalBureau of the Committee of Supplies of the Moscow Regionhave already had to intervene in order to prevent the stoppage of the Kolomna locomotive works, as well as the Sormovoworks and the Bryansk works in Bezhetsk. 
 All the same, the Sormovo works is now at a standstill owing to a strike, and the other works may stop at any moment.... 
” Catastrophe will not wait. 
 It is advancing with terrific speed. 
 Writing about the Donets area, A. 
 Sandomirsky, whono doubt knows the facts very well, says in today’s Novaya Zhizn : “The vicious circle—lack of coal, lack of metal, lack of engines and rolling stock, suspension of production—is growing wider. 
 And whilecoal is being burned and metal piles up at the works, it cannot be ob-tained where it is needed. 
” The government, supported by the Socialist-Revolution-aries and Mensheviks, simply obstructs the struggle against economic dislocation. 
 Sandomirsky reports it as a fact that Palchinsky, Deputy Minister of Commerce and virtual col-league of the Tseretelis and Chernovs, has responded to thecomplaint of the manufacturers by prohibiting (!!) “self-appointed” (!!) control commissions from acting on theinquiry instituted by the Donets committee to determine the quantity of metal available. 
 Just think what a madhouse this is: the country is on the rocks, the people are on the verge of famine and disaster,there is a shortage of coal and iron although they can bemined, the Donets committee is conducting an inquirythrough the Soviets of Soldiers’ and Workers’ Deputies concerning the quantity of metal, i. 
e. 
, is looking for iron for the people. 
 On the other hand, a servant of the manufac-turers, of the capitalists, Minister Palchinsky, in league with the Tseretelis and Chernovs, prohibits the inquiry. 
 Mean-while the crisis is mounting and catastrophe is drawing even nearer. 
 Where and how does one get the money? It is easy enough to “demand” five million for one factory, but surely one mustrealise that much more is needed for all the factories. 
 Isn’t it obvious that no money can be obtained unless the measure we have been demanding and advocating since early April is adopted, unless all the banks are consolidated into one bank and brought under control, and unless com-mercial secrecy is abolished? The Goujons and the other capitalists, with the co-opera-tion of the Palchinskys, are “deliberately” (this word wasused by the Economic Department) trying to bring produc-tion to a standstill. 
 The government is on their side . 
 The Tseretelis and Chernovs are mere ornaments or justpawns. 
 Isn’t it high time you gentlemen realised that the Social-ist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks as parties will have to answer to the people for the catastrophe? Pravda No. 
 95, Published according to July 13 (June 30), 1917 the Pravda text JUST HOW IS IT TO BE DONE? Rabochaya Gazeta is disturbed about the political signifi-cance of the offensive. 
 One of its contributors even re-proaches another, saying that the latter’s evasive phrasesultimately amount to an admission that, objectively, theRussian revolutionary army is now shedding its blood for the annexationist plans of the Allied bourgeoisie rather than for peace without annexations ( Rabochaya Gazeta No. 
 93, page 2, column 1). 
 Now this “objective” significance of the offensive is bound to disturb the workers, some of whom are still followingthe Mensheviks. 
 And this is also reflected in the columns of Rabochaya Gazeta . 
 Not wishing to venture upon an open break with the workers, the paper is trying to somehow linkthe “offensive” with the revolutionary proletarian peacestruggle. 
 Unfortunately for the cunning editors, the onlyconnection that can be established here is a negative one. 
 It would be difficult to imagine more pitiful and confused people than these respectable editors frightened by those very spirits which they, together with the Socialist-Revolu-tionaries, have conjured up. 
 On the one hand, Rabochaya Gazeta reports that “the West now sees the significance of the Russian offensive in anentirely false light. 
 The British and French bourgeois news-papers regard it as a renunciation of the Soviet’s ‘utopian’ plans. 
 Chauvinist resolutions are being passed under thepretext of hailing Kerensky and the advancing revolutionary army. 
 And while the war drums thunder for the Russian offensive, the persecution of those who hold the same views as the Russian democrats and accept the same peace policy is growing”. 
 A very valuable admission! All the more so because it comes from a ministerial newspaper which only yesterdayconsidered our forecasts of these inevitable consequences of the offensive to be prompted by Bolshevik malice. 
 It turns out that the question is not of our “malice” at all, but of the fact that the policy adopted by the leaders of theSoviet has its own logic and that this logic leads to the strengthening of the anti-revolutionary forces in and outside Russia. 
 It is this unpleasant fact that Rabochaya Gazeta would like to gloss over somehow. 
 The method suggested by the editors is very simple: “It is urgently necessary that the Cen-tral Executive Committee of the Congress of Soviets ofWorkers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, together with the Soviet ofPeasants’ Deputies, should issue an explicit and categoricalstatement to the effect that, as far as Russian democrats are concerned, the aims of the war remain the same as before”, and so on, and so forth. 
 You see how resolutely the Menshe-viks fight against the imperialist war: they are willing tomake another urgent and categorical statement. 
 The numberof the most “urgent”, most “categorical”, and most “impas-sioned” statements that have already been made! How many more times will it be necessary to repeat those categorical statements as speedily as possible to moderate with words,if only a little, the actions of a government which the ministerial Rabochaya Gazeta fully supports! Really, gentlemen, your most “categorical” words, decla-rations and notes cannot alleviate the facts which you your-selves report. 
 Those facts can only be countered by actions which would actually mark a break with the policy of con-tinuing the imperialist war. 
 The government of Lvov-Teresh-chenko-Shingaryov-Kerensky-Tsereteli cannot do that. 
 Allit can do is confirm, by its cowardly and pitiful policytowards Finland and the Ukraine, its complete inability to carry out its most “categorical” statements about “no annex-ations” and about the “right” to self-determination. 
 Underthese circumstances, all those promised declarations will serve as a means of lulling the people. 
 Lulling the people with high-sounding declarations instead of waging a “prole-tarian peace struggle”—this is Rabochaya Gazeta ’s pro-gramme, this is its real answer to the growth of the anti-revolutionary forces due to the offensive. 
 Pravda No. 
 95, Published according to July 13 (June 30), 1917 the Pravda text HOW AND WHY THE PEASANTS WERE DECEIVED It is known that when peasant deputies from all over Rus-sia arrived in Petrograd for their All-Russia Congress, they were promised—by the Socialist-Revolutionaries and by thegovernment—that the sale and purchase of land would beimmediately prohibited. 
 At first, Minister Pereverzev really wanted to carry out that promise, and sent a telegram to stop all transactions involving the sale or purchase of land. 
 But later some invis-ible hand intervened, and Minister Pereverzev withdrew histelegram to the notaries public, i. 
e. 
, again permitted thesale and purchase of land. 
 The peasants began to worry. 
 If I am not mistaken, they even sent a delegation to the Ministry. 
 The peasants were reassured. 
 They were soothed as one soothes little children. 
 They were assured that a law would be issued immediately prohibiting the sale and purchase ofland and that Pereverzev’s temporary order had been “sus-pended” “ only ” because such a law was about to be issued. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionaries reassured the peasants and fed them with promises. 
 The peasants believed them. 
 The peasants felt reassured. 
 The peasants went home. 
 Weeks passed. 
On June 24—no earlier—news appeared in the papers that Minister Chernov, leader of the Socialist-RevolutionaryParty, had submitted a Bill to the government (no more than a Bill, as yet) to prohibit the sale and purchase of land. 
 On June 29, the papers published reports about a “private conference” of the Duma, held on June 28. 
 At the conference, according to Rech (a paper of the majority party in the Pro-visional Government), Mr. 
 Rodzyanko “in his concluding remarks dwelt on the question of land transactions in connection with the new [oh yes, exceedingly new, new in the ex-treme!] government measures. 
 He maintained that if land deals wereprohibited, land would lose its value [for whom? For the landowners, obviously!! But isn’t it from them that the peasants want to take the land?], all security for loans would depreciate, and the landowners[the former landowners, Mr. 
 Rodzyanko!] would be denied all credit. 
 From what funds, asked Rodzyanko, will the landowners pay their debts to the banks? In most cases the debts are already overdue, andthis Bill would lead to the immediate and legitimate abolition of all landed property without auctions. 
 “In view of this, Rodzyanko proposed that the conference should instruct the Provisional Committee to examine the matter in order to endeavour to prevent the enactment of a law that would be fatal to the state, not to private ownership of land. 
” Here, then, is the “invisible hand” made visible! Here is the “cunning mechanism” of the coalition government, withits near-socialist Ministers, given away by this gentleman,this former Chairman of the former Duma, this formerlandowner, this former confidant of Stolypin the Hangman, this former protector of the agent provocateur Malinovsky— Mr. 
 Rodzyanko! Let us even assume that now that Mr. 
 Rodzyanko has so clumsily let the cat out of the bag, the law prohibiting thesale and purchase of land will at last be passed. 
 At last! But that is not the whole point. 
 The point is that this striking example should make clear to all of us, and help the peasants understand, how and why the peasants were deceived . 
 For the fact is incontrovertible and indubitable: they havedeceived the peasants by not fulfilling immediately what they had promised to fulfil immediately at the All-RussiaCongress of Peasants’ Deputies. 
 How did they deceive the peasants? By feeding them with promises. 
 That is the “cunning mechanism” of every coali-tion government on earth, i. 
e. 
, of every bourgeois Ministrywhich includes traitors to socialism. 
 In these Ministries,former socialists serve—whether consciously or not makesno difference—as tools with which the capitalists deceive the people. 
 Why were-the peasants deceived? Because the tools of deceit, the Socialist-Revolutionaries—we shall make the most favourable assumption about them— themselves failed to understand the cunning mechanism of class domination and class policy in the present administration of Russia. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionaries allowed themselves to be ledastray by talk. 
 But actually, as the Rodzyanko “incident”shows very well, Russia is being ruled by a bloc betweentwo blocs, by an alliance between two alliances. 
 One bloc is the bloc of the Cadets and the monarchist landowners, among whom Mr. 
 Rodzyanko ranks first. 
 The existence of this bloc as a political fact was shown to thewhole of Russia during the Petrograd elections, when all the Black Hundred papers, all the papers to the right of the Cadets, supported the Cadets. 
 Thanks to the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, this bloc has a majority in the government. 
 This bloc delayed the prohibition of transactions involving the sale and purchase of land. 
 It issupporting the landowners and the capitalists responsible for the lock-outs. 
 The second bloc is that of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks, which has deceived the people by empty promises. 
 Skobelev and Tsereteli, Peshekhonov and Chernov promised an awful lot. 
 It is easy to make promises. 
 The“socialist” Ministers’ method of feeding the people withpromises has been tried in every advanced country in the world and has everywhere ended in failure. 
 Russia’s specificfeature is that owing to the revolutionary situation in the country the failure of the Socialist-Revolutionary and Men-shevik parties will be worse and will come sooner than usual. 
 Let every worker and every soldier use this example, which is particularly instructive to the peasants, to fullyexplain to the peasants how and why they were deceived ! The peasants can only achieve their ends in alliance with the workers, not in a bloc (alliance) with the capitalists. 
 Pravda No. 
 96, Published according to July 14 (1), 1917 the Pravda text WHO IS RESPONSIBLE? Mr. 
 N. 
 Rostov quotes in the ministerial Rabochaya Gazeta several excerpts from soldiers’ letters which attest to the extreme ignorance of the peasants. 
 The author, according to his own words, has at his disposal a bulky batch of letterssent to the Agitation Department of the Executive Committeeof the Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies from everypart of the country. 
 He says that all the letters clamour forone and the same thing: Papers, send us papers! The Menshevik writer suddenly exclaims in alarm: “If the revolution does not get through to them [the peasants] asa clear fact of great usefulness, they will rise against therevolution .... 
” The peasants are “as ignorant as ever”. 
 The Menshevik and ministerial official was a bit late in becoming alarmed over his batch of letters. 
 More than seven weeks have passed since May 6, when the Mensheviks began to serve the capitalists, and in all this time bourgeois coun-ter-revolutionary lies and slander against the revolutionhave been pouring freely into the countryside through thebourgeois papers, which have become dominant, through thedirect and indirect servants and supporters of the capitalist government backed by the Mensheviks. 
 If the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries had not been betraying the revolution and supporting the counter-revolutionary Cadets, power would have been in the handsof the Executive Committee since early May. 
 The ExecutiveCommittee could immediately have established a state monopoly over private advertising in the press, and could thus have obtained tens of millions of newspaper copies for free distribution in the countryside. 
 The large printing presses and stocks of newsprint would have been used by the Executive Committee to enlighten the peasants and not to befog them through a dozen or so bourgeois, counter-revolu-tionary newspapers which have virtually seized the key role in the newspaper business. 
 The Executive Committee could then have disbanded the Duma, and, having saved the people’s money on this—not tospeak of many other things—it could have spent that money on sending a thousand agitators, or even thousands of them, to the countryside. 
 In times of revolution, procrastination is often equiva-lent to a complete betrayal of the revolution. 
 Responsibilityfor the delay in the transfer of power to the workers, sol-diers and peasants, for the delay in carrying through revolu-tionary measures to enlighten the ignorant peasants, rests wholly on the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks. 
 They have betrayed the revolution on this matter. 
 They bear the blame for the fact that the workers and soldiers areforced to limit themselves to primitive means in the fightagainst the counter-revolutionary bourgeois press and agita-tion, whereas they could and should have had nation-wide means for the purpose. 
 Pravda No. 
 96, Published according to July 14 (1), 1917 the Pravda text WHA T COUL D THE CADET S HAV E COUNTE D ON WHE N THE Y WITHDRE W FRO M THE CABINET ?66 The question arises quite naturally. 
 To correctly meet events with definite tactics, we must understand them cor-rectly. 
 How, then, are we to understand the Cadet withdrawal? Spite? Disagreement in principle over the Ukraine? Of course not. 
 It would be ridiculous to suspect the Cadets of loyalty to principles, or the bourgeoisie of the ability todo something out of spite. 
 The Cadet withdrawal can only be understood as a calcu-lated move. 
 What are their calculations? To govern a country which has carried out a major revolu-tion and is still in a state of unrest, and to govern it duringa world-wide imperialist war, you need the initiative andscope of a truly revolutionary class—massively courageous,historically great, wholeheartedly enthusiastic. 
 Either you suppress this class by force, as the Cadets have been preach-ing for some time, since May 6 in fact, or you entrust your-self to its leadership. 
 Either you are in alliance with im-perialist capital, then you must take the offensive, you mustbe an obedient servant of capital, you must sell yourself toit, you must throw overboard the utopian ideas of abolishing landed property without compensation (see Birzhevka for Lvov’s speeches against Chernov’s programme); or you are against imperialist capital, then you must immediatelypropose precise peace terms to all nations, because they haveall been exhausted by the war, you must dare to raise, and beable to raise, the banner of world proletarian revolution against capital, and to do so not in words but in deeds, to further the revolution with the greatest determination inRussia herself. 
 The Cadets are wily businessmen in trade, in finance, in safeguarding capital, as well as in politics. 
 They have cor-rectly taken into account the fact that the situation is ob-jectively a revolutionary one. 
 They agree to reforms and enjoy sharing power with the reformists, the Tseretelis and Cher-novs. 
 But reforms will not help. 
 There is no way out of the crisis, the war and economic disruption, through reforms. 
 From their class point of view, from the imperialist exploiters’ point of view, the Cadets have calculated correctly. 
 They seem to say: “By withdrawing, we present an ultima-tum. 
 We know that at present the Tseretelis and Chernovsdo not trust the truly revolutionary class, that at presentthey do not want to conduct a truly revolutionary policy. 
Let’s frighten them. 
 To be without the Cadets means being without the ‘aid’ of world-wide Anglo-American capital, means raising the banner of revolution against the latter as well . 
 The Tseretelis and Chernovs wouldn’t do that, they wouldn’t dare! They will give in to us! “If not, then even if a revolution against capital starts, it will fail and we shall come back. 
” That is how the Cadets calculate. 
 We repeat: from the point of view of the exploiting class, their calculations arecorrect. 
 Were the Tseretelis and Chernovs to take the point of view of the exploited class and not that of the vacillating pettybourgeoisie, they would reply to the Cadets’ correct calcu-lations by correct adherence to the revolutionary proletari-at’s policy. 
 Written on July 3 (16), 1917 Published in Proletarskoye Dyelo No. 
 2, Published according to July 28 (15), 1917 the manuscript ALL POWER TO THE SOVIETS! “Drive nature out of the door and she will rush back through the window. 
” It seems that the ruling Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties have to “learn” this simple truth time and again by their own experience. 
 Theyundertook to be “revolutionary democrats” and found them-selves in the shoes of revolutionary democrats—they arenow forced to draw the conclusions which every revolutionarydemocrat must draw. 
 Democracy is the rule of the majority. 
 As long as the will of the majority was not clear, as long as it was possibleto make it out to be unclear, at least with a grain of plau-sibility, the people were offered a counter-revolutionarybourgeois government disguised as “democratic”. 
 But thisdelay could not last long. 
 During the several months that have passed since February 27 the will of the majority of the workers and peasants, of the overwhelming majority of thecountry’s population, has become clear in more than a gener-al sense. 
 Their will has found expression in mass organisa-tions—the Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’Deputies. 
 How, then, can anyone oppose the transfer of all power in the state to the Soviets? Such opposition means nothing butrenouncing democracy! It means no more no less than impos-ing on the people a government which admittedly can nei-ther come into being nor hold its ground democratically , i. 
e. 
, as a result of truly free, truly popular elections. 
 It is a fact, strange as it may seem at first sight, that the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks have forgotten this perfectly simple, perfectly obvious and palpable truth. 
 Their position is so false, and they are so badly confused and bewildered, that they are unable to “recover” this truth they have lost. 
 Following the elections in Petrograd and in Moscow, the convocation of the All-Russia Peasant Con-gress, and the Congress of Soviets, the classes and partiesthroughout Russia have shown what they stand for so clearlyand specifically that people who have not gone mad or delib-erately got themselves into a mess simply cannot have any illusions on this score. 
 To tolerate the Cadet Ministers or the Cadet government or Cadet policies means challenging democrats and democracy. 
This is the source of the political crises since February 27,and this is also the source of the shakiness and vacillation ofour government system. 
 At every turn, daily and even hour-ly, appeals are being made to the people’s revolutionary spirit and to their democracy on behalf of the most author-itative government institutions and congresses. 
 Yet thegovernment’s policies in general, and its foreign and eco-nomic policies in particular, are all departures from revolu-tionary principles, and breaches of democracy. 
 This sort of thing will not do. 
 It is inevitable that a situation like the present should show elements of instability now for one reason, now for an-other. 
 And it is not exactly a clever policy to jib. 
 Thingsare moving by fits and starts towards a point where powerwill be transferred to the Soviets, which is what our Party called for long ago. 
 Pravda No. 
 99, Published according to July 18 (5), 1917 the Pravda text WHERE IS STATE POWER AND WHERE IS COUNTER-REVOLUTION? This question is usually answered quite simply: there is no counter-revolution at all or we do not know where it is. 
 But we know full well where power is. 
 It is in the hands of the Provisional Government, which is controlled by the Cen-tral Executive Committee (C. 
E. 
C. 
) of the All-Russia Congressof Soviets of Soldiers’ and Workers’ Deputies. 
 This is theusual answer. 
 Yesterday’s political crisis, 67 like most types of crises, which tear down everything conventional and shatter all illusions, left in its wake the ruins of the illusions expressedin the usual answers—cited above—to the basic questionsof any revolution. 
 There is a former member of the Second Duma, Alexinsky, whom the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks , the ruling parties in the Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peas-ants’ Deputies, refused to admit on to the Executive Com-mittee of the Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies until he rehabilitated himself , i. 
e. 
, until he redeemed his honour. 
68 What was the trouble? Why did the Executive Committee publicly and formally deny Alexinsky its confidence, de-manding that he redeem his honour, i. 
e. 
, declaring him dis-honest? It was because Alexinsky had made himself so notorious by libellous statements that he had been branded a slandererin Paris by journalists of the most diverse parties. 
 Alexinskydid not bother to redeem his honour before the Executive Committee. 
 He preferred to hide himself in Plekhanov’s newspaper Yedinstvo , appearing first under initials, and then, after he had plucked up courage, under his full name. 
 On July 4, yesterday afternoon, a few Bolsheviks were warned by friends that Alexinsky had laid before the Pet-rograd journalists’ committee some new malicious libel. 
 Most of those who received the warning ignored it completely,treating Alexinsky and his “work” with disdainful contempt. 
But one Bolshevik, Jugashvili (Stalin), a member of the Cen-tral Executive Committee, who as a Georgian Social-Demo-crat had known Comrade Chkheidze for a long time, spoke to the latter at a meeting of the C. 
E. 
C. 
 about Alexinsky’s new infamous slander campaign. 
 This happened late at night, but Chkheidze declared that the C. 
E. 
C. 
 could not be indifferent to the spreading of libelby people who are afraid of open court and an investigationby the C. 
E. 
C. 
 In his own name, as Chairman of the C. 
E. 
C. 
, and in the name of Tsereteli, a member of the Provisional Government, Chkheidze immediately telephoned all newspa-per offices, suggesting that they refrain from publishing Alexinsky ’s libel . 
 Chkheidze told Stalin that most papers had expressed readiness to comply with his request, and thatonly Yedinstvo and Rech had “kept silent” for a time (we have not seen Yedinstvo , but Rech has not printed the libel). 
 As a result, the libel appeared only on the pages of a petty, yel-low, and to most intelligent people completely unknown pa-per, Zhivoye Slovo69 No. 
 51 (404), whose editor and pub-lisher signs himself A. 
 M. 
 Umansky. 
 The slanderers will now answer before the court. 
 In this respect things are quite simple. 
 The absurdity of the libel is striking: a certain ensign of the Sixteenth Siberian Rifle Regiment by the name ofYermolenko was “dispatched” (?) “on April 25 to us behindthe front lines of the Sixth Army to agitate for the speediestconclusion of a separate peace treaty with Germany”. 
 Appar-ently, he is the escaped prisoner of whom the “document” published in Zhivoye Slovo says: “This commission was accepted by Yermolenko on the insistence of the com-rades”!! From this alone you can judge how little faith can be put in an individual who is dishonourable enough to accept such a “commission” !... The witness has no sense of honour. 
 This is a fact. 
 And what was the witness’s testimony? He testified the following: “Officers of the German General Staff, Schiditzki and Lübers, had told him that propaganda of a similar kind was being carried on in Russia by A. 
 Skoropis-Yoltukhovsky, chairman of the Ukrainiansection of the Union for the Liberation of the Ukraine, 70 and an agent of the German General Staff, and by Lenin. 
 Leninwas commissioned to do all he could to undermine the confi-dence of the Russian people in the Provisional Government. 
” Thus the German officers, in order to induce Yermolenko to commit this dishonourable act, shamelessly lied to himabout Lenin who, as everybody knows and as is officiallystated by the entire Bolshevik Party , has always rejected most emphatically, consistently, and unconditionally aseparate peace treaty with Germany!! The lie of the German officers is so obvious, crude and preposterous that no lit-erate person would even for a moment take it for anythingbut a lie. 
 And a politically literate person would be evenmore certain that to associate Lenin with an individuallike Yoltukhovsky (?) and with the Union for the Liberationof the Ukraine is particularly preposterous, for both Lenin and all other internationalists have repeatedly dissociated themselves publicly from this dubious social-patriotic “Union” during the war! The crude lie told by Yermolenko, whom the Germans had bribed, or by German officers, would not deserve the slight-est attention, were it not that the “document” has added what it calls “fresh information”—it is not known by whom, from whom, how, or when received—according to which“money for propaganda is being received” (by whom? the“document” is afraid to say plainly that the accused or sus-pected is Lenin!! The document says nothing about who “is receiving it”) “through trusted people”: the “Bolsheviks” Fürstenberg (Hanecki) and Kozlovsky. 
 It is alleged that there is information proving the transfer of money throughbanks, and that “the military censorship has discovered acontinuous (!) exchange of telegrams of a political and finan-cial nature between German agents and Bolshevik leaders”!! Again such a crude lie that it sticks out like a sore thumb. 
 If there were even a word of truth in that, then how could it happen (1) that Hanecki had quite recently been allowed freely to enter Russia and permitted to leave her just as freely? (2) that neither Hanecki nor Kozlovsky had been arrested before the appearance in the press of information concerning their crimes? Is it really possible that the General Staff, had it actually been in possession of even remotelytrustworthy information about the sending of money, tele-grams, etc. 
, would have permitted the publication of ru-mours about this through the Alexinskys and the yellowpress, without arresting Hanecki and Kozlovsky? Isn’t it clear this is nothing but the cheap work of newspaper slanderers of the lowest order? We may add that Hanecki and Kozlovsky are not Bolshe-viks, but members of the Polish Social-Democratic Party;that we have known Hanecki, a member of its Central Com-mittee, since the 1903 London Congress from which the Polish delegates withdrew, and so on. 
 The Bolsheviks never received any money from either Hanecki or Kozlovsky. 
 All that is a lie, a complete, vulgar lie. 
 What is its political significance? First, it indicates that the Bolsheviks’ political opponents are so low and con-temptible that they cannot get along without lies and libel. 
 Secondly, it provides us with an answer to the title ques-tion of this article. 
 The report about the “documents” was sent to Kerensky as early as May 16. 
 Kerensky is a member of the Provisional Government and the Soviet, i. 
e. 
, of both “powers”. 
 May 16to July 5 is a long time. 
 The power, if it really were a power, could and should itself have investigated those “documents”, interrogated the witnesses, and arrested the suspects. 
 Thepower, both “powers”—the Provisional Government and the C. 
E. 
C. 
—could and should have done this. 
 Yet both powers are inactive, while the General Staff is found to have some sort of relations with Alexinsky, who was not admitted to the Soviet’s Executive Committee owing to his libellous activities! The General Staff, at the verymoment of the Cadets’ withdrawal, permits—probably byaccident—the handing over of its official documents toAlexinsky for publication! The power is inactive. 
 Neither Kerensky, nor the Pro-visional Government, nor the C. 
E. 
C. 
 so much as think of arresting Lenin, Hanecki, or Kozlovsky, if they are undersuspicion. 
 Last night, July 4, both Chkheidze and Tsereteli asked the newspapers not to print the obvious libel. 
 But just a little later, late at night, Polovtsev sent military cadets and Cossacks to wreck Pravda ’s offices, stop the paper’s publication, arrest its publishers, seize its ledgers (on thepretext of investigating whether or not suspicious fundswere involved). 
 At the same time that yellow, base, filthylittle rag, Zhivoye Slovo, printed foul libel to arouse passions, revile the Bolsheviks, create an atmosphere of mob violence, and afford a plausible justification for the behaviour of Polovtsev, the military cadets and the Cossacks who hadwrecked Pravda ’s offices. 
 Whoever does not close his eyes to the truth cannot remain deluded. 
 When it is necessary to act, both powers remain inactive—the C. 
E. 
C. 
, because it “trusts” the Cadets and is afraid of irritating them, and the Cadets, who do not act as a power because they prefer to act behind the scenes . 
 Counter-revolution behind the scenes—this is it, as clear as day: the Cadets, certain quarters of the General Staff(“high-ranking officers”, as our Party’s resolution callsthem), and the shady, semi-Black Hundred press. 
 These are not inactive, these “work” together hand in glove; this is the soil in which pogroms, attempted pogroms, the shoot-ing of demonstrators, etc. 
, etc. 
, are nurtured. 
 Whoever does not deliberately shut his eyes to the truth cannot remain deluded any longer. 
 There is no power, and there will be none until the trans-fer of power to the Soviets lays the foundation for creating power. 
 Counter-revolution thrives on the absence of author-ity by uniting the Cadets with certain high-ranking officersand with the Black Hundred press. 
 This is a sad reality,but a reality nevertheless. 
 Workers and soldiers! You must show firmness, determi-nation and vigilance! Written on July 5 (18), 1917 Published in Listok “Pravdy ”, Published according to July 19 (6), 1917 the newspaper text FOUL SLANDER BY ULTRA -REACTIONARY NEWSPAPERS AND ALEXINSKY Today’s issue of Zhivoye Slovo , an obviously Black Hundred type of paper, carries low, foul slander againstLenin. 
 Pravda cannot appear because its premises were wrecked by military cadets on the night of July 4-5. 
 This accounts for the delay in publishing a detailed refutation of the foulslander. 
 For the time being we declare that the Zhivoye Slovo report is slander and that on the night of July 4-5 Chkheidze rang up all the big papers , asking them not to publish slan-derous, riot-raising articles. 
 The big papers complied with Chkheidze’s request, and on July 5 none of them publishedthe infamous slander , with the exception of the filthy Zhivoye Slovo . 
 Alexinsky is so well known as a slanderer that he has not been admitted to the Executive Committee of the Soviet until he rehabilitates himself, i. 
e. 
, until he redeems his honour . 
 Citizens! Don’t believe those foul slanderers, Alexinsky and Zhivoye Slovo . 
 Zhivoye Slovo ’s slander is evident at a glance from the following: the paper writes that on May 16 a letter (No. 
 3719) accusing Lenin was sent to Kerensky from the General Staff. 
 Obviously, Kerensky would have been dutybound to have Lenin arrested immediately and to order agovernment investigation , had he for a single moment believed those accusations or suspicions to be serious. 
 Written on July 5 (18), 1917 Published in Listok “Pravdy ”, Published according to July 19 (6), 1917 the newspaper text SLANDER AND FACTS An immense torrent of abuse and slander is being poured on the Bolsheviks for the demonstration of July 3 and 4. 
 They go so far as to accuse the Bolsheviks of “trying to seize the city”, of wanting to “violate” the will of the Soviets, of “encroaching on the authority of the Soviets”,and so on, and so forth. 
 The facts, however, show that the Bolsheviks did not seize a single building, a single institution, let alone asection of the city (although they could have), nor tried to do so even though the people were armed. 
 The facts show that the only political act of violence against an institution occurred on the night of July 4-5, when the military cadets and Cossacks wrecked Pravda on Polovtsev’s orders, without the knowledge and against the will of the Soviet . 
 This is a fact. 
 It was a deliberate, malicious use of force against an en-tire institution, an “encroachment” and “violation” not inwords, but in deeds. 
 Had this encroachment been lawful,either the Provisional Government or the Soviet would havesanctioned the measure. 
 Neither authority , however , did so . 
 Those who committed violence against “ Pravda ” received no support either in the Soviet or in the Provisional Govern-ment. 
 The Bolsheviks appealed to the soldiers who had started the demonstration to act peaceably and in an organised way . 
 Neither the Provisional Government nor the Soviet ap-pealed to the military cadets, the Cossacks or Polovtsevto act peaceably and in an organised, lawful way. 
 * * * But, we are told, there was shooting. 
 Yes, there was. 
 But who did the shooting? Who dares blame it on anyone without an investigation? Please listen to a witness from bourgeois quarters . 
 This witness is the paper Birzheviye Vedomosti , evening edition of July 4—a witness whom nobody in the worldcould suspect of partiality towards the Bolsheviks! Hereis what the witness says: “At 2 p. 
m. 
 sharp, when the armed demonstrators were passing the Sadovaya and Nevsky corner and a large number of spectators werewatching them quietly, a deafening shot rang out from the right side of Sadovaya , after which disorderly firing began. 
” And so, even the witness from the bourgeois paper is compelled to admit the truth, namely, that the shootingbegan from the right side of Sadovaya !! Surely this is a clear enough indication that the shooting was aimed at the dem-onstrators. 
 Is it really so difficult to appreciate that if the demon-strators had planned or wished to use force, they would have sent people against a definite institution , as Polovtsev sent military cadets and Cossacks against Pravda ? Since sailors were killed, and since the witness from the bourgeoispaper says that the shooting was started “from the right side of Sadovaya” “when the armed demonstrators were passing”, isn’t this obvious enough proof that it was the Black Hundreds , the opponents of democracy, the quarters close to the Cadets, that wanted and were bent on violence? Written on July 5 (18), 1917 Published in Listok “Pravdy ”, Published according to July 19 (6), 1917 the newspaper text CLOSE TO THE TRUTH Speaking at the Central Executive Committee meeting on the evening of July 4, Citizen Chaikovsky came surpris-ingly close to the truth. 
 He objected to the Soviet taking power and, among other things, advanced this what we might call “decisive”argument: we must carry on the war but cannot do it with-out money, and the British and Americans won’t give anymoney if power is in the hands of “socialists”; they willonly give money if the Cadets participate in the government. 
 That is close to the truth. 
 It is impossible to participate in the imperialist war without “participating” in the capitalist business of sub-jugating the people with loans from the capitalist gentlemen. 
 In order to really oppose the imperialist war, we must sever all ties that fetter people and bind them to capital. 
 The workers and peasants must fearlessly take over the supervision of the banks and production and the regulationof production. 
 We, too, think that the British and Americans will give no money unless they have a guarantee from the Cadets. 
The alternative is: either serve the Cadets, serve capital, pile up imperialist loans (and put up with the fitting title of imperialist democrats instead of claiming to be “revolu-tionary” democrats); or break with the Cadets, break withthe capitalists, break with imperialism, and become realrevolutionaries on war issues as well. 
 Chaikovsky came close to the truth. 
 Written on July 5 (18), 1917 Published in Listok “Pravdy ”, Published according to July 19 (6), 1917 the newspaper text A NEW DREYFUS CASE? Are some of the “leaders” of our General Staff planning to re-enact the Dreyfus case71? This idea is suggested by the outrageously insolent and monstrous slander published in Zhivoye Slovo and analysed by us in detail elsewhere. 
 In the Dreyfus case, the French General Staff made it-self sadly and disgracefully famous throughout the worldby resorting to wrong, unfair and downright criminal (base)measures to indict Dreyfus. 
 Our General Staff showed their hand in a “case” against the Bolsheviks, doing it publicly for the first time, I think, through—this is strange and significant and incredible— Zhivoye Slovo , a Black Hundred rag, which printed an obvious slander about Lenin being a spy. 
 The report beginsas follows: “The Chief of Staff of the Supreme Command sent the record of inter-rogation [of Yermolenko] to the War Minister, with his letter No. 
 3719 of May 16, 1917. 
” Is it conceivable—if the case is handled properly at all— that records of interrogation belonging to the GeneralStaff should be published in the Black Hundred press before investigation is instituted and before the suspects are arrested? The General Staff is in charge of intelligence. 
 This is beyond question. 
 But how can an intelligence service func-tion if a document dispatched on May 16 and received byKerensky long ago is put in circulation by a Black Hundred rag instead of Kerensky ? In what way does this differ, in point of fact, from the methods used in the Dreyfus case? Listok “Pravdy ”, Published according to July 19 (6), 1917 the text in Listok “Pravdy ” APPEAL OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMISSION OF THE PETROGRAD COMMITTEE OF THE R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 (B. 
) In pursuance of the decision of the C. 
C. 
 R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 published yesterday (signed also by the Petrograd Commit-tee), the Executive Commission of the Petrograd Committeeof the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 appeals to workers to resume work to-morrow, i. 
e. 
, on the morning of July 7. 
 This decision is supported by a meeting of delegates from the factory staffs of Vyborgskaya Storona. 
 Executive Commission, Petrograd Committee of the R. 
 S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Written on July 6 (19), 1917 First published in 1928 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany VII the manuscript DREYFUSIAD A combination of the old and the new—this has always been the case with methods of exploitation and repression used by tsarism. 
 It has not changed in republican Russia. 
The counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie flavour their po-litical baiting of the Bolsheviks, the party of the interna-tional revolutionary proletariat, with the foulest slanderand “campaigning” in the press that is quite like the cam-paign of the French clerical and monarchist papers in the Dreyfus case. 
 The watchword at that time was that Dreyfus must be indicted for espionage at all costs! Today the watchwordis that some Bolshevik or other must be indicted for espio-nage at all costs! The foulest slander, garbling, crude lies and artful tricks to confuse the reader—all these devices are being used by the yellow press and the bourgeois pressgenerally with great zeal. 
 The net result is a wild, furiousuproar in which it is sometimes impossible to make outarticulate words, let alone arguments. 
 Here are some of the methods used in our modern, repub-lican Dreyfusiad. 
 First they trotted out three main “argu-ments”: Yermolenko, Kozlovsky’s twenty million, and theimplication of Parvus. 
 Next day Zhivoye Slovo , the chief riot-instigating paper, published two “corrections” admitting that the “leader”of the Bolsheviks had not been bribed but was a fanatic and changing the twenty million to twenty thousand. 
 Mean-while another paper declared Yermolenko’s testimony to beof secondary importance. 
 In Listok “Pravdy ”72 of July 6, we showed the complete absurdity of Yermolenko’s testimony. 
 * Obviously, it had become inconvenient to refer to it. 
 In the same issue of Listok there is a letter from Kozlovsky denying the slander. 
 Following the denial 20,000,000 isreduced to 20,000—a “round” figure again instead of anexact one. 
 They implicate Parvus, trying hard to establish some sort of connection between him and the Bolsheviks. 
 In reality it was the Bolsheviks who in the Geneva Sotsial-Demokrat73 called Parvus a renegade, ** denounced him ruthlessly as a German Plekhanov, and once and for alleliminated all possibility of close relations with social-chauvinists like him. 
 It was the Bolsheviks who at a meeting held in Stockholm jointly with the Swedish Left Socialists 74 categorically refused to admit Parvus in any capacity, even as a guest, let alone speak to him. 
 Hanecki was engaged in business as an employee of the firm in which Parvus was a partner. 
 Commercial and finan-cial correspondence was censored, of course, and is quite open to examination. 
 An effort is being made to mix these commercial affairs with politics, although no proof whatso-ever is being furnished!! They have gone to the ridiculous extreme of blaming Pravda for the fact that its dispatches to the socialist papers of Sweden and all other countries (dispatches which, of course, had to pass the censor and are fully known to him) were reprinted by German papers, often with distortions!As if reprinting, or malicious distortions, can be blamedon the original source! It is a veritable Dreyfusiad, a campaign of lies and slan-der stemming from fierce political hatred. 
 How foul the sources must be to substitute slander for the clash of ideas! Written on July 6-7 (19-20), 1917 First published in Lenin Published according to Miscellany VI, 1925 the manuscript *See pp. 
 157 -61 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 **See present edition, Vol. 
 21, pp. 
 421 -22. 
— Ed. 
 IN REFUTATION OF SINISTER RUMOURS Listok “Pravdy ” of July 6 carried a detailed refutation of the foul slander spread by the Black Hundred papers * with regard to Lenin and others. 
 A similar refutation, ina briefer form, was published as a separate leaflet on be-half of our Party Central Committee. 
 In addition, we have only to answer the following ques-tion put to us: are the rumours concerning the arrest ofLenin, Kamenev, Zinoviev and others true? No, these rumours are untrue . 
 All the Bolsheviks named here who are baited with particular zeal by the vile and slanderous pressare members of the All-Russia Central Executive Committeeof the Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies. 
 Onceagain we request all fair-minded citizens not to believethese infamous slanders and sinister rumours. 
 Written on July 7 (20), 1917 First published in 1928 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany VII the manuscript *See pp. 
 157-62 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 THRE E CRISE S75 The more violent the slander and lies against the Bol-sheviks these days, the more calmly must we, while refuting the lies and slander, reflect upon the historical interrelation of events and the political, i. 
e. 
, class , significance of the revolution’s present course. 
 To refute the lies and slander, we only have to refer again to Listok “Pravdy ” of July 6, and to call the reader’s attention especially to the article printed below which gives docu-mentary evidence that on July 2 the Bolsheviks campaigned against the demonstration (as admitted by the Socialist-Revolutionaries’ paper). 
 The article indicates that on July 3the popular mood exploded into action and the demon-stration started against our advice. 
 It shows that on July 4,in a leaflet (reprinted by the Socialist-Revolutionary paper Dyelo Naroda ), we called for a peaceful and organised demonstration, that on the night of July 4 we passed a decision to call off the demonstration. 
 Slanderers, continueyour slander! You can never refute these facts and theirdecisive significance in every connection! Let us turn to the question of the historical interrelation of the events. 
 When, as early as the beginning of April,we opposed support for the Provisional Government, we wereattacked by both the S. 
R. 
s and the Mensheviks. 
 But whathas reality proved? What have the three political crises proved—April 20 and 21, June 10 and 18, July 3 and 4? They have proved, in the first place, that the masses are becoming increasingly dissatisfied with the bourgeoispolicy of the Provisional Government’s bourgeois majority. 
 It is rather interesting to note that the ruling Socialist-Revolutionaries’ newspaper, Dyelo Naroda , despite its marked hostility to the Bolsheviks, is compelled to admit, in its July 6 issue, the deep economic and political causes of theaction of July 3 and 4. 
 The stupid, crude, infamous liethat this action was artificially created, that the Bolshevikscampaigned in favour of action, will daily be more and more exposed. 
 The common cause, the common origin, the deep common root of the three above-mentioned political crises is clear,especially if we look at them in their interrelation, as sciencedemands that politics be looked at. 
 It is absurd even tothink that three such crises could be produced artificially. 
 In the second place, it is instructive to grasp what each one of them had in common with the others, and what was its specific features. 
 What is common to all three is a mass dissatisfaction overflowing all bounds, a mass resentment with the bour-geoisie and their government. 
 Whoever forgets, ignores or underestimates this essence of the matter , renounces the ABC of socialism concerning the class struggle. 
 Let those who call themselves socialists, who know something about the character of the class struggle in Euro-pean revolutions, think about the class struggle in theRussian revolution. 
 These crises are peculiar in the ways they manifested themselves. 
 The first (April 20-21) was stormy and spontane-ous, and completely unorganised. 
 It led to Black Hundredsfiring on the demonstrators and to unprecedentedly savageand lying accusations against the Bolsheviks. 
 After theoutburst came a political crisis. 
 In the second case, the demonstration was called by the Bolsheviks, and was cancelled after a stern ultimatum and direct ban by the Congress of Soviets; then, on June18, came a general demonstration in which the Bolshevikslogans clearly predominated. 
 As the Socialist-Revolution-aries and Mensheviks themselves admitted on the eveningof June 18, a political crisis would certainly have broken out had it not been for the offensive at the front. 
 The third crisis broke out spontaneously on July 3 despite the Bolsheviks’ efforts on July 2 to check it. 
 Reaching its climax on July 4, it led to a furious outburst of counter-revolution on July 5 and 6. 
 The vacillation of the S. 
R. 
s and Mensheviks expressed itself in Spiridonova and a number of other S. 
R. 
s declaring for the transfer of power to theSoviets, and in the Menshevik internationalists, previouslyopposed to it, voicing the same idea. 
 The last, and perhaps the most instructive, conclusion to be drawn from considering the events in their intercon-nection is that all three crises manifested some form of demonstration that is new in the history of our revolution,a demonstration of a more complicated type in which themovement proceeds in waves, a sudden drop following arapid rise, revolution and counter-revolution becomingmore acute, and the middle elements being eliminated for a more or less extensive period. 
 In all three crises, the movement took the form of a demonstration . 
 An anti-government demonstration—that would be the most exact, formal description of events. 
 Butthe fact of the matter is that it was not an ordinarydemonstration; it was something considerably more than a demonstration, but less than a revolution. 
 It was an out-burst of revolution and counter-revolution together , a sharp, sometimes almost sudden elimination of the middleelements, while the proletarian and bourgeois elementsmade a stormy appearance. 
 In this respect it is extremely typical that, for each of these movements, the middle elements blame both of the specific class forces—the proletariat as well as the bour-geoisie. 
 Look at the S. 
R. 
s and Mensheviks. 
 They leanover backwards to frantically shout that, by their extremes,the Bolsheviks are helping the counter-revolution. 
 At thesame time, however, they admit again and again that the Cadets (with whom they form a bloc in the government) are counter-revolutionary. 
 “Our urgent task is to draw aline,” wrote Dyelo Naroda yesterday, “to dig a deep moat between ourselves and all the Right elements, includingYedinstvo , which has gone militant” (with which, we may add, the S. 
R. 
s formed a bloc during the elections). 
 Compare that with today’s (July 7) issue of Yedinstvo , in which Plekhanov’s editorial is compelled to state theindisputable fact that the Soviets (i. 
e. 
, the S. 
R. 
s and Mensheviks) will “think over the matter for a fortnight” and that, if power were to pass to the Soviets, “it would be tantamount to victory for Lenin’s supporters”. 
 “If the Cadets don’t stick to the rule—the worse, the better ...,” says Plekhanov, “they themselves will have to admit thatthey have made a big mistake [by withdrawing from theCabinet], making the work of Lenin’s supporters easier. 
” Isn’t that typical? The middle elements blame the Cadets for making the Bolsheviks’ work easier, and the Bolsheviks for making the Cadets’ work easier! Is it so hard to guessthat if we substitute class names for political ones we havebefore us the dreams of the petty bourgeoisie about thedisappearance of the class struggle between the proletariatand the bourgeoisie? Isn’t the petty bourgeoisie complaining about the class struggle between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie? Is it really so hard to guess that no Bolsheviksin the world could have “created” even a single “popularmovement”, let alone three movements, if the deepest eco-nomic and political causes had not set the proletariat intoaction? Is it so difficult to guess that no Cadets and mon-archists combined could have called forth any movement “from the Right” if it had not been for the equally deep causesthat make the bourgeoisie as a class counter-revolutionary? Both we and the Cadets were blamed for the April 20-21 movement—for intransigence, extremes, and for aggravatingthe situation. 
 The Bolsheviks were even accused (absurd as it may be) of the firing on Nevsky. 
 When the movement was over, however, those same S. 
R. 
s and Mensheviks, intheir joint, official organ, Izvestia , wrote that the “popular movement” had “swept away the imperialists, Milyukov,etc. 
”, i. 
e. 
, they praised the movement!! Isn’t that typical? Doesn’t it show very clearly that the petty bourgeoisie do not understand the workings, the meaning, of the class struggle between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie? The objective situation is this. 
 The vast majority of the country’s population is petty-bourgeois by its living con-ditions and more so by its ideas. 
 But big capital rules thecountry, primarily through banks and syndicates. 
 There is an urban proletariat in this country, mature enough to go its own way, but not yet able to draw at once the majorityof the semi-proletarians to its side. 
 From this fundamental, class fact follows the inevitability of such crises as the three we are now examining, as well as their forms. 
 In future the forms of crises may, of course, change, but the substance of the issue will remain the same even if,for instance, the S. 
R. 
 Constituent Assembly meets in Octo-ber. 
 The S. 
R. 
s have promised the peasants: (1) to abolishprivate landownership; (2) to transfer the land to the workingpeople; (3) to confiscate the landed estates and transfer them to the peasants without compensation. 
 These great reforms can never be realised without the most decisiverevolutionary measures against the bourgeoisie, measuresthat can only be taken when the poor peasants join the proletariat, only when the banks and the syndicates are nation-alised. 
 The credulous peasants, believing for a time that these beautiful things can be achieved by compromising withthe bourgeoisie, will inevitably be disappointed and ...“dissatisfied” (mildly speaking) with the sharp class struggleof the proletariat against the bourgeoisie for the imple-mentation of the promises of the S. 
R. 
s. 
 So it was, and so it will be. 
 Written on July 7 (20), 1917 Published in the magazine Published according to Rabotnitsa No. 
 7, July 19, 1917 the manuscript THE QUESTIO N OF THE BOLSHEVI K LEADERS APPEARIN G IN COUR T76 Judging by private conversations, there are two opinions on this question. 
 Comrades succumbing to the “Soviet atmosphere” often incline towards appearing in court. 
 Those closer to the workers apparently incline towards not appearing. 
 In principle, the question chiefly boils down to an esti-mation of what is usually called constitutional illusions. 
 Anyone who thinks that a regular government and a regular court exist or can exist in Russia, that a Constituent Assembly is likely to be called, may arrive at a conclusionin favour of appearing. 
 That idea is completely erroneous, however. 
 It is the latest events, after July 4, that have most vividly shownthat a Constituent Assembly is unlikely to be called (with-out a new revolution), that neither a regular governmentnor a regular court exists or can exist in Russia (at present). 
 The court is an organ of power. 
 The liberals sometimes forget this, but it is a sin for a Marxist to do so. 
 Where, then, is the power? Who constitutes the power?There is no government. 
 It changes daily. 
 It is inactive. 
The power that is active is the military dictatorship. 
 Under these conditions, it is ridiculous even to speak of“the courts”. 
 It is not a question of “courts”, but of an epi-sode in the civil war . 
 This is what those in favour of appear-ing in court unfortunately do not want to understand. 
 Pereverzev and Alexinsky as initiators of the “case”!! Isn’t it ridiculous to speak of courts in such circumstances? /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR Isn’t it naïve to think that, in such conditions, any court can examine, investigate and establish anything?? Power is in the hands of a military dictatorship. 
 Without a new revolution, this power can only become stronger fora certain time, primarily for the duration of the war. 
 “I’ve done nothing against the law. 
 The courts are just. 
 They will sort things out. 
 The trial will be public. 
 Thepeople will understand. 
 I shall appear. 
” This reasoning is childishly naive. 
 The authorities need not a trial but a persecution campaign against the interna-tionalists. 
 What Kerensky and Co. 
 need is to put them ingaol and keep them there. 
 So it was (in Britain and France),and so it will be (in Russia). 
 Let the internationalists work illegally as much as they can, but let them not commit the folly of appearing in court of their own free will! Written on July 8 (21), 1917 First published in the magazine Published according to Proletarskaya Revolyutsia the manuscript No. 
 1 (36), 1925 THE POLITICA L SITUATI ON77 FOUR THESES 1. 
 The counter-revolution has become organised and con-solidated, and has actually taken state power into its hands. 
 The complete organisation and consolidation of the coun-ter-revolution consists in a combination of its three main forces, a combination excellently conceived and alreadyput into practice: (1. 
) The Constitutional-Democratic Party,i. 
e. 
, the real leader of the organised bourgeoisie, has, bywithdrawing from the Cabinet, confronted it with an ulti-matum, thus clearing the way for the Cabinet’s overthrow by the counter-revolution; (2. 
) The General Staff and themilitary leaders, with the deliberate or semi-deliberateassistance of Kerensky, whom even the most prominentSocialist-Revolutionaries now call a Cavaignac, have seizedactual state power and have proceeded to shoot down revolu-tionary units at the front, disarm the revolutionary troops and workers in Petrograd and Moscow, suppress unrest inNizhni-Novgorod, arrest Bolsheviks and ban their papers,not only without trial, but even without a governmentorder. 
 At present, basic state power in Russia is virtuallya military dictatorship. 
 This fact is still obscured by a num-ber of institutions that are revolutionary in words but power-less in deeds. 
 Yet it is so obvious and fundamental a factthat, without understanding it, one cannot understand any-thing about the political situation. 
 (3. 
) The Black Hundred-monarchist and bourgeois press, which has switched fromhounding Bolsheviks to hounding the Soviets, the “incen-diary” Chernov, etc. 
, has indicated with the utmost clarity that the true meaning of the policy of military dictatorship,which now reigns supreme and is supported by the Cadets and monarchists, is preparation for disbanding the Soviets. 
 Many of the leaders of the S. 
R. 
s and Mensheviks, i. 
e. 
, the present majority in the Soviets, have admitted and expressed this during the past few days, but, true to their petty-bourgeois nature, they shrug off this formidable realitywith meaningless high-sounding phrases. 
 2. 
 The leaders of the Soviets and of the Socialist-Revo-lutionary and Menshevik parties, headed by Tsereteli and Chernov, have completely betrayed the cause of the revolu-tion by putting it in the hands of the counter-revolution-aries and by turning themselves, their parties and theSoviets into mere fig-leaves of the counter-revolution. 
 Proof of this is that the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks have betrayed the Bolsheviks and have tacit-ly agreed to close down their papers without daring to tell the people plainly and openly that they are doing so andwhy. 
 By sanctioning the disarming of the workers and therevolutionary regiments, they have deprived themselves ofall real power. 
 They have turned into the most loud-mouthedranters who help the reaction to “divert” the people’s attention until it is finally ready to disband the Soviets. 
 It is impossible to understand anything at all about thepresent political situation without realising this completeand final bankruptcy of the S. 
R. 
s and Mensheviks and thepresent majority in the Soviets and without realising thattheir “Directory” and other masquerades are an absolute sham. 
 3. 
 All hopes for a peaceful development of the Russian revolution have vanished for good. 
 This is the objectivesituation: either complete victory for the military dic-tatorship, or victory for the workers’ armed uprising; thelatter victory is only possible when it coincides with a deep mass upheaval against the government and the bourgeoisie caused by economic disruption and the prolongation of thewar. 
 The slogan “All Power to the Soviets!” was a slogan for peaceful development of the revolution which was pos-sible in April, May, June, and up to July 5-9, i. 
e. 
, up to the time when actual power passed into the hands of the military dictatorship. 
 This slogan is no longer correct,for it does not take into account that power has changed hands and that the revolution has in fact been completely betrayed by the S. 
R. 
s and Mensheviks. 
 Reckless actions, revolts, partial resistance, or hopeless hit-and-run attempts to oppose reaction will not help. 
 What will help is a clearunderstanding of the situation, endurance and determinationof the workers’ vanguard, preparation of forces for the armeduprising, for the victory of which conditions at present areextremely difficult, but still possible if the facts and trends mentioned in the thesis coincide. 
 Let us have no constitu-tional or republican illusions of any kind, no more illusionsabout a peaceful path, no sporadic actions, no yielding nowto provocation from the Black Hundreds and Cossacks. 
Let us muster our forces, reorganise them, and resolutelyprepare for the armed uprising, if the course of the crisis permits it on a really mass, country-wide scale. 
 The transfer of land to the peasants is impossible at present without anarmed uprising, since the counter-revolutionaries, havingtaken power, have completely united with the landownersas a class. 
 The aim of the insurrection can only be to transfer power to the proletariat, supported by the poor peasants, with a view to putting our Party programme into effect. 
 4. 
 The party of the working class, without abandoning legal activity but never for a moment overrating it, mustcombine legal with illegal work, as it did in 1912-14. 
 Don’t let a single hour of legal work slip by. 
 But don’t cherish any constitutional or “peaceful” illusions. 
 Form ille-gal organisations or cells everywhere and at once for thepublication of leaflets, etc. 
 Reorganise immediately, con-sistently, resolutely, all along the line. 
 Act as we did in 1912-14, when we could speak about overthrowing tsarism by a revolution and an armed upris-ing, without at the same time losing our legal base in the Duma, the insurance societies, the trade unions, etc. 
 Written on July 10 (23), 1917 Published on August 2 (July 20), Published according to 1917 , in Proletarskoye Dyelo No. 
 6 the manuscript Signed: W LETTER TO THE EDITORS OF NOVAYA ZHIZN Permit us, comrades, to turn to your hospitality on account of the forced suspension of our Party paper. 
 Cer-tain papers have begun a furious baiting campaign against us, accusing us of espionage or of communicating with an enemy government. 
 The extraordinary thoughtlessness (an inappropriate and much too weak a word) with which this baiting is conductedmay be seen from the following plain facts. 
 Zhivoye Slovo first published a statement that Lenin was a spy. 
 Then, in a “correction” which is supposed not to change anything, it declared that he was not accused of spying! First thepaper came out with Yermolenko’s testimony, then it wascompelled to admit that it is downright awkward andshameful to see such a person’s testimony as evidence. 
 The name of Parvus is dragged in, without mentioning, however, that no one denounced Parvus as sharply and mercilessly, as far back as 1915, as the Geneva Sotsial-Demokrat , which we edited and which, in an article entitled “The Uttermost Limit”, branded Parvus as “a renegade”“licking Hindenburg’s boots”, * etc. 
 Every literate person knows, or can easily find out, that all political or other rela-tions between ourselves and Parvus are completely out of the question. 
 The name of one Sumenson is trotted out, a woman with whom we have never even met, let alone had anything to do. 
Business enterprises of Hanecki and Kozlovsky are alsodragged in, but not a single fact is mentioned as to where, how and when the business was a screen for espionage. 
 *See present edition, Vol. 
 21, pp. 
 421-22. 
— Ed. 
 Not only have we never participated directly or indirectly in business enterprises, but we have never received from any of the above comrades a single kopek either for our-selves personally or for the Party. 
 They go so far as to blame us for Pravda dispatches being reprinted in a distorted fashion by German newspapers,but they “forget” to mention that Pravda issues German and French bulletins abroad and that the reprinting of material from these bulletins is entirely free. 
 78 And all this is done with the participation and even on the initiative of Alexinsky, who has not been admittedto the Soviet, who, in other words, has been recognised asan obvious slanderer!! Is it really impossible to under-stand that such , methods against us are tantamount to legal assassination ? The Central Executive Committee’s discus-sion of the conditions on which the Committee’s memberscould be brought to court undoubtedly introduces an ele-ment of orderliness. 
 79 Will the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties want to participate in an attempt atlegal assassination? Will they want to take part in an attempt to put us on trial without even indicating whether we are accused of espionage or mutiny, in an attempt to put us ontrial without any precise indictment at all? Will they wantto take part in an attempt to stage an obviously unfair trialwhich may handicap their own candidates in the Consti-tuent Assembly elections? Will those parties want to make the eve of the convocation of a Constituent Assembly in Russia the beginning of a Dreyfusiad on Russian soil? The near future will give an answer to these questions which we deem it the duty of the free press to raise openly. 
 We are not talking about the bourgeois press. 
 Of course, Milyukov believes in our espionage or in our acceptance of German money about as much as Markov and Zamyslov-sky believed that Jews drink children’s blood. 
 But Milyukov and Co. 
 know what they are doing. 
 N. 
 Lenin Novaya Zhizn No. 
 71, Published according to July 11 (24), 1917 the text in Novaya Zhizn LETTER TO THE EDITORS OF PROLETARSKOYE DYELO Comrades, We have changed our minds about submitting to the Provisional Government’s decree ordering our arrests, for the following reasons. 
 From the letter of Pereverzev, the former Minister of Justice, published on Sunday in Novoye Vremya , it became perfectly clear that the “espionage” “case” of Lenin andothers was quite deliberately framed by the party of the counter-revolution. 
 Pereverzev has openly admitted that he took advantage of unconfirmed accusations to work up (his actual expres-sion) the soldiers against our Party. 
 This is admitted bythe former Minister of Justice, a man who only yesterdaycalled himself a socialist! Pereverzev is gone, but whether the new Minister of Justice will hesitate to adopt Pereverzev’s and Alexinsky’s methods, nobody can venture to say. 
 The counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie are trying to create a new Dreyfus case. 
 They believe in our “espionage” asmuch as the leaders of Russian reaction, who framed theBeilis case, 80 believed that Jews drink children’s blood. 
 There are no guarantees of justice in Russia at present. 
 The Central Executive Committee, which considers it-self the plenipotentiary organ of the Russian democrats,appointed a commission to investigate the espionage charges,but under pressure from the counter-revolutionary forcesdismissed it. 
 The Central Executive Committee refused to either directly confirm or to revoke the warrant for our arrest. 
 It washed its hands of the case, virtually deliveringus to the counter-revolution. 
 The charges of “conspiracy” and “moral incitement” to revolt preferred against us are of a very definite nature, but no precise indictment of our alleged crime is brought either by the Provisional Government or by the Soviet, bothof which know full well that it is sheer nonsense to speakof “conspiracy” in referring to a movement like that ofJuly 3 -5. 
 The Menshevik and S. 
R. 
 leaders are simply trying to appease the counter-revolution that is already bearing down on them too, by delivering a number of our Party mem-bers to the counter-revolutionaries in compliance with theirdemand. 
 At present there can be no legal basis in Russia,not even such constitutional guarantees as exist in theorderly bourgeois countries. 
 To give ourselves up at presentto the authorities would mean putting ourselves into the hands of the Milyukovs, Alexinskys, Pereverzevs, of rampant counter-revolutionaries who look upon all the chargesagainst us as a simple civil war episode. 
 After what happened on July 6 -8, not a single Russian revolutionary can harbour constitutional illusions anylonger. 
 Revolution and counter-revolution are coming to grips in a decisive fashion. 
 We shall continue to fight on the side of the former. 
 We shall continue to aid the proletariat’s revolutionary struggle as far as we can. 
 The Constituent Assembly alone,if it meets, and if its convocation is not the handiworkof the bourgeoisie, will have full authority to pass judge-ment upon the Provisional Government’s decree ordering our arrest. 
 N. 
 Lenin Proletarskoye Dyelo No. 
 2, Published according to the text July 28 (15), 1917 in Proletarskoye Dyelo ON SLOGANS Too often has it happened that, when history has taken a sharp turn, even progressive parties have for some time been unable to adapt themselves to the new situation and have repeated slogans which had formerly been correct buthad now lost all meaning—lost it as “suddenly” as thesharp turn in history was “sudden”. 
 Something of the sort seems likely to recur in connection with the slogan calling for the transfer of all state power to the Soviets. 
 That slogan was correct during a period of our revolution—say, from February 27 to July 4—that hasnow passed irrevocably. 
 It has patently ceased to be correctnow. 
 Unless this is understood, it is impossible to understandanything of the urgent questions of the day. 
 Every partic-ular slogan must be deduced from the totality of specific features of a definite political situation. 
 And the political situation in Russia now, after July 4, differs radicallyfrom the situation between February 27 and July 4. 
 During that period of the revolution now past, the so-called “dual power” existed in the country, which both mate-rially and formally expressed the indefinite and transitional condition of state power. 
 Let us not forget that the issue of power is the fundamental issue of every revolution. 
 At that time state power was unstable. 
 It was shared, by voluntary agreement, between the Provisional Govern-ment and the Soviets. 
 The Soviets were delegations fromthe mass of free—i. 
e. 
, not subject to external coercion—and armed workers and soldiers. 
 What really mattered was that arms were in the hands of the people and that there wasno coercion of the people from without. 
 That is what opened up and ensured a peaceful path for the progress of the revo-lution. 
 The slogan “All Power Must Be Transferred to the Soviets” was a slogan for the next step, the immediately feasible step, on that peaceful path of development. 
 It wasa slogan for the peaceful development of the revolution,which was possible and, of course, most desirable betweenFebruary 27 and July 4 but which is now absolutely im-possible. 
 Apparently, not all the supporters of the slogan “All Power Must Be Transferred to the Soviets” have givenadequate thought to the fact that it was a slogan for peace-ful progress of the revolution—peaceful not only in thesense that nobody, no class, no force of any importance,would then (between February 27 and July 4) have been able to resist and prevent the transfer of power to the So-viets. 
 That is not all. 
 Peaceful development would thenhave been possible, even in the sense that the struggle ofclasses and parties within the Soviets could have assumed a most peaceful and painless form, provided full state powerhad passed to the Soviets in good time. 
 The latter aspect of the matter has similarly not yet re-ceived adequate attention. 
 In their class composition, theSoviets were organs of the movement of the workers andpeasants, a ready-made form of their dictatorship. 
 Hadthey possessed full state power, the main shortcoming ofthe petty-bourgeois groups, their chief sin, that of trusting the capitalists, really would have been overcome, would have been criticised by the experience of their own mea-sures. 
 The change of classes and parties in power could haveproceeded peacefully within the Soviets, provided the latterwielded exclusive and undivided power. 
 The contact betweenall the Soviet parties and the people could have remained stable and unimpaired. 
 One must not forget for a single moment that only such a close contact between the Sovietparties and the people, freely growing in extent and depth,could have helped peacefully to get rid of the illusion ofpetty-bourgeois compromise with the bourgeoisie. 
 The trans-fer of power to the Soviets would not, and could not, in itself have changed the correlation of classes; it would in no way have changed the petty-bourgeois nature of the peas-ants. 
 But it would have taken a big and timely step towards separating the peasants from the bourgeoisie, towards bringing them closer to, and then uniting them with, the workers. 
 This is what might have happened had power passed to the Soviets at the proper time. 
 That would have been the easiestand the most advantageous course for the people. 
 This coursewould have been the least painful, and it was therefore neces-sary to fight for it most energetically. 
 Now, however, thisstruggle, the struggle for the timely transfer of power to the Soviets, has ended. 
 A peaceful course of development has become impossible. 
 A non-peaceful and most painful coursehas begun. 
 The turning-point of July 4 was precisely a drastic change in the objective situation. 
 The unstable condition of statepower has come to an end. 
 At the decisive point, power has passed into the hands of the counter-revolution. 
 The develop-ment of the parties on the basis of the collaboration of thepetty-bourgeois Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik par-ties and the counter-revolutionary Cadets has brought abouta situation in which both these petty-bourgeois parties havevirtually become participants in and abettors of counter-revolutionary butchery. 
 As the struggle between parties developed, the unreasoning trust which the petty bourgeoi-sie put in the capitalists led to their deliberate support ofthe counter-revolutionaries. 
 The development of party rela-tions has completed its cycle. 
 On February 27, all classesfound themselves united against the monarchy. 
 After July 4, the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie, working hand in glove with the monarchists and the Black Hundreds, securedthe support of the petty-bourgeois Socialist-Revolution-aries and Mensheviks, partly by intimidating them, andhanded over real state power to the Cavaignacs, the mili-tary gang, who are shooting insubordinate soldiers at the front and smashing the Bolsheviks in Petrograd. 
 The slogan calling for the transfer of state power to the Soviets would now sound quixotic or mocking. 
 Objectivelyit would be deceiving the people; it would be fostering inthem the delusion that even now it is enough for the Soviets to want to take power, or to pass such a decision, for power to be theirs, that there are still parties in the Soviets which have not been tainted by abetting the butchers, that it ispossible to undo what has been done. 
 It would be a profound error to think that the revolu-tionary proletariat is capable of “refusing” to support the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks against the coun-ter-revolution by way of “revenge”, so to speak, for thesupport they gave in smashing the Bolsheviks, in shootingdown soldiers at the front and in disarming the workers. 
First, this would be applying philistine conceptions ofmorality to the proletariat (since, for the good of the cause , the proletariat will always support not only the vacillating petty bourgeoisie but even the big bourgeoisie); secondly—and that is the important thing—it would be a philistineattempt to obscure the political substance of the situationby “moralising”. 
 And the political substance is that power can no longer be taken peacefully. 
 It can be obtained only by winning a decisive struggle against those actually in power at themoment, namely, the military gang, the Cavaignacs, who arerelying for support on the reactionary troops brought toPetrograd and on the Cadets and monarchists. 
 The substance of the situation is that these new holders of state power can be defeated-only by the revolutionary masses, who, to be brought into motion, must not only be ledby the proletariat, but must also turn their backs on theSocialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties, which havebetrayed the cause of the revolution. 
 Those who introduce philistine morals into politics reason as follows: let us assume that the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks did commit an “error” in supporting theCavaignacs, who are disarming the proletariat and therevolutionary regiments; still, they must be given a chanceto “rectify” their “error”; the rectification of the “error”“should not be made difficult” for them; the swing of the petty bourgeoisie towards the workers should be facilitated. 
 Such reasoning would be childishly naïve or simply stupid,if not a new deception of the workers. 
 For the swing of thepetty-bourgeois masses towards the workers would mean, andcould only mean, that these masses had turned their backsupon the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties could now rectify their “error” only by denouncing Tsereteli, Chernov,Dan and Rakitnikov as the butchers’ aides. 
 We are wholly and unconditionally in favour of their “error” being “recti-fied” in this way .... 
 We said that the fundamental issue of revolution is the issue of power. 
 We must add that it is revolutions that showus at every step how the question of where actual power lies is obscured, and reveal the divergence between formal andreal power. 
 That is one of the chief characteristics of everyrevolutionary period. 
 It was not clear in March and April 1917 whether real power was in the hands of the government or the Soviet. 
 Now, however, it is particularly important for class-conscious workers to soberly face the fundamental issue ofrevolution, namely, who holds state power at the moment?Consider its material manifestations, do not mistake words for deeds, and you will have no difficulty in finding the answer. 
 Frederick Engels once wrote the state is primarily con-tingents of armed men with material adjuncts, such asprisons. 
 81 Now it is the military cadets and the reactionary Cossacks, who have been specially brought to Petrograd, those who are keeping Kamenev and the others in prison, who closed down Pravda , who disarmed the workers and a certain section of the soldiers, who are shooting down anequally certain section of the soldiers, who are shootingdown an equally certain section of troops in the army. 
These butchers are the real power. 
 The Tseretelis and Cher-novs are ministers without power, puppet Ministers, leaders of parties that support the butchery. 
 That is a fact. 
 And thefact is no less true because Tsereteli and Chernov themselvesprobably “do not approve” of the butchery, or because theirpapers timidly dissociate themselves from it. 
 Such changesof political garb change nothing in substance. 
 The newspaper of 150,000 Petrograd voters has been closed down. 
 The military cadets on July 6 killed the workerVoinov for carrying Listok “Pravdy ” out of the printers’. 
 Isn’t that butchery? Isn’t that the handiwork of Cavaignacs?But neither the government nor the Soviets are to “blame”for this, they may tell us. 
 So much the worse for the government and the Soviets, we reply; for that means that they are mere figureheads, puppets,and that real power is not in their hands. 
 Primarily, and above all, the people must know the truth —they must know who actually wields state power. 
 The people must be told the whole truth, namely, that power is in the hands of a military clique of Cavaignacs(Kerensky, certain generals, officers, etc. 
), who are supportedby the bourgeois class headed by the Cadet Party, and byall the monarchists, acting through the Black Hundredpapers, Novoye Vremya , Zhivoye Slovo , etc. 
, etc. 
 That power must be overthrown. 
 Unless this is done, all talk of fighting the counter-revolution is so much phrase-mongering, “self-deception and deception of the people”. 
 That power now has the support both of the Tseretelis and Chernovs in the Cabinet and of their parties. 
 We mustexplain to the people the butcher’s role they are playing and the fact that such a “finale” for these parties was inevitable after their “errors” of April 21, May 5, June 9 and July 4and after their approval of the policy of an offensive, apolicy which went nine-tenths of the way to predeterminingthe victory of the Cavaignacs in July. 
 All agitational work among the people must be reorganised to ensure that it takes account of the specific experience of the present revolution, and particularly of the July days,i. 
e. 
, that it clearly points to the real enemy of the people,the military clique, the Cadets and the Black Hundreds, andthat it definitely unmasks the petty-bourgeois parties, theSocialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties, which played and are playing the part of butcher’s aides. 
 All agitational work among the people must be reorganised so as to make clear that it is absolutely hopeless to expectthe peasants to obtain land as long as the power of the mili-tary clique has not been overthrown, and as long as theSocialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties have not been exposed and deprived of the people’s trust. 
 That would be a very long and arduous process under the “normal” condi-tions of capitalist development, but both the war and eco-nomic disruption will tremendously accelerate it. 
 Theseare “accelerators” that may make a month or even a weekequal to a year. 
 Two objections may perhaps be advanced against what has been said above: first, that to speak now of a decisive struggleis to encourage sporadic action, which would only benefit the counter-revolutionaries; second, that their overthrow would still mean transferring power to the Soviets. 
 In answer to the first objection, we say: the workers of Russia are already class-conscious enough not to yield toprovocation at a moment which is obviously unfavourableto them. 
 It is indisputable that for them to take action andoffer resistance at the moment would mean aiding the coun-ter-revolutionaries. 
 It is also indisputable that a decisive struggle will be possible only in the event of a new revolu-tionary upsurge in the very depths of the masses. 
 But it isnot enough to speak in general terms of a revolutionaryupsurge, of the rising tide of revolution, of aid by the West-European workers, and so forth; we must draw a definiteconclusion from our past, from the lessons we have been given. 
 And that will lead us to the slogan of a decisive struggle against the counter-revolutionaries, who haveseized power. 
 The second objection also amounts to a substitution of arguments of too general a character for concrete realities. 
No one, no force, can overthrow the bourgeois counter-revolutionaries except the revolutionary proletariat. 
 Now, after the experience of July 1917, it is the revolutionaryproletariat that must independently take over state power. 
Without that the victory of the revolution is impossible . 
 The only solution is for power to be in the hands of the pro-letariat, and for the latter to be supported by the poor peasants or semi-proletarians. 
 And we have already indicated the factors that can enormously accelerate this solution. 
 Soviets may appear in this new revolution, and indeed are bound to, but not the present Soviets, not organs collab-orating with the bourgeoisie, but organs of revolutionarystruggle against the bourgeoisie. 
 It is true that even then we shall be in favour of building the whole state on the model of the Soviets. 
 It is not a question of Soviets in general, butof combating the present counter-revolution and the treach-ery of the present Soviets. 
 The substitution of the abstract for the concrete is one of the greatest and most dangerous sins in a revolution. 
 The present Soviets have failed, have suffered complete defeat, because they are dominated by the Socialist-Revolutionaryand Menshevik parties. 
 At the moment these Soviets are like sheep brought to the slaughterhouse and bleating pitifully under the knife. 
 The Soviets at present are powerless and helpless against the triumphant and triumphing coun-ter-revolution. 
 The slogan calling for the transfer of powerto the Soviets might be construed as a “simple” appeal forthe transfer of power to the present Soviets, and to say that,to appeal for it, would now mean deceiving the people. 
Nothing is more dangerous than deceit. 
 The cycle of development of the class and party struggle in Russia from February 27 to July 4 is complete. 
 A new cycleis beginning, one that involves not the old classes, not theold parties, not the old Soviets, but classes, parties andSoviets rejuvenated in the fire of struggle, tempered,schooled and refashioned by the process of the struggle. 
 We must look forward, not backward. 
 We must operate not with the old, but with the new, post-July, class andparty categories. 
 We must, at the beginning of the newcycle, proceed from the triumphant bourgeois counter-revo-lution, which triumphed because the Socialist-Revolution-aries and Mensheviks compromised with it, and which can be defeated only by the revolutionary proletariat. 
 Of course, in this new cycle there will be many and various stages,both before the complete victory of the counter-revolutionand the complete defeat (without a struggle) of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, and before a new upsurgeof a new revolution. 
 But it will only be possible to speak of this later, as each of these stages is reached. 
 Written in mid-July 1917 Published in pamphlet form Published according to in 1917 by the Kronstadt Committee the pamphlet text of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
) OUR THANKS TO PRINCE G. 
 Y. 
 LVOV In a farewell talk to members of the Committee of Jour-nalists under the Provisional Government, Prince G. 
 Y. 
 Lvov, former head of the Provisional Government, made some valuable admissions for which the workers will cer-tainly be grateful. 
 “What strengthens my optimism above all else,” Lvov said, “are the events of the past few days inside the country. 
 I am convinced that our ‘deep breach’ in the Lenin front is incomparably more signif-icant for Russia than the German breach in our South-Western Front. 
” How can the workers not be grateful to the prince for this sober appraisal of the class struggle? They will bemore than grateful, they will take a lesson from Lvov. 
 What an endless flow of fine words and infinite hypoc-risy all the bourgeois people and landowners, as well as the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks trailing after them, pour out while orating against “civil war”! But lookat Prince Lvov’s valuable admission and you will see thathe very calmly appraises Russia’s internal situation fromthe point of view of civil war. 
 What the paltry truth of theprince’s admissions amounts to is that the bourgeoisie, which head the counter-revolution, have made a deep breach in the revolutionary workers’ front. 
 Two enemies, two hos-tile camps, and one has made a breach in the front of theother—this is how Prince Lvov sums up Russia’s inter-nal situation. 
 Let us, then, give Prince Lvov our heartfeltthanks for his frankness! After all, he is a thousand times more correct than those sentimental Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik philistines who imagine that the class strugglebetween the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, which inevi-tably becomes exceedingly aggravated during a revolution, is likely to disappear because of their curses and magic spells! Two enemies, two hostile camps, and one has made a breach in the front of the other—this is Prince Lvov’scorrect philosophy of history. 
 He is right in practicallydiscounting the thira camp, the petty bourgeoisie, theSocialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks. 
 This third camp appears to be big, but, in fact, it cannot decide anything independently. 
 That is clear to the sober-minded prince,just as it is clear to every Marxist who understands theeconomic position of the pe tty bourgeoisie, and as it isclear, lastly, to anyone who thinks about the lessons ofthe revolution’s history, which have always revealed the impotence of the petty-bourgeois parties whenever the struggle between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat becameacute. 
 Even in war-time, the internal class struggle is far more important than the struggle against the foreign enemy. 
What savage abuse the big and petty bourgeoisie have hurled at the Bolsheviks for recognising this truth! What efforts to deny it have been made by the numerous lovers of alluringwords about “unity”, “revolutionary democracy”, and so on,and so forth! But when a serious and decisive moment came, Prince Lvov at once fully admitted this truth, openly declaring that a “victory” over the class enemy at home was more important than the position in the struggle against theforeign enemy. 
 An incontestable truth. 
 A useful truth. 
The workers will be very grateful to Prince Lvov for ad-mitting it, for reminding them of it, for spreading it around. 
And to express their gratitude to the prince, the workers will use their Party to see that the greatest number of working and exploited people understand and assimilatethis truth as well as possible. 
 Nothing is more useful tothe working class in the struggle for emancipation thanthis truth. 
 What is this “breach” in the civil war front which Prince Lvov is so triumphant about? This question must be dealt with very carefully if the workers are to learn well fromLvov. 
 The “breach in the front” of the internal war on this occasion came, firstly, from the fact that the bourgeoisie had poured oceans of filth and slander on their class ene-mies, the Bolsheviks, and had shown exceptional tenacityin this really infamous and vile business of slandering theirpolitical opponents. 
 It was the “ideological preparation”,if we may call it that, for the “breach in the front of theclass struggle”. 
 Secondly, the material and really essential “breach” came from the arrest and outlawing of people of hostilepolitical trends, from the murder of some of them in thestreet without trial (Voinov was murdered on July 6 forcarrying publications out of the Pravda printers’), from the closing down of their newspapers and the disarming of the workers and revolutionary soldiers. 
 This is what the “breach in the front of the war against the class enemy” means. 
 Let the workers think this overwell so as to be able to apply it to the bourgeoisie whenthe time is ripe. 
 The proletariat will never resort to slander. 
 They will close down the bourgeoisie’s newspapers after openly declar-ing by law, by government decree, that the capitalistsand their defenders are enemies of the people. 
 The bourgeoi-sie, in the shape of our enemy, the government, and thepetty bourgeoisie, in the shape of the Soviets, are afraidto say a single open and frank word about the ban on Pravda , about the reason for closing it down. 
 The proletariat will tell the truth instead of resorting to slander. 
 They will tellthe peasants and everyone else the truth about the bourgeoisnewspapers and why they must be closed down. 
 Unlike the petty-bourgeois—Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik—windbags, the proletariat will know very well what is actually meant by a “breach in the front” of the class struggle and by making the enemy, the exploiters,harmless. 
 Prince Lvov has helped the workers realise thistruth. 
 Thank you, Prince Lvov. 
 Proletarskoye Dyelo No. 
 5, Published according to the text August 1 (July 19), 1917 in Proletarskoye Dyelo CONSTITUTIONA L ILLUSION S82 Constitutional illusions are what we call a political error when people believe in the existence of a normal, juridical, orderly and legalised—in short, “constitutional”—system, although it does not really exist. 
 At first glanceit may appear that in Russia today, July 1917, when noconstitution has yet been drafted, there can be no question of constitutional illusions arising. 
 But it would be very wrong to think so. 
 In reality, the essential characteristicof the present political situation in Russia is that an extre-mely large number of people entertain constitutional illu-sions. 
 It is impossible to understand anything about thepolitical situation in Russia today without appreciating this. 
 Positively no step can be taken towards a correct for-mulation of our tactical tasks in Russia today unless weabove all concentrate on systematically and ruthlessly ex-posing constitutional illusions, revealing all their roots andre-establishing a proper political perspective. 
 Let us take three ideas which are most typical of the current constitutional illusions, and look into them care-fully. 
 Idea No. 
 1 is that our country is about to have a Constit-uent Assembly; therefore, everything going on now is tem-porary, transitory, inessential and non-decisive, and every-thing will soon be revised and firmly regulated by the Constituent Assembly. 
 Idea No. 
 2 is that certain parties, such as the Socialist-Revolutionaries or the Mensheviks,or their alliance, command an obvious and undisputed majority among the people or in “the most influential” institutions, such as the Soviets; therefore, the will of these parties and institutions, like the will of the majority of the people in general, cannot be ignored, and even less violated,in republican, democratic and revolutionary Russia. 
 IdeaNo. 
 3 is that a certain measure , such as closing down Pravda , was not legalised either by the Provisional Government orby the Soviets; therefore, it was only a passing phase, a chance occurrence, which cannot at all be regarded as something decisive. 
 Let us look into each of these ideas. 
 I The first Provisional Government promised to convene a Constituent Assembly. 
 It considered that its main jobwas to prepare the country for a Constituent Assembly. 
 Thesecond Provisional Government fixed September 30 for con-vening a Constituent Assembly. 
 The third ProvisionalGovernment, after July 4, solemnly reaffirmed that date. 
 Nevertheless, the chances are a hundred to one against the Constituent Assembly being convened on that date. 
 Andeven if it is, the chances are again a hundred to one thatit will be as impotent and useless as was the First Duma—until a second revolution triumphs in Russia. 
 To appreciatethis, you only have to detach yourself for a moment from the present hubbub of empty phrases, promises and petty doings which fuddles your thinking, and take a look at themain thing, at what determines everything in public life—the class struggle. 
 It is clear that the bourgeoisie in Russia have become very closely tied up with the landowners. 
 This is shown by the whole press, the elections, the entire policy of the Cadet Party and the parties to the right of it, and by speechesmade at “congresses” of “interested” persons. 
 The bour-geoisie understand perfectly what the petty-bourgeoisSocialist-Revolutionary and “Left” Menshevik windbags can-not understand, namely, that private landownership in Russia cannot be abolished, and this without compensation, except by carrying through a gigantic economic revolution,by bringing the banks under popular control, by national-ising the syndicates and adopting the most ruthless revolu-tionary measures against capital. 
 The bourgeoisie under-stand that perfectly. 
 At the same time, however, they must know, see and feel that the vast majority of peasants inRussia will now be much more to the left than Chernov aswell as declaring for confiscation of the landed estates. 
 Forthe bourgeoisie know better than we do, both as to how manypartial concessions were made them by Chernov, say, from May 6 to July 2, over delaying and curtailing the various peasant demands, and as to how much effort it took theRight Socialist-Revolutionaries (Chernov, believe it or not, is regarded as a “centre” man by the Socialist-Revo-lutionaries!) at the Peasant Congress and on the Exe-cutive Committee of the All-Russia Congress of Peasants’ Deputies to “reassure” the peasants and feed them on pro-mises. 
 The big bourgeoisie differ from the petty bourgeoisie in that they have learned, from their economic and politicalexperience, the conditions under which “order” (i. 
e. 
, keepingdown the people) can be preserved under capitalism. 
 The bourgeoisie are businessmen, people who make big com-mercial transactions and are accustomed to getting downeven to political matters in a strictly business-like manner. 
They take the bull by the horns rather than putting theirtrust in words. 
 The Constituent Assembly in Russia today will yield a majority to peasants who are more to the left than the Socialist-Revolutionaries. 
 The bourgeoisie know this andtherefore are bound to put up a tremendous resistance to anearly convocation. 
 With a Constituent Assembly convened, it will be impossible, or exceedingly difficult, to carry on theimperialist war in the spirit of the secret treaties concluded by Nicholas II, or to defend the landed estates or the payment of compensation for them. 
 The war will notwait. 
 The class struggle will not wait. 
 This was evidentenough even in the brief span from February 28 toApril 21. 
 From the very beginning of the revolution there have been two views on the Constituent Assembly. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, completely swayed byconstitutional illusions, viewed the matter with the cred-ulity of the petty bourgeoisie who will not hear of the class struggle: the Constituent Assembly has been proclaimed, there will be a Constituent Assembly and that’s all there is to it! Everything else is of the devil’s making. 
Meanwhile the Bolsheviks said: only the growing strengthand authority of the Soviets can guarantee the convocationand success of the Constituent Assembly. 
 The Mensheviksand Socialist-Revolutionaries laid emphasis on the act of law: the proclamation, the promise, the declaration to call a Constituent Assembly. 
 The Bolsheviks laid emphasis onthe class struggle: if the Soviets were to win, the ConstituentAssembly would be certain to meet; if not, there would beno such certainty. 
 That is exactly what happened. 
 The bourgeoisie have all along been waging both in the open and under cover a continuous and relentless struggle against calling a Con-stituent Assembly. 
 This struggle was prompted by a desireto delay its convocation until after the war. 
 It expresseditself in the fact that several times they postponed the dateof convocation. 
 When, after June 18, or more than a month after the formation of the coalition Cabinet, the convoca-tion date was at last set, a Moscow bourgeois paper declaredthis had been done under the pressure of Bolshevik propagan-da. 
 Pravda has published an exact quotation from that paper. 
 After July 4, when the servility and timidity of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks had led to the “victory” of the counter-revolution, a brief but highly sig-nificant phrase—the “impossibly early” convocation of aConstituent Assembly!!—slipped into Rech . 
 And on July 16, an item appeared in Volya Naroda and Russkaya Volya , saying that the Cadets insisted on postponing the convoca-tion of the Constituent Assembly under the pretext that it was “impossible” to convene it at such “short” notice, andadding that the Menshevik Tsereteli, a lackey of the coun-ter-revolution, had consented to its postponement untilNovember 20! Undoubtedly, this item slipped in against the will of the bourgeoisie who cannot benefit from such “revelations”. 
 But murder will out. 
 The counter-revolutionaries, lettingthemselves go after July 4, blurted out the truth. 
 The very first seizure of power by the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie after July 4 was immediately followed by a measure (a very serious measure) against calling a Con-stituent Assembly. 
 That is a fact. 
 And that fact reveals the utter futility of constitutional illusions. 
 Unless a new revolution takesplace in Russia, unless the power of the counter-revolution-ary bourgeoisie (primarily the Cadets) is overthrown, and unless the people withdraw their trust from the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties, parties compromisingwith the bourgeoisie, the Constituent Assembly will eithernever meet, or else will be just a “Frankfurt talking shop”, 83 an impotent and worthless assembly of petty bourgeoispeople frightened to death by the war and the prospect of the bourgeoisie “boycotting the government”, and helplessly torn between frantic efforts to rule without the bourgeoisieand the fear of getting along without them. 
 The Constituent Assembly issue is subordinate to that of the course and outcome of the class struggle between thebourgeoisie and the proletariat. 
 Some time ago, Rabochaya Gazeta blurted out the remark that the Constituent Assembly would be a Convention. 
 This is an example of the empty,wretched and contemptible bragging of our Mensheviklackeys of the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie. 
 If it is notto be a “Frankfurt talking shop” or a First Duma, if it isto be a Convention, it must have the courage, the capacity and the strength to strike merciless blows at the counter-revolutionaries instead of compromising with them. 
 For thispurpose power must be in the hands of the most advanced,most determined and most revolutionary class of today. 
For this purpose that class must be supported by the wholemass of the urban and rural poor (the semi-proletarians). 
 For this purpose the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie, i. 
e. 
, primarily the Cadets and the high-ranking army officers,must be dealt with mercilessly. 
 These are the real, the class,the material conditions necessary for a Convention. 
 Youhave only to list these conditions in a precise and clear wayto understand the stupidity of Rabochaya Gazeta ’s bragging and the utter foolishness of the constitutional illusions of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks regarding aConstituent Assembly in Russia today. 
 II When lashing the petty-bourgeois “Social-Democrats” of 1848, Marx was particularly severe in his condemnation oftheir unrestrained use of empty phrases about “the people”and the majority of the people in general. 
 84 It is well to recall this in examining the second idea, in analysing con-stitutional illusions about a “majority”. 
 For the majority in the state to really decide, definite conditions are required, one of which is the firm establish-ment of a political system, a form of state power, makingit possible to decide matters by a majority and guaranteeingthe translation of this possibility into reality. 
 That is onething. 
 Another is that the class composition of this majority and the interrelation of classes inside (and outside) it should enable it to draw the chariot of state concertedly and effec-tively. 
 Every Marxist knows that these two concrete condi-tions play a decisive part in the question of a popular major-ity and of the direction of state affairs in line with the willof the majority. 
 And yet the political literature of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, and their polit-ical conduct even more so, betray a complete lack of un-derstanding of these conditions. 
 If political power in the state is in the hands of a class whose interests coincide with those of the majority, thatstate can be governed truly in line with the will of the major-ity. 
 But if political power is in the hands of a class whose interests diverge from those of the majority, any form ofmajority rule is bound to become deception or suppressionof the majority. 
 Every bourgeois republic provides hundredsand thousands of examples of this kind. 
 In Russia, the bour-geoisie rule both the economic and political life. 
 Their interests, particularly during the imperialist war, violently conflict with the interests of the majority. 
 Hence, from a ma-terialist and Marxist, and not from a formally juridicalpoint of view, we must expose this conflict and combat bour-geois deception of the people. 
 Our Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, on the contrary, have fully demonstrated and proved that their true role is to be an instrument of the bourgeoisie for de-ceiving the people (the “majority”), to be the vehicle of that deception and contribute to it. 
 However sincere indi-vidual Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks may be, their fundamental political ideas—that it is possible to break free of the imperialist war and gain “peace withoutannexations and indemnities” without the dictatorshipof the proletariat and the triumph of socialism, and that itis possible to secure the transfer of land to the people with-out compensation and establish “control” over production in the people’s interests without the same condition—these fundamental political (and, of course, economic) ideas ofthe Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks are, in prac-tice, nothing but petty-bourgeois self-deception, or decep-tion of the masses (the “majority”) by the bourgeoisie, whichis the same thing. 
 That is our first and main “amendment” to the majority issue as understood by the petty-bourgeois democrats, so-cialists of the Louis Blanc type, Socialist-Revolutionariesand Mensheviks. 
 What, in fact, is the value of a “majority”when a majority is in itself only a formal thing and whenmaterially, in actual fact, that majority is a majority of the parties through which the bourgeoisie deceive the major-ity? And, of course—and this leads us to our second “amend-ment”, to the second of the above-mentioned fundamentalconditions—this deception can only be properly understoodby ascertaining its class roots and class meaning. 
 This is not self-deception, not (to put it bluntly) a “swindle”, but an illusory idea arising out of the economic situationin which a class finds itself. 
 The petty-bourgeois is in suchan economic position, the conditions of his life are suchthat he cannot help deceiving himself, he involuntarilyand inevitably gravitates one minute towards the bour-geoisie, the next towards the proletariat. 
 It is econo-mically impossible for him to pursue an independent “line”. 
 His past draws him towards the bourgeoisie, his future towards the proletariat. 
 His better judgement gravitatestowards the latter, his prejudice 85 (to use a familiar expres-sion of Marx’s) towards the former. 
 For the majority of the people to become an actual majority in state admin-istration, the actual servant of the interests of the major-ity, and the actual protector of its rights, and so on, a certain class condition is required, namely, that the major-ity of the petty bourgeoisie should join forces with the revolutionary proletariat, at least at the decisive moment and in the decisive place. 
 Without this, a majority is mere fiction which may prevail for a while, may glitter and shine, make a noise and reap laurels, but is absolutely and inevitably doomed to failure nonetheless. 
 This, incidentally, was where the majority of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks came to grief, as the Russian revolution showed in July 1917. 
 Further, a revolution differs from a “normal” situation in the state precisely because controversial issues of state life are decided by the direct class and popular struggle to the point of armed struggle. 
 It cannot be otherwise when the masses are free and armed. 
 This fundamental fact implies that in time of revolution it is not enough to ascertain the “will of the majority”—you must prove to be stronger at the decisive moment and in the decisive place; you must win. 
 Beginning with the Peasant War in the Middle Ages in Germany, and throughout all the big revolutionary move-ments and epochs, including 1848, 1871 and 1905, we have seen innumerable examples of the better organised, more politically-conscious and better armed minority forcing its will upon the majority and defeating it. 
 Frederick Engels particularly stressed the lesson to be drawn from experience, a lesson which to some degree is common to the peasant revolt of the sixteenth century and to the Revolution of 1848 in Germany, namely, disunity of action and lack of centralisation on the part of the op-pressed owing to their petty-bourgeois status in life. 
86 Examining the matter from this point of view, we come to the same conclusion, namely, that a simple majority of the petty-bourgeois masses does not and cannot decide anything,for the disunited millions of rural petty proprietors canonly acquire organisation, political consciousness in action and centralisation of action (which is indispensable forvictory) when they are led either by the bourgeoisie or by the proletariat. 
 In the long run we know that the problems of social life are resolved by the class struggle in its bitterest and fierc-est form—civil war. 
 In this war, as in any other war—a fact also well known and in principle not disputed by any-one—it is economics that decide. 
 It is quite typical and sig-nificant that the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks,while not denying this “in principle” and while realisingperfectly the capitalist character of Russia today, dare notface the truth soberly. 
 They are afraid to admit the truththat every capitalist country, including Russia, is basi-cally divided into three main forces: the bourgeoisie, the petty bourgeoisie and the proletariat. 
 The first and thirdare spoken of and recognised by all. 
 Yet the second—whichreally is the numerical majority !— nobody cares to appraise soberly, neither from the economic, political nor militarypoint of view. 
 Truth does not flatter. 
 That is why the Socialist-Revolu-tionaries and Mensheviks shrink from recognising themselves. 
 III When I was just beginning this article, the closing down of Pravda was merely an “incident”, one that had not yet been legalised by the government. 
 But now, after July 16,the government has formally closed Pravda down. 
 If viewed historically and as a whole, throughout the process of its preparation and realisation, this measure castsa remarkably bright light on the “nature of the constitution” in Russia and on the danger of constitutional illusions. 
 It is known that the Cadet Party, headed by Milyukov and the newspaper Rech , has been demanding repressive measures against the Bolsheviks ever since April. 
 Thisdemand for repression, presented in various forms—from“statesman-like” articles in Rech to Milyukov’s repeated cries “Arrest them” (Lenin and other Bolsheviks)—has been one of the major components, if not the major component, ofthe Cadet political programme in the revolution. 
 The Cadet Party had been systematically, relentlessly and continuously demanding repressive measures against theBolsheviks long before Alexinsky and Co. 
 in June and July invented and fabricated the foully slanderous charge that the Bolsheviks were German spies or were receiving Germanmoney, and long before the equally slanderous charge —running counter to generally known facts and published documents—of “armed uprising” or of “rebellion”. 
 Since this demand has now been met, what are we to think of the honesty or intelligence of those who forget, or pretend toforget, the true class and party origin of this demand?How on earth can we help describing as crude falsificationor incredible political stupidity the futile efforts of theSocialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks to make out they believe the “occasion” which presented itself on July 4 for the repressive measures against the Bolsheviks was an“accident” or an “isolated” incident? There must surelybe a limit to the distortion of indisputable historicalfacts! You have only to compare the movement of April 20-21 with that of July 3-4 to realise immediately that they are alike in character: both contained such objective facts asthe spontaneous popular outburst of discontent, impatienceand indignation, the provocative shots from the right,the killings on Nevsky, the slanderous outcries from thebourgeoisie, particularly the Cadets, to the effect that “it was the Lenin people who fired the shots on Nevsky”, the extreme aggravation and exacerbation of the strugglebetween the workers and the bourgeoisie, the utter confu-sion of the petty-bourgeois parties, the Socialist-Revolu-tionaries and Mensheviks, and the tremendous range ofvacillation in their policy and in their approach to the issue of state power generally. 
 June 9-10 and June 18 give us just the same class picture in a different form. 
 The course of events is as clear as can be: it shows grow-ing popular discontent, impatience and indignation andan increasing aggravation of the struggle between theproletariat and the bourgeoisie, particularly for influence over the petty-bourgeois masses. 
 Linked with this are two very important historical developments which have made theSocialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks dependent on thecounter-revolutionary Cadets. 
 These developments are, first,the formation on May 6 of a coalition Cabinet in whichthe Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks turned out to be the hangers-on of the bourgeoisie, getting themselves more and more into a tangle by making deals and agree-ments with the latter, rendering them thousands of “ser-vices”, delaying the most essential revolutionary measures time and again; and secondly, the offensive at the front. 
 The offensive inevitably implied the resumption of the imperialist war, a vast increase in the influence, weightand role of the imperialist bourgeoisie, the most wide-spread chauvinism among the people, and, last but notleast, * the transfer of power—first military power and then state power generally—to the counter-revolutionary high-ranking army officers. 
 This was the course of historical events which between April 20-21 and July 3-4 deepened and sharpened classantagonisms, and which after July 4 enabled the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie to accomplish what on April 20-21had stood out very clearly as their programme and tactics, their immediate aim and their “clean” methods, which were to lead to the achievement of that aim. 
 Nothing could be more pointless historically, more pitiful theoretically or more ridiculous practically thanthe philistine whining (echoed, incidentally, by L. 
 Martovas well) over July 4, to the effect that the Bolsheviks “con-trived” to defeat themselves, that this defeat came from their own “adventurism”, and so on, and so forth. 
 All this whining,all these arguments to the effect that we “should not have”participated (in the attempt to lend a “peaceable and organ-ised” character to the perfectly legitimate popular dis-content and indignation!!), are either sheer apostasy, if coming from Bolsheviks, or the usual expression of the usual cowed and confused state of the petty bourgeoisie. 
 In actualfact, the movement of July 3 -4 grew out of the movement of April 20 -21 and after as inevitably as summer follows spring. 
 It was the imperative duty of the proletarian partyto remain with the masses and try to lend as peaceable and organised a character as possible to their justified action rather than stand aside and wash its hands like PontiusPilate, on the pedantic plea that the masses were not organ-ised down to the last man and that their movement some-times went to excesses—as though there had been no excesseson April 20 -21, as though there had ever in history been a serious popular movement free of excesses! *These four words are given in English by Lenin. 
— Ed. 
 The defeat of the Bolsheviks after July 4 followed with historical inevitability from the whole preceding course of events because on April 20 -21 the petty-bourgeois masses and their leaders, the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Men-sheviks, were not yet tied by the offensive and had not yetgot themselves into a tangle by their deals with the bour-geoisie in the “coalition Cabinet”, whereas by July 4 theyhad become so tied and entangled they could not but stoop to co-operation (in repressive measures, in slander, in butch-ery) with the counter-revolutionary Cadets. 
 On July 4the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks slid for goodinto the cesspool of counter-revolution; they had been steadly sliding towards it throughout May and June due totheir role in the coalition Cabinet and their approval of the policy of offensive. 
 We may appear to have digressed from our subject, the closing down of Pravda , to a historical estimation of the events of July 4. 
 But this only appears so, for the one can-not be understood without the other. 
 We have seen that,if we look into the matter and the interconnection of events, the closing down of Pravda , and the arrests and the other forms of persecution of the Bolsheviks are nothing butthe realisation of the long-standing programme of thecounter-revolutionaries, the Cadets in particular. 
 It would now be highly instructive to see who specifically carried out this programme, and by what means. 
 Let us have a look at the facts. 
 On July 2-3 the movement was growing; the people were seething with indignation atgovernment inaction, the high cost of living, economicdislocation and the offensive. 
 The Cadets withdrew, playinga give-away game and presenting an ultimatum to theSocialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, leaving them, tied to power but lacking power, to pay for the people’s defeat and indignation. 
 On July 2-3 the Bolsheviks were trying to restrain the masses from action. 
 This has been acknowledged even by an eyewitness from Dyelo Naroda , who reported on what took place in the Grenadier Regiment on July 2. 
 On the evening of July 3, the movement overflowed its banks and the Bolsheviks drew up an appeal stressing that the movementmust be “peaceable and organised”. 
 On July 4, provocative shots from the right increased the number of victims of the firing on both sides. 
 It should be pointed out that the Executive Committee’s promise to investigate the incidents, to issue bulletins twice a day, etc. 
, etc. 
, has remained anempty promise! The Socialist-Revolutionaries and Men-sheviks did nothing whatsoever, they didn’t even publisha complete list of the dead on both sides!! On the night of July 4 the Bolsheviks drew up an appeal to stop the action and Pravda printed it that same night. 
 But that same night, firstly, counter-revolutionary troopsbegan to arrive in Petrograd (apparently upon the summonsor with the consent of the Socialist-Revolutionaries andMensheviks, of their Soviets—a “delicate” point regardingwhich, of course, the strictest silence is maintained even now when every bit of need for secrecy is past!). 
 Secondly, that same night military cadets and suchlike, clearly actingupon instructions from Polovtsev, commanding, and fromthe General Staff, began raids on the Bolsheviks. 
 On thenight of July 4-5, Pravda ’s office was raided. 
 On July 5 and 6, its printers’, “Trud”, was wrecked; a worker named Voinov was murdered in broad daylight for carrying Listok “Pravdy ” from the printers’; house searches and arrests were made among the Bolsheviks and the revolutionaryregiments were disarmed. 
 Who started it all? Not the government or the Soviet, but the counter-revolutionary military gang grouped around the General Staff and acting in the name of the “counter-intelligence service”, circulating the lies of Pereverzevand Alexinsky in order to stir up the army, and so on. 
 The government is absent. 
 So are the Soviets; they are trembling for their own fate as they receive message aftermessage that the Cossacks may come and smash them up. 
 The Black Hundred and Cadet press, which led the hounding of the Bolsheviks, is beginning to hound the Soviets. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks have bound themselves hand and foot by their entire policy. 
 Beingbound, they called (or tolerated the calling of) counter-revolutionary troops to Petrograd. 
 And that bound them even more. 
 They have sunk to the very bottom of the foul counter-revolutionary cesspool. 
 They cravenly dismissedtheir own commission, appointed to investigate the “case” of the Bolsheviks. 
 They basely betrayed the Bolsheviks to the counter-revolutionaries. 
 They abjectly participated in the funeral procession of the Cossacks who were killed, and so kissed the hand of the counter-revolutionaries. 
 They are completely bound. 
 They are at the bottom of the cesspool. 
 They try this, that and the other; they hand Kerensky the Cabinet, they go to Canossa to the Cadets, they organise a “Zemsky Sobor” or a “coronation” of the counter-revolu-tionary government in Moscow. 
87 Kerensky dismisses Polov-tsev. 
 But nothing comes of all those efforts. 
 They in no way change the actual state of affairs . 
 Kerensky dismisses Polov-tsev, but at the same time gives shape and legality to Polov-tsev’s measures and to his policy; he closes down Pravda , he introduces capital punishment for the soldiers, he bansmeetings at the front, he continues to arrest Bolsheviks(even Kollontai!) in accordance with Alexinsky’s pro-gramme. 
 The “nature of the constitution” in Russia is coming out with striking clarity: the offensive at the front and the coalition with the Cadets in the rear have cast the So-cialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks into the cesspoolof counter-revolution. 
 In reality , state power is passing into the hands of the counter-revolutionaries, the militarygang. 
 Kerensky and the government of Tsereteli and Cher-nov are only a screen for it ; they are compelled to legalise its measures, actions and policies post factum . 
 The haggling going on between the Cadets and Kerensky, Tsereteli and Chernov is of secondary importance, if notentirely unimportant. 
 Whether the Cadets win in thishaggling, or whether Tsereteli and Chernov hold out “alone”, will have no effect on the actual state of affairs. 
 The funda-mental, the main and decisive fact is that the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks have swung over to thecounter-revolutionaries (a swing forced by the policy theyhave been pursuing since May 6). 
 The cycle of party development is complete. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks have slid steadily down-wards—from their expression of “confidence” in Kerensky onFebruary 28 to May 6, which bound them to the counter-revolutionaries, and then to July 5, when they touched rock bottom. 
 A new period is coming in. 
 The victory of the counter-revolutionaries is making the people disappointed with theSocialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties and is pavingthe way for the masses to adopt a policy of support for therevolutionary proletariat. 
 Written on July 26 (August 8), 1917 Published in Rabochy i Soldat Published according to Nos. 
 11 and 12, August 4 and 5, 1917 the manuscript AN ANSWER I On July 22 the newspapers printed a report “from the Public Prosecutor of the Petrograd City Court” about the inquiry into the events of July 3-5, and about the pro-secution of a group of Bolsheviks, including myself, whoare charged with treason and the organisation of an armeduprising. 
 The government had to publish the report because this dirty business had already created too much of a scandal, having clearly been rigged, as every intelligent personrealises, with the aid of the slanderer Alexinsky to meet along-standing wish and demand of the counter-revolution-ary Cadet Party. 
 But by publishing the report, the government of Tse-reteli and Co. 
 will disgrace itself even more, for now the crudeness of the fabrication just hits one in the eye. 
 I left Petrograd on Thursday, June 29, on account of illness and did not return until Tuesday morning, July 4. 
But of course I assume full and unqualified responsibilityfor every single move or measure of our Party Central Com-mittee, as well as of our Party as a whole. 
 I call attention to my absence to account for my ignorance of certain detailsand for my allusion mainly to documents that have appearedin the press. 
 Obviously, it is documents of this nature, particularly if published in the anti-Bolshevik press, that the Public Prosecutor should have carefully collected, set in order and examined before anything else. 
 But the “republican”Prosecutor, who is carrying out the policies of the “socia-list” Minister Tsereteli, failed to perform his principal duty! Shortly after July 4, the ministerial newspaper Dyelo Naroda admitted that it was a fact that on July 2 the Bol-sheviks had taken action in the Grenadier Regiment by cam-paigning against a demonstration. 
 Had the Prosecutor a right to keep quiet about this document? Had he any grounds for discounting the testimony of such a witness? As it so happens, this testimony establishes the highly important fact that the movement developed spontaneouslyand that the Bolsheviks tried to put off rather than hastenthe demonstration. 
 Furthermore, the same paper printed a still more im-portant document, namely, the text of an appeal signed by our Party Central Committee and written on the night ofJuly 3-4. 
 The appeal was written and sent to print after the movement, despite our efforts to check or rather controlit, had “spilled over”, after the demonstration had becomea fact. 
 The utter baseness and unscrupulousness of the Tserete-lian Prosecutor, and his boundless treachery, show in hisevasion of the question of exactly when, on what day and hour, whether before the Bolshevik appeal or after it,the demonstration began . 
 As a matter of fact, the appeal stressed the need to give the movement a peaceable and organised character! Can you imagine a charge more laughable than that of “organising an armed uprising”, made against an organisa-tion which on the night of July 3-4, i. 
e. 
, the night beforethe fateful day, issued an appeal for a “peaceful and organ-ised demonstration”? Or take another question: what differ-ence is there between the Prosecutor of Dreyfus or Beilis and the “republican” Prosecutor of the “socialist” MinisterTsereteli, a Prosecutor who keeps completely quiet aboutthe appeal? Further, the Prosecutor does not say that on the night of July 3-4 our Party Central Committee wrote an appeal to stop the demonstration and printed it in Pravda , whose offices were wrecked by counter-revolutionary troops thatvery night. 
 Further, the Prosecutor does not say that on July 4 Trotsky and Zinoviev, in several speeches delivered before the workers and soldiers marching towards the Taurida Palace, called on them to disperse once they had made known their will. 
 Those speeches were heard by hundreds and thousands of people. 
 Then, let every fair-minded citizen who doesnot want his country to be disgraced by another rigged “Beilis case” see to it that irrespective of party affiliation, those who heard the speeches make written declarationsto the Prosecutor (keeping copies for themselves), statingwhether Trotsky’s and Zinoviev’s speeches contained anappeal to disperse. 
 A decent Prosecutor would himselfhave made such an appeal to the population. 
 But how on earth can there be decent Prosecutors in the Cabinet of Kerensky, Yefremov, Tsereteli and Co. 
? And isn’t it hightime Russian citizens themselves took care to make “Beiliscases” impossible in their country? By the way, owing to illness, I personally made only one speech on July 4, from the balcony of Kshesinskaya’s Palace. 
 The Prosecutor mentions it, and tries to set out what I said, but far from naming any witnesses, he is againreticent about eyewitness reports given in the press. 
 I haveby no means been able to secure a complete set of the papers,but still I have seen two testimonies: (1) in the BolshevikProletarskoye Dyelo (Kronstadt) and (2) in the Menshevik ministerial Rabochaya Gazeta . 
 Why not verify the contents of my speech by these documents and by a public appeal? The speech contained the following points: (1) an apology for confining myself to just a few words on account of ill-ness; (2) greetings to the revolutionary people of Kronstadton behalf of the Petrograd workers; (3) an expression of confidence that our slogan “All Power to the Soviets” must and will win despite all the zigzags of history; (4) an ap-peal for “firmness, steadfastness and vigilance”. 
 I bring out these particulars in order not to pass by the scant but truly factual evidence which the Prosecutor touchedupon—barely touched upon—in such a cursory, indif-ferent and careless fashion. 
 However, the important thing is not the particulars, of course, but the overall picture, the overall significance /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR of July 4. 
 The Prosecutor proved completely incapable of so much as even thinking about this. 
 On this question, we first of all have the highly valuable testimony given in the press by a rabid anti-Bolshevik,who turns upon us a veritable spate of invective and spitefulphrases. 
 I refer to the ministerial Rabochaya Gazeta cor-respondent. 
 He contributed his personal observations shortlyafter July 4. 
 The facts fully established by him show that his observations and experiences fall into two sharply differentiated parts. 
 He contrasts the second with thefirst, saying that things had taken a “favourable turn”for him. 
 The first part of the author’s experiences is the attempt he made to defend the ministers amid a raging crowd. 
 He was insulted, pummelled, and eventually detained. 
 He heard extremely violent outcries and slogans, of whichhe recalls in particular “Death to Kerensky” (because heordered an offensive, “sent forty thousand men to death”,etc. 
). 
 The second part of the author’s experiences, the one that brought a “favourable” turn for him, as he puts it, be-gan when the raging crowd led him “before the tribu-nal” at the Kshesinskaya Palace. 
 There he was released atonce. 
 Those are the facts which prompted the author to turn a torrent of abuse upon the Bolsheviks. 
 Abuse coming from a political opponent is natural, particularly if the opponent is a Menshevik who senses that the people, crushed bycapital and the imperialist war, are against instead of forhim. 
 Yet abuse cannot alter the facts, which even as statedby a most rabid anti-Bolshevik testify that the aroused crowdwent as far as to shout “Death to Kerensky”, that by and large the Bolshevik organisation gave the movement the slogan “All Power to the Soviets”, and that this organisationwas the only one that carried any moral weight with thepeople and urged them to forgo violence. 
 Those are the facts. 
 Let the willing and unwilling lackeys of the bourgeoisie shout and curse about the facts, accusing the Bolsheviks of “conniving with the mob”, etc. 
, etc. 
 We of the party of the revolutionary proletariat reply that ourParty has always been and will always be with the oppressed whenever they voice their absolutely justified and legit-imate indignation at the high cost of living, at the inac-tion and treachery of the “socialist” Ministers, at the impe-rialist war and its prolongation. 
 Our Party did its boundenduty by marching together with the justly indignant peopleon July 4 and by trying to make their movement, theirdemonstration, as peaceful and organised as possible. 
For on July 4 a peaceful transfer of power to the Soviets, a peaceful development of the Russian revolution, was still possible. 
 The crass stupidity of the Prosecutor’s fairy-tale about the “organisation of an armed uprising” can be seen fromthe following: no one will deny that the vast majorityof the armed soldiers and sailors who crowded the Petrograd streets on July 4 were on our Party’s side. 
 Our Party had every opportunity to set about removing and arrestinghundreds of high officials, taking over dozens of public andgovernment buildings and institutions, and so on. 
 We didnothing of the kind. 
 Only people so mixed up that theyrepeat all sorts of tall stories spread by the counter-revolu-tionary Cadets do not see the laughable absurdity of the assertion that on July 3 or 4 an “armed uprising” was“organised”. 
 The first question the investigation should have put, if it had at all been worthy of that name, was “who startedthe shooting?” The next question should have been, “How many killed and wounded were there on each side? In what circumstances did each killing and wounding take place?”Had the investigation been anything like a real investiga-tion (and not like a trouble-making article in the papers ofthe Dans, the Alexinskys, etc. 
), it would have been theinvestigators’ duty to hold an open, public cross-examina-tion of the witnesses and then immediately publish the record of the interrogation. 
 That is what courts of inquiry always did in Britain when Britain was a free country. 
 That, or roughly that,is what the Executive Committee of the Soviet felt it hadto do at first, when fear of the Cadets had not yet com-pletely numbed its conscience. 
 We know the Executive Com-mittee then promised in the press to issue two bulletins dailyon the work of its investigating commission. 
 We also know the Executive Committee (i. 
e. 
, the Socialist-Revolution-aries and Mensheviks) deceived the people by not keeping its promise. 
 But the text of that promise has gone down in history as an admission from our enemies, an admission ofwhat any fair investigator should have done. 
 It is instructive, at any rate, to note that one of the first bourgeois , rabidly anti-Bolshevik papers to carry a report about the shooting on July 4 was the evening Bir-zhevka of the same date. 
 And it is this report that suggests that the shooting was not started by the demonstrators, and that the first shots were fired against them!! Of course, the “republican” Prosecutor of the “socialist” Cabinet pre-ferred to say nothing about this testimony from Birzhevka !! And yet this testimony of the utterly anti-Bolshevik Bir-zhevka fully accords with the general picture of what hap-pened as our Party sees it. 
 Had it been an armed uprising,then, of course, the insurgents would not have fired on thecounter-demonstrators but would have surrounded certainbarracks and certain buildings; they would have wiped outcertain army units, etc. 
 On the other hand, if it was a demonstration against the government, with a counter-demonstration by government defenders, it was perfectlynatural that the counter-revolutionaries should be the firstto shoot, partly because they were enraged by the enormousnumber of demonstrators, and partly with provocative in-tent. 
 And it was just as natural the demonstrators should counter shots with shots. 
 Lists of the dead, though probably incomplete, were published, nevertheless, in a few papers (I think in Rech and Dyelo Naroda ). 
 The prime and immediate duty of the investigation was to verify, complete, and officially publishthese lists. 
 To evade this means concealing proof that the counter-revolutionaries started the shooting. 
 Indeed, even a cursory examination of the published lists shows that the two main and prominent groups, theCossacks and the sailors, had each about the same numberkilled. 
 Could this have been so if the ten thousand armedsailors who arrived in Petrograd on July 4 to join the work-ers and soldiers, particularly the machine-gunners who had many machine-guns, had been intent on an armed up-rising? Obviously, the number of dead among the Cossacks and other opponents of the insurrection would in that case have been ten times greater, for no one will deny that the pre-dominance of the Bolsheviks among the armed people in thePetrograd streets on July 4 was enormous. 
 There is a longlist of relevant testimonies in the press from our Partyopponents, and any fair investigating body would undoubt-edly have collected and published all this evidence. 
 If the number of dead is approximately the same on both sides, this proves that the shooting was started bythe counter-revolutionaries and that the demonstratorsmerely returned the fire. 
 Otherwise there could not havebeen an equal number of dead. 
 Finally, the following piece of press information is ex-ceedingly important: Cossacks are known to have been killed on July 4 during an open skirmish between thedemonstrators and counter-demonstrators. 
 Such skirmishestake place even in non-revolutionary times, if the populationis at all aroused; for instance, they are not infrequent inthe Latin countries, particularly in the South. 
 Bolsheviks are also known to have been killed after July 4, when there was no clash between excited demonstrators and counter-demonstrators, and hence when the murder of an unarmedby an armed person was really an act of butchery. 
 Suchwas the murder of the Bolshevik Voinov in ShpalernayaStreet on July 6. 
 What kind of an investigating commission is it that does not fully collect even the evidence which has appearedin the press concerning the number of dead on both sides,and the time and circumstances of each killing? This isjust a mockery of an investigation. 
 It is clearly futile to expect as much as an attempt at a historical evaluation of July 4 from such an “investigat-ing” commission. 
 Yet this evaluation is indispensable toanyone wanting to maintain an intelligent attitude towardspolitics. 
 Whoever attempts a historical estimate of July 3 and 4 cannot shut his eyes to the exact identity of this move-ment and that of April 20 and 21. 
 In both cases there was a spontaneous outburst of popular indignation. 
 In both cases armed people came on to the streets. 
 In both cases there was a skirmish between the demon-strators and counter-demonstrators, resulting in a certain (approximately equal) number of victims on both sides. 
 In both cases there was an extremely sharp outburst in the struggle between the revolutionary masses and thecounter-revolutionaries, the bourgeoisie, while the neutral,intermediate elements which inclined towards compromise were temporarily inactive. 
 In both cases the special kind of anti-government demon-stration (its special features have been listed above) was dueto a deep and protracted crisis of power. 
 The difference between the two movements is that the latter was much more intense than the former and that the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties, neutral on April 20 and 21, have since got themselves into a tangleby their dependence on the counter-revolutionary Cadets(through the coalition Cabinet and the policy of takingoffensive action), and so, on July 3 and 4, found themselveson the side of the counter-revolution. 
 The counter-revolutionary Cadet Party brazenly lied even after the events of April 20 and 21, shouting, “Theshooting on Nevsky was done by Lenin’s men”, and, clown-like, they demanded an investigation. 
 The Cadets andtheir friends then constituted the majority in the govern-ment and so the investigation was wholly in their hands. 
 It was begun and abandoned, and nothing was published. 
 Why? Evidently because the facts in no way confirmed what the Cadets wanted. 
 In other words, the investigationconcerning April 20 and 21 was “smothered” because thefacts proved that the firing had been started by the counter-revolutionaries, the Cadets and their friends. 
 This is clear. 
 The same thing apparently happened on July 3 and 4 and that explains the crude and glaring falsification used bythe Prosecutor, who affronts all standards of reasonablyconscientious investigation to please Tsereteli and Co. 
 The movement on July 3 and 4 was the last attempt by means of a demonstration to induce the Soviets to takepower. 
 That was when the Soviets, i. 
e. 
, the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks controlling them, virtually handed over power to the counter-revolution by summoning counter-revolutionary troops to Petrograd, disarming and disbanding revolutionary regiments and the workers, ap-proving and tolerating acts of tyranny and violence againstthe Bolsheviks, the introduction of the death penalty atthe front, etc. 
 Military, and consequently political, power has now virtually passed into the hands of the counter-revolution represented by the Cadets and backed by the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks. 
 Now, a peaceful develop-ment of the Russian revolution is no longer possible and thehistorical alternative is either complete victory for thecounter-revolution, or a new revolution. 
 II The charge of espionage and relations with Germany is purely a Beilis case deserving only a brief comment. 
 Onthis point, the “investigation” merely repeats the slander of the notorious slanderer Alexinsky, distorting the facts in a particularly crude way. 
 It is not true that in 1914 Zinoviev and I were arrested in Austria. 
 Only I was arrested. 
 It is not true that I was arrested as a Russian subject. 
 I was arrested on suspicion of spying, the local gendarme having mistaken the graphs of agrarian statistics in my notebooks for “plans”! Obviously, that Austrian gendarmewas quite on a par with Alexinsky and the -group. 
 But it appears that I have been persecuted for international-ism more than anyone else, for I have been persecuted byboth belligerent coalitions as a spy—by the gendarme in Austria and by the Cadets, Alexinsky and Co. 
 in Russia. 
 It is not true that Hanecki played a part in my release from the Austrian prison. 
 Victor Adler helped put theAustrian authorities to shame. 
 Poles helped, being ashamedthat such an infamous arrest of a Russian revolutionarycould take place on Polish soil. 
 It is an infamous lie that I was in contact with Parvus, that I visited military camps, etc. 
 Nothing of the kind hap-pened, or could have happened. 
 Upon the appearance of the very first issues of Parvus’s journal The Bell88, our newspa-per, Sotsial-Demokrat , described Parvus as a renegade and a German Plekhanov. 
 * Parvus is as much a social-chau-vinist on the side of Germany as Plekhanov is on the side ofRussia. 
 Being revolutionary internationalists, we had andcould have nothing in common with German, Russian,or Ukrainian (Union for the Liberation of the Ukraine)social-chauvinists. 
 Steinberg is a member of an exile committee in Stock-holm, where I first met him. 
 About April 20 or a little later,Steinberg came to Petrograd, where I remember him solic-iting a subsidy for the exile society. 
 The Prosecutor couldhave verified this quite easily if he had wanted to. 
 The Prosecutor’s argument is that Parvus is connected with Hanecki, and that Hanecki is connected with Lenin! But this is just a big swindle, for everyone knows thatHanecki had financial dealings with Parvus, but nonewith me. 
 Hanecki, being a tradesman, worked for Parvus or did business with him. 
 But then a great many Russian exiles associated with the press have worked in establishments and institutions belonging to Parvus. 
 The Prosecutor’s argument is that business correspondence may have served as a screen for relations in the nature ofespionage. 
 One wonders how many members of the Cadet,Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary parties could be indicted for business correspondence according to this wonderful formula! But since the Prosecutor is in possession of several tele-grams from Hanecki to Sumenson (which have already beenpublished) and since the Prosecutor knows in which bank,when, and how much money Sumenson had (for the Prosecu-tor has published a few figures of this nature), why shouldn’t he invite two or three office or business employees to takepart in the investigation? It would surely take them nomore than a couple of days to make a complete extract from all the business and bank records for him. 
 Hardly anything reveals the true nature of this “Beilis case” as well as the fragmentary figures cited by the Prose-*See Vol. 
 21 of present edition, pp. 
 421-22. 
— Ed. 
 cutor: within six months Sumenson drew 750,000 rubles, she has 180,000 rubles left on her account!! If you are going to publish figures, why not publish them all? When exactly, from whom exactly did Sumenson receive money “within sixmonths”, and to whom did she pay it out? When exactly,and exactly what consignments of goods were received? What could be easier than to collect these complete data? This could and should have been done in a matter of two or three days! It would have disclosed the whole round of business dealings between Hanecki and Sumenson! It wouldhave left no room for the obscure insinuations the Prosecu-tor is making! How low the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks have fallen is shown by Alexinsky’s foulest and most infa-mous slander, paraphrased to read like a “state” document by the officials of the Cabinet of Tsereteli and Co. 
! III Of course, it would be extremely naïve to regard the “judicial cases” instituted by the Cabinet of Tsereteli, Ke-rensky and Co. 
 against the Bolsheviks as actual judicialcases. 
 That would be an absolutely unpardonable consti-tutional illusion. 
 Having entered into a coalition with the counter-revolu-tionary Cadets on May 6 and having adopted the policy of an offensive, i. 
e. 
, resumption and prolongation of the impe-rialist war, the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Menshe-viks inevitably found themselves under the thumb of theCadets. 
 Being captives, they are forced to participate in the filthiest Cadet deals, in the Cadets’ lowest and most slan-derous intrigues. 
 The “case” of Chernov is rapidly beginning to enlighten even the backward, that is, to corroborate our view. 
 AfterChernov, Rech is now denouncing Tsereteli as well, calling him a “hypocrite” and a “Zimmerwaldist”. 
 Now the blind will see and the stones will speak. 
 The counter-revolutionaries are closing their ranks. 
 The Cadets form their basis. 
 The General Staff, the militaryleaders and Kerensky are in their hands and the Black Hun-dred press is at their service. 
 These are the allies of the bour-geois counter-revolution. 
 Foul slander against political opponents will help the workers to realise all the sooner where the counter-revolu-tion is, and to sweep it away in the name of freedom, peace, bread for the hungry and land for the peasants. 
 Written between July 22 and 26 (August 4 and 8), 1917 Published in Rabochy i Soldat Published according to Nos. 
 3 and 4, July 26 and 27, 1917 the manuscript Signed: N. 
 Lenin THE BEGINNING OF BONAPARTISM Now that the Cabinet of Kerensky, Nekrasov, Avksentyev and Co. 
89 has been formed, the gravest and most disastrous error Marxists could make would be to mistake words fordeeds, deceptive appearances for reality or generally for something serious. 
 Let’s leave this pastime to the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries who have already gone as far as to play thepart of clowns around the Bonapartist Kerensky. 
 Indeed, itcertainly is buffoonery on the part of the Chernovs, Avksen-tyevs and Tseretelis to start striking postures and uttering fancy words at a time when Kerensky, clearly at the Cadets’ bidding, forms something of a secret Directory composedof himself, Nekrasov, Tereshchenko and Savinkov, keepsquiet about both the Constituent Assembly and the decla-ration of July 8, 90 proclaims the sacred union of classes in his address to the people, concludes an agreement on terms unknown to anyone with Kornilov, who has presented a most brazen ultimatum, and continues the policy of scan-dalously outrageous arrests. 
 At a time like this, it certainly is buffoonery on the part of Chernov to challenge Milyukov to appear before a courtof arbitration, of Avksentyev to shout about the futility of a narrow class point of view, or of Tsereteli and Dan to push through the Central Executive Committee of the So-viets the emptiest resolutions stuffed with utterly mean-ingless phrases, resolutions that call to mind the CadetFirst Duma during its worst period of impotence in the faceof tsarism. 
 Just as the Cadets in 1906 prostituted the first assembly of popular representatives in Russia by reducing it to amiserable talking shop in face of the growing tsarist counter-revolution, so the S. 
R. 
s and Mensheviks in 1917 have pros-tituted the Soviets by reducing them to a miserable talking-shop in face of the growing Bonapartist counter-revolution. 
 Kerensky’s Cabinet is undoubtedly a cabinet taking the first steps towards Bonapartism. 
 We see the chief historical symptom of Bonapartism: the manoeuvring of state power, which leans on the militaryclique (on the worst elements of the army) for support, between two hostile classes and forces which more or less balance each other out. 
 The class struggle between the bourgeoisie and the pro-letariat has reached the limit and on April 20 and 21, aswell as on July 3 -5, the country was within a hair’s breadth of civil war. 
 This socio-economic condition certainly forms the classical basis for Bonapartism. 
 And then, this condi-tion is combined with others that are quite akin to it; thebourgeoisie are ranting and raving against the Soviets, butare as yet powerless to disperse them, while the Soviets, prostituted by Tsereteli, Chernov and Co. 
, are now powerless to put up serious resistance to the bourgeoisie. 
 The landowners and peasants, too, live as on the eve of civil war: the peasants demand land and freedom, they canbe kept in check, if at all, only by a Bonapartist governmentcapable of making the most unscrupulous promises to allclasses without keeping any of them. 
 Add to this the situation created by a foolhardy offen-sive and military reverses, in which fancy phrases about saving the country are particularly fashionable (concealingthe desire to save the imperialist programme of the bourgeoi-sie), and you have a perfect picture of the socio-politicalsetting for Bonapartism. 
 Don’t let us be deluded by phrases. 
 Don’t let us be mis-led by the idea that all we have is the first steps of Bona-partism. 
 It is the first steps we must be able to discern un-less we want to find ourselves in the ridiculous predicamentof the stupid philistine who laments the second stepalthough he himself helped to take the first. 
 It would now be nothing short of stupid philistinism to entertain constitutional illusions, such as, for instance, that the present Cabinet is probably more Left than all thepreceding ones (see Izvestia ), that well-meaning criticism by the Soviets could rectify the errors of the government, that the arbitrary arrests and suppression of newspapers were isolated incidents which, it is to be hoped, will never recur, or that Zarudny is an honest man and that in republi-can and democratic Russia a fair trial is possible and every-one should appear at it, and so on, and so forth. 
 The stupidity of these constitutional philistine illusions is too obvious to require special refutation. 
 The struggle against the bourgeois counter-revolution demands soberness and the ability to see and speak of thingsas they are. 
 Bonapartism in Russia is no accident but a natural prod-uct of the evolution of the class struggle in a petty-bour-geois country with a considerably developed capitalism and a revolutionary proletariat. 
 Historical stages like April 20 and 21, May 6, June 9 and 10, June 18 and 19, and July 3-5are landmarks which show clearly how preparations for Bona-partism proceeded. 
 It would be a very big mistake to thinkthat a democratic situation rules out Bonapartism. 
 On thecontrary, it is exactly in a situation like this (the history of France has confirmed it twice) that Bonapartism emerges, given a certain relationship between classes and theirstruggle. 
 However, to recognise the inevitability of Bonapartism does not at all mean forgetting the inevitability of its down-fall. 
 If we only said the counter-revolution had temporarily gained the upper hand here in Russia we should be dodgingthe issue. 
 If we analysed the origin of Bonapartism and, fearlessly facing the truth, told the working class and the wholepeople that the beginning of Bonapartism is a fact, we should thereby start a real and stubborn struggle to overthrow Bonapartism, a struggle waged on a large political scaleand based on far-reaching class interests. 
 The Russian Bonapartism of 1917 differs from the begin-nings of French Bonapartism in 1799 and 1849 in severalrespects, such as the fact that not a single important task of the revolution has been accomplished here. 
 The struggle to settle the agrarian and the national questions is onlyjust gathering momentum. 
 Kerensky and the counter-revolutionary Cadets who use him as a pawn can neither convoke the Constituent Assembly on the appointed date, nor postpone it, without in both cases promoting the revolution. 
 And the catastrophe engenderedby the prolongation of the imperialist war keeps on ap-proaching with even greater force and speed than ever. 
 The advance contingents of the Russian proletariat suc-ceeded in emerging from our June and July days without losing too much blood. 
 The proletarian party has every opportunity to choose the tactics and form, or forms, oforganisation that will in any circumstances prevent unex-pected (seemingly unexpected) Bonapartist persecutionsfrom cutting short its existence and its regular messages tothe people. 
 Let the Party loudly and clearly tell the people the whole truth that Bonapartism is beginning; that the “new”government of Kerensky, Avksentyev and Co. 
 is merelya screen for the counter-revolutionary Cadets and the mili-tary clique which is in power at present; that the peoplecan get no peace, the peasants no land, the workers no eight-hour day, and the hungry no bread unless the counter-revolution is completely stamped out. 
 Let the Party say so,and every step in the march of events will bear it out. 
 With remarkable speed Russia has gone through a whole epoch in which the majority of the people put their faithin the petty-bourgeois Socialist-Revolutionary and Men-shevik parties. 
 And now the majority of the working people are beginning to pay heavily for their credulity. 
 All indications are that the march of events is continu-ing at a very fast pace and that the country is approachingthe next epoch, when the majority of the working peoplewill have to entrust their fate to the revolutionary proletar-iat. 
 The revolutionary proletariat will take power and be-gin a socialist revolution; despite all the difficulties andpossible zigzags of development, it will draw the workersof all the advanced countries into the revolution, and willdefeat both war and capitalism. 
 Rabochy i Soldat No. 
 6, Published according to the text July 29, 1917 in Rabochy i Soldat LESSONS OF THE REVOLUTION The article was written at the end of July, the Afterword on September 6 (19), 1917 The article was published on September 12 and 13 (August 30 and 31), 1917 , in the newspaper Rabochy Nos. 
 8 and 9 Signed: N-kov in No. 
 8 and N. 
 Lenin in No. 
 9 The Afterword was published in 1917 Published according to in the pamphlet: N. 
 Lenin, the pamphlet text Lessons of the Revolution , Priboi Publishers LESSONS OF THE REVOLUTION The article was written at the end of July, the Afterword on September 6 (19), 1917 The article was published on September 12 and 13 (August 30 and 31), 1917 , in the newspaper Rabochy Nos. 
 8 and 9 Signed: N-kov in No. 
 8 and N. 
 Lenin in No. 
 9 The Afterword was published in 1917 Published according to in the pamphlet: N. 
 Lenin, the pamphlet text Lessons of the Revolution , Priboi Publishers Every revolution means a sharp turn in the lives of a vast number of people. 
 Unless the time is ripe for such a turn, no real revolution can take place. 
 And just as any turn in the life of an individual teaches him a great deal and brings rich experience and great emotional stress, so a revolution teaches an entire people very rich and valuable lessons in a short space of time. 
 During a revolution, millions and tens of millions of people learn in a week more than they do in a year of or-dinary, somnolent life. 
 For at the time of a sharp turn in the life of an entire people it becomes particularly clear what aims the various classes of the people are pursuing, what strength they possess, and what methods they use. 
 Every class-conscious worker, soldier and peasant should ponder thoroughly over the lessons of the Russian revolu-tion, especially now, at the end of July, when it is clear that the first phase of our revolution has failed. 
 I Let us see, in fact, what the workers and peasants were striving for when they made the revolution. 
 What did they expect of the revolution? As we know, they expected liberty, peace, bread and land. 
 But what do we see now? Instead of liberty, the old tyranny is coming back. 
 The death penalty is being introduced for the soldiers at the front . 
91 Peasants are prosecuted for the unauthorised sei-zure of landed estates. 
 Printing presses of workers’ news-papers are wrecked. 
 Workers’ newspapers are closed down without trial. 
 Bolsheviks are arrested, often without anycharge or upon blatantly trumped-up charges. 
 It may be argued that the persecution of Bolsheviks does not constitute a violation of freedom, for only certain individuals are being prosecuted and on certain charges. 
 Such an argument, however, would be a deliberate and ob-vious lie; for how can anyone wreck printing presses andclose down newspapers for the crimes of individuals, even ifthese charges were proved and established by a court of law?It would be a different thing if the government had legally declared the whole party of the Bolsheviks, their very trend and views, to be criminal. 
 But everybody knows thatthe government of free Russia could not, and did not, doanything of the kind. 
 What chiefly exposes the libellous character of the charges against the Bolsheviks is that the newspapers of the land-owners and capitalists furiously abused the Bolsheviks for their struggle against the war and against the landown-ers and capitalists, and openly demanded the arrest andprosecution of the Bolsheviks even when not a single chargeagainst a single Bolshevik had been trumped up. 
 The people want peace. 
 Yet the revolutionary govern-ment of free Russia has resumed the war of conquest on the basis of those very same secret treaties which ex-Tsar Nich-olas II concluded with the British and French capitalistsso that the Russian capitalists might plunder other na-tions. 
 Those secret treaties remain unpublished. 
 The gov-ernment of free Russia resorted to subterfuges, and to this day has not proposed a just peace to all nations. 
 There is no bread. 
 Famine is again drawing near. 
 Every-body sees that the capitalists and the rich are unscru-pulously cheating the treasury on war deliveries (the waris now costing the nation fifty million rubles daily), thatthey are raking in fabulous profits through high prices, while nothing whatsoever has been done to establish effec-tive control by the workers over the production and distri-bution of goods. 
 The capitalists are becoming more brazenevery day; they are throwing workers out into the street,and this at a time when the people are suffering from short-ages. 
 A vast majority of the peasants, at congress after con-gress, have loudly and clearly declared that landed pro-prietorship is an injustice and robbery. 
 Meanwhile, a govern-ment which calls itself revolutionary and democratic has been leading peasants by the nose for months and deceiving them by promises and delays. 
 For months the capitalists did not allow Minister Chernov to issue a law prohibitingthe purchase and sale of land. 
 And when this law was finallypassed, the capitalists started a foul slander campaignagainst Chernov, which they are still continuing. 
 Thegovernment has become so brazen in its defence of the land-owners that it is beginning to bring peasants to trial for “unauthorised” seizures of land. 
 They are leading the peasants by the nose, telling them to wait for the Constituent Assembly. 
 The convocationof the Assembly, however, is being steadily postponed bythe capitalists. 
 Now that owing to Bolshevik pressure it has been set for September 30, the capitalists are openly clamouring about this being “impossibly” short notice, andare demanding the Constituent Assembly’s postponement. 
The most influential members of the capitalist and land-owner party, the “Cadet”, or “people’s freedom”, Party,such as Panina, are openly urging that the convocation of the Constituent Assembly be delayed until after the war. 
 As to land, wait until the Constituent Assembly. 
 As to the Constituent Assembly, wait until the end of the war. 
As to the end of the war, wait until complete victory. 
 Thatis what it comes to. 
 The capitalists and landowners, havinga majority in the government, are plainly mocking at the peasants. 
 II But how could this happen in a free country, after the overthrow of the tsarist regime? In a non-free country, the people are ruled by a tsar and a handful of landowners, capitalists and bureaucrats who are not elected by anybody. 
 In a free country, the people are ruled only by those who have been elected for that purpose by the people them-selves. 
 At the elections the people divide themselves intoparties, and as a rule each class of the population forms its own party; for instance, the landowners, the capital-ists, the peasants and the workers all form separate parties. 
In free countries, therefore, the people are ruled through an open struggle between parties and by free agreement between these parties. 
 For about four months after the overthrow of the tsarist regime on February 27, 1917, Russia was ruled as a freecountry, i. 
e. 
, through an open struggle between freelyformed parties and by free agreement between them. 
 Tounderstand the development of the Russian revolution,therefore, it is above all necessary to study the chief parties, the class interests they defended, and the relations among them all. 
 III After the overthrow of the tsarist regime state power passed into the hands of the first Provisional Government, consisting of representatives of the bourgeoisie, i. 
e. 
, the capitalists, who were joined by the landowners. 
 The “Cadet”Party, the chief capitalist party, held pride of place asthe ruling and government party of the bourgeoisie. 
 It was no accident this party secured power, although it was not the capitalists, of course, but the workers and peasants, the soldiers and sailors, who fought the tsarist troops and shed their blood for liberty. 
 Power was secured by the capi-talist party because the capitalist class possessed the powerof wealth, organisation and knowledge. 
 Since 1905, andparticularly during the war, the class of the capitalists, andthe landowners associated with them, have made in Russia the greatest progress in organising. 
 The Cadet Party has always been monarchist, both in 1905 and from 1905 to 1917. 
 After the people’s victoryover tsarist tyranny it proclaimed itself a republican party. 
The experience of history shows that whenever the peopletriumphed over a monarchy, capitalist parties were willing to become republican as long as they could uphold the privileges of the capitalists and their unlimited powerover the people. 
 The Cadet Party pays lip-service to “people’s freedom”. 
 But actually it stands for the capitalists, and it was imme-diately backed by all the landowners, monarchists and Black Hundreds. 
 The press and the elections are proof of this. 
 After the revolution, all the bourgeois papers and the wholeBlack Hundred press began to sing in unison with the Cadets. 
 Not daring to come out openly, all the monarchist parties supported the Cadet Party at the elections, as, for example, in Petrograd. 
 Having obtained state power, the Cadets made every effort to continue the predatory war of conquest begun byTsar Nicholas II, who had concluded secret predatory trea-ties with the British and French capitalists. 
 Under thesetreaties, the Russian capitalists were promised, in the event of victory, the seizure of Constantinople, Galicia, Armenia, etc. 
 As to the people, the government of theCadets put them off with empty subterfuges and promises,deferring the decision of all matters of vital and essentialimportance to the workers and peasants until the Constit-uent Assembly met, without appointing the date of its convocation. 
 Making use of liberty, the people began to organise in-dependently. 
 The chief organisation of the workers andpeasants, who form the overwhelming majority of thepopulation of Russia, was the Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’and Peasants’ Deputies. 
 These Soviets already began to be formed during the February Revolution, and within a few weeks all class-conscious and advanced workers andpeasants were united in Soviets in most of the larger citiesof Russia and in many rural districts. 
 The Soviets were elected in an absolutely free way. 
 They were genuine organisations of the people, of the workers and peasants. 
 They were genuine organisations of the vast majority of the people. 
 The workers and peasants in soldiers’uniforms were armed. 
 It goes without saying that the Soviets could and should have taken over state power in full. 
 Pending the convocationof the Constituent Assembly there should have been no other power in the state but the Soviets. 
 Only then would our revolution have become a truly popular and trulydemocratic revolution. 
 Only then could the working people,who are really striving for peace, and who really have nointerest in a war of conquest, have begun firmly and reso-lutely to carry out a policy which would have ended the war of conquest and led to peace. 
 Only then could the workers and peasants have curbed the capitalists, who are makingfabulous profits “from the war” and who have reduced the country to a state of ruin and starvation. 
 But in the So-viets only a minority of the deputies were on the side of the revolutionary workers’ party, the Bolshevik Social-Democrats, who demanded that all state power should betransferred to the Soviets. 
 The majority of the deputies tothe Soviets were on the side of the parties of the MenshevikSocial-Democrats and the Socialist-Revolutionaries, whowere opposed to the transfer of power to the Soviets. 
 Instead of removing the bourgeois government and replacing it by a government of the Soviets, these parties insisted on sup-porting the bourgeois government, compromising withit and forming a coalition government with it. 
 This policyof compromise with the bourgeoisie pursued by the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties, who enjoyed the confidence of the majority of the people, is the main con-tent of the entire course of development of the revolutionduring the five months since it began. 
 IV Let us first see how this compromising of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks with the bourgeoisie pro-ceeded, and then let us try to explain why the majority of the people trusted them. 
 V The Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries have com-promised with the capitalists in one way or another at everystage of the Russian revolution. 
 At the very close of February 1917, as soon as the people had triumphed and the tsarist regime had been overthrown,the capitalist Provisional Government admitted Keren-sky as a “socialist”. 
 As a matter of fact, Kerensky has never been a socialist; he was only a Trudovik, 92 and he enlisted himself with the “Socialist-Revolutionaries” only in March1917, when it was already safe and quite profitable todo so. 
 Through Kerensky, as Deputy Chairman of thePetrograd Soviet, the capitalist Provisional Government immediately set about gaining control of and taming the Soviet. 
 The Soviet, i. 
e. 
, the Socialist-Revolutionaries andMensheviks who predominated in it, allowed itself to be tamed, agreeing immediately after the formation of the capitalist Provisional Government to “support it”—“to the extent” that it carried out its promises. 
 The Soviet regarded itself as a body verifying and exer-cising control over the activities of the Provisional Govern-ment. 
 The leaders of the Soviet established what was knownas a Contact Commission to keep in touch with the govern-ment. 
 93 Within that Contact Commission, the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik leaders of the Soviet held continuous negotiations with the capitalist government,holding, properly speaking, the status of Ministers withoutportfolio or unofficial Ministers. 
 This state of affairs lasted throughout March and almost the whole of April. 
 Seeking to gain time, the capitalists resorted to delays and subterfuges. 
 Not a single step of any importance to further the revolution was taken by thecapitalist government during this period. 
 It did absolutelynothing even to further its direct and immediate task, theconvocation of the Constituent Assembly; it did not submitthe question to the localities or even set up a central com-mission to handle the preparations. 
 The government was concerned with only one thing, namely, surreptitiouslyrenewing the predatory international treaties concludedby the tsar with the capitalists of Britain and France,thwarting the revolution as cautiously and quietly as pos-sible, and promising everything without fulfilling any of its promises. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks in the Contact Commission acted like simpletons who werefed on fancy phrases, promises, and more promises. 
 Like thecrow in the fable, the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Men-sheviks succumbed to flattery and listened with pleasureto the assurances of the capitalists that they valued the Soviets highly and did not take a single step without them. 
 But time passed and the capitalist government did ab-solutely nothing for the revolution. 
 On the contrary, duringthis period it managed, to the detriment of the revolution,to renew the secret predatory treaties, or, rather, to reaf-firm them and “vitalise” them by supplementary and no less secret negotiations with Anglo-French imperialist diplomats. 
 During this period it managed, to the detriment of therevolution, to lay the foundations of a counter-revolutionary organisation of (or at least of a rapprochement among) the generals and officers in the army in the field. 
 To the detri-ment of the revolution it managed to start the organisation of industrialists, of factory-owners, who, under the on-slaught of the workers, were compelled to make concessionafter concession, but who at the same time began to sabotage(damage) production and prepare to bring it to a standstillwhen the opportunity came. 
 However, the organisation of the advanced workers and peasants in the Soviets made steady progress. 
 The foremostrepresentatives of the oppressed classes felt that, in spiteof the agreement between the government and the PetrogradSoviet, in spite of Kerensky’s pompous talk, in spite of the“Contact Commission”, the government remained an enemy of the people, an enemy of the revolution. 
 The people felt that unless the resistance of the capitalists was broken, thecause of peace, liberty and the revolution, would inevitablybe lost. 
 The impatience and bitterness of the people kepton growing. 
 VI It burst out on April 20-21. 
 The movement flared up spon-taneously; nobody had cleared the ground for it. 
 The move-ment was so markedly directed against the government thatone regiment even appeared fully armed at the MariinskyPalace to arrest the ministers. 
 It became perfectly obvious to everybody that the government could not retain power. 
 The Soviets could (and should) have taken over power with-out meeting the least resistance from any quarter. 
 Instead,the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks supported thecollapsing capitalist government, entangled themselveseven further in compromises with it and took steps that were even more fatal to the revolution, that tended to lead to its doom. 
 Revolution enlightens all classes with a rapidity and thoroughness unknown in normal, peaceful times. 
 The capi-talists, better organised and more experienced than anybodyelse in matters of class struggle and politics, learnt their lesson quicker than the others. 
 Realising that the govern-ment’s position was hopeless, they resorted to a methodwhich for many decades, ever since 1848, has been practised by the capitalists of other countries in order to fool, divide and weaken the workers. 
 This method is known as a “coali-tion” government, i. 
e. 
, a joint cabinet formed of members of the bourgeoisie and turncoats from socialism. 
 In countries where freedom and democracy have long existed side by side with a revolutionary labour movement,in Britain and France, the capitalists have repeatedly andvery successfully resorted to this method. 
 When the “socialist” leaders entered a bourgeois cabinet, they invariably proved to be figureheads, puppets, screens for the capitalists, in-struments for deceiving the workers. 
 The “democratic andrepublican” capitalists of Russia resorted to this verymethod. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks letthemselves be fooled at once, and the “coalition” cabinet, joined by Chernov, Tsereteli and Co. 
, became a fact on May 6. 
 The simpletons of the Socialist-Revolutionary and Men-shevik parties were jubilant and fatuously bathed in therays of the ministerial glory of their leaders. 
 The capitalistsgleefully rubbed their hands at having found helpers againstthe people in the persons of the “leaders of the Soviets” and at having secured their promise to support “offensive operations at the front”, i. 
e. 
, a resumption of the imperialistpredatory war, which had come to a standstill for a while. 
The capitalists were well aware of the puffed-up impotenceof these leaders, they knew that the promises of the bour-geoisie—regarding control over production, and even the organisation of production, regarding a peace policy, and so forth—would never be fulfilled. 
 And so it turned out. 
 The second phase in the development of the revolution, May 6 to June 9, or June 18, fully corro-borated the expectations of the capitalists as to the ease withwhich the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks could be fooled. 
 While Peshekhonov and Skobelev were deceiving them-selves and the people with florid speeches to the effect thatone hundred per cent of the profits of the capitalists wouldbe taken away from them, that their “resistance was broken”,and so forth, the capitalists continued to consolidate their position. 
 Nothing, absolutely nothing, was undertaken during this period to curb the capitalists. 
 The ministerialturncoats from socialism proved to be mere talking machines for distracting the attention of the oppressed classes, while the entire apparatus of state administration actually re-mained in the hands of the bureaucracy (the officialdom) and the bourgeoisie. 
 The notorious Palchinsky, Deputy Ministerfor Industry, was a typical representative of that apparatus,blocking every measure against the capitalists. 
 While theministers prated everything remained as of old. 
 The bourgeoisie used Minister Tsereteli in particular to fight the revolution. 
 He was sent to “pacify” Kronstadt when the local revolutionaries had the audacity to removean appointed commissar. 
 94 The bourgeoisie launched in their newspapers an incredibly vociferous, violent andvicious campaign of lies, slander and vituperation againstKronstadt, accusing it of the desire “to secede from Russia”, and repeating this and similar absurdities in a thousand ways to intimidate the petty bourgeoisie and the philistines. 
A most typically stupid and frightened philistine, Tsereteli,was the most “conscientious” of all in swallowing the baitof bourgeois slander; he was the most zealous of all in“smashing up and subduing” Kronstadt, without realising that he was playing the role of a lackey of the counter-revo-lutionary bourgeoisie. 
 He turned out to be the instrument ofthe “compromise” arrived at with revolutionary Kronstadt,whereby the commissar for Kronstadt was not simply ap-pointed by the government, but was elected locally and wasconfirmed by the government. 
 It was on such miserable compromises that the ministers who had deserted socialism for the bourgeoisie wasted their time. 
 Wherever a bourgeois minister could not appear in defence of the government, before the revolutionary workers or in theSoviets, Skobelev, Tsereteli, Chernov or some other “socialist”Minister appeared (or, to be precise, was sent by the bour-geoisie) and faithfully performed their assignment; he would do his level best to defend the Cabinet, whitewash thecapitalists and fool the people by making promise afterpromise and by advising people to wait, wait and wait. 
 Minister Chernov particularly was engaged in bargaining with his bourgeois colleagues; down to July, to the new “crisis of power” which began after the movement of July 3-4, to the resignation of the Cadets from the Cabinet, MinisterChernov was continuously engaged in the useful and inte-resting work, so beneficial to the people, of “persuading” his bourgeois colleagues, exhorting them to agree at least to prohibition of the purchase and sale of land. 
 This prohibition had been most solemnly promised to the peasants at the All-Russia Congress of Peasant Deputies in Petrograd. 
 But thepromise remained only a promise. 
 Chernov proved unable tofulfil it either in May or in June, until the revolutionarytide, the spontaneous outbreak of July 3-4, which coincided with the resignation of the Cadets from the Cabinet, made it possible to enact this measure. 
 Even then, however, it provedto be an isolated measure, incapable of promoting to anypalpable extent the struggle of the peasants against thelandowners for land. 
 Meanwhile, at the front, the counter-revolutionary, im-perialist task of resuming the imperialist, predatory war, a task which Guchkov, so hated by the people, had been unableto accomplish, was being accomplished successfully andbrilliantly by the “revolutionary democrat” Kerensky, thatnew-baked member of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party. 
 Herevelled in his own eloquence, incense was burned to him by the imperialists, who were using him as a pawn, he was flattered and worshipped—all because he served the capita-lists faithfully, trying to talk the “revolutionary troops”into agreeing to resume the war being waged in pursuanceof the treaties concluded by Tsar Nicholas II with the capi-talists of Britain and France, a war waged so that Russian capitalists might secure Constantinople and Lvov, Erzurum and Trebizond. 
 So passed the second phase of the Russian revolution— May 6 to June 9. 
 Shielded and defended by the “socialist”Ministers, the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie grew instrength, consolidated their position and prepared an offen-sive both against the external enemy and against the inter-nal enemy, i. 
e. 
, the revolutionary workers. 
 VII On June 9, the revolutionary workers’ party, the Bolshe-viks, was preparing for a demonstration in Petrograd to give organised expression to the irresistibly growing populardiscontent and indignation. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik leaders, entangled in compromises with the bourgeoisie and bound by the imperialist policy of an offen-sive, were horrified, feeling that they were losing their in-fluence among the masses. 
 A general howl went up againstthe demonstration, and the counter-revolutionary Cadetsjoined in this howl, this time together with the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks. 
 Under their direction, andas a result of their policy of compromise with the capitalists, the swing of the petty-bourgeois masses to an alliance with the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie became quite definiteand strikingly obvious. 
 This is the historical significanceand class meaning of the crisis of June 9. 
 The Bolsheviks called off the demonstration, having no wish to lead the workers at that moment into a losing fight against the united Cadets, Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks. 
 The latter, however, so as to retain at least avestige of the people’s confidence, were compelled to call ageneral demonstration for June 18. 
 The bourgeoisie werebeside themselves with rage, rightly discerning in this aswing of the petty-bourgeois democrats towards the proletar-iat, and they decided to paralyse the action of the democrats by an offensive at the front. 
 In fact, June 18 was marked by an impressive victory for the slogans of the revolutionary proletariat, the slogansof Bolshevism, among the people of Petrograd. 
 And on June19 the bourgeoisie and the Bonapartist * Kerensky solemnly announced that the offensive at the front had begun on June 18. 
 The offensive meant in effect the resumption of the preda-tory war in the interests of the capitalists and against thewill of the vast majority of the working people. 
 That iswhy the offensive was inevitably accompanied, on the one hand, by a gigantic growth of chauvinism and the transfer of military power (and consequently of state power) to themilitary gang of Bonapartists, and, on the other, by the use *Bonapartism (from Bonaparte, the name of the two French emperors) is a name applied to a government which endeavours toappear non-partisan by taking advantage of a highly acute strugglebetween the parties of the capitalists and the workers. 
 Actually serving the capitalists, such a government dupes the workers most of all by promises and petty concessions. 
 of violence against the masses, the persecution of the inter-nationalists, the abolition of freedom of agitation, and the arrest and shooting of those who were against the war. 
 Whereas May 6 bound the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks to the triumphal chariot of the bourgeoisie witha rope, June 19 shackled them, as servants of the capitalists,with a chain. 
 VIII Owing to the resumption of the predatory war, the bitter-ness of the people naturally grew even more rapidly andintensely. 
 July 3-4 witnessed an outburst of their anger whichthe Bolsheviks attempted to restrain and which, of course, they had to endeavour to make as organised as possible. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, being slaves of the bourgeoisie, shackled by their master, agreed toeverything: dispatching reactionary troops to Petrograd,bringing back the death penalty, disarming the workers andrevolutionary troops, arresting and hounding, and closing down newspapers without trial. 
 The power which the bour-geoisie in the government were unable to take entirely, andwhich the Soviets did not want to take, fell into the handsof the military clique, the Bonapartists, who, of course,were wholly backed by the Cadets and the Black Hundreds,by the landowners and capitalists. 
 Down the ladder, step by step. 
 Having once set foot on the ladder of compromise with the bourgeoisie, the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks slid irresistibly downwards,to rock bottom. 
 On February 28, in the Petrograd Soviet,they promised conditional support to the bourgeois govern-ment. 
 On May 6 they saved it from collapse and allowed themselves to be made its servants and defenders by agreeing to an offensive. 
 On June 9 they united with the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie in a campaign of furious rage,lies and slander against the revolutionary proletariat. 
 OnJune 19 they approved the resumption of the predatory war. 
On July 3 they consented to the summoning of reactionary troops, which was the beginning of their complete surrender of power to the Bonapartists. 
 Down the ladder, step bystep. 
 This shameful finale of the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties was not fortuitous but a consequence of the economic status of the small owners, the petty bourgeoi-sie, as has been repeatedly borne out by experience in Europe. 
 IX Everybody, of course, has seen the small owner bend every effort and strain every nerve to “get on in the world”, to become a real master, to rise to the position of a “strong”employer, to the position of a bourgeois. 
 As long as capital-ism rules the roost, there is no alternative for the smallowner other than becoming a capitalist (and that is possibleat best in the case of one small owner out of a hundred), or becoming a ruined man, a semi-proletarian, and ultimately a proletarian. 
 The same is true in politics: the petty-bour-geois democrats, especially their leaders, tend to trail afterthe bourgeoisie. 
 The leaders of the petty-bourgeois democratsconsole their people with promises and assurances about thepossibility of reaching agreement with the big capitalists; at best, and for a very brief period, they obtain certain minor concessions from the capitalists for a small uppersection of the working people; but on every decisive issue,on every important matter, the petty-bourgeois democratshave always tailed after the bourgeoisie as a feeble appendageto them, as an obedient tool in the hands of the financial magnates. 
 The experience of Britain and France has proved this over and over again. 
 The experience of the Russian revolution from February to July 1917, when events developed with unusual rapidity,particularly under the influence of the imperialist war andthe deep-going crisis brought about by it, has most strikingly and palpably confirmed the old Marxist truth that the posi-tion of the petty bourgeoisie is unstable. 
 The lesson of the Russian revolution is that there can be no escape for the working people from the iron grip of war,famine, and enslavement by the landowners and capitalistsunless they completely break with the Socialist-Revolution-ary and Menshevik parties and clearly understand the latter’s treacherous role, unless they renounce all compromises withthe bourgeoisie and resolutely side with the revolutionary workers. 
 Only the revolutionary workers, if supported by the peasant poor, are capable of smashing the resistance of the capitalists and leading the people in gaining land with-out compensation, complete liberty, victory over famineand the war, and a just and lasting peace. 
 AFTERWORD This article was written at the end of July, as is apparent from the text. 
 The history of the revolution during August has fully corroborated what is said in this article. 
 Then, at the endof August, the Kornilov revolt 95 caused a new turn in the revolution by clearly demonstrating to the whole people that the Cadets, in alliance with the counter-revolutionary generals, were striving to disband the Soviets and restorethe monarchy. 
 The near future will show how strong thisnew turn of the revolution is, and whether it will succeedin putting an end to the fatal policy of compromise withthe bourgeoisie. 
 N. 
 Lenin September 6, 1917 KAMENE V’S SPEEC H IN THE C. 
E. 
C. 
 ON THE STOCKHOL M CONFERENC E96 The speech made by Comrade Kamenev on August 6 in the Central Executive Committee on the Stockholm Conference cannot but meet with reproof from all Bolsheviks who are faithful to their Party and principles. 
 In the very first sentence of his speech, Comrade Kamenev made a formal statement which gave his whole speech amonstrous ring. 
 He made the reservation that he was speak-ing on his own behalf, and that “our group has not discussed this issue”. 
 First of all, since when, in an organised party, do individu-al members speak about important issues “on their own behalf”? Since the group had not discussed the issue, Comrade Kamenev had no right to speak. 
 This is the first conclusionto be drawn from his words. 
 Secondly, what right had Comrade Kamenev to ignore the decision of the Party Central Committee against partici-pating in the Stockholm Conference? As long as this decision has not been rescinded by a congress or by a new decision of the Central Committee, it remains law for the Party. 
Had it been rescinded, Comrade Kamenev could not have kept quiet, could not have spoken in the present perfect: “We Bolsheviks have so far adopted a negative attitude to theStockholm Conference. 
” Again the conclusion is that Kamenev had no right to speak and, moreover, directly violated a Party decision,directly spoke against the Party, and thwarted its will by not saying a word about the Central Committee decision, which is binding on him. 
 Yet the decision was publishedin Pravda , even with the additional remark that the Party representative would withdraw from the Zimmerwald Con-ference should it favour participation in the Stockholm Conference. 
 * Kamenev gave an incorrect account of the reasons for the “former” negative attitude of the Bolsheviks towardsparticipation in the Stockholm Conference. 
 He did not saythat social-imperialists were going to attend the conferenceand that it would be a disgrace for a revolutionary Social-Democrat to have any truck with them. 
 Sad to admit, Starostin, who has often been very much in the wrong in the past, put the revolutionary Social-Democratic point of view a thousand times better, morecorrectly and more fittingly than Kamenev. 
 To confer withsocial-imperialists, ministers, butcher’s aides in Russia would be shameful treachery. 
 There could then be no talk of inter-nationalism. 
 Kamenev’s arguments, which actually favour a “change” in our view on the Stockholm Conference, are ludicrouslyfeeble. 
 “It became clear to us,” Kamenev said, “that from that [??] moment the Stockholm Conference ceased [??] to be a blind instrument of the imperialist countries. 
” That is not true. 
 There is not a single fact to support it, and Kamenev could advance no serious argument in its fa-vour. 
 If the Anglo-French social-imperialists refuse to at-tend, while the German do attend, can that be regarded asa change in principle?? Is it a change at all from an interna-tionalist point of view? Can Kamenev really have “forgotten”the decision of our Party conference (April 29) on the perfect-ly analogous case of the Danish social-imperialist? According to newspaper reports, Kamenev further said, “The broad revolutionary banner under which the forces of the world proletariat are mustering is beginning to wave over Stockholm. 
” This is a meaningless declamation in the spirit of Chernov and Tsereteli. 
 It is a blatant untruth. 
 In actual fact, it isnot the revolutionary banner that is beginning to waveover Stockholm, but the banner of deals, agreements, amne-sty for the social-imperialists, and negotiations among bank-ers for dividing up annexed territory. 
 *See present edition, Vol. 
 24, p. 
 388. 
— Ed. 
 We cannot tolerate a situation where the party of the internationalists, which is responsible to the whole world for revolutionary internationalism, compromises itself by winking at the dirty tricks of the Russian and German so-cial-imperialists, of the ministers of the bourgeois imperi-alist government of the Chernovs, Skobelevs and Co. 
 We have decided to build a Third International, and we must do so in face of all difficulties. 
 Not a single step back-ward to deals with the social-imperialists and deserters from socialism! Proletary No. 
 3 Published according to August 29 (16), 1917 the text in Proletary Signed: N. 
 Lenin RUMOURS OF A CONSPIRACY The item published under the above title in Novaya Zhizn No. 
 103 on August 17 deserves very serious attention. 
 We must dwell on it (again and again), even though what itmakes out to be something serious is not serious at all. 
 It says roughly that on August 14 the rumour was put about in Moscow that some Cossack units were moving to-wards Moscow from the front and that, moreover, “certain military groups enjoying the sympathy of certain circles in Moscow” were organising “decisive counter-revolutionaryactions”. 
 It also alleges that the military authorities had noti-fied the Moscow Soviet of Soldiers’ and Workers’ Deputies,and “with the participation of Central Executive Committeemembers” (i. 
e. 
, Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries) had taken steps to inform the soldiers of the need to guard the city, etc. 
 “Moscow Bolsheviks,” the item says in conclu-sion, “were likewise invited to participate in these prepara-tions since they are influential among many army units andwere given access to these for the occasion. 
” This last sentence is deliberately vague and ambiguous, for if the Bolsheviks are influential among many army units (which is indisputable and generally recognised), then whoand how could give them “access” to those units? This is obviously absurd. 
 If, however, the Bolsheviks were really“given access” “for the occasion” (By whom? Evidently bythe Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s!) to any army units, that means there was a certain bloc , alliance or agreement between the Bolsheviks and the defencists on “defence against the coun-ter-revolution”. 
 It is this circumstance that makes an unserious item serious, and requires a very careful approach to what is reported on the part of all class-conscious workers. 
 The rumour put about by the defencists, i. 
e. 
, by the Men-sheviks and S. 
R. 
s, is clearly absurd, and the foul andinfamous political calculations which have prompted itare quite evident. 
 It is the Provisional Government which isreally counter-revolutionary and which the defencists al-legedly want to defend. 
 Cossack troops were recalled from the front to the capitals, specifically to Petrograd on July 3,by none other than the Provisional Government and the“socialist” Ministers, as was formally confirmed by the Cos-sack General Kaledin at the Moscow counter-revolutionaryimperialist meeting. 
 This is a fact. 
 This particular fact, which exposes the Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s, and proves their betrayal of the revolution, their alliance with the counter-revolutionaries, their alliance with the Kaledins—this fact the Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s wouldlike to cover up, to hush up, to make people forget, through“rumours” alleging that the Cossacks are marching on Moscow against the will of Kerensky, Tsereteli, Skobelev and Avksen-tyev, that the Mensheviks and the S. 
R. 
s are “defending therevolution”, and so on. 
 The political scheme of the Menshe-vik and defencist traitors is as clear as can be: they want tofool the workers, to make themselves out to be revolutiona-ries, to learn something about the Bolsheviks (so as to pass it on to the counter-intelligence service, of course), to patch up their reputation! A scheme as vile as it is crude! Atsmall expense, having made up a stupid little “rumour”,they hope to gain “access” to the Bolshevik army units and,in general, to strengthen confidence in the ProvisionalGovernment by assuring naïve people that it is this govern-ment the Cossacks want to overthrow, that it is not in collu-sion with the Cossacks and is “defending the revolution”,and so on, and so forth. 
 The little scheme is obvious. 
 The rumour, of course, is absurd and clearly fabricated. 
 But confidence in the Provi-sional Government they hope to get in cold cash, and, fur-ther, they hope to draw the Bolsheviks into a “bloc” with them! First page of the manuscript “Rumours of a Conspiracy”, August 1917 Reduced First page of the manuscript “Rumours of a Conspiracy”, August 1917 Reduced It is hard to believe that there can be such fools and scoundrels among the Bolsheviks willing to enter into a bloc with the defencists at present. 
 It is hard to believe, first, because there is an explicit resolution of the Sixth Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P . 
97 which says (see Proletar y98 No. 
 4) that “the Mensheviks have deserted for good to the camp of the proletariat’s enemies”. 
 You do not concludeagreements or make blocs with people who have deserted for good to the enemy camp. 
 “The prime task of revolution-ary Social-Democrats”, the resolution goes on to say, “is toisolate them [the Menshevik defencists] completely fromall the more or less revolutionary elements of the workingclass. 
” It is obviously against this isolation that the Men-sheviks and S. 
R. 
s are fighting by spreading absurd rumours. 
 And it is obvious that in Moscow as in Petrograd, the workers are turning away more and more from the Mensheviks andS. 
R. 
s, realising more and more clearly the treacherous,counter-revolutionary nature of their policies. 
 And so, to“remedy the situation”, the defencists are compelled toresort to every trick in the book. 
 The Congress resolution being what it is, any Bolshevik who came to terms with the defencists for the purpose of“giving access”, or indirectly expressing confidence in theProvisional Government (which is allegedly being defendedagainst the Cossacks), would, of course, be immediatelyand deservedly expelled from the Party. 
 There are, however, other reasons why it is hard to believe there can be Bolsheviks, in Moscow or elsewhere, capable offorming a bloc with the defencists, of forming anything likecommon, even temporary, bodies, of making any kind ofdeal, etc. 
, with them. 
 Let us imagine a situation mostfavourable to such rather unlikely Bolsheviks; let us assume that in their naïveté they actually believed in the rumours they hear from the Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s; let us even assumethat, to inspire them with confidence, they were given cer-tain, likewise invented, “facts”. 
 It is obvious that even inthese circumstances, not a single honest Bolshevik whohas not completely lost his head would agree to any bloc with the defencists, would make any deals on “giving access”, etc. 
 Even in these circumstances, a Bolshevik would say:“Our workers and soldiers will fight the counter-revolutionary troops if they start an offensive now against the Provisional Government; they will do so not to defend this government, which called Kaledin and Co. 
 on July 3, but to independently defend the revolution as they pursue their own aim, theaim of securing victory for the workers, for the poor, forthe cause of peace, and not for the imperialists, for Keren-sky, Avksentyev, Tsereteli, Skobelev and Co. 
” Even inthe exceedingly unlikely situation we have assumed, a Bolshevik would tell the Mensheviks: “We shall fight, of course, but we refuse to enter into any political alliancewhatever with you, refuse to express the least confidence inyou. 
 We shall fight in the very same way as the Social-Democrats fought tsarism in February 1917, together withthe Cadets, without entering into any alliance with the Cadets or trusting them for one second. 
 The slightest confidence in the Mensheviks would be as much of a betrayal of the revo-lution now as confidence in the Cadets would have been be-tween 1905 and 1917. 
” A Bolshevik would tell the workers and soldiers: “Let us fight, but not one iota of trust in the Mensheviks if you don’t want to rob yourselves of the fruits of victory. 
” It is all too advantageous for the Mensheviks to put about false rumours and allegations to the effect that the govern-ment they support is saving the revolution, while in realityit has already formed a bloc with the Kaledins, is already counter-revolutionary, has already taken a great many steps, and is daily taking further steps, to meet the terms of this bloc with the Kaledins. 
 To believe these rumours, to support them directly or indirectly, would mean, on the part of the Bolsheviks, be-traying the cause of the revolution. 
 The chief guarantee ofits success today is for the people to clearly realise the treachery of the Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s and completely break with them, and for every revolutionary worker to boycottthem as completely as they boycotted the Cadets after theexperience of 1905. 
 (I request that several copies be made of this article, so that it may be sent to several Party papers and magazinessimultaneously for publication, and at the same time be put before the Central Committee on my behalf with the following postscript: I request that this article be considered as my report to the Central Committee, with the added proposal that theCentral Committee order an official investigation, withMoscow comrades who are not members of the C. 
C. 
 partici-pating, to establish whether the Bolsheviks had any commoninstitutions with the defencists on this basis, whether there were any blocs or agreements, what they consisted in, etc. 
 The facts and particulars must be investigated officially,and all details ascertained. 
 If the existence of a bloc isconfirmed, members of the Central Committee or the MoscowCommittee must be relieved of their duties and the questionof their formal removal must be submitted, even before the next Congress meets, to the next plenary meeting of the Central Committee. 
 For now , after the Moscow meeting, after the strike, after July 3-5, it is Moscow that is acquiring, ormay acquire, the significance of a centre . 
 It may well be that a movement similar to that of July 3-5 will developin this vast proletarian centre, which is larger than Petro-grad. 
 At that time the task in Petrograd was to give the movement a peaceful and organised character. 
 That was a correct slogan. 
 The task facing us in Moscow now is entirely different; the former slogan would be absolutely incorrect. 
Our task now would be to take power and to proclaim our-selves the government in the name of peace, land for the peasants, and the convocation of the Constituent Assembly at the appointed time by agreement with the peasants in thevarious localities, etc. 
 It is quite possible that such a move-ment will break out in Moscow due to unemployment,famine, a railway strike, economic dislocation, and so on. 
It is highly important to have people “at the helm” in Moscow who will not swerve to the right, who will not form blocs with the Mensheviks, and who in the event of a movementwill understand the new tasks, the new slogan of seizing power, the new ways and means of winning it. 
 This is why an “investigation” of the bloc case and censure of the Bolsheviksin the bloc, if any, and their removal are necessary not only for discipline, not only for remedying the blunder already made, but for the vital interests of the future movement. 
 The Moscow strike on August 12 proved that the active workers support the Bolsheviks, even though the Duma elections yielded a majority to the S. 
R. 
s. 
 This is very similar to the situation in Petrograd before July 3-5, 1917. 
 But there is a vast difference between the situation then and now, forat that time Petrograd could not even have taken powerphysically, and had it done so, it could not have retainedpower politically, for Tsereteli and Co. 
 had not yet sunkas low as to support butchery. 
 This is why at that time , on July 3-5, 1917, in Petrograd, the slogan of taking power would have been incorrect . 
 At that time, even the Bolsheviks were not, and could not have been, consciously determinedto treat Tsereteli and Co. 
 as counter-revolutionaries. 
 Atthat time, neither the soldiers nor the workers could havehad the experience brought by the month of July. 
 The situation now is entirely different. 
 Should a spontane-ous movement break out in Moscow today, the slogan shouldbe precisely to seize power. 
 It is of the utmost importance,therefore, that the movement in Moscow be led by people fitfor the task, who have fully grasped and considered this slogan. 
 This is why we must insist again and again on an investigation and the removal of the guilty. 
) Written on August 18-19 (August 31-September 1), 1917 First published in Published according to Lenin Miscellany VII, 1928 the manuscript THEY DO NOT SEE THE WOOD FOR THE TREES Speaking at the session of the Central Executive Commit-tee of the Soviets on August 4, L. 
 Martov said (we quotefrom the Novaya Zhizn report) that “Tsereteli’s criticism is too mild”, that “the government does not repel counter-revolutionary attempts by army officers”, and that “it is notour aim to overthrow the present government or undermine confidence in it.... 
” “The actual balance of forces,” Martov continued, “does not at present warrant the demand forpower to be transferred to the Soviets. 
 This could come onlyin the course of a civil war, which at the moment is imper-missible. 
” “It is not our intention to overthrow the govern-ment,” Martov concluded, “but we must call its attention to the fact that there are other forces in the country besides the Cadets and army officers. 
 They are the revolutionarydemocratic forces, and on them the Provisional Governmentmust rely for support. 
” These are remarkable arguments from Martov, and they deserve very careful examination. 
 They are remarkable in that they bring out very clearly the most widespread, the most harmful and most dangerous political errors of thepetty-bourgeois masses and their most typical prejudices. 
Of all spokesmen for these masses, Martov, a publicist, iscertainly one of the most “Left-wing”, most revolutionary,most politically conscious and most skilful. 
 It is therefore more useful to analyse his arguments than those of a Chernov flaunting an array of empty words or of a stupid Tsereteliand their like. 
 In analysing Martov’s arguments, we shallanalyse what is at present most reasonable in the ideas ofthe petty bourgeoisie. 
 First of all, Martov’s vacillation over the transfer of power to the Soviets is quite typical. 
 Prior to July 4 Martov was against this slogan. 
 After July 4, he was for it. 
 Early in August, he was once more against it, and note his monstrous-ly illogical and amusing, from a Marxist point of view, ar-gumentation. 
 He is against it because, he says, “the actual balance of forces does not at present warrant the demand for power to be transferred to the Soviets. 
 This could come onlyin the course of a civil war, which at the moment is imper-missible”. 
 What a muddle. 
 It implies, first, that before July 4 the transfer of power was possible without civil war (true enough!), but it was just then that Martov was against the transfer. 
 It implies, secondly, that after July 4, when Martov was forthe transfer of power to the Soviets, it was possible withoutcivil war—an obvious, glaring distortion of the facts, forit was on the night of July 4-5 that the Bonapartists, support-ed by the Cadets and attended on by lackeys like Chernov and Tsereteli, brought the counter-revolutionary troops to Petrograd. 
 To take power peacefully under these circum-stances would have been absolutely impossible. 
 Thirdly and lastly, Martov implies that a Marxist or even just a revolutionary democrat had the right to reject a slogancorrectly expressing the interests of the people and those of the revolution on the grounds that the slogan could be real-ised “only in the course of a civil war”. 
 But this is an obvi-ous absurdity, an obvious renunciation of the whole classstruggle, the whole revolution. 
 For everyone knows thatthe history of all revolutions the world over reveals aninevitable rather than an accidental transformation of the class struggle into civil war. 
 Everyone knows that it was after July 4 that we in Russia saw the counter-revolutionarybourgeoisie starting civil war, the disarming of regiments,executions at the front, and assassination of Bolsheviks. 
Civil war is “impermissible” for revolutionary democrats,if you please, just when the course of events has inexorably brought about a situation in which the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie have started civil war. 
 Martov has entangled himself in the most unbelievable, amusing, and helpless fashion. 
 In disentangling the confusion created by him, we must say:It was before July 4 that to transfer full power to the then existing Soviets was the only correct slogan. 
 At that time, it could have been done peacefully, without civil war, be-cause there had been no systematic acts of violence against the masses, against the people, such as began after July 4. 
 At that time, the transfer of power guaranteed the peaceful progress of the whole revolution and, in particular, made it possible to peacefully eliminate the struggle between classesand parties within the Soviets. 
 After July 4, the transfer of power to the Soviets became impossible without civil war, since, on July 4 and 5, powerhad passed to a military Bonapartist clique backed by the Cadets and the Black Hundreds. 
 Hence, all Marxists, all those on the side of the revolutionary proletariat, all honestrevolutionary democrats, must now explain to the workers and peasants the radical change in the situation which neces-sitates a new path for the transfer of power to the proletariansand semi-proletarians. 
 Martov has advanced no arguments in defence of his “idea” that civil war is impermissible “at the moment”, indefence of his statement that it is not his intention “tooverthrow the present government”. 
 Because his opinion isunsubstantiated, and particularly because he voiced it ata meeting of defencists, it inevitably smacks of the defencist argument that civil war is impermissible while the enemy threatens from without. 
 We wonder whether Martov could have brought himself to advance such an argument openly. 
 Among the mass ofthe petty bourgeoisie, this argument is very popular. 
 And,of course, it is one of the most common place. 
 The bourgeoisie were unafraid of revolution and civil war at times when the enemy threatened from without—either in September 1870in France or in February 1917 in Russia. 
 The bourgeoisiewere unafraid of seizing power at the price of civil war attimes when the enemy threatened from without. 
 The revo-lutionary proletariat will reckon just as little with this “argument” from liars and lackeys of the bourgeoisie. 
 * * * One of the most glaring theoretical mistakes which Martov makes and which is also very typical of the whole range of political ideas of the petty bourgeoisie, is to confound tsarist counter-revolution, and monarchist counter-revolution ingeneral, with bourgeois counter-revolution. 
 It is due to the particular narrow-mindedness, or particular stupidity, of the petty-bourgeois democrat who cannot break free from economic, political and ideological dependence on the bour-geoisie, who cedes them priority, sees them as an “ideal”,and believes their cries about the danger of “counter-revo-lution from the right”. 
 Martov expressed this range of ideas, or rather this petty-bourgeois stupidity, by saying in his speech: “To counter-balance the pressure exerted upon it [the government] from the right, we must create a c ounter-pressure. 
” Here is a sample of the philistine credulity and disregard of the class struggle. 
 It implies that the government issomething above classes and above parties, the only troublebeing that it is under too strong pressure from the right, so that there is need of stronger pressure from the left. 
 What wisdom worthy of Louis Blanc, Chernov, Tsereteli, and allthat despicable crew! How infinitely useful this philistinewisdom is for the Bonapartists! How they long to make “thefoolish yokels” believe that the present government isfighting both the Right and the Left, the extremes only, as it builds up true statehood and exercises true democracy! Yet, in practice, it is this Bonapartist government thatconstitutes a government of the counter-revolutionarybourgeoisie. 
 It is to the advantage of the bourgeoisie (and necessary for the perpetuation of their domination) to deceive the people by making believe that they represent “the revolution in general, while counter-revolution threatens from the right,from the tsar. 
” It is only through the infinite stupidity ofthe Dans and Tseretelis, through the infinite conceit of theChernovs and Avksentyevs, that this idea, nurtured by theconditions of life of the petty bourgeoisie, still survives among “revolutionary democrats” in general. 
 Anyone who has learned anything from history or from Marxism will have to admit that a political analysis mustfocus on the class issue: what class represents the revolution and what class the counter-revolution? French history shows us that the Bonapartist counter-revolution developed at the end of the eighteenth century (and then, for a second time, from 1848 to 1852) on the basisof the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie, and in turn paved the way for the restoration of a legitimate monarchy. 
 Bona-partism is a form of government which grows out of the counter-revolutionary nature of the bourgeoisie, in the con-ditions of democratic changes and a democratic revolution. 
 You have to purposely shut your eyes not to see how, before your very eyes, Bonapartism is growing in Russiaunder very similar conditions. 
 The tsarist counter-revolutionis at present negligible; it has no political importance and plays no political role. 
 The bogey of a tsarist counter-revo-lution is being purposely played up and made a fuss overby charlatans to frighten fools, to treat philistines to a polit-ical sensation, to distract the people’s attention from thereal and serious counter-revolution. 
 You just cannot helplaughing at the arguments of a Zarudny, who endeavours to assess the counter-revolutionary role of a little backyard union called “Holy Russia” but who does “not see” the coun-ter-revolutionary role of the union of the entire bourgeoisieof Russia called the Cadet Party. 
 The Cadet Party is the major political force of the bour-geois counter-revolution in Russia. 
 This force has splendidly rallied around it all Black Hundred elements, both at the elections and (more important still) in the apparatus ofmilitary and civil administration and in the press campaignof lies, slander and baiting directed primarily at the Bol-sheviks, i. 
e. 
, the party of the revolutionary proletariat, andthen against the Soviets. 
 Gradually but relentlessly, the present government is pursuing the very policy which the Cadet Party has beensystematically advocating and preparing for ever sinceMarch 1917. 
 It has resumed and is prolonging the imperialistwar; it has stopped chattering about peace; it first gaveministers the right to close down newspapers, then to dis-perse conferences, then to arrest and exile people; it has restored capital punishment and executions at the front;it is disarming the workers and the revolutionary regiments;it has flooded the capital with counter-revolutionary troops;it has begun to arrest and persecute the peasants for unau-thorised “seizures”; it is shutting down factories and organis-ing lock-outs. 
 This is a far from complete list of measures which present an excellent picture of the bourgeois counter-revolution of Bonapartism. 
 And what about the postponed convocation of the Con-stituent Assembly and the crowning of a Bonapartist policy with a Zemsky Sobor in Moscow—a step leading to the post-ponement of the Constituent Assembly until after the war?Isn’t this a gem of Bonapartist politics? Yet Martov does notsee where the general headquarters of the bourgeois counter-revolution is. 
 Really some do not see the wood for the trees. 
 * * * What really dirty lackey’s role the Central Executive Committee of the Soviets, i. 
e. 
, the S. 
R. 
s and Menshevikswho dominate it, played in the matter of postponing theConstituent Assembly! The Cadets set the tone by launchingthe idea of postponement, starting a press campaign and using the Cossack congress as a pretext to demand postpone-ment. 
 (A Cossack congress! How could the Liebers, Avksen-tyevs, Chernovs and Tseretelis help behaving like lackeys!)The Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s hopped along after the Cadets,they crawled at their master’s call like dogs threatened withtheir master’s whip. 
 Instead of giving the people a plain statement of the facts showing how brazenly, how shamelessly the Cadets hadbeen delaying and blocking the convocation of the Constitu-ent Assembly since March, and instead of exposing the falseevasions and the assertion that it was impossible to convokethe Constituent Assembly at the appointed time, the Bureau of the Central Executive Committee promptly brushed aside all “doubts” expressed even by Dan (even by Dan!) and sentBramson and Bronzov, two lackeys of that bureau of lackeys,to the Provisional Government with a report “on the needto postpone elections to the Constituent Assembly untilOctober 28-29”. 
 A splendid prelude to the coronation of the Bonapartists by a Zemsky Sobor in Moscow. 
 Whoever has not stooped to complete infamy must rally to the party ofthe revolutionary proletariat. 
 Without the victory of therevolutionary proletariat there can be no peace for the people, land for the peasants nor bread for the workers andall working people. 
 Proletary No. 
 6 Published according to September 1 (August 19), 1917 the text in Proletary Signed: N. 
 Karpov POLITICAL BLACKMAIL Blackmail is the extortion of money under threat of exposing certain facts or invented “stories” which may bedisagreeable to the person concerned, or under threat of causing him some other unpleasantness. 
 Political blackmail is the threat of exposing, or the actual exposure, of true, but more often invented, “stories” withthe aim of causing an opponent political damage, of slan-dering him, of depriving him of the possibility of engagingin political activity, or of making it difficult for him. 
 Our republican and—please excuse the term—even demo-cratic bourgeois and petty-bourgeois people proved them-selves to be heroes of political blackmail by starting a “cam-paign” of defamation, lies and slander against the parties andpolitical leaders that do not suit them. 
 Tsarism persecutedcrudely, savagely, brutally. 
 The republican bourgeoisie per-secute in a dirty way, striving to besmirch the reputation of the hated proletarian revolutionary and internationalist byslander, lies, insinuations, defamation, rumours, etc. 
, etc. 
 The Bolsheviks in particular have had the honour of ex-periencing these methods of persecution used by the republi-can imperialists. 
 In general, the Bolshevik might apply to himself the well-known words of the poet: He hears the voice of approbation Not in the dulcet sounds of praise , But in the savage cries of indignation! 99 Savage cries of indignation at the Bolsheviks rang out from all bourgeois and nearly all petty-bourgeois papers almost immediately after the beginning of the Russian revolution. 
 And the Bolshevik, the internationalist, the sup-porter of the proletarian revolution, may justly hear the voice of approbation in these savage cries of indignation, for the fierce hatred of the bourgeoisie is often the best proof of faithful and honest service to the cause of the proletariatby the slandered, baited and persecuted. 
 The blackmailing nature of the slanderous methods of the bourgeoisie may be illustrated best of all by an examplewhich does not concern our Party, namely, the “affair” of the Socialist-Revolutionary Chernov. 
 Some members of the Cadet Party, notorious slanderers headed by Milyukovand Hessen, trying to intimidate or expel Chernov, starteda campaign, baiting him for his allegedly “defeatist” articlesabroad, and for his association with persons supposed tohave received money from German imperialist agents. 
 The campaign gathered strength. 
 It was taken up by all bour-geois papers. 
 Afterwards the Cadets and S. 
R. 
s “came to terms” on a certain composition of the Cabinet. 
 And lo and behold! TheChernov “affair” is dropped! It was dropped in a few days,without trial or examination, without publishing docu-ments, without questioning witnesses, without presenting the decision of experts. 
 When the Cadets were dissatisfiedwith Chernov, they began a slanderous “affair”. 
 When theCadets had come to terms politically with Chernov, at leastfor a while, the “affair” was dropped. 
 This is a graphic example of political blackmail. 
 Baiting in the newspapers, slander, and insinuations serve as a weapon of political struggle and political revenge in thehands of the bourgeoisie and such scoundrels as the Milyu-kovs, Hessens, Zaslavskys, Dans, etc. 
 Once the politicalaim is attained, the “case” against X or Y is dropped, show-ing the dirty character, base dishonesty, and blackmailing nature of those who started it. 
 For it is obvious that one who does not practise blackmail would not discontinue his revelations—if he were promptedby honest motives—no matter what political changes tookplace; he would in any circumstances bring his revelationsto a conclusion, to a court sentence, to a point where the public was fully informed, where all documents were collect-ed and published, or he would openly and explicitly admitthat he had made a mistake or had misinterpreted the facts. 
 The case of Chernov, who is not a Bolshevik, clearly de-monstrates the true nature of the blackmailing crusade against the Bolsheviks by the bourgeois and petty-bourgeois papers. 
 When the political aim of those knights and hangers-on of capital seemed to them to have been reached, whenthe Bolsheviks had been arrested and their newspapers closeddown, the blackmailers fell silent ! Having at their disposal every means of revealing the truth—the press, money, aid from the foreign bourgeoisie, the co-operation of “public opinion” of the whole bourgeoisie of Russia, and the friendlysupport of the state power of one of the largest countries ofthe world—having all this at their disposal, the heroes ofthe anti-Bolshevik crusade, the Milyukovs and Hessens,the Zaslavskys and Dans, fell silent ! It is becoming clear to every fair-minded person, as it at once became clear to class-conscious workers, whose entirelife prepares them for a quick understanding of the methodsof the bourgeoisie, that the Milyukovs and Hessens, theZaslavskys and Dans, etc. 
, etc. 
, are political blackmailers . 
 We must make it perfectly clear, must explain it to the masses, write about it in the papers every day, collect docu-ments about it for a pamphlet, boycott the blackmailers,and so on, and so forth. 
 These are the methods of struggleworthy of the proletariat in combating slander and blackmail! One of the latest to suffer from blackmail was our comrade, Kamenev. 
 He has “withdrawn from public activity” until his case is examined. 
 We think that a mistake. 
 It is exactly what the blackmailers wanted. 
 They do not want to examinehis case. 
 Kamenev should merely have countered the scoun-drels with the trust of his own party, and let the dogs of Rech , Birzhevka , Dyen , Rabochaya Gazeta and other filthy rags bark. 
 If our Party were to consent to the suspension of public activities by its leaders because they had been slandered bythe bourgeoisie, the Party would suffer terribly; it wouldcause harm to the proletariat and make its enemies happy. 
For the bourgeoisie have many papers they have even moreblackmailing, venal pens (like those of Zaslavsky and Co. 
), and it would be only too easy for them to “suspend” our Party workers! The bourgeoisie are not interested in exam-ining the case, in getting to the root of the matter. 
 That won’t do, comrades! We must not give in to the clam-our of the bourgeois press! We must not please those black-mailing scoundrels, the Milyukovs, Hessens and Zaslav-skys. 
 We must rely on the proletarians’ verdict, the verdictof the class-conscious workers in our Party, which numbers240,000 internationalists. 
 We mustn’t forget that interna-tionalists are persecuted throughout the world by the bour-geoisie allied with the defencists, through lies, slander and blackmail. 
 We must stand firm in branding the blackmailers. 
 We must firmly submit our slightest doubts for the class-con-scious workers, for our Party, to judge. 
 We trust our Party. 
We see in it the intelligence, honour and conscience of ourtimes. 
 We see the only guarantee of success for the emanci-pation movement of the working class in a world alliance of revolutionary internationalists. 
 No yielding to the “public opinion” of those who sit in one Cabinet with the Cadets, who shake the hands of theMilyukovs, Dans and Zaslavskys! Down with the political blackmailers! Scorn and boycott them! Always expose their infamous names to the workers! We must unswervingly follow our own path, keep our Partyin working order, and even protect its leaders from wastingtheir time on mud-slingers and their filthy slander. 
 Proletary No. 
 10 Published according to September 6 (August 24), 1917 the Proletary text PAPER RESOLUTIONS Mr. 
 Tsereteli is one of the most garrulous of the “socialist” Ministers and petty-bourgeois leaders. 
 You have to forceyourself to read his countless speeches right through. 
 These absolutely meaningless, absolutely non-committal, abso-lutely insignificant, truly “ministerial” speeches are so emptyand banal. 
 What makes these eloquent “utterances” (whosevery emptiness was bound to make Tsereteli a favouriteof the bourgeoisie) so intolerable is the infinite self-conceitof the speaker. 
 It is sometimes hard to decide whether those sleek, smooth and honeyed phrases conceal unusual stupidity or cynical political trickery. 
 The more meaningless Tsereteli’s speeches, the more emphatically we must stress the perfectly incredible andextraordinary thing that happened to him at the plenarysession of the Petrograd Soviet on August 18. 
 It is incredible but a fact that Tsereteli accidentally uttered a couple of simple, clear, sensible and true sentences. 
 He uttered twosentences which correctly express a profound and serious po-litical truth, a truth of no fleeting importance, but one thatsums up the whole present-day political situation, its essen-tial, radical features and its fundamental characteristics. 
 According to the account published in Rech , Tsereteli (the reader, of course, will remember that Tsereteli was upin arms against the resolution demanding the abolition ofthe death penalty) said: “None of your resolutions will help. 
 What we need is real action and not paper resolutions.... 
” There is no denying it. 
 Sensible speeches are pleasant to hear. 
 Of course, this truth hits first and hardest of all at Tsereteli himself. 
 For it was he, one of the most prominent leaders of the Soviet, who helped prostitute this institution, reduce its role to that of a wretched liberal assembly, which isbequeathing an archive of exemplarily impotent and piouswishes to the world. 
 Tsereteli—who got the Soviet, emascu-lated by the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, topass hundreds of “paper resolutions”—least of all had the right, when it came to adopting a resolution which struck a painful blow at himself, to cry out against “paper resolutions”. 
He has put himself in the particularly ridiculous position ofa parliamentarian who has worked on more “parliamentary”resolutions than anyone else, has extolled their worth tothe skies more than anyone else, and has fussed over them more than anyone else, yet, when a resolution is passed against him , cries “sour grapes!” at the top of his voice, saying that the resolution, after all, is only a paper one. 
 Nevertheless, the truth is the truth, even if uttered by a false man in a false tone. 
 The resolution is a paper one not for the reason given by ex-Minister Tsereteli, who holds that defence of the revolu-tion (don’t laugh!) requires the death penalty. 
 The resolu-tion is a paper one because it repeats the stereotyped formulawhich has been learnt by heart and meaninglessly reiteratedever since March 1917—“The Soviet demands of the Provision-al Government. 
” They are accustomed to “demand”, and they go on doing so by force of habit, not seeing that the situation has changed, that power has left them, and that a“demand” not backed by power is ridiculous. 
 Moreover, this stereotyped “demand” fosters among the people the illusion that the situation has not changed, thatthe Soviet is a power, that by announcing its “demand” the Soviet has done its business and can sleep the sleep of one who has done his duty as a “revolutionary (if you please)democrat”. 
 A reader may ask: “Do you mean to say that the Bolshe-viks, who advocate political clearheadedness and takingaccount of the forces, and who are opposed to phrasemonger-ing, should not have voted for the resolution?” No. 
 They should have voted for it, if only because one clause of the resolution (the third) contains the excellent and true idea (the fundamental, main and decisive idea) that the death penalty is a weapon against the masses (the situation would be different if it were a weapon against the landowners and capitalists). 
 They should have voted for theresolution, even though the philistine Socialist-Revolution-aries fouled Martov’s text and instead of the reference to“imperialist aims which are alien to the interests of the peo-ple” inserted an absolutely false phrase intended to deceive the people and whitewash a predatory war, namely, “defence of the country and the revolution”. 
 They should have voted for the resolution, at the same time recording their disagreement with certain passagesand declaring: “Workers, don’t think the Soviet is now ina position to demand anything of the Provisional Govern-ment. 
 Don’t have any illusions. 
 Understand that the Soviet is already unable to demand, and that the present government is under the complete sway of the counter-revolutionarybourgeoisie. 
 Think seriously about this bitter truth. 
” Nobodycould have prevented the Soviet members from voting in fa-vour after they had made such reservations in one form or another. 
 Then the resolution would have ceased to be a “paper” one. 
And then we could have got round the treacherous question of Tsereteli who asked the Soviet members whether theywanted to “overthrow” the Provisional Government—inquite the same way, in exactly the same way, as Katkov asked the liberals under Alexander III whether they wanted to “overthrow” the autocracy. 
 We would have answered theex-Minister: “Dear citizen, you have just passed a criminallaw against those who ‘attempt’, or who only intend, to‘overthrow’ the government (which was formed by agreementbetween the landowners and capitalists, on the one hand, and the petty-bourgeois traitors to democracy, on the other). 
 We are well aware that all the bourgeoisie would have praisedyou even more heartily had you ‘brought’ several Bolsheviksunder that pleasant (for you) law. 
 But don’t be surprised ifwe don’t go out of our way to help you and pretexts toapply that ‘pleasant’ law. 
” * * * The whole political system of Russia was reflected in the incident of August 18 like the sun in a pool of water: the Bonapartist government, the death penalty, the criminal law, the coating of these “pleasant” (for the provocateurs)pills by just the kind of phrases that Louis Napoleon used togive out about equality, fraternity, liberty, the honour andprestige of the country, the traditions of the Great Revolu-tion, the suppression of anarchy. 
 Petty-bourgeois ministers and ex-ministers, cloyingly sweet-tongued, protesting that they have souls, that theyare damning their souls by introducing the death penaltyand applying it to the people, and that they weep when theydo so—an improved edition of the “schoolmaster” of thesixties who followed Pirogov’s advice and thrashed not simply, not in the ordinary old way, but while shedding tears of commiseration over the good citizen’s son who was under-going a “legitimate” and “just” caning. 
 Peasants, deceived by their petty-bourgeois leaders, con-tinuing to believe that the marriage of the bloc of Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks with the bourgeoisie can bring about the abolition of private ownership of land with-out compensation. 
 Workers—but we shall say nothing about what the work-ers think until the “humane” Tsereteli abolishes the newcriminal law. 
 Rabochy No. 
 2 Published according to September 8 (August 26), 1917 the Rabochy text THE STOCKHOLM CONFERENCE Many people are taking an interest again in the Stockholm Conference. 
 The question of its significance has been dis-cussed at length in the newspapers. 
 It is inseparable from an appraisal of the very principles of the whole of present-day socialism, particularly concerning the attitude to the im-perialist war. 
 This is why the Stockholm Conference shouldbe dealt with in some detail. 
 From the outset the revolutionary Social-Democrats, i. 
e. 
, the Bolsheviks, were against participating in the conference, as a matter of principle. 
 Everyone knows that on the attitude to the war socialists in all countries, belligerent and neutralalike, are split into two large, main divisions. 
 Some tookthe side of their governments, of their bourgeoisie. 
 These wecall social-chauvinists, i. 
e. 
, socialists in words and chauvin-ists in action. 
 A chauvinist is one who conceals defence of the predatory interests of “his own” ruling classes with the concept “defence of the fatherland”. 
 In the present war, thebourgeoisie of both belligerent coalitions are pursuing pred-atory aims: the German bourgeoisie are fighting to plunderBelgium, Serbia, etc. 
, the British and French bourgeoisieare fighting to plunder the German colonies, etc. 
, and the Russian bourgeoisie are fighting to plunder Austria (Lvov) and Turkey (Armenia, Constantinople). 
 Hence, those socialists who have come down on the side of their bourgeoisie in the war have ceased to be socialists,have betrayed the working class and have, in effect, desertedto the camp of the bourgeoisie. 
 They have become class enemies of the proletariat. 
 The history of European and American socialism, particularly during the time of theSecond international, i. 
e. 
, from 1889 to 1914, shows us that this desertion of certain socialists, particularly most leaders and members of parliament, to the bourgeoisie is no accident. 
 In all countries, the opportunist wing of socialism provided the main recruits for social-chauvinism. 
 Regarded scien-tifically, which means not singling out individuals but takingthe whole international trend in its process of development,the sum total of its social ties, social-chauvinism is oppor-tunism carried to its logical conclusion. 
 Everywhere the workers are showing, in a more or less clear and sharp form, that they realise the social-chauvinistsare betraying socialism, that they hate and despise the moreprominent social-chauvinists such as Plekhanov in Russia,Scheidemann in Germany, Guesde, Renaudel and Co. 
 inFrance, Hyndman and others in Britain, etc. 
, etc. 
 A revolutionary internationalist trend has arisen in all countries during the war, despite the gagging and ruthlesspersecution by the bourgeoisie. 
 This trend has remained loyalto socialism. 
 It has not yielded to chauvinism, has not allowedchauvinism to be covered up by lying phrases about defenceof the fatherland. 
 It has exposed the utterly fraudulent nature of these phrases and the absolutely criminal nature of the war, which the bourgeoisie of both coalitions pursue forpurposes of plunder. 
 This trend includes, for example, Mac-Lean in Britain, who has been sentenced to eighteen months’hard labour for opposing the predatory British bourgeoisie,and Karl Liebknecht in Germany, who has been sentenced to penal servitude by the German imperialist robbers for the “crime” of calling for a revolution in Germany and exposingthe predatory character of the war waged by Germany. 
 TheBolsheviks in Russia also belong to this trend and are per-secuted by the agents of Russian republican-democraticimperialism for a “crime” similar to the one for which Mac-Lean and Karl Liebknecht are being persecuted. 
 This is the only trend loyal to socialism. 
 It is the only trend that has not failed the solemn declaration of convic-tions, the solemn pledge made in November 1912 in theBasle Manifesto which was unanimously signed by the social-ists of the world, of every country without exception. 
 The Manifesto speaks not of war in general—there are wars and wars—but of the war which everyone in 1912 clearly saw wasbeing prepared, and which broke out in 1914, the war between Germany and Britain and their allies for world domination. 
 With this war in the offing, the Basle Manifesto does not say a word about the duty or right of socialists to “defend their fatherland” (i. 
e. 
, to justify their participation in the war). 
What it does say, very explicitly, is that this war must leadto the “proletarian revolution”. 
 The betrayal of socialismby the social-chauvinists of all countries is perfectly evidentfrom the cowardly manner in which all of them now avoid, like thieves avoiding the scene of their crime, the passage in the Basle Manifesto which speaks of the connection be-tween this particular war and the proletarian revolution. 
 The impassable gulf that separates the socialists, who remained loyal to the Basle Manifesto and “responded” tothe war by advocating and preparing for the proletarian revolution, from the social-chauvinists, who responded to the war by supporting “their” national bourgeoisie, is obvious. 
It is also obvious how helpless, naive and hypocritical arethe attempts to “reconcile” or “unite” the two trends. 
 It is this kind of attempt that is evident in all its wretch-edness on the part of the third trend in world socialism, the so-called “Centre” or “Kautskian” trend (named after the most prominent “Centrist”, Karl Kautsky). 
 Throughoutthe three years of the war this trend has shown its completelack of principle and its helplessness in all countries. 
 InGermany, for example, events compelled the Kautskyitesto break away from the German Plekhanovs and form a sepa-rate, so-called Independent Social-Democratic Party. 
 100 Al l the same, this party is afraid of drawing the necessary con-clusions, it preaches “unity” with the social-chauvinists onan international scale, continues to deceive the mass ofworkers with the hope of restoring this unity in Germany,and hinders the only correct proletarian tactics of revolution-ary struggle against “one’s own” government, a struggle to be waged in war-time as well, a struggle which may and mustvary in form but which cannot be put off. 
 This is the state of affairs in international socialism. 
 With-out making a clear appraisal of this situation, withouthaving a principled opinion about all the trends in interna-tional socialism, it is impossible so much as to approach practical questions like that of the Stockholm Conference. 
Yet the Bolshevik Party was the only party that gave a principled appraisal of all trends in international socialism in the detailed resolution which it adopted at its conference held between April 24 and 29, 1917, and which was endorsed by our Sixth Party Congress in August. 
 To ignore this prin-cipled appraisal and discuss Stockholm without reference toit means taking an entirely unprincipled stand. 
 As an example of the lack of principle prevailing among the petty-bourgeois democrats, the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, we may quote an article from Novaya Zhizn of August 10. 
 The article is worthy of attention because itbrings together, in a newspaper belonging to the extremeLeft wing of the petty-bourgeois democrats, the most wide-spread errors, prejudices and lack of principle over Stockholm. 
 “One is free,” we read in the leader of Novaya Zhizn , “to take a dim view of the Stockholm Conference, for one reason or another. 
 One isfree, as a matter of principle, to condemn attempts to bring about agreement among the ‘defencist majorities’. 
 But why deny what is strikingly obvious? After all, following the well-known decision of theBritish workers, which sparked off a political crisis in the countryand caused the first deep crack in British ‘national unity’, the confer-ence acquired a new significance. 
” This argument is a perfect example of lack of principle. 
 Indeed, how is it possible to draw the conclusion, from theindisputable fact that owing to the Stockholm Conference a deep crack has occurred in British “national unity”, that it is our duty to patch up this crack rather than widen it?The fundamental alternative is to break with the defencists(social-chauvinists) or to agree with them. 
 There can be noother choice. 
 The Stockholm Conference was just one of nu-merous attempts to reach agreement. 
 It failed. 
 Its failure was due to the unwillingness of the Anglo-French imperialists to hold peace negotiations now , while the German imperialists are willing. 
 The British workers have become more aware ofbeing deceived by the British imperialist bourgeoisie. 
 Then what use should be made of this? We revolutionary internationalists say that it should be used for widening the breach between the workers and their social-chauvinists, for making this breach complete, for removing every hindranceto the development of the revolutionary struggle of the massesagainst their governments, against their bourgeoisie. 
 Acting in this way, we, and we alone, can widen the crack and force a complete break. 
 What is actually achieved by those going to Stockholm, or rather, by those preaching to the people that it is necessaryto go there, now that reality has “squashed” the idea? Allthey manage is to patch up the crack, for the StockholmConference is admittedly being convened and supported bypeople who are supporting their own governments, by the ministerialist Chernovs and Tseretelis, the Staunings, Bran-tings and Troelstras, not to speak of the Scheidemanns. 
 This is what is “strikingly obvious”, this is what the op-portunists of Novaya Zhizn forget, or gloss over, when they argue absolutely without any regard for principles, withouta general appreciation of social-chauvinism as a trend. 
 The Stockholm Conference is a colloquy of ministers of imperial-ist governments. 
 Novaya Zhizn cannot evade this fact however hard it tries. 
 To call upon the workers to go toStockholm, to tell them to wait for Stockholm, to call uponthem to place any hopes whatever in Stockholm means sayingto them: “You can, you must, expect good to come from an agreement between the petty-bourgeois parties and imperial-ist government ministers, those who support imperialistgovernments. 
” It is this unprincipled and most harmful propaganda that Novaya Zhizn is unwittingly carrying on. 
 Owing to the conflict between the Anglo-French social-chauvinists and their governments, the paper forgets that the Chernovs, Skobelevs, Tseretelis, Avksentyevs, Brantings,Staunings and Scheidemanns are also social-chauvinistssupporting their governments. 
 Isn’t this lack of principle? Instead of saying to the workers: see, the Anglo-French imperialists have not even allowed their social-chauvinists to go and talk with the German social-chauvinists; that shows that Britain and France are also waging a predatory war and that there is no salvation except through a complete rupturewith all the governments, with all the social-chauvinists, Novaya Zhizn consoles the workers with illusions. 
 “In Stockholm,” it writes, “they are going to reach an agreement on peace and to jointly draw up a general plan of struggle : refusal to vote credits, renunciation of ‘national unity’, recall of ministersfrom the governments, etc. 
” The only thing which is supposed to make this thoroughly fraudulent sentence sound convincing is that the word “struggle” is printed in bold type. 
 A wonderful device, I must say! After three years of war, efforts are still being made to feed the workers with the emptiest promises: “In Stockholmthey are going” to renounce national unity. 
 Who plans that? The Scheidemanns, Chernovs, Skobelevs, Avksentyevs, Tseretelis, Staunings and Brantings, i. 
e. 
, the very people (and parties) who for several years and forseveral months have been pursuing a national unity policy. 
No matter how sincere Novaya Zhizn ’s faith in such a miracle may be, no matter how conscientiously it may hold the con-viction that it is possible, we must say, nevertheless, that it is spreading the greatest piece of deception among the workers. 
 Novaya Zhizn is deceiving the workers by inspiring them with confidence in the social-chauvinists. 
 It implies that,although so far the social-chauvinists have been Cabinetmembers and have pursued a national unity policy, they willsoon reach agreement among themselves in Stockholm, they will come to an understanding and cease to act in that way. 
 They will begin to fight for peace, they will refuse to votecredits, etc. 
, etc. 
 All that is nothing but deception, the greatest deception. 
 It is reactionary talk designed to console and reassure theworkers, to inspire them with confidence in the social-chau-vinists. 
 But the socialists who “fight for peace”—not in words, not to deceive themselves or the workers—started theirfight long ago, without waiting for any international confer-ences. 
 They started their fight by renouncing national unity,precisely in the way it was done by MacLean in Britain, KarlLiebknecht in Germany and the Bolsheviks in Russia. 
 “We quite understand the legitimate and healthy scepti-cism of the Bolsheviks towards the Renaudels and Scheide-manns,” writes Novaya Zhizn , “but the publicists of Rabochy i Soldat , like doctrinaires, just cannot see the wood for the trees; they do not take into account the changes in the moodof the masses on which Renaudel and Scheidemann have relied. 
” It is not a matter of scepticism, gentlemen; it is in your midst that intellectual scepticism, which conceals and ex- /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR presses lack of principle, is the dominant mood. 
 We are not sceptical of the Renaudels and the Scheidemanns, we are their enemies. 
 There is a world of difference between these two things. 
 We have broken with them, and we call uponthe masses to break with them. 
 It is we, and we alone, who“take into account” the change in the mood of the masses,as well as something besides, something far more importantand more profound than moods and changes in moods, name-ly, the fundamental interests of the masses, the fact that these interests cannot be reconciled with the social-chauvi-nist policy represented by the Renaudels and Scheidemanns. 
In Stockholm, the Novaya Zhizn people and the ministers of the Russian imperialist government will meet none otherthan the Scheidemanns and Renaudels (for there is no real difference between Stauning and Troelstra, let alone between Avksentyev and Skobelev, on the one hand, and Renaudel,on the other). 
 But we turn our backs on the Stockholm comedyplayed between the social-chauvinists, among the social-chauvinists, in order to open the eyes of the masses , so as to express their interests, call them to revolution, and use their change of mood not to pander to a given mood in an unprincipled manner, but to wage a struggle on principlefor a complete rupture with social-chauvinism. 
 “The Bolsheviks,” writes Novaya Zhizn , “like to taunt the interna-tionalists going to Stockholm with having compromised with theScheidemanns and Hendersons, ‘without noticing’ that their attitudeto the conference puts them in the same category as the Plekhanovs,Guesdes and Hyndmans—for profoundly different reasons, of course. 
” It is not true to say that our attitude to the conference puts us in the same category as the Plekhanovs! That isobviously absurd. 
 Our position coincides with that of the Plekhanovs in refusing to go to a milk-and-water conference with a group of social-chauvinists. 
 But both in principle andin practice, our attitude towards the conference differs from that of the Plekhanovs. 
 Meanwhile, you who call yourselvesinternationalists are really going to the conference togetherwith the Scheidemanns, Staunings and Brantings; you are really compromising with them. 
 Isn’t that a fact? You de-scribe as “the great cause of uniting the international prole-tariat” what is the petty, miserable business—largely an intrigue which is dependent upon the imperialists of one of the coalitions— of uniting the social-chauvinists . 
 That is a fact. 
 You would-be internationalists cannot urge the masses to take part in the Stockholm Conference (it is very probablethat things will go no further than urging, for the conferencewill not take place; but the ideological significance of theurging remains); you cannot urge the masses to participatein the Stockholm Conference without uttering a pile of lies, without sowing illusions, without whitewashing the social-chauvinists, without rousing hopes among the masses that theStaunings and Brantings, the Skobelevs and Avksentyevs arecapable of renouncing “national unity” in earnest. 
 Meanwhile, in our propaganda against Stockholm, we Bolsheviks tell the masses the whole truth. 
 We continue to expose the social-chauvinists and the policy of compromise with them, and lead the masses towards a complete rupturewith them. 
 Since matters have reached a point where theGerman imperialists consider the situation appropriate forparticipation in the Stockholm Conference and are sendingtheir Scheidemann agents to it, while the British imperialists consider the situation inappropriate and do not even want to talk about peace, we expose the British imperialists andtake advantage of the conflict between them and the Britishworkers to promote the latter’s class-consciousness, to carryon vigorous propaganda for internationalism, and explainthe need for a complete rupture with social-chauvinism. 
 The would-be internationalists of Novaya Zhizn are behav-ing like intellectual impressionists, i. 
e. 
, like people whospinelessly yield to the moods of the moment and forget thefundamental principles of internationalism. 
 The Novaya Zhizn people reason as follows: since British imperialism is opposed to the Stockholm Conference, we must be for it; it shows that the conference has acquired a significance it has not had so far. 
 To reason like that actually means abandoning principles, for German imperialism is at present in favour of the Stock-holm Conference because of its own selfish and predatoryimperialist interests. 
 What is the value of the “international-ism” of “internationalists” who are afraid of openly admit-ting this indisputable and obvious fact, who have to hidefrom it? What guarantee have you, gentlemen, that by taking part in the Stockholm Conference together with the Scheidemanns, Staunings and Co. 
 you will not virtually be-come a plaything, a tool in the hands of the secret diplomats of German imperialism? You cannot have any such guarantee. 
There is none. 
 Even if it does take place, which is very im-probable, the Stockholm Conference will be an attempt bythe German imperialists to explore the possibilities of suchand such an exchange of annexations. 
 That will be the true, the actual significance of the eloquent speeches of the Schei-demanns, Skobelevs and Co. 
 And if the conference does nottake place, your preaching to the masses, rousing false hopesin them in regard to the social-chauvinists, hopes for theirspeedy, possible and probable “reformation”, will acquirereal significance. 
 In either case, you may wish to be internationalists but you will actually turn out to be accomplices of the social-chauvinists, now of one coalition, now of both coalitions. 
 We, however, take into account all the ups and downs and all the particulars of politics and remain consistent interna-tionalists advocating the fraternal alliance of the workers, rupture with the social-chauvinists and work for the prole-tarian revolution. 
 Rabochy No. 
 2 Published according to September 8 (August 26), 1917 the Rabochy text Signed: N. 
 K-ov A PUBLICIST’S DIARY PEASANTS AND WORKERS Izvestia of the All-Russia Congress of Peasants ’ Deputies101 No. 
 88, of August 19, carries an exceedingly interesting arti-cle which should be regarded as basic material for every Party propaganda and agitation worker who has anything to dowith the peasants and for every class-conscious worker who isgoing to the countryside or comes in contact with peasants. 
 The article is entitled “Model Mandate Compiled on the Basis of 242 Mandates Submitted by Local Deputies to the First All-Russia Congress of Peasants’ Deputies Held in Petrograd, 1917”. 
 The best thing would be for the Congress of Peasants’ Deputies to publish as much detailed information as possibleabout all those mandates (if it is absolutely impossible toprint them all in full, which, of course, would be preferable). 
 It is particularly necessary, for instance, to have a full list of the gubernias, uyezds and volosts, showing how manymandates have been received from each locality, when theywere compiled or delivered, and to analyse at least the basicdemands, so that we can tell whether the various pointsdiffer according to areas, whether such questions as aboli-tion of private property rights to all peasant lands, periodic redistribution of land, prohibition of wage-labour, confisca-tion of the landowners’ implements and livestock, etc. 
, etc. 
,are put differently in, say, areas with homestead and com-munal land ownership, areas with Russian and non-Russianpopulations, central and outlying areas, areas that never had serfdom, and so on. 
 No thorough-going study of the extraordinarily valuable material contained in the peasantmandates is possible without such details. 
 And we Marxists must exert every effort to make a thorough-going study of the facts underlying our policy. 
 In the absence of better material, and as long as it has not been proved factually incorrect in one respect or another,the summary of the mandates (as we shall call the “Model Mandate”) remains the only material of its kind which, werepeat, is an absolute must for every Party member. 
 The first part of the summary is devoted to general politi-cal principles, to demands of political democracy; the second, to the land question. 
 (It is to be hoped that the All-RussiaCongress of Peasants’ Deputies or some other body willsummarise the peasants’ mandates and resolutions concerningthe war. 
) Without going into detail in the first part, we shallnote only two points from it, §6, demanding the election of all office-holders, and §11, calling for the abolition of the standing army once the war is over. 
 These points bring thepeasants’ political programme closest of all to the Bolshevik Party programme. 
 Basing ourselves on these points, we muststress and prove through all our propaganda and agitationthat the Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary leaders are traitors not only to socialism, but also to democracy. 
 In Kronstadt, for instance, contrary to the will of the popula-tion and to democratic principles, and to please the capital-ists, they upheld the office of a commissar subject to appro-val by the government, that is, an office not purely elective. 
 In the Petrograd district councils and in other local self-government bodies, the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshe-vik leaders, contrary to democratic principles, are fightingthe Bolshevik demand for the immediate institution of aworkers’ militia, to be succeeded by a popular militia. 
 According to the summary, the peasant land demands are primarily abolition of private ownership of all types of land, including the peasants’ lands, without compensation; trans-fer of lands on which high-standard scientific farming ispractised to the state or the communes; confiscation of alllivestock and implements on the confiscated lands (peasantswith little land are excluded) and their transfer to thestate or the communes; a ban on wage-labour; equalised distribution of land among the working people, with period-ical redistributions, and so on. 
 In the transition period,pending the convocation of the Constituent Assembly, the peasants demand the immediate enactment of laws prohibit-ing the purchase and sale of land, abolition of laws concern-ing separation from the commune, farmsteads, etc. 
, laws protecting forests, fisheries, etc. 
, abolishing long-term andrevising short-term leases, and so on. 
 You do not have to give these demands a lot of thought to see that it is absolutely impossible to realise them in alliance with the capitalists, without breaking completely with them, without waging the most determined and ruthless struggle against the capitalist class, without overthrowingits rule. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionaries are deceiving themselves and the peasants precisely by assuming and spreading theidea that these reforms, or similar reforms, are possible with-out overthrowing capitalist rule, without all state power being transferred to the proletariat, without the peasant poorsupporting the most resolute, revolutionary measures of aproletarian state power against the capitalists. 
 The signifi-cance of the appearance of a Left wing among the “Socialist-Revolutionaries” is that it proves there is a growing aware-ness of this deception within their party. 
 Indeed, confiscation of all private land means the con-fiscation of hundreds of millions in capital belonging to thebanks to which the greater part of this land is mortgaged. 
How can any measure like this be taken without the revolu-tionary class overcoming the capitalists’ resistance by revolutionary methods? Moreover, it is here a question of the most highly centralised capital of all, bank capital, whichis connected through billions of threads with all the nervecentres of the capitalist economy of a huge country andwhich can be defeated only by the no less centralised mightof the urban proletariat. 
 Further, take the transfer of highly efficient farms to the state. 
 Obviously, the “state” capable of taking them overand running them really and truly in the interests of theworking people, and not in the interests of the officialsand the capitalists themselves, must be a proletarian revo-lutionary state. 
 The confiscation of stud farms, etc. 
, and then of all live-stock and implements, is something more than strikingone staggering blow after another at private ownership of the means of production. 
 It means taking steps towards socialism, for the transfer of livestock and implements “to the exclusive use of the state or a commune” implies large-scale, socialist agriculture or at least socialist control overintegrated small farms, socialist regulation of their economy. 
 And what about a “ban” on wage-labour? This is a mean-ingless phrase, helpless, unwittingly naïve wishful thinkingon the part of downtrodden petty proprietors, who do not see that capitalist industry as a whole would come to a stand-still if there were no reserve army of wage-labour in thecountryside, that it is impossible to “ban” wage-labour inthe villages while permitting it in the towns, and lastly, thatto “ban” wage-labour means nothing but a step towardssocialism. 
 Here we come to the fundamental question of the workers’ attitude to the peasants. 
 A mass Social-Democratic workers’ movement has exist-ed in Russia for more than twenty years (if we begin withthe great strikes of 1896). 
 Throughout this long span oftime, through two great revolutions, through the entire political history of Russia, runs the issue of whether the working class is to lead the peasants forward, to socialism,or whether the liberal bourgeoisie are to drag them back, toconciliation with capitalism. 
 The opportunist wing of the Social-Democrats has always reasoned by the worldly-wise formula: since the Socialist-Revolutionaries are petty bourgeois, “we” reject their philis-tine utopian views on socialism in the name of bourgeois rejection of socialism. 
 Struvism neatly replaces Marxism,and Menshevism slithers down to the role of a Cadet flunkeyseeking to “reconcile” the peasants to bourgeois rule. 
 Thelatest and most striking evidence of that role is that Tse-reteli and Skobelev, hand in hand with Chernov and Avksen-tyev, were busy signing the Cadets’ reactionary landownerdecrees in the name of “revolutionary democrats”. 
 The revolutionary Social-Democrats, who have never renounced criticism of the petty-bourgeois illusions of theSocialist-Revolutionaries, and never entered into any bloc with them except against the Cadets, work unremittingly to wrest the peasants away from Cadet influence, and in opposition to the philistine’s utopian view of socialism, put forward the revolutionary proletarian road to socialism instead of liberal conciliation with capitalism. 
 Now that the war has speeded up developments fantas-tically, aggravated the crisis of capitalism to the utmost,and confronted the peoples with making an immediatechoice between destruction and immediate determinedstrides towards socialism, the full depth of the gulf be-tween semi-liberal Menshevism and revolutionary proleta-rian Bolshevism is clearly revealed over the practical issue of what action the tens of millions of peasants should take. 
 Accept the rule of capital because “we” are not yet ripe for socialism, the Mensheviks tell the peasants, substituting,incidentally, the abstract question of “socialism” in generalfor the concrete question of whether it is possible to heal the wounds inflicted by the war without decisive strides towards socialism. 
 Accept capitalism because the Socialist-Revolutionaries are petty-bourgeois utopians, the Mensheviks tell the peas-ants and rally together with the Socialist-Revolutionariesto support the Cadet government. 
 And the Socialist-Revolutionaries, beating their breast, assure the peasants that they are against any peace with thecapitalists, that they have never regarded the Russianrevolution as a bourgeois revolution—and therefore enter into a bloc with the opportunist social-Democrats and rally to support a bourgeois government. 
 The Socialist-Revolu-tionaries sign all peasant programmes, however revolution-ary, except that they do so not to carry them out, but topigeon-hole them and deceive the peasants with the most non-committal promises, while actually pursuing for monthsa policy of compromise with the Cadet in the coalitiongovernment. 
 This crying, practical, direct, palpable betrayal of the peasants’ interests by the Socialist-Revolutionaries radi-cally alters the situation. 
 We must take this change intoaccount. 
 It is not enough to conduct agitation againstthe Socialist-Revolutionaries in the old way, the way we didbetween 1902 and 1903, and 1905 and 1907. 
 It is not enough to expose theoretically the petty-bourgeois illusions of “socialisation of land”, “equalised land tenure”, “a ban onwage-labour”, etc. 
 That was on the eve of the bourgeois revolution, or before the bourgeois revolution’s completion, and the task was primarily to carry it through to overthrow the monarchy. 
 Now the monarchy has been overthrown. 
 The bourgeois revolution has been completed in so far as Russia has becomea democratic republic with a government of Cadets, Men-sheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries. 
 And the war in thepast three years has pushed us a good thirty years ahead. 
 It has forced on Europe universal labour service and the compulsory syndication of undertakings, caused hungerand unprecedented ravages in the leading countries, andimposed steps towards socialism. 
 The fundamental premise of our class policy at that time was that only the workers and peasants can overthrow the monarchy. 
 And this premise was correct. 
 February and March 1917 reaffirmed this. 
 The premise of our class policy today is that only the pro-letariat, leading the poorest peasants (the-semi-proletarians,as our programme puts it), can end the war with a democrat-ic peace, heal the war wounds, and initiate steps towards socialism which have become absolutely necessary and urgent . 
 It follows that the emphasis in our propaganda and agi-tation against the Socialist-Revolutionaries must beshifted to the fact that they have betrayed the peasants. 
They represent a minority of well-to-do farmers rather thanthe mass of the peasant poor. 
 They are leading the peasants to an alliance with the capitalists, i. 
e. 
, to subordination to them, rather than to an alliance with the workers. 
 Theyhave bartered the interests of the working and exploitedpeople for ministerial posts and a bloc with the Mensheviksand Cadets. 
 History, accelerated by the war, has forged so far ahead that the old formulas have acquired a new meaning. 
 “A ban on wage-labour” was formerly only an empty phrase bandied about by the petty-bourgeois intellectual. 
 In the light oftoday, it means something different: the millions of peasantpoor say in their 242 mandates that they want hired labourabolished but do not know how to do it. 
 We know how. 
 We know that this can be done only in alliance with the workers, under their leadership, against the capitalists, not througha compromise with them. 
 These are the changes that the basic line of our propaganda and agitation against the Socialist-Revolutionaries, the basic line we pursue in addressing the peasants, must now undergo. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionary Party has betrayed you, comrade peasants. 
 It has betrayed the hovels and desertedto the palaces, if not the royal palaces, then those wherethe Cadets, those bitter enemies of the revolution, and par-ticularly the peasant revolution, sit in the same government as the Chernovs, Peshekhonovs, and Avksentyevs. 
 Only the revolutionary proletariat, only the vanguard that unites it, the Bolshevik Party, can actually carry out the programme of the peasant poor which is put forwardin the 242 mandates. 
 For the revolutionary proletariat is really advancing to the abolition of wage-labour along the only correct path, through the overthrow of capital and notby prohibiting the hiring of labourers, not through a “ban”on wage-labour. 
 The revolutionary proletariat is reallyadvancing to confiscation of land, implements, and agri-cultural technical establishments, to what the peasants want and what the Socialist-Revolutionaries cannot give them. 
 This is how the basic line pursued by the worker in address-ing the peasant must now change. 
 We workers can and willgive you what the peasant poor want and are searching forwithout always knowing where and how to find it. 
 Weworkers are upholding our own interests and at the same time the interests of the vast majority of the peasants against the capitalists , while the Socialist-Revolutionaries, allying themselves with the capitalists, are betraying these inter-ests. 
 * * * Let us recall what Engels said on the peasant question shortly before his death. 
 He stressed that socialists haveno intention whatever of expropriating the small peasants,and that the advantages of mechanised socialist agricul-ture 102 will be made clear to them only by force of example . 
 The war has now confronted Russia in practice with a problem of exactly this order. 
 There is a shortage of imple-ments. 
 They must be confiscated, and the highly efficientfarms must not be “divided up”. 
 The peasants have begun to realise this. 
 Need has com-pelled them to do so. 
 The war has compelled them, for there are no implements to be had anywhere. 
 What there is must be thriftily husbanded. 
 And large-scale farming meanssaving labour through the use of implements as well as manyother things. 
 The peasants want to keep their small farms, to set equal standards for all, and to make readjustments on an equal-itarian basis from time to time. 
 Fine. 
 No sensible socialist will differ with the peasant poor over this. 
 If the land isconfiscated, that means the domination of the banks has been undermined, if the implements are confiscated, thatmeans the domination of capital has been undermined— and in that case, provided the proletariat rules centrally , provided political power is taken over by the proletariat, the rest will come by itself , as a result of “force of example”, prompted by experience. 
 The crux of the matter lies in political power passing into the hands of the proletariat. 
 When this has taken place,everything that is essential, basic, fundamental in the pro-gramme set out in the 242 mandates will become feasible . 
 Life will show what modifications it will undergo as it iscarried out. 
 This is an issue of secondary importance. 
 Weare not doctrinaires. 
 Our theory is a guide to action, not adogma. 
 We do not claim that Marx knew or Marxists know the road to socialism down to the last detail. 
 It would be non-sense to claim anything of the kind. 
 What we know is thedirection of this road, and the class forces that follow it;the specific, practical details will come to light only throughthe experience of the millions when they take things into their own hands. 
 Trust the workers, comrade peasants, and break with the capitalists! Only in close alliance with the workers canyou begin to carry out the programme set out in the 242mandates. 
 Allied with the capitalists and led by the Social-ist-Revolutionaries, you will never live to see a single determined, radical step in the spirit of this programme. 
 But when in alliance with the urban workers, waging a ruthless struggle against capital, you begin to realise the programme of the 242 mandates, the whole world will come to our and your assistance, and then the success of that programme—not as it stands now, but in its essence—will be assured. 
 When that happens, the domination of capital and wage slavery will come to an end. 
 That will be thebeginning of the reign of socialism, the reign of peace, thereign of the working people. 
 Rabochy No. 
 6 Published according to September 11 (August 29), 1917 the Rabochy text Signed: N. 
 Lenin SLANDERERS The August 20 issue of Rech , and Russkaya Volya , a news-paper founded with notoriously questionable money and re-commending “socialist-minded” voters to vote for Yedinstvo and for the Popular Socialists, have again published slan-derous statements against me. 
 The information comes, according to both papers, from the “War Ministry”, and “ Rech ” even asserts that it is backed by “documentary evidence and numerous testimonies by individuals” . 
 The law on libel in the press has virtually been suspended in Russia. 
 Slanderers, especially those contributing to thebourgeois papers, have been granted complete freedom. 
They can come out in the papers anonymously, lie and slan-der as much as they please, and hide behind allegedly offi-cial reports not signed by any official—they can get away with anything! Those infamous slanderers, headed by Mr. 
Milyukov and his like, enjoy the privilege of immunity. 
 The slanderers assert that I had certain relations with the Union for the Liberation of the Ukraine. 
 Milyukov’snewspaper writes: “The German Government instructed Lenin to advocate peace. 
” “In Berlin,” it says, “there were two socialist meetings in which Lenin and Yoltukhovskytook part. 
” Russkaya Volya adds to the latter phrase: “Lenin stopped a Yoltukhovsky’s. 
” Since Mr. 
 Milyukov and other scoundrels like him—knights of the foul slander—are allowed to slander with impunity, all I can do is repeat that it is slander and again confront the knights of blackmail, who refer to witnesses, with a ref-erence to a witness known to the masses. 
 I have known Basok, one of those active in the Union for the Liberation of the Ukraine, since 1906, when he was a Menshevik and attended the Stockholm Congress together with me. 
 In the autumn of 1914, or early 1915, when I wasliving in Berne, I received a visit at my home from thewell-known Caucasian Menshevik Tria, who had come fromConstantinople. 
 He told me about Basok’s activity in theUnion for the Liberation of the Ukraine, and of the connec-tion between that Union and the German government. 
 He handed me a letter from Basok, who expressed sympathywith me and said he hoped our views would become closer. 
I was so angry that I wrote an answer to Basok there andthen, in the presence of Tria, and gave the letter to Triaasking him to pass it on since he was about to make another trip to Constantinople. 
 In my letter to Basok, I declared that since he was enter-ing into relations with one of the imperialists, our waysparted for good and we had nothing in common. 
 That is all the “relations” I have ever had with the Unionfor the Liberation of the Ukraine. 
 Rabochy No. 
 8 Published according to September 12 (August 30), 1917 the Rabochy text Signed: N. 
 Lenin TO THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF THE R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 It is possible that these lines will come too late, for events are developing with a rapidity that sometimes makes one’s head spin. 
 I am writing this on Wednesday, August 30, and the recipients will read it no earlier than Friday, Sep-tember 2. 
 Still, on chance, I consider it my duty to writethe following. 
 The Kornilov revolt is a most unexpected (unexpected at such a moment and in such a form) and downright unbe-lievably sharp turn in events. 
 Like every sharp turn, it calls for a revision and change of tactics. 
 And as with every revision, we must be extra-cautious not to become unprincipled. 
 It is my conviction that those who become unprincipled are people who (like Volodarsky) slide into defencism or (like other Bolsheviks) into a bloc with the S. 
R. 
s, into supporting the Provisional Government. 
 Their attitude is absolutely wrong and unprincipled. 
 We shall become defen-cists only after the transfer of power to the proletariat, after a peace offer, after the secret treaties and ties with the banks have been broken— only afterwards . 
 Neither the cap-ture of Riga nor the capture of Petrograd will make us defencists. 
 (I should very much like Volodarsky to readthis. 
) Until then we stand for a proletarian revolution, weare against the war, and we are no defencists. 
 Even now we must not support Kerensky’s government. 
 This is unprincipled. 
 We may be asked: aren’t we going to fight against Kornilov? Of course we must! But this is not the same thing; there is a dividing line here, which isbeing stepped over by some Bolsheviks who fall into compromise and allow themselves to be carried away by the course of events. 
 We shall fight, we are fighting against Kornilov, just as Kerensky’s troops do , but we do not support Kerensky. 
 On the contrary , we expose his weakness. 
 There is the difference. 
 It is rather a subtle difference, but it is highlyessential and must not be forgotten. 
 What, then, constitutes our change of tactics after the Kornilov revolt? We are changing the form of our struggle against Kerensky. 
 Without in the least relaxing our hostility towards him,without taking back a single word said against him, withoutrenouncing the task of overthrowing him, we say that wemust take into account the present situation. 
 We shall not overthrow Kerensky right now. 
 We shall approach the task of fighting against him in a different way , namely, we shall point out to the people (who are fighting against Kornilov)Kerensky’s weakness and vacillation . 
 That has been done in the past as well . 
 Now, however, it has become the all-impor-tant thing and this constitutes the change. 
 The change, further, is that the all-important thing now has become the intensification of our campaign for somekind of “partial demands” to be presented to Kerensky:arrest Milyukov, arm the Petrograd workers, summon theKronstadt, Vyborg and Helsingfors troops to Petrograd,dissolve the Duma, arrest Rodzyanko, legalise the transfer of the landed estates to the peasants, introduce workers’ control over grain and factories, etc. 
, etc. 
 We must presentthese demands not only to Kerensky, and not so much to Kerensky, as to the workers, soldiers and peasants who havebeen carried away by the course of the struggle against Kornilov. 
 We must keep up their enthusiasm , encourage them to deal with the generals and officers who have declared for Kornilov, urge them to demand the immediate transfer of land to the peasants, suggest to them that it is necessary to arrest Rodzyanko and Milyukov, dissolve the Duma,close down Rech and other bourgeois papers, and institute investigations against them. 
 The “Left” S. 
R. 
s must be especially urged on in this direction. 
 It would be wrong to think that we have moved farther away from the task of the proletariat winning power. 
 No. 
 First page of the letter to the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 August 30 (September 12), 1917 Reduced First page of the letter to the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 August 30 (September 12), 1917 Reduced We have come very close to it, not directly , but from the side. 
 At the moment we must campaign not so much directly against Kerensky, as indirectly against him, namely, by demanding a more and more active, truly revolutionary waragainst Kornilov. 
 The development of this war alone canlead us to power, but we must speak of this as little as pos-sible in our propaganda (remembering very well that eventomorrow events may put power into our hands, and then we shall not relinquish it). 
 It seems to me that this should be passed on in a letter (not in the papers) to the propagan-dists, to groups of agitators and propagandists, and to Partymembers in general. 
 We must relentlessly fight againstphrases about the defence of the country, about a unitedfront of revolutionary democrats, about supporting the Provisional Government, etc. 
, etc. 
, since they are just empty phrases . 
 We must say: now is the time for action ; you S. 
R. 
 and Menshevik gentlemen have long since worn those phrasesthreadbare. 
 Now is the time for action ; the war against Kornilov must be conducted in a revolutionary way, bydrawing the masses in, by arousing them, by inflaming them (Kerensky is afraid of the masses, afraid of the people). 
 In the war against the Germans, action is required right now; immediate and unconditional peace must be offered on precise terms. 
 If this is done, either a speedy peace can be attained or the war can be turned into a revolutionary war; if not, allthe Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries remain lackeys of imperialism. 
 P. 
S. 
 Having read six issues of Rabochy , 103 after this was written, I must say that our views fully coincide. 
 I heartilywelcome the splendid editorials, press review and articlesby V. 
 M—n and Vol—y. 
 As to Volodarsky’s speech, I have read his letter to the editors, which likewise “eliminates” my reproaches. 
 Once more, best wishes and greetings! Lenin Written on August 30 September 12, 1917 First published in Pravda No. 
 250, Published according to November 7, 1920 the manuscript A PUBLICIST’S DIARY 1. 
 THE ROOT OF THE EVIL Everyone will probably agree that the writer N. 
 Sukhanov of Novaya Zhizn is one of the best rather than worst repre-sentatives of petty-bourgeois democracy. 
 He sincerely leanstowards internationalism, which he has proved in the hard-est times, at the height of tsarist reaction and chauvinism. 
 He has knowledge and a desire to work out serious problemsindependently, which he has proved by his long evolutionfrom Socialist-Revolutionism towards revolutionary Marx-ism. 
 It is all the more characteristic that even such people are apt, when dealing with the fundamental issues of the revo-lution in its crucial periods, to treat their readers to argu-ments as thoughtless as the following: “No matter how many revolutionary gains we have lost in the past few weeks, one, and perhaps the most important of all, is still there: the government and its policies can only be maintained by the graceof the Soviet majority. 
 The revolutionary democrats have of theirown accord given up all the influence they commanded; the democraticorgans can still regain it very easily and, given proper understandingof the requirements of the moment, can without difficulty direct the Policies of the Provisional Government into the proper channel” (Novaya Zhizn No. 
 106, August 20). 
 These words contain the most thoughtless, the most monstrous untruth concerning the most important issueof the revolution, an untruth, moreover, which has mostoften been put about, in vastly differing countries, among the petty-bourgeois democrats and has ruined the greatest number of revolutions. 
 When you think over the sum total of petty-bourgeois illusions contained in the argument quoted above, you can-not help thinking that it is no accident the Novaya Zhizn people sit at the “unity” congress 104 together with Minis-ters, with socialists eligible for the cabinet, with the Tse-retelis and Skobelevs, with cabinet members who are com-rades of Kerensky, Kornilov and Co. 
 No accident at all. 
 They actually have a common ideological foundation, namely,unreasoning philistine gullibility, uncritically borrowedfrom the petty-bourgeois environment, in good intentions. 
For this gullibility pervades all of Sukhanov’s argument, aswell as all the activities of those defencist Mensheviks who act in good faith. 
 This petty-bourgeois gullibility is the root of the evil in our revolution. 
 Sukhanov would probably hasten to subscribe to what Marxism demands of all serious policy, namely, that it bebased on and grounded in facts capable of exact and objec-tive verification. 
 Let us try to approach the assertion which Sukhanov makes in the passage above from the point of view of this demand. 
 What are the facts underlying this assertion? How could Sukhanov prove that the government “can only be main-tained by the grace” of the Soviets, that they could “veryeasily” “regain their influence”, or that they could “without difficulty” change the policies of the Provisional Govern-ment? Sukhanov could have referred, first, to his general impres-sion, to the “obvious” strength of the Soviets, to the fact that Kerensky came to the Soviet, to the amiable words of this or that minister, etc. 
 This would certainly have been very poor proof—rather an admission of the complete lack of proof and objective facts. 
 Sukhanov could have referred, secondly, to the objective fact that by far most of the resolutions passed by workers, soldiers and peasants declare emphatically for the Sovietsand in favour of supporting them. 
 These resolutions, hemight have said, demonstrate the will of the majority of thepeople. 
 This kind of reasoning is as common among philistines as the first kind. 
 But it is absolutely untenable. 
 In all revolutions, the will of the majority of the workers and peasants, i. 
e. 
, undoubtedly, the will of the majorityof the population, has been for democracy. 
 Nevertheless,the great majority of revolutions have ended with the defeatof democracy. 
 In view of the experience of the majority of revolutions, particularly that of 1848 (which resembles our present revolution most), Marx mercilessly ridiculed the petty-bourgeois democrats who wished to win through resolutionsand references to the will of the majority of the people. 
 Our own experience proves this even better. 
 In the spring of 1906 most of the resolutions passed by workers and peas-ants were undoubtedly in favour of the First Duma. 
 The majority of the people undoubtedly stood for it. 
 Nevertheless, the tsar succeeded in dissolving it because the upswing of therevolutionary classes (workers’ strikes and peasant unrestin the spring of 1906) proved too weak for a new revolution. 
 Think over the experience of the present revolution. 
 Both from March to April and from July to August 1917, most resolutions were for the Soviets, the majority of the people were for the Soviets. 
 Yet everyone sees, knows and feelsthat from March to April the revolution was moving forward,whereas from July to August it was moving backwards. 
Consequently, reference to the majority of the people decidesnothing as far as the specific issues of a revolution are con-cerned. 
 This reference, made by way of proof, is in itself a specimen of petty-bourgeois illusion. 
 It shows unwillingness to admitthat in a revolution the enemy classes must be defeated , the state power that defends them must be overthrown and that the “will of the majority of the people” is insufficient to bring this about. 
 What is needed is the strength of the revolutionary classes that will and can fight, a strengthwhich at the decisive moment and place will crush the enemy’s strength. 
 How often has it happened during revolutions that the small but well-organised, armed and centralised power of the ruling classes, the landowners and the bourgeoisie, has crushed piecemeal the power of the “majority of the people”,who were poorly organised, poorly armed and lacked unity. 
 To make “general” references to the “will of the people” instead of considering specific issues of the class struggleat a time when it has been particularly sharpened by the revolution is worthy only of the most stupid petty bourgeois. 
 Thirdly, in the comment quoted above, Sukhanov advances another “argument” that is likewise fairly common among philistines. 
 He says “the revolutionary democrats have of their own accord given up all the influence they commanded”. 
 From this he infers that what was given up “of their own accord” can be taken back easily. 
 An utterly worthless argument. 
 First of all, the return of what was voluntarily ceded presupposes the “voluntaryconsent” of the beneficiary of the concession. 
 It follows thatthis voluntary consent is there. 
 Who has received the “ con-cession ”? Who has profited from the “influence” given up by the “revolutionary democrats”? It is quite typical that this question, fundamental to all but a headless politician, is completely ignored by Sukhanov. 
For the crux of the matter is precisely in whose hands is,in practice , that which the “revolutionary [pardon the ex-pression] democrats” have “given up of their own accord”. 
 Sukhanov ignores the crux of the matter, as do all Men-sheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, all petty-bourgeoisdemocrats in general. 
 Moreover, it may be that in a child’s “give-and-take” game it is easy to take something back: if Katya freely lets Masha have her ball, it may be “very easy” to take it back. 
 But there are not many, apart from Russian intel-lectuals, who would venture to extend such conceptions topolitics, to the class struggle. 
 In politics, ceding “influence” of one’s own free will proves such impotence on the part of the one who does the ceding, such flabbiness, such lack of character, such meek-ness, that, generally speaking, the only thing one can inferis that whoever gives up his influence of his own accord“deserves” to be deprived of his right to exist as well as hisinfluence. 
 In other words, the fact of voluntarily giving upone’s influence “proves” in itself only this, that the benefici-ary of the voluntarily ceded influence will inevitably deprive the one who has ceded it even of his rights. 
 If the “revolutionary democrats” have voluntarily ceded their influence, they are therefore not revolutionary butvile, philistine, cowardly democrats still bound by servility,democrats whom (after such a surrender) their enemies can either disperse or simply reduce to naught, allowing them to die as much “of their own accord” as they ceded theirinfluence . 
 To regard the actions of political parties as whims means renouncing all study of politics. 
 There must be an explanation for an action like the “giving up of their influence of their own accord” by two huge parties which, according to allavailable information and reports and to objective electionfigures, sway the majority of the people. 
 It cannot be acci-dental. 
 It must be due to a definite economic position ofsome large class of the people. 
 It must be linked up with the history of the development of those parties. 
 Sukhanov’s argument is highly typical of thousands upon thousands of similar philistine arguments because it is ineffect based on the conception of good will (“their ownaccord”) and ignores the history of the parties under consid-eration. 
 Sukhanov has simply left their history out of his examination, forgetting that voluntary surrender of influence began, strictly speaking, on February 28, when the Sovietexpressed confidence in Kerensky and approved the “agree-ment” with the Provisional Government. 
 And May 6 wasa surrender of influence on a truly gigantic scale. 
 Taken asa whole, it is all as clear as can be: the S. 
R. 
 and Menshevik parties placed themselves on an inclined plane from the very first, and rolled down faster and faster. 
 After July 3-5, theyreached rock bottom. 
 Isn’t it perfectly thoughtless to say now that the surrender was voluntary, that it is “very easy” to make great politicalparties face about, that they can “without difficulty” be induced to take the opposite direction to the one they have been following for years (and for months during the revo-lution), and that it is “very easy” to scramble out of the pitand climb up the inclined plane to the top? Fourthly and lastly, Sukhanov could in defence of his opin-ion have referred to the fact that the workers and soldiers, who express confidence in the Soviet, are armed and therefore could “very easily” regain their influence. 
 But it is on this,perhaps the most important, point that the philistine com-ment of the writer of Novaya Zhizn is particularly lame. 
 To be as specific as possible, let us compare April 20-21 with July 3-5. 
 On April 20 popular indignation against the government burst out. 
 An armed regiment came on to the streets ofPetrograd intending to arrest the government. 
 There was no arrest. 
 The government, however, saw clearly that it had nobody to rely on. 
 No troops were for it. 
 Such a govern-ment was indeed “very easy” to overthrow, and the govern-ment confronted the Soviet with an ultimatum: either youback me, or I go. 
 On July 4, a similar outburst of popular indignation, an outburst which all parties tried to restrain but which brokeout in spite of all the restraining. 
 As before, there was an armed anti-government demonstration. 
 But the enormous difference was that the S. 
R. 
 and Menshevik leaders, whohad isolated themselves from the people and were confused,agreed with the bourgeoisie as early as July 3 to call Ka-ledin ’s troops to Petrograd. 
 There is the crux of the matter! With a soldier’s frankness, Kaledin said so at the Moscow meeting: “After all, it was you socialist Ministers who called us to your aid on July 31” Nobody dared refute Kaledin atthe Moscow meeting because he spoke the truth. 
 Kaledinmocked the Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s, who were compelledto keep silent. 
 The Cossack general spat in their faces, butthey merely wiped it off and said: “Divine dew!” The bourgeois papers reported Kaledin’s words but the Menshevik Rabochaya Gazeta and the S. 
R. 
 “ Dyelo Naroda ” concealed that political statement from their readers, the most important statement made at the Moscow meeting. 
 What happened was that for the first time the government resorted expressly to Kaledin’s troops, while the determined, truly revolutionary troops and the workers were disarmed. 
 This is the fundamental fact which Sukhanov has “veryeasily” evaded and forgotten. 
 It remains a fact nevertheless. 
It is a decisive fact as far as the present period of the revo-lution, the first revolution, is concerned. 
 Power in a decisive place at the front, and then in the army, has passed into the hands of the Kaledins . 
 This is a fact. 
 The most active of the troops hostile to them havebeen disarmed. 
 The fact that the Kaledins do not use theirpower immediately to establish their complete dictator-ship does not at all disprove that they hold power. 
 Wasn’tthe tsar in power after December 1905? And didn’t circum-stances compel him to use it so prudently that he had two Dumas convened before he took all power , i. 
e. 
, before he made a coup d’état 105? Power should be judged by actions instead of words. 
 The actions of the government since July 5 have shown that power is in the hands of the Kaledins, who are making slow but steady headway, daily securing “concessions”, large and small. 
 Today it is the impunity with which military cadetsraid the Pravda offices and kill its staff members, and make arbitrary arrests; then comes a law closing down news-papers, and laws banning meetings and conferences, throw-ing citizens out of the country without trial, imposing prison sentences for insulting “the ambassadors of friendlycountries”, meting out penal servitude for assailing thegovernment, introducing capital punishment at the front,and so on, and so forth. 
 The Kaledins are no fools. 
 Why should they go right through, forcing their way and risking defeat, when they receive the things they need bit by bit, every day ? Mean-while, the foolish Skobelevs and Tseretelis, Chernovs andAvksentyevs, Dans and Liebers shout “Triumph for democ-racy! Victory!” at every step of the Kaledins forward, seeingas “victory” the fact that the Kaledins, Kornilovs and Keren-skys do not swallow them at once!! The root of the evil is that their very economic position makes the petty-bourgeois masses amazingly credulousand ignorant, and that they are still half asleep and mumbledrowsily, “It is ‘very easy’ to take back what we have givenup of our own free will!” Try and get the Kaledins and Korni-lovs to give back anything of their own free will! The root of the evil is that “democratic” journalism main-tains this drowsy, philistine, stupid, slavish illusion, in-stead of fighting it. 
 If we look at things the way a political historian in general and a Marxist in particular should, i. 
e. 
, if we con-sider them as a whole, it is perfectly clear that a decisive turn at present, far from being “easy”, is, on the contrary,absolutely impossible without a new revolution . 
 I do not at all touch here on the question of whether this revolution is desirable. 
 I do not at all examine the ques-tion of whether it can take place peacefully and legally (generally speaking, there have been examples of peaceful and legal revolutions in history). 
 I merely state that it ishistorically impossible to bring about a decisive turn without a new revolution. 
 For power is already in other hands. 
 It is no longer held by the “revolutionary democrats”. 
 It has already been seized and consolidated. 
 The conduct of the S. 
R. 
 and Menshevik parties is no accident; it is a product ofthe economic status of the petty bourgeoisie, and the resultof a long series of political events—from February 28 toMay 6, from May 6 to June 9, from June 9 to June 18 and 19(the offensive), etc. 
 There is a need for changes in the situation of power, in its composition, in the conditions of activity of the major parties, in the “aspirations” of theclass which sustains them. 
 These changes are historicallyunthinkable without a new revolution . 
 Instead of explaining to the people all the main historical conditions of the new revolution, its economic and political prerequisites, its political aims, the interrelation of classes that corresponds to it, etc. 
, Sukhanov and a host of petty-bourgeois democrats are lulling the people to sleep by tri-fling away their time, by asserting self-complacently that“we shall regain everything without difficulty”, “very easily”,that our “most important” revolutionary gain “is still there”, and similar thoughtless, ignorant, downright criminal non-sense. 
 There are signs of a radical social change. 
 They clearly indicate the direction of the work to be done. 
 The influenceof the S. 
R. 
s and Mensheviks is plainly dwindling amongthe proletariat, while the influence of the Bolsheviks is plainly growing. 
 Incidentally, even the elections of August 20, compared with the June elections to the districtcouncils 106 of Petrograd, showed an increase in favour of the Bolsheviks, and this despite the bringing of “Kaledin’stroops to Petrograd”! Among the petty-bourgeois democrats, who cannot help wavering between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, the turn is objectively evident from the strengthening, consoli-dation and development of revolutionary internationalisttrends: Martov and others among the Mensheviks, Spirido-nova, Kamkov and others among the S. 
R. 
s. 
 Needless to say,the approaching famine, economic dislocation and military reverses may very greatly hasten this turn towards the trans-fer of power to the proletariat supported by the peasant poor. 
 2. 
 CORVÉE AND SOCIALISM The bitterest enemies of socialism sometimes do it a service by the excessive zeal of their “exposures”. 
 They beardown on the very things that deserve sympathy and emula-tion. 
 They open the people’s eyes to the infamy of the bour-geoisie by the very nature of their attacks. 
 That is what happened to one of the most infamous bourgeois newspapers, Russkaya Volya , which on August 20 published a report from Yekaterinburg entitled “Corvée”. 
Here is what it had to say: “The Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies has introduced in our city a service in kind by horse-owners, who must take it in turnsto put their horses at the disposal of the Soviet for the daily businesstrips of its members. 
 “A special schedule has been drawn up and every ‘citizen with a horse’ is punctually notified in writing when and where, and at what precise hour, he must arrive for duty with his horse. 
 “To make things clearer, the ‘order’ adds: ‘In the event of non-compliance with this demand, the Soviet will hire cabmen at yourexpense to the amount of 25 rubles’. 
” The defender of the capitalists is indignant, of course. 
 The capitalists watch with perfect equanimity how the vastmajority of the people suffer want all their lives—not only those doing “corvée”, but also those doing back-breaking work in a factory, mine, or some other job, often starvingbecause they have no work at all. 
 And the capitalists lookon with equanimity. 
 But now that the workers and soldiers have introduced just one little public duty for the capitalists, the exploiters are howling, “Corvée!” Ask any worker or peasant whether it would be bad if the Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies were theonly power in the state and introduced everywhere somepublic duty for the rich, such as a compulsory duty withhorses, motor vehicles or bicycles, compulsory daily clerical work to keep a record of products or of the needy, and so on, and so forth. 
 Any worker, any peasant, except perhaps the kulaks, will say it would be a good thing. 
 And this is true. 
 It is not socialism as yet—only one of the first steps towards socialism, but it is just what the poor need urgently and immediately. 
 Without such measures, the people cannot be saved from famine and ruin. 
 Why, then, does the Yekaterinburg Soviet remain a rare exception? Why have similar measures not been taken allover Russia long ago? Why are they not being developedinto a whole system of measures of precisely this kind? Why, after the introduction of a public duty for the rich to lend their horses, is a similar public duty for the rich not introduced to present full accounts of their financial operations, especially by the terms of government contracts,under a similar control of the Soviets, with “punctual noti-fication in writing” as to when and where the accounts should be presented, when and where taxes should be paid, and to what amount? Because by far most of the Soviets are controlled by S. 
R. 
 (“Socialist-Revolutionary”) and Menshevik leaders who have in fact deserted to the bourgeoisie, have entered the bour-geois cabinet and pledged themselves to support it, betray ing not only socialism but democracy as well. 
 Those leaders are making agreements with the bourgeoisie, who, far from allowing the imposition of a public duty on the rich—as in Petrograd, for example—have for months been holdingup much more moderate reforms. 
 Those leaders deceive themselves and the people by saying that “Russia is not yet ripe for the introduction ofsocialism”. 
 Why must we treat such assertions as deception? Because, through such assertions, the situation is mis-represented to make believe that it is a question of unprece-dentedly complicated and difficult changes, such as are boundto break up the normal way of life of millions of people. 
 Thesituation is misrepresented to make believe that some want to “introduce” socialism in Russia by decree, without con-sidering the existing technical level, the great number ofsmall undertakings, or the habits and wishes of the majorityof the population. 
 That is a lie from beginning to end. 
 Nobody has ever pro-posed anything of the kind. 
 No party or individual has had any intention of “introducing socialism” by decree. 
 It is, and has been, a question solely of measures which, like thepublic duty imposed on the rich in Yekaterinburg, have the full approval of the mass of the poor, i. 
e. 
, the majority of the population, measures which are perfectly ripe, tech-nically and culturally, will bring immediate relief to the poor and make it possible to ease the hardships of the warand distribute them more evenly. 
 Almost six months of revolution have passed, but the S. 
R. 
 and Menshevik leaders still obstruct all these measures,betraying the interests of the people in favour of compromise with the bourgeoisie. 
 Until the workers and peasants realise that those leaders are traitors who must be driven out, must be removed fromtheir posts, they will inevitably remain under the thumb ofthe bourgeoisie. 
 Rabochy No. 
 10 Published according to September 14 (1), 1917 the Rabochy text Signed: N. 
 Lenin CONCERNING THE PARTY PROGRAMME Comrade Bukharin’s report in Spartak107 about the “narrow” congress that is to be called to adopt a programme shows how pressing this matter is. 
 It really is an urgent matter. 
Our Party is ahead of the other internationalist parties; this is a fact now. 
 And it is in duty bound to take the initiative, to come forward with a programme answering questions about imperialism. 
 It will be a scandal and a shame if we do not do this. 
 I propose that the Central Committee resolve that:“Every Party organisation immediately appoint one or several committees to draft the programme; they, along with all theoreticians or writers, etc. 
, should give precedence to this matter, and present either drafts of their own, orchanges and amendments to other drafts, not later thanwithin three to seven days. 
” This is perfectly feasible, given perseverance. 
It will take a couple of weeks to collect and print the drafts or circulate them to the main organisations in type-written form. 
 Then we must immediately announce the calling of a narrow congress (one delegate to 4,000 or 5,000 members) in a month from now —for the purpose of adopting the programme. 
 Our Party must come forward with a programme— that is the only way we can promote the cause of the Third In-ternational in deeds instead of words. 
 Everything else is empty phrases, empty promises, and postponement to the Greek calends. 
 Once we take the initiative, we shall speed up work on all sides, and only then shall we prepare the programme of the Third Inter-national. 
 Written not later than September 3 (16), 1917 First published in Published according to Lenin Miscellany VII, 1928 the manuscript ON ZIMMERWA LD108 It is now quite clear that we made a mistake by not withdrawing from it. 
 Everybody is being bamboozled by hopes from Stockholm. 
 Meanwhile the Stockholm Conference is being “postponed” from month to month. 
 And Zimmerwald is “ waiting ” for Stockholm! The Ka-utsky men plus the Italians, i. 
e. 
, the Zimmerwald majority,are “waiting” for Stockholm. 
 And we are joining in this comedy, bearing responsibility for it before the workers. 
 It is a disgrace. 
We must withdraw from Zimmerwald immediately . 
 By staying there for information only, we lose nothing, but we are not going to be held responsible for the comedy of “waiting” for Stockholm. 
 In leaving rotten Zimmerwald we must decide immediate-ly, at the plenary meeting on September 3, 1917, to call a conference of the Left-wingers , and entrust this to the Stockholm representatives. 
 What has happened is that, after we made a blunder by staying in Zimmerwald, our Party, the world’s only inter-nationalist party with seventeen newspapers, etc. 
, is play-ing at compromise with the German and Italian Martovs and Tseretelis, just as Martov is compromising with Tse-reteli, just as Tsereteli is compromising with the Socialist-Revolutionaries and as the Socialist-Revolutionaries arecompromising with the bourgeoisie. 
 And this is called “standing for” the Third International!!! Written not later than September 3 (16), 1917 First published in Published according to Lenin Miscellany VII, 1928 the manuscript VIOLATIONS OF DEMOCRACY IN MASS ORGANISATIONS We must pass a resolution branding as a fraud * worthy of Nicholas II such practices as those of the Soviet of Sol-diers’ Deputies (the soldiers have one representative to every 500 people, while the workers have 1 : 1,000)109 or the Trade Union Bureau (1 representative to a membersin the small unions and 1 to a-b members in the large ones). 
 What sort of democrats are we if we tacitly put up with this fraud ? What is wrong with Nicholas II, for that matter, who also “allowed” unequal representation from the peasants and from the landowners?? By tolerating such things, we are prostituting democracy. 
We must pass a resolution demanding equal suffrage (both in the Soviets and at trade union congresses), branding theslightest departure from equality as a fraud —using exactly this word—as a Nicholas II method . 
 This resolution of the plenary meeting of the Central Committee must be written in a language everybody can understand and spread inleaflet form among the mass of the workers. 
 We cannot tolerate a fraud of democracy if we call our-selves “democrats”. 
 We are not democrats but unprincipledpeople if we tolerate this!! Written not later than September 3 (16), 1917 First published in Published according to Lenin Miscellany VII, 1928 the manuscript *“One representative, everywhere, to an equal number of elec-tors” is the ABC of democracy. 
 Anything else is a fraud . 
 ON COMPROMISES The term compromise in politics implies the surrender of certain demands, the renunciation of part of one’s de-mands, by agreement with another party. 
 The usual idea the man in the street has about the Bol-sheviks, an idea encouraged by a press which slanders them, is that the Bolsheviks will never agree to a compromise with anybody. 
 The idea is flattering to us as the party of the revolution-ary proletariat, for it proves that even our enemies arecompelled to admit our loyalty to the fundamental principlesof socialism and revolution. 
 Nevertheless, we must say that this idea is wrong. 
 Engels was right when, in his criti-cism of the Manifesto of the Blanquist Communists 110 (1873), he ridiculed their declaration: “No compromises!”111 This, he said, was an empty phrase, for compromises areoften unavoidably forced upon a fighting party by circum-stances, and it is absurd to refuse once and for all to accept “payments on account”. 
 112 The task of a truly revolutionary party is not to declare that it is impossible to renounce allcompromises, but to be able, through all compromises , when they are unavoidable, to remain true to its principles,to its class, to its revolutionary purpose, to its task ofpaving the way for revolution and educating the mass of the people for victory in the revolution. 
 To agree, for instance, to participate in the Third and Fourth Dumas was a compromise, a temporary renunciationof revolutionary demands. 
 But this was a compromiseabsolutely forced upon us, for the balance of forces madeit impossible for us for the time being to conduct a mass revolutionary struggle, and in order to prepare this struggle over a long period we had to be able to work even from inside such a “pigsty”. 
 History has proved that this approach to the question by the Bolsheviks as a party was perfectly correct. 
 Now the question is not of a forced, but of a voluntary compromise. 
 Our Party, like any other political party, is striving after political domination for itself . 
 Our aim is the dictatorship of the revolutionary proletariat. 
 Six months of revolutionhave proved very clearly, forcefully and convincingly that this demand is correct and inevitable in the interests of this particular revolution, for otherwise the people will never obtain a democratic peace, land for the peasants,or complete freedom (a fully democratic republic). 
 Thishas been shown and proved by the course of events dur-ing the six months of our revolution, by the struggle of the classes and parties and by the development of the crises of April 20-21, June 9-10 and 18-19, July 3-5 andAugust 27-31. 
 The Russian revolution is experiencing so abrupt and original a turn that we, as a party, may offer a voluntarycompromise—true, not to our direct and main class enemy, the bourgeoisie, but to our nearest adversaries, the “ruling” petty-bourgeois-democratic parties, the Socialist-Revolu-tionaries and Mensheviks. 
 We may offer a compromise to these parties only by way of exception, and only by virtue of the particular situation,which will obviously last only a very short time. 
 And I think we should do so. 
 The compromise on our part is our return to the pre-July demand of all power to the Soviets and a government ofS. 
R. 
s and Mensheviks responsible to the Soviets. 
 Now, and only now, perhaps during only a few days or a week or two, such a government could be set up and consoli-dated in a perfectly peaceful way. 
 In all probability it could secure the peaceful advance of the whole Russian revolution, and provide exceptionally good chances for greatstrides in the world movement towards peace and the victoryof socialism. 
 In my opinion, the Bolsheviks, who are partisans of world revolution and revolutionary methods, may and should consent to this compromise only for the sake of the revolu-tion’s peaceful development—an opportunity that is ex-tremely rare in history and extremely valuable, an oppor-tunity that only occurs once in a while. 
 The compromise would amount to the following: the Bolsheviks, without making any claim to participate inthe government (which is impossible for the internation-alists unless a dictatorship of the proletariat and the poorpeasants has been realised), would refrain from demandingthe immediate transfer of power to the proletariat and the poor peasants and from employing revolutionary methods of fighting for this demand. 
 A condition that is self-evident and not new to the S. 
R. 
s and Mensheviks wouldbe complete freedom of propaganda and the convocationof the Constituent Assembly without further delays or evenat an earlier date. 
 The Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s, being the government bloc, would then agree (assuming that the compromise had beenreached) to form a government wholly and exclusively respon-sible to the Soviets, the latter taking over all power locallyas well. 
 This would constitute the “new” condition. 
 I think theBolsheviks would advance no other conditions, trusting that the revolution would proceed peacefully and party strife in the Soviets would be peacefully overcome thanks to really complete freedom of propaganda and to the immediateestablishment of a new democracy in the composition ofthe Soviets (new elections) and in their functioning. 
 Perhaps this is already impossible? Perhaps. 
 But if there is even one chance in a hundred, the attempt at real-ising this opportunity is still worth while. 
 What would both “contracting” parties gain by this “compromise”, i. 
e. 
, the Bolsheviks, on the one hand, andthe S. 
R. 
 and Menshevik bloc, on the other? If neither side gains anything, then the compromise must be recognised as impossible, and nothing more is to be said. 
 No matter how difficult this compromise may be at present (afterJuly and August, two months equivalent to two decadesin “peaceful”, somnolent times), I think it stands a smallchance of being realised. 
 This chance has been created bythe decision of the S. 
R. 
s and Mensheviks not to participate in a government together with the Cadets. 
 The Bolsheviks would gain the opportunity of quite freely advocating their views and of trying to win influence in the Soviets under a really complete democracy. 
 In words, “everybody” now concedes the Bolsheviks this freedom. 
 In reality, this freedom is impossible under a bourgeois government or a government in which the bour-geoisie participate, or under any government, in fact, otherthan the Soviets. 
 Under a Soviet government, such freedomwould be possible (we do not say it would be a certainty, but still it would be possible). 
 For the sake of such a pos-sibility at such a difficult time, it would be worth compro-mising with the present majority in the Soviets. 
 We have nothing to fear from real democracy, for reality is on ourside, and even the course of development of trends withinthe S. 
R. 
 and Menshevik parties, which are hostile to us,proves us right. 
 The Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s would gain in that they would at once obtain every opportunity to carry out their bloc’s programme with the support of the obviously overwhelmingmajority of the people and in that they would secure forthemselves the “peaceful” use of their majority in the Soviets. 
 Of course, there would probably be two voices heard from this bloc, which is heterogeneous both because it is a bloc and because petty-bourgeois democracy is always less homogeneous than the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. 
 One voice would say: we cannot follow the same road as the Bolsheviks and the revolutionary proletariat. 
 Itwill demand too much anyway and will entice the peasant poor by demagogy. 
 It will demand peace and a break with the Allies. 
 That is impossible. 
 We are better off and saferwith the bourgeoisie; after all, we have not parted wayswith them but only had a temporary quarrel , and only over the Kornilov incident. 
 We have quarrelled, but weshall make it up. 
 Moreover, the Bolsheviks are not “ceding” us anything, for their attempts at insurrection are as doomed to defeat as was the Commune of 1871. 
 The other voice would say: the allusion to the Commune is very superficial and even foolish. 
 For, in the first place,the Bolsheviks have learnt something since 1871; theywould not fail to seize the banks, and would not refuse to advance on Versailles. 
 Under such conditions even the Commune might have been victorious. 
 Furthermore, theCommune could not immediately offer the people what the Bolsheviks will be able to offer if they come to power, namely, land to the peasants, an immediate offer of peace, real control over production, an honest peace with the Ukrainians, Finns, etc. 
 The Bolsheviks, to put it bluntly,hold ten times more “trumps” than the Commune did. 
 Inthe second place, the Commune, after all, means a strenuouscivil war, a set-back to peaceful cultural development for along time to come, an opportunity for all sorts of Mac-Mahons and Kornilovs to operate and plot with greater ease—and such operations are a menace to our wholebourgeois society. 
 Is it wise to risk a Commune? Now a Commune is inevitable in Russia if we do not take power into our own hands, if things remain in as gravea state as they were between May 6 and August 31. 
 Every revolutionary worker and soldier will inevitably think about the Commune and believe in it; he will inevitablyattempt to bring it about, for he will argue: “The peopleare perishing; war, famine and ruin are spreading. 
 Onlythe Commune can save us. 
 So let us all perish, let us die,but let us set up the Commune. 
” Such thoughts are inevi-table with the workers, and it will not be as easy to crush the Commune now as it was in 1871. 
 The Russian Communewill have allies throughout the world, allies a hundredtimes stronger than those the Commune had in 1871 .... 
 Is it wise for us to risk a Commune? I cannot agree, either,that the Bolsheviks virtually cede us nothing by their compromise. 
 For, in all civilised countries, civilised min-isters value highly every agreement with the proletariatin war-time, however small. 
 They value it very, very highly. 
And these are men of action, real ministers. 
 The Bolsheviksare rapidly becoming stronger, in spite of repression, andthe weakness of their press .... 
 Is it wise for us to risk a Commune? We have a safe majority; the peasant poor will not wake up for some time to come; we are safe for our lifetime. 
 I donot believe that in a peasant country the majority willfollow the extremists. 
 And against an obvious majority,no insurrection is possible in a really democratic republic. 
 This is what the second voice would say. 
 There may also be a third voice coming from among the supporters of Martov or Spiridonova, which would say: I am indignant, “comrades”, that both of you, speaking about the Commune and its likelihood, unhesitatingly side with its opponents. 
 In one form or another, both of you side with those who suppressed the Commune. 
 I willnot undertake to campaign for the Commune and I cannotpromise beforehand to fight in its ranks as every Bolshevikwill do, but I must say that if the Commune does start in spite of my efforts, I shall rather help its defenders than its opponents. 
 The medley of voices in the “bloc” is great and inevitable, for a host of shades is represented among the petty-bourgeoisdemocrats—from the complete bourgeois, perfectly eligiblefor a post in the government, down to the semi-pauperwho is not yet capable of taking up the proletarian position. 
 Nobody knows what will be the result of this medley of voices at any given moment. 
 * * * The above lines were written on Friday, September 1, but due to unforeseen circumstances (under Kerensky, as history will tell, not all Bolsheviks were free to choose their domicile) they did not reach the editorial office thatday. 
 After reading Saturday’s and today’s (Sunday’s)papers, I say to myself: perhaps it is already too late tooffer a compromise. 
 Perhaps the few days in which a peace-ful development was still possible have passed too. 
 Yes, to all appearances, they have already passed. 
 113 In one way or another, Kerensky will abandon both the S. 
R. 
 Partyand the S. 
R. 
s themselves, and will consolidate his positionwith the aid of the bourgeoisie without the S. 
R. 
s, and thanks to their inaction .... 
 Yes, to all appearances, the days when by chance the path of peaceful development became possible have already passed. 
 All that remains is to send these notes to the editor with the request to have them entitled: “Be-lated Thoughts”. 
 Perhaps even belated thoughts are some-times not without interest. 
 Written on September 1-3 (14-16 ), 1917 Published in Rabochy Put No. 
 3, Published according to September 19 (6), 1917 the newspaper text Signed: N. 
 Lenin DRAF T RESOLUTION ON THE PRESEN T POLITICA L SITUATIO N114 The Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, on the basis of the resolution on the political situation adopted by the Sixth Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 (Bolsheviks), and applyingthat resolution to the present situation, at its plenary meet-ing states: 1. 
 In the two months from July 3 to September 3, due to the unparalleled speed of the revolution, the course of the class struggle and the development of political events have carried the whole country as far forward as it wouldhave been impossible for the country to advance over manyyears in peace-time, without revolution and war. 
 2. 
 It becomes more and more apparent that the events of July 3-5 were the turning-point of the whole revolution. 
 Without a correct estimate of these events, it is impossible to correctly estimate either the proletariat’s tasks, or thespeed of development of revolutionary events, which isbeyond our control. 
 3. 
 The slander against the Bolsheviks, which the bour-geoisie spread with tremendous zeal and which they put about very widely among the people with the aid of the millions invested in capitalist papers and publishing houses,is being exposed more and more rapidly and widely. 
 Firstit was the workers in the capital and in the large cities,and then the peasants, who realised more and more that theslander against the Bolsheviks is one of the main weapons used by the landowners and capitalists in the struggle against the defenders of the interests of the workers andpoor peasants, i. 
e. 
, against the Bolsheviks. 
 4. 
 An outright attempt was made to camouflage the Kornilov revolt, i. 
e. 
, a revolt of generals and officers behind whom stand the landowners and the capitalists headed by the Cadet Party (the “people’s freedom” party),by bringing up again the old slander against the Bolsheviks. 
It was this that helped finally to open the eyes of the broad-est sections of the people to the true meaning of the bour-geois slander against the Bolshevik workers’ party, the party of the true defenders of the poor. 
 5. 
 Had our Party refused to support the July 3-4 mass movement, which burst out spontaneously despite ourattempts to prevent it, we should have actually and com-pletely betrayed the proletariat, since the people weremoved to action by their well-founded and just anger at the protraction of the imperialist war, which is a predatory war conducted in the interests of the capitalists, and atthe inaction of the government and the Soviets in regardto the bourgeoisie, who are intensifying and aggravatingeconomic disruption and famine. 
 6. 
 In spite of all the efforts of the bourgeoisie and the government, in spite of the arrest of hundreds of Bolshe-viks, the seizure of their papers and documents, the searchof their editorial offices, etc. 
—in spite of all this nobodyhas succeeded, and nobody will ever succeed, in provingthe slander that our Party’s aim in the July 3-4 movementwas anything other than a “peaceful and organised” demon-stration with the slogan of transfer of all state power to the Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies. 
 7. 
 It would have been wrong if the Bolsheviks had aimed to seize power on July 3-4, since neither the majority ofthe people nor even the majority of the workers at thattime had yet actually experienced the counter-revolutionary policies of generals in the army, of the landowners in the countryside, and of the capitalists in the town. 
 Thesepolicies were only revealed to the masses after July 5, andstemmed from a compromise between the Socialist-Revolu-tionaries and Mensheviks, on the one hand, and the bour-geoisie, on the other. 
 None of our Party organisations, either central or local, advocated, either in writing or by word of mouth, the slogan of seizing power on July 3-4;none of them even discussed this question. 
 8. 
The real mistake of our Party on July 3-4, as events now reveal, was merely that the Party considered the general situation in the country less revolutionary than it proved to be, that the Party still considered a peaceful development of political changes possible through an alte-ration in the Soviets’ policies, whereas in reality the Men-sheviks and S. 
R. 
s had become so much entangled and bound by compromising with the bourgeoisie, and the bourgeoisie had become so counter-revolutionary, that peaceful develop-ment was no longer possible. 
 This erroneous view, however, which was sustained only by the hope that events would not develop too fast, our Party could not have got over other than by participating in the popular movement of July 3-4 with the slogan “All power to the Soviets” and with the aim of making the movement peaceful and organised. 
 9. 
The historic significance of the Kornilov revolt is that with extraordinary force, it opened the people’s eyes to a fact which the S. 
R. 
s and Mensheviks had concealed and still are concealing under conciliatory phrases. 
 The fact is that the landowners and the bourgeoisie, headed by the Cadet Party, and the generals and officers who are on their side, have organised themselves; they are ready to commit, or are committing, the most outrageous crimes, such as surrendering Riga (followed by Petrograd) to the Germans, laying the war front open, putting the Bolshevik regi-ments under fire, starting a mutiny, leading troops against the capital with the “Savage Division ”115 at their head, etc. 
 The purpose of all this is to seize power completely and put it in the hands of the bourgeoisie, to consolidatethe power of the landowners in the countryside, and todrench the country in the blood of workers and peasants. 
 The Kornilov revolt has proved for Russia what has been proved throughout history for all countries, namely, that thebourgeoisie will betray their country and commit any crimeto retain both their power over the people and their profits. 
 10. 
 The workers and peasants of Russia have no other alternative than the most determined struggle against,and victory over, the landowners and the bourgeoisie, over the Cadet Party and the generals and officers sympathising with it. 
 Only the urban working class can lead the people,i. 
e. 
, all working people, into such a struggle and to such a /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR victory, provided all state power passes into its hands and provided it is supported by the peasant poor. 
 11. 
 Events in the Russian revolution, particularly since May 6, and even more so since July 3, have been developingwith such incredible, storm-or hurricane-like velocity,that it can by no means be the task of the Party to speedthem up. 
 All efforts, in fact, must be directed towardskeeping up with events and doing on time our work of explaining to the workers, and to the working people in general, as much as we can, the changes in the situationand in the course of the class struggle. 
 This is still themain task of our Party; we must explain to the people thatthe situation is extremely critical, that every action mayend in an explosion, and that therefore a premature uprising may cause the greatest harm. 
 At the same time, the critical situation is inevitably leading the working class—perhapswith catastrophic speed—to a situation in which, due to achange in events beyond its control, it will find itself com-pelled to wage a determined battle with the counter-revo-lutionary bourgeoisie and to gain power. 
 12. 
 The Kornilov revolt fully revealed that the entire army hates the General Staff. 
 This had to be admitted even by those Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s who through months ofeffort had proved their hatred for the Bolsheviks and theirdefence of the policy of agreement between the workersand peasants, on the one hand, and the landowners and the bourgeoisie, on the other. 
 The hatred of the army for the General Staff will not die down but will become strongernow that Kerensky’s government has confined itself tosubstituting Alexeyev for Kornilov, leaving Klembovskyand other Kornilov generals, and has done absolutely noth-ing substantial to democratise the armed forces and remove the counter-revolutionary commanders. 
 Soviets, which tol-erate and support this weak, wavering, unprincipled policyof Kerensky and missed another opportunity to take allpower peacefully when the Kornilov revolt was beingliquidated, become guilty not only of conciliation but evenof criminal conciliation. 
 The army, which hates the General Staff and does not want to fight a war it now knows to be a war of conquest,is inevitably doomed to new catastrophes. 
 13. 
 Only the working class, when it has gained power, will be able to pursue a peace policy, not merely in words, like the Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s, who in practice support the bourgeoisie and their secret treaties, but in deeds. 
Specifically, the working class will immediately offer all peoples open, precise, clear and just peace terms. 
 This will be done irrespective of the military situation, even ifKornilov’s generals follow up the surrender of Riga by that of Petrograd. 
 The working class can do this in the name of the entire people, since the overwhelming majority ofRussia’s workers and peasants oppose the present war ofannexation and support a peace on just terms, withoutannexations and indemnities. 
 The S. 
R. 
s and Mensheviks are deceiving themselves and the people when they spend months talking about this peace. 
 The working class, on gaining power, will offer thispeace to all without losing a single day. 
 The capitalists of all countries have so much difficulty in stemming the workers’ revolution against war—a revo-lution which is growing everywhere—that if the Russian revolution were to pass from impotent and pitiful yearning for peace to a forthright peace offer coupled with the pub-lication and annulment of secret treaties, etc. 
, there areninety-nine chances in a hundred that peace would quicklyfollow, that the capitalists would be unable to stand in theway of peace. 
 If, however, the highly improbable were to happen and the capitalists were to reject the peace terms of the Russianworkers’ government, against the will of their peoples, arevolution in Europe would come a hundred times nearer,and our workers’ and peasants’ army would elect for itselfnot hated but respected commanders and military leaders. 
 The army would see the justice of the war once peace had been offered, the secret treaties torn up, the alliance withthe landowners and the bourgeoisie severed, and all landgiven to the peasants. 
 Only then would the war become ajust war for Russia, only this war would the workers andpeasants fight of their own free will, without being blud-geoned into fighting; and this war would bring even nearer the inevitable workers’ revolution in the advanced coun-tries. 
 14. 
 Only the working class, when it has gained power, will be able to guarantee the immediate transfer of all landed estates to the peasants without compensation. 
 This must not be put off. 
 The Constituent Assembly will legalisethe transfer, but it is not the peasants’ fault that the Con-stituent Assembly is being delayed. 
 The peasants dailybecome more convinced that it is impossible to get theland by agreement with the landowners and the capitalists. 
 The land can only be obtained through a very close, brotherly alliance of the poor peasants and the workers. 
 Chernov’s resignation from the government after he had for months tried to uphold the interests of the peasantsthrough concessions, big and small, to the Cadet landown-ers, and after all these attempts had failed, revealed with particular clarity the hopelessness of the policy of concilia-tion. 
 The peasants see, know and feel that since July 5the landowners have become arrogant in the villages andthat it is necessary to curb them and render them harmless. 
 15. 
 Only the working class, when it has gained power, will be able to put an end to economic disruption and the impending famine. 
 Since May 6 the government has kept on promising control, but it has done and could do nothingbecause the capitalists and landowners obstructed all work. 
Unemployment is growing, famine is approaching, currencyis losing value. 
 Peshekhonov’s resignation after the fixedprices have doubled will aggravate the crisis, and it again shows the utter feebleness and impotence of the government. 
 Only workers’ control over production and distribution cansave the situation. 
 Only a workers’ government will curbthe capitalists, will bring heroic support from all workingpeople for the efforts of state power , and will establish order and a fair exchange of grain for manufactured goods. 
 16. 
 The confidence of the peasant poor in the urban work-ing class, temporarily undermined by the slander of thebourgeoisie and by hopes put in the policy of conciliation,has been returning, particularly after the arrests in thecountryside and the various kinds of persecution of workingpeople after July 5 and then the Kornilov revolt opened the people’s eyes. 
 One of the signs that the people are losing faith in conciliation with the capitalists is that among theS. 
R. 
s. 
 and Mensheviks, the two main parties responsible for introducing this policy of conciliation and bringing it to a culmination, there have been growing, especially since July 5, a discontent within these parties and a struggle against conciliation. 
 This opposition at the last Socialist-Revolutionary “Council” and at the Menshevik congressinvolved about two-fifths (40 per cent) of the members. 
 17. 
 The whole course of events, all economic and polit-ical conditions, everything that is happening in the armed forces, are increasingly paving the way for the successful winning of power by the working class, which will bringpeace, bread and freedom and will hasten the victory ofthe proletarian revolution in other countries. 
 Written not later than September 3 16), 1917 First published in 1925 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany IV the manuscript THE IMPENDING CATASTROPHE AND HOW TO COMBAT IT Published at the end Published according to of October 1917 in pamphlet the manuscript form by Priboi Publishers THE IMPENDING CATASTROPHE AND HOW TO COMBAT IT Published at the end Published according to of October 1917 in pamphlet the manuscript form by Priboi Publishers First page of the manuscript The Impending Catastrophe and How to Combat It , September 10 -14 (23 -27), 1917 Reduced First page of the manuscript The Impending Catastrophe and How to Combat It , September 10 -14 (23 -27), 1917 Reduced FAMINE IS APPROACHING Unavoidable catastrophe is threatening Russia. 
 The railways are incredibly disorganised and the disorganisationis progressing. 
 The railways will come to a standstill. 
 The delivery of raw materials and coal to the factories will cease. 
 The delivery of grain will cease. 
 The capitalists aredeliberately and unremittingly sabotaging (damaging,stopping, disrupting, hampering) production, hoping thatan unparalleled catastrophe will mean the collapse ofthe republic and democracy, and of the Soviets and prole-tarian and peasant associations generally, thus facilitating the return to a monarchy and the restoration of the unlim-ited power of the bourgeoisie and the landowners. 
 The danger of a great catastrophe and of famine is im-minent. 
 All the newspapers have written about this timeand again. 
 A tremendous number of resolutions have been adopted by the parties and by the Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies—resolutions which admitthat a catastrophe is unavoidable, that it is very close, thatextreme measures are necessary to combat it, that “heroicefforts” by the people are necessary to avert ruin, and so on. 
 Everybody says this. 
 Everybody admits it. 
 Everybody has decided it is so. 
 Yet nothing is being done. 
Six months of revolution have elapsed. 
 The catastrophe is even closer. 
 Unemployment has assumed a mass scale. 
 Tothink that there is a shortage of goods in the country, thecountry is perishing from a shortage of food and labour, although there is a sufficient quantity of grain and raw materials, and yet in such a country, at so critical a moment,there is mass unnemployment! What better evidence is needed to show that after six months of revolution (which some call a great revolution, but which so far it would perhaps be fairer to call a rotten revolution), in a democratic republic, with an abundance of unions, organs and insti-tutions which proudly call themselves “revolutionary-democratic”, absolutely nothing of any importance has actually been done to avert catastrophe, to avert famine?We are nearing ruin with increasing speed. 
 The war will not wait and is causing increasing dislocation in every sphere of national life. 
 Yet the slightest attention and thought will suffice to satisfy anyone that the ways of combating catastropheand famine are available, that the measures required tocombat them are quite clear, simple, perfectly feasible, and fully within reach of the people’s forces, and that these measures are not being adopted only because, exclusively because, their realisation would affect the fabulous profitsof a handful of landowners and capitalists. 
 And, indeed, it is safe to say that every single speech, every single article in a newspaper of any trend, every single resolution passed by any meeting or institution quite clearly and explicitly recognises the chief and principalmeasure of combating, of averting, catastrophe and famine. 
This measure is control, supervision, accounting, regulationby the state, introduction of a proper distribution of labour-power in the production and distribution of goods, hus-banding of the people’s forces, the elimination of all waste-ful effort, economy of effort. 
 Control, supervision andaccounting are the prime requisites for combating catas-trophe and famine. 
 This is indisputable and universallyrecognised. 
 And it is just what is not being done from fear of encroaching on the supremacy of the landowners and capitalists, on their immense, fantastic and scandalous profits, profits derived from high prices and war contracts(and, directly or indirectly, nearly everybody is now “work-ing” for the war), profits about which everybody knowsand which everybody sees, and over which everybody issighing and groaning. 
 And absolutely nothing is being done to introduce such control, accounting and supervision by the state as wouldbe in the least effective. 
 COMPLETE GOVERNMENT INACTIVITY There is a universal, systematic and persistent sabotage of every kind of control, supervision and accounting andof all state attempts to institute them. 
 And one must beincredibly naïve not to understand, one must be an utterhypocrite to pretend not to understand, where this sabotagecomes from and by what means it is being carried on. 
 For this sabotage by the bankers and capitalists, their frustra-tion of every kind of control, supervision and accounting, is being adapted to the state forms of a democratic republic,to the existence of “revolutionary-democratic” institutions. 
The capitalist gentlemen have learnt very well a fact whichall supporters of scientific socialism profess to recognise but which the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries tried to forget as soon as their friends had secured cushy jobsas ministers, deputy ministers, etc. 
 That fact is that theeconomic substance of capitalist exploitation is in no wiseaffected by the substitution of republican-democratic formsof government for monarchist forms, and that, consequently, the reverse is also true—only the form of the struggle for the inviolability and sanctity of capitalist profits need bechanged in order to uphold them under a democratic re-public as effectively as under an absolute monarchy. 
 The present, modern republican-democratic sabotage of every kind of control, accounting and supervision consists in the capitalists “eagerly” accepting in words the “prin-ciple” of control and the necessity for control (as, of course,do all Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries), insistingonly that this control be introduced “gradually”, method-ically and in a “state-regulated” way. 
 In practice, how-ever, these specious catchwords serve to conceal the frus-tration of control, its nullification, its reduction to a fiction, the mere playing at control, the delay of all business-likeand practically effective measures, the creation of extra-ordinarily complicated, cumbersome and bureaucraticallylifeless institutions of control which are hopelessly depend-ent on the capitalists, and which do absolutely nothing and cannot do anything. 
 So as not to trot out bald statements, let us cite wit-nesses from among the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolu-tionaries, i. 
e. 
, the very people who had the majority in the Soviets during the first six months of revolution, who took part in the “coalition government” and who are there-fore politically responsible to the Russian workers andpeasants for winking at the capitalists and allowing themto frustrate all control. 
 Izvestia TsIK (i. 
e. 
, the newspaper of the Central Execu-tive Committee of the All-Russia Congress of Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies), the official organ of the highest of the so-called “fully authorised”(no joke!) bodies of “revolutionary” democracy, in issueNo. 
 164, of September 7, 1917, printed a resolution by a special control organisation created and run by these veryMensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries. 
 This special institution is the Economic Department of the Central Exec-utive Committee. 
 Its resolution officially records as a fact“the complete inactivity of the central bodies set up under the government for the regulation of economic life ”. 
 Now, how could one imagine any more eloquent testimony to the collapse of the Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary policy than this statement signed by the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries themselves? The need for the regulation of economic life was already recognised under tsarism, and certain institutions were setup for the purpose. 
 But under tsarism economic chaossteadily grew and reached monstrous proportions. 
 It was at once recognised that it was the task of the republican, revolutionary government to adopt effective and resolutemeasures to put an end to the economic chaos. 
 When the“coalition” government was formed with the Mensheviksand Socialist-Revolutionaries participating, it promisedand undertook, in its most solemn public declaration of May 6, to introduce state control and regulation. 
 The Tseretelis and Chernovs, like all the Menshevik and Social-ist-Revolutionary leaders, vowed and swore that not onlywere they responsible for the government, but that the“authorised bodies of revolutionary democracy” under theircontrol actually kept an eye on the work of the government and verified its activities. 
 Four months have passed since May 6, four long months, in which Russia has sacrificed the lives of hundreds of thousands of soldiers for the sake of the absurd imperialist “offensive”, in which chaos and disaster have been advancing in seven-league strides, in which the summer season afforded an exceptional opportunity to do a great deal in the matter of water transport, agriculture, prospecting for minerals, and so on and so forth—and after four months the Menshe-viks and Socialist-Revolutionaries have been obliged of-ficially to admit the “complete inactivity” of the control institutions set up under the government!! And these Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, with the serious mien of statesmen, now prate (I am writing this on the very eve of the Democratic Conference of Septem-ber 12116) that matters can be furthered by replacing the coalition with the Cadets by a coalition with commercial and industrial Kit Kityches ,117 the Ryabushinskys, Bu-blikovs, Tereshchenkos and Co. 
 How, one may ask, are we to explain this astonishing blindness of the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries? Are we to regard them as political babes in the wood whoin their extreme foolishness and naïveté do not realise what they are doing and err in good faith? Or does the abundance of posts they occupy as ministers, deputy ministers, govern-ors-general, commissars and the like have the propertyof engendering a special kind of “political” blindness? CONTROL MEASURES ARE KNOWN TO ALL AND EASY TO TAKE One may ask: aren’t methods and measures of control extremely complex, difficult, untried and even unknown?Isn’t the delay due to the fact that although the statesmenof the Cadet Party, the merchant and industrial class, and the Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary parties have for six months been toiling in the sweat of their brow,investigating, studying and discovering measures andmethods of control, still the problem is incredibly difficultand has not yet been solved? Unfortunately, this is how they are trying to present matters to hoodwink the ignorant, illiterate and downtrod-den muzhiks and the Simple Simons who believe everythingand never look into things. 
 In reality, however, even tsarism, even the “old regime”, when it set up the War Industries Committees118 knew the principal measure, the chief method and way to introduce control, namely, by uniting the population according to profession, purpose of work,branch of labour, etc. 
 But tsarism feared the union of the population and therefore did its best to restrict and arti-ficially hinder this generally known, very easy and quitepractical method and way of control. 
 All the belligerent countries, suffering as they are from the extreme burdens and hardships of the war, suffering—in one degree or another—from economic chaos and famine,have long ago outlined, determined, applied and testeda whole series of control measures, which consist almost in-variably in uniting the population and in setting up or encouraging unions of various kinds, in which state repre-sentatives participate, which are under the supervision ofthe state, etc. 
 All these measures of control are known toall, much has been said and written about them, and thelaws passed by the advanced belligerent powers relatingto control have been translated into Russian or expounded in detail in the Russian press. 
 If our state really wanted to exercise control in a business-like and earnest fashion, if its institutions had not con-demned themselves to “complete inactivity” by their servilityto the capitalists, all the state would have to do wouldbe to draw freely on the rich store of control measures which are already known and have been used in the past. 
 The only obstacle to this—an obstacle concealed from the eyesof the people by the Cadets, Socialist-Revolutionaries andMensheviks—was, and still is, that control would bringto light the fabulous profits of the capitalists and wouldcut the ground from under these profits. 
 To explain this most important question more clearly (a question which is essentially equivalent to that of theprogramme of any truly revolutionary government that would wish to save Russia from war and famine), let usenumerate these principal measures of control and examineeach of them. 
 We shall see that all a government would have had to do, if its name of revolutionary-democratic governmentwere not merely a joke, would have been to decree, in the very first week of its existence, the adoption of the principal measures of control, to provide for strict and severe punish-ment to be meted out to capitalists who fraudulently evaded control, and to call upon the population itself to exercisesupervision over the capitalists and see to it that theyscrupulously observed the regulations on control—andcontrol would have been introduced in Russia long ago. 
These principal measures are: (1) Amalgamation of all banks into a single bank, and state control over its operations, or nationalisation of thebanks. 
 (2) Nationalisation of the syndicates, i. 
e. 
, the largest, monopolistic capitalist associations (sugar, oil, coal, ironand steel, and other syndicates). 
 (3) Abolition of commercial secrecy. 
 (4) Compulsory syndication (i. 
e. 
, compulsory amalgama-tion into associations) of industrialists, merchants andemployers generally. 
 (5) Compulsory organisation of the population into consumers’ societies, or encouragement of such organisation, and the exercise of control over it. 
 Let us see what the significance of each of these measures would be if carried out in a revolutionary-democratic way. 
 NATIONALISATION OF THE BANKS The banks, as we know, are centres of modern economic life, the principal nerve centres of the whole capitalisteconomic system. 
 To talk about “regulating economic life”and yet evade the question of the nationalisation of thebanks means either betraying the most profound ignoranceor deceiving the “common people” by florid words and grandiloquent promises with the deliberate intention of not fulfilling these promises. 
 It is absurd to control and regulate deliveries of grain, or the production and distribution of goods generally,without controlling and regulating bank operations. 
 Itis like trying to snatch at odd kopeks and closing one’s eyes to millions of rubles. 
 Banks nowadays are so closely and intimately bound up with trade (in grain and everythingelse) and with industry that without “laying hands” on the banks nothing of any value, nothing “revolutionary-demo-cratic”, can be accomplished. 
 But perhaps for the state to “lay hands” on the banks is a very difficult and complicated operation? They usuallytry to scare philistines with this very idea—that is, thecapitalists and their defenders try it, because it is to theiradvantage to do so. 
 In reality, however, nationalisation of the banks, which would not deprive any “owner” of a single kopek, presents absolutely no technical or cultural difficulties, and is beingdelayed exclusively because of the vile greed of an insignifi-cant handful of rich people. 
 If nationalisation of the banksis so often confused with the confiscation of private property,it is the bourgeois press, which has an interest in deceiving the public, that is to blame for this widespread confu-sion. 
 The ownership of the capital wielded by and concentrated in the banks is certified by printed and written certificatescalled shares, bonds, bills, receipts, etc. 
 Not a single oneof these certificates would be invalidated or altered if the banks were nationalised, i. 
e. 
, if all the banks were amal-gamated into a single state bank. 
 Whoever owned fifteenrubles on a savings account would continue to be the ownerof fifteen rubles after the nationalisation of the banks;and whoever had fifteen million rubles would continueafter the nationalisation of the banks to have fifteen million rubles in the form of shares, bonds, bills, commercial cer-tificates and so on. 
 What, then, is the significance of nationalisation of the banks? It is that no effective control of any kind over the indi-vidual banks and their operations is possible (even if com-mercial secrecy, etc. 
, were abolished) because it is impos-sible to keep track of the extremely complex, involvedand wily tricks that are used in drawing up balance sheets,founding fictitious enterprises and subsidiaries, enlistingthe services of figureheads, and so on, and so forth. 
 Onlythe amalgamation of all banks into one, which in itself would imply no change whatever in respect of ownership, and which, we repeat, would not deprive any owner ofa single kopek, would make it possible to exercise real con-trol—provided, of course, all the other measures indicated above were carried out. 
 Only by nationalising the banks can the state put itself in a position to know where and how, whence and when, millions and billions of rubles flow. 
 Andonly control over the banks, over the centre, over the pivotand chief mechanism of capitalist circulation, would makeit possible to organise real and not fictitious control overall economic life, over the production and distribution of staple goods, and organise that “regulation of economic life” which otherwise is inevitably doomed to remaina ministerial phrase designed to fool the common people. 
Only control over banking operations, provided they wereconcentrated in a single state bank, would make it possible,if certain other easily-practicable measures were adopted, to organise the effective collection of income tax in such a way as to prevent the concealment of property and incomes;for at present the income tax is very largely a fiction. 
 Nationalisation of the banks has only to be decreed and it would be carried out by the directors and employeesthemselves. 
 No special machinery, no special preparatory steps on the part of the state would be required, for this is a measure that can be effected by a single decree, “ata single stroke”. 
 It was made economically feasible bycapitalism itself once it had developed to the stage ofbills, shares, bonds and so on. 
 All that is required is to unify accountancy . 
 And if the revolutionary-democratic government were to decide that immediately, by telegraph, meetings of managers and employees should be called inevery city, and conferences in every region and in thecountry as a whole, for the immediate amalgamation of allbanks into a single state bank, this reform would be carriedout in a few weeks. 
 Of course, it would be the managers and the higher bank officials who would offer resistance, who would try to deceive the state, delay matters, and soon, for these gentlemen would lose their highly remunera-tive posts and the opportunity of performing highly profit-able fraudulent operations. 
 That is the heart of the matter . 
 But there is not the slightest technical difficulty in the way of the amalgamation of the banks; and if the state power were revolutionary not only in word (i. 
e. 
, if it didnot fear to do away with inertia and routine), if it were democratic not only in word (i. 
e. 
, if it acted in the interests of the majority of the people and not of a handful of rich men), it would be enough to decree confiscation of property and imprisonment as the penalty for managers, boardmembers and big shareholders for the slightest delay orfor attempting to conceal documents and accounts. 
 Itwould be enough, for example, to organise the pooreremployees separately and to reward them for detecting fraud and delay on the part of the rich for nationalisation of the banks to be effected as smoothly and rapidly ascan be. 
 The advantages accruing to the whole people from na-tionalisation of the banks— not to the workers especially (for the workers have little to do with banks) but to the mass of peasants and small industrialists—would be enor-mous. 
 The saving in labour would be gigantic, and, assumingthat the state would retain the former number of bank em-ployees, nationalisation would be a highly important steptowards making the use of the banks universal, towardsincreasing the number of their branches, putting their operations within easier reach, etc. 
, etc. 
 The availability of credit on easy terms for the small owners, for the peasants, would increase immensely. 
 As to the state, it would for thefirst time be in a position first to review all the chief monetary operations, which would be unconcealed, then to control them, then to regulate economic life, and finally to obtain millions and billions for major state transactions, without paying the capitalist gentlemen sky-high “commissions”for their “services”. 
 That is the reason—and the only rea-son—why all the capitalists, all the bourgeois professors,all the bourgeoisie, and all the Plekhanovs, Potresovs andCo. 
, who serve them, are prepared to fight tooth and nail against nationalisation of the banks and invent thousands of excuses to prevent the adoption of this very easy andvery pressing measure, although even from the standpoint of the “defence” of the country, i. 
e. 
, from the militarystandpoint, this measure would provide a gigantic advant-age and would tremendously enhance the “military might” of the country. 
 The following objection might be raised: why do such advanced states as Germany and the U. 
S. 
A. 
 “regulate economic life” so magnificently without even thinking of nationalising the banks? Because, we reply, both these states are not merely capi-talist, but also imperialist states, although one of themis a monarchy and the other a republic. 
 As such, they carryout the reforms they need by reactionary-bureaucraticmethods, whereas we are speaking here of revolutionary-democratic methods. 
 This “little difference” is of major importance. 
 In most cases it is “not the custom” to think of it. 
 The term “revo-lutionary democracy” has become with us (especially amongthe Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks) almosta conventional phrase, like the expression “thank God”,which is also used by people who are not so ignorant as to believe in God; or like the expression “honourable citizen”, which is sometimes used even in addressing staff membersof Dyen or Yedinstvo , although nearly everybody guesses that these newspapers have been founded and are maintainedby the capitalists in the interests of the capitalists, andthat there is therefore very little “honourable” about the pseudo-socialists contributing to these newspapers. 
 If we do not employ the phrase “revolutionary democracy” as a stereotyped ceremonial phrase, as a conventionalepithet, but reflect on its meaning, we find that to be a de-mocrat means reckoning in reality with the interests ofthe majority of the people and not the minority, and that to be a revolutionary means destroying everything harmful and obsolete in the most resolute and ruthlessmanner. 
 Neither in America nor in Germany, as far as we know, is any claim laid by either the government or the rulingclasses to the name “revolutionary democrats”, to which our Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks lay claim (and which they prostitute). 
 In Germany there are only four very large private banks of national importance. 
 In America there are only two. 
 It is easier, more convenient, more profitable for thefinancial magnates of those banks to unite privately, surrep-titiously, in a reactionary and not a revolutionary way, in a bureaucratic and not a democratic way, bribing govern-ment officials (this is the general rule both in America and in Germany ), and preserving the private character of the banks in order to preserve secrecy of operations, to milk the state of millions upon millions in “super-profits”, and to make financial frauds possible. 
 Both America and Germany “regulate economic life” in such a way as to create conditions of war-time penal servitude for the workers (and partly for the peasants) and a paradise for the bankers and capitalists. 
 Their regulation consists in “squeezing” the workers to the point of starvation, while the capitalists are guaranteed (surreptitiously, in a reac-tionary-bureaucratic fashion) profits higher than before the war. 
 Such a course is quite possible in republican-imperialist Russia too. 
 Indeed, it is the course being followed not only by the Milyukovs and Shingaryovs, but also by Kerensky in partnership with Tereshchenko, Nekrasov, Bernatsky,Prokopovich and Co. 
, who also uphold , in a reactionary-bureaucratic manner, the “inviolability” of the banks andtheir sacred right to fabulous profits. 
 So let us better tellthe truth , namely, that in republican Russia they want to regulate economic life in a reactionary-bureaucratic manner, but “often” find it difficult to do so owing to the existenceof the “Soviets”, which Kornilov No. 
 1 did not manage todisband, but which Kornilov No. 
 2 will try to disband. 
 That would be the truth. 
 And this simple if bitter truth is more useful for the enlightenment of the people than the honeyed lies about “our”, “great”, “revolutionary” democ-racy. 
 * * * Nationalisation of the banks would greatly facilitate the simultaneous nationalisation of the insurance business, i. 
e. 
, the amalgamation of all the insurance companies into one, the centralisation of their operations, and state con-trol over them. 
 Here, too, congresses of insurance companyemployees could carry out this amalgamation immediatelyand without any great effort, provided a revolutionary-democratic government decreed this and ordered directors and big shareholders to effect the amalgamation without the slightest delay and held every one of them strictlyaccountable for it. 
 The capitalists have invested hundreds of millions of rubles in the insurance business; the work is all done by the employees. 
 The amalgamation of this busi-ness would lead to lower insurance premiums, would provide a host of facilities and conveniences for the insured andwould make it possible to increase their number withoutincreasing expenditure of effort and funds. 
 Absolutelynothing but the inertia, routine and self-interest of a handfulof holders of remunerative jobs are delaying this reform, which, among other things, would enhance the country’s defence potential by economising national labour and creat-ing a number of highly important opportunities to “reg-ulate economic life” not in word, but in deed. 
 NATIONALISATION OF THE SYNDICATES Capitalism differs from the old, pre-capitalistic systems of economy in having created the closest interconnectionand interdependence of the various branches of the economy. 
Were this not so, incidentally, no steps towards socialismwould be technically feasible. 
 Modern capitalism, under which the banks dominate production, has carried this interdependence of the various branches of the economy tothe utmost. 
 The banks and the more important branchesof industry and commerce have become inseparably merged. 
This means, on the one hand, that it is impossible to nation-alise the banks alone, without proceeding to create a state monopoly of commercial and industrial syndicates (sugar, coal, iron, oil, etc. 
), and without nationalising them. 
It means, on the other hand, that if carried out in earnest,the regulation of economic activity would demand thesimultaneous nationalisation of the banks and the syndicates. 
 Let us take the sugar syndicate as an example. 
 It came into being under tsarism, and at that time developed into a huge capitalist combine of splendidly equipped refin-eries. 
 And, of course, this combine, thoroughly imbuedwith the most reactionary and bureaucratic spirit, securedscandalously high profits for the capitalists and reducedits employees to the status of humiliated and downtrodden slaves lacking any rights. 
 Even at that time the state controlled and regulated production—in the interests ofthe rich, the magnates. 
 All that remains to be done here is to transform reaction-ary-bureaucratic regulation into revolutionary-democratic regulation by simple decrees providing for the summoning of a congress of employees, engineers, directors andshareholders, for the introduction of uniform accountancy,for control by the workers’ unions, etc. 
 This is an exceed-ingly simple thing, yet it has not been done! Under whatis a democratic republic, the regulation of the sugar industry actually remains reactionary-bureaucratic; every-thing remains as of old—the dissipation of national labour,routine and stagnation, and the enrichment of the Bobrin-skys and Tereshchenkos. 
 Democrats and not bureaucrats,the workers and other employees and not the “sugar barons”,should be called upon to exercise independent initiative— and this could and should be done in a few days, at a single stroke, if only the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Menshe-viks did not befog the minds of the people by plans for“association” with these very sugar barons, for the veryassociation with the wealthy from which the “completeinaction” of the government in the matter of regulating economic life follows with absolute inevitability, and of which it is a consequence. 
 * Take the oil business. 
 It was to a vast extent “socialised” by the earlier development of capitalism. 
 Just a coupleof oil barons wield millions and hundreds of millions ofrubles, clipping coupons and raking in fabulous profits from a “business” which is already actually, technically and socially organised on a national scale and is already being conducted by hundreds and thousands of employees,engineers, etc. 
 Nationalisation of the oil industry couldbe effected at once by, and is imperative for, a revolutionary-democratic state, especially when the latter suffers from an acute crisis and when it is essential to economies national labour and to increase the output of fuel at all costs. 
 Itis clear that here bureaucratic control can achieve nothing,can change nothing, for the “oil barons” can cope with the *These lines had been written when I learnt from the newspapers that the Kerensky government is introducing a sugar monopoly, and,of course, is introducing it in a reactionary-bureaucratic way, without congresses of workers and other employees, without publicity, and without curbing the capitalists! Tereshchenkos, the Kerenskys, the Avksentyevs and the Skobelevs as easily as they coped with the tsar’s ministers— by means of delays, excuses and promises, and by bribing the bourgeois press directly or indirectly (this is called“public opinion”, and the Kerenskys and Avksentyevs“reckon” with it), by bribing officials (left by the Kerenskysand Avksentyevs in their old jobs in the old state machinerywhich remains intact). 
 If anything real is to be done bureaucracy must be aban-doned for democracy, and in a truly revolutionary way,i. 
e. 
, war must be declared on the oil barons and sharehold-ers, the confiscation of their property and punishment byimprisonment must be decreed for delaying nationalisationof the oil business, for concealing incomes or accounts, for sabotaging production, and for failing to take steps to increase production. 
 The initiative of the workers and otheremployees must be drawn on; they must be immediately summoned to conferences and congresses; a certain propor-tion of the profits must be assigned to them , provided they institute overall control and increase production. 
 Had these revolutionary-democratic steps been taken at once, imme-diately, in April 1917, Russia, which is one of the richestcountries in the world in deposits of liquid fuel, could, usingwater transport, have done a very great deal during thissummer to supply the people with the necessary quantitiesof fuel. 
 Neither the bourgeois nor the coalition Socialist-Revolu-tionary-Menshevik-Cadet government has done anythingat all. 
 Both have confined themselves to a bureaucraticplaying at reforms. 
 They have not dared to take a singlerevolutionary-democratic step. 
 Everything has remainedas it was under the tsars—the oil barons, the stagnation, the hatred of the workers and other employees for their exploit-ers, the resulting chaos, and the dissipation of nationallabour—only the letterheads on the incoming and outgoing papers in the “republican” offices have been changed! Take the coal industry. 
 It is technically and culturally no less “ripe” for nationalisation, and is being no less shamelessly managed by the robbers of the people, the coal barons, and there are a number of most striking facts of direct sabotage, direct damage to and stoppage of production by the industrialists. 
 Even the ministerial Rabochaya Gazeta of the Mensheviks has admitted these facts. 
 And what do we find? Absolutely nothing has been done, except to call the old, reactionary-bureaucratic meetings “ona half-and-half basis”—an equal number of workers andbandits from the coal syndicate! Not a single revolutionary-democratic step has been taken, not a shadow of an attempthas been made to establish the only control which is real— control from below , through the employees’ union, through the workers, and by using terror against the coal industrial-ists who are ruining the country and bringing productionto a standstill! How can this be done when we are “all”in favour of the “coalition”—if not with the Cadets, thenwith commercial and industrial circles. 
 And coalition means leaving power in the hands of the capitalists, letting them go unpunished, allowing them to hamper affairs, to blameeverything on the workers, to intensify the chaos and thus pave the way for a new Kornilov revolt! ABOLITION OF SECRECY Unless commercial secrecy is abolished, either control over production and distribution will remain an emptypromise, only needed by the Cadets to fool the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, and by the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks to fool the working classes, or control can be exercised only by reactionary-bu-reaucratic methods and means. 
 Although this is obviousto every unprejudiced person, and although Pravda per-sistently demanded the abolition of commercial secrecy * (and was suppressed largely for this reason by the Kerenskygovernment which is subservient to capital), neither our republican government nor the “authorised bodies of rev-olutionary democracy” have even thought of this first step to real control. 
 This is the very key to all control. 
 Here we have the most sensitive spot of capital, which is robbing the peopleand sabotaging production. 
 And this is exactly why the *See present edition, Vol. 
 24, pp. 
 521-22, and this volume, pp. 
 140-41. 
— Ed. 
 Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks are afraid to do anything about it. 
 The usual argument of the capitalists, one reiterated by the petty bourgeoisie without reflection, is that ina capitalist economy the abolition of commercial secrecy isin general absolutely impossible, for private ownershipof the means of production, and the dependence of theindividual undertakings on the market render essential the “sanctity” of commercial books and commercial operations, including, of course, banking operations. 
 Those who in one form or another repeat this or similar arguments allow themselves to be deceived and themselvesdeceive the people by shutting their eyes to two fundamen-tal, highly important and generally known facts of modern economic activity. 
 The first fact is the existence of large-scale capitalism, i. 
e. 
, the peculiar features of the economicsystem of banks, syndicates, large factories, etc. 
 The secondfact is the war. 
 It is modern large-scale capitalism, which is everywhere becoming monopoly capitalism, that deprives commercial secrecy of every shadow of reasonableness, turns it into hypocrisy and into an instrument exclusively for concealingfinancial swindles and the fantastically high profits of bigcapital. 
 Large-scale capitalist economy, by its very tech-nical nature, is socialised economy, that is, it both operatesfor millions of people and, directly or indirectly, unites by its operations hundreds, thousands and tens of thousands of families. 
 It is not like the economy of the small handi-craftsman or the middle peasant who keep no commercialbooks at all and who would therefore not be affected bythe abolition of commercial secrecy! As it is, the operations conducted in large-scale business are known to hundreds or more persons. 
 Here the law pro-tecting commercial secrecy does not serve the interests ofproduction or exchange, but those of speculation and profit-seeking in their crudest form, and of direct fraud, which,as we know, in the case of joint-stock companies is particu-larly widespread and very skilfully concealed by reports and balance-sheets, so compiled as to deceive the public. 
 While commercial secrecy is unavoidable in small com-modity production, i. 
e. 
, among the small peasants and handicraftsmen, where production itself is not socialised but scattered and disunited, in large-scale capitalist pro-duction, the protection of commercial secrecy means pro-tection of the privileges and profits of literally a handfulof people against the interest of the whole people. 
 This has already been recognised by the law, inasmuch as provisionis made for the publication of the accounts of joint-stockcompanies. 
 But this control, which has already been in-troduced in all advanced countries, as well as in Russia, is a reactionary-bureaucratic control which does not openthe eyes of the people and which does not allow the whole truth about the operations of joint-stock companies to become known. 
 To act in a revolutionary-democratic way, it would be necessary to immediately pass another law abolishing com-mercial secrecy, compelling the big undertakings and thewealthy to render the fullest possible accounts, and invest-ing every group of citizens of substantial democratic numer-ical strength (1,000 or 10,000 voters, let us say) with theright to examine all the records of any large undertaking. 
 Such a measure could be fully and easily effected by a simple decree. 
 It alone would allow full scope for popular initiative in control, through the office employees’ unions, the workers’unions and all the political parties, and it alone wouldmake control effective and democratic. 
 Add to this the war. 
 The vast majority of commercial and industrial establishments are now working not for the “free market”, but for the government , for the war. 
 This is why I have already stated in Pravda that people who counter us with the argument that socialism cannot beintroduced are liars, and barefaced liars at that, because itis not a question of introducing socialism now, directly. 
 overnight, but of exposing plunder of the state . 
 * Capitalist “war” economy (i. 
e. 
, economy directly or indirectly connected with war contracts) is systematicand legalised plunder , and the Cadet gentry, who, together with the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, areopposing the abolition of commercial secrecy, are nothing but aiders and abettors of plunder . 
 * See pp. 
 68-69 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 The war is now costing Russia fifty million rubles a day . 
 These fifty million go mostly to army contractors. 
 Of these fifty, at least five million daily , and probably ten million or more, constitute the “honest income” of the capitalists,and of the officials who are in one way or another in collu-sion with them. 
 The very large firms and banks which lendmoney for war contracts transactions thereby make fantasticprofits, and do so by plundering the state, for no other epithet can be applied to this defrauding and plundering of the people “on the occasion of” the hardships of war, “onthe occasion of” the deaths of hundreds of thousands andmillions of people. 
 “Everybody” knows about these scandalous profits made on war contracts, about the “letters of guarantee” which are concealed by the banks, about who benefits by the rising cost of living. 
 They are smiled on in “society”. 
 Quitea number of precise references are made to them even in the bourgeois press, which as a general rule keeps silent about“unpleasant” facts and avoids “ticklish” questions. 
 Everybodyknows about them, yet everybody keeps silent, everybody tolerates them, everybody puts up with the government, which prates eloquently about “control” and “regulation”!! The revolutionary democrats, were they real revolution-aries and democrats, would immediately pass a law abolish-ing commercial secrecy, compelling contractors and mer-chants to render accounts public, forbidding them to abandon their field of activity without the permission of the author-ities, imposing the penalty of confiscation of propertyand shooting * for concealment and for deceiving the people, organising verification and control from below , democrati-cally, by the people themselves, by unions of workers andother employees, consumers, etc. 
 Our Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks fully de-serve to be called scared democrats, for on this question *I have already had occasion to point out in the Bolshevik press that it is right to argue against the death penalty only when it isapplied by the exploiters against the mass of the working people with the purpose of maintaining exploitation. 
 (See pp. 
 265-68 of this vol-ume. 
— Ed. 
) It is hardly likely that any revolutionary government whatever could do without applying the death penalty to the exploiters (i. 
e. 
, the landowners and capitalists). 
 they repeat what is said by all the scared philistines, namely, that the capitalists will “run away” if “too severe” measures are adopted, that “we” shall be unable to get along without the capitalists, that the British and French million-aires, who are, of course, “supporting” us, will most likelybe “offended” in their turn, and so on. 
 It might be thoughtthat the Bolsheviks were proposing something unknown tohistory, something that has never been tried before, some-thing “utopian”, while, as a matter of fact, even 125 years ago, in France, people who were real “revolutionary demo-crats”, who were really convinced of the just and defensivecharacter of the war they were waging, who really hadpopular support and were sincerely convinced of this, wereable to establish revolutionary control over the rich and to achieve results which earned the admiration of the world. 
 And in the century and a quarter that have since elapsed,the development of capitalism, which resulted in the crea-tion of banks, syndicates, railways and so forth, has greatlyfacilitated and simplified the adoption of measures of reallydemocratic control by the workers and peasants over the exploiters, the landowners and capitalists. 
 In point of fact, the whole question of control boils down to who controls whom, i. 
e. 
, which class is in controland which is being controlled. 
 In our country, in republicanRussia, with the help of the “authorised bodies” of suppos-edly revolutionary democracy, it is the landowners and capitalists who are still recognised to be, and still are, the controllers. 
 The inevitable result is the capitalistrobbery that arouses universal indignation among the people,and the economic chaos that is being artificially kept up bythe capitalists. 
 We must resolutely and irrevocably, notfearing to break with the old, not fearing boldly to build the new, pass to control over the landowners and capitalists by the workers and peasants. 
 And this is what our Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks fear worse than the plague. 
 COMPULSORY ASSOCIATION Compulsory syndication, i. 
e. 
, compulsory association, of the industrialists, for example, is already being practisedin Germany. 
 Nor is there anything new in it. 
 Here, too. 
 through the fault of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, we see the utter stagnation of republican Russia, whom these none-too-respectable parties “enter-tain” by dancing a quadrille with the Cadets, or with theBublikovs, or with Tereshchenko and Kerensky. 
 Compulsory syndication is, on the one hand, a means whereby the state, as it were, expedites capitalist develop-ment, which everywhere leads to the organisation of the class struggle and to a growth in the number, variety and importance of unions. 
 On the other hand, compulsory“unionisation” is an indispensable precondition for anykind of effective control and for all economy of nationallabour. 
 The German law, for instance, binds the leather manu-facturers of a given locality or of the whole country to form an association, on the board of which there is a rep-resentative of the state for the purpose of control. 
 A lawof this kind does not directly, i. 
e. 
, in itself, affect propertyrelations in any way; it does not deprive any owner ofa single kopek and does not predetermine whether the con-trol is to be exercised in a reactionary-bureaucratic or a revolutionary-democratic form, direction or spirit. 
 Such laws can and should be passed in our country im-mediately, without wasting a single week of precious time;is should be left to social conditions themselves to determine the more specific forms of enforcing the law, the speed with which it is to be enforced, the methods of supervision over its enforcement, etc. 
 In this case, the state requires nospecial machinery, no special investigation, nor preliminaryenquiries for the passing of such a law. 
 All that is requiredis the determination to break with certain private interestsof the capitalists, who are “not accustomed” to such inter-ference and have no desire to forfeit the super-profits which are ensured by the old methods of management and theabsence of control. 
 No machinery and no “statistics” (which Chernov wanted to substitute for the revolutionary initiative of the peasants)are required to pass such a law, inasmuch as its implemen-tation must be made the duty of the manufacturers or industrialists themselves, of the available public forces, under the control of the available public (i. 
e. 
, non-govern-ment, non-bureaucratic) forces too, which, however, must consist by all means of the so-called “lower estates”, i. 
e. 
, of the oppressed and exploited classes, which in history have always proved to be immensely superior to the exploiters in their capacity for heroism, self-sacrifice andcomradely discipline. 
 Let us assume that we have a really revolutionary-demo-cratic government and that it decides that the manufactur-ers and industrialists in every branch of production who employ, let us say, not less than two workers shall imme-diately amalgamate into uyezd and gubernia associations. 
Responsibility for the strict observance of the law is laidin the first place on the manufacturers, directors, boardmembers, and big shareholders (for they are the real leaders of modern industry, its real masters). 
 They shall be regarded as deserters from military service, and punishedas such, if they do not work for the immediate implemen-tation of the law, and shall bear mutual responsibility, oneanswering for all, and all for one, with the whole of theirproperty. 
 Responsibility shall next be laid on all office employees, who shall also form one union, and on all workers and their trade union. 
 The purpose of “unionisation” is toinstitute the fullest, strictest and most detailed account-ancy, but chiefly to combine operations in the purchase of raw materials, the sale of products, and the economy of national funds and forces. 
 When the separate establish-ments are amalgamated into a single syndicate, this economy can attain tremendous proportions, as economic scienceteaches us and as is shown by the example of all syndicates,cartels and trusts. 
 And it must be repeated that this unionisa-tion will not in itself alter property relations one iota andwill not deprive any owner of a single kopek. 
 This circum-stance must be strongly stressed, for the bourgeois press constantly “frightens” small and medium proprietors byasserting that socialists in general, and the Bolsheviks inparticular, want to “expropriate” them—a deliberatelyfalse assertion, as socialists do not intend to, cannot andwill not expropriate the small peasant even if there is a fully socialist revolution. 
 All the time we are speaking only of the immediate and urgent measures, which have alreadybeen introduced in Western Europe and which a democracy that is at all consistent ought to introduce immediately in our country to combat the impending and inevitable catastrophe. 
 Serious difficulties, both technical and cultural, would be encountered in amalgamating the small and very smallproprietors into associations, owing to the extremely smallproportions and technical primitiveness of their enterprisesand the illiteracy or lack of education of the owners. 
. 
 But precisely such enterprises could be exempted from the law (as was pointed out above in our hypothetical example). 
Their non-amalgamation, let alone their belated amalga-mation, could create no serious obstacle, for the part playedby the huge number of small enterprises in the sum totalof production and their importance to the economy as a whole are negligible , and, moreover, they are often in one way or another dependent on the big enterprises. 
 Only the big enterprises are of decisive importance; and here the technical and cultural means and forces for“unionisation” do exist ; what is lacking is the firm, deter-mined initiative of a revolutionary government which should be ruthlessly severe towards the exploiters to set these forces and means in motion. 
 The poorer a country is in technically trained forces, and in intellectual forces generally, the more urgent it is to decree compulsory association as early and as resolutelyas possible and to begin with the bigger and biggest enter-prises when putting the decree into effect, for it is asso-ciation that will economise intellectual forces and make it possible to use them to the full and to distribute them more correctly. 
 If, after 1905, even the Russian peasantsin their out-of-the-way districts, under the tsarist govern-ment, in face of the thousands of obstacles raised by that government, were able to make a tremendous forward stride in the creation of all kinds of associations, it is clear thatthe amalgamation of large-and medium-scale industryand trade could be effected in several months, if not earlier,provided compulsion to this end were exercised by a reallyrevolutionary-democratic government relying on the sup-port, participation, interest and advantage of the “lower ranks”, the democracy, the workers and other employees,and calling upon them to exercise control. 
 REGULATION OF CONSUMPTION The war has compelled all the belligerent and many of the neutral countries to resort to the regulation of consump-tion. 
 Bread cards have been issued and have become cus-tomary, and this has led to the appearance of other rationcards. 
 Russia is no exception and has also introduced breadcards. 
 Using this as an example, we can draw, perhaps, the most striking comparison of all between reactionary-bureau-cratic methods of combating a catastrophe, which are con-fined to minimum reforms, and revolutionary-democraticmethods, which, to justify their name, must directly aimat a violent rupture with the old, obsolete system and at the achievement of the speediest possible progress. 
 The bread card—this typical example of how consumption is regulated in modern capitalist countries—aims at, andachieves (at best), one thing only, namely, distributingavailable supplies of grain to give everybody his share. 
A maximum limit to consumption is established, not for all foodstuffs by far, but only for principal foodstuffs, those of “popular” consumption. 
 And that is all. 
 There is nointention of doing anything else. 
 Available supplies ofgrain are calculated in a bureaucratic way, then divided ona per capita basis, a ration is fixed and introduced, andthere the matter ends. 
 Luxury articles are not affected, for they are “anyway” scarce and “anyway” so dear as to be beyond the reach of the “people”. 
 And so, in all the belliger-ent countries without exception, even in Germany, which evidently, without fear of contradiction, may be said to bea model of the most careful, pedantic and strict regulationof consumption— even in Germany we find that the rich con-stantly get around all “rationing”. 
 This, too, “everybody” knows and “everybody” talks about with a smile; and in theGerman socialist papers, and sometimes even in the bour-geois papers, despite the fierce military stringency of theGerman censorship, we constantly find items and reportsabout the “menus” of the rich, saying how the wealthy can obtain white bread in any quantity at a certain health re-sort (visited, on the plea of illness, by everybody who hasplenty of money), and how the wealthy substitute choice and rare articles of luxury for articles of popular consump-tion. 
 A reactionary capitalist state which fears to undermine the pillars of capitalism, of wage slavery, of the economicsupremacy of the rich, which fears to encourage the ini-tiative of the workers and the working people generally,which fears to provoke them to a more exacting attitude— such a state will be quite content with bread cards. 
 Such a state does not for a moment, in any measure it adopts, lose sight of the reactionary aim of strengthening capitalism, preventing its being undermined, and confining the “reg-ulation of economic life” in general, and the regulationof consumption in particular, to such measures as are abso-lutely essential to feed the people, and makes no attempt whatsoever at real regulation of consumption by exercising control over the rich and laying the greater part of the burden in war-time on those who are better off, who are privileged,well fed and overfed in peace-time. 
 The reactionary-bureaucratic solution to the problem with which the war has confronted the peoples confines itself to bread cards, to the equal distribution of “popular” foodstuffs, of those absolutely essential to feed the people,without retreating one little bit from bureaucratic andreactionary ideas, that is, from the aim of not encouraging the initiative of the poor, the proletariat, the mass ofthe people (“demos”), of not allowing them to exercise control over the rich, and of leaving as many loopholes as possible for the rich to compensate themselves with articles of luxury. 
 And a great number of loopholes are left in all countries, we repeat, even in Germany—not to speak ofRussia; the “common people” starve while the rich visithealth resorts, supplement the meagre official ration by all sorts of “extras” obtained on the side, and do not allow themselves to be controlled. 
 In Russia, which has only just made a revolution against the tsarist regime in the name of liberty and equality,in Russia, which, as far as its actual political institutionsare concerned, has at once become a democratic republic, what particularly strikes the people, what particularly arouses popular discontent, irritation, anger and indignationis that everybody sees the easy way in which the wealthy get around the bread cards. 
 They do it very easily indeed. 
 “From under the counter”, and for a very high price, espe-cially if one has “ pull ” (which only the rich have), one can obtain anything, and in large quantities, too. 
 It is thepeople who are starving. 
 The regulation of consumptionis confined within the narrowest bureaucratic-reactionarylimits. 
 The government has not the slightest intention ofputting regulation on a really revolutionary-democratic footing, is not in the least concerned about doing so. 
 “Everybody” is suffering from the queues but—but the rich send their servants to stand in the queues, and evenengage special servants for the purpose! And that is “de-mocracy ”! At a time when the country is suffering untold calamities, a revolutionary-democratic policy would not confine itself to bread cards to combat the impending catastrophe butwould add, firstly, the compulsory organisation of thewhole population in consumers’ societies, for otherwisecontrol over consumption cannot be fully exercised; secondly,labour service for the rich, making them perform without pay secretarial and similar duties for these consumers’ societies; thirdly, the equal distribution among the popu-lation of absolutely all consumer goods, so as really todistribute the burdens of the war equitably; fourthly, theorganisation of control in such a way as to have the poorerclasses of the population exercise control over the consump-tion of the rich. 
 The establishment of real democracy in this sphere and the display of a real revolutionary spirit in the organisa-tion of control by the most needy classes of the people wouldbe a very great stimulus to the employment of all availableintellectual forces and to the development of the truly revolutionary energies of the entire people. 
 Yet now the ministers of republican and revolutionary-democratic Rus-sia, exactly like their colleagues in all other imperialistcountries, make pompous speeches about “working in commonfor the good of the people” and about “exerting every effort”,but the people see, feel and sense the hypocrisy of this talk. 
 The result is that no progress is being made, chaos is spreading irresistibly, and a catastrophe is approaching,for our government cannot introduce war-time penal servi-tude for the workers in the Kornilov, Hindenburg, general imperialist way—the traditions, memories, vestiges, habits and institutions of the revolution are still too much alive among the people; our government does not wantto take any really serious steps in a revolutionary-democraticdirection, for it is thoroughly infected and thoroughlyenmeshed by its dependence on the bourgeoisie, its “coali-tion” with the bourgeoisie, and its fear to encroach on their real privileges. 
 GOVERNMENT DISRUPTION OF THE WORK OF THE DEMOCRATIC ORGANISATIONS We have examined various ways and means of combating catastrophe and famine. 
 We have seen everywhere that the contradictions between the democrats, on the one hand,and the government and the bloc of the Socialist-Revolu-tionaries and Mensheviks which is supporting it, on theother, are irreconcilable. 
 To prove that these contradictionsexist in reality, and not merely in our exposition, and that their irreconcilability is actually borne out by con-flicts affecting the people as a whole, we have only to recalltwo very typical “results” and lessons of the six months’history of our revolution. 
 The history of the “reign” of Palchinsky is one lesson. 
 The history of the “reign” and fall of Peshekhonov is the other. 
 The measures to combat catastrophe and hunger described above boil down to the all-round encouragement (even tothe extent of compulsion) of “unionisation” of the popula-tion, and primarily the democrats, i. 
e. 
, the majority ofthe population, or, above all, the oppressed classes, the workers and peasants, especially the poor peasants. 
 And this is the path which the population itself spontaneouslybegan to adopt in order to cope with the unparalleled diffi-culties, burdens and hardships of the war. 
 Tsarism did everything to hamper the free and independ-ent “unionisation” of the population. 
 But after the fall of the tsarist monarchy, democratic organisations began to spring up and grow rapidly all over Russia. 
 The struggleagainst the catastrophe began to be waged by spontaneously arising democratic organisations—by all sorts of committees of supply, food committees, fuel councils, and so on and so forth. 
 And the most remarkable thing in the whole six months’ history of our revolution, as far as the question we areexamining is concerned, is that a government which calls itself republican and revolutionary, and which is supported by the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries in the name of the “authorised bodies of revolutionary democracy”, fought the democratic organisations and defeated them !! By this fight, Palchinsky earned extremely wide and very sad notoriety all over Russia. 
 He acted behind thegovernment’s back, without coming out publicly (just asthe Cadets generally preferred to act, willingly pushing forward Tsereteli “for the people”, while they themselves arranged all the important business on the quiet). 
 Palchinskyhampered and thwarted every serious measure taken bythe spontaneously created democratic organisations, for noserious measure could be taken without “injuring” theexcessive profits and wilfulness of the Kit Kityches. 
 And Palchinsky was in fact a loyal defender and servant of the Kit Kityches. 
 Palchinsky went so far—and this fact wasreported in the newspapers—as simply to annul the orders, of the spontaneously created democratic organisations! The whole history of Palchinsky’s “reign”—and he “reigned” for many months, and just when Tsereteli, Skobelev and Chernov were “ministers”—was a monstrous scandal from beginning to end; the will of the people and the decisionsof the democrats were frustrated to please the capitalists and meet their filthy greed. 
 Of course, only a negligiblepart of Palchinsky’s “feats” could find its way into thepress, and a full investigation of the manner in which he hindered the struggle against famine can be made only by a truly democratic government of the proletariat when itgains power and submits all the actions of Palchinsky andhis like, without concealing anything, to the judgement of the people. 
 It will perhaps be argued that Palchinsky was an excep-tion, and that after all he was removed. 
 But the fact is that Palchinsky was not the exception but the rule , that the situation has in no way improved with his removal, that his place has been taken by the same kind of Palchinskys with different names, and that all the “ influence ” of the capitalists, and the entire policy of frustrating the struggle against hunger to please the capitalists , has remained intact. 
 For Kerensky and Co. 
 are only a screen for defence of theinterests of the capitalists. 
 The most striking proof of this is the resignation of Peshekhonov, the Food Minister. 
 As we know, Peshekhonov is a very, very moderate Narodnik. 
 But in the organisation of food supply he wanted to work honestly, in contact withand supported by the democratic organisations. 
 The ex-perience of Peshekhonov’s work and his resignation are all the more interesting because this extremely moderateNarodnik, this member of the Popular Socialist Party, who was ready to accept any compromise with the bourgeoisie, was nevertheless compelled to resign! For the Kerenskygovernment, to please the capitalists, landowners andkulaks, had raised the fixed prices of grain! This is how M. 
 Smith describes this “step” and its sig-nificance in the newspaper Svobodnaya Zhizn119 No. 
 1, of September 2: “Several days before the government decided to raise the fixed prices, the following scene was enacted in the national Food Commit-tee: Rolovich, a Right-winger, a stubborn defender of the interestsof private trade and a ruthless opponent of the grain monopoly and state interference in economic affairs, publicly announced with a smug smile that he understood the fixed grain prices would shortly be raised. 
 “The representative of the Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies replied by declaring that he knew nothing of the kind, that as long asthe revolution in Russia lasted such an act could not take place, andthat at any rate the government could not take such a step without first consulting the authorised democratic bodies—the Economic Council and the national Food Committee. 
 This statement was support-ed by the representative of the Soviet of Peasants’ Deputies. 
 “But, alas, reality introduced a very harsh amendment to this counter-version! It was the representative of the wealthy elementsand not the representatives of the democrats who turned out to be right. 
 He proved to be excellently informed of the preparations for an attack on democratic rights, although the democratic representativesindignantly denied the very possibility of such an attack. 
” And so, both the representative of the workers and the representative of the peasants explicitly state their opinionin the name of the vast majority of the people, yet the Kerensky government acts contrary to that opinion, in the interests of the capitalists! Rolovich, a representative of the capitalists, turned out to be excellently informed behind the backs of thedemocrats—just as we have always observed, and nowobserve, that the bourgeois newspapers, Rech and Birzhevka , are best informed of the doings in the Kerensky govern-ment. 
 What does this possession of excellent information show? Obviously, that the capitalists have their “channels” andvirtually hold power in their own hands. 
 Kerensky is a figurehead which they use as and when they find necessary. 
The interests of tens of millions of workers and peasantsturn out to have been sacrificed to the profits of a handful of the rich. 
 And how do our Socialist-Revolutionaries and Menshe-viks react to this outrage to the people? Did they addressan appeal to the workers and peasants, saying that afterthis, prison was the only place for Kerensky and his col-leagues? God forbid! The Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, through their Economic Department, confined themselvesto adopting the impressive resolution to which we havealready referred! In this resolution they declare that theraising of grain prices by the Kerensky government is“a ruinous measure which deals a severe blow both at the food supply and at the whole economic life of the country”, and that these ruinous measures have been taken in direct“violation ” of the law!! Such are the results of the policy of compromise, of flirting with Kerensky and desiring to “spare” him! The government violates the law by adopting, in the interests, of the rich, the landowners and capitalists, a measure which ruins the whole business of control, food supply and the stabilisation of the extremely shaky finances,yet the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks continueto talk about an understanding with commercial and in-dustrial circles, continue to attend conferences with Te-reshchenko and to spare Kerensky, and confine themselves to a paper resolution of protest, which the governmentvery calmly pigeonholes!! This reveals with great clarity the fact that the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks have betrayed the people and the revolution, and that the Bolsheviks are becoming the real leaders of the masses, even of the Socialist-Revolu-tionary and Menshevik masses. 
 For only the winning of power by the proletariat, headed by the Bolshevik Party, can put an end to the outrageousactions of Kerensky and Co. 
 and restore the work of demo-cratic food distribution, supply and other organisations, which Kerensky and his government are frustrating . 
 The Bolsheviks are acting—and this can be very clearly seen from the above example—as the representatives ofthe interests of the whole people, which are to ensure food distribution and supply and meet the most urgent needs of the workers and peasants , despite the vacillating, irres-olute and truly treacherous policy of the Socialist-Revolu-tionaries and Mensheviks, a policy which has broughtthe country to an act as shameful as this raising of grainprices! FINANCIAL COLLAPSE AND MEASURES TO COMBAT IT There is another side to the problem of raising the fixed grain prices. 
 This raising of prices involves a new chaoticincrease in the issuing of paper money, a further increasein the cost of living, increased financial disorganisation and the approach of financial collapse. 
 Everybody admits that the issuing of paper money constitutes the worst formof compulsory loan, that it most of all affects the conditionsof the workers, of the poorest section of the population, andthat it is the chief evil engendered by financial disorder. 
 And it is to this measure that the Kerensky government, supported by the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Menshe-viks, is resorting! There is no way of effectively combating financial dis-organisation and inevitable financial collapse exceptthat of revolutionary rupture with the interests of capitaland that of the organisation of really democratic control, i. 
e. 
, control from “below”, control by the workers and the poor peasants over the capitalists, a way to which we re-ferred throughout the earlier part of this exposition. 
 Large issues of paper money encourage profiteering, enable the capitalists to make millions of rubles, and place tremendous difficulties in the way of a very necessary ex-pansion of production, for the already high cost of materi-als, machinery, etc. 
, is rising further by leaps and bounds. 
What can be done about it when the wealth acquired bythe rich through profiteering is being concealed? An income tax with progressive and very high rates for larger and very large incomes might be introduced. 
 Our government has introduced one, following the example ofother imperialist governments. 
 But it is largely a fiction,a dead letter, for, firstly, the value of money is falling fasterand faster, and, secondly, the more incomes are derivedfrom profiteering and the more securely commercial secrecy is maintained, the greater their concealment. 
 Real and not nominal control is required to make the tax real and not fictitious. 
 But control over the capitalistsis impossible if it remains bureaucratic, for the bureaucracyis itself bound to and interwoven with the bourgeoisie bythousands of threads. 
 That is why in the West-European imperialist states, monarchies and republics alike, financial order is obtained solely by the introduction of “labourservice”, which creates war-time penal servitude or war-time slavery for the workers. 
 Reactionary-bureaucratic control is the only method known to imperialist states—not excluding the democratic republics of France and America—of foisting the burdens of the war on to the proletariat and the working people. 
 The basic contradiction in the policy of our government is that, in order not to quarrel with the bourgeoisie, not todestroy the “coalition” with them, the government has tointroduce reactionary-bureaucratic control, which it calls “revolutionary-democratic” control, deceiving the people at every step and irritating and angering the masses whohave just overthrown tsarism. 
 Yet only revolutionary-democratic measures, only the organisation of the oppressed classes, the workers andpeasants, the masses, into unions would make it possible to establish a most effective control over the rich and wage a most successful fight against the concealment of incomes. 
 An attempt is being made to encourage the use of cheques as a means of avoiding excessive issue of paper money. 
 This measure is of no significance as far as the poor are concerned, for anyway they live from hand to mouth, complete their “economic cycle” in one week and returnto the capitalists the few meagre coppers they manage toearn. 
 The use of cheques might have great significance asfar as the rich are concerned. 
 It would enable the state,especially in conjunction with such measures as national-isation of the banks and abolition of commercial secrecy, really to control the incomes of the capitalists, really to impose taxation on them, and really to “democratise” (andat the same time bring order into) the financial system. 
 But this is hampered by the fear of infringing the priv-ileges of the bourgeoisie and destroying the “coalition” with them. 
 For unless truly revolutionary measures are adopted and compulsion is very seriously resorted to, thecapitalists will not submit to any control, will not makeknown their budgets, and will not surrender their stocks ofpaper money for the democratic state to “keep account” of. 
 The workers and peasants, organised in unions, by na-tionalising the banks, making the use of cheques legally com-pulsory for all rich persons, abolishing commercial secrecy,imposing confiscation of property as a penalty for conceal-ment of incomes, etc. 
, might with extreme ease make controlboth effective and universal—control, that is, over therich, and such control as would secure the return of paper money from those who have it, from those who conceal it, to the treasury , which issues it. 
 This requires a revolutionary dictatorship of the democ-racy, headed by the revolutionary proletariat; that is,it requires that the democracy should become revolution-ary in fact . 
 That is the crux of the matter. 
 But that is just what is not wanted by our Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, who are deceiving the people by displayingthe flag of “revolutionary democracy” while they are in fact supporting the reactionary-bureaucratic policy of thebourgeoisie, who, as always, are guided by the rule: “ Après nous le déluge ”—after us the deluge! We usually do not even notice how thoroughly we are permeated by anti-democratic habits and prejudices re-garding the “sanctity” of bourgeois property. 
 When an engineer or banker publishes the income and expenditure of a worker, information about his wages and the productivity of his labour, this is regarded as absolutely legitimate and fair. 
 Nobody thinks of seeing it as an intrusion into the“private life” of the worker, as “spying or informing” onthe part of the engineer. 
 Bourgeois society regards thelabour and earnings of a wage-worker as its open book, any bourgeois being entitled to peer into it at any moment, and at any moment to expose the “luxurious living” of the worker, his supposed “laziness”, etc. 
 Well, and what about reverse control? What if the unions of employees, clerks and domestic servants were invited by a democratic state to verify the income and expenditure of capitalists, to publish information on the subject and to assist the government in combating concealment of incomes? What a furious howl against “spying” and “informing” would be raised by the bourgeoisie! When “masters”control servants, or when capitalists control workers, thisis considered to be in the nature of things; the privatelife of the working and exploited people is not considered inviolable. 
 The bourgeoisie are entitled to call to account any “wage slave” and at any time to make public his incomeand expenditure. 
 But if the oppressed attempt to controlthe oppressor, to show up his income and expenditure, to expose his luxurious living even in war-time, when his luxurious living is directly responsible for armies at the front starving and perishing—oh, no, the bourgeoisie will not tolerate “spying” and “informing”! It all boils down to the same thing: the rule of the bour-geoisie is irreconcilable with truly-revolutionary true de-mocracy. 
 We cannot be revolutionary democrats in thetwentieth century and in a capitalist country if we fear to advance towards socialism. 
 CAN WE GO FORWARD IF WE FEAR TO ADVANCE TOWARDS SOCIALISM? What has been said so far may easily arouse the following objection on the part of a reader who has been brought up on the current opportunist ideas of the Socialist-Revolu-tionaries and Mensheviks. 
 Most measures described here, he may say, are already in effect socialist and not democratic measures! This current objection, one that is usually raised (in one form or another) in the bourgeois, Socialist-Revolution-ary and Menshevik press, is a reactionary defence ofbackward capitalism, a defence decked out in a Struveangarb. 
 It seems to say that we are not ripe for socialism, thatit is too early to “introduce” socialism, that our revolution is a bourgeois revolution and therefore we must be the menials of the bourgeoisie (although the great bourgeoisrevolutionaries in France 125 years ago made their revo-lution a great revolution by exercising terror against all oppressors, landowners and capitalists alike!). 
 The pseudo-Marxist lackeys of the bourgeoisie, who have been joined by the Socialist-Revolutionaries and who argue in this way, do not understand (as an examinationof the theoretical basis of their opinion shows) what impe-rialism is, what capitalist monopoly is, what the stateis, and what revolutionary democracy is. 
 For anyone whounderstands this is bound to admit that there can be no advance except towards socialism. 
 Everybody talks about imperialism. 
 But imperialism is merely monopoly capitalism. 
 That capitalism in Russia has also become monopoly capitalism is sufficiently attested by the examples ofthe Produgol, the Prodamet, the Sugar Syndicate, etc. 
 This Sugar Syndicate is an object-lesson in the way mo-nopoly capitalism develops into state-monopoly capitalism. 
 And what is the state? It is an organisation of the ruling class—in Germany, for instance, of the Junkers and capi-talists. 
 And therefore what the German Plekhanovs (Schei-demann, Lensch, and others) call “war-time socialism” is in fact war-time state-monopoly capitalism, or, to put it more simply and clearly, war-time penal servitude forthe workers and war-time protection for capitalist profits. 
 Now try to substitute for the Junker-capitalist state, for the landowner-capitalist state, a revolutionary-democratic state, i. 
e. 
, a state which in a revolutionary way abolishes all privileges and does not fear to introduce the fullest democracy in a revolutionary way. 
 You will find that,given a really revolutionary-democratic state, state-monopoly capitalism inevitably and unavoidably implies a step, and more than one step, towards socialism! For if a huge capitalist undertaking becomes a monopoly, it means that it serves the whole nation. 
 If it has becomea state monopoly, it means that the state (i. 
e. 
, the armedorganisation of the population, the workers and peasantsabove all, provided there is revolutionary democracy) directs the whole undertaking. 
 In whose interest? Either in the interest of the landowners and capitalists, in which case we have not a revolutionary-democratic, buta reactionary-bureaucratic state, an imperialist republic. 
 Or in the interest of revolutionary democracy—and then it is a step towards socialism . 
 For socialism is merely the next step forward from state-capitalist monopoly. 
 Or, in other words, socialism is merely state-capitalist monopoly which is made to serve the interests of the whole people and has to that extent ceased to be capi-talist monopoly. 
 There is no middle course here. 
 The objective process of development is such that it is impossible to advance from monopolies (and the war has magnified their number, role and importance tenfold) without advancing towardssocialism. 
 Either we have to be revolutionary democrats in fact, in which case we must not fear to take steps towards socialism. 
Or we fear to take steps towards socialism, condemn them in the Plekhanov, Dan or Chernov way, by arguing that our revolution is a bourgeois revolution, that socialism cannotbe “introduced”, etc. 
, in which case we inevitably sink tothe level of Kerensky, Milyukov and Kornilov, i. 
e. 
, we ina reactionary-bureaucratic way suppress the “revolutionary-democratic” aspirations of the workers and peasants. 
 There is no middle course. 
 And therein lies the fundamental contradiction of our revolution. 
 It is impossible to stand still in history in general, and in war-time in particular. 
 We must either advance or re-treat. 
 It is impossible in twentieth-century Russia, which has won a republic and democracy in a revolutionary way, to go forward without advancing towards socialism, without taking steps towards it (steps conditioned and determined by the level of technology and culture: large-scale machine production cannot be “introduced” in peasant agriculture nor abolished in the sugar industry). 
 But to fear to advance means retreating—which the Kerenskys, to the delight of the Milyukovs and Plekhanovs,and with the foolish assistance of the Tseretelis and Chernovs,are actually doing. 
 The dialectics of history is such that the war, by extra-ordinarily expediting the transformation of monopoly capitalism into state-monopoly capitalism, has thereby extraordinarily advanced mankind towards socialism. 
 Imperialist war is the eve of socialist revolution. 
 And this not only because the horrors of the war give rise toproletarian revolt—no revolt can bring about socialism unless the economic conditions for socialism are ripe— but because state-monopoly capitalism is a complete ma-terial preparation for socialism, the threshold of socialism, a rung on the ladder of history between which and the rungcalled socialism there are no intermediate rungs . 
 * * * Our Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks approach the question of socialism in a doctrinaire way, from thestandpoint of a doctrine learnt by heart but poorly under-stood. 
 They picture socialism as some remote, unknown and dim future. 
 But socialism is now gazing at us from all the windows of modern capitalism; socialism is outlined directly, prac-tically , by every important measure that constitutes a for-ward step on the basis of this modern capitalism. 
 What is universal labour conscription? It is a step forward on the basis of modern monopoly capitalism, a step towards the regulation of economic lifeas a whole, in accordance with a certain general plan,a step towards the economy of national labour and towardsthe prevention of its senseless wastage by capitalism. 
 In Germany it is the Junkers (landowners) and capital-ists who are introducing universal labour conscription, and therefore it inevitably becomes war-time penal servitudefor the workers. 
 But take the same institution and think over its signifi-cance in a revolutionary-democratic state. 
 Universal la-bour conscription, introduced, regulated and directed by the Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies,will still not be socialism, but it will no longer be capitalism. 
 It will be a tremendous step towards socialism, a step from which, if complete democracy is preserved, there can nolonger be any retreat back to capitalism, without unparal-leled violence being committed against the masses. 
 THE STRUGGLE AGAINST ECONOMIC CHAOS —AND THE WAR A consideration of the measures to avert the impending catastrophe brings us to another supremely important question, namely, the connection between home and foreignpolicy, or, in other words, the relation between a war ofconquest, an imperialist war, and a revolutionary, prole-tarian war, between a criminal predatory war and a justdemocratic war. 
 All the measures to avert catastrophe we have described would, as we have already stated, greatly enhance thedefence potential, or, in other words, the military mightof the country. 
 That, on the one hand. 
 On the other hand,these measures cannot be put into effect without turningthe war of conquest into a just war, turning the war waged by the capitalists in the interests of the capitalists into a war waged by the proletariat in the interests of all theworking and exploited people. 
 And, indeed, nationalisation of the banks and syndicates, taken in conjunction with the abolition of commercialsecrecy and the establishment of workers’ control over the capitalists, would not only imply a tremendous saving of national labour, the possibility of economising forcesand means, but would also imply an improvement in theconditions of the working masses , of the majority of the population. 
 As everybody knows, economic organisationis of decisive importance in modern warfare. 
 Russia has enough grain, coal, oil and iron; in this respect, we are in a better position than any of the belligerent Europeancountries. 
 And given a struggle against economic chaos /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR by the measures indicated above, enlisting popular initia-tive in this struggle, improving the people’s conditions, and nationalising the banks and syndicates, Russia could use her revolution and her democracy to raise the whole countryto an incomparably higher level of economic organisation. 
 If instead of the “coalition” with the bourgeoisie, which is hampering every measure of control and sabotagingproduction, the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks had in April effected the transfer of power to the Soviets and had directed their efforts not to playing at “ministerialleapfrog”, not to bureaucratically occupying, side by sidewith the Cadets, ministerial, deputy-ministerial and sim-ilar posts, but to guiding the workers and peasants intheir control over the capitalists, in their war against the capitalists, Russia would now be a country completely transformed economically, with the land in the handsof the peasants, and with the banks nationalised, i. 
e. 
,would to that extent (and these are extremely important economic bases of modern life) be superior to all other capitalist countries. 
 The defence potential, the military might, of a country whose banks have been nationalised is superior to that of a country whose banks remain in private hands. 
 The mili-tary might of a peasant country whose land is in the handsof peasant committees is superior to that of a country whose land is in the hands of landowners. 
 Reference is constantly being made to the heroic patriot-ism and the miracles of military valour performed by theFrench in 1792-93. 
 But the material, historical economicconditions which alone made such miracles possible areforgotten. 
 The suppression of obsolete feudalism in a reallyrevolutionary way, and the introduction throughout the country of a superior mode of production and free peasant land tenure, effected, moreover, with truly revolutionary-democratic speed, determination, energy and devotion—such were the material, economic conditions which with“miraculous” speed saved France by regenerating and reno-vating her economic foundation. 
 The example of France shows one thing, and one thing only, namely, that to render Russia capable of self-de-fence, to obtain in Russia, too, “miracles” of mass heroism, all that is obsolete must be swept away with “Jacobin” ruthlessness and Russia renovated and regenerated econom-ically . 
 And in the twentieth century this cannot be done merely by sweeping tsarism away (France did not confineherself to this 125 years ago). 
 It cannot be done even by themere revolutionary abolition of the landed estates (wehave not even done that, for the Socialist-Revolutionariesand Mensheviks have betrayed the peasants), by the mere transfer of the land to the peasants. 
 For we are living in the twentieth century, and mastery over the land without mastery over the banks cannot regenerate and renovate the life of the people. 
 The material, industrial renovation of France at the end of the eighteenth century was associated with a polit-ical and spiritual renovation, with the dictatorship of revolutionary democrats and the revolutionary proletariat(from which the democrats had not dissociated themselvesand with which they were still almost fused), and witha ruthless war declared on everything reactionary. 
 Thewhole people, and especially the masses, i. 
e. 
, the oppressed classes, were swept up by boundless revolutionary enthu-siasm; everybody considered the war a just war of defence, as it actually was . 
 Revolutionary France was defending herself against reactionary monarchist Europe. 
 It was notin 1792-93, but many years later, after the victory of reaction within the country, that the counter-revolutionary dicta-torship of Napoleon turned France’s wars from defensive wars into wars of conquest. 
 And what about Russia? We continue to wage an impe-rialist war in the interests of the capitalists, in alliancewith the imperialists and in accordance with the secrettreaties the tsar concluded with the capitalists of Britain and other countries, promising the Russian capitalists in these treaties the spoliation of foreign lands, of Constan-tinople, Lvov, Armenia, etc. 
 The war will remain an unjust, reactionary and predatory war on Russia’s part as long as she does not propose a justpeace and does not break with imperialism. 
 The social character of the war, its true meaning, is not determined by the position of the enemy troops (as the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks think, stooping to the vul-garity of an ignorant yokel). 
 What determines this character is the policy of which the war is a continuation (“war is the continuation of politics”), the class that is waging the war, and the aims for which it is waging this war. 
 You cannot lead the people into a predatory war in accordance with secret treaties and expect them to beenthusiastic. 
 The foremost class in revolutionary Russia,the proletariat, is becoming increasingly aware of the crim-inal character of the war, and not only have the bourgeoi-sie been unable to shatter this popular conviction, but, onthe contrary, awareness of the criminal character of thewar is growing. 
 The proletariat of both metropolitan cities of Russia has definitely become internationalist! How, then, can you expect mass enthusiasm for the war! One is inseparable from the other—home policy is insep-arable from foreign policy. 
 The country cannot be madecapable of self-defence without the supreme heroism ofthe people in boldly and resolutely carrying out great eco-nomic transformations. 
 And it is impossible to arousepopular heroism without breaking with imperialism, without proposing a democratic peace to all nations, and without thus turning the war from a criminal war of conquest andplunder into a just, revolutionary war of defence. 
 Only a thorough and consistent break with the capitalists in both home and foreign policy can save our revolutionand our country, which is gripped in the iron vice of im-perialism. 
 THE REVOLUTIONARY DEMOCRATS AND THE REVOLUTIONARY PROLETARIAT To be really revolutionary, the democrats of Russia today must march in very close alliance with the prole-tariat, supporting it in its struggle as the only thoroughly revolutionary class. 
 Such is the conclusion prompted by an analysis of the means of combating an impending catastrophe of unparal-leled dimensions. 
 The war has created such an immense crisis, has so strained the material and moral forces of the people, has dealt such blows at the entire modern social organisation thathumanity must now choose between perishing or entrusting its fate to the most revolutionary class for the swiftest and most radical transition to a superior mode of production. 
 Owing to a number of historical causes—the greater backwardness of Russia, the unusual hardships broughtupon her by the war, the utter rottenness of tsarism and theextreme tenacity of the traditions of 1905—the revolutionbroke out in Russia earlier than in other countries. 
 Therevolution has resulted in Russia catching up with the advanced countries in a few months, as far as her political system is concerned. 
 But that is not enough. 
 The war is inexorable; it puts the alternative with ruthless severity: either perish orovertake and outstrip the advanced countries economically as well . 
 That is possible, for we have before us the experience of a large number of advanced countries, the fruits of theirtechnology and culture. 
 We are receiving moral supportfrom the war protest that is growing in Europe, from theatmosphere of the mounting world-wide workers’ revolution. 
We are being inspired and encouraged by a revolutionary-democratic freedom which is extremely rare in time of imperialist war. 
 Perish or forge full steam ahead. 
 That is the alternative put by history. 
 And the attitude of the proletariat to the peasants in such a situation confirms the old Bolshevik concept, correspondingly modifying it, that the peasants must be wrested from the influence of the bourgeoisie. 
 That is thesole guarantee of salvation for the revolution. 
 And the peasants are the most numerous section of the entire petty-bourgeois mass. 
 Our Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks have as-sumed the reactionary function of keeping the peasants under the influence of the bourgeoisie and leading them toa coalition with the bourgeoisie, and not with the prole-tariat. 
 The masses are learning rapidly from the experience of the revolution. 
 And the reactionary policy of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks is meeting with failure: they have been beaten in the Soviets of both Petrograd andMoscow. 
 120 A “Left” opposition is growing in both petty-bourgeois-democratic parties. 
 On September 10, 1917, a city conference of the Socialist-Revolutionaries held in Petro-grad gave a two-thirds majority to the Left Socialist-Revolu-tionaries, who incline towards an alliance with the prole-tariat and reject an alliance (coalition) with the bourgeoisie. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks repeat a favourite bourgeois comparison—bourgeoisie and democra-cy. 
 But, in essence, such a comparison is as meaningless as comparing pounds with yards. 
 There is such a thing as a democratic bourgeoisie, and there is such a thing as bourgeois democracy; one wouldhave to be completely ignorant of both history and politicaleconomy to deny this. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks needed a false comparison to conceal the indisputable fact that between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat stand the petty bourgeoisie . 
 By virtue of their economic class status, the latter inevitably vacillate between the bourgeoisie and theproletariat. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks are trying to draw the petty bourgeoisie into an alliance with the bourgeoisie. 
 That is the whole meaning of their “coalition”,of the coalition cabinet, and of the whole policy of Kerensky,a typical semi-Cadet. 
 In the six months of the revolutionthis policy has suffered a complete fiasco. 
 The Cadets are full of malicious glee. 
 The revolution, they say, has suffered a fiasco; the revolution has been unable to cope either with the war or with economic dislocation. 
 That is not true. 
 It is the Cadets , and the Socialist-Revo-lutionaries and Mensheviks who have suffered a fiasco, for this alliance has ruled Russia for six months, only to in-crease economic dislocation and confuse and aggravate the military situation. 
 The more complete the fiasco of the alliance of the bour-geoisie and the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks , the sooner the people will learn their lesson and the more easily they will find the correct way out, namely, the alliance of the peasant poor, i. 
e. 
, the majority of the peas-ants, and the proletariat. 
 September 10 -14, 1917 ONE OF THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS OF THE REVOLUTION The key question of every revolution is undoubtedly the question of state power. 
 Which class holds power de-cides everything. 
 When Dyelo Naroda , the paper of the chief governing party in Russia, recently complained(No. 
 147) that, owing to the controversies over power, boththe question of the Constituent Assembly and that of breadare being forgotten, the Socialist-Revolutionaries shouldhave been answered, “Blame yourselves. 
 For it is the waver-ing and indecision of your party that are mostly to blame for ‘ministerial leapfrog’, the interminable postponementsof the Constituent Assembly, and the undermining by thecapitalists of the planned and agreed measures of a grainmonopoly and of providing the country with bread. 
” The question of power cannot be evaded or brushed aside, because it is the key question determining everything in a revolution’s development, and in its foreign and domesticpolicies. 
 It is an undisputed fact that our revolution has“wasted” six months in wavering over the system of power;it is a fact resulting from the wavering policy of the Social-ist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks. 
 In the long run, these parties’ wavering policy was determined by the class po-sition of the petty bourgeoisie, by their economic insta-bility in the struggle between capital and labour. 
 The whole issue at present is whether the petty-bourgeois democrats have learned anything during these great, excep-tionally eventful six months. 
 If not, then the revolution is lost, and only a victorious uprising of the proletariat can save it. 
 If they have learned something, the establishmentof a stable, unwavering power must be begun immediately. 
 Only if power is based, obviously and unconditionally, on a majority of the population can it be stable during a popular revolution, i. 
e. 
, a revolution which rouses the people, the majority of the workers and peasants, to action. 
 Up tonow state power in Russia has virtually remained in the hands of the bourgeoisie , who are compelled to make only particular concessions (only to begin withdrawing themthe following day), to hand out promises (only to fail to carry them out), to search for all sorts of excuses to cover their domination (only to fool the people by a show of“honest coalition”), etc. 
, etc. 
 In words it claims to be apopular, democratic, revolutionary government, but indeeds it is an anti-popular, undemocratic, counter-rev-olutionary, bourgeois government. 
 This is the contradiction which has existed so far and which has been a source of the complete instability and inconsistency of power, ofthat “ministerial leapfrog” in which the S. 
R. 
s and Men-sheviks have been engaged with such unfortunate (for thepeople) enthusiasm. 
 In early June 1917 I told the All-Russia Congress of Soviets * that either the Soviets would be dispersed and die an inglorious death, or all power must be transferredto them. 
 The events of July and August very convincinglybore out these words. 
 No matter what lies the lackeys ofthe bourgeoisie—Potresov, Plekhanov and others, whodesignate as “broadening the base” of power its virtual transfer to a tiny minority of the people, to the bourgeoisie, the exploiters—may resort to, only the power of the Sovietscan be stable, obviously based on a majority of the people. 
 Only Soviet power could be stable and not be overthrown even in the stormiest moments of the stormiest revolution. 
Only this power could assure a continuous and broad development of the revolution, a peaceful struggle of parties within the Soviets. 
 Until this power is created,there will inevitably be indecision, instability, vacillation,endless “crises of power”, a constant farce of ministerialleapfrog, outbreaks on the Right and on the Left. 
 The slogan, “Power to the Soviets”, however, is very often, if not in most cases, taken quite incorrectly to mean *See pp. 
 17-19 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 a “Cabinet of the parties of the Soviet majority”. 
 We would like to go into more detail on this very false notion. 
 A “Cabinet of the parties of the Soviet majority” means a change of individual ministers, with the entire old gov-ernment apparatus left intact—a thoroughly bureaucraticand thoroughly undemocratic apparatus incapable of carry-ing-out serious reforms, such as are contained even in theS. 
R. 
 and Menshevik programmes. 
 “Power to the Soviets” means radically reshaping the entire old state apparatus, that bureaucratic apparatuswhich hampers everything democratic. 
 It means removingthis apparatus and substituting for it a new, popular one,i. 
e. 
, a truly democratic apparatus of Soviets, i. 
e. 
, theorganised and armed majority of the people—the workers, soldiers and peasants. 
 It means allowing the majority of the people initiative and independence not only in theelection of deputies, but also in state administration,in effecting reforms and various other changes. 
 To make this difference clearer and more comprehen-sible, it is worth recalling a valuable admission made some time ago by the paper of the governing party of the S. 
R. 
s, Dyelo Naroda . 
 It wrote that even in those ministries which were in the hands of socialist Ministers (this was writtenduring the notorious coalition with the Cadets, when someMensheviks and S. 
R. 
s were ministers), the entire admin-istrative apparatus had remained unchanged, and hampered work. 
 This is quite understandable. 
 The entire history of the bourgeois-parliamentary, and also, to a considerable extent,of the bourgeois-constitutional, countries shows that achange of ministers means very little, for the real work ofadministration is in the hands of an enormous army of officials. 
 This army, however, is undemocratic through and through, it is connected by thousands and millionsof threads with the landowners and the bourgeoisie and iscompletely dependent on them. 
 This army is surroundedby an atmosphere of bourgeois relations, and breathesnothing but this atmosphere. 
 It is set in its ways, petrified, stagnant, and is powerless to break free of this atmosphere. 
 It can only think, feel, or act in the old way. 
 This armyis bound by servility to rank, by certain privileges of “Civil” Service; the upper ranks of this army are, through the medium of shares and banks, entirely enslaved by finance capital, being to a certain extent its agent and a vehicle of its in-terests and influence. 
 It is the greatest delusion, the greatest self-deception, and a deception of the people, to attempt, by means ofthis state apparatus, to carry out such reforms as the abo-lition of landed estates without compensation, or the grain monopoly, etc. 
 This apparatus can serve a republican bour-geoisie, creating a republic in the shape of a “monarchywithout a monarch”, like the French Third Republic, butit is absolutely incapable of carrying out reforms whichwould even seriously curtail or limit the rights of capital,the rights of “sacred private property”, much less abolish those rights. 
 That is why it always happens, under all sorts of “coalition” Cabinets that include “socialists”, that thesesocialists, even when individuals among them are perfectlyhonest, in reality turn out to be either a useless ornament ofor a screen for the bourgeois government, a sort of lightningconductor to divert the people’s indignation from the gov-ernment, a tool for the government to deceive the people. 
 This was the case with Louis Blanc in 1848, and dozens oftimes in Britain and France, when socialists participatedin Cabinets. 
 This is also the case with the Chernovs andTseretelis in 1917. 
 So it has been and so it will be as longas the bourgeois system exists and as long as the old bour-geois, bureaucratic state apparatus remains intact. 
 The Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies are particularly valuable because they represent a new type of state apparatus, which is immeasurably higher, incom-parably more democratic. 
 The S. 
R. 
s and Mensheviks havedone everything, the possible and the impossible, to turn the Soviets (particularly the Petrograd Soviet and the All-Russia Soviet, i. 
e. 
, the Central Executive Committee)into useless talking shops which, under the guise of “con-trol”, merely adopted useless resolutions and suggestionswhich the government shelved with the most polite andkindly smile. 
 The “fresh breeze” of the Kornilov affair, however, which promised a real storm, was enough for all that was musty in the Soviet to blow away for a while,and for the initiative of the revolutionary people to begin expressing itself as something majestic, powerful and in-vincible. 
 Let all sceptics learn from this example from history. 
 Let those who say: “We have no apparatus to replace theold one, which inevitably gravitates towards the defence ofthe bourgeoisie,” be ashamed of themselves. 
 For this ap-paratus exists . 
 It is the Soviets. 
 Don’t be afraid of the people’s initiative and independence. 
 Put your faith in their revolutionary organisations, and you will see in all realms of state affairs the same strength, majesty and in-vincibility of the workers and peasants as were displayedin their unity and their fury against Kornilov. 
 Lack of faith in the people, fear of their initiative and independence, trepidation before their revolutionary energy instead of all-round and unqualified support for it—this is where the S. 
R. 
 and Menshevik leaders have sinned mostof all. 
 This is where we find one of the deepest roots of theirindecision, their vacillation, their infinite and infinitelyfruitless attempts to pour new wine into the old bottlesof the old, bureaucratic state apparatus. 
 Take the history of the democratisation of the army in the 1917 Russian revolution, the history of the ChernovMinistry, of Palchinsky’s “reign”, and of Peshekhonov’sresignation—you will find what we have said above strik-ingly borne out at every step. 
 Because there was no fullconfidence in the elected soldiers’ organisations and no absolute observance of the principle of soldiers electing their commanding officers, the Kornilovs, Kaledins andcounter-revolutionary officers came to be at the head ofthe army. 
 This is a fact. 
 Without deliberately closing one’seyes, one cannot fail to see that after the Kornilov affair Kerensky’s government is leaving everything as before , that in fact it is bringing back the Kornilov affair . 
 The appoint-ment of Alexeyev, the “peace” with the Klembovskys,Gagarins, Bagrations and other Kornilov men, and leniencyin the treatment of Kornilov and Kaledin all very clearlyprove that Kerensky is in fact bringing back the Kornilovaffair. 
 There is no middle course. 
 This has been shown by expe-rience. 
 Either all power goes to the Soviets and the armyis made fully democratic, or another Kornilov affair occurs. 
 And what about the history of the Chernov Ministry? Didn’t it prove that every more or less serious step towards actually satisfying the peasants’ needs, every step showing confidence in the peasants and in their mass organisationsand actions, evoked very great enthusiasm among them?Chernov, however, had to spend almost four months “hag-gling” with the Cadets and bureaucrats, who by endlessdelays and intrigues finally forced him to resign without having accomplished anything. 
 For and during these four months the landowners and capitalists “won the game”—they saved the landed estates, delayed the convocation of theConstituent Assembly, and even started a number of re-pressions against the land committees. 
 There is no middle course. 
 This has been shown by ex-perience. 
 Either all power goes to the Soviets both centrally and locally, and all land is given to the peasants immediately , pending the Constituent Assembly’s decision, or the land-owners and capitalists obstruct every step, restore thelandowners’ power, drive the peasants into a rage andcarry things to an exceedingly violent peasant revolt. 
 The same thing happened when the capitalists (with the aid of Palchinsky) crushed every more or less serious at-tempt to supervise production, when the merchants thwartedthe grain monopoly and broke up the regulated democraticdistribution of grain and other foodstuffs just begun by Peshekhonov. 
 What is now necessary in Russia is not to invent “new reforms ”, not to make “plans ” for “comprehensive ” changes. 
 Nothing of the kind. 
 This is how the situation is depicted — deliberately depicted in a false light—by the capitalists , the Potresovs , the Plekhanovs , who shout against “introducing socialism ” and against the “dictatorship of the proletariat ”. 
 The situation in Russia in fact is such that the unprecedented burdens and hardships of the war, the unparalleled and veryreal danger of economic dislocation and famine have ofthemselves suggested the way out, have of themselves notonly pointed out, but advanced reforms and other changesas absolutely necessary. 
 These changes must be the grain monopoly, control over production and distribution, re-striction of the issue of paper money, a fair exchange ofgrain for manufactured goods, etc. 
 Everyone recognises measures of this kind and in this direction as inevitable, and in many places they have al-ready been launched from the most diverse sides. 
 They have already been launched , but they have been and are being obstructed everywhere by the resistance of the landownersand the capitalists, which is being put up through theKerensky government (an utterly bourgeois and Bonapart-ist government in reality ), through the old bureaucratic state apparatus, and through the direct and indirect pres-sure of Russian and “Allied” finance capital. 
 Not so long ago I. 
 Prilezhayev, lamenting the resignation of Peshekhonov and the collapse of the fixed prices and thegrain monopoly, wrote in Dyelo Naroda (No. 
 147): “Courage and resolve are what our governments of all compositions have lacked .... 
 The revolutionary democrats must not wait; they must themselves show initiative, and intervene in the economic chaosin a planned way .... 
 If anywhere, it is here that a firm course and a determined government are necessary. 
” That goes without saying. 
 Words of gold. 
 The only trouble is that the author forgot that the question of the firm course to take, of courage and resolve, is not a personal matter, but a question of which class is capable of mani-festing courage and resolve. 
 The only class capable of thisis the proletariat. 
 A courageous and resolute governmentsteering a firm course is nothing but the dictatorship of theproletariat and the poor peasants. 
 I. 
 Prilezhayev unwitting-ly longs for this dictatorship . 
 What would such a dictatorship mean in practice? It would mean nothing but the fact that the resistance of theKornilov men would be broken and the democratisation ofthe army restored and completed. 
 Two days after its crea-tion ninety-nine per cent of the army would be enthusiastic supporters of this dictatorship. 
 This dictatorship would give land to the peasants and full power to the local peasantcommittees. 
 How can anyone in his right senses doubt thatthe peasants would support this dictatorship? What Pe-shekhonov only promised (“the resistance of the capitalists has been broken” was what Peshekhonov actually said in his famous speech before the Congress of Soviets), this dictatorship would put into effect, would translate intoreality. 
 At the same time the democratic organisations of food supply, control, etc. 
, that have already begun to form would in no way be eliminated. 
 They would, on the contrary, be supported and developed, and all obstacles in the way of their work would be removed. 
 Only the dictatorship of the proletariat and the poor peasants is capable of smashing the resistance of the capi-talists, of displaying truly supreme courage and determi-nation in the exercise of power, and of securing the enthu-siastic, selfless and truly heroic support of the masses both in the army and among the peasants. 
 Power to the Soviets—this is the only way to make further progress gradual , peaceful and smooth , keeping perfect pace with the political awareness and resolve of the majorityof the people and with their own experience. 
 Power to the Soviets means the complete transfer of the country’s admin-istration and economic control into the hands of the work-ers and peasants, to whom nobody would dare offer resist-ance and who, through practice, through their own expe-rience, would soon learn how to distribute the land, products and grain properly. 
 Rabochy Put No. 
 10, Published according to September 27 (14), 1917 the text in Rabochy Put Signed: N. 
 Lenin HOW TO GUARANTEE THE SUCCESS OF THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY ON FREEDOM OF THE PRESS In early April, setting out the Bolsheviks’ attitude to the question of whether the Constituent Assembly should be convened, I wrote: “Yes, and as soon as possible. 
 But there is only one way to assure its convocation and success, and that is by in-creasing the number and strength of the Soviets andorganising and arming the working-class masses. 
 This is the only guarantee” ( Political Parties in Russia and the Tasks of the Proletariat , Cheap Library of Zhizn i Znaniye, Book III, pp. 
 9 and 29). 
 * Five months have passed since then and these words have been proved correct by several delays in and postponementsof the convocation through the fault of the Cadets. 
 And they have been well borne out by the Kornilov affair. 
 Now, in connection with the calling of the Democratic Conference on September 12, I should like to dwell onanother aspect of the matter. 
 Both the Menshevik Rabochaya Gazeta and Dyelo Naroda have deplored the fact that very little is being done for campaigning among the peasants to enlighten this real massof the Russian people, their real majority. 
 Everyone real-ises and admits that the success of the Constituent Assemblydepends on the enlightenment of the peasants, but ridicu-lously little is being done about it. 
 The peasants are being deceived, fooled and intimidated by the utterly deceitful *See present edition, Vol. 
 24, p. 
 99. 
— Ed. 
 and counter-revolutionary bourgeois and “yellow” press, in comparison with which the press of the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries (not to speak of the Bolsheviks) is very, very weak. 
 Why is that so?Because the ruling S. 
R. 
 and Menshevik parties are weak, hesitant and inactive, because, disagreeing that all powershould be taken over by the Soviets, they leave the peasants in ignorance and solitude, a prey to the capitalists, to their press and their propaganda. 
 While boastfully calling our revolution great and shout-ing to the right and left high-sounding, bombastic phrasesabout “revolutionary democracy”, the Mensheviks andS. 
R. 
s in effect leave Russia in the conditions of a most ordi-nary, most petty-bourgeois revolution which, having over-thrown the tsar, leaves everything else unchanged and doesnothing, absolutely nothing, effective to enlighten the peas-ants politically and to end the peasants’ ignorance, thatlast (and strongest) bulwark , the bulwark of the exploiters and oppressors of the people. 
 This is the time to recall that. 
 It is now, with the Demo-cratic Conference before us, two months ahead of the “ap-pointed” convocation of the Constituent Assembly (to befurther postponed), that we must show how easily matterscould be put right, how much could be done for the politicaleducation of the peasants, if only—if only our “revolution-ary democrats” in inverted commas were really revolution-ary, i. 
e. 
, capable of acting in a revolutionary way, andreally democratic, i. 
e. 
, reckoning with the will and inter-ests of the majority of the people, and not of the capitalistminority, which continues to hold power (the Kerenskygovernment) and with which, either directly or indirectly, in a new or old form, the S. 
R. 
s and Mensheviks are still eager to compromise. 
 The capitalists (followed, either from stupidity or from inertia, by many S. 
R. 
s and Mensheviks) call “freedom ofthe press” a situation in which censorship has been abolishedand all parties freely publish all kinds of papers. 
 In reality it is not freedom of the press, but freedom for the rich, for the bourgeoisie, to deceive the oppressed andexploited mass of the people. 
 Indeed, take, say, the Petrograd and Moscow newspapers. 
 You will see at once that it is the bourgeois papers —Rech, Birzhevka , Novoye Vremy a, Russkoye Slovo121, and so on, and so forth (for there are a great many papers of this sort)— that have by far the largest circulation. 
 What makes forthis prevalence? Not at all the will of the majority, forthe elections have shown that in both capitals the majority(a gigantic majority, too) favours the democrats, i. 
e. 
, the S. 
R. 
s, Mensheviks and Bolsheviks. 
 These three parties command from three-quarters to four-fifths of the votes,while the circulation of the newspapers they publish iscertainly less than a quarter, or even less than one-fifth,that of the whole bourgeois press (which, as we know andsee now, supported the Kornilov affair directly and indi-rectly). 
 Why is that so? Everyone knows very well why. 
 Because the publication of a newspaper is a big and profitable capitalist undertak-ing in which the rich invest millions upon millions of ru-bles. 
 “Freedom of the press” in bourgeois society means freedom for the rich systematically, unremittingly, daily, in millions of copies, to deceive, corrupt and fool the exploited and oppressed mass of the people, the poor. 
 This is the simple, generally known, obvious truth which everyone sees and realises but which “almost everyone”“bashfully” passes over in silence, timidly evades. 
 The question is whether and how this crying evil can be fought. 
 First of all, there is a very simple, good and lawful means which I pointed out in Pravda long ago, which it is partic-ularly opportune to recall now, before September 12, andwhich workers should always bear in mind, for they will hardly be able to do without it when they have won politi-cal power. 
 * That means is a state monopoly on private press adver-tising. 
 Look at Russkoye Slovo , Novoye Vremya , Birzhevka , Rech , etc. 
—you will see a multitude of private advertise-ments, which yield a tremendous income, in fact the prin-*See pp. 
 97-98 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 cipal income, to their capitalist publishers. 
 This is how bourgeois papers hold sway, how they get rich, and how they deal in poison for the people all over the world. 
 In Europe there are newspapers which have a circulation as large as one-third the number of inhabitants of thetown (for instance, 12,000 copies in a town with a popula-tion of 40,000) and are delivered free to every home , and yet yield their owners a sizable income. 
 These papers live by advertisements paid by private people, while the free deliv-ery of the paper to every home ensures the best circulationof the advertisements. 
 Then why cannot democrats who call themselves revolu-tionary carry out a measure like declaring private pressadvertising a state monopoly, or banning advertisements anywhere outside the newspapers published by the Soviets in the provincial towns and cities and by the central Soviet in Petrograd for the whole of Russia? Why must “revo-lutionary ” democrats tolerate such a thing as the enrichment, through private advertising, of rich men, Kornilov backers,and spreaders of lies and slander against the So-viets? Such a measure would be absolutely just. 
 It would greatly benefit both those who published private advertisementsand the whole people, particularly the most oppressedand ignorant class, the peasants, who would be able to have Soviet papers, with supplements for the peasants, at a very low price or even free of charge. 
 Why not do that? Only because private property and hereditary rights (to profits from advertising) are sacredto the capitalist gentlemen. 
 But how can anyone call-ing himself a revolutionary democrat in the twentiethcentury, in the second Russian revolution, recognise such rights as “sacred”?! Some may say it would mean infringing freedom of the press. 
 That is not true. 
 It would mean extending and restoring freedom of the press, for freedom of the press means thatall opinions of all citizens may be freely published. 
 What do we have now? Now, the rich alone have this monopoly, and also the big parties. 
 Yet if large Soviet newspapers were to be published, with all advertisements, it would be perfectly feasible to guarantee the expression of their opinion to a much greater number of citizens—say, to every group having collected a certain number of signa-tures. 
 Freedom of the press would in practice become much more democratic, would become incomparably more com-plete as a result. 
 But some may ask: where would we get printing presses and newsprint? There we have it!!! The issue is not “freedom of the press” but the exploiters’ sacrosanct ownership of the printingpresses and stocks of newsprint they have seized! Just why should we workers and peasants recognise that sacred right? How is that “right” to publish false infor-mation better than the “right” to own serfs? Why is it that in war-time all sorts of requisitioning—of houses, flats, vehicles, horses, grain and metals—are al-lowed and practised everywhere, while the requisitioningof printing presses and newsprint is impermissible? The workers and peasants may in fact be deceived for a while if such measures are made out to be unjust or hard to realise, but the truth will win through in the end. 
 State power in the shape of the Soviets takes all the print-ing presses and all the newsprint and distributes them equitably : the state should come first—in the interests of the majority of the people, the majority of the poor, partic-ularly the majority of the peasants, who for centuries have been tormented, crushed and stultified by the landowners and capitalists. 
 The big parties should come second—say, those that have polled one or two hundred thousand votes in both capitals. 
 The smaller parties should come third, and then any group of citizens which has a certain number of members or has collected a certain number of signatures. 
 This is the distribution of newsprint and printing presses that would be just and, with the Soviets in power, could beeffected easily enough. 
 Then, two months before the Constituent Assembly, we could really help the peasants by ensuring the delivery to every village of half a dozen pamphlets (or newspaper issues, or special supplements) in millions of copies from every big party. 
 That would truly be a “ revolutionary-democratic ” prepa-ration for the elections to the Constituent Assembly; it would be aid to the countryside on the part of the advanced workers and soldiers. 
 It would be state aid to the people’senlightenment, and not to their stultification and deception;it would be real freedom of the press for all , and not for the rich. 
 It would be a break with that accursed, slavish pastwhich compels us to suffer the usurpation by the rich of the great cause of informing and teaching the peasants. 
 Rabochy Put No. 
 11, Published according to September 28 (15), 1917 the text in Rabochy Put Signed: N. 
 Lenin THE STATE AND REVOLUTION THE IST THEORY OF THE STATE AND THE TASKS OF THE PROLETARIAT IN THE REVOLUTION122 Written in August-September 1917 Published as a pamphlet in 1918 Printed according to by Zhizn i Znaniye Publishers the pamphlet text published by Kommunist Publishers in 1919 and verified with the manuscript and the 1918 edition THE STATE AND REVOLUTION THE IST THEORY OF THE STATE AND THE TASKS OF THE PROLETARIAT IN THE REVOLUTION122 Written in August-September 1917 Published as a pamphlet in 1918 Printed according to by Zhizn i Znaniye Publishers the pamphlet text published by Kommunist Publishers in 1919 and verified with the manuscript and the 1918 edition First page of the manuscript The State and Revolution August-September 1917 Reduced First page of the manuscript The State and Revolution August-September 1917 Reduced PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION The question of the state is now acquiring particular importance both in theory and in practical politics. 
 Theimperialist war has immensely accelerated and intensifiedthe process of transformation of monopoly capitalism intostate-monopoly capitalism. 
 The monstrous oppression ofthe working people by the state, which is merging more and more with the all-powerful capitalist associations, is be-coming increasingly monstrous. 
 The advanced countries—we mean their hinterland—are becoming military convictprisons for the workers. 
 The unprecedented horrors and miseries of the protracted was are making the people’s position unbearable and increasing their anger. 
 The world proletarian revolution is clearly maturing. 
 The question of its relation to thestate is acquiring practical importance. 
 The elements of opportunism that accumulated over the decades of comparatively peaceful development havegiven rise to the trend of social-chauvinism which dominates the official socialist parties throughout the world. 
 This trend—socialism in words and chauvinism in deeds (Ple-khanov, Potresov, Breshkovskaya, Rubanovich, and, ina slightly veiled form, Tsereteli, Chernov and Co. 
 in Rus-sia; Scheidemann, Legien, David and others in Germany;Renaudel, Guesde and Vandervelde in France and Belgium; Hyndman and the Fabians 123 in England, etc. 
, etc. 
)—is conspicuous for the base, servile adaptation of the “leadersof socialism” to the interests not only of “their” national bourgeoisie, but of “their” state, for the majority of the so-called Great Powers have long been exploiting and enslav-ing a whole number of small and weak nations. 
 And the imperialist war is a war for the division and redivision ofthis kind of booty. 
 The struggle to free the working peoplefrom the influence of the bourgeoisie in general, and of theimperialist bourgeoisie in particular, is impossible withouta struggle against opportunist prejudices concerning the “state”. 
 First of all we examine the theory of Marx and Engels of the state, and dwell in particular detail on those aspectsof this theory which are ignored or have been distorted bythe opportunists. 
 Then we deal specially with the one who ischiefly responsible for these distortions, Karl Kautsky, the best-known leader of the Second International (1889-1914), which has met with such miserable bankruptcy in thepresent war. 
 Lastly, we sum up the main results of theexperience of the Russian revolutions of 1905 and particular-ly of 1917. 
 Apparently, the latter is now (early August1917) completing the first stage of its development; but this revolution as a whole can only be understood as a link in a chain of socialist proletarian revolutions being caused bythe imperialist war. 
 The question of the relation of the so-cialist proletarian revolution to the state, therefore, isacquiring not only practical political importance, but alsothe significance of a most urgent problem of the day, the problem of explaining to the masses what they will have to do before long to free themselves from capitalist tyranny. 
 The Author August 1917 PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION The present, second edition is published virtually unal-tered, except that section 3 had been added to Chapter II. 
 The Author Moscow December 17, 1918 C H A P T E R I CLASS SOCIETY AND THE STATE 1. 
 THE STATE—A PRODUCT OF THE IRRECONCILABILITY OF CLASS ANTAGONISMS What is now happening to Marx’s theory has, in the course of history, happened repeatedly to the theories of revolution-ary thinkers and leaders of oppressed classes fighting foremancipation. 
 During the lifetime of great revolutionaries, the oppressing classes constantly hounded them, received their theories with the most savage malice, the most furioushatred and the most unscrupulous campaigns of lies andslander. 
 After their death, attempts are made to convertthem into harmless icons, to canonise them, so to say, andto hallow their names to a certain extent for the “consola-tion” of the oppressed classes and with the object of duping the latter, while at the same time robbing the revolutionarytheory of its substance , blunting its revolutionary edge and vulgarising it. 
 Today, the bourgeoisie and the opportunistswithin the labour movement concur in this doctoring ofMarxism. 
 They omit, obscure, or distort the revolutionary side of this theory, its revolutionary soul. 
 They push to the foreground and extol what is or seems acceptable to thebourgeoisie. 
 All the social-chauvinists are now “Marxists”(don’t laugh!). 
 And more and more frequently German bour-geois scholars, only yesterday specialists in the annihilationof Marxism, are speaking of the “national-German” Marx, who, they claim, educated the labour unions which are so splendidly organised for the purpose of waging a predatorywar! In these circumstances, in view of the unprecedentedly wide-spread distortion of Marxism, our prime task is to re-establish what Marx really taught on the subject of the state. 
 This will necessitate a number of long quotationsfrom the works of Marx and Engels themselves. 
 Of course,long quotations will render the text cumbersome and nothelp at all to make it popular reading, but we cannot pos-sibly dispense with them. 
 All, or at any rate all they most essential passages in the works of Marx and Engels on the subject of the state must by all means be quoted as fully aspossible so that the reader may form an independent opin-ion of the totality of the views of the founders of scientificsocialism, and of the evolution of those views, and so thattheir distortion by the “Kautskyism” now prevailing may be documentarily proved and clearly demonstrated. 
 Let us being with the most popular of Engels’s works, The Origin of the Family , Private Property , and the State , the sixth edition of which was published in Stuttgart asfar back as 1894. 
 We have to translate the quotationsfrom the German originals, as the Russian translations, while very numerous, are for the most part either incomplete or very unsatisfactory. 
 Summing up his historical analysis, Engels says: “The state is, therefore, by no means a power forced on society from without; just as little is it ‘the reality of the ethical idea’, ‘the image and reality of reason ’, as Hegel maintains. 
 Rather, it is a product of societyat a certain stage of development; it is the admissionthat this society has become entangled in an insolublecontradiction with itself, that it has split into irrecon-cilable antagonisms which it is powerless to dispel. 
 But in order that these antagonisms, these classes with conflicting economic interests, might not consume them-selves and society in fruitless struggle, it became neces-sary to have a power, seemingly standing above society,that would alleviate the conflict and keep it within thebounds of ‘order’; and this power, arisen out of society but placing itself above it, and alienating itself more and more from it, is the state. 
” (Pp. 
 177-78, sixthGerman edition. 
) 124 This expresses with perfect clarity the basic idea of Marxism with regard to the historical role and the meaning of the state. 
 The state is a product and a manifestation of the irreconcilability of class antagonisms. 
 The state arises where, when and insofar as class antagonism objectivelycannot be reconciled. 
 And, conversely, the existence of the state proves that the class antagonisms are irrecon-cilable. 
 It is on this most important and fundamental point that the distortion of Marxism, proceeding along two main lines,begins. 
 On the one hand, the bourgeois, and particularly the petty-bourgeois, ideologists, compelled under the weigh of indisputable historical facts to admit that the state only exists where there are class antagonisms and a class strug-gle, “correct” Marx in such a way as to make it appearthat the gate is an organ for the reconciliation of classes. 
 According to Marx, the state could neither have arisen normaintained itself had it been possible to reconcile classes. 
From what the petty-bourgeois and philistine professors and publicists say, with quite frequent and benevolent references to Marx, it appears that the state does reconcileclasses. 
 According to Marx, the state is an organ of classrule , an organ for the oppression of one class by another; it is the creation of “order”, which legalises and perpetuatesthis oppression by moderating the conflict between the classes. 
 In the opinion of the petty-bourgeois politicians, however, order means the reconciliation of classes, and notthe oppression of one class by another; to alleviate the con-flict means reconciling classes and not depriving the op-pressed classes of definite means and methods of struggleto overthrow the oppressors. 
 For instance, when, in the revolution of 1917, the ques-tion of the significance and role of the state arose in allits magnitude as a practical question demanding imme-diate action, and, moreover, action on a mass scale, allthe Social-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks descended atonce to the petty-bourgeois theory that the “state” “recon-ciles” classes. 
 Innumerable resolutions and articles by poli-ticians of both these parties are thoroughly saturated withthis petty-bourgeois and philistine “reconciliation” theory. 
 That the state is an organ of the rule of a definite class which cannot be reconciled with its antipode (the class opposite to it) is something the petty-bourgeois democrats will never be able to understand. 
 Their attitude to the state is one of themost striking manifestations of the fact that our Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks are not socialists at all(a point that we Bolsheviks have always maintained), butpetty-bourgeois democrats using near-socialist phraseology. 
 On the other hand, the “Kautskyite” distortion of Marx-ism is far more subtle. 
 “Theoretically”, it is not deniedthat the state is an organ of class rule, or that class antago-nisms are irreconcilable. 
 But what is overlooked or glossedover is this: if the state is the product of the irreconcilabil-ity of class antagonisms, if it is a power standing above society and “ alienating itself more and more from it”, it is clear that the liberation of the oppressed class is impos-sible not only without a violent revolution, but also without the destruction of the apparatus of state power which was created by the ruling class and which is the embodiment ofthis “alienation”. 
 As we shall see later, Marx very explicitly drew this theoretically self-evident conclusion on the strength of a concrete historical analysis of the tasks of the revolution. 
And—as we shall show in detail further on—it is this conclu-sion which Kautsky has “forgotten” and distorted. 
 2. 
 SPECIAL BODIES OF ARMED MEN, PRISONS , ETC. 
 Engels continues: “As distinct from the old gentile [tribal or clan] order,125 the state, first, divides its subjects according to territory .... 
” This division seems “natural” to us, but it costs a prolonged struggle against the old organisation accor-ding to generations or tribes. 
 “The second distinguishing feature is the establish-ment of a public power which no longer directly coin-cides with the population organising itself as an armed force. 
 This special, public power is necessary because a self-acting armed organisation of the population hasbecome impossible since the split into classes .... 
 This public power exists in every state; it consists not merely of armed men but also of material adjuncts, prisons, and institutions of coercion of all kinds, of which gentile [clan] society knew nothing.... 
” Engels elucidates the concept of the “power” which is called the state, a power which arose from society butplaces itself above it and alienates itself more and more from it. 
 What does this power mainly consist of? It con-sists of special bodies of armed men having prisons, etc. 
,at their command. 
 We are justified in speaking of special bodies of armed men, because the public power which is an attribute of everystate “does not directly coincide” with the armed population, with its “self-acting armed organisation”. 
 Like all great revolutionary thinkers, Engels tries to draw the attention of the class-conscious workers to whatprevailing philistinism regards as least worthy of attention,as the most habitual thing, hallowed by prejudices that arenot only deep-rooted but, one might say, petrified. 
 A stand-ing army and police are the chief instruments of state power. 
 But how can it be otherwise? From the viewpoint of the vast majority of Europeans of the end of the nineteenth century, whom Engels wasaddressing, and who had not gone through or closely ob-served a single great revolution, it could not have been otherwise. 
 They could not understand at all what a “self-acting armed organisation of the population” was. 
 Whenasked why it became necessary to have special bodies ofarmed men placed above society and alienating themselvesfrom it (police and a standing army), the West-Europeanand Russian philistines are inclined to utter a few phrases borrowed from Spencer of Mikhailovsky, to refer to the growing complexity of social life, the differentiation offunctions, and so on. 
 Such a reference seems “scientific”, and effectively lulls the ordinary person to sleep by obscuring the importantand basic fact, namely, the split of society into irreconcilab-ly antagonistic classes. 
 Were it not for this split, the “self-acting armed organi-sation of the population” would differ from the primitive organisation of a stick-wielding herd of monkeys, or of prim-itive men, or of men united in clans, by its complexity, its high technical level, and so on. 
 But such an organisa-tion would still be possible. 
 It is impossible because civilised society is split into antagonistic, and, moreover, irreconcilably antagonisticclasses, whose “self-acting” arming would lead to an armedstruggle between them. 
 A state arises, a special power is created, special bodies of armed men, and every revolution, by destroying the state apparatus, shows us the naked classstruggle, clearly shows us how the ruling class strives torestore the special bodies of armed men which serve it, and how the oppressed class strives to create a new organi-sation of this kind, capable of serving the exploited instead of the exploiters. 
 In the above argument, Engels raises theoretically the very same question which every great revolution raises be-fore us in practice, palpably and, what is more, on a scaleof mass action, namely, the question of the relationshipbetween “special” bodies of armed men and the “self-acting armed organisation of the population”. 
 We shall see how this question is specifically illustrated by the experience ofthe European and Russian revolutions. 
 But to return to Engels’s exposition. 
He points out that sometimes—in certain parts of North America, for example—this public power is weak (he has in mind a rare exception in capitalist society, and those parts of North America in its pre-imperialist days where thefree colonists predominated), but that, generally speaking,it grows stronger: “It [the public power] grows stronger, however, in proportion as class antagonisms within the state become more acute, and as adjacent states become larger and more populous. 
 We have only to look at our present-day Europe, where class struggle and rivalry in con-quest have tuned up the public power to such a pitchthat it threatens to swallow the whole of society andeven the state. 
” This was written not later than the early nineties of the last century, Engels’s last preface being dated June 16, 1891. 
 The turn towards imperialism—meaning the complete domination of the trusts, the omnipotence of the big banks, a grand-scale colonial policy, and so forth—was only just beginning in France, and was even weaker in North Americaand in Germany. 
 Since then “rivalry in conquest” has takena gigantic stride, all the more because by the beginning ofthe second decade of the twentieth century the world hadbeen completely divided up among these “rivals in conquest”, i. 
e. 
, among the predatory Great Powers. 
 Since then, mili-tary and naval armaments have grown fantastically and thepredatory war of 1914-17 for the domination of the worldby Britain or Germany, for the division of the spoils, hasbrought the “swallowing” of all the forces of society by therapacious state power close to complete catastrophe. 
 Engels could, as early as 1891, point to “rivalry in con-quest” as one of the most important distinguishing featuresof the foreign policy of the Great Powers, while the social-chauvinist scoundrels have ever since 1914, when this rivalry,many time intensified, gave rise to an imperialist war,been covering up the defence of the predatory interests of “their own” bourgeoisie with phrases about “defence of the fatherland”, “defence of the republic and the revolution”,etc. 
! 3. 
 THE STATE—AN INSTRUMENT FOR THE EXPLOITATION OF THE OPPRESSED CLASS The maintenance of the special public power standing above society requires taxes and state loans. 
 “Having pubic power and the right to levy taxes,” Engels writes, “the officials now stand, as organs of society, above society. 
 The free, voluntary respect that was accorded to the organs of the gentile [clan] consti-tution does not satisfy them, even if they could gainit.... 
” Special laws are enacted proclaiming the sanctity and immunity of the officials. 
 “The shabbiest policeservant” has more “authority” than the representa-tive of the clan, but even the head of the military power of a civilised state may well envy the elder of a clanthe “unrestrained respect” of society. 
 The question of the privileged position of the officials as organs of state power is raised here. 
 The main point indicated is: what is it that places them above society? We shall see how this theoretical question was answered inpractice by the Paris Commune in 1871 and how it wasobscured from a reactionary standpoint by Kautsky in 1912. 
 “Because the state arose from the need to hold class antagonisms in check, but because it arose, at the same time, in the midst of the conflict of these classes, it is, as a rule, the state of the most powerful, economi-cally dominant class, which, through the medium ofthe state, becomes also the politically dominant class,and thus acquires new means of holding down and ex-ploiting the oppressed class .... 
” The ancient and feudal states were organs for the exploitation of the slaves and serfs; likewise, “the modern representative stateis an instrument of exploitation of wage-labour bycapital. 
 By way of exception, however, periodsoccur in which the warring classes balance each other sonearly that the state power as ostensible mediator acquires, for the moment, a certain degree of independ-ence of both .... 
” Such were the absolute monarchies of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the Bonapart-ism of the First and Second Empires in France, andthe Bismarck regime in Germany. 
 Such, we may add, is the Kerensky government in repub-lican Russia since it began to persecute the revolutionaryproletariat, at a moment when, owing to the leadership ofthe petty-bourgeois democrats, the Soviets have already become impotent, while the bourgeoisie are not yet strong enough simply to disperse them. 
 In a democratic republic, Engels continues, “wealth exercises its power indirectly, but all the more surely”,first, by means of the “direct corruption of officials”(America); secondly, by means of an “alliance of thegovernment and the Stock Exchange” (France andAmerica). 
 At present, imperialism and the domination of the banks have “developed” into an exceptional art both these methods of upholding and giving effect to the omnipotence of wealth in democratic republics of all descriptions. 
 Since, for instance, in the very first months of the Russian demo-cratic republic, one might say during the honeymoon ofthe “socialist” S. 
R. 
s and Mensheviks joined in wedlockto the bourgeoisie, in the coalition government. 
 Mr. 
 Pal-chinsky obstructed every measure intended for curbing thecapitalists and their marauding practices, their plundering of the state by means of war contracts; and since later on Mr. 
 Palchinsky, upon resigning from the Cabinet (andbeing, of course, replaced by another quite similar Pal-chinsky), was “rewarded” by the capitalists with a lucrativejob with a salary of 120,000 rubles per annum—what wouldyou call that? Direct or indirect bribery? An alliance of the government and the syndicates, or “merely” friendly relations? What role do the Chernovs, Tseretelis, Avksen-tyevs and Skobelevs play? Are they the “direct” or only theindirect allies of the millionaire treasury-looters? Another reason why the omnipotence of “wealth” is more certain in a democratic republic is that it does not depend on individual defects in the political machinery or on the faulty political shell of capitalism. 
 A democratic republicis the best possible political shell for capitalism, and, there-fore, once capital has gained possession of this very bestshell (through the Palchinskys, Chernovs, Tseretelis and Co. 
),it establishes its power so securely, so firmly, that no change of persons, institutions or parties in the bourgeois-democratic republic can shake it. 
 We must also note that Engels is most explicit in calling universal suffrage as well an instrument of bourgeois rule. 
 Uni-versal suffrage, he says, obviously taking account of thelong experience of German Social-Democracy, is “the gauge of the maturity of the working class. 
 It cannot and never will be anything more in the present-day state. 
” The petty-bourgeois democrats, such as our Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, and also their twin broth-ers, all the social-chauvinists and opportunists of Western Europe, expect just this “more” from universal suffrage. 
They themselves share, and instil into the minds of the people, the false notion that universal suffrage “in the present-day state” is really capable of revealing the will of the majority of the working people and of securing its realisation. 
 Here, we can only indicate this false notion, only point out that Engels’s perfectly clear, precise and concrete statementis distorted at every step in the propaganda and agitationof the “official” (i. 
e. 
, opportunist) socialist parties. 
 A de-tailed exposure of the utter falsity of this notion which Engels brushes aside here is given in our further accountof the views of Marx and Engels on the “ present-day ” state. 
 Engels gives a general summary of his views in the most popular of his works in the following words: “The state, then, has not existed from all eternity. 
 There have been societies that did without it, that hadno idea of the state and state power. 
 At a certain stageof economic development, which was necessarily boundup with the split of society into classes, the state becamea necessity owing to this split. 
 We are now rapidly approaching a stage in the development of production at which the existence of these classes not only willhave ceased to be a necessity, but will become a posi-tive hindrance to production. 
 They will fall as inevi-tably as they arose at an earlier stage. 
 Along with themthe state will inevitably fall. 
 Society, which will reor-ganise production on the basis of a free and equal asso-ciation of the producers, will put the whole machineryof state where it will then belong: into a museum ofantiquities, by the side of the spinning-wheel and thebronze axe. 
” We do not often come across this passage in the propaganda and agitation literature of the present-day Social-Demo-crats. 
 Even when we do come across it, it is mostly quoted inthe same manner as one bows before an icon, i. 
e. 
, it is doneto show official respect for Engels, and no attempt is made togauge the breadth and depth of the revolution that this rel-egating of “the whole machinery of state to a museum of antiquities” implies. 
 In most cases we do not even find anunderstanding of what Engels calls the state machine. 
 4. 
 THE “WITHERING AWAY” OF THE STATE , AND VIOLENT REVOLUTION Engels’s words regarding the “withering away” of the state are so widely known, they are often quoted, and so clearly reveal the essence of the customary adaptation of Marxism to opportunism that we must deal with them indetail. 
 We shall quote the whole argument from which theyare taken. 
 “The proletariat seizes state power and turns the means of production into state property to begin with . 
 But thereby it abolishes itself as the proletariat, abolishesall class distinctions and class antagonisms, and abol-ishes also the state as state. 
 Society thus far, operating amid class antagonisms, needed the state, that is, an organisation of the particular exploiting class, forthe maintenance of its external conditions of produc-tion, and, therefore, especially, for the purpose offorcibly keeping the exploited class in the conditionsof oppression determined by the given mode of produc-tion (slavery, serfdom or bondage, wage-labour). 
 The state was the official representative of society as awhole, its concentration in a visible corporation. 
 Butit was this only insofar as it was the state of that classwhich itself represented, for its own time, society asa whole: in ancient times, the state of slave-owning citizens; in the Middle Ages, of the feudal nobility; in our own time, of the bourgeoisie. 
 When at last it becomesthe real representative of the whole of society, it ren-ders itself unnecessary. 
 As soon as there is no longerany social class to be held in subjection, as soon asclass rule, and the individual struggle for existence based upon the present anarchy in production, with the collisions and excesses arising from this struggle,are removed, nothing more remains to be held in sub-jection—nothing necessitating a special coerciveforce, a state. 
 The first act by which the state reallycomes forward as the representative of the whole of society—the taking possession of the means of pro-duction in the name of society—is also its last independ-ent act as a state. 
 State interference in social relations becomes, in one domain after another, superfluous, and then dies down of itself. 
 The government of per-sons is replaced by the administration of things, and by the conduct of processes of production. 
 The state isnot ‘abolished’. 
 It withers away . 
 This gives the measure of the value of the phrase ‘a free people’s state’, bothas to its justifiable use for a long time from an agitationalpoint of view, and as to its ultimate scientific insuf-ficiency; and also of the so-called anarchists’ demand that the state be abolished overnight. 
” ( Herr Eugen Dühring’s Revolution in Science [Anti-Dühring ], pp. 
 301-03, third German edition. 
) 126 It is safe to say that of this argument of Engels’s, which is so remarkably rich in ideas, only one point has become an integral part of socialist thought among modern socialistparties, namely, that according to Marx that state “withersaway”—as distinct from the anarchist doctrine of the“abolition” of the state. 
 To prune Marxism to such an ex-tent means reducing it to opportunism, for this “inter-pretation” only leaves a vague notion of a slow, even, gradual change, of absence of leaps and storms, of absenceof revolution. 
 The current, widespread, popular, if one maysay so, conception of the “withering away” of the state un-doubtedly means obscuring, if not repudiating, revolution. 
 Such an “interpretation”, however, is the crudest dis-tortion of Marxism, advantageous only to the bourgeoisie. 
 In point of theory, it is based on disregard for the mostimportant circumstances and considerations indicated in,say, Engels’s “summary” argument we have just quoted infull. 
 In the first place, at the very outset of his argument, Engels says that, in seizing state power, the proletariat thereby “abolishes the state as state”. 
 It is not done toponder over the meaning of this. 
 Generally, it is eitherignored altogether, or is considered to be something inthe nature of “Hegelian weakness” on Engels’s part. 
 As amatter of fact, however, these words briefly express the experience of one of the greatest proletarian revolutions, the Paris Commune of 1871, of which we shall speak ingreater detail in its proper place. 
 As a matter of fact, En-gels speaks here of the proletariat revolution “abolishing” the bourgeois state, while the words about the state wither-ing away refer to the remnants of the proletarian state after the socialist revolution. 
 According to Engels, the bourgeois state does not “wither away”, but is “ abolished ” by the proletariat in the course of the revolution. 
 Whatwithers away after this revolution is the proletarian stateor semi-state. 
 Secondly, the state is a “special coercive force”. 
 Engels gives this splendid and extremely profound definitionhere with the utmost lucidity. 
 And from it follows thatthe “special coercive force” for the suppression of the pro-letariat by the bourgeoisie, of millions of working peopleby handfuls of the rich, must be replaced by a “special coer-cive force” for the suppression of the bourgeoisie by the proletariat (the dictatorship of the proletariat). 
 This isprecisely what is meant by “abolition of the state as state”. 
This is precisely the “act” of taking possession of the meansof production in the name of society. 
 And it is self-evidentthat such a replacement of one (bourgeois) “special force” by another (proletarian) “special force” cannot possibly take place in the form of “withering away”. 
 Thirdly, in speaking of the state “withering away”, and the even more graphic and colorful “dying down of itself”,Engels refers quite clearly and definitely to the periodafter “the state has taken possession of the means of pro-duction in the name of the whole of society”, that is, after the socialist revolution. 
 We all know that the politicalform of the “state” at that time is the most complete democ-racy. 
 But it never enters the head of any of the opportun-ists, who shamelessly distort Marxism, that Engels is conse-quently speaking here of democracy “dying down of itself”, or “withering away”. 
 This seems very strange at first sight. 
 But it is “incomprehensible” only to those who have notthought about democracy also being a state and, consequent-ly, also disappearing when the state disappears. 
 Revolutionalone can “abolish” the bourgeois state. 
 The state in general,i. 
e. 
, the most complete democracy, can only “wither away”. 
 Fourthly, after formulating his famous proposition that “the state withers away”, Engels at once explains specificallythat this proposition is directed against both the opportu-nists and the anarchists. 
 In doing this, Engels puts in the forefront that conclusion, drawn from the proposition that “the state withers away”, which is directed against the oppor-tunists. 
 One can wager that out of every 10,000 persons who have read or heard about the “withering away” of the state,9,990 are completely unaware, or do not remember, thatEngels directed his conclusions from that proposition not against anarchists alone . 
 And of the remaining ten, probably nine do not know the meaning of a “free people’sstate” or why an attack on this slogan means an attack onopportunists. 
 This is how history is written! This ishow a great revolutionary teaching is imperceptibly fal-sified and adapted to prevailing philistinism. 
 The con-clusion directed against the anarchists has been repeated thousands of times; it has been vulgarised, and rammed intopeople’s heads in the shallowest form, and has acquired thestrength of a prejudice, whereas the conclusion directedagainst the opportunists has been obscured and “forgotten”! The “free people’s state” was a programme demand and a catchword current among the German Social-Democrats in the seventies. 
 This catchword is devoid of all politicalcontent except that it describes the concept of democracyin a pompous philistine fashion. 
 Insofar as it hinted ina legally permissible manner at a democratic republic,Engels was prepared to “justify” its use “for a time” from an agitational point of view. 
 But it was an opportunist catchword, for it amounted to something more thanprettifying bourgeois democracy, and was also failureto understand the socialist criticism of the state in gener-al. 
 We are in favour of a democratic republic as the bestform of state for the proletariat under capitalism. 
 But we have no right to forget that wage slavery is the lot of the people even in the most democratic bourgeois republic. 
Furthermore, every state is a “special force” for the suppres-sion of the oppressed class. 
 Consequently, every state is not “free and not a “people’s state”. 
 Marx and Engels explained this repeatedly to their party comrades in the seventies. 
 Fifthly, the same work of Engels’s, whose arguments about the withering away of the state everyone remembers, alsocontains an argument of the significance of violent revolu- /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR tion. 
 Engels’s historical analysis of its role becomes a veritable panegyric on violent revolution. 
 This, “no one remembers”. 
 It is not done in modern socialist parties to talk or even think about the significance of this idea, andit plays no part whatever in their daily propaganda andagitation among the people. 
 And yet it is inseparably boundup with the “withering away” of the state into one harmoni-ous whole. 
 Here is Engels’s argument: “...That force, however, plays yet another role [other than that of a diabolical power] in history, a revo-lutionary role; that, in the words of Marx, it is the mid-wife of every old society which is pregnant with a newone, that it is the instrument with which social move-ment forces its way through and shatters the dead, fossilised political forms—of this there is not a word inHerr Dühring. 
 It is only with sighs and groans that headmits the possibility that force will perhaps be neces-sary for the overthrow of an economy based on ex-ploitation—unfortunately, because all use of force de-moralises, he says, the person who uses it. 
 And this in spite of the immense moral and spiritual impetus whichhas been given by every victorious revolution! And thisin Germany, where a violent collision—which may,after all, be forced on the people—would at least havethe advantage of wiping out the servility which has penetrated the nation’s mentality following the humil-iation of the Thirty Years’ War. 
 127 And this person’s mode of thought—dull, insipid, and impotent—presumesto impose itself on the most revolutionary party thathistory has ever known!” (P. 
 193, third German edition,Part II, end of Chap. 
 IV) How can this panegyric on violent revolution, which Engels insistently brought to the attention of the GermanSocial-Democrats between 1878 and 1894, i. 
e. 
, right up tothe time of his death, be combined with the theory of the“withering away” of the state to form a single theory? Usually the two are combined by means of eclecticism, by an unprincipled or sophistic selection made arbitrarily(or to please the powers that be) of first one, then another argument, and in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, if not more, it is the idea of the “withering away” that is placed in the forefront. 
 Dialectics are replaced by eclecticism— this is the most usual, the most wide-spread practice to bemet with in present-day official Social-Democratic litera-ture in relation to Marxism. 
 This sort of substitution is, ofcourse, nothing new; it was observed even in the history ofclassical Greek philosophy. 
 In falsifying Marxism in oppor-tunist fashion, the substitution of eclecticism for dialectics is the easiest way of deceiving the people. 
 It gives an illu-sory satisfaction; it seems to take into account all sides ofthe process, all trends of development, all the conflictinginfluences, and so forth, whereas in reality it provides nointegral and revolutionary conception of the process of so-cial development at all. 
 We have already said above, and shall show more fully later, that the theory of Marx and Engels of the inevita-bility of a violent revolution refers to the bourgeois state. 
The latter cannot be superseded by the proletarian state (the dictatorship of the proletariat) through the process of ‘withering away”, but, as a general rule, only through a violent revolution. 
 The panegyric Engels sang in its honour,and which fully corresponds to Marx’s repeated statements(see the concluding passages of The Poverty of Philosophy 128 and the Communist Manifesto129, with their proud and open proclamation of the inevitability of a violent revolu-tion; see what Marx wrote nearly thirty years later, in crit-icising the Gotha Programme of 1875, when he mercilesslycastigated the opportunist character of that programme 130)— this panegyric is by no means a mere “impulse”, a mere de-clamation or a polemical sally. 
 The necessity of systemati-cally imbuing the masses with this and precisely this view of violent revolution lies at the root of the entire theory of Marx and Engels. 
 The betrayal of their theory by the nowprevailing social-chauvinist and Kautskyite trends ex-presses itself strikingly in both these trends ignoring such propaganda and agitation. 
 The supersession of the bourgeois state by the proletarian state is impossible without a violent revolution. 
 The abo-lition of the proletarian state, i. 
e. 
, of the state in general,is impossible except through the process of “withering away”. 
 A detailed and concrete elaboration of these views was given by Marx and Engels when they studied each particu-lar revolutionary situation, when they analysed the lessons of the experience of each particular revolution. 
 We shall nowpass to this, undoubtedly the most important, part of theirtheory. 
 C H A P T E R II THE STATE AND REVOLUTION . 
 THE EXPERIENCE OF 1848-51 1. 
 THE EVE OF THE REVOLUTION The first works of mature Marxism— The Poverty of Philosophy and the Communist Manifesto —appeared just on the eve of the revolution of 1848. 
 For this reason, in ad-dition to presenting the general principles of Marxism, theyreflect to a certain degree the concrete revolutionary situ-ation of the time. 
 It will, therefore, be more expedient,perhaps, to examine what the authors of these works said about the state immediately before they drew conclusions from the experience of the years 1848-51. 
 In The Poverty of Philosophy , Marx wrote: “The working class, in the course of development, will substitute for the old bourgeois society an associa-tion which will preclude classes and their antagonism, and there will be no more political power groups, since the political power is precisely the official expression ofclass antagonism in bourgeois society. 
” (P. 
 182, Germanedition, 1885. 
) 131 It is instructive to compare this general exposition of the idea of the state disappearing after the abolition of classes with the exposition contained in the Communist Manifesto , written by Marx and Engels a few months later—in Novem-ber 1847, to be exact: “...In depicting the most general phases of the devel-opment of the proletariat, we traced the more or less veiled civil war, raging within existing society up tothe point where that war breaks out into open revolu-tion, and where the violent overthrow of the bourgeoi-sie lays the foundation for the sway of the proletariat .... 
 “...We have seen above that the first step in the rev-olution by the working class is to raise the proletar-iat to the position of the ruling class to win the battle ofdemocracy. 
 “The proletariat will use its political supremacy to wrest, by degree, all capital from the bourgeoisie, to centralise all instruments of production in the hands of the state, i. 
e. 
, of the proletariat organised as the rulingclass; and to increase the total productive forces asrapidly as possible. 
” (Pp. 
 31 and 37, seventh Germanedition, 1906. 
) 132 Here we have a formulation of one of the most remark-able and most important ideas of Marxism on the subject ofthe state, namely, the idea of the “dictatorship of the pro-letariat” (as Marx and Engels began to call it after theParis Commune); and, also, a highly interesting definitionof the state, which is also one of the “forgotten words” of Marxism: “ the state , i. 
e. 
, the proletariat organised as the ruling class ”. 
 This definition of the state has never been explained in the prevailing propaganda and agitation literature of theofficial Social-Democratic parties. 
 More than that, it hasbeen deliberately ignored, for it is absolutely irreconcilable with reformism, and is a slap in the face for the common opportunist prejudices and philistine illusions about the“peaceful development of democracy”. 
 The proletariat needs the state—this is repeated by all the opportunists, social-chauvinists and Kautskyites, whoassure us that this is what Marx taught. 
 But they “ forget ” to add that, in the first place, according to Marx, the prole-tariat needs only a state which is withering away, i. 
e. 
, astate so constituted that it begins to wither away immedi-ately, and cannot but wither away. 
 And, secondly, the work-ing people need a “state, i. 
e. 
, the proletariat organised asthe ruling class”. 
 The state is a special organisation of force: it is an organ-isation of violence for the suppression of some class. 
 Whatclass must the proletariat suppress? Naturally, only the exploiting class, i. 
e. 
, the bourgeoisie. 
 The working people need the state only to suppress the resistance of the exploit-ers, and only the proletariat can direct this suppression, can carry it out. 
 For the proletariat is the only class that isconsistently revolutionary, the only class that can unite allthe working and exploited people in the struggle against thebourgeoisie, in completely removing it. 
 The exploiting classes need political rule to maintain exploitation, i. 
e. 
, in the selfish interests of an insignifi-cant minority against the vast majority of all people. 
The exploited classes need political rule in order to com-pletely abolish all exploitation, i. 
e. 
, in the interests of thevast majority of the people, and against the insignificantminority consisting of the modern slave-owners—the land-owners and capitalists. 
 The petty-bourgeois democrats, those sham socialists who replaced the class struggle by dreams of class harmony,even pictured the socialist transformation in a dreamy fash-ion—not as the overthrow of the rule of the exploiting class,but as the peaceful submission of the minority to the major-ity which has become aware of its aims. 
 This petty-bour-geois utopia, which is inseparable from the idea of the statebeing above classes, led in practice to the betrayal of theinterests of the working classes, as was shown, for example,by the history of the French revolutions of 1848 and 1871,and by the experience of “socialist” participation in bour-geois Cabinets in Britain, France, Italy and other countries at the turn of the century. 
 All his life Marx fought against this petty-bourgeois socialism, now revived in Russia by the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties. 
 He developed histheory of the class struggle consistently, down to the theory of political power, of the state. 
 The overthrow of bourgeois rule can be accomplished only by the proletariat, the particular class whose economicconditions of existence prepare it for this task and provideit with the possibility and the power to perform it. 
 Whilethe bourgeoisie break up and disintegrate the peasantry and all the petty-bourgeois groups, they weld together, unite and organise the proletariat. 
 Only the proletariat—by virtue of the economic role it plays in large-scale produc-tion—is capable of being the leader of all the working and exploited people, whom the bourgeoisie exploit, oppress and crush, often not less but more than they do the prole-tarians, but who are incapable of waging an independent struggle for their emancipation. 
 The theory of class struggle, applied by Marx to the question of the state and the socialist revolution, leads as amatter of course to the recognition of the political rule of the proletariat, of its dictatorship, i. 
e. 
, of undivided power directly backed by the armed force of the people. 
 The over-throw of the bourgeoisie can be achieved only by the prole-tariat becoming the ruling class , capable of crushing the inevitable and desperate resistance of the bourgeoisie, and oforganising all the working and exploited people for the new economic system. 
 The proletariat needs state power, a centralised organ-isation of force, an organisation of violence, both to crushthe resistance of the exploiters and to lead the enormous mass of the population—the peasants, the petty bourgeoi-sie, and semi-proletarians—in the work of organising a socialist economy. 
 By educating the workers’ party, Marxism educates the vanguard of the proletariat, capable of assuming power andleading the whole people to socialism, of directing and organ-ising the new system, of being the teacher, the guide, theleader of all the working and exploited people in organising their social life without the bourgeoisie and against the bourgeoisie. 
 By contrast, the opportunism now prevailingtrains the members of the workers’ party to be the repre-sentatives of the better-paid workers, who lose touch withthe masses, “get along” fairly well under capitalism, andsell their birthright for a mass of pottage, i. 
e. 
, renounce their role as revolutionary leaders of the people against the bourgeoisie. 
 Marx’s theory of “the state, i. 
e. 
, the proletariat organised as the ruling class”, is inseparably bound up with the wholeof his doctrine of the revolutionary role of the proletariat inhistory. 
 The culmination of this rule is the proletarian dictatorship, the political rule of the proletariat. 
 But since the proletariat needs the state as a special form of organisation of violence against the bourgeoisie, the fol-lowing conclusion suggests itself: is it conceivable that such an organisation can be created without first abolishing, destroying the state machine created by the bourgeoisie for themselves ? The Communist Manifesto leads straight to this conclusion, and it is of this conclusion that Marx speakswhen summing up the experience of the revolution of 1848-51. 
 2. 
 THE REVOLUTION SUMMED UP Marx sums up his conclusions from the revolution of 1848-51, on the subject of the state we are concerned with,in the following argument contained in The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte : “But the revolution is thoroughgoing. 
 It is still journeying through purgatory. 
 It does its work me-thodically. 
 By December 2, 1851 [the day of LouisBonaparte’s coup d’état], it had completed one halfof its preparatory work. 
 It is now completing theother half. 
 First it perfected the parliamentary power, in order to be able to overthrow it. 
 Now that it has attained this, it is perfecting the executive power , re-ducing it to its purest expression, isolating it, settingit up against itself as the sole object, in order to concentrate all its forces of destruction against it [italics ours]. 
 And when it has done this second half of its preliminary work, Europe will leap from its seat and exultantly exclaim: well grubbed, old mole! “This executive power with its enormous bureau-cratic and military organisation, with its vast andingenious state machinery, with a host of officialsnumbering half a million, besides an army of another half million, this appalling parasitic body, which enmeshes the body of French society and chokes allits pores, sprang up in the days of the absolute mon-archy, with the decay of the feudal system, which ithelped to hasten. 
” The first French Revolution devel-oped centralisation, “but at the same time” it increased “the extent, the attributes and the number of agents of governmental power. 
 Napoleon completed thisstate machinery”. 
 The legitimate monarchy and the July monarchy “added nothing but a greater division of labour”. 
 “...Finally, in its struggle against the revolution, the parl-iamentary republic found itself compelled to strength-en, along with repressive measures, the resourcesand centralisation of governmental power. 
 All revo-lutions perfected this machine instead of smashing it[italics ours]. 
 The parties that contended in turn for domination regarded the possession of this huge state edifice as the principal spoils of the victor. 
” ( The Eigh-teenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte , pp. 
 98-99, fourth edition, Hamburg, 1907. 
) 133 In this remarkable argument, Marxism takes a tremendous step forward compared with the Communist Manifesto . 
 In the latter, the question of the state is still treated in anextremely abstract manner, in the most general terms andexpressions. 
 In the above-quoted passage, the question istreated in a concrete manner, and the conclusion is extremelyprecise, definite, practical and palpable: all previous revo-lutions perfected the state machine, whereas it must be broken, smashed. 
 This conclusion is the chief and fundamental point in the Marxist theory of the state. 
 And it is precisely thisfundamental point which has been completely ignored by the dominant official Social-Democratic parties and, indeed, distorted (as we shall see later) by the foremost theoretician of the Second International, Karl Kautsky. 
 The Communist Manifesto gives a general summary of history, which compels us to regard the state as the organof class rule and leads us to the inevitable conclusion thatthe proletariat cannot overthrow the bourgeoisie without first winning political power, without attaining political supremacy, without transforming the state into the “prole-tariat organised as the ruling class”; and that this proletar-ian state will begin to wither away immediately after itsvictory because the state is unnecessary and cannot exist ina society in which there are no class antagonisms. 
 The ques-tion as to how, from the point of view of historical devel-opment, the replacement of the bourgeois by the proletarianstate is to take place is not raised here. 
 This is the question Marx raises and answers in 1852. 
 True to his philosophy of dialectical materialism, Marx takes as his basis the historical experience of the great years of revolution, 1848 to 1851. 
 Here, as everywhere else,his theory is a summing up of experience , illuminated by a profound philosophical conception of the world and a richknowledge of history. 
 The problem of the state is put specifically: How did the bourgeois state, the state machine necessary for the rule of the bourgeoisie, come into being historically? Whatchanges did it undergo, what evolution did it perform inthe course of bourgeois revolutions and in the face of theindependent actions of the oppressed classes? What arethe tasks of the proletariat in relation to this state machine? The centralised state power that is peculiar to bour-geois society came into being in the period of the fall ofabsolutism. 
 Two institutions most characteristic of thisstate machine are the bureaucracy and the standing army. 
In their works, Marx and Engels repeatedly show that thebourgeoisie are connected with these institutions by thou-sands of threads. 
 Every worker’s experience illustrates this connection in an extremely graphic and impressive manner. 
From its own bitter experience, the working class learns torecognise this connection. 
 That is why it so easily graspsand so firmly learns the doctrine which shows the inevitabil-ity of this connection, a doctrine which the petty-bourgeois democrats either ignorantly and flippantly deny, or still more flippantly admit “in general”, while forgetting todraw appropriate practical conclusions. 
 The bureaucracy and the standing army are a “parasite” on the body of bourgeois society—a parasite created bythe internal antagonisms which rend that society, but a parasite which “chokes” all its vital pores. 
 The Kautskyite opportunism now prevailing in official Social-Democracyconsiders the view that the state is a parasitic organism to be the peculiar and exclusive attribute of anarchism. 
 Itgoes without saying that this distortion of Marxism is ofvast advantage to those philistines who have reduced social-ism to the unheard-of disgrace of justifying and pretti-fying the imperialist war by applying to it the concept of “defence of the fatherland”; but it is unquestionably a distortion, nevertheless. 
 The development, perfection, and strengthening of the bureaucratic and military apparatus proceeded during allthe numerous bourgeois revolutions which Europe has wit-nessed since the fall of feudalism. 
 In particular, it is thepetty bourgeois who are attracted to the side of the bigbourgeoisie and are largely subordinated to them through this apparatus, which provides the upper sections of the peasants, small artisans, tradesmen, and the like with com-paratively comfortable, quiet, and respectable jobs raisingthe holders above the people. 
 Consider what happened in Russia during the six months following February 27, 1917. 
The official posts which formerly were given by preference to the Black Hundreds have now become the spoils of the Cadets, Mensheviks, and Social-Revolutionaries. 
 Nobodyhas really thought of introducing any serious reforms. 
Every effort has been made to put them off “until the Con-stituent Assembly meets”, and to steadily put off its con-vocation until after the war! But there has been no delay, no waiting for the Constituent Assembly, in the matter of di-viding the spoils of getting the lucrative jobs of ministers,deputy ministers, governors-general, etc. 
, etc. 
! The game ofcombinations that has been played in forming the govern-ment has been, in essence, only an expression of this divi-sion and redivision of the “spoils”, which has been going on above and below, throughout the country, in every depart-ment of central and local government. 
 The six months betweenFebruary 27 and August 27, 1917, can be summed up, objec-tively summed up beyond all dispute, as follows: reformsshelved, distribution of official jobs accomplished and“mistakes” in the distribution corrected by a few redistri-butions. 
 But the more the bureaucratic apparatus is “redistribut-ed” among the various bourgeois and petty-bourgeoisparties (among the Cadets, Socialist-Revolutionaries andMensheviks in the case of Russia), the more keenly awarethe oppressed classes, and the proletariat at their head, be-come of their irreconcilable hostility to the whole of bour-geois society. 
 Hence the need for all bourgeois parties, evenfor the most democratic and “revolutionary-democratic” among them, to intensify repressive measures against the revolutionary proletariat, to strengthen the apparatus of coercion, i. 
e. 
, the state machine. 
 This course of events com-pels the revolution “ to concentrate all its forces of destruction ” against the state power, and to set itself the aim, not ofimproving the state machine, but of smashing and destroy-ing it. 
 It was not logical reasoning, but actual developments, the actual experience of 1848-51, that led to the matter being presented in this way. 
 The extent to which Marx heldstrictly to the solid ground of historical experience canbe seen from the fact that, in 1852, he did not yet specifi-cally raise the question of what was to take the place of the state machine to be destroyed. 
 Experience had not yet provided material for dealing with this question, which history placed on the agenda later on, in 1871. 
 In 1852,all that could be established with the accuracy of scien-tific observation was that the proletarian revolution had approached the task of “concentrating all its forces of de-struction” against the state power, of “smashing” the state machine. 
 Here the question may arise: is it correct to generalise the experience, observations and conclusions of Marx, toapply them to a field that is wider than the history of Franceduring the three years 1848-51? Before proceeding to dealwith this question, let us recall a remark made by Engels and then examine the facts. 
 In his introduction to the third edition of The Eighteenth Brumaire , Engels wrote: “France is the country where, more than anywhere else, the historical class struggles were each timefought out to a finish, and where, consequently, the changing political forms within which they move and in which their results are summarised have beenstamped in the sharpest outlines. 
 The centre of feudal-ism in the Middle Ages, the model country, since theRenaissance, of a unified monarchy based on socialestates, France demolished feudalism in the Great Revolution and established the rule of the bourgeoisie in a classical purity unequalled by any other Europeanland. 
 And the struggle of the upward-striving prole-tariat against the ruling bourgeoisie appeared here in an acute form unknown elsewhere. 
” (P. 
 4, 1907 edition). 
 The last remark is out of date inasmuch as since 1871 there has been a lull in the revolutionary struggle of theFrench proletariat, although, long as this lull may be, itdoes not at all preclude the possibility that in the comingproletarian revolution France may show herself to be the classic country of the class struggle to a finish. 
 Let us, however, cast a general glance over the history of the advanced countries at the turn of the century. 
 Weshall see that the same process went on more slowly, inmore varied forms, in a much wider field: on the one hand,the development of “parliamentary power” both in the re-publican countries (France, America, Switzerland), and in the monarchies (Britain, Germany to a certain extent,Italy, the Scandinavia countries, etc. 
); on the other hand,a struggle for power among the various bourgeois and petty-bourgeois parties which distributed and redistributed the“spoils” of office, with the foundations of bourgeois society unchanged; and, lastly, the perfection and consolidation of the “executive power”, of its bureaucratic and militaryapparatus. 
 There is not the slightest doubt that these features are common to the whole of the modern evolution of all capital-ist states in general. 
 In the last three years 1848-51 France displayed, in a swift, sharp, concentrated form, the very same processes of development which are peculiar to thewhole capitalist world. 
 Imperialism—the era of bank capital, the era of gigantic capitalist monopolies, of the development of monopolycapitalism into state-monopoly capitalism—has clearly shown an extraordinary strengthening of the “state machine” and an unprecedented growth in its bureaucratic and mili-tary apparatus in connection with the intensification ofrepressive measures against the proletariat both in themonarchical and in the freest, republican countries. 
 World history is now undoubtedly leading, on an in-comparably larger scale than in 1852, to the “concentration of all the forces” of the proletarian revolution on the “de-struction” of the state machine. 
 What the proletariat will put in its place is suggested by the highly instructive material furnished by the Paris Com-mune. 
 3. 
 THE PRESENTATION OF THE QUESTION BY IN 1852* In 1907, Mehring, in the magazine Neue Zeit134 (Vol. 
 XXV, 2, p. 
 164), published extracts from Marx’s letter toWeydemeyer dated March 5, 1852. 
 This letter, among otherthings, contains the following remarkable observation: “And now as to myself, no credit is due to me for discovering the existence of classes in modern societyor the struggle between them. 
 Long before me bour-geois historians had described the historical develop-ment of this class struggle and bourgeois economists, the economic anatomy of classes. 
 What I did that was new was to prove: (1) that the existence of classes is only bound up with the particular , historical phases in the development of production (historische Entwick-lungsphasen der Produktion), (2) that the class strugglenecessarily leads to the dictatorship of the proletariat , (3) that this dictatorship itself only constitutes the transition to the abolition of all classes and to a class-less society . 
” 135 In these words, Marx succeeded in expressing with strik-ing clarity, first, the chief and radical difference betweenhis theory and that of the foremost and most profound think-ers of the bourgeoisie; and, secondly, the essence of histheory of the state. 
 It is often said and written that the main point in Marx’s theory is the class struggle. 
 But this is wrong. 
 And this wrong notion very often results in an opportunist distortionof Marxism and its falsification in a spirit acceptable to thebourgeoisie. 
 For the theory of the class struggle was creatednot by Marx, but by the bourgeoisie before Marx, and, generally speaking, it is acceptable to the bourgeoisie. 
 Those who recognize only the class struggle are not yet Marxists; *Added in the second edition. 
 they may be found to be still within the bounds of bourgeois thinking and bourgeois politics. 
 To confine Marxism to the theory of the class struggle means curtailing Marxism, distorting it, reducing it to something acceptable to thebourgeoisie. 
 Only he is a Marxist who extends the recognition of the class struggle to the recognition of the dictatorship of the proletariat . 
 That is what constitutes the most profound distinction between the Marxist and the ordinary petty (as well as big) bourgeois. 
 This is the touchstone on which the real understanding and recognition of Marxism should be tested. 
 And it is not surprising that when the history ofEurope brought the working class face to face with thisquestion as a practical issue, not only all the opportunists and reformists, but all the Kautskyites (people who vacillate between reformism and Marxism) proved to be miserable philistines and petty-bourgeois democrats repudiating the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 Kautsky’s pamphlet, The Dictatorship of the Proletariat , published in August 1918, i. 
e. 
, long after the first edition of the present book, is a per-fect example of petty-bourgeois distortion of Marxism and base renunciation of it in deeds , while hypocritically recog-nising it in words (see my pamphlet, The Proletarian Revolu-tion and the Renegade Kautsky , Petrograd and Moscow, 1918). 
 Opportunism today, as represented by its principal spo-kesman, the ex-Marxist Karl Kautsky, fits in completely with Marx’s characterisation of the bourgeois position quoted above, for this opportunism limits recognition of the classstruggle to the sphere of bourgeois relations. 
 (Within thissphere, within its framework, not a single educated libe-ral will refuse to recognise the class struggle “in principle”!)Opportunism does not extend recognition of the class struggle to the cardinal point, to the period of transition from capi-talism to communism, of the overthrow and the complete abolition of the bourgeoisie. 
 In reality, this period inevitably is a period of an unprecedentedly violentclass struggle in unprecedentedly acute forms, and,consequently, during this period the state must inevitably be a state that is democratic in a new way (for the proletar-iat and the propertyless in general) and dictatorial in a new way (against the bourgeoisie). 
 Further. 
 The essence of Marx’s theory of the state has been mastered only by those who realise that the dictatorship of a single class is necessary not only for every class society in general, not only for the proletariat which has overthrown the bourgeoisie, but also for the entire historical period which separates capitalism from “classless society”, fromcommunism. 
 Bourgeois states are most varied in form, buttheir essence is the same: all these states, whatever their form, in the final analysis are inevitably the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie . 
 The transition from capitalism to commu-nism is certainly bound to yield a tremendous abundanceand variety of political forms, but the essence will inevita-bly be the same: the dictatorship of the proletariat . 
 C H A P T E R III THE STATE AND REVOLUTION . 
 EXPERIENCE OF THE PARIS COMMUNE OF 1871 ’S ANALYSIS 1. 
 WHAT MADE THE COMMUNARDS ’ ATTEMPT HEROIC ? It is well known that in the autumn of 1870, a few months before the Commune, Marx warned the Paris workers thatany attempt to overthrow the government would be thefolly of despair. 
 But when, in March 1871, a decisive battle was forced upon the workers and they accepted it, when the uprising had become a fact, Marx greeted the proletarianrevolution with the greatest enthusiasm, in spite of unfa-vorable auguries. 
 Marx did not persist in the pedanticattitude of condemning an “untimely” movement as didthe ill-famed Russian renegade from Marxism, Plekhanov, who in November 1905 wrote encouragingly about the wor-kers’ and peasants’ struggle, but after December 1905cried, liberal fashion: “They should not have taken uparms. 
” Marx, however, was not only enthusiastic about the heroism of the Communards, who, as he expressed it, “stormed heaven”. 
 Although the mass revolutionary movement did not achieve its aim, he regarded it as a historic experienceof enormous importance, as a certain advance of the world proletarian revolution, as a practical step that was more im-portant than hundreds of programmes and arguments. 
 Marx endeavored to analyse this experiment, to draw tactical lessons from it and re-examine his theory in the light of it. 
 The only “correction” Marx thought it necessary to make to the Communist Manifesto he made on the basis of the revolutionary experience of the Paris Communards. 
 The last preface to the new German edition of the Commu-nist Manifesto , signed by both its authors, is dated June 24, 1872. 
 In this preface the authors, Karl Marx and Fred-erick Engels, say that the programme of the Communist Manifesto “has in some details become out-of-date”, and the go on to say: “...One thing especially was proved by the Commune , viz. 
, that ‘the working class cannot simply lay hold of the ready-made state machinery and wield it for its ownpurposes ’.... 
” 136 The authors took the words that are in single quotation marks in this passage from Marx’s book, The Civil War in France . 
 Thus, Marx and Engels regarded one principal and funda-mental lesson of the Paris Commune as being of such enor-mous importance that they introduced it as an importantcorrection into the Communist Manifesto . 
 Most characteristically, it is this important correction that has been distorted by the opportunists, and its meaning probably is not known to nine-tenths, if not ninety-nine-hundredths, of the readers of the Communist Manifesto . 
 We shall deal with this distortion more fully farther on, in achapter devoted specially to distortions. 
 Here it will be suf-ficient to note that the current, vulgar “interpretation” of Marx’s famous statement just quoted is that Marx here allegedly emphasises the idea of slow development in con-tradistinction to the seizure of power, and so on. 
 As a matter of fact, the exact opposite is the case . 
 Marx’s idea is that the working class must break up , smash the “ready-made state machinery”, and not confine itself merely to laying hold of it. 
 On April 12, 1871, i. 
e. 
, just at the time of the Commune, Marx wrote to Kugelmann: “If you look up the last chapter of my Eighteenth Brumaire , you will find that I declare that the next attempt of the French Revolution will be no longer, as before, to transfer the bureaucratic-military machinefrom one hand to another, but to smash it [Marx’s italics—the original is zerbrechen ], and this is the pre-condition for every real people’s revolution on theContinent. 
 And this is what our heroic Party comrades in Paris are attempting. 
” ( Neue Zeit , Vol. 
 XX, 1, 1901-02, p. 
 709. 
) 137 (The letters of Marx to Kugel-mann have appeared in Russian in no less than two edi-tions, one of which I edited and supplied with a pref-ace. 
) * The words, “to smash the bureaucratic-military machine”, briefly express the principal lesson of Marxism regardingthe tasks of the proletariat during a revolution in relationto the state. 
 And this is the lesson that has been not onlycompletely ignored, but positively distorted by the prevail-ing, Kautskyite, “interpretation” of Marxism! As for Marx’s reference to The Eighteenth Brumaire , we have quoted the relevant passage in full above. 
 It is interesting to note, in particular, two points in the above-quoted argument of Marx. 
 First, he restricts hisconclusion to the Continent. 
 This was understandable in1871, when Britain was still the model of a purely capi-talist country, but without a militarist clique and, to a considerable degree, without a bureaucracy. 
 Marx thereforeexcluded Britain, where a revolution, even a people’srevolution, then seemed possible, and indeed was possible,without the precondition of destroying “ready-made state machinery”. 
 Today, in 1917, at the time of the first great imperialist war, this restriction made by Marx is no longer valid. 
Both Britain and America, the biggest and the last repre-sentatives—in the whole world—of Anglo-Saxon “liberty”,in the sense that they had no militarist cliques and bureauc-racy, have completely sunk into the all-European filthy, bloody morass of bureaucratic-military institutions which *See present edition, Vol. 
 12, pp. 
 104-12. 
— Ed. 
 subordinate everything to themselves, and suppress every-thing. 
 Today, in Britain and America, too, “the precondition for every real people’s revolution” is the smashin g, the destruction of the “ready-made state machinery” (made and brought up to the “European”, general imperialist, per-fection in those countries in the years 1914-17). 
 shoul d be paid to Marx’s reaucratic-military state machine is “the precondition for every real peopl e’s revolution”. 
 This idea of a “people’s” revolution seems strange coming from Marx, so that the Rus-sian Plekhanovites and Mensheviks, those followers of Struve who wish to be regarded as Marxists, might possibly declare such an expression to be a “slip of the pen” on Marx’s part. 
 They have reduced Marxism to such a state of wretchedly liberal distortion that nothing exists for them beyond the antithesis between bourgeois revolution and pro-letarian revolution, and even this antithesis they interpret in an utterly lifeless way. 
 If we take the revolutions of the 20 twentieth century as examples we shall, of course, have to admit that the Por-tuguese and the Turkish revolutions are both bourgeois revolutions. 
 Neither of them, however, is a “people’s” revolu-tion, since in neither does the mass of the people, their vast majority, come out actively, independently, with their own economic and political demands to any noticeable degree. 
 By contrast, although the Russian bourgeois revolution of 1905-07 displayed no such “brilliant” successes as at time fell to the Portuguese and Turkish revolutions, it was un-doubtedly a “real people’s” revolution, since the mass of the people, their majority, the very lowest social groups, crushed by oppression and exploitation, rose independently and stamped on the entire course of the revolution the im-print of their own demands, their attempt to build in their own way a new society in place of the old society that was being destroyed. 
 In Europe, in 1871, the proletariat did not constitute the majority of the people in any country on the Continent. 
 A “people’s” revolution, one actually sweeping the ma-jority into its stream, could be such only if it embraced both the proletariat and the peasants. 
 These two classesextremely profoun d remar k that the destruction of the bu-Secondly, particular attention then constituted the “people”. 
 These two classes are united by the fact that the “bureaucratic-military state machine” oppresses, crushes, exploits them. 
 To smash this machine, to break it up , is truly in the interest of the “people”, of their majority, of the workers and most of the peasants, is “theprecondition” for a free alliance of the poor peasant andthe proletarians, whereas without such an alliancedemocracy is unstable and socialist transformation is impossible. 
 As is well known, the Paris Commune was actually work-ing its way toward such an alliance, although it did not-reach its goal owing to a number of circumstances, internaland external. 
 Consequently, in speaking of a “real people’s revolution”, Marx, without in the least discounting the special features of the petty bourgeois (he spoke a great deal about themand often), took strict account of the actual balance ofclass forces in most of the continental countries of Europein 1871. 
 On the other hand, he stated that the “smashing”of the state machine was required by the interests of both the workers and the peasants, that it united them, that it placed before them the common task of removing the “par-asite” and of replacing by something new. 
 By what exactly? 2. 
 WHAT IS TO REPLACE THE SMASHED STATE MACHINE ? In 1847, in the Communist Manifesto , Marx’s answer to this question was as yet a purely abstract one; to be exact,it was an answer that indicated he tasks, but not the waysof accomplishing them. 
 The answer given in the Communist Manifesto was that this machine was to be replaced by “the proletariat organised as the ruling class”, by the “winning of the battle of democracy”. 
 Marx did not indulge in utopias; he expected the experience of the mass movement to provide the reply to the questionas to the specific forms this organisation of the proletariatas the ruling class would assume and as to the exact man-ner in which this organisation would be combined with the most complete, most consistent “winning of the battle ofdemocracy”. 
 Marx subjected the experience of the Commune, meagre as it was, to the most careful analysis in The Civil War in France. 
 Let us quote the most important passages of this work. 
 Originating from the Middle Ages, there developed in the 19th century “the centralised state power,with its ubiquitous organs of standing army, police, bureaucracy, clergy, and judicature”. 
 With the devel-opment of class antagonisms between capital and la-bour, “state power assumed more and more the characterof a public force organised for the suppression of the workingclass, of a machine of class rule. 
 After every revolution,which marks an advance in the class struggle, the purely coercive character of the state power stands out in bolder and bolder relief”. 
 After the revolutionof 1848-49, state power became “the national war instru-ments of capital against labour”. 
 The Second Empireconsolidated this. 
 “The direct antithesis to the empire was the Com-mune. 
” It was the “specific form” of “a republic that was not only to remove the monarchical form of classrule, but class rule itself .... 
” What was this “specific” form of the proletarian, social-ist republic? What was the state it began to create? “... The first decree of the Commune ... was the sup-pression of the standing army, and its replacement by thearmed people.... 
” This demand now figures in the programme of every party calling itself socialist. 
 The real worth of their programme, however, is best shown by the behavior of our Socialist-Revolutionists and Mensheviks, who, right after therevolution of February 27, refused to carry out thisdemand! “The Commune was formed of the municipal council-lors, chosen by universal suffrage in the various wardsof the town, responsible and revocable at any time. 
 The majority of its members were naturally working men, or acknowledged representatives of the working class .... 
 The police, which until then had been the in-strument of the Government, was at once stripped ofits political attributes, and turned into the responsible,and at all times revocable, agent of the Commune. 
So were the officials of all other branches of the admini-stration. 
 From the members of the Commune down-wards, the public service had to be done at workmen ’s wages . 
 The privileges and the representation allowances of the high dignitaries of state disappeared along withthe high dignitaries themselves.... 
 Having once got rid ofthe standing army and the police, the instruments ofphysical force of the old government, the Commune proceeded at once to break the instrument of spiritual suppression, the power of the priests .... 
 The judicial func-tionaries lost that sham independence ... they were thence-forward to be elective, responsible, and revocable.... 
” 138 The Commune, therefore, appears to have replaced the smashed state machine “only” by fuller democracy: abolition of the standing army; all officials to be elected and subjectto recall. 
 But as a matter of fact this “only” signifies agigantic replacement of certain institutions by other in-stitutions of a fundamentally different type. 
 This is ex-actly a case of “quantity being transformed into quality”: democracy, introduced as fully and consistently as is at all conceivable, is transformed from bourgeois into proletariandemocracy; from the state ( =a special force for the suppres-sion of a particular class) into something which is no longerthe state proper. 
 It is still necessary to suppress the bourgeoisie and crush their resistance. 
 This was particularly necessary for the Commune; and one of the reasons for its defeat was thatit did not do this with sufficient determination. 
 The organof suppression, however, is here the majority of the popula-tion, and not a minority, as was always the case under slav-ery, serfdom, and wage slavery. 
 And since the majority of people itself suppresses its oppressors, a ‘special force” for suppression is no longer necessary ! In this sense, the state begins to wither away . 
 Instead of the special institutions of a privileged minority (privileged officialdom, the chiefs of the standing army), the majority itself can directly fulfil all these functions, and the more the functions of state power are performed by the people as a whole, the less need thereis for the existence of this power. 
 In this connection, the following measures of the Com-mune, emphasised by Marx, are particularly noteworthy:the abolition of all representation allowances, and of all monetary privileges to officials, the reduction of the re-muneration of all servants of the state to the level of “ work-men ’s wages ”. 
 This shows more clearly than anything else the turn from bourgeois to proletarian democracy, from the democracy of the oppressors to that of the oppressed classes,from the state as a “ special force ” for the suppression of a particular class to the suppression of the oppressors by the general force of the majority of the people—the workers and the peasants. 
 And it is on this particularly strikingpoint, perhaps the most important as far as the problem ofthe state is concerned, that the ideas of Marx have beenmost completely ignored! In popular commentaries, the number of which is legion, this is not mentioned. 
 The thing done is to keep silent about it as if it were a piece ofold-fashioned “naïveté”, just as Christians, after their reli-gion had been given the status of state religion, “forgot”the “naïveté” of primitive Christianity with its democraticrevolutionary spirit. 
 The reduction of the remuneration of high state officials seem “simply” a demand of naive, primitive democ-racy. 
 One of the “founders” of modern opportunism, theex-Social-Democrat Eduard Bernstein, has more than oncerepeated the vulgar bourgeois jeers at “primitive” democracy. 
Like all opportunists, and like the present Kautskyites, he did not understand at all that, first of all, the transition from capitalism to socialism is impossible without a certain “reversion” to “primitive” democracy (for how else can themajority, and then the whole population without exception,proceed to discharge state functions?); and that, secondly,“primitive democracy” based on capitalism and capitalist culture is not the same as primitive democracy in prehistoric or pre-capitalist times. 
 Capitalist culture has created large-scale production, factories, railways, the postal service, telephones, etc. 
, and on this basis the great majority of the functions of the old “state power” have become so simplified and can be reduced to such exceedingly simple operations of registration, filing, and checking that they can be easilyperformed by every literate person, can quite easily beperformed for ordinary “workmen’s wages”, and that thesefunctions can (and must) be stripped of every shadow ofprivilege, of every semblance of “official grandeur”. 
 All officials, without exception, elected and subject to recall at any time , their salaries reduced to the level of ordinary “workmen’s wages”—these simple and “self-evi-dent” democratic measures, while completely uniting theinterests of the workers and the majority of the peasants,at the same time serve as a bridge leading from capitalism to socialism. 
 These measures concern the reorganisation of the state, the purely political reorganisation of society;but, of course, they acquire their full meaning and signifi-cance only in connection with the “expropriation of the ex-propriators” either bring accomplished or in preparation,i. 
e. 
, with the transformation of capitalist private owner-ship of the means of production into social ownership. 
 “The Commune,” Marx wrote, “made the catchword of all bourgeois revolutions, cheap government, a real-ity, by abolishing the two greatest sources of expendi-ture—the army and the officialdom. 
” From the peasants, as from other sections of the petty bourgeoisie, only an insignificant few “rise to the top”,“get on in the world” in the bourgeois sense, i. 
e. 
, becomeeither well-to-do, bourgeois, or officials in secure andprivileged positions. 
 In every capitalist country where there are peasants (as there are in most capitalist coun-tries), the vast majority of them are oppressed by the gov-ernment and long for its overthrow, long for “cheap” govern-ment. 
 This can be achieved only by the proletariat; and by achieving it, the proletariat at the same time takes a steptowards the socialist reorganisation of the state. 
 3. 
 ABOLITION OF PARLIAMENTARISM “The Commune,” Marx wrote, “was to be a working, not a parliamentary, body, executive and legislative atthe same time.... 
 “Instead of deciding once in three or six years which member of the ruling class was to represent and repress [ver-and zertreten] the people in parliament, universal suffrage was to serve the people constitutedin communes, as individual suffrage serves every otheremployer in the search for workers, foremen and ac-countants for his business. 
” Owing to the prevalence of social-chauvinism and oppor-tunism, this remarkable criticism of parliamentarism, madein 1871, also belongs now to the “forgotten words” of Marx-ism. 
 The professional Cabinet Ministers and parliamentari-ans, the traitors to the proletariat and the “practical”socialists of our day, have left all criticism of parliamenta-rism to the anarchists, and, on this wonderfully reasonable ground, they denounce all criticism of parliamentarism as “anarchism”!! It is not surprising that the proletariat ofthe “advanced” parliamentary countries, disgusted withsuch “socialists” as the Scheidemanns, Davids, Legiens,Sembats, Renaudels, Hendersons, Vanderveldes, Staunings, Brantings, Bissolatis, and Co. 
, has been with increasing frequency giving its sympathies to anarcho-syndicalism, inspite of the fact that the latter is merely the twin brother ofopportunism. 
 For Marx, however, revolutionary dialectics was never the empty fashionable phrase, the toy rattle, which Ple-khanov, Kautsky and others have made of it. 
 Marx knew how to break with anarchism ruthlessly for its inability tomake use even of the “pigsty” of bourgeois parliamentarism,especially when the situation was obviously not revolution-ary; but at the same time he knew how to subject parlia-mentarism to genuinely revolutionary proletarian criticism. 
 To decide once every few years which members of the rul-ing class is to repress and crush the people through parlia-ment—this is the real essence of bourgeois parliamen-tarism, not only in parliamentary -constitutional monarchies, but also in the most democratic republics. 
 But if we deal with the question of the state, and if we consider parliamentarism as one of the institutions ofthe state, from the point of view of the tasks of the prole-tariat in this field, what is the way out of parliamentarism? How can it be dispensed with? Once again, we must say: the lessons of Marx, based on the study of the Commune, have been so completely for-gotten that the present-day “Social-Democrat” (i. 
e. 
, pres-ent-day traitor to socialism) really cannot understand anycriticism of parliamentarism other than anarchist or reac-tionary criticism. 
 The way out of parliamentarism is not, of course, the abolition of representative institutions and the elective principle, but the conversion of the representative insti-tutions from talking shops into “working” bodies. 
 “TheCommune was to be a working, not a parliamentary, body,executive and legislative at the same time. 
” “A working, not a parliamentary body”—this is a blow straight from the shoulder at the present-day parliamentar-ians and parliamentary “lap-dogs” of Social-Democracy!Take any parliamentary country, from America to Swit-zerland, from France to Britain, Norway and so forth—inthese countries the real business of “state” is performed be-hind the scenes and is carried on by the departments, chan-celleries, and General Staffs. 
 Parliament is given up to talk for the special purpose of fooling the “common people”. 
This is so true that even in the Russian republic, a bourgeois-democratic republic, all these sins of parliamentarism cameout at once, even before it managed to set up a real parlia-ment. 
 The heroes of rotten philistinism, such as the Skobe-levs and Tseretelis, the Chernovs and Avksentyevs, have even succeeded in polluting the Soviets after the fashion ofthe most disgusting bourgeois parliamentarism, in convert-ing them into mere talking shops. 
 In the Soviets, the “social-ist” Ministers are fooling the credulous rustics with phrase-mongering and resolutions. 
 In the government itself a sort of permanent shuffle is going on in order that, on the one hand, as many Socialist-Revolutionaries and Men-sheviks as possible may in turn get near the “pie”, the lucrative and honourable posts, and that, on the other hand, the “attention” of the people may be “engaged”. 
 Meanwhile the chancelleries and army staffs “do” the business of “state”. 
 Dyelo Naroda , the organ of the ruling Socialist-Revolu-tionary Party, recently admitted in a leading article—with the matchless frankness of people of “good society”,in which “all” are engaged in political prostitution—thateven in the ministries headed by the “socialists” (save the mark!), the whole bureaucratic apparatus is in fact un-changed, is working in the old way and quite “freely” sabotag-ing revolutionary measures! Even without this admission,does not the actual history of the participation of the So-cialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks in the governmentprove this? It is noteworthy, however, that in the ministerial company of the Cadets, the Chernovs, Rusanovs, Zenzinovs and other editors of Dyelo Naroda have so completely lost all sense of shame as to brazenly assert, as if it werea mere bagetelle, that in “their” ministries everything isunchanged!! Revolutionary-democratic phrases to gullthe rural Simple Simons, and bureaucracy and red tape to “gladden the hearts” of the capitalists—that is the essence of the “honest” coalition. 
 The Commune substitutes for the venal and rotten par-liamentarism of bourgeois society institutions in whichfreedom of opinion and discussion does not degenerate intodeception, for the parliamentarians themselves have to work, have to execute their own laws, have themselves to test the results achieved in reality, and to account directlyto their constituents. 
 Representative institutions remain,but there is no parliamentarism here as a special system, as the division of labour between the legislative and theexecutive, as a privileged position for the deputies. 
 We cannot imagine democracy, even proletarian democracy, without representative institutions, but we can and must imagine democracy without parliamentarism, if criticism of bour-geois society is not mere words for us, if the desire to over-throw the rule of the bourgeoisie is our earnest and sinceredesire, and not a mere “election” cry for catching workers’ votes, as it is with the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolution-aries, and also the Scheidemanns and Legiens, the Semblatsand Vanderveldes. 
 It is extremely instructive to note that, in speaking of the function of those officials who are necessary for the Commune and for proletarian democracy, Marx compares them to the workers of “every other employer”, that is, of the ordi-nary capitalist enterprise, with its “workers, foremen, andaccountants”. 
 There is no trace of utopianism in Marx, in the sense that he made up or invented a “new” society. 
 No, he studied the birth of the new society out of the old, and the forms of transition from the latter to the former, as a natural-historical process. 
 He examined the actual experience of amass proletarian movement and tried to draw practicallessons from it. 
 He “Learned” from the Commune, just asall the great revolutionary thinkers learned unhesitatingly from the experience of great movements of the oppressed classes, and never addressed them with pedantic “homi-lies” (such as Plekhanov’s: “They should not have taken uparms” or Tsereteli’s: “A class must limit itself”). 
 Abolishing the bureaucracy at once, everywhere and completely, is out of the question. 
 It is a utopia. 
 But to smash the old bureaucratic machine at once and to begin immediately to construct a new one that will make possiblethe gradual abolition of all bureaucracy—this is not a utopia, it is the experience of the Commune, the direct andimmediate task of the revolutionary proletariat. 
 Capitalism simplifies the functions of “state” admin-istration; it makes it possible to cast “bossing” aside and to confine the whole matter to the organisation of the pro-letarians (as the ruling class), which will hire “workers,foremen and accountants” in the name of the whole of society. 
 We are not utopians, we do not “dream” of dispensing at once with all administration, with all subordination. 
 These anarchist dreams, based upon incomprehension of the tasks of the proletarian dictatorship, are totally aliento Marxism, and, as a matter of fact, serve only to postponethe socialist revolution until people are different. 
 No,we want the socialist revolution with people as they arenow, with people who cannot dispense with subordination, control, and “foremen and accountants”. 
 The subordination, however, must be to the armed van-guard of all the exploited and working people, i. 
e. 
, to the proletariat. 
 A beginning can and must be made at once, overnight, to replace the specific “bossing” of state of-ficials by the simple functions of “foremen and account-ants”, functions which are already fully within the abilityof the average town dweller and can well be performed for“workmen’s wages”. 
 We, the workers, shall organise large-scale production on the basis of what capitalism has already created, relying on our own experience as workers, establishing strict, iron discipline backed up by the state power of the armed work-ers. 
 We shall reduce the role of state officials to that ofsimply carrying out our instructions as responsible, revo-cable, modestly paid “foremen and accountants” (of course,with the aid of technicians of all sorts, types and degrees). 
 This is our proletarian task, this is what we can and must start with in accomplishing the proletarian revolution. 
 Such a beginning, on the basis of large-scale production,will of itself lead to the gradual “withering away” of allbureaucracy, to the gradual creation of an order—an orderwithout inverted commas, an order bearing no similarity to wage slavery—an order under which the functions of control and accounting, becoming more and more simple, will beperformed by each in turn, will then become a habit andwill finally die out as the special functions of a special sec-tion of the population. 
 A witty German Social-Democrat of the seventies of the last century called the postal service an example of the socialist economic system. 
 This is very true. 
 At the presentthe postal service is a business organised on the lines of astate-capitalist monopoly. 
 Imperialism is gradually trans-forming all trusts into organisations of a similar type, inwhich, standing over the “common” people, who are over-worked and starved, one has the same bourgeois bureaucracy. 
 But the mechanism of social management is here already tohand. 
 Once we have overthrown the capitalists, crushed theresistance of these exploiters with the iron hand of the armedworkers, and smashed the bureaucratic machinery of the mod-ern state, we shall have a splendidly-equipped mechanism, freed from the “parasite”, a mechanism which can very well be set going by the united workers themselves, who willhire technicians, foremen and accountants, and pay them all, as indeed all “state” officials in general, workmen’s wages. 
 Here is a concrete, practical task which can immedi-ately be fulfilled in relation to all trusts, a task whose ful-filment will rid the working people of exploitation, a taskwhich takes account of what the Commune had already begunto practice (particularly in building up the state). 
 To organise the whole economy on the lines of the postal service so that the technicians, foremen and accountants, as well as all officials, shall receive salaries no higher than “a workman’s wage”, all under the control and leadershipof the armed proletariat—that is our immediate aim. 
 Thisis the state and this is the economic foundation we need. 
This is what will bring about the abolition of parliamen-tarism and the preservation of representative institutions. 
 This is what will rid the labouring classes of the bourgeoi-sie’s prostitution of these institutions. 
 4. 
 ORGANISATION OF NATIONAL UNITY “In a brief sketch of national organisation which the Commune had no time to develop, it states explicit-ly that the Commune was to be the political form ofeven the smallest village.... 
” The communes were toelect the “National Delegation” in Paris. 
 “...The few but important functions which would still remain for a central government were not to be suppressed, as had been deliberately mis-stated, butwere to be transferred to communal, i. 
e. 
, strictlyresponsible, officials. 
 “...National unity was not to be broken, but, on the contrary, organised by the communal constitution; it was to become a reality by the destruction of state power which posed as the embodiment of that unityyet wanted to be independent of, and superior to, thenation, on whose body it was but a parasitic excres-cence. 
 While the merely repressive organs of the oldgovernmental power were to be amputated, its legiti-mate functions were to be wrested from an authority claiming the right to stand above society, and restoredto the responsible servants of society. 
” The extent to which the opportunists of present-day So-cial-Democracy have failed—perhaps it would be more true to say, have refused—to understand these observations of Marx is best shown by that book of Herostratean fame of therenegade Bernstein, The Premises of Socialism and the Tasks of the Social-Democrats . 
 It is in connection with the above passage from Marx that Bernstein wrote that “as faras its political content is concerned”, this programme “displays, in all its essential features, the greatest similar-ity to the federalism of Proudhon .... 
 In spite of all the other points of difference between Marx and the ‘petty-bourgeois’Proudhon [Bernstein places the word “petty-bourgeois”in inverted commas, to make it sound ironical] on thesepoints, their lines of reasoning run as close as could be. 
” Of course, Bernstein continues, the importance of the municipalities is growing, but “it seems doubtful to mewhether the first job of democracy would be such a dissolu-tion [Auflösung] of the modern states and such a completetransformation [Umwandlung] of their organisation as isvisualised by Marx and Proudhon (the formation of a Na-tional Assembly from delegates of the provincial of district assemblies, which, in their turn, would consist of delegatesfrom the communes), so that consequently the previousmode of national representation would disappear. 
” (Bern-stein, Premises , German edition, 1899, pp. 
 134 and 136. 
) To confuse Marx’s view on the “destruction of state power, a parasitic excrescence”, with Proudhon’s federalism is positively monstrous! But it is no accident, for it neveroccurs to the opportunist that Marx does not speak here atall about federalism as opposed to centralism, but aboutsmashing the old, bourgeois state machine which existsin all bourgeois countries. 
 The only thing that does occur to the opportunist is what he sees around him, in an environment of petty-bour-geois philistinism and “reformists” stagnation, namely, only“municipalities”! The opportunist has even grown out ofthe habit of thinking about proletarian revolution. 
 It is ridiculous. 
 But the remarkable thing is that no-body argued with Bernstein on this point. 
 Bernstein has been refuted by many, especially by Plekhanov in Russianliterature and by Kautsky in European literature, but neith-er of them has said anything about this distortion of Marx by Bernstein. 
 The opportunist has so much forgotten how to think in a revolutionary way and to dwell on revolution that he at-tributes “federalism” to Marx, whom he confuses with thefounder of anarchism, Proudhon. 
 As for Kautsky andPlekhanov, who claim to be orthodox Marxists and defend-ers of the theory of revolutionary Marxism, they are silent on this point! Here is one of the roots of the extreme vul-garisation of the views on the difference between Marxismand anarchism, which is characteristic of both the Kaut-skyites and the opportunists, and which we shall discussagain later. 
 There is not a trace of federalism in Marx’s above-quoted observation on the experience of the Commune. 
 Marx agreed with Proudhon on the very point that the oppor-tunist Bernstein did not see. 
 Marx disagreed with Proudhonon the very point on which Bernstein found a similarity be-tween them. 
 Marx agreed with Proudhon in that they both stood for the “smashing” of the modern state machine. 
 Neither the opportunists nor the Kautskyites wish to see the similarityof views on this point between Marxism and anarchism (bothProudhon and Bakunin) because this is where they havedeparted from Marxism. 
 Marx disagreed both with Proudhon and Bakunin precise-ly on the question of federalism (not to mention the dic-tatorship of the proletariat). 
 Federalism as a principlefollows logically from the petty-bourgeois views of anarch-ism. 
 Marx was a centralist. 
 There is no departure what-ever from centralism in his observations just quoted. 
 Onlythose who are imbued with the philistine “superstitious belief” in the state can mistake the destruction of the bour-geois state machine for the destruction of centralism! Now if the proletariat and the poor peasants take state power into their own hands, organise themselves quitefreely in communes, and unite the action of all the communes in striking at capital, in crushing the resistance of the capi-talists, and in transferring the privately-owned railways, factories, land and so on to the entire nation, to the whole of society, won’t that be centralism? Won’t that be the most consistent democratic centralism and, moreover, proletar-ian centralism? Bernstein simply cannot conceive of the possibility of voluntary centralism, of the voluntary fusion amalgamation ofthe proletarian communes, for the sole purpose of destroying bour-geois rule and the bourgeois state machine. 
 Like all philis-tines, Bernstein pictures centralism as something whichcan be imposed and maintained solely from above, and solely by the bureaucracy and military clique. 
 As though foreseeing that his views might be distorted, Marx expressly emphasised that the charge that the Com-mune had wanted to destroy national unity, to abolish thecentral authority, was a deliberate fraud. 
 Marx purposelyused the words: “National unity was ... to be organised”, so as to oppose conscious, democratic, proletarian centralism to bourgeois, military, bureaucratic centralism. 
 But there are none so deaf as those who will not hear. 
 And the very thing the opportunists of present-day Social-Democracy do not want to hear about it the destruction ofstate power, the amputation of the parasitic excrescence. 
 5. 
 ABOLITION OF THE PARASITE STATE We have already quoted Marx’s words on the subject, and we must now supplement them. 
 “It is generally the fate of new historical creations,” he wrote, “to be mistaken for the counterpart of olderand even defunct forms of social life, to which theymay bear a certain likeness. 
 Thus, this new Commune,which breaks [ bricht , smashes] the modern state power, has been regarded as a revival of the medieval com-munes ... as a federation of small states (as Montesquieu and the Girondins 139 visualised it) ... as an exaggerated form of the old struggle against over-centralisation .... 
 “...The Communal Constitution would have restored to the social body all the forces hitherto absorbed bythat parasitic excrescence, the ‘state’, feeding upon and hampering the free movement of society. 
 By this one act it would have initiated the regeneration ofFrance.... 
 “...The Communal Constitution would have brought the rural producers under the intellectual lead of the central towns of their districts, and there secured to them, in the town working men, the natural trusteesof their interests. 
 The very existence of the Communeinvolved, as a matter of course, local self-government,but no longer as a counterpoise to state power, now be-come superfluous. 
” “Breaking state power”, which as a “parasitic excres-cence”; its “amputation”, its “smashing”; “state power,now become superfluous”—these are the expressions Marxused in regard to the state when appraising and analysingthe experience of the Commune. 
 All this was written a little less than half a century ago; and now one has to engage in excavations, as it were, inorder to bring undistorted Marxism to the knowledge ofthe mass of the people. 
 The conclusions drawn from the ob-servation of the last great revolution which Marx livedthrough were forgotten just when the time for the next great proletarian revolution has arrived. 
 “...The multiplicity of interpretations to which the Commune has been subjected, and the multiplicityof interests which expressed themselves in it showthat it was a thoroughly flexible political form, whileall previous forms of government had been essentially repressive. 
 Its true secret was this: it was essentially a working-class government , the result of the struggle of the producing against the appropriating class, thepolitical form at last discovered under which theeconomic emancipation of labour could be accom-plished.... 
 “Except on this last condition, the Communal Con-stitution would have been an impossibility and a de-lusion.... 
” The utopians busied themselves with “discovering” po-litical forms under which the socialist transformation of society was to take place. 
 The anarchists dismissed the question of political forms altogether. 
 The opportunistsof present-day Social-Democracy accepted the bourgeois political forms of the parliamentary democratic state as the limit which should not be overstepped; they battered their foreheads praying before this “model”, and denounced as an-archism every desire to break these forms. 
 Marx deduced from the whole history of socialism and the political struggle that the state was bound to disap-pear, and that the transitional form of its disappearance(the transition from state to non-state) would be the “pro-letariat organised as the ruling class”. 
 Marx, however, did not set out to discover the political forms of this future stage. 
 He limited himself to carefully observing Frenchhistory, to analysing it, and to drawing the conclusion towhich the year 1851 had led, namely, that matters weremoving towards destruction of the bourgeois state ma-chine. 
 And when the mass revolutionary movement of the pro-letariat burst forth, Marx, in spite of its failure, in spite ofits short life and patent weakness, began to study the formsit had discovered . 
 The Commune is the form “at last discovered” by the proletarian revolution, under which the economic emancipa-tion of labour can take place. 
 The Commune is the first attempt by a proletarian rev-olution to smash the bourgeois state machine; and it is the political form “at last discovered”, by which the smashedstate machine can and must be replaced . 
 We shall see further on that the Russian revolutions of 1905 and 1917, in different circumstances and under differ-ent conditions, continue the work of the Commune andconfirm Marx’s brilliant historical analysis. 
 C H A P T E R IV CONTINUATION . 
 SUPPLEMENTARY EXPLANATIONS BY ENGELS Marx gave the fundamentals concerning the signifi-cance of the experience of the Commune. 
 Engels returnedto the same subject time and again, and explained Marx’sanalysis and conclusions, sometimes elucidating other as-pects of the question with such power and vividness that it is necessary to deal with his explanations specially. 
 1. 
 THE HOUSING QUESTION In his work, The Housing Question (1872), Engels already took into account the experience of the Commune, anddealt several times with the tasks of the revolution in re-lation to the state. 
 It is interesting to note that the treatmentof this specific subject clearly revealed, on the one hand,points of similarity between the proletarian state and the present state—points that warrant speaking of the state in both cases—and, on the other hand, points of differencebetween them, or the transition to the destruction of thestate. 
 “How is the housing question to be settled then? In present-day society, it is settled just as any other social question: by the gradual economic levelling of demand and supply, a settlement which reproduces thequestion itself again and again and therefore is no set-tlement. 
 How a social revolution would settle thisquestion not only depends on the circumstances in eachparticular case, but is also connected with much more far-reaching questions, one of the most fundamental of which is the abolition of the antithesis between townand country. 
 As it is not our task to create utopiansystems for the organisation of the future society, itwould be more than idle to go into the question here. 
But one thing is certain: there is already a sufficient quantity of houses in the big cities to remedy immedi-ately all real ‘housing shortage ’, provided they are used judiciously. 
 This can naturally only occur through theexpropriation of the present owners and by quarteringin their houses homeless workers or workers overcrowdedin their present homes. 
 As soon as the proletariat has won political power, such a measure prompted by concern for the common good will be just as easy tocarry out as are other expropriations and billetings bythe present-day state. 
” (German edition, 1887, p. 
 22. 
) 140 The change in the form of state power is not examined here, but only the content of its activity. 
 Expropriations and billetings take place by order even of the present state. 
From the formal point of view, the proletarian state will also “order” the occupation of dwellings and expropriation of houses. 
 But it is clear that the old executive apparatus, the bureaucracy, which is connected with the bourgeoisie, would simply be unfit to carry out the orders of the prole-tarian state. 
 “...It must be pointed out that the ‘actual seizure’ of all the instruments of labour, the taking possession of industry as a whole by the working people, is the exact opposite of the Proudhonist ‘redemption’. 
 Inthe latter case the individual worker becomes the ownerof the dwelling, the peasant farm, the instruments oflabour; in the former case, the ‘working people’ remainthe collective owners of the houses, factories and in-struments of labour, and will hardly permit their use, at least during a transitional period, by individualsor associations without compensation for the cost. 
In the same way, the abolition of property in land isnot the abolition of ground rent but its transfer, ifin a modified form, to society. 
 The actual seizure of all the instruments of labour by the working people, therefore, does not at all preclude the retention of rentrelations. 
” (P. 
 68. 
) We shall examine the question touched upon in this pas-sage, namely, the economic basis for the withering away of the state, in the next chapter. 
 Engels expresses himself most cautiously, saying that the proletarian state would “hard-ly” permit the use of houses without payment, “at least dur-ing a transitional period”. 
 The letting of houses owed bythe whole people to individual families presupposes the col-lection of rent, a certain amount of control, and the employ-ment of some standard in allotting the housing. 
 All this calls for a certain form of state, but it does not at all callfor a special military bureaucratic apparatus, with of-ficials occupying especially privileged positions. 
 Thetransition to a situation in which it will be possible tosupply dwellings rent-free depends on the complete “with-ering away” of the state. 
 Speaking of the Blanquists’ adoption of the fundamental position of Marxism after the Commune and under the influence of its experience, Engels, in passing, formulates this position as follows: “...Necessity of political action by the proletariat and of its dictatorship as the transition to the abolitionof classes and, with them, of the state.... 
” (P. 
 55. 
) Addicts of hair-splitting criticism, or bourgeois “extermi-nators of Marxism”, will perhaps see a contradiction between this recognition of the “abolition of the state” and repudi-ation of this formula as an anarchist one in the above pas-sage from Anti-Dühring . 
 It would not be surprising if the opportunists classed Engels, too, as an “anarchist”, for it isbecoming increasingly common with the social-chauviniststo accuse the internationalists of anarchism. 
 Marxism has always taught that with the abolition of classes the state will also be abolished. 
 The well-knownpassage on the “withering away of the state in Anti-Dühring accuses the anarchists not simply of favouring the abolition of the state, but of preaching that the state canbe abolished “overnight”. 
 As the now prevailing “Social-Democratic” doctrine com-pletely distorts the relation of Marxism to anarchism on thequestion of the abolition of the state, it will be particularlyuseful to recall a certain controversy in which Marx andEngels came out against the anarchists. 
 2. 
 CONTROVERSY WITH THE ANARCHISTS This controversy took place in 1873. 
 Marx and Engels contributed articles against the Proudhonists, “autonomists”or “anti-authoritarians”, to an Italian socialist annual, andit was not until 1913 that these articles appeared in Germanin Neue Zeit . 
 141 “If the political struggle of the working class assumes revolutionary form,” wrote Marx, ridiculing the anarch-ists for their repudiation of politics, “and if the work-ers set up their revolutionary dictatorship in place ofthe dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, they commit the terrible crime of violating principles, for in order to satisfy their wretched, vulgar everyday needs and tocrush the resistance of the bourgeoisie, they give the state a revolutionary and transient form, instead of laying down their arms and abolishing the state. 
” (Neue Zeit , Vol. 
 XXXII, 1, 1913-14, p. 
 40. 
) It was solely against this kind of “abolition” of the state that Marx fought in refuting the anarchists! He did not at alloppose the view that the state would disappear when classesdisappeared, or that it would be abolished when classes were abolished. 
 What he did oppose was the proposition that the workers should renounce the use of arms, organisedviolence, that is , the state , which is to serve to “crush the resistance of the bourgeoisie”. 
 To prevent the true meaning of his struggle against anarch-ism from being distorted, Marx expressly emphasised the “revolutionary and transient form” of the state which the proletariat needs. 
 The proletariat needs the state only tem-porarily. 
 We do not after all differ with the anarchists on thequestion of the abolition of the state as the aim. 
 We maintain that, to achieve this aim, we must temporarily make use ofthe instruments, resources, and methods of state power against the exploiters, just as the temporary dictatorship of the oppressed class is necessary for the abolition of classes. 
Marx chooses the sharpest and clearest way of statinghis case against the anarchists: After overthrowing the yokeof the capitalists, should the workers “lay down their arms”,or use them against the capitalists in order to crush their resistance? But what is the systematic use of arms by one class against another if not a “transient form” of state? Let every Social-Democrat ask himself: Is that how he has been posing the question of the state in controversy withthe anarchists? Is that how it has been posed by the vast majority of the official socialist parties of the Second In-ternational? Engels expounds the same ideas in much greater detail and still more popularly. 
 First of all he ridicules the muddledideas of the Proudhonists, who call themselves “anti-authoritarians”, i. 
e. 
, repudiated all authority, all subordi-nation, all power. 
 Take a factory, a railway, a ship on the high seas, said Engels: is it not clear that not one of these complex technical establishments, based on the use of ma-chinery and the systematic co-operation of many people, could function without a certain amount of subordination and, consequently, without a certain amount of authority or power? “...When I counter the most rabid anti-authoritar-ians with these arguments, they only answer they can give me is the following: Oh, that’s true, except that here it is not a question of authority with which we vest our delegates, but of a commissio n! These people imag-ine they can change a thing by changing its nam e.... 
” Having thus shown that authority and autonomy are rel-ative terms, that the sphere of their application varies sion of authority to the question of the state. 
 one could have come to terms with them. 
 But they are blind to all facts that make authority necessary and they passionately fight the word. 
 “Why do the anti-authoritarians not them-selves to crying out against political authority, the state? All socialists are agreed that the state, and with it political authority, will disappear as a result of the coming social revolution, that is, that public functions will lose their political character and become mere administrative functions of watching over social inter-ests. 
 But the anti-authoritarians demand that the pol-itical state be abolished at one stroke, even before the social relations that gave both to it have been de-stroyed. 
 They demand that the first act of the social revolution shall be the abolition of authority. 
 “Have these gentlemen ever seen a revolution? A revolution is certainly the most authoritarian thing there is; it is an act whereby one part of the population imposes its will upon the other part by means of rifles,confine absurd to take them as absolutes, and adding that the sphere steadily expanding, Engels passes from the general discus-with the various phases of social development, that it is which the conditions of production make inevitable,selves with saying that the social organisation of the“Had the autonomists,” he wrote, “contented them-of application of machinery and large-scale production is future would allow authority only within the bounds /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR bayonets and cannon, all of which are highly authori-tarian means. 
 And the victorious party must maintain its rule by means of the terror which its arms inspire in the reactionaries. 
 Would the Paris Commune havelasted more than a day if it had not used the authorityof the armed people against the bourgeoisie? Cannotwe, on the contrary, blame it for having made too lit-tle use of that authority? Therefore, one of two things: either that anti-authoritarians don’t know what they are talking about, in which case they are creating nothingbut confusion. 
 Or they do know, and in that case theyare betraying the cause of the proletariat. 
 In either casethey serve only reaction. 
” (P. 
 39. 
) This argument touches upon questions which should be examined in connection with the relationship between pol-itics and economics during the withering away of the state(the next chapter is devoted to this). 
 These questions are:the transformation of public functions from political intosimple functions of administration, and the “political state”. 
 This last term, one particularly liable to misun-derstanding, indicates the process of the withering away ofthe state: at a certain stage of this process, the state whichis withering away may be called a non-political state. 
 Against, the most remarkable thing in this argument of Engels’s is the way he states his case against the anarchists. 
 Social-Democrats, claiming to be disciples of Engels, have argued on this subject against the anarchists millions oftimes since 1873, but they have not argued as Marxists could and should. 
 The anarchist idea of abolition of thestate is muddled and non-revolutionary —that is how En-gels put it. 
 It is precisely the revolution in its rise and devel-opment, with its specific tasks in relation to violence, au-thority, power, the state, that the anarchists refuse to see. 
 The usual criticism of anarchism by present-day Social-Democrats has boiled down to the purest philistine banality:“We recognise the state, whereas the anarchists do not!”Naturally, such banality cannot but repel workers who are at all capable of thinking and revolutionary-minded. 
 What Engels says is different. 
 He stresses that all socialists recog-nise that the state will disappear as a result of the socialist revolution. 
 He then deals specifically with the question of the revolution—the very question which, as a rule, the Social-Democrats evade out of opportunism, leaving it, so to speak, exclusively for the anarchists “to work out”. 
 And when deal-ing with this question, Engels takes the bull by the horns;he asks: should not the Commune have made more use of the revolutionary power of the state , that is, of the proletariat armed and organised as the ruling class? Prevailing official Social-Democracy usually dismissed the question of the concrete tasks of the proletariat in therevolution either with a philistine sneer, or, at best, withthe sophistic evasion: “The future will show”. 
 And theanarchists were justified in saying about such Social-Demo-crats that they were failing in their task of giving the workers a revolutionary education. 
 Engels draws upon the experience of the last proletarian revolution precisely for the purposeof making a most concrete study of what should be done bythe proletariat, and in what manner, in relation to both thebanks and the state. 
 3. 
 LETTER TO BEBEL One of the most, if not the most, remarkable observation on the state in the works of Marx and Engels is contained in the following passage in Engels’s letter to Bebel dated March 18-28, 1875. 
 This letter, we may observe in paren-thesis, was, as far as we know, first published by Bebel inthe second volume of his memoirs ( Aus meinem Leben ), which appeared in 1911, i. 
e. 
, thirty-six years after the letter hadbeen written and sent. 
 Engels wrote to Bebel criticising the same draft of the Gotha Programme which Marx criticised in his famous letterto Bracke. 
 Referring specially to the question of the state,Engels said: “The free people’s state has been transferred into the free state. 
 Taken in its grammatical sense, a free stateis one where the state is free in relation to its citizens,hence a state with a despotic government. 
 The whole talk about the state should be dropped, especially since the Commune, which was no longer a state in the propersense of the word. 
 The ‘people’s state’ has been thrown in our faces by the anarchists to the point of disgust, although already Marx’s book against Proudhon and later the Communist Manifesto say plainly that with the introduction of the socialist order of society the statedissolves of itself [sich auflöst] and disappears. 
 As thestate is only a transitional institution which is used inthe struggle, in the revolution, to hold down one’s adver-saries by force, it is sheer nonsense to talk of a ‘free people’s state’; so long as the proletariat still needs the state, it does not need it in the interests of freedom butin order to hold down its adversaries, and as soon asit becomes possible to speak of freedom the state assuch ceases to exist. 
 We would therefore propose re-placing the state everywhere by Gemeinwesen , a good old German word which can very well take the place of the French word commune . 
” (Pp. 
 321-22 of the German original. 
) 142 It should be borne in mind that this letter refers to the party programme which Marx criticised in a letter dated only a few weeks later than the above (Marx’s letter is dated May 5, 1875), and that at the time Engels was living withMarx in London. 
 Consequently, when he says “we” in thelast sentence, Engels undoubtedly, in his own as well asin Marx’s name, suggests to the leader of the German work-ers’ party that the word “state” be struck out of the programme and replaced by the word “ community ”. 
 What a howl about “anarchism” would be raised by the leading lights of present-day “Marxism”, which has been fal-sified for the convenience of the opportunists, if such anamendment of the programme were suggested to them! Let them howl. 
 This will earn them the praises of the bourgeoisie. 
 And we shall go on with our work. 
 In revising the pro-gramme of our Party, we must by all means take the advice ofEngels and Marx into consideration in order to come nearerthe truth, to restore Marxism by ridding it of distortions,to guide the struggle of the working class for its emancipa-tion more correctly. 
 Certainly no one opposed to the advice of Engels and Marx will be found among the Bolsheviks. 
 Theonly difficulty that may perhaps arise will be in regard to the term. 
 In German there are two words meaning “communi-ty”, of which Engels used the one which does not denote a single community, but their totality, a system of communi-ties. 
 In Russian there is no such word, and we may have tochoose the French word “commune”, although this also hasits drawbacks. 
 “The Commune was no longer a state in the proper sense of the word”—this is the most theoretically important state-ment Engels makes. 
 After what has been said above, this statement is perfectly clear. 
 The Commune was ceasing to be a state since it had to suppress, not the majority of thepopulation, but a minority (the exploiters). 
 It had smashedthe bourgeois state machine. 
 In place of a special coercive force the population itself came on the scene. 
 All this was a departure from the state in the proper sense of the word. 
 And had the Commune become firmly established, all tracesof the state in it would have “withered away” of themselves;it would not have had to “abolish” the institutions of thestate—they would have ceased to function as they ceasedto have anything to do. 
 “The ‘people’s state’ has been thrown in our faces by the anarchists”. 
 In saying this, Engels above all has in mindBakunin and his attacks on the German Social-Democrats. 
Engels admits that these attacks were justified insofar as the “people’s state” was as much an absurdity and as mucha departure from socialism as the “free people’s state”. 
 En-gels tried to put the struggle of the German Social-Demo-crats against the anarchists on the right lines, to make thisstruggle correct in principle, to ride it of opportunist preju-dices concerning the “state”. 
 Unfortunately, Engels’s letterwas pigeon-holed for thirty-six years. 
 We shall see fartheron that, even after this letter was published, Kautsky per-sisted in virtually the same mistakes against which Engels had warned. 
 Bebel replied to Engels in a letter dated September 21, 1875, in which he wrote, among other things, that he “fullyagreed” with Engels’s opinion of the draft programme, andthat he had reproached Liebknecht with readiness to make concessions (p. 
 334 of the German edition of Bebel’s mem-oirs, Vol. 
 II). 
 But if we take Bebel’s pamphlet, Our Aims , we find there views on the state that are absolutely wrong. 
 “The state must ... be transformed from one based on class rule into a people ’s state . 
” (Unsere Ziele , German edition, 1886, p. 
 14. 
) This was printed in the ninth (ninth!) edition of Be-bel’s pamphlet! It is not surprising that opportunist viewson the state, so persistently repeated, were absorbed by the German Social-Democrats, especially as Engels’s revolution-ary interpretations had been safely pigeon-holed, and allthe conditions of life were such as to “wean” them from revo-lution for a long time. 
 4. 
 CRITICISM OF THE DRAFT OF THE ERFURT PROGRAMME In analysing Marxist teachings on the state, the criti-cism of the draft of the Erfurt Programme,143 sent by En-gels to Kautsky on June 29, 1891, and published only tenyears later in Neue Zeit , cannot be ignored; for it is with the opportunist views of the Social-Democrats on questions of state organisation that this criticism is mainly concerned. 
 We shall note in passing that Engels also makes an ex-ceedingly valuable observation on economic questions, whichshows how attentively and thoughtfully he watched the vari-ous changes occurring in modern capitalism, and how for this reason he was able to foresee to a certain extent the tasks of our present, the imperialist, epoch. 
 Here is that ob-servation: referring to the word “planlessness” (Planlosig-keit), used in the draft programme, as characteristic of capi-talism, Engels wrote: “When we pass from joint-stock companies to trusts which assume control over, and monopolise, whole in-dustries, it is not only private production that ceases,but also planlessness. 
” ( Neue Zeit , Vol. 
 XX, 1, 1901-02, p. 
 8. 
) Here was have what is most essential in the theoretical appraisal of the latest phase of capitalism, i. 
e. 
, imperialism,namely, that capitalism becomes monopoly capitalism . 
 The latter must be emphasised because the erroneous bourgeoisreformist assertion that monopoly capitalism or state-monopoly capitalism is no longer capitalism, but can now be called “state socialism” and so on, is very common. 
 The trusts, of course, never provided, do not now provide, and cannot provide complete planning. 
 But however much they do plan, however much the capitalist magnates calculatein advance the volume of production on a national and evenon an international scale, and however much they syste-matically regulate it, we still remain under capitalism — at its new stage, it is true, but still capitalism, without a doubt. 
 The “proximity” of such capitalism to socialism should serve genuine representatives of the proletariat as an argu-ment proving the proximity, facility, feasibility, and urgencyof the socialist revolution, and not at all as an argument fortolerating the repudiation of such a revolution and the effortsto make capitalism look more attractive, something which all reformists are trying to do. 
 But to return to the question of the state. 
 In his letter Engels makes three particularly valuable suggestions: first,in regard to the republic; second, in regard to the connectionbetween the national question and state organisation; and,third, in regard to local self-government. 
 In regard to the republic, Engels made this the focal point of this criticism of the draft of the Erfurt Programme. 
 Andwhen we recall the importance which the Erfurt Programmeacquired for all the Social-Democrats of the world, andthat it became the model for the whole Second Internation-al, we may say without exaggeration that Engels thereby criticises the opportunism of the whole Second International. 
 “The political demands of the draft,” Engels wrote, “have one great fault. 
 It lacks [Engels’s italics] pre-cisely what should have been said. 
” And, later on, he makes it clear that the German Consti-tution is, strictly speaking, a copy of the extremely reaction-ary Constitution of 1850, that the Reichstag is only, asWilhelm Liebknecht put it, “the fig leaf of absolutism” andthat to wish “to transform all the instruments of labour into common property” on the basis of a constitution which legalises the existence of petty states and the federation ofpetty German states is an “obvious absurdity”. 
 “To touch on that is dangerous, however,” Engels added, knowing only too well that it was impossible legally to include in the programme the demand for a republic in Germany. 
 But he refused to merely acceptthis obvious consideration which satisfied “everybody”. 
He continued: “Nevertheless, somehow or other, thething has to be attacked. 
 How necessary this is is shownprecisely at the present time by opportunism, which is gaining ground [einreissende] in a large section of the Social-Democrat press. 
 Fearing a renewal of the Anti-Socialist Law, 144 or recalling all manner of overhasty pronouncements made during the reign of that law, theynow want the Party to find the present legal order inGermany adequate for putting through all Party de-mands by peaceful means.... 
” Engels particularly stressed the fundamental fact that the German Social-Democrats were prompted by fear of arenewal of the Anti-Socialist Law, and explicitly describedit as opportunism; he declared that precisely because there was no republic and no freedom in Germany, the dreams of a “peaceful” path were perfectly absurd. 
 Engels was carefulnot to tie his hands. 
 He admitted that in republican or veryfree countries “one can conceive” (only “conceive”!) of apeaceful development towards socialism, but in Germany, herepeated, “...in Germany, where the government is almost omnipotent and the Reichstag and all other represent-ative bodies have no real power, to advocate such athing in Germany, where, moreover, there is no need todo so, means removing the fig leaf from absolutism andbecoming oneself a screen for its nakedness. 
” The great majority of the official leaders of the German Social-Democratic Party, which pigeon-holed this advice,have really proved to be a screen for absolutism. 
 “...In the long run such a policy can only lead one’s own party astray. 
 They push general, abstract political questions into the foreground, thereby concealing the immediate concrete questions, which at the moment ofthe first great events, the first political crisis, automat-ically pose themselves. 
 What can result from this except that at the decisive moment the party suddenly proves helpless and that uncertainty and discord on the most decisive issues reign in it because these issues havenever been discussed?... “This forgetting of the great, the principal considera-tions for the momentary interests of the day, this strug-gling and striving for the success of the moment regard-less of later consequences, this sacrifice of the future of the movement for its present may be ‘honestly’ meant,but it is and remains opportunism, and ‘honest’ oppor-tunism is perhaps the most dangerous of all.... 
 “If one thing is certain it is that our party and the working class can only come to power in the form of the democratic republic. 
 This is even the specific form for the dictatorship of the proletariat, as the GreatFrench Revolution has already shown.... 
” Engels realised here in a particularly striking form the fundamental idea which runs through all of Marx’s works,namely, that the democratic republic is the nearest approach to the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 For such a republic, without in the least abolishing the rule of capital, and, there-fore, the oppression of the masses and the class struggle,inevitably leads to such an extension, development, unfold-ing, and intensification of this struggle that, as soon as itbecomes possible to meet the fundamental interests of the oppressed masses, this possibility is realised inevitably and solely through the dictatorship of the proletariat, throughthe leadership of those masses by the proletariat. 
 These, too,are “forgotten words” of Marxism for the whole of the SecondInternational, and the fact that they have been forgottenwas demonstrated with particular vividness by the history of the Menshevik Party during the first six months of the Russian revolution of 1917. 
 On the subject of a federal republic, in connection with the national composition of the population, Engels wrote: “What should take the place of the present-day Germany [with its reactionary monarchical Constitution and its equally reactionary division into petty states, adivision which perpetuates all the specific features of “Prussianism” instead of dissolving them in Germany as a whole]? In my view, the proletariat can only use the form of the one and indivisible republic. 
 In the gigantic territory of the United States, a federal republic is still,on the whole, a necessity, although in the Eastern statesit is already becoming a hindrance. 
 It would be a stepforward in Britain where the two islands are peopled byfour nations and in spite of a single Parliament three different systems of legislation already exist side by side. 
 In little Switzerland, it has long been a hindrance,tolerable only because Switzerland is content to be apurely passive member of the European state system. 
For Germany, federalisation on the Swiss model wouldbe an enormous step backward. 
 Two points distinguish a union state from a completely unified state: first, that each member state, each canton, has its own civiland criminal legislative and judicial system, and,second, that alongside a popular chamber there is also afederal chamber in which each canton, whether largeor small, votes as such. 
” In Germany, the union state is the transition to the completely unified state, and the “revolution from above” of 1866 and 1870 must not bereversed but supplemented by a “movement from below”. 
 Far from being indifferent to the forms of state, Engels, on the contrary, tried to analyse the transitional forms with the utmost thoroughness in order to establish, in accordance with the concrete historical peculiarities of each particularcase, from what and to what the given transitional form is passing. 
 Approaching the matter from the standpoint of the prole-tariat and the proletarian revolution, Engels, like Marx, upheld democratic centralism, the republic—one and indi-visible. 
 He regarded the federal republic either as an excep-tion and a hindrance to development, or as a transition froma monarchy to a centralised republic, as a “step forward”under certain special conditions. 
 And among these specialconditions, he puts the national question to the fore. 
 Although mercilessly criticising the reactionary nature of small states, and the screening of this by the national ques-tion in certain concrete cases, Engels, like Marx, never betrayed the slightest desire to brush aside the national ques-tion—a desire of which the Dutch and Polish Marxists, who proceed from their perfectly justified opposition to the nar-row philistine nationalism of “their” little states, are oftenguilty. 
 Even in regard to Britain, where geographical conditions, a common language and the history of many centuries wouldseem to have “put an end” to the national question in the various small divisions of the country—even in regard to that country, Engels reckoned with the plain fact that thenational question was not yet a thing of the past, and recog-nised in consequence that the establishment of a federalrepublic would be a “step forward”. 
 Of course, there is notthe slightest hint here of Engels abandoning the criticism of the shortcomings of a federal republic or renouncing the most determined advocacy of, and struggle for, a unified and cen-tralised democratic republic. 
 But Engels did not at all men democratic centralism in the bureaucratic sense in which the term is used by bour-geois and petty-bourgeois ideologists, the anarchists among the latter. 
 His idea of centralism did not in the least pre-clude such broad local self-government as would combinethe voluntary defence of the unity of the state by the “com-munes” and districts, and the complete elimination of allbureaucratic practices and all “ordering” from above. 
 Car-rying forward the programme views of Marxism on the state, Engels wrote: “So, then, a unified republic—but not in the sense of the present French Republic, which is nothing but theEmpire established in 1798 without the Emperor. 
From 1792 to 1798 each French department, each com-mune [Gemeinde], enjoyed complete self-government on the American model, and this is what we too musthave. 
 How self-government is to be organised and howwe can manage, without a bureaucracy has been shownto us by America and the first French Republic, and isbeing shown even today by Australia, Canada and the other English colonies. 
 And a provincial [regional] and communal self-government of this type is far freerthan, for instance, Swiss federalism, under which, it is true, the canton is very independent in relation to the Bund [i. 
e. 
, the federated state as a whole], but is also independent in relation to the district [Bezirk] and the commune. 
 The cantonal governments appoint the dis-trict governors [Bezirksstatthalter] and prefects—whichis unknown in English-speaking countries and which wewant to abolish here as resolutely in the future as thePrussian Landräte and Regierungsräte” (commissioners, district police chiefs, governors, and in general all of-ficials appointed from above). 
 Accordingly, Engelsproposes the following words for the self-governmentclause in the programme: “Complete self-governmentfor the provinces [gubernias or regions], districts andcommunes through officials elected by universal suf-frage. 
 The abolition of all local and provincial authori-ties appointed by the state. 
” I have already had occasion to point out—in Pravda (No. 
 68, May 28, 1917), * which was suppressed by the gov-ernment of Kerensky and other “socialist” Ministers—how on this point (of course, not on this point alone by any means) our pseudo-socialist representatives of pseudo-revolutionarypseudo-democracy have made glaring departures from de-mocracy . 
 Naturally, people who have bound themselves by a “coalition” to the imperialist bourgeoisie have remained deafto this criticism. 
 It is extremely important to note that Engels, armed with facts, disproved by a most precise example the preju-dice which is very widespread, particularly among petty-bourgeois democrats, that a federal republic necessarilymeans a greater amount of freedom than a centralised repub-lic. 
 This is wrong. 
 It is disproved by the facts cited by En-gels regarding the centralised French Republic of 1792-98 and the federal Swiss Republic. 
 The really democratic cen-tralised republic gave more freedom that the federal republic. 
 In other words, the greatest amount of local, regional, and other freedom known in history was accorded by a centralised and not a federal republic. 
 *See present edition, Vol. 
 24, pp. 
 536-38. 
— Ed. 
 Insufficient attention has been and is being paid in our Party propaganda and agitation to this fact, as, indeed, to the whole question of the federal and the centralised repub-lic and local self-government. 
 5. 
 THE 1891 PREFACE TO ’S THE CIVIL WAR IN FRANCE In his preface to the third edition of The Civil War in France (this preface is dated March 18, 1891, and was ori-ginally published in Neue Zeit ), Engels, in addition to some interesting incidental remarks on questions concerning theattitude towards the state, gave a remarkably vivid summaryof the lessons of the Commune. 
 145 This summary, made more profound by the entire experience of the twenty years that separated the author from the Commune, and directed ex-pressly against the “superstitious belief in the state” sowidespread in Germany, may justly be called the last word of Marxism on the question under consideration. 
 In France, Engels observed, the workers emerged with arms from every revolution: “therefore the disarm-ing of the workers was the first commandment forthe bourgeois, who were at the helm of the state. 
 Hence,after every revolution won by the workers, a new strug-gle, ending with the defeat of the workers. 
” This summary of the experience of bourgeois revolutions is as concise as it is expressive. 
 The essence of the matter—among other things, on the question of the state ( has the oppressed class arms ?)—is here remarkably well-grasped. 
 It is precisely this essence that is most often evaded both by professors influenced by bourgeois ideology, and by petty-bourgeois democrats. 
 In the Russian revolution of 1917,the honour (Cavaignac honour) of blabbing this secret ofbourgeois revolutions fell to the Menshevik, would-beMarxist, Tsereteli. 
 In his “historic” speech of June 11, Tse-reteli blurted out that the bourgeoisie were determined to disarm the Petrograd workers—presenting, of course, this decision as his own, and as a necessity for the “state” ingeneral! Tsereteli’s historical speech of June 11 will, of course, serve every historian of the revolution of 1917 as a graphic illus-tration of how the Social-Revolutionary and Menshevik bloc, led by Mr. 
 Tsereteli, deserted to the bourgeoisie against the revolutionary proletariat. 
 Another incidental remark of Engels’s, also connected with the question of the state, deals with religion. 
 It is wellknown that the German Social-Democrats, as they degenera-ted and became increasingly opportunist, slipped more and more frequently into the philistine misinterpretation of thecelebrated formula: “Religion is to be declared a private mat-ter. 
” That is, the formula was twisted to mean that religionwas a private matter even for the party of the revolutionary proletariat!! It was against this complete betrayal of the revolutionary programme of the proletariat that Engels vigorously protested. 
 In 1891 he saw only the very feeble beginnings of opportunism in his party, and, therefore, heexpressed himself with extreme caution: “As almost only workers, or recognised representa-tives of the workers, sat in the Commune, its decisions bore a decidedly proletarian character. 
 Either they decreed reforms which the republican bourgeoisie hadfailed to pass solely out of cowardice, but which pro-vided a necessary basis for the free activity of the work-ing class—such as the realisation of the principlethat in relation to the state religion is a purely private matter—or the Commune promulgated decrees which were in the direct interest of the working class and inpart cut deeply into the old order of society. 
” Engels deliberately emphasised the words “in relation to the state” as a straight thrust at German opportunism, which had declared religion to be a private matter in relation to the party , thus degrading the party of the revolutionary proletariat to the level of the most vulgar “free-thinking”philistinism, which is prepared to allow a non-denominationalstatus, but which renounces the party struggle against the opium of religion which stupefies the people. 
 The future historian of the German Social-Democrats, in tracing the roots of their shameful bankruptcy in 1914, willfind a fair amount of interesting material on this question, beginning with the evasive declarations in the articles of the party’s ideological leader, Kautsky, which throw the door wide open to opportunism, and ending with the atti-tude of the party towards the “Los-von-Kirche-Bewegung”146 (the “Leave-the-Church” movement) in 1913. 
 But let us see how, twenty years after the Commune, Engels summed up its lessons for the fighting proletariat. 
 Here are the lessons to which Engels attached prime im-portance: “...It was precisely the oppressing power of the former centralised government, army, political parties, bu-reaucracy, which Napoleon had created in 1798 andwhich every new government had since then taken overas a welcome instrument and used against its opponents— it was this power which was to fall everywhere, just as it had fallen in Paris. 
 “From the very outset the Commune had to recognise that the working class, once in power, could not go onmanaging with the old state machine; that in order notto lose again its only just-gained supremacy, this work-ing class must, on the one hand, do away with all the old machinery of oppression previously used againstit itself, and, on the other, safeguard itself against itsown deputies and officials, by declaring them all, with-out exception, subject to recall at any time.... 
” Engels emphasised once again that not only under a mon-archy, but also in a democratic republic the state remains a state, i. 
e. 
, it retains its fundamental distinguishing fea-ture of transforming the officials, the ‘servants of society”,its organs, into the masters of society. 
 “Against this transformation of the state and the organs of the state from servants of society into mas-ters of society—an inevitable transformation in allprevious states—the Commune used two infalliblemeans. 
 In the first place, it filled all posts—administra-tive, judicial, and educational—by election on the basis of universal suffrage of all concerned, subject to recall at any time by the electors. 
 And, in the second place,it paid all officials, high or low, only the wages received by other workers. 
 The highest salary paid by the Com-mune to anyone was 6,000 francs. 
 * In this way a depen-dable barrier to place-hunting and careerism was set up, even apart from the binding mandates to delegatesto representative bodies, which were added besides .... 
” Engels here approached the interesting boundary line at which consistent democracy, on the one hand, is trans-formed into socialism and, on the other, demands socialism. 
 For, in order to abolish the state, it is necessary to convertthe functions of the civil service into the simple operationsof control and accounting that are within the scope and abil-ity of the vast majority of the population, and, subsequent-ly, of every single individual. 
 And if careerism is to be abol-ished completely, it must be made impossible for “honou-rable” though profitless posts in the Civil Service to be usedas a springboard to highly lucrative posts in banks or joint-stock companies, as constantly happens in all the freest capi-talist countries. 
 Engels, however, did not make the mistake some Marxists make in dealing, for example, with the question of the right of nations to self-determination, when they argue that isimpossible under capitalism and will be superfluous undersocialism. 
 This seemingly clever but actually incorrect state-ment might be made in regard to any democratic institu-tion, including moderate salaries for officials, because fully consistent democracy is impossible under capitalism, and under socialism all democracy will wither away . 
 This is a sophism like the old joke about a man becoming bald by losing one more hair. 
 To develop democracy to the utmost , to find the forms for this development, to test them by practice , and so forth— all this is one of the component tasks of the struggle for the social revolution. 
 Taken separately, no kind of democracywill bring socialism. 
 But in actual life democracy will neverbe “taken separately”; it will be “taken together” with other *Nominally about 2,400 rubles or, according to the present rate of exchange, about 6,000 rubles. 
 The action of those Bolsheviks whopropose that a salary of 9,000 rubles be paid to members of municipal councils, for instance, instead of a maximum salary of 6,000 rubles— quite an adequate sum— throughout the state , is inexcusable. 
 things, it will exert its influence on economic life as well, will stimulate its transformation; and in its turn it will be influenced by economic development, and so on. 
 This is the dialectics of living history. 
 Engels continued: “...This shattering [Sprengung] of the former state power and its replacement by a new and truly demo-cratic one is described in detail in the third section of The Civil War . 
 But it was necessary to touch briefly here once more on some of its features, because inGermany particularly the superstitious belief in thestate has passed from philosophy into the general con-sciousness of the bourgeoisie and even of many workers. 
 According to the philosophical conception, the state is the ‘realisation of the idea’, or the Kingdom of Godon earth, translated into philosophical terms, the spherein which eternal truth and justice are, or should be,realised. 
 And from this follows a superstitious reverencefor the state and everything connected with it, which takes root the more readily since people are accustomed from childhood to imagine that the affairs and interestscommon to the whole of society could not be looked afterother than as they have been looked after in the past,that is, through the state and its lucratively positionedofficials. 
 And people think they have taken quite an extraordinary bold step forward when they have rid themselves of belief in hereditary monarchy and swearby the democratic republic. 
 In reality, however, thestate is nothing but a machine for the oppression of oneclass by another, and indeed in the democratic republicno less than in the monarchy. 
 And at best it is an evil inherited by the proletariat after its victorious struggle for class supremacy, whose worst sides the victoriousproletariat will have to lop off as speedily as possible,just as the Commune had to, until a generation rearedin new, free social conditions is able to discard the entirelumber of the state. 
” Engels warned the Germans not to forget the principles of socialism with regard to the state in general in connec-tion with the substitution of a republic for the monarchy. 
 His warnings now read like a veritable lesson to the Tsere-telis and Chernovs, who in their “coalition” practice have revealed a superstitious belief in, and a superstitious rev-erence for, the state! Two more remarks. 
 1. 
 Engels’s statement that in a demo-cratic republic, “no less” than in a monarchy, the state re-mains a “machine for the oppression of one class by another” by no means signifies that the form of oppression makes no difference to the proletariat, as some anarchists “teach”. 
A wider, freer and more open form of the class struggle and of class oppression vastly assists the proletariat in its strug-gle for the abolition of classes in general. 
 2. 
 Why will only a new generation be able to discard the entire lumber of the state? This question is bound up with that of overcoming democracy, with which we shall dealnow. 
 6. 
 ENGELS ON THE OVERCOMING OF DEMOCRACY Engels came to express his views on this subject when establishing that the term “Social-Democrat” was scientifi-cally wrong. 
 In a preface to an edition of his articles of the seventies on various subjects, mostly on “international” questions(Internationales aus dem Volkstaat *), dated January 3, 1894, i. 
e. 
, written a year and a half before his death, En-gels wrote that in all his articles he used the word “Commu-nist”, and not “Social-Democrat”, because at that time the Proudhonists in France and the Lassalleans147 in Germany called themselves Social-Democrats. 
 “...For Marx and myself,” continued Engels, “it was therefore absolutely impossible to use such a loose term to characterise our special point of view. 
 Today thingsare different, and the word [“Social-Democrat”] mayperhaps pass muster [mag passieren], inexact [ unpas-send , unsuitable] though it still is for a party whose economic programme is not merely socialist in general, but downright communist, and whose ultimate politi-cal aim is to overcome the whole state and, consequent-*On International Topics from “The People ’s State”. 
—Ed. 
 ly, democracy as well. 
 The names of real [Engels’s italics] political parties, however, are never wholly appropriate; the party develops while the name stays. 
”148 The dialectician Engels remained true to dialectics to the end of his days. 
 Marx and I, he said, had a splendid, sci-entifically exact name for the party, but there was no realparty, i. 
e. 
, no mass proletarian party. 
 Now (at the end of the nineteenth century) there was a real party, but its name was scientifically wrong. 
 Never mind, it would “pass mus-ter”, so long as the party developed , so long as the scientific in accuracy of the name was not hidden from it and did nothinder its development on the right direction! Perhaps some wit would console us Bolsheviks in the man-ner of Engels: we have a real party, it is developing splendid-ly; even such a meaningless and ugly term as “Bolshevik”will “pass muster”, although it expresses nothing whateverbut the purely accidental fact that at the Brussels-LondonCongress of 1903 we were in the majority. 
 * Perhaps now that the persecution of our Party by republicans and “revo-lutionary” petty-bourgeois democrats in July and August has earned the name “Bolshevik” such universal respect,now that, in addition, this persecution marks the tremendoushistorical progress our Party has made in its real develop-ment—perhaps now even I might hesitate to insist on thesuggestion I made in April to change the name of our Party. 
 Perhaps I would propose a “compromise” to my comrades, namely, to call ourselves the Communist Party, but to re-tain the word “Bolshevik” in brackets. 
 But the question of the name of the Party is incomparably less important than the question of the attitude of the revo-lutionary proletariat to the state. 
 In the usual argument about the state, the mistake is constantly made against which Engels warned and whichwe have in passing indicated above, namely, it is constantlyforgotten that the abolition of the state means also the abo-lition of democracy: that the withering away of the statemeans the withering away of democracy. 
 *“Majority” in Russian is bolshinstvo ; hence the name Bolshevik . 
— Tr. 
 At first sight this assertion seems exceedingly strange and incomprehensible; indeed, someone may even suspect us of expecting the advent of a system of society in which the principle of subordination of the minority to the majoritywill not be observed—for democracy means the recognitionof this very principle. 
 No, democracy is not identical with the subordination of the minority to the majority. 
 Democracy is a state which recognises the subordination of the minority to the major-ity, i. 
e. 
, an organisation for the systematic use of force by one class against another, by one section of the popula-tion against another. 
 We set ourselves the ultimate aim of abolishing the state, i. 
e. 
, all organised and systematic violence, all use of vio-lence against people in general. 
 We do not expect the ad-vent of a system of society in which the principle of subor-dination of the minority to the majority will not be observed. 
In striving for socialism, however, we are convinced that itwill develop into communism and, therefore, that the needfor violence against people in general, for the subordination of one man to another, and of one section of the population to another, will vanish altogether since people will become accustomed to observing the elementary conditions of social life without violence and without subordination . 
 In order to emphasise this element of habit, Engels speaks of a new generation , “reared in new, free social conditions”, which will “be able to discard the entire lumber of the state”— of any state, including the democratic-republican state. 
 In order to explain this, it is necessary to analyse the economic basis of the withering away of the state. 
 C H A P T E R V THE ECONOMIC BASIS OF THE WITHERING AWAY OF THE STATE Marx explains this question most thoroughly in his Cri-tique of the Gotha Programme (letter to Bracke, May 5, 1875, which was not published until 1891 when it was printed inNeue Zeit , Vol. 
 IX, 1, and which has appeared in Rus-sian in a special edition). 
 The polemical part of this remark-able work, which contains a criticism of Lassalleanism, has, so to speak, overshadowed its positive part, namely, the analysis of the connection between the development of com-munism and the withering away of the state. 
 1. 
 PRESENTATION OF THE QUESTION BY From a superficial comparison of Marx’s letter to Bracke of May 5, 1875, with Engels’s letter to Bebel of March 28,1875, which we examined above, it might appear that Marxwas much more of a “champion of the state” than Engels,and that the difference of opinion between the two writers on the question of the state was very considerable. 
 Engels suggested to Bebel that all chatter about the state be dropped altogether, that the word “state” be eliminatedfrom the programme altogether and the word “community”substituted for it. 
 Engels even declared that the Communewas long a state in the proper sense of the word. 
 Yet Marx even spoke of the “future state in communist society”, i. 
e. 
, he would seem to recognise the need for the state evenunder communism. 
 But such a view would be fundamentally wrong. 
 A closer examination shows that Marx’s and Engels’s views on thestate and its withering away were completely identical, and that Marx’s expression quoted above refers to the state in the process of withering away . 
 Clearly, there can be no question of specifying the moment of the future “withering away”, the more so since it will obviously be a lengthy process. 
 The apparent differencebetween Marx and Engels is due to the fact that they dealt with different subject and pursued different aims. 
 Engels set out to show Bebel graphically, sharply, and in broad out-line the utter absurdity of the current prejudices concern-ing the state (shared to no small degree by Lassalle). 
 Marxonly touched upon this question in passing, being interested in another subject, namely, the development of communist society. 
 The whole theory of Marx is the application of the theory of development—in its most consistent, complete, consid-ered and pithy form—to modern capitalism. 
 Naturally, Marx was faced with the problem of applying this theory both to the forthcoming collapse of capitalism and to the future development of future communism. 
 On the basis of what facts , then, can the question of the future development of future communism be dealt with? On the basis of the fact that it has its origin in capitalism, that it develops historically from capitalism, that it is the result of the action of a social force to which capitalism gave birth . 
 There is no trace of an attempt on Marx’s part to make up a utopia, to indulge in idle guess-work about what cannotbe known. 
 Marx treated the question of communism in thesame way as a naturalist would treat the question of the devel-opment of, say, a new biological variety, once he knew that it had originated in such and such a way and was changing in such and such a definite direction. 
 To begin with, Marx brushed aside the confusion the Gotha Programme brought into the question of the relationshipbetween state and society. 
 He wrote: “‘Present-day society’ is capitalist society, which exists in all civilised countries, being more or less freefrom medieval admixture, more or less modified by theparticular historical development of each country, moreor less developed. 
 On the other hand, the ‘present-daystate’ changes with a country’s frontier. 
 It is different in the Prusso-German Empire from what it is in Switzer-land, and different in England from what it is in theUnited States. 
 ‘ The present-day state’ is, therefore, a fiction. 
 “Nevertheless, the different states of the different civilised countries, in spite of their motley diversity of form, all have this in common, that they are based on modern bourgeois society, only one more or less capi-talistically developed. 
 The have, therefore, also cer-tain essential characteristics in common. 
 In this senseit is possible to speak of the ‘present-day state’, in con-trast with the future, in which its present root, bourgeois society, will have died off. 
 “The question then arise: what transformation will the state undergo in communist society? In other words, what social functions will remain in existence there that are analogous to present state functions? This question can only be answered scientifically, and one does not get a flea-hop nearer to the problem by a thousand-fold combination of the word people with the wordstate. 
” 149 After thus ridiculing all talk about a “people’s state”, Marx formulated the question and gave warning, as it were,that those seeking a scientific answer to it should use onlyfirmly-established scientific data. 
 The first fact that has been established most accurately by the whole theory of development, by science as a whole— a fact tat was ignored by the utopians, and is ignored by the present-day opportunists, who are afraid of the socialistrevolution—is that, historically, there must undoubtedlybe a special stage, or a special phase, of transition from capi-talism to communism. 
 2. 
 THE TRANSITION CAPITALISM TO COMMUNISM Marx continued: “Between capitalist and communist society lies the period of the revolutionary transformation of the oneinto the other. 
 Corresponding to this is also a political transition period in which the state can be nothing but the revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat . 
” Marx bases this conclusion on an analysis of the role played by the proletariat in modern capitalist society, on the dataconcerning the development of this society, and on the irre-concilability of the antagonistic interests of the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. 
 Previously the question was put as follows: to achieve its emancipation, the proletariat must overthrow the bour-geoisie, win political power and establish its revolutionarydictatorship. 
 Now the question is put somewhat differently: the tran-sition from capitalist society—which is developing towards communism—to communist society is impossible withouta “political transition period”, and the state in this period can only be the revolutionary dictatorship of the prole-tariat. 
 What, then, is the relation of this dictatorship to democ-racy? We have seen that the Communist Manifesto simply places side by side the two concepts: “to raise the proletariat to theposition of the ruling class” and “to win the battle of democ-racy”. 
 On the basis of all that has been said above, it is possible to determine more precisely how democracy changes in the transition from capitalism to communism. 
 In capitalist society, providing it develops under the most favourable conditions, we have a more or less completedemocracy in the democratic republic. 
 But this democracyis always hemmed in by the narrow limits set by capitalist exploitation, and consequently always remains, in effect, a democracy for the minority, only for the propertied classes,only for the rich. 
 Freedom in capitalist society always re-mains about the same as it was in the ancient Greek repub-lics: freedom for the slave-owners. 
 Owing to the conditionsof capitalist exploitation, the modern wage slaves are so crushed by want and poverty that “they cannot be bothered with democracy”, “cannot be bothered with politics”; in theordinary, peaceful course of events, the majority of the popu-lation is debarred from participation in public and politicallife. 
 The correctness of this statement is perhaps mot clearly confirmed by Germany, because constitutional legality steadily endured there for a remarkably long time—nearlyhalf a century (1871-1914)—and during this period the Social-Democrats were able to achieve far more than in other coun-tries in the way of “utilising legality”, and organised a largerproportion of the workers into a political party than any-where else in the world. 
 What is this largest proportion of politically conscious and active wage slaves that has so far been recorded in capi-talist society? One million members of the Social-DemocraticParty—out of fifteen million wage-workers! Three millionorganised in trade unions—out of fifteen million! Democracy for an insignificant minority, democracy for the rich—that is the democracy of capitalist society. 
 If welook more closely into the machinery of capitalist democracy, we see everywhere, in the “petty”—supposedly petty—details of the suffrage (residential qualifications, exclusion of women, etc. 
), in the technique of the representative institutions, in the actual obstacles to the right of assembly (public build-ings are not for “paupers”!), in the purely capitalist orga-nisation of the daily press, etc. 
, etc. 
,—we see restrictionafter restriction upon democracy. 
 These restrictions, excep-tions, exclusions, obstacles for the poor seem slight, espe-cially in the eyes of one who has never known want himself and has never been inclose contact with the oppressed classesin their mass life (and nine out of 10 ten, if not 99 ninety-nine outof 100 a hundred, bourgeois publicists and politicians come underthis category); but in their sum total these restrictions ex-clude and squeeze out the poor from politics, from active participation in democracy. 
 Marx grasped this essence of capitalist democracy splen-didly when, in analysing the experience of the Commune,he said that the oppressed are allowed once every few yearsto decide which particular representatives of the oppressingclass shall represent and repress them in parliament! But from this capitalist democracy—that is inevitably narrow and stealthily pushes aside the poor, and is thereforehypocritical and false through and through—forward devel-opment does not proceed simply, directly and smoothly,towards “greater and greater democracy”, as the liberal pro-fessors and petty-bourgeois opportunists would have us be-lieve. 
 No, forward development, i. 
e. 
, development towards communism, proceeds through the dictatorship of the prole-tariat, and cannot do otherwise, for the resistance of the capitalist exploiters cannot be broken by anyone else or in any other way. 
 And the dictatorship of the proletariat, i. 
e. 
, the organi-sation of the vanguard of the oppressed as the ruling class for the purpose of suppressing the oppressors, cannot resultmerely in an expansion of democracy. 
 Simultaneously with an immense expansion of democracy, which for the first time becomes democracy for the poor, democracy for the people,and not democracy for the money-bags, the dictatorship of the proletariat imposes a series of restrictions on the freedom of the oppressors, the exploiters, the capitalists. 
 We mustsuppress them in order to free humanity from wage slavery, their resistance must be crushed by force; it is clear that there is no freedom and no democracy where there is suppression and where there is violence. 
 Engels expressed this splendidly in his letter to Bebel when he said, as the reader will remember, that “the prole-tariat needs the state, not in the interests of freedom but inorder to hold down its adversaries, and as soon as it becomespossible to speak of freedom the state as such ceases to exist”. 
 Democracy for the vast majority of the people, and sup-pression by force, i. 
e. 
, exclusion from democracy, of theexploiters and oppressors of the people—this is the changedemocracy undergoes during the transition from capitalism to communism. 
 Only in communist society, when the resistance of the capitalists has been completely crushed, when the capital-ists have disappeared, when there are no classes (i. 
e. 
, whenthere is no distinction between the members of society asregards their relation to the social means of production),only then “the state ... ceases to exist”, and “ it becomes pos-sible to speak of freedom ”. 
 Only then will a truly complete de-mocracy become possible and be realised, a democracy with-out any exceptions whatever. 
 And only then will democ-racy begin to wither away , owing to the simple fact that, freed from capitalist slavery, from the untold horrors, savage-ry, absurdities, and infamies of capitalist exploitation, people will gradually become accustomed to observing the elementary rules of social intercourse that have been knownfor centuries and repeated for thousands of years in all copy-book maxims. 
 They will become accustomed to observingthem without force, without coercion, without subordination,without the special apparatus for coercion called the state. 
 The expression “the state withers away ” is very well-cho-sen, for it indicates both the gradual and the spontaneousnature of the process. 
 Only habit can, and undoubtedlywill, have such an effect; for we see around us on millionsof occasions how readily people become accustomed to ob-serving the necessary rules of social intercourse when there is no exploitation, when there is nothing that arouses indig-nation, evokes protest and revolt, and creates the need forsuppression. 
 And so in capitalist society we have a democracy that is curtailed, wretched, false, a democracy only for the rich, for the minority. 
 The dictatorship of the proletariat, the period of transition to communism, will for the first timecreate democracy for the people, for the majority, along withthe necessary suppression of the exploiters, of the minority. 
communism alone is capable of providing really completedemocracy, and the more complete it is, the sooner it will become unnecessary and wither away of its own accord. 
 In other words, under capitalism we have the state in the proper sense of the word, that is, a special machine forthe suppression of one class by another, and, what is more,of the majority by the minority. 
 Naturally, to be success-ful, such an undertaking as the systematic suppression of the exploited majority by the exploiting minority calls forthe utmost ferocity and savagery in the matter of suppress-ing, it calls for seas of blood, through which mankindis actually wading its way in slavery, serfdom and wagelabour. 
 Furthermore, during the transition from capitalism to com-munism suppression is still necessary, but it is now the sup-pression of the exploiting minority by the exploited majority. 
A special apparatus, a special machine for suppression, the“state”, is still necessary, but this is now a transitional state. 
 It is no longer a state in the proper sense of the word; for the suppression of the minority of exploiters by the majority of the wage slaves of yesterday is comparatively so easy, simple and natural a task that it will entail far less bloodshedthan the suppression of the risings of slaves, serfs or wage-labourers, and it will cost mankind far less. 
 And it is com-patible with the extension of democracy to such an over-whelming majority of the population that the need for a special machine of suppression will begin to disappear. 
 Natu-rally, the exploiters are unable to suppress the people withouta highly complex machine for performing this task, but the people can suppress the exploiters even with a very simple “machine”, almost without a “machine”, without a special apparatus, by the simple organisation of the armed people (such as the Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, wewould remark, running ahead). 
 Lastly, only communism makes the state absolutely un-necessary, for there is nobody to be suppressed—“nobody” in the sense of a class , of a systematic struggle against a defi-nite section of the population. 
 We are not utopians, and donot in the least deny the possibility and inevitability of ex-cesses on the part of individual persons , or the need to stop such excesses. 
 In the first place, however, no special machine, no special apparatus of suppression, is needed for this: this will be done by the armed people themselves, as simply and as readily as any crowd of civilised people, even in mod-ern society, interferes to put a stop to a scuffle or to preventa woman from being assaulted. 
 And, secondly, we knowthat the fundamental social cause of excesses, which consistin the violation of the rules of social intercourse, is the ex-ploitation of the people, their want and their poverty. 
 With the removal of this chief cause, excesses will inevitably be-gin to “ wither away ”. 
 We do not know how quickly and in what succession, but we do know they will wither away. 
With their withering away the state will also wither away . 
 Without building utopias, Marx defined more fully what can be defined now regarding this future, namely, the differ-ences between the lower and higher phases (levels, stages) ofcommunist society. 
 3. 
 THE FIRST DRAFT PHASE OF COMMUNIST SOCIETY In the Critique of the Gotha Programme , Marx goes into detail to disprove Lassalle’s idea that under socialism theworker will receive the “undiminished” or “full product ofhis labour”. 
 Marx shows that from the whole of the sociallabour of society there must be deducted a reserve fund, a fund for the expansion of production, a fund for the replace-ment of the “wear and tear” of machinery, and so on. 
 Then,from the means of consumption must be deducted a fund foradministrative expenses, for schools, hospitals, old people’shomes, and so on. 
 Instead of Lassalle’s hazy, obscure, general phrase (“the full product of his labour to the worker”), Marx makes a sober estimate of exactly how socialist society will haveto manage its affairs. 
 Marx proceeds to make a concrete anal-ysis of the conditions of life of a society in which there will be no capitalism, and says: “What we have to deal with here [in analysing the programme of the workers’ party] is a communist so-ciety, not as it has developed on its own foundations, but, on the contrary, just as it emerges from capitalist society; which is thus in every respect, economically, morally, and intellectually, still stamped with the birthmarks of the old society from whose womb it comes. 
” It is this communist society, which has just emerged into the light of day out of the womb of capitalism and whichis in every respect stamped with the birthmarks of the old society, that Marx terms the “first”, or lower, phase of com-munist society. 
 The means of production are no longer the private property of individuals. 
 The means of production belong to the wholeof society. 
 Every member of society, performing a certainpart of the socially-necessary work, receives a certificate from society to the effect that he has done a certain amount of work. 
 And with this certificate he receives from the publicstore of consumer goods a corresponding quantity of pro-ducts. 
 After a deduction is made of the amount of labourwhich goes to the public fund, every worker, therefore, re-ceives from society as much as he has given to it. 
 “Equality” apparently reigns supreme. 
 But when Lassalle, having in view such a social order (usually called socialism, but termed by Marx the first phaseof communism), says that this is “equitable distribution”,that this is “the equal right of all to an equal product of la-bour”, Lassalle is mistaken and Marx exposes the mistake. 
 “Hence, the equal right,” says Marx, in this case still cer-tainly conforms to “bourgeois law”, which, like all law,implies inequality . 
 All law is an application of an equal measure to different people who in fact are not alike, are not equal to one another. 
 That is why the “equal right” is aviolation of equality and an injustice. 
 In fact, everyone, hav-ing performed as much social labour as another, receives an equal share of the social product (after the above-mentioneddeductions). 
 But people are not alike: one is strong, another is weak; one is married, another is not; one has more children, another has less, and so on. 
 And the conclusion Marx draws is: “...With an equal performance of labour, and hence an equal share in the social consumption fund, one will in factreceive more than another, one will be richer than another,and so on. 
 To avoid all these defects, the right instead of being equal would have to be unequal. 
” The first phase of communism, therefore, cannot yet pro-vide justice and equality; differences, and unjust differences,in wealth will still persist, but the exploitation of man by man will have become impossible because it will be im-possible to seize the means of production —the factories, ma-chines, land, etc. 
—and make them private property. 
 In smashing Lassalle’s petty-bourgeois, vague phrases about“equality” and “justice” in general , Marx shows the course of development of communist society, which is compelled to abolish at first only the “injustice” of the means of production seized by individuals, and which is unable at once to elimin-ate the other injustice, which consists in the distribution of consumer goods “according to the amount of labour per-formed” (and not according to needs). 
 The vulgar economists, including the bourgeois profes-sors and “our” Tugan, constantly reproach the socialists withforgetting the inequality of people and with “dreaming” of eliminating this inequality. 
 Such a reproach, as we see, only proves the extreme ignorance of the bourgeois ideolo-gists. 
 Marx not only most scrupulously takes account of the ine-vitable inequality of men, but he also takes into account thefact that the mere conversion of the means of production into the common property of the whole society (commonly called “socialism”) does not remove the defects of distribution and the inequality of “bourgeois laws” which continues to pre-vail so long as products are divided “according to the amount of labour performed”. 
 Continuing, Marx says: “But these defects are inevitable in the first phase of communist society as it is when it has just emerged,after prolonged birth pangs, from capitalist society. 
 Law can never be higher than the economic structure of society and its cultural development conditioned thereby. 
” And so, in the first phase of communist society (usually called socialism) “bourgeois law” is not abolished in its entire-ty, but only in part, only in proportion to the economicrevolution so far attained, i. 
e. 
, only in respect of the means of production. 
 “Bourgeois law” recognises them as the private property of individuals. 
 Socialism converts them into com-mon property. 
 To that extent —and to that extent alone— “bourgeois law” disappears. 
 However, it persists as far as its other part is concerned; it persists in the capacity of regulator (determining factor) in the distribution of products and the allotment of labour among the members of society. 
 The socialist principle, “Hewho does not work shall not eat”, is already realised; the other socialist principle, “An equal amount of products for an equalamount of labour”, is also already realised. 
 But this is not yet communism, and it does not yet abolish “bourgeois law”, which gives unequal individuals, in return for unequal (real-ly unequal) amounts of labour, equal amounts of products. 
 This is a “defect”, says Marx, but it is unavoidable in the first phase of communism; for if we are not to indulge in uto-pianism, we must not think that having overthrown capital-ism people will at once learn to work for society without any rules of law . 
 Besides, the abolition of capitalism does not immediately create the economic prerequisites for such a change. 
 Now, there are no other rules than those of “bourgeois law”. 
 To this extent, therefore, there still remains the need for astate, which, while safeguarding the common ownership of the means of production, would safeguard equality in labour and in the distribution of products. 
 The state withers away insofar as there are no longer any capitalists, any classes, and, consequently, no class can be suppressed . 
 But the state has not yet completely withered away, since thee still remains the safeguarding of “bourgeois law”, which sanctifies actual inequality. 
 For the state to wither awaycompletely, complete communism is necessary. 
 4. 
 THE HIGHER PHASE OF COMMUNIST SOCIETY Marx continues: “In a higher phase of communist society, after the enslaving subordination of the individual to the divi-sion of labour, and with it also the antithesis betweenmental and physical labour, has vanished, after labour has become not only a livelihood but life’s prime want, after the productive forces have increased with the all-round development of the individual, and all the springsof co-operative wealth flow more abundantly—onlythen can the narrow horizon of bourgeois law be left be-hind in its entirety and society inscribe on its banners: From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs!” Only now can we fully appreciate the correctness of En-gels’s remarks mercilessly ridiculing the absurdity of com-bining the words “freedom” and “state”. 
 So long as the stateexists there is no freedom. 
 When there is freedom, there will be no state. 
 The economic basis for the complete withering away of the state is such a high state of development of communism atwhich the antithesis between mental and physical labourdisappears, at which there consequently disappears one ofthe principal sources of modern social inequality—a source, moreover, which cannot on any account be removed imme-diately by the mere conversion of the means of productioninto public property, by the mere exploitation of the capi-talists. 
 This expropriation will make it possible for the productive forces to develop to a tremendous extent. 
 And when we see how incredibly capitalism is already retarding this develop-ment, when we see how much progress could be achieved onthe basis of the level of technique already attained, we areentitled to say with the fullest confidence that the expropria-tion of the capitalists will inevitably result in an enormousdevelopment of the productive forces of human society. 
 But how rapidly this development will proceed, how soon it will reach the point of breaking away from the division of labour,of doing away with the antithesis between mental and phys-ical labour, of transforming labour into “life’s prime want”—we do not and cannot know. 
 That is why we are entitled to speak only of the inevitable withering away of the state, emphasising the protracted na-ture of this process and its dependence upon the rapidity ofdevelopment of the higher phase of communism, and leaving the question of the time required for, or the concrete formsof, the withering away quite open, because there is no mate-rial for answering these questions. 
 The state will be able to wither away completely when society adopts the rule: “From each according to his ability,to each according to his needs”, i. 
e. 
, when people have becomeso accustomed to observing the fundamental rules of socialintercourse and when their labour has become so productive that they will voluntarily work according to their ability . 
 “The narrow horizon of bourgeois law”, which compels oneto calculate with the heartlessness of a Shylock whether onehas not worked half an hour more than somebody else, wheth-er one is not getting less pay than somebody else—thisnarrow horizon will then be left behind. 
 There will then be no need for society, in distributing the products, to regulate the quantity to be received by each; each will take freely“according to his needs”. 
 From the bourgeois point of view, it is easy to declare that such a social order is “sheer utopia” and to sneer at the social-ists for promising everyone the right to receive from society, without any control over the labour of the individual citi-zen, any quantity of truffles, cars, pianos, etc. 
 Even to thisday, most bourgeois “savants” confine themselves to sneeringin this way, thereby betraying both their ignorance and theirselfish defence of capitalism. 
 Ignorance—for it has never entered the head of any socialist to “promise” that the higher phase of the development of communism will arrive; as for the greatest socialists’ forecast that it will arrive, it presupposes not the present productiv-ity of labour and not the present ordinary run of people, who, like the seminary students in Pomyalovsky’s stories, 150 are capable of damaging the stocks of public wealth “just for fun”, and of demanding the impossible. 
 Until the “higher” phase of communism arrives, the social-ists demand the strictest control by society and by the state over the measure of labour and the measure of consumption; but this control must start with the expropriation of the cap-italists, with the establishment of workers’ control over the capitalists, and must be exercised not by a state of bureau-crats, but by a state of armed workers . 
 The selfish defence of capitalism by the bourgeois ideolo-gists (and their hangers-on, like the Tseretelis, Chernovs, andCo. 
) consists in that they substitute arguing and talk about the distant future for the vital and burning question of pre-sent-day politics, namely, the expropriation of the capital-ists, the conversion of all citizens into workers and other employees of one huge “syndicate”—the whole state—and the complete subordination of the entire work of this syn-dicate to a genuinely democratic state, the state of the So-viets of Workers ’ and Soldiers ’ Deputies . 
 In fact, when a learned professor, followed by the philis-tine, followed in turn by the Tseretelis and Chernovs, talksof wild utopias, of the demagogic promises of the Bolsheviks,of the impossibility of “introducing” socialism, it is thehigher stage, or phase, of communism he has in mind, which no one has ever promised or even thought to “intro-duce”, because, generally speaking, it cannot be “intro-duced”. 
 And this brings us to the question of the scientific distinc-tion between socialism and communism which Engelstouched on in his above-quoted argument about the incorrect-ness of the name “Social-Democrat”. 
 Politically, the distinc-tion between the first, or lower, and the higher phase of com-munism will in time, probably, be tremendous. 
 But itwould be ridiculous to recognise this distinction now, undercapitalism, and only individual anarchists, perhaps, couldinvest it with primary importance (if there still are people among the anarchists who have learned nothing from the “Plekhanov” conversion of the Kropotkins, of Grave, Cornelis-sen, and other “stars” of anarchism into social-chauvinistsor “anarcho-trenchists”, as Ghe, one of the few anarchistswho have still preserved a sense of humor and a conscience,has put it). 
 But the scientific distinction between socialism and com-munism is clear. 
 What is usually called socialism was termedby Marx the “first”, or lower, phase of communist society. 
 Insofar as the means of production becomes common property, the word “communism” is also applicable here, providing we do not forget that this is not complete communism. 
 The great significance of Marx’s explanations is that here, too,he consistently applies materialist dialectics, the theory ofdevelopment, and regards communism as something whichdevelops out of capitalism. 
 Instead of scholastically invented, “concocted” definitions and fruitless disputes over words (What is socialism? What is communism?), Marx gives an analysis of what might be called the stages of the economicmaturity of communism. 
 In its first phase, or first stage, communism cannot as yet be fully mature economically and entirely free from tradi-tions or vestiges of capitalism. 
 Hence the interesting phenom-enon that communism in its first phase retains “the narrow horizon of bourgeois law”. 
 Of course, bourgeois law in regard to the distribution of consumer goods inevitably presupposes the existence of the bourgeois state , for law is nothing without an apparatus capable of enforcing the observance of the rules of law. 
 It follows that under communism there remains for a time not only bourgeois law, but even the bourgeois state, withoutthe bourgeoisie! This may sound like a paradox or simply a dialectical conundrum of which Marxism is often accused by peoplewho have not taken the slightest trouble to study its extra-ordinarily profound content. 
 But in fact, remnants of the old, surviving in the new, confront us in life at every step, both in nature and in society. 
And Marx did not arbitrarily insert a scrap of “bourgeois”law into communism, but indicated what is economicallyand politically inevitable in a society emerging out of the womb of capitalism. 
 Democracy is of enormous importance to the working class in its struggle against the capitalists for its emancipation. 
But democracy is by no means a boundary not to be over-stepped; it is only one of the stages on the road fromfeudalism to capitalism, and from capitalism to com-munism. 
 Democracy means equality. 
 The great significance of the proletariat’s struggle for equality and of equality as a slogan will be clear if we correctly interpret it as meaning the abo-lition of classes . 
 But democracy means only formal equality. 
 And as soon as equality is achieved for all members of so-ciety in relation to ownership of the means of production, that is, equality of labour and wages, humanity will inevi-tably be confronted with the question of advancing father,from formal equality to actual equality, i. 
e. 
, to the operationof the rule “from each according to his ability, to each accor-ding to his needs”. 
 By what stages, by means of what practical measures humanity will proceed to this supreme aim we donot and cannot know. 
 But it is important to realise how infi-nitely mendacious is the ordinary bourgeois conception ofsocialism as something lifeless, rigid, fixed once and for all,whereas in reality only socialism will be the beginning of a rapid, genuine, truly mass forward movement, embracing first the majority and then the whole of the population, in all spheres of public and private life. 
 Democracy is a form of the state, one of its varieties. 
 Consequently, like every state, it represents, on the onehand, the organised, systematic use of force against persons; but, on the other hand, it signifies the formal recognition of equality of citizens, the equal right of all to determinethe structure of, and to administer, the state. 
 This, in turn,results in the fact that, at a certain stage in the developmentof democracy, it first welds together the class that wagesa revolutionary struggle against capitalism—the proleta-riat, and enables it to crush, smash to atoms, wipe off the face of the earth the bourgeois, even the republican-bourgeois, state machine, the standing army, the police andthe bureaucracy and to substitute for them a more democratic state machine, but a state machine nevertheless, in the shapeof armed workers who proceed to form a militia involving the entire population. 
 Here “quantity turns into quality”: such a degree of democ-racy implies overstepping the boundaries of bourgeois socie-ty and beginning its socialist reorganisation. 
 If really all take part in the administration of the state, capitalism cannotretain its hold. 
 The development of capitalism, in turn, cre-ates the preconditions that enable really “all” to take part in the administration of the state. 
 Some of these preconditionsare: universal literacy, which has already been achieved in a number of the most advanced capitalist countries, then the “training and disciplining” of millions of workers by the huge, complex, socialised apparatus of the postal service, railways, big factories, large-scale commerce, banking, etc. 
,etc. 
 Given these economic preconditions, it is quite possible, after the overthrow of the capitalists and the bureaucrats,to proceed immediately, overnight, to replace them in the control over production and distribution, in the work of keeping account of labour and products, by the armed work-ers, by the whole of the armed population. 
 (The questionof control and accounting should not be confused with thequestion of the scientifically trained staff of engineers, agron-omists, and so on. 
 These gentlemen are working today in obedience to the wishes of the capitalists and will work even better tomorrow in obedience to the wishes of the armedworkers. 
) Accounting and control—that is mainly what is needed for the “smooth working”, for the proper functioning, of thefirst phase of communist society. 
 All citizens are transformed into hired employees of the state, which consists of the armed workers. 
 All citizens becomes employees and workers of a single country-wide state “syndicate”. 
 All that is required is that they should work equally, do their proper share ofwork, and get equal pay. 
 The accounting and control neces-sary for this have been simplified by capitalism to the utmost and reduced to the extraordinarily simple operations— which any literate person can perform—of supervising andrecording, knowledge of the four rules of arithmetic, and is-suing appropriate receipts. 
 * When the majority of the people begin independently and everywhere to keep such accounts and exercise such control over the capitalists (now converted into employees) and over the intellectual gentry who preserve their capitalisthabits, this control will really become universal, general, *When the more important functions of the state are reduced to such accounting and control by the workers themselves, it willcease to be a “political state” and “public functions will lose theirpolitical character and become mere administrative functions” (cf. 
 above, Chapter IV, 2, Engels’s controversy with the anar-chists). 
 and popular; and there will be no getting away from it, there will be “nowhere to go”. 
 The whole of society will have become a single office and a single factory, with equality of labour and pay. 
 But this “factory” discipline, which the proletariat, after defeating the capitalists, after overthrowing the exploiters,will extend to the whole of society, is by no means ourideal, or our ultimate goal. 
 It is only a necessary step for thoroughly cleansing society of all the infamies and abominations of capitalist exploitation, and for further pro-gress. 
 From the moment all members of society, or at least the vast majority, have learned to administer the state them-selves , have taken this work into their own hands, have orga-nised control over the insignificant capitalist minority, over the gentry who wish to preserve their capitalist habits andover the workers who have been thoroughly corrupted bycapitalism—from this moment the need for government ofany kind begins to disappear altogether. 
 The more completethe democracy, the nearer the moment when it becomes unnec-essary. 
 The more democratic the “state” which consists of the armed workers, and which is “no longer a state in the prop-er sense of the word”, the more rapidly every form of state begins to wither away. 
 For when all have learned to administer and actually do independently administer social production, independently keep accounts and exercise control over the parasites, the sons of the wealthy, the swindlers and other “guardians ofcapitalist traditions”, the escape from this popular account-ing and control will inevitably become so incredibly diffi-cult, such a rare exception, and will probably be accompa-nied by such swift and severe punishment (for the armed workers are practical men and not sentimental intellectuals, and they scarcely allow anyone to trifle with them),that the necessity of observing the simple, fundamental rules of the community will very soon become a habit . 
 Then the door will be thrown wide open for the transi-tion from the first phase of communist society to its higher phase, and with it to the complete withering away of the state. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR C H A P T E R VI THE VULGARISATION OF ISM BY THE OPPORTUNISTS The question of the relation of the state to the social revolution, and of the social revolution to the state, likethe question of revolution generally, was given very littleattention by the leading theoreticians and publicists of theSecond International (1889-1914). 
 But the most character-istic thing about the process of the gradual growth of op-portunism that led to the collapse of the Second Interna-tional in 1914 is the fact that even when these people weresquarely faced with this question they tried to evade it or ignored it. 
 In general, it may be said that evasiveness over the question of the relation of the proletarian revolution to the state— an evasiveness which benefited and fostered opportunism— resulted in the distortion of Marxism and in its complete vulgarisation. 
 To characterise this lamentable process, if only briefly, we shall take the most prominent theoreticians of Marxism:Plekhanov and Kautsky. 
 1. 
 PLEKHANOV ’S CONTROVERSY WITH THE ANARCHISTS Plekhanov wrote a special pamphlet on the relation of anarchism to socialism, entitled Anarchism and Socialism , which was published in German in 1894. 
 In treating this subject, Plekhanov contrived completely to evade the most urgent, burning, and most politicallyessential issue in the struggle against anarchism, namely, the relation of the revolution to the state, and the question of the state in general! His pamphlet falls into two distinctparts: one of them is historical and literary, and containsvaluable material on the history of the ideas of Stirner,Proudhon, and others; the other is philistine, and containsa clumsy dissertation on the theme that an anarchist cannot be distinguished from a bandit. 
 It is a most amusing combination of subjects and most char-acteristic of Plekhanov’s whole activity on the eve of the revolution and during the revolutionary period in Russia. 
 In fact, in the years 1905 to 1917, Plekhanov revealed him-self as a semi-doctrinaire and semi-philistine who, in poli-tics, trailed in the wake of the bourgeoisie. 
 We have now seen how, in their controversy with the an-archists, Marx and Engels with the utmost thoroughness ex-plained their views on the relation of revolution to the state. 
In 1891, in his foreword to Marx’s Critique of the Gotha Pro-gramme , Engels wrote that “we”—that is, Engels and Marx— “were at that time, hardly two years after the Hague Con-gress of the [First] International, 151 engaged in the most violent struggle against Bakunin and his anarchists. 
” The anarchists had tried to claim the Paris Commune as their “own”, so to say, as a collaboration of their doctrine; and they completely misunderstood its lessons and Marx’s analysis of these lessons. 
 Anarchism has given nothing evenapproximating true answers to the concrete political ques-tions: Must the old state machine be smashed ? And what should be put in its place? But to speak of “anarchism and socialism” while com-pletely evading the question of the state, and disregarding the whole development of Marxism before and after theCommune, meant inevitably slipping into opportunism. 
For what opportunism needs most of all is that the two ques-tions just mentioned should not be raised at all. 
 That in itself is a victory for opportunism. 
 2. 
 KAUTSKY ’S CONTROVERSY WITH THE OPPORTUNISTS Undoubtedly, an immeasurably larger number of Kaut-sky’s works have been translated into Russian than into any other language. 
 It is not without reason that some GermanSocial-Democrats say in jest that Kautsky is read more inRussia than in Germany (let us say, in parenthesis, that thisjest has a far deeper historical meaning than those who firstmade it suspect. 
 The Russian workers, by making in 1905 an unusually great and unprecedented demand for the best works of the best Social-Democratic literature in the world,and by receiving translations and editions of these works in quantities unheard of in other countries, rapidly transplant-ed, so to speak, the enormous experience of a neighbouring, more advanced country to the young soil of our proletarian movement). 
 Besides his popularisation of Marxism, Kautsky is par-ticularly known in our country for his controversy with theopportunists, with Bernstein at their head. 
 One fact, how-ever, is almost unknown, one which cannot be ignored if we set out to investigate how Kautsky drifted into the morass of unbelievably disgraceful confusion and defence of social-chauvinism during the supreme crisis of 1914-15. 
 This factis as follows: shortly before he came out against the mostprominent representatives of opportunism in France (Mil-lerand and Jaurès) and in Germany (Bernstein), Kautsky betrayed very considerable vacillation. 
 The Marxist Zarya , 152 which was published in Stuttgart in 1901-02, and advocated revolutionary proletarian views, was forced to enter into controversy with Kautsky and describe as “elastic” the half-hearted, evasive resolution, conciliatory towards the oppor-tunists, that he proposed at the International Socialist Con-gress in Paris in 1900. 
 153 Kautsky’s letters published in Ger-many reveal no less hesitancy on his part before he took thefield against Bernstein. 
 Of immeasurably greater significance, however, is the fact that, in his very controversy with the opportunists,in his formulation of the question and his manner of treating it, we can new see, as we study the history of Kautsky’s latest betrayal of Marxism, his systematic deviation towardsopportunism precisely on the question of the state. 
 Let us take Kautsky’s first important work against oppor-tunism, Bernstein and the Social-Democratic Programme . 
 Kautsky refutes Bernstein in detail, but here is a character-istic thing: Bernstein, in his Premises of Socialism , of Herostratean fame, accuses Marxism of “ Blanquism ” (an accusation since repeated thousands of times by the opportunists and liberalbourgeoisie in Russia against the revolutionary Marxists,the Bolsheviks). 
 In this connection Bernstein dwells partic-ularly on Marx’s The Civil War in France , and tries, quite unsuccessfully, as we have seen, to identify Marx’s viewson the lessons of the Commune with those of Proudhon. 
 Bernstein pays particular attention to the conclusion which Marx emphasised in his 1872 preface to the Communist Manifesto , namely, that “the working class cannot simply lay hold of the ready-made state machinery and wield itfor its own purposes ”. 
 This statement “pleased” Bernstein so much that he used it no less than three times in his book, interpreting it in themost distorted, opportunist way. 
 As we have seen, Marx meant that the working-class must smash , break , shatter ( Sprengung , explosion—the expression used by Engels) the whole state machine. 
 But according toBernstein it would appear as though Marx in these wordswarned the working class against excessive revolutionary zeal when seizing power. 
 A cruder and more hideous distortion of Marx’s idea cannot be imagined. 
 How, then, did Kautsky proceed in his most detailed re-futation of Bernsteinism? He refrained from analysing the utter distortion of Marx-ism by opportunism on this point. 
 He cited the above-quoted passage from Engels’s preface to Marx’s Civil War and said that according to Marx the working class cannot simply take over the ready-made state machinery, but that, gener-ally speaking, it can take it over—and that was all. 
 Kautsky did not say a word about the fact that Bernstein attributedto Marx the very opposite of Marx’s real idea, that since 1852 Marx had formulated the task of the proletarian revolution as being to “smash” the state machine. 
 The result was that the most essential distinction between Marxism and opportunism on the subject of the tasks of theproletarian revolution was slurred over by Kautsky! “We can quite safely leave the solution of the problems of the pro-letarian dictatorship of the future,” said Kautsky, writing “ against ” Bernstein. 
 (P. 
 172, German edition. 
) This is not a polemic against Bernstein, but, in essence, a concession to him, a surrender to opportunism; for at pre-sent the opportunists ask nothing better than to “quite safely leave to the future” all fundamental questions of the tasks of the proletarian revolution. 
 From 1852 to 1891, or for forty years, Marx and Engels taught the proletariat that it must smash the state machine. 
 Yet, in 1899, Kautsky, confronted with the complete betray-al of Marxism by the opportunists on this point, fraudulentlysubstituted for the question whether it is necessary to smash this machine the question for the concrete forms in whichit is to be smashed, and then sough refuge behind the “in-disputable” (and barren) philistine truth that concrete forms cannot be known in advance!! A gulf separates Marx and Kautsky over their attitude towards the proletarian party’s task of training the workingclass for revolution. 
 Let us take the next, more mature, work by Kautsky, which was also largely devoted to a refutation of opportun-ist errors. 
 It is his pamphlet, The Social Revolution . 
 In this pamphlet, the author chose as his special theme the questionof “the proletarian revolution” and “the proletarian regime”. 
He gave much that was exceedingly valuable, but he avoided the question of the state. 
 Throughout the pamphlet the authorspeaks of the winning of state power—and no more; that is, he has chosen a formula which makes a concession to the opportunists, inasmuch as it admits the possibility of seizing power without destroying the state machine. 
 The very thing which Marx in 1872 declared to be “obsolete” in the programmeof the Communist Manifesto , is revived by Kautsky in 1902. 
 A special section in the pamphlet is devoted to the “forms and weapons of the social revolution”. 
 Here Kautsky speaks of the mass political strike, of civil war, and of the “instru-ments of the might of the modern large state, its bureaucracyand the army”; but he does not say a word about what theCommune has already taught the workers. 
 Evidently, it wasnot without reason that Engels issued a warning, particu-larly to the German socialists, against “superstitious rev-erence” for the state. 
 Kautsky treats the matter as follows: the victorious pro-letariat “will carry out the democratic programme”, and hegoes on to formulate its clauses. 
 But he does not say a wordabout the new material provided in 1871 on the subject of the replacement of bourgeois democracy by proletarian de-mocracy. 
 Kautsky disposes of the question by using such“impressive-sounding” banalities as: “Still, it goes without saying that we shall not achieve supremacy under the present conditions. 
 Revolution itself presupposes long anddeep-going struggles, which, in themselves, will change our presentpolitical and social structure. 
” Undoubtedly, this “goes without saying”, just as the fact that horses eat oats of the Volga flows into the Caspian. 
Only it is a pity that an empty and bombastic phrase about“deep-going” struggles is used to avoid a question of vital importance to the revolutionary proletariat, namely, what makes its revolution “deep-going” in relation to the state, to democracy, as distinct from previous, non-proletarianrevolutions. 
 By avoiding this question, Kautsky in practice makes a concession to opportunism on this most essential point, although in words he declares stern war against it and stresses the importance of the “idea of revolution” (how muchis this “idea” worth when one is afraid to teach the workersthe concrete lessons of revolution?), or says, “revolutionaryidealism before everything else”, or announces that the En-glish workers are now “hardly more than petty bourgeois”. 
 “The most varied form of enterprises—bureaucratic [??], trade unionist, co-operative, private ... can exist side by side in socialistsociety,” Kautsky writes. 
 “... There are, for example, enterprises whichcannot do without a bureaucratic [??] organisation, such as the rail-ways. 
 Here the democratic organisation may take the following shape: the workers elect delegates who form a sort of parliament, whichestablishes the working regulations and supervises the managementof the bureaucratic apparatus. 
 The management of other enterprisesmay be transferred to the trade unions, and still others may becomeco-operative enterprises. 
” This argument is erroneous; it is a step backward com-pared with the explanations Marx and Engels gave in the seventies, using the lessons of the Commune as an example. 
 As far as the supposedly necessary “bureaucratic” organ-isation is concerned, there is no difference whatever betweena railway and any other enterprise in large-scale machineindustry, any factory, large shop, or large-scale capitalistagricultural enterprise. 
 The technique of all these enter-prises makes absolutely imperative the strictest discipline, the utmost precision on the part of everyone in carryingout his allotted task, for otherwise the whole enterprise may come to a stop, or machinery or the finished product may be damaged. 
 In all these enterprises the workers will, of course, “elect delegates who will form a sort of parlia-ment ”. 
 The whole point, however, is that this “sort of parlia-ment” will not be a parliament in the sense of a bourgeois parliamentary institution. 
 The whole point is that this“sort of parliament” will not merely “establish the working regulations and supervise the management of the bureau-cratic apparatus”, as Kautsky, whose thinking does not gobeyond the bounds of bourgeois parliamentarism, imagines. 
In socialist society, the “sort of parliament” consisting ofworkers’ deputies will, of course, “establish the workingregulations and supervise the management” of the “appa-ratus”, but this apparatus will not be “bureaucratic”. 
 The workers, after winning political power, will smash the oldbureaucratic apparatus, shatter it to its very foundations,and raze it to the ground; they will replace it by a new one,consisting of the very same workers and other employees,against whose transformation into bureaucrats the measures will at once be taken which were specified in detail by Marx and Engels: (1) not only election, but also recall at any time;(2) pay not to exceed that of a workman; (3) immediate in-troduction of control and supervision by all, so that all may become “bureaucrats” for a time and that, therefore,nobody may be able to become a “bureaucrat”. 
 Kautsky has not reflected at all on Marx’s words: “The Commune was a working, not parliamentary, body, exec-utive and legislative at the same time. 
” Kautsky has not understood at all the difference between bourgeois parliamentarism, which combines democracy ( not for the people ) with bureaucracy ( against the people ), and proletarian democracy, which will take immediate steps to cut bureaucracy down to the roots, and which will be ableto carry these measures through to the end, to the completeabolition of bureaucracy, to the introduction of completedemocracy for the people. 
 Kautsky here displays the same old “superstitious rever-ence” for the state, and “superstitious belief” in bureaucracy. 
 Let us now pass to the last and best of Kautsky’s works against the opportunists, his pamphlet The Road to Power (which, I believe, has not been published in Russian, for it appeared in 1909, when reaction was at its height in our country). 
 This pamphlet is a big step forward, since it does not deal with the revolutionary programme in general, as thepamphlet of 1899 against Bernstein, or with the tasks ofthe social revolution irrespective of the time of its occur-rence, as the 1902 pamphlet, The Social Revolution ; it deals with the concrete conditions which compels us to recognise that the “era of revolutions” is setting in . 
 The author explicitly points to the aggravation of class an-tagonisms in general and to imperialism, which plays a par-ticularly important part in this respect. 
 After the “revolu-tionary period of 1789-1871” in Western Europe, he says,a similar period began in the East in 1905. 
 A world war is approaching with menacing rapidity. 
 “It [the proletariat] can no longer talk of premature revolution. 
” “We haveentered a revolutionary period. 
” The “revolutionary erais beginning”. 
 These statements are perfectly clear. 
 This pamphlet of Kautsky’s should serve as a measure of comparison of what the German Social-Democrats promised to be before the impe-rialist war and the depth of degradation to which they, in-cluding Kautsky himself, sank when the war broke out. 
 “Thepresent situation,” Kautsky wrote in the pamphlet undersurvey, “is fraught with the danger that we [i. 
e. 
, the GermanSocial-Democrats] may easily appear to be more ‘moderate’ than we really are. 
” It turned out that in reality the German Social-Democratic Party was much more moderate and op-portunist than it appeared to be! It is all the more characteristic, therefore, that although Kautsky so explicitly declared that the era of revolutionhad already begun, in the pamphlet which he himself said was devoted to an analysis of the “ political revolu-tion”, he again completely avoided the question of thestate. 
 These evasions of the question, these omissions and equivocations, inevitably added up to that complete swing-over to opportunism with which we shall now have to deal. 
 Kautsky, the German Social-Democrats’ spokesman, seems to have declared: I abide by revolutionary views (1899), I recognise, above all, the inevitability of the social revolu-tion of the proletariat (1902), I recognise the advent of a new era of revolutions (1909). 
 Still, I am going back on what Marx said as early as 1852, since the question of the tasks ofthe proletarian revolution in relation to the state is beingraised (1912). 
 It was in this point-blank form that the question was put in Kautsky’s controversy with Pannekoek. 
 3. 
 KAUTSKY ’S CONTROVERSY WITH PANNEKOEK In opposing Kautsky, Pannekoek came out as one of the representatives of the “Left radical” trend which includedRosa Luxemburg, Karl Radek, and others. 
 Advocating revo-lutionary tactics, they were united in the conviction that Kautsky was going over to the “Centre”, which wavered in anunprincipled manner between Marxism and opportunism. 
This view was proved perfectly correct by the war, whenthis “Centrist” (wrongly called Marxist) trend, or Kautskyism,revealed itself in all its repulsive wretchedness. 
 In an article touching on the question of the state, entitled “Mass Action and Revolution” ( Neue Zeit , 1912, Vol. 
 XXX, 2), Pannekoek described Kautsky’s attitude as one of “pas-sive radicalism”, as “a theory of inactive expectancy”. 
“Kautsky refuses to see the process of revolution,” wrotePannekoek (p. 
 616). 
 In presenting the matter in this way, Pannekoek approached the subject which interests us, name-ly, the tasks of the proletarian revolution in relation to thestate. 
 “The struggle of the proletariat,” he wrote, “is not merely a struggle against the bourgeoisie for state power, but a struggle against state power .... 
 The content of this [the proletarian] revolution is the destruc-tion and dissolution [Auflösung] of the instruments of power of thestate with the aid of the instruments of power of the proletariat. 
 (P. 
 544. 
) “The struggle will cease only when, as the result of it, the state organisation is completely destroyed. 
 The organisation of themajority will then have demonstrated its superiority by destroying theorganisation of the ruling minority. 
” (P. 
 548. 
) The formulation in which Pannekoek presented his ideas suffers from serious defects. 
 But its meaning is clear nonetheless, and it is interesting to note how Kautsky com-bated it. 
 “Up to now,” he wrote, “the antithesis between the Social-Democrats and the anarchists has been that the former wished to win the state powerwhile the latter wished to destroy it. 
 Pannekoek wants to do both. 
”(P. 
 724. 
) Although Pannekoek’s exposition lacks precision and concreteness—not to speak of other shortcomings of hisarticle which have no bearing on the present subject—Kaut-sky seized precisely on the point of principle raised by Pan-nekoek; and on this fundamental point of principle Kautsky completely abandoned the Marxist position and went overwholly to opportunism. 
 His definition of the distinction be-tween the Social-Democrats and the anarchists is absolutelywrong; he completely vulgarises and distorts Marxism. 
 The distinction between Marxists and the anarchists is this: (1) The former, while aiming at the complete abolition of the state, recognise that this aim can only be achievedafter classes have been abolished by the socialist revolution,as the result of the establishment of socialism, which leadsto the withering away of the state. 
 The latter want to abolishhe state completely overnight, not understanding the con-ditions under which the state can be abolished. 
 (2) The form-er recognise that after the proletariat has won politicalpower it must completely destroy the old state machine andreplace it by a new one consisting of an organisation of thearmed workers, after the type of the Commune. 
 The latter,while insisting on the destruction of the state machine, have a very vague idea of what the proletariat will put in its place and how it will use its revolutionary power. 
 The anarchists even deny that the revolutionary proletariat should use the state power, they reject its revolutionary dictatorship. 
 (3) The former demand that the proletariat be trained for revo-lution by utilising the present state. 
 The anarchists rejectthis. 
 In this controversy, it is not Kautsky but Pannekoek who represents Marxism, for it was Marx who taught that theproletariat cannot simply win state power in the sense that the old state apparatus passes into new hands, but must smash this apparatus, must break it and replace it by a newone. 
 Kautsky abandons Marxism for the opportunist camp, for this destruction of the state machine, which is utterly unac-ceptable to the opportunists, completely disappears from his argument, and he leaves a loophole for them in that “con-quest” may be interpreted as the simple acquisition of a ma-jority. 
 To cover up his distortion of Marxism, Kautsky behaves like a doctrinaire: he puts forward a “quotation” from Marxhimself. 
 In 1850, Marx wrote that a “resolute centralisationof power in the hands of the state authority” was necessary, and Kautsky triumphantly asks: does Pannekoek want to destroy “Centralism ”? This is simply a trick, like Bernstein’s identification of the views of Marxism and Proudhonism on the subject offederalism as against centralism. 
 Kautsky’s “quotation” is neither here nor there. 
 Central-ism is possible with both the old and the new state machine. 
 If the workers voluntarily unite their armed forces, thiswill be centralism, but it will be based on the “completedestruction” of the centralised state apparatus—the standingarmy, the police, and the bureaucracy. 
 Kautsky acts like anoutright swindler by evading the perfectly well-known ar-guments of Marx and Engels on the Commune and plucking out a quotation which has nothing to do with the point atissue. 
 “Perhaps he [Pannekoek],” Kautsky continues, “wants to abolish the state functions of the officials? But we cannot do without officialseven in the party and the trade unions, let alone in the state ad-ministration. 
 And our programme does not demand the abolition of state officials, but that they be elected by the people .... 
 We are discussing here not the form the administrative apparatus of the ‘future state’will assume, but whether our political struggle abolishes [literallydissolves —auflöst] the state power before we have captured it . 
 [Kautsky’s italics] Which ministry with its officials could be abolished?” Then follows an enumeration of the ministries of education, justice, finance and war. 
 “No, not one of the present ministries will be removed by ourpolitical struggle against the government .... 
 I repeat, in order to pre-vent misunderstanding: we are not discussing here the form the ‘futurestate’ will be given by the victorious Social-Democrats, but how thepresent state is changed by our opposition. 
” (P. 
 725. 
) This is an obvious trick. 
 Pannekoek raised the question of revolution . 
 Both the title of his article and the passages quoted above clearly indicate this. 
 By skipping to the ques-tion of “opposition”, Kautsky substitutes the opportunist for the revolutionary point of view. 
 What he says means: at present we are an opposition; what we shall be after we have captured power, that we shall see. 
 Revolution has vanished! And that is exactly what the opportunists wanted. 
 The point at issue is neither opposition nor political strug-gle in general, but revolution . 
 Revolution consists in the pro-letariat destroying the “administrative apparatus” and the whole state machine, replacing it by a new one, made up of the armed workers. 
 Kautsky displays a “superstitiousreverence” for “ministries”; but why can they not be re-placed, say, by committees of specialists working undersovereign, all-powerful Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’Deputies? The point is not at all whether the “ministries” will re-main, or whether “committees of specialists” or some otherbodies will be set up; that is quite immaterial. 
 The pointis whether the old state machine (bound by thousands ofthreads to the bourgeoisie and permeated through and throughwith routine and inertia) shall remain, or be destroyed and replaced by a new one. 
 Revolution consists not in the new class commanding, governing with the aid of the old state machine, but in this class smashing this machine and com-manding, governing with the aid of a new machine. 
 Kautsky slurs over this basic idea of Marxism, or he does not under-stand it at all. 
 His question about officials clearly shows that he does not understand the lessons of the Commune or the teachingsof Marx. 
 “We cannot do without officials even in the partyand the trade unions .... 
” We cannot do without officials under capitalism , under the rule of the bourgeoisie . 
 The proletariat is oppressed, the working people are enslaved by capitalism. 
 Under capital-ism, democracy is restricted, cramped, curtailed, mutilatedby all the conditions of wage slavery, and the poverty andmisery of the people. 
 This and this alone is the reason whythe functionaries of our political organisations and tradeunions are corrupted—or rather tend to be corrupted—by the conditions of capitalism and betray a tendency to become bureaucrats, i. 
e. 
, privileged persons divorced from the peopleand standing above the people. 
 That is the essence of bureaucracy; and until the capital-ists have been expropriated and the bourgeoisie overthrown, even proletarian functionaries will inevitably be “bureaucrat-ised” to a certain extent. 
 According to Kautsky, since elected functionaries will remain under socialism, so will officials, so will the bureau-cracy! This is exactly where he is wrong. 
 Marx, referringto the example of the Commune, showed that under socialism functionaries will cease to be “bureaucrats”, to be “officials”, they will cease to be so in proportion as —in addition to the principle of election of officials—the principle of recallat any time is also introduced, as salaries are reduced to the level of the wages of the average workman, and as parliamentary institutions are replaced by “work-ing bodies, executive and legislative at the same time”. 
 As a matter of fact, the whole of Kautsky’s argument against Pannekoek, and particularly the former’s wonderfulpoint that we cannot do without officials even in our partyand trade union organisations, is merely a repetition of Bernstein’s old “arguments” against Marxism in general. 
 In his renegade book, The Premises of Socialism , Bernstein combats the ideas of “primitive” democracy, combats whathe calls “doctrinaire democracy”: binding mandates, unpaidofficials, impotent central representative bodies, etc. 
 toprove that this “primitive” democracy is unsound, Bernstein refers to the experience of the British trade unions, as in-terpreted by the Webbs. 
 154 Seventy years of development “in absolute freedom”, he says (p. 
 137, German edition),convinced the trade unions that primitive democracy wasuseless, and they replaced it by ordinary democracy, i. 
e. 
,parliamentarism combined with bureaucracy. 
 In reality, the trade unions did not develop “in absolute freedom” but in absolute capitalist slavery , under which, it goes without saying, a number of concessions to the prevail-ing evil, violence, falsehood, exclusion of the poor from theaffairs of “higher” administration, “cannot be done without”. 
Under socialism much of “primitive” democracy will inevi-tably be revived, since, for the first time in the history of civilised society the mass of population will rise to taking an independent part, not only in voting and elections, but also in the everyday administration of the state . 
 Under socialism all will govern in turn and will soon become accustomed to no one governing. 
 Marx’s critico-analytical genius saw in the practical meas-ures of the Commune the turning-point which the opportun-ists fear and do not want to recognise because of their coward-ice, because they do not want to break irrevocably withthe bourgeoisie, and which the anarchists do not want to see, either because they are in a hurry or because they do not understand at all the conditions of great social changes. 
“We must not even think of destroying the old state machine;how can we do without ministries and officials>” argues theopportunist, who is completely saturated with philistinismand who, at bottom, not only does not believe in revolution, in the creative power of revolution, but lives in mortal dread of it (like our Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolution-aries). 
 “We must think only of destroying the old state machine; it is no use probing into the concrete lessons of earlier prole-tarian revolutions and analyzing what to put in the place of what has been destroyed, and how ,” argues the anarchist (the best of the anarchist, of course, and not those who,following the Kropotkins and Co. 
, trail behind the bour-geoisie). 
 Consequently, the tactics of the anarchist becomethe tactics of despair instead of a ruthlessly bold revolu-tionary effort to solve concrete problems while taking into account the practical conditions of the mass move-ment. 
 Marx teaches us to avoid both errors; he teaches us to act with supreme boldness in destroying the entire old state ma-chine, and at the same time he teaches us to put the questionconcretely: the Commune was able in the space of a few weeks to start building a new , proletarian state machine by introducing such-and-such measures to provide wider demo-cracy and to uproot bureaucracy. 
 Let us learn revolutionaryboldness from the Communards; let us see in their practicalmeasures the outline of really urgent and immediately pos-sible measures, and then, following this road , we shall achieve the complete destruction of bureaucracy. 
 The possibility of this destruction is guaranteed by the fact that socialism will shorten the working day, will raise the people to a new life, will create such conditions for the majority of the population as will enable everybody , without exception, to perform “state functions”, and this will lead to the complete withering away of every form of state in general. 
 “Its object [the object of the mass strike],” Kautsky continues, “cannot be to destroy the state power; its only object can be to make the government compliant on some specific question, or to replacea government hostile to the proletariat by one willing to meet it half-way [entgegenkommende ].... 
 But n ever, under no circumstances can it [that is, the proletarian victory over a hostile government] lead tothe destruction of the state power; it can lead only to a certain shifting [Verschiebung] of the balance of forces within the state power .... 
 The aim of our political struggle remains, as in the past, the conquest ofstate power by winning a majority in parliament and by raisingparliament to the ranks of master of the government. 
” (Pp. 
 726,727, 732. 
) This is nothing but the purest and most vulgar opportun-ism: repudiating revolution in deeds, while accepting it in words. 
 Kautsky’s thoughts go no further than a “govern-ment ... willing to meet the proletariat half-way”—a stepbackward to philistinism compared with 1847, when theCommunist Manifesto proclaimed “the organisation of the proletariat as the ruling class”. 
 Kautsky will have to achieve his beloved “unity” with the Scheidemanns, Plekhanovs and Vanderveldes, all ofwhom agree to fight for a government “willing to meet theproletariat half-way. 
” We, however, shall break with these traitors to socialism, and we shall fight for the complete destruction of the old state ma-chine, in order that the armed proletariat itself may become the government . 
 These are two vastly different things. 
 Kautsky will have to enjoy the pleasant company of the Legiens and Davids, Plekhanovs, Potresovs, Tseretelis andChernovs, who are quite willing to work for the “shifting of the balance of forces within the state power”, for “winning a majority in parliament”, and “raising parliament to theranks of master of the government”. 
 A most worthy object,which is wholly acceptable to the opportunists and whichkeeps everything within the bounds of the bourgeois parlia-mentary republic. 
 We, however, shall break with the opportunists; and the entire class-conscious proletariat will be with us in the fight—not to “shift the balance of forces”, but to overthrow the bourgeoisie , to destroy bourgeois parliamentarism, for a democratic republic after the type of the Commune, or arepublic of Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, forthe revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat. 
 * * * To the right of Kautsky in international socialism there are trends such as Socialist Monthly155 in Germany (Legien, David, Kolb, and many others, including the ScandinavianStauning and Branting), Jaurès’s followers and Vandervelde in France and Belgium; Turati, Treves, and other Right-wingers of the Italian Party; the Fabians and “Independents”(the Independent labour Party, which, in fact, has alwaysbeen dependent on the Liberals) in Britain; and the like. 
All these gentry, who play a tremendous, very often a pre-dominant role in the parliamentary work and the press of their parties, repudiate outright the dictatorship of the pro-letariat and pursue a policy of undisguised opportunism. 
In the eyes of these gentry, the “dictatorship” of theproletariat “contradicts” democracy!! There is really noessential distinction between them and the petty-bourgeoisdemocrats. 
 Taking this circumstance into consideration, we are justi-fied in drawing the conclusion that the Second International,that is, the overwhelming majority of its official represen-tatives, has completely sunk into opportunism. 
 The expe-rience of the Commune has been not only ignored but dis-torted. 
 Far from inculcating in the workers’ minds the idea that the time is nearing when they must act to smash the old state machine, replace it by a new one, and in thisway make their political rule the foundation for the socialistreorganisation of society, they have actually preached to themasses the very opposite and have depicted the “conquest ofpower” in a way that has left thousands of loopholes for op-portunism. 
 The distortion and hushing up of the question of the rela-tion of the proletarian revolution to the state could not but play an immense role at a time when states, which possess a military apparatus expanded as a consequence of imperialist rivalry, have become military monsters which are exterminating millions of people in order to settle theissue as to whether Britain or Germany—this or that financecapital—is to rule the world. 
 * *The MS. 
 continues as follows: C h a p t e r VII THE EXPERIENCE OF THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTIONS OF 1905 AND 1917 The subject indicated in the title of this chapter is so vast that volumes could and should be written about it. 
 In the present pamphlet we shall have to confine ourselves, naturally, to the most important lessons provided by experience, those touching directly upon the tasksof the proletariat in the revolution in relation to state power. 
 (Herethe manuscript breaks off. 
— Ed. 
) POSTSCRIPT TO THE FIRST EDITION This pamphlet was written in August and September 1917. 
 I had already drawn up the plan for the next, the sev-enth chapter, “The Experience of the Russian Revolutions of 1905 and 1917”. 
 Apart from the title, however, I had notime to write a single line of the chapter; I was “interrupted”by a political crisis—the eve of the October revolution of1917. 
 Such an “interruption” can only be welcomed; but thewriting of the second part of this pamphlet (“The Experience of the Russian Revolutions of 1905 and 1917”) will probably have to be put off for a long time. 
 It is more pleasant anduseful to go through the “experience of revolution” thanto write about it. 
 The Author Petrograd November 30, 1917 N O T E S 1 2 3 4The First All-Russia Congress of Soviets of Workers ’ and Soldiers ’ Deputies sat in Petrograd from June 3 to 24 (June 16 to July 7), 1917. 
 It was attended by more than a thousand delegates. 
 The Bolsheviks, then a minority in the Soviets, were represented by 105 delegates. 
 The majority was made up of Socialist-Revolu-tionaries and Mensheviks. 
 Among the items on the Congress agenda were: the attitude to the Provisional Government, the war, and preparations for the Constituent Assembly. 
 Lenin spoke on the attitude to the Provisional Government and on the war. 
 The Bol-sheviks tabled their own motions on all the major issues. 
 They exposed the imperialist character of the war, stressed the disastrous consequences that compromise with the bourgeoisie was bound to have, and insisted that all power be transferred to the Soviets. 
 The Congress resolutions declared in favour of the Provisional Government and its preparations for an offensive at the front, and took a stand against the transfer of power to the Soviets. 
 p. 
 15 The first coalition government was formed on May 5 (18), 1917, and its composition announced in the press the following day. 
 Along with representatives of the bourgeoisie, it included the Socialist-Revolutionaries Kerensky and Chernov, Pereverzev, who was close to the S. 
R. 
s, the Mensheviks Skobelev and Tsereteli; and the Popular Socialist Peshekhonov. 
 p. 
 18 The Provisional Government was formed on March 2 (15), 1917, by agreement between the Duma’s Provisional Committee and the S. 
R. 
 and Menshevik leaders of the Executive Committee of the Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies. 
 It was composed of Prince G. 
 Y. 
 Lvov (Chairman of the Council of Ministers and Minister of the Interior), P. 
 N. 
 Milyukov, the Cadet leader (Minister for Foreign Affairs), A. 
 I. 
 Guchkov, the Octobrist leader (War, and ad interim Naval, Minister), and other members of the big bourgeoisie and landed proprietors, as well as the Tru-dovik A. 
 F. 
 Kerensky (Minister of Justice). 
 p. 
 19 Rabochaya Gazeta (Workers’ Gazette)—a daily newspaper published by the Mensheviks in Petrograd from March 7 (20) to November 30 (December 13), 1917. 
 On August 30 (September 12) it became a mouthpiece of the Menshevik Central Committee. 
 It supported the bourgeois Provisional Government and fought against the Bolshevik Party and its leader, Lenin. 
 Its reaction to the October Revolution and the establishment of Soviet rule was hostile. 
 p. 
 19 K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1965, p. 
 395. 
 p. 
 19 Lenin is referring to the resolutions of the Seventh (April) All-Russia Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
), held in Petrograd from April 24 to 29 (May 7-12), 1917 (see The C. 
P. 
 S. 
U. 
 in Resolutions and Decisions of Congresses , Conferences and Plenary Meetings of the C. 
C. 
 , 7th ed. 
, Part I, 1954, pp. 
 332-53 [in Russian]). 
 p. 
 20 Lyakhov —a colonel of the tsarist army, led the Russian troops which put down the bourgeois revolution of 1908 in Persia. 
 By “Lyakhov’s policy” Lenin means the suppression of the revolu-tionary and national liberation movements by the tsarist govern-ment. 
 p. 
 22 Cadets —members of the Constitutional-Democratic Party, the leading party of the liberal monarchist bourgeoisie in Russia. 
 The party, founded in October 1905, grouped members of the bourgeoisie, Zemstvo officials from among the landowners, and bourgeois intellectuals. 
 Among its leaders were P. 
 N. 
 Milyukov, S. 
 A. 
 Muromtsev, V. 
 A. 
 Maklakov, A. 
 I. 
 Shingaryov, P. 
 B. 
 Struve and F. 
 I. 
 Rodichev. 
 Subsequently the Cadets became a party of the imperialist bourgeoisie. 
 During the First World War they fully supported the tsarist government’s aggressive foreign policy. 
 During the February bourgeois-democratic revolution of 1917, they did their best to rescue the monarchy. 
 Following the victory of the October Socialist Revolution they took an uncompromising stand against the Soviet state and shared in all the armed counter-revolutionary actions and campaigns of the interventionists. 
 After the foreign invaders and the whiteguards had been defeated, the Cadets fled from the country and continued their anti-Soviet, counter-revolutionary activity as émigrés. 
 p. 
 22 Izvestia Petrogradskogo Soveta Rabochikh i Soldatskikh Deputatov (Bulletin of the Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Depu-ties)—a daily newspaper founded on February 28 (March 13), 1917. 
 After the First All-Russia Congress of Soviets had formed the Central Executive Committee of Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, Izvestia became the organ of the C. 
E. 
C. 
, and from August 1 (14) on, that is, beginning with its issue No. 
 132, appeared under the title of Izvestia Tsentralnogo Ispolnitelnogo Komiteta i Petrogradskogo Soveta Rabochikh i Soldatskikh Deputatov (Bulletin of the Central Executive Committee and the Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies). 
 On September 29 (October 12), its issue No. 
 184 appeared under the new title Izvestia Tsentralnogo5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12Ispolnitelnogo Komiteta Sovetov Rabochikh i Soldatskikh Deputatov (Bulletin of the Central Executive Committee of Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies). 
 Throughout that period the paper was controlled by the Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s, and waged a bitter struggle against the Bolshevik Party. 
 After the Second All-Russia Congress of Soviets the Izvestia editorial board was changed and the paper became the official organ of Soviet power. 
 It published the first important documents of the Soviet Government, and articles and speeches by Lenin. 
 In March 1918 its publication was transferred to Moscow. 
 In Decem-ber 1922, with the formation of the U. 
S. 
S. 
R. 
, Izvestia became the organ of the C. 
E. 
C. 
 U. 
S. 
S. 
R. 
 and the All-Russia C. 
E. 
C. 
 The paper was reorganised by decision of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the U. 
S. 
S. 
R. 
 dated January 24, 1938, and ever since January 26, 1938, has been published under the title of Izvestia Sovetov Deputatov Trudyashchikhsya (Bulletin of the Soviets of Working People’s Deputies). 
 p. 
 22 The First All-Russia Congress of Peasant Deputies was held in Petrograd from May 4 to 28 (May 17 to June 10), 1917. 
 It was attended by 1,115 delegates from the gubernias and army units. 
 The Bolsheviks, who took an active part in its deliberations, exposed the imperialist policies of the bourgeois Provisional Government and the Menshevik and S. 
R. 
 policy of compromise. 
 Lenin spoke on the agrarian question. 
 He insisted on immediate confiscation of the landed estates, to be transferred to peasant committees, and on nationalisation of all the lands in Russia. 
 S. 
R. 
 domination at the Congress left its imprint on the resolutions adopted. 
 The Congress approved the Provisional Government’s policy and the entry of “socialists” into the government. 
 It declared for war “to a victorious conclusion” and for an offensive at the front, then in preparation. 
 It pronounced itself against the imme-diate transfer of the landed estates to the peasants, and put off decision on the land question pending convocation of the Consti-tuent Assembly. 
 p. 
 22 Novaya Zhizn (New Life)—a daily newspaper of a Menshevik trend published by a group of Social-Democrats who called themselves internationalists ”. 
 The group comprised the Mensheviks who supported Martov, and certain intellectuals with semi-Menshevik leanings. 
 It vacillated continuously between the conciliators and the Bolsheviks. 
 Novaya Zhizn appeared in Petrograd from April 1917. 
 After the October Revolution it adopted a hostile attitude to the Soviet state. 
 It was closed down in July 1918. 
 p. 
 24 Lenin has in mind the British Government issuing a passport to Ramsay MacDonald, the British Independent Labour Party leader, who was invited to Russia by the Executive Committee of the Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies. 
 The trip was frustrated by the British Seamen’s Union, which refused to man the ship in which MacDonald was to sail to Russia. 
 p. 
 24 13 14 15 16The Manifesto of the Petrograd Soviet of Workers ’ and Soldiers ’ Deputies “To the Peoples of the World ” was adopted by the Soviet on March 14 (27), 1917, and was published in the capital the next day. 
 The S. 
R. 
 and Menshevik leaders were compelled to vote for it under pressure from the revolutionary people, who insisted on ending the war. 
 The Manifesto called on the working people of the belligerent countries to take action in favour of peace. 
 However, it did not expose the predatory nature of the war, nor did it propose any practical measures for peace. 
 It virtually justified the continuation of the imperialist war by the bourgeois Provisional Government. 
 p. 
 25 In June 1917 Italy overran Albania and proclaimed her indepen-dence under Italy’s virtual protectorate. 
 In Greece, a coup d’état was carried out under the pressure of Britain and France. 
 By launching an economic blockade that caused a terrible famine, and by occupying a number of Greek provinces, the Allies forced King Constantine to abdicate, and put Venizelos, their adherent, in power. 
 Greece was dragged into the war on the side of the Entente, contrary to the will of the vast majority of her people. 
 During the First World War Persia (Iran) was occupied by British and Russian troops. 
 By early 1917 Persia, having lost all independence, was occupied by the Russians in the north and the British in the south. 
 Provisional Government diplomats backed all these acts of imperialist tyranny. 
 p. 
 26 Reference is to the declaration which the bureau of the Bolshevik group and the bureau of the united internationalist Social-Democ-rats made at the First All-Russia Congress of Soviets. 
 They demand-ed that the Congress first of all discuss the offensive at the front for which the Provisional Government was preparing. 
 The decla-ration pointed out that the offensive was being imposed by the magnates of the imperialist Allies and that the Russian counter-revolutionaries expected thereby to concentrate power in the hands of the military-diplomatic and capitalist groups, and to deliver a blow to the revolutionary fight for peace and to the positions gained by the Russian democrats. 
 The declaration warned the work-ing class, the armed forces and the peasants of the danger threaten-ing the country, and called on the Congress to immediately repel the counter-revolutionaries’ onslaught. 
 The Congress rejected the proposal made by the bureau of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
) group. 
 p. 
 26 Dyelo Naroda (People’s Cause)—an S. 
R. 
 daily published in Petro-grad between March 1917 and June 1918. 
 It changed its title several times. 
 It adopted a defencist and conciliatory stand and supported the bourgeois Provisional Government. 
 Its publication was resumed in Samara in October 1918 (three issues were brought out) and in 17 18 19 20 21Moscow in March 1919 (ten issues). 
 The paper was closed down the same year for its counter-revolutionary trend. 
 p. 
 26 Lenin described as Narodniks three petty-bourgeois parties of a Narodnik type: the Trudoviks, Socialist-Revolutionaries and Popular Socialists. 
 p. 
 29 Basle Manifesto of 1912 —a manifesto on the war, adopted by the Extraordinary International Socialist Congress which sat in Basle on November 24 and 25, 1912. 
 It warned the nations against the imminent threat of a world imperialist war, revealed the aggressive aims of the war and called on the workers of the world to fight for peace and “to pit against the might of capitalist imperialism the international solidarity of the working class”. 
 The Manifesto included a clause, formulated by Lenin, from a resolution of the Stuttgart Congress (1907), to the effect that in the event of an impe-rialist war the socialists should take advantage of the economic and political crisis that would result from the war to hasten the downfall of capitalist class rule and fight for socialist revolution. 
 p. 
 35 Allusion is to the prohibition of the All-Ukraine Army Congress by Kerensky, the Provisional Government’s War Minister. 
 Despite the ban, the Congress sat from June 5-12 (18-25), 1917, in Kiev. 
 It was attended by some 2,000 delegates. 
 It passed the “Universal Act” on the autonomy of the Ukraine, published by the Ukrainian Central Rada. 
 The counter-revolutionary policies of the Provisional Govern-ment and the Menshevik and S. 
R. 
 parties towards the Ukraine were denounced by Lenin in the articles “The Ukraine” and “The Ukraine and the Defeat of the Ruling Parties of Russia” (see pp. 
 91-92 and 99-102 of this volume). 
 p. 
 37 Reference is to the tsar’s Manifesto of October 17, 1905, promising “civil liberties” and a “legislative” Duma. 
 The Manifesto was a concession wrested from the tsarist regime by the revolution. 
 The autocracy wanted to gain time, split the revolutionary forces, foil the All-Russia Strike and crush the revolution. 
 The Bolsheviks exposed this political manoeuvre. 
 On October 18 (31), 1905, the C. 
C. 
 R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 issued the appeal “To the Russian People” reveal-ing the spurious character of the tsar’s Manifesto and calling on the working people to continue their revolutionary struggle. 
 p. 
 40 The Russian revolution of 1905-07 gave rise to revolutionary move-ments among the peoples of the East. 
 In 1908 a bourgeois revolution broke out in Turkey. 
 In 1906 there was a bourgeois revolution in Persia, resulting in the overthrow of the shah in 1909. 
 The year 1910 saw the rise of a revolutionary movement in China against the feudal lords and foreign imperialists. 
 The movement led to a revolution, and to the establishment of a bourgeois republic in December 1911. 
 p. 
 40 22 23 24Sotsial-Demokrat (The Social-Democrat)—a daily newspaper of the Moscow Regional Bureau, the Moscow Committee, and subse-quently the Moscow District Committee of the Bolshevik Party. 
 It was published from March 1917 to March 1918, and was merged with Pravda when the Party’s Central Committee had moved to Moscow. 
 p. 
 42 Pravda (The Truth)—a Bolshevik daily newspaper published le-gally. 
 Its first issue appeared in St. 
 Petersburg on April 22 (May 5), 1912. 
 Lenin, who guided Pravda ideologically, contributed to the paper almost daily. 
 He gave recommendations to its editors with a view to making it a militant revolutionary paper. 
 A substantial part of the Party’s organising work was done through Pravda . 
 Conferences with representatives of local Party cells were held in its offices, which also received information on Party work in factories and passed on directives of the Party’s Central and Petrograd Committees. 
 Pravda was doggedly persecuted by the police and was closed down on July 8 (21), 1914. 
 It did not resume publication until after the February bourgeois-democratic revolution of 1917. 
 From March 5 (18), 1917, onwards it was brought out as a paper of the Central and Petrograd Commit-tees of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Upon his arrival in Petrograd Lenin joined the editorial board, and Pravda launched a campaign for his plan to bring about the development of the bourgeois-democratic revolution into a socialist revolution. 
 From July to October 1917 the paper, being persecuted by the counter-revolutionary Provisional Government, had to change its title more than once. 
 It appeared as Listok “Pravdy ”, Proletary , Rabochy and Rabochy Put . 
 Since the victory of the October Socialist Revolution it has been published—beginning with October 27 (November 9), 1917—under its original title, Pravda . 
 Pravda holds a prominent place in the history of the Bolshevik press. 
 The generation of advanced workers it educated played an outstanding part in the October Revolution and in socialist construction. 
 Pravda was the first mass paper of the working class to be published legally. 
 It marked a new stage in the development of the press of Russia’s working class and the world proletariat. 
 The day when the first issue of Pravda appeared has been cele-brated as the workers’ Press Day ever since 1914. 
 p. 
 42 The factory committees , which came into being in March 1917, immediately after the victory of the February Revolution, were class organisations of the workers. 
 The factory elders’ councils and other elected bodies formed from provisional strike committees in the periods of revolutionary upsurge are considered the forerun-ners of the factory committees. 
 The factory committees became very active as soon as they were set up. 
 They formulated the workers’ economic demands and 25 26presented them to the factory owners, introduced an eight-hour day by their own decision, exercised control over the employment and discharge of labour power, formed workers’ militia units, combated sabotage on the part of the employers, secured raw mate-rials and fuel for the factories concerned to prevent stoppages, and so on. 
 They took an active part in the October Revolution. 
 In 1918 they were merged with the trade unions and became pri-mary units of the latter. 
 The First Petrograd Conference of Factory Committees was held from May 30 to June 3 (June 12-16), 1917. 
 The 568 delegates attending it represented the factory committees, trade union bu-reaus, and other workers’ organisations of Petrograd and vicinity. 
 The conference discussed the state of industry and the problem of controlling and regulating production in Petrograd, the tasks of the factory committees, their role in the trade union movement, etc. 
 The Conference became a scene of bitter struggle between the Bolsheviks and Mensheviks over the role and tasks of the factory committees and over workers’ control. 
 The Mensheviks tried to nullify the political and economic role of the factory committees and to substitute state control involving bourgeois parties for workers’ control. 
 The conference carried the Bolshevik motion. 
 The conference was very important in that it enabled the factory committees to exchange experience and join forces in the campaign for workers’ control. 
 To this end it elected a standing Central Council of Factory Committees of 25. 
 Lenin took part in the conference. 
 He drafted the “Resolution on Measures to Cope with Economic Dislocation”, which was carried by a vast majority, and analysed the conference resolutions in his articles “The Petty-Bourgeois Stand on Economic Dislocation” and “Economic Dislocation and the Proletariat’s Struggle Against It”, criticising the Menshevik stand at the conference and uphold-ing the Bolsheviks’ tactics on workers’ control over production. 
 p. 
 43 Rech (Speech)—Central Organ of the Cadet Party published daily in St. 
 Petersburg from February 1906. 
 It was closed down by the Military Revolutionary Committee under the Petrograd Soviet. 
 On October 26 (November 8), 1917. 
 It continued publication under different titles till August 1918. 
 p. 
 44 Yedinstvo (Unity)—mouthpiece of the Right wing of the defencist Mensheviks headed by G. 
 V. 
 Plekhanov; it was published in Petrograd. 
 Four issues appeared in May and June 1914. 
 From March to November 1917 the paper was published daily. 
 In Decem-ber 1917 and January 1918 it appeared under the title Nashe Yedin-stvo (Our Unity). 
 Supporting the Provisional Government and advocating coalition with the bourgeoisie and firm power, Yedinstvo waged a fierce struggle against the Bolsheviks, very often resorting to the gutter press methods. 
 Its reaction to the October Revolution and the establishment of Soviet rule was hostile. 
 p. 
 44 27 28 29 30 31 32Struvism —a liberal-bourgeois distortion of Marxism, so named after P. 
 B. 
 Struve, the chief exponent of “legal Marxism” in Russia. 
 p. 
 45 Vorwärts (Forward)—Central Organ of the German Social-Democrat-ic Party published daily in Berlin from 1891 to 1933. 
 Engels used the columns of Vorwärts to fight against all mani-festations of opportunism. 
 In the second half of the nineties, after Engels’s death, the paper found itself in the hands of the party’s Right wing, and continuously published opportunist articles. 
 It carried biased reports on the struggle against opportunism and revisionism in the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 It backed the Economists and then, after the split in the Party, the Mensheviks. 
 In the years of reaction it published slanderous articles by Trotsky, while denying Lenin and other Bolsheviks the opportunity to refute the slander and present an objective picture of the situation in the Party. 
 During the First World War Vorwärts took a social-chauvinist stand. 
 After the October Socialist Revolution it conducted anti-Soviet propaganda. 
 p. 
 46 In Russian political writing, the term diehards was applied to the extreme Right wing of the reactionary landowners. 
 p. 
 48 The term “ gentlemen of June 3 ” applies to the bourgeois and landown-er parties (Right-wing, Octobrist and Cadet) which won a vast superiority in the Third and Fourth Dumas under the counter-revolutionary electoral law passed by the tsarist government on June 3 (16), 1907. 
 The law curtailed the already limited suffrage of the workers and peasants. 
 The June 3 parties periodically held so-called private meetings of Deputies to the Fourth Duma. 
 One of these meetings took place on June 3 (16), 1917, that is, the day the All-Russia Congress of Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies was convened. 
 This was not mere coincidence, for the counter-revolutionary parties of the Russian bourgeoisie and landowners were trying to exert political pressure on the petty-bourgeois conciliators, the Menshe-viks and S. 
R. 
s, who commanded a majority at the Congress. 
 Among the items, the meeting discussed foreign policy matters. 
 It was addressed by V. 
 A. 
 Maklakov, P. 
 N. 
 Milyukov, V. 
 V. 
 Shul-gin and other Octobrist and Cadet leaders. 
 They insisted on the vigorous fulfilment of commitments in respect of the Allies and on putting an end to the revolution. 
 The resolution adopted by the meeting said as much. 
 p. 
 48 Volya Naroda (People’s Will)—a daily newspaper published by the Right wing of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party in Petrograd in 1917. 
 It was closed down in November 1917. 
 Afterwards it reappeared under other titles, and was suppressed altogether in February 1918. 
 p. 
 54 Novoye Vremya (New Times)—a daily newspaper published in St. 
 Petersburg from 1868 to 1917. 
 It was owned by different publish-33 34 35ers, and repeatedly changed its political trend. 
 In 1905 it became a Black Hundred paper. 
 After the February bourgeois-democratic revolution of 1917 it adopted a counter-revolutionary platform and carried on a fierce anti-Bolshevik campaign. 
 It was closed down by the Military Revolutionary Committee under the Petro-grad Soviet on October 26 (November 8), 1917. 
 Lenin described Novoye Vremya as a typically venal organ. 
 p. 
 59 Socialist-Revolutionaries (S. 
R. 
s)—a petty-bourgeois party founded in Russia in late 1901 and early 1902 as a result of the amalgama-tion of various Narodnik groups and circles. 
 Their views were an eclectic hodgepodge of Narodnik and revisionist ideas. 
 During the First World War most of the S. 
R. 
s advocated social-chauvinist views. 
 After the February bourgeois-democratic revolution of 1917 the S. 
R. 
s and Mensheviks were the mainstay of the counter-revolu-tionary, bourgeois-landowner Provisional Government, and S. 
R. 
 leaders (Kerensky, Avksentyev, Chernov) were members of the cabinet. 
 The S. 
R. 
 Party refused to support the peasants’ demand for the abolition of the landed estates, and advocated their pre-servation. 
 The S. 
R. 
 members of the Provisional Government sent punitive expeditions against peasants who had seized landed estates. 
 At the end of November 1917 the Left S. 
R. 
s formed an inde-pendent party. 
 To retain their influence on the peasants, they nominally recognised Soviet power and reached agreement with the Bolsheviks. 
 But shortly afterwards they began to fight against Soviet rule. 
 During the foreign military intervention and the Civil War the S. 
R. 
s engaged in counter-revolutionary subversion, actively sup-ported the invaders and whiteguards, took part in counter-revolu-tionary conspiracies, and organised acts of terrorism against Soviet statesmen and Communist Party leaders. 
 After the Civil War they continued their hostile activity inside the country and abroad, where they joined the White émigrés. 
 p. 
 61 Reference is to the speech which the Menshevik Skobelev, Labour Minister of the Provisional Government, made at the meeting of the Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies on May 13 (26), 1917, saying that taxation of the propertied classes should be increased “to 100 per cent of their profits”. 
 p. 
 65 Lenin is referring to the First All-Russia Congress of Soviets ban-ning the demonstration fixed by the Bolshevik Central Committee for June 10 (23), 1917. 
 Early in June tension in Petrograd grew. 
 The prolongation of the war by the Provisional Government, preparations for an offensive at the front, and food shortages, all caused resentment and indignation among the workers and soldiers. 
 The government’s order to troops to take over the Durnovo country-house and evict the workers’ organisations of the Vyborgskaya Storona district from it gave rise to a strike. 
 On June 7 (20) four factories went on strike, and next day, twenty-eight. 
 The masses were eager to hold a street demonstration. 
 To ward off provocation and unnecessary loss of life, a joint meeting of the Central and Petrograd Committees, the Military Organisation, and district delegates from the workers and delegates from troop units, held on June 8 (21), carried Lenin’s motion to hold a peaceful organised demonstration. 
 The action was set for June 10 (23). 
 The Bolshevik Central Committee’s decision to hold a demon-stration brought a ready response from the masses and alarmed the government, as well as the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolution-aries, who resolved to foil the demonstration. 
 On the evening of June 9 (22) the First All-Russia Congress of Soviets, led by them, passed a resolution banning all street demonstrations for three days. 
 On a motion by Lenin, the Central Committee of the Bolshevik Party, not wishing to go against the Congress decision, resolved on the night of June 9-10 to call off the demonstration. 
 Members of the Central and Petrograd Committees and other prominent members of the Party were sent to factories and barracks to dis-suade the workers and soldiers from demonstrating. 
 As a result of their explanatory work, the workers and soldiers agreed that it would be-unwise to hold a demonstration just then. 
 This indicated the Party’s growing influence, its ability to keep in touch with the people, and the flexibility of the Bolshevik leadership. 
 Two days later the S. 
R. 
 and Menshevik leadership of the Congress of Soviets decided to hold a demonstration on June 18 (July 1)—the day when the Russian troops were to take the offensive—as proof of the people’s “confidence” in the Provisional Government. 
 Under Lenin’s personal leadership, the Central and Petrograd Committees did a great deal to ensure that the demonstration reflected the true sentiment of the people and win that important peaceful battle against the Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s for influence among the people. 
 Lenin took part in preparations for the demon-stration by formulating watchwords, checking the preparation of streamers and banners, giving directions to correspondents, writing telegrams to be sent to local Bolshevik organisations, taking steps to guarantee that there would be an adequate number of Bolshevik speakers, putting his own name on the list of speakers, and attend-ing the Marsovo Polye meeting. 
 On June 18 (July 1) the demonstration brought some 500,000 Petrograd workers and soldiers out into the streets. 
 By far most of the demonstrators carried Bolshevik revolutionary slogans. 
 Only small groups carried the conciliating parties’ slogans expressing confidence in the Provisional Government. 
 The demonstration revealed the heightened revolutionary spirit of the people and the vastly increased influence and prestige of the Bolshevik Party. 
 It also revealed the complete failure of the petty-bourgeois con-ciliating parties backing the Provisional Government. 
 Lenin dealt with the June demonstration in “The Eighteenth of June”, “Three Crises” (see pp. 
 110-12 and 171-75 of this volume) and other articles. 
 p. 
 70 36 37 38 39 40After the victory of the February revolution the workers’ organisa-tions of the Vyborgskaya Storona district (the bakers’ union, the district branch of the people’s militia, etc. 
), joined by the anar-chists, took over the vacant country-house of tsarist ex-Minister Durnovo and the adjoining garden (20 dessiatines in area), which the workers of the district subsequently used as recreation grounds. 
 On June 7 (20) the Provisional Government, backed by the S. 
R. 
 and Menshevik majority on the Petrograd Soviet and then by the First All-Russia Congress of Soviets, ordered the country-house to be vacated. 
 The order brought protests from the Petrograd work-ers, particularly those of Vyborgskaya Storona. 
 Several factories struck. 
 The government yielded but on the night of June 18-19 (July 1-2) it sent a contingent of Cossacks and soldiers which took the country-house by assault, killing two anarchists and arresting 59 people. 
 As the overwhelming majority of the arrested had noth-ing to do with the anarchists, they had to be released shortly after. 
 The raid deeply angered the workers. 
 For several weeks the bourgeois press was busy playing up the “horrors” which it alleged to have taken place at the country-house, and used this particular incident to the hilt to campaign against the revolutionary-minded masses and the Bolsheviks. 
 p. 
 70 Catiline (Lucius Sergius Catilina )—Roman politician and soldier. 
 In 63 B. 
C. 
 he engineered a conspiracy to effect a coup d’état, abol-ish the republic and establish a military dictatorship. 
 p. 
 73 The basic provisions of the draft were incorporated in the declara-tion of the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
) and the Bureau of the Bolshevik group at the First All-Russia Congress of Soviets concerning the Congress ban on the peaceful demonstration fixed by the Bolshevik Party for June 10 (23). 
 p. 
 77 Black Hundreds —monarchist bands formed by the tsarist police to fight the revolutionary movement. 
 They assassinated revolu-tionaries, attacked progressive intellectuals and carried out anti-Jewish pogroms. 
 p. 
 79 Reference is to the speech made by the Menshevik Tsereteli, member of the Provisional Government, on June 11 (24), 1917, at the joint meeting of the Steering Committee of the First All-Russia Congress of Soviets, the Executive Committee of the Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, the Executive Committee of the Congress of Peasants’ Deputies, and the bureaus of all Congress parties. 
 The meeting was arranged by the S. 
R. 
 and Menshevik leaders to strike a blow at the Bolshevik Party, taking advantage of the majority they commanded. 
 In his speech, which he held in a hysterical key, Tsereteli said the demonstration which the Bolsheviks had scheduled for June 10 (23) was “a Bolshevik conspir-acy to overthrow the government and seize power”. 
 The speech was slanderous and counter-revolutionary throughout. 
 The Bolshe-viks left the meeting in protest against the slanders spread by 41 42 43Tsereteli and other S. 
R. 
 and Menshevik leaders. 
 Lenin, who had been against the meeting from the outset, did not attend. 
 p. 
 79 Cavaignac , Louis Eugène —French general who after the February revolution of 1848 became War Minister of the Provisional Govern-ment. 
 In June 1848 he led the suppression of the Paris workers’ uprising. 
 p. 
 83 Reference is to the statement which the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
) and the Bureau of the Bolshevik group at the First All-Russia Congress of Soviets made regarding the ban on the peaceful demonstration appointed by the Bolshevik Party for June 10 (23), 1917. 
 The statement exposed the provocative conduct of the Menshevik and S. 
R. 
 leaders of the Congress of Soviets, who banned the demonstration, and the counter-revolutionary policies of the Provisional Government. 
 It warned that the revolution was in danger, and called on the working class to be staunch and vigilant. 
 The statement was read at the joint meeting of the Congress Steering Committee, the Executive Committee of the Petrograd Soviet, the Executive Committee of the Congress of Peasants’ Deputies, and the bureaus of all Congress parties on June 11 (24). 
 The Bolsheviks had wanted the statement to be read at the Congress sitting on June 12 (25), but the chairman of the meeting denied the Bolsheviks the floor. 
 The statement was therefore handed to the Congress Steering Committee. 
 The same sitting passed a resolution condemning the Bolshevik Party despite the fact that the Bolshe-viks had called off the demonstration. 
 p. 
 88 The Ukrainian Central Rada (Council) was a counter-revolutionary bourgeois nationalist organisation founded in April 1917 at the All-Ukraine National Congress in Kiev by a bloc of Ukrainian bourgeois and petty-bourgeois nationalist parties and groups. 
 M. 
 S. 
 Grushevsky, an ideologue of the Ukrainian bourgeoisie, was its chairman and V. 
 K. 
 Vinnichenko its vice-chairman. 
 Among its members were Petlyura, Yefremov, Antonovich and other nationalists. 
 Socially, the Rada relied for support on the urban and rural bourgeoisie, the kulaks, and the petty-bourgeois national-ist intellectuals. 
 It tried to consolidate the power of the Ukrainian bourgeoisie and landowners and to establish a Ukrainian bourgeois state, taking advantage of the national liberation movement in the Ukraine. 
 Under the guise of fighting for national independence, it strove to win the support of the Ukrainian people, divert them from the all-Russia revolutionary movement, bring them under the sway of the Ukrainian bourgeoisie, and prevent the victory of the socialist revolution in the Ukraine. 
 The Rada supported the Provi-sional Government despite differences over the issue of granting autonomy to the Ukraine. 
 Following the victory of the October Socialist Revolution the Rada declared itself the supreme organ of the “Ukrainian People’s Republic” and campaigned openly against Soviet rule. 
 44 45 46 47 48 49 50It was one of the principal centres of the counter-revolutionaries of the whole of Russia. 
 p. 
 91 Malenkaya Gazeta (The Little Newspaper)—a yellow reactionary newspaper published in Petrograd from September 1914 to July 1917 by A. 
 A. 
 Suvorin, Jr. 
 From May 1917 on, it appeared under the subtitle of “An Extra-Party Socialist Newspaper”, speculating on the people’s sympathy for socialism. 
 After the February bour-geois-democratic revolution of 1917 it opposed the Bolshevik Party and conducted a vicious slander campaign against Lenin. 
 p. 
 98 Russkaya Volya (Russia’s Will)—a bourgeois daily newspaper founded by A. 
 D. 
 Protopopov, the tsarist Minister of the Interior, and financed by the big banks. 
 It was published in Petrograd from December 1916. 
 After the February revolution it carried on a smear campaign against the Bolsheviks. 
 It was closed down by the Mili-tary Revolutionary Committee on October 25 (November 7), 1917. 
 p. 
 98 Derzhimorda —a policeman in Gogol’s Inspector-General , a boorish, insolent oppressor, a petty tyrant. 
 p. 
 100 Wild Landowner —a character in M. 
 Saltykov-Shchedrin’s fairy-tale of the same name. 
 p. 
 100 The Council of State—one of the supreme organs of state power in tsarist Russia; was established in 1810, according to M. 
 M. 
 Spe-ransky’s plan, as a legislative-advisory body whose members were appointed and confirmed by the tsar. 
 A reactionary institution, it voted down even moderate Bills approved by the Duma. 
 p. 
 100 Junkovsky, tsarist Deputy Minister of the Interior, was informed in 1914 that Malinovsky, Deputy to the Fourth Duma, was an agent provocateur. 
 He conveyed the information to Rodzyanko, Chairman of the Fourth Duma, who pledged his “honour” that he would not divulge the secret. 
 The two decided to remove Mali-novsky from the Duma, doing it, however, in such a way as “not to expose either the Duma or the Ministers to scandal”. 
 Malinovsky resigned as Deputy and left Russia with the aid of the police. 
 He was exposed in 1917, on the strength of evidence derived from the Police Department archives. 
 In 1918 he was tried by decision of the Soviet Government and was shot under the sentence of the Revolutionary Tribunal. 
 p. 
 103 Dyen (The Day)—a liberal bourgeois daily newspaper published in St. 
 Petersburg from 1912. 
 Among its contributors were Menshe-vik liquidators, who took it over completely after the February revolution. 
 Dyen was closed down by the Military Revolutionary Committee under the Petrograd Soviet on October 26 (November 8), 1917. 
 p. 
 104 51 52 53 54 55On June 16 (29), 1917, Dyen , Novaya Zhizn and Birzheviye Vedo-mosti published the findings of the extraordinary committee of inquiry appointed by the Provisional Government to investigate the crimes of the tsarist regime. 
 The committee published evidence against the agent provocateur Malinovsky. 
 p. 
 104 Birzhevka , short for Birzheviye Vedomosti (Stock-Exchange Record-er)—a bourgeois newspaper founded in 1880. 
 It was published in St. 
 Petersburg, first three and then four times a week, and in the end daily. 
 From 1902 onwards it was brought out twice a day. 
 Time-serving, venality and lack of principle made its title a byword. 
 After the February revolution the paper conducted riot-raising propaganda against the Bolshevik Party and Lenin. 
 It was closed down by the Military Revolutionary Committee under the Petro-grad Soviet at the end of October 1917. 
 p. 
 104 Reference is to the treachery of Azef, member of the S. 
R. 
 Party’s Central Committee, who for a number of years was a secret police agent. 
 In 1908 he was exposed, and fled from the country. 
 p. 
 104 This refers to the offensive launched by the Provisional Government in June 1917, at the instance of the Russian and Anglo-French imperialists. 
 Kerensky, the War Minister, ordered the offensive on June 16 (29). 
 On June 18 (July 1) the Russian troops took the offensive on the South-Western Front. 
 The operation was successful at first and the Russians made headway, taking several thousand prisoners. 
 Later on fatigue, the troops’ incomprehension of the purpose of the offensive, and inadequate technical preparation resulted in the German troops effecting a break-through and forcing the Russian troops into a disorderly retreat. 
 The Russian Army sustained a crushing defeat, losing about 60,000 men and officers in ten days. 
 The miscarriage of the offensive defeated the entire policy of the Provisional Government and the S. 
R. 
 and Menshevik defencist bloc backing it. 
 The defeat at the front made for an increase in Bolshevik influence on the workers and soldiers, who satisfied themselves more and more that the Bolsheviks were right. 
 The news of the enormous casualties which the offensive had involved angered the working people and hastened a new political crisis in the country. 
 p. 
 113 The Zimmerwaldists were members of the group formed at the first conference of internationalists held in Zimmerwald from Septem-ber 5 to 8, 1915. 
 During the conference a struggle developed between the revolu-tionary internationalists led by Lenin and the Kautskyite majority. 
 Lenin formed of the Left internationalists the Zimmerwald Left group in which the Bolshevik Party was the only one to take a correct and consistently internationalist stand against the war. 
 The conference adopted a manifesto describing the world war as an imperialist war. 
 It condemned the conduct of those “socialists” 56 57 58 59who voted for war credits and were members of bourgeois cabinets. 
 It called on the workers of Europe to begin fighting against the war, for peace without annexations and indemnities. 
 The conference also passed a resolution expressing sympathy with the war victims, and elected the International Socialist Committee. 
 p. 
 113 Young Turks —European name of the members of Unity and Prog-ress, a Turkish bourgeois and landowner nationalist party founded in Istanbul in 1889. 
 They strove to restrict the sultan’s absolute power, transform the feudal empire into a bourgeois constitutional monarchy and thereby enhance the role of the Turkish bourgeoisie in the country’s economic and political life. 
 In July 1908 they took power as a result of a revolution accomplished by the top section of the bourgeoisie, with support from the armed forces. 
 The govern-ment they formed preserved the monarchy and pursued a reaction-ary policy. 
 After Turkey had been defeated in the First World War (autumn 1918) the Young Turk Party dissolved itself. 
 p. 
 122 The All-Russia Trade Union Conference was held in Petrograd between June 21 and 28 (July 4-11), 1917. 
 It was attended by 211 delegates, 73 of them being Bolsheviks, and the rest Mensheviks, S. 
R. 
s, Bundists and non-party people. 
 Among the items on the agenda were the trade union movement and development and the economic struggle. 
 The Bolsheviks moved resolutions or amend-ments on all the major issues. 
 The conference carried by a slight majority of 10 or 12 the motions tabled by the defencist Menshe-viks. 
 It elected a provisional Central Council of Trade Unions. 
 p. 
 123 The Octobrists were members of the Octobrist Party (or Union of October 17), founded in Russia upon the publication of the tsar’s manifesto of October 17 (30), 1905. 
 The Party was counter-revolu-tionary and defended the interests of the big bourgeoisie and of the landed proprietors farming on capitalist lines. 
 It was led by A. 
 I. 
 Guchkov, a noted industrialist and house-owner in Moscow, and M. 
 V. 
 Rodzyanko, a big landowner. 
 The Octobrists fully sup-ported the tsarist government’s home and foreign policies. 
 During the First World War the Octobrists, who saw that the tsar-ist regime was unable to win the war, formed the “progressive bloc”, an opposition group which demanded that a responsible Ministry be set up, that is, a government enjoying the confidence of the bourgeoisie and landed proprietors. 
 After the February revolution the Octobrists became a ruling party and fought against the approaching socialist revolution. 
 Guchkov was War Minister in the first Provisional Government. 
 After the October Revolution the Octobrists fought against Soviet rule. 
 p. 
 129 Reference is to the Third Congress of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, held in Moscow between late May and early June 1917. 
 The Congress revealed sharp differences between the party’s Right 60 61 62 63 64 65 66and Left wings over certain issues, including that of the attitude to the war, the Left S. 
R. 
s opposing the Provisional Government’s policy of prolonging the war. 
 The Central Committee was elected on June 2 (15). 
 In publishing the results of the vote it was stated that many delegates had voted against electing A. 
 F. 
 Kerensky to the Central Committee because he was overburdened with work in the War and Naval ministries, that is, for practical and not political reasons. 
 When Y. 
 Breshko-Breshkovskaya (“Grandmother of the Russian Revolution”), one of the founders and veteran members of the S. 
R. 
 Party, heard that Kerensky had not been elected, she construed that as an intrigue and resigned from the S. 
R. 
 Party’s Central Commit-tee in protest, making a relevant statement for the press. 
 p. 
 129 Zemlya i Volya (Land and Freedom)—a Socialist-Revolutionary newspaper published in Moscow from March 1917 to May 1918. 
 p. 
 129 The expression “ His Majesty ’s Opposition ” was used by P. 
 N. 
 Milyu-kov, the Cadet leader. 
 Speaking at a luncheon given by the Lord Mayor of London on June 19 (July 2), 1909, Milyukov said: “So long as Russia has a legislative chamber controlling the budget, the Russian opposition will remain an opposition of, and not to, His Majesty. 
” p. 
 132 Zemstvos —rural self-government bodies set up in the central guber-nias of tsarist Russia in 1864. 
 They were dominated by the nobil-ity, and their jurisdiction was limited to purely local economic and welfare matters—hospital and road building, statistics, insurance etc. 
 They functioned under the control of the governors of the guber-nias and the Minister of the Interior, who could block any deci-sions the government found undesirable. 
 p. 
 132 Nozdrev —a blustering liar in Gogol’s Dead Souls. 
 p. 
 135 Vestnik Finansov , Promyshlennosti i Torgovli (Finance, Industry and Trade Messenger)—a weekly journal published by the Ministry of Finance in St. 
 Petersburg from November 1883 to 1917. 
 It published government decisions, economic articles, and surveys. 
 p. 
 140 “Moderate and proper”—the philistine virtues of Molchalin, a character in Griboyedov’s Wit Works Woe . 
 p. 
 142 On July 2 (15), hearing of the miscarriage of the June offensive, the Cadet Ministers Shingaryov, Manuilov and Shakhovskoi resigned from the coalition Provisional Government on the pretext that they disagreed with the government’s stand on the Ukrainian question. 
 In a declaration to the Ukrainian Central Rada, the Provisional Government had promised to appoint by mutual agreement a General Secretariat to administer the Ukraine, while 67the Cadets insisted that the Ukrainian question be settled solely by the Constituent Assembly. 
 The true reason for the Cadets’ resignation was their desire to provoke a government crisis with an eye to bringing pressure to bear on the “socialist” Ministers and securing their consent to a Cadet counter-revolutionary programme: the disarming of the Red Guards, withdrawal of the revolutionary troops from Petro-grad, and prohibition of the Bolshevik Party. 
 p. 
 153 Lenin is referring to the massive demonstrations that took place in Petrograd on July 3 and 4 (16 and 17), 1917. 
 The soldiers, sailors and workers took to the streets, being angered by the Provisional Government sending troops into an offensive that ended in defeat, as might have been expected. 
 The movement began on July 3 (16) in the Vyborg district with the action of the First Machine-Gun Regiment. 
 It threatened to develop into an insurrection against the Provisional Government. 
 Just then the Bolshevik Party was against all armed action, for it considered that there was no revolutionary crisis in the coun-try as yet. 
 The Central Committee meeting held at 4 p. 
m. 
, on Ju-ly 3 (16), resolved to refrain from action. 
 A similar resolution was adopted by the Bolsheviks’ Second Petrograd City Conference, which took place at the same time. 
 Conference delegates went to the city’s factories and districts to restrain the masses from action. 
 But action had already begun and there was no stopping it. 
 In view of the mood of the masses, the Central Committee meeting in a joint session with the Petrograd Committee and the Military Organisation, resolved late on the evening of July 3 (16) to join in the demonstration in order to lend it a peaceful and orga-nised character. 
 Lenin was not in Petrograd at the time—being ill as a result of sustained overwork, he had gone to the country for a few day’s rest. 
 Getting word of the events, he returned to Petrograd on the morning of July 4 (17) and assumed political leadership. 
 During the day of July 4 (17) he addressed the Kron-stadt sailors from the balcony of Kshesinskaya’s Palace (see this volume, p. 
 213). 
 His speech played an important part; it called on the sailors to exercise restraint and be staunch and vigilant. 
 Over 500,000 people took part in the July 4 (17) demonstration. 
 They carried Bolshevik slogans—“All Power to the Soviets!”, etc. 
 They insisted that the Central Executive Committee of the Soviets take power into its hands. 
 But the S. 
R. 
 and Menshevik leaders refused to take power. 
 With the knowledge and consent of the Menshevik and S. 
R. 
 Central Executive Committee, the Provisional Government sent military cadets and Cossacks against the peaceful demonstration. 
 The troops opened fire. 
 In addition to them the Provisional Govern-ment called in counter-revolutionary units from the front line to smash the demonstration. 
 A meeting of the Central and Petrograd Committees held on the night of July 4-5 under Lenin’s leadership resolved to discontin-ue the demonstration in an organised fashion. 
 It was a judicious measure by the Party, which knew how to retreat in time and stave off the defeat of the main revolutionary forces. 
 The Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s virtually took part in and abetted the counter-revolu-tionary butchery. 
 They joined the bourgeoisie in bearing down on the Bolshevik Party. 
 Pravda , Soldatskaya Pravda and other Bolshevik papers were closed down by the Provisional Govern-ment, and the printing plant of Trud , acquired with money collected by the workers, was wrecked. 
 The workers were disarmed, and arrests, house searches and riots took place. 
 The revolutionary-minded units in the Petrograd garrison were sent off to the front line. 
 After the July events power in the country was fully taken over by the counter-revolutionary Provisional Government. 
 The Soviets became a mere appendage to it. 
 Dual power was at an end. 
 So was the peaceful period of the revolution. 
 The Bolsheviks were faced with the task of preparing for an armed uprising to overthrow the Provisional Government. 
 p. 
 157 Lenin is referring to the following fact: Upon his return from abroad in April 1917 G. 
 A. 
 Alexinsky, a slanderer and plotter, began to contribute to the bourgeois Russkaya Volya (all socialist newspapers having refused to have anything to do with him) and proffered his services to the Executive Committee of the Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies. 
 The Executive Commit-tee adopted the following decision: “In view of the facts regarding G. 
 A. 
 Alexinsky’s activity that have become known, the Executive Committee does not see its way to admitting him into its institu-tions. 
 Should he wish to rehabilitate himself, the Executive Com-mittee will not be disagreeable to taking part in an investigation. 
” p. 
 157 Zhivoye Slovo (The Living Word)—a yellow daily newspaper with Black Hundred leanings published in Petrograd from 1916. 
 In 1917 it campaigned rabidly against the Bolsheviks. 
 The October Revo-lution put an end to its publication. 
 p. 
 158 The Union for the Liberation of the Ukraine was founded by a group of Ukrainian bourgeois nationalists in 1914, shortly after the begin-ning of the First World War. 
 Expecting tsarist Russia to lose the war, the Union sought the Ukraine’s secession from Russia and the establishment of a bourgeois and landowner Ukrainian monar-chy under German protectorate. 
 p. 
 159 Dreyfus case —the trial of the Jew Dreyfus, a French General Staff officer, whom the reactionary monarchists among the French military, bent on provocation, falsely charged in 1894 with espio-nage and high treason. 
 The French reactionaries took advantage of the framed-up indictment of Dreyfus, who was sentenced to life imprisonment, to foment anti-Semitism and attack the republican regime and democratic liberties. 
 When, in 1898, the socialists and progressive spokesmen of bourgeois democracy, including Emile68 69 70 71 72 73 74Zola, Jean Jaurès and Anatole France, started a campaign for a re-examination of the Dreyfus case, the latter assumed a markedly political character. 
 The country split into two camps over it, with the republicans and democrats on one side and the bloc of monarchists, clericals, anti-Semites and nationalists on the other. 
 In 1899, under pressure from public opinion, Dreyfus was pardoned and released. 
 In 1906, he was acquitted by the Court of Cassation and was reinstated in the Army. 
 p. 
 166 See Note 23. 
 p. 
 169 Sotsial-Demokrat —illegal Central Organ of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 pub-lished from February 1908 to January 1917. 
 Beginning with issue No. 
 2, it was brought out abroad, the issues 2 to 32 (February 1909 to December 1913) being published in Paris and 33 to 58 (Novem-ber 1914 to January 1917) in Geneva. 
 Altogether 58 issues appeared, five of them with supplements. 
 From December 1911 the paper was edited by Lenin, who contributed over eighty articles and other items. 
 During the First World War Sotsial-Demokrat played a promi-nent role in the struggle against international opportunism, na-tionalism and chauvinism, in the propaganda of Bolshevik watch-words, and in the matter of arousing the working class and working people generally to fight against the imperialist war and its inspir-ers. 
 It published Lenin’s article “On the Slogan for a United States of Europe”, which for the first time formulated the conclusion of the possibility of socialism triumphing first in one country. 
 The dissemination of the paper in Russia and the reprinting of its more important items by local Bolshevik papers contributed to the political enlightenment and internationalist education of Russia’s proletariat and to the training of the working people for the coming revolution. 
 Sotsial-Demokrat did much to unify the internationalist ele-ments of the world Social-Democratic movement. 
 It made its way into many countries in the face of war-time obstacles. 
 Lenin, who had a high opinion of Sotsial-Demokrat ’s role during the First World War, wrote afterwards that “no class-conscious worker who wishes to understand the development of the ideas of the international socialist revolution and of its first victory on October 25, 1917, can manage without” studying articles published in Sotsial-Demokrat (see present edition, Vol. 
 27, p. 
 221). 
 p. 
 169 The Swedish Left Socialists (or the Party of the Young) constituted the Left trend among the Swedish Social-Democrats. 
 During the First World War they adhered to an internationalist position and formed part of the Zimmerwald Left. 
 In May 1917 they founded the Left Social-Democratic Party of Sweden. 
 The congress which this party held in 1919 resolved to join the Communist Interna-tional. 
 In 1921 the party’s revolutionary wing became the Commu-nist Party of Sweden. 
 p. 
 169 75 76 77 78The offices of Pravda having been wrecked on July 5 (18), 1917, by the Provisional Government, the article “Three Crises” appeared in Rabotnitsa No. 
 7 on July 19 (August 1). 
 The editors of the jour-nal wanted that particular issue to be circulated as widely as pos-sible and therefore published on the cover an appeal to all workers, trade unions, factory committees, and R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
) cells and district organisations earnestly asking them to take energetic steps for the widest possible dissemination of the issue. 
 Rabotnitsa (Woman Worker)—a legal periodical published by the C. 
C. 
 R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
) on Lenin’s initiative in St. 
 Petersburg, with money collected by women workers. 
 It appeared from February 23 (March 8) to June 1914. 
 Seven issues were brought out, of which the police confiscated three. 
 Among the members of its editorial board were I. 
 F. 
 Armand, A. 
 I. 
 Yelizarova, N. 
 K. 
 Krupskaya, P. 
 F. 
 Kudelli, L. 
 R. 
 Menzhinskaya, Y. 
 F. 
 Rozmirovich, K. 
 N. 
 Sa-moilova and L. 
 N. 
 Stal. 
 The periodical resumed publication on May 10 (23), 1917, and continued till January 1918. 
 Rabotnitsa played an important part in the political education of women workers during the Bolshevik Party’s preparations for the socialist revolution in Russia. 
 p. 
 171 Reference is to the summons for Lenin to appear before the court of the bourgeois Provisional Government to answer the slanderous charge of espionage in favour of Germany. 
 The Bolsheviks, who were fighting to transform the imperialist war into a civil war and advocating the tsarist government’s defeat in the war, were first charged with high treason in favour of Germa-ny by the tsar’s secret police in the early days of the war. 
 After the February bourgeois-democratic revolution of 1917, when the Party set course for a socialist revolution in Russia, the bourgeois, Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik press carried slanderous reports in view of the passage through Germany of a Bolshevik group led by Lenin. 
 The Seventh (April) Conference exposed that lie in its resolution “On the War”. 
 p. 
 176 The article “ The Political Situation ” was first published in the Kronstadt Bolshevik paper Proletarskoye Dyelo No. 
 6 on August 2 (July 20), 1917, under the heading “Political Mood”. 
 To safeguard the newspaper against suppression by the Provi-sional Government, the editors substituted “a resolute fight” for “an armed uprising”. 
 In this volume, the article appears according to the manuscript. 
 p. 
 178 Byulleten “Pravdy ” (The “Pravda” Bulletin) was published in German in Stockholm from June to November 1917 under the title of Russische Korrespondenz “Prawda ”. 
 Its publisher was a C. 
C. 
 R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
) group abroad, and it carried articles on major issues of the Russian revolution, documents, reviews, and news items on the life of the Party and the country. 
 There was also a French edition. 
 p. 
 182 79 80 81 82 83 84After the reactionary Zhivoye Slovo had published the infamous calumny against Lenin, the Menshevik and S. 
R. 
 Central Executive Committee of the Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies on July 5 (18), 1917, appointed a commission of inquiry at the instance of the Bolshevik group to investigate the slanderous charges against Lenin and other Bolsheviks. 
 But as soon as the Provisional Govern-ment had decided to refer the case “of the organised armed action in the city of Petrograd on July 3-5, 1917, against state power” to the Petrograd Court, the C. 
E. 
C. 
 commission of inquiry resigned and on July 9 (22) published in Izvestia the statement that it was “discontinuing its activity and putting the evidence collected by it at the disposal of a government committee”. 
 At a joint meeting held by the C. 
E. 
C. 
 of the Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies and the Executive Committee of the All-Russia Congress of Peas-ants’ Deputies on July 13 (26), the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries put through a resolution stating that they consid-ered Lenin’s refusal to appear in court absolutely impermissible. 
 The resolution said that all persons against whom charges had been proferred by the judicial authorities were removed from work in the Soviets. 
 p. 
 182 Beilis case —the trial of the Jew Beilis, staged for provocative pur-poses by the tsar’s government in 1913 in Kiev. 
 Beilis was falsely accused of the ritual murder of Yushchinsky, a Christian boy (the murder was actually committed by the Black Hundreds). 
 The government’s aim was to stir up anti-Semitism and take advantage of anti-Jewish pogroms to divert the people’s attention from the revolutionary movement growing throughout the country. 
 The trial aroused public indignation. 
 In a number of towns, workers held protest demonstrations. 
 Beilis was acquitted. 
 p. 
 183 See Frederick Engels, The Origin of the Family , Private Property and the State (Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works , in three volumes, Vol. 
 3, Moscow, 1973, p. 
 327). 
 p. 
 189 The article “ Constitutional Illusions ” was first published in Rabo-chy i Soldat in 1917 and then appeared in pamphlet form under the title of “The Current Situation”. 
 To prevent the suppression of the newspaper and ensure the secrecy of the Bolshevik Party’s preparations for an armed uprising, the editors substituted “includ-ing its drastic forms” for “including armed struggle”. 
 p. 
 196 Lenin is referring to the Frankfurt Parliament, a national assembly convened in Germany in May 1848, after the March revolution. 
 The majority in it was held by the liberal bourgeoisie, which engaged in fruitless talk on a draft constitution, while leaving power in the king’s hands. 
 p. 
 200 Reference is to Karl Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bona-parte (Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 1, Moscow, 1973, pp. 
 394-487). 
 p. 
 201 85 86 87 88 89 90See Karl Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 1, Moscow, 1973, p. 
 480). 
 p. 
 202 See Frederick Engels, The Peasant War in Germany , Moscow, 1965. 
 p. 
 203 Reference is to the State Conference planned by the Provisional Government. 
 It was called in Moscow on August 12 (25), 1917. 
 Most of the delegates were landowners, members of the bourgeoisie, generals, officers and Cossack leaders. 
 The Soviet delegation was composed of Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries. 
 The confer-ence was expected to rally the counter-revolutionary forces of the bourgeoisie and landowners to defeat the revolution. 
 Kornilov, Alexeyev, Kaledin and others put forward a programme for crush-ing the revolution. 
 Kerensky threatened in his speech to put down the revolutionary movement and prevent seizures of the landed estates by the peasants. 
 The Central Committee of the Bolshevik Party called on the working class to join in a protest action against the conference. 
 On the opening day of the conference the Bolsheviks organised a one-day general strike in Moscow involving over 400,000 people. 
 Protest meetings and strikes took place in several other cities. 
 p. 
 209 The Bell (Die Glocke ) a periodical published in Munich and then in Berlin from 1915 to 1925 by the social-chauvinist Parvus (Hel-fand), member of the German Social-Democratic Party and an agent of German imperialism. 
 p. 
 220 Lenin means the coalition Provisional Government formed on July 24 (August 6), 1917. 
 It included A. 
 F. 
 Kerensky, Premier and War and Naval Minister (S. 
R. 
), N. 
 V. 
 Nekrasov, Deputy Premier and Minister of Finance (Cadet), and N. 
 D. 
 Avksentyev, Minister of the Interior (S. 
R. 
). 
 The cabinet was composed of Cadets, So-cialist-Revolutionaries, Mensheviks, Popular Socialists, and non-party people who were close to the Cadets. 
 In this composition, it found itself in Cadet hands. 
 At a joint meeting of the Central Executive Committee of Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies and the Executive Committee of the Congress of Peasants’ Deputies, held on July 25 (August 7), the Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s adopted a resolution urging the most active support for the new coalition government. 
 p. 
 223 That is, the declaration issued by the Provisional Government on July 8 (21), 1917. 
 It contained a number of demagogic promises which the Provisional Government hoped would reassure the people after the July events. 
 The government promised to hold elections to the Constituent Assembly on the appointed date, September 17 (30), guarantee the early introduction of local—urban and Zemstvo (rural)—self-government, abolish the social estates, take steps to remedy economic dislocation, and draft legislation on an eight-91 92 93 94hour day, labour safety and social insurance, as well as a land reform, to be considered by the Constituent Assembly. 
 Not one of these promises was kept. 
 p. 
 223 On July 12 (25) the Provisional Government introduced capital punishment at the front. 
 The divisional “military revolutionary tribunals” that were set up passed sentences which became effective immediately and were executed without delay. 
 p. 
 229 The Trudoviks (Trudovik group) were a Duma group of petty-bourgeois democrats--peasants and intellectuals with Narodnik leanings. 
 The group was formed by the peasant Deputies to the First Duma in April 1906. 
 In the Duma it wavered between the Cadets and the revolutionary Social-Democrats. 
 During the First World War most of the Trudoviks adhered to a social-chauvinist position. 
 After the February revolution the Trudoviks, expressing the interests of the kulaks, actively supported the Provisional Govern-ment. 
 Their reaction to the October Revolution was hostile and they took part in the counter-revolutionary activities of the bour-geoisie. 
 p. 
 234 The Contact Commission was formed by decision of the compromising Executive Committee of the Petrograd Soviet on March 8 (21) to “influence” and “exercise control over” the activity of the Provi-sional Government. 
 Its members were M. 
 I. 
 Skobelev, Y. 
 M. 
 Stek-lov, N. 
 N. 
 Sukhanov, V. 
 N. 
 Filippovsky and N. 
 S. 
 Chkheidze (subsequently V. 
 M. 
 Chernov and I. 
 G. 
 Tsereteli were included). 
 The Commission helped the Provisional Government take advan-tage of the prestige of the Petrograd Soviet to disguise its counter-revolutionary policies. 
 The Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolution-aries hoped with its aid to keep the people from revolutionary action aimed at effecting the transfer of power to the Soviets. 
 The Com-mission was abolished in the middle of April 1917, its functions being handed over to the Executive Committee’s Bureau. 
 p. 
 235 On May 17 (30), 1917, in view of a conflict between the Kronstadt Soviet and Pepelayev, the Provisional Government Commissar, the non-affiliated section of the Soviet passed a resolution abolish-ing the office of government commissar and investing the Kronstadt Soviet with full powers. 
 The resolution, supported by the Bolshe-viks, said that the only authority in Kronstadt was the Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, which should enter into direct contact with the Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Depu-ties on all matters affecting the state. 
 The bourgeois, S. 
R. 
 and Menshevik press launched a slander campaign against the people of Kronstadt and the Bolsheviks, alleging that Russia had begun to disintegrate, that a state of anarchy was in, that Kronstadt had seceded, and so on. 
 First the Petrograd Soviet and then the Provisional Govern-ment sent delegations (Chkheidze, Gotz and others in the former 95 96case and the Ministers Skobelev and Tsereteli in the latter) to deal with the Kronstadt incident. 
 In the Kronstadt Soviet the two Ministers succeeded in putting through a compromise decision stipulating that the commissar be elected by the Soviet and his election confirmed by the Provisional Government. 
 A political resolution was also passed, saying that the Kronstadt Soviet recog-nised the authority of the Provisional Government but adding that this “recognition certainly does not rule out criticism and the desire that the revolutionary democrats should form a new central authority and transfer all power to the Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies”. 
 The resolution expressed the hope that the Bolsheviks would achieve this by exerting ideological influence. 
 It ended with an emphatic protest against attempts to attribute to the Kronstadt Bolsheviks “the intention of severing Kronstadt from the rest of Russia”. 
 p. 
 238 The Kornilov revolt against the revolution was organised by the bourgeoisie and landowners in August 1917. 
 It was led by the tsarist general Kornilov, then Supreme Commander-in-Chief of the Army. 
 The conspirators aimed at capturing Petrograd, smashing the Bolshevik Party, disbanding the Soviets, establishing a military dictatorship, and paving the way for the restoration of the monar-chy. 
 A. 
 F. 
 Kerensky, head of the Provisional Government, joined in the conspiracy. 
 However, when the revolt began, he dissociated himself from Kornilov, fearing that he might be swept away with Kornilov, and declared Kornilov to be a rebel against the Provision-al Government. 
 The revolt began on August 25 (September 7). 
 Kornilov marched the Third Cavalry Corps against Petrograd. 
 In Petrograd itself, the counter-revolutionary organisations of Kornilov’s backers were getting ready for action. 
 The Bolshevik Party led the people against Kornilov as it continued, in accordance with Lenin’s recommendation, to expose the Provisional Government and its S. 
R. 
 and Menshevik hangers-on. 
 In response to the call of the Bolshevik Party’s Central Com-mittee, the workers of Petrograd and the revolutionary soldiers and sailors rose to fight the rebels. 
 The Petrograd workers promptly formed Red Guard units. 
 Revolutionary committees were set up in several localities. 
 The advance of the Kornilov troops was checked and Bolshevik propaganda began to demoralise them. 
 The Kornilov revolt was put down by the workers and peasants under the leadership of the Bolshevik Party. 
 Under pressure from the people, the Provisional Government had to order the arrest and trial of Kornilov and his accomplices. 
 p. 
 243 The question of convening an international socialist conference in Stockholm arose in April 1917. 
 Borgbjerg, a Danish social-chauvinist, arrived in Petrograd and, on behalf of the joint commit-tee of the workers’ parties of Denmark, Norway and Sweden, invit-ed the socialist parties of Russia to attend the “Stockholm socialist peace conference”. 
 The matter was discussed at a meeting of the Pe-trograd Soviet. 
 The Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s accepted the invitation and decided to take the initiative in calling the conference. 
 On a motion by Lenin, the Seventh (April) All-Russia Conference of the Bolshe-vik Party declared itself emphatically against participation in the Stockholm conference, a social-chauvinist affair. 
 It exposed the imperialist nature of the conference and branded Borgbjerg as an agent of the German imperialists. 
 On August 6 (19), 1917, at a meeting of the Central Executive Committee discussing preparations for the Stockholm conference, Kamenev insisted on participation in the conference. 
 He said the Bolshevik resolution on the matter should be revised. 
 The Bolshe-vik group of the C. 
E. 
C. 
 dissociated itself from his state-ment Simultaneously with the letter “Kamenev’s Speech in the C. 
E. 
C. 
 on the Stockholm Conference”, which he sent to Proletary f or publication, Lenin on August 17 (30) wrote another letter, addressed to the Bureau of the Central Committee Abroad. 
 With reference to Kamenev’s statement, Lenin wrote: “I consider Kamenev’s statement ... the height of stupidity, if not of baseness, and have already written about this to the Central Committee and for the press” (see present edition, Vol. 
 35, p. 
 320). 
 On August 16 (29), the Bolshevik Party’s Central Committee, upon discussing the issue of the Stockholm conference, reaffirmed the decision not to attend. 
 The conference never met. 
 p. 
 244 Lenin is referring to the resolution “Unification of the Party”, passed by the Sixth Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
). 
 (See The C. 
P. 
S. 
U. 
 in Resolutions and Decisions of Congresses , Conferences and Plenary Meetings of the C. 
C. 
 , Part I, 1954, p. 
 388 [in Russian]. 
) The Sixth Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
) sat in Petrograd from July 26 to August 3 (August 8-16), 1917, in semi-legal conditions. 
 It was attended by 157 delegates voting and 110 delegates with voice but no vote, from 240,000 Party members. 
 Lenin guided the congress from underground. 
 He kept in touch with Petrograd through Bolsheviks assigned by the Central Committee who visited him at Razliv. 
 Lenin’s theses “The Political Situation”, the article “On Slogans” and other items formed the basis for congress resolu-tions. 
 While at Razliv, Lenin took part in drafting the most important resolutions of the congress. 
 The congress unanimously elected Lenin its honorary chairman. 
 The items on the congress agenda were: (1) Report by the Orga-nising Bureau; (2) Report by the C. 
C. 
 R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
); (3) Reports from Local Organisations; (4) The Current Situation: (a) The War and the International Situation; (b) The Political and Economic Situation; (5) Revision of the Programme; (6) The Organisational Question; (7) Elections to the Constituent Assembly; (8) The International; (9) Unification of the Party; (10) The Trade Union Movement; (11) Elections; (12) Miscellaneous. 
 The congress also discussed the question whether Lenin should appear in court. 
97 The congress heard the political report of the Central Committee and the report on the political situation, both of which were presented by Stalin on behalf of the Central Committee. 
 The reso-lution on the political situation was based on Lenin’s guiding recommendations. 
 It appraised the political situation in the country following the July events, and set out the Party’s political line at the new stage of the revolution. 
 The congress declared that the peaceful development of the revolution was over and that power in the country had virtually passed into the hands of the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie. 
 In keeping with Lenin’s recom-mendations, it temporarily withdrew the slogan “All Power to the Soviets”, because just then the Soviets, led by the Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s, were an appendage to the counter-revolutionary Provi-sional Government. 
 This withdrawal did not imply renunciation of the Soviets as the political form of proletarian dictatorship. 
 The congress advanced the slogan of fighting for the complete abolition of the dictatorship of the counter-revolutionary bour-geoisie and for the proletariat winning power in alliance with the peasant poor, through an armed uprising. 
 The congress rejected the anti-Lenin proposals put forward by Preobrazhensky, who contended that the socialist revolution could not win in Russia and that Russia could not take the socialist road unless a proletarian revolution was accomplished in the West. 
 The congress also rebuffed Bukharin, who opposed the Party’s course for the socialist revolution, saying that the peasants formed a bloc with the bourgeoisie and would refuse to follow the working class. 
 The congress decisions laid special emphasis on Lenin’s thesis of the alliance of the proletariat and the peasant poor as the para-mount condition for the victory of the socialist revolution. 
 “It is only the revolutionary proletariat,” said the resolution “The Polit-ical Situation”, “that can accomplish this task—a task set by the new upswing—provided it is supported by the peasant poor” (The C. 
P. 
 S. 
U. 
 in Resolutions , etc. 
, Part I, 1954, p. 
 376 [in Russian]). 
 The question whether Lenin should appear in court was one of the first items discussed by the congress. 
 Stalin, who touched on it in replying to the debate on the Central Committee’s political activity, declared in favour of Lenin appearing in court, on the understanding that Lenin’s personal safety would be guaranteed and the trial conducted on democratic lines. 
 He moved a resolution to that effect. 
 “It is not clear at the moment,” he said, “who is in power. 
 There is no guarantee that if they [Lenin and Zinoviev. 
— Ed. 
] are arrested they will not be subjected to brute force. 
 Things will be different if the trial is held on democratic lines and it is guaranteed that they will not be torn to pieces. 
 When we asked the Central Executive Committee about this, they replied: ‘We don’t know what may happen. 
’ So long as the situation is not clear and a covert struggle is going on between the nominal and the real authority, there is no point in the comrades appearing before the authorities. 
 If, however, power is wielded by an authority which can safeguard our comrades against violence and is fair-dealing /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR at least to some extent ... they shall appear. 
” ( Minutes of the Sixth Congress of the R. 
 S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 (B. 
), August 1917 , 1958, pp. 
 27 and 28 [in Russian]. 
) This approach was prompted by an incorrect estima-tion of the political power in the country at the time, and by the idea that a bourgeois court could be “fair”. 
 The question whether Lenin should appear in court was dealt with in a report by G. 
 K. 
 Orjonikidze. 
 He stressed that Lenin must under no circumstances be delivered into the hands of the investigators. 
 F. 
 E. 
 Dzerzhinsky, N. 
 A. 
 Skrypnik and others spoke against Lenin appearing in court. 
 We must say clearly and explic-itly, said Dzerzhinsky, that those comrades who advised Lenin not to allow himself to be arrested did well. 
 We must make clear to all comrades that we don’t trust the Provisional Government and the bourgeoisie and will not deliver Lenin until justice triumphs, that is, until that disgraceful trial is called off. 
 V. 
 Volodarsky, I. 
 Bezrabotny (D. 
 Z. 
 Manuilsky) and M. 
 Lashe-vich spoke in favour of Lenin appearing in court (provided his safety was guaranteed, the trial was public and representatives of the Central Executive Committee of the Soviets attended it), and moved a resolution in that sense. 
 As a result of the debate, the Sixth Party Congress unanimously passed a resolution against Lenin appearing in court, expressed its “emphatic protest against the outrageous persecution of revolu-tionary proletarian leaders by the public prosecutor, spies and po-lice”, and sent Lenin a message of greeting. 
 Y. 
 M. 
 Sverdlov reported on the Central Committee’s organising activity. 
 He pointed out that in the three months that had passed since the Seventh (April) All-Russia Conference the Party mem-bership had trebled, increasing from 80,000 to 240,000, and the number of Party organisations had grown from 78 to 162. 
 The congress heard nineteen reports from local organisations. 
 The speakers stressed the vast amount of work being carried on by local organisations and the steadily growing influence of the Bolsheviks among the working people. 
 The congress discussed and approved the Party’s economic platform, which envisaged nationalisation and centralisation of the banks, nationalisation of large-scale industry, confiscation of the landed estates and nationalisation of all the lands in the country, establishment of workers’ control over production and distribution, organisation of proper exchange between town and country, and other revolutionary measures. 
 The congress adopted the new Party Rules. 
 The first clause of the Rules, dealing with membership, was supplemented with the stipulation that Party members should submit to all Party deci-sions. 
 The new provision was introduced that persons seeking admission should present recommendations from two Party mem-bers and that their admission should be subject to approval by the general meeting of the organisation concerned. 
 The Rules stressed that “all Party organisations should be based on the prin-ciples of democratic centralism. 
 Party congresses were to be con-vened once a year and plenary meetings of the Central Committee, not less than once in two months. 
 The congress reaffirmed the decision of the Seventh Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
) on the need to revise the Party Programme in the sense indicated by the conference. 
 It found it necessary to call a congress before long for the express purpose of adopting a new Programme, and instructed the Central Committee and all Party organisations to begin discussing a revision of the Party Programme, preparatory to the congress. 
 The congress resolution “Youth Leagues” said it was a pressing task to contribute to the formation of socialist class organisations of young workers, and obliged Party organisations to devote the greatest attention to this task. 
 In discussing the item “The Trade Union Movement”, the congress criticised the theory of trade union neutrality and pointed out that the trade unions had a vital interest in carrying the revolution through to a victorious end and that they could accomplish the tasks facing Russia’s working class provided they remained militant class organisations recognising the political leadership of the Bolshevik Party. 
 The congress made all its decisions subordinate to the chief objective, which was to train the working class and the peasant poor for an armed uprising to bring about the victory of the social-ist revolution. 
 In a manifesto addressed to all working people, all workers, soldiers and peasants of Russia, it called on them to gather strength and prepare, under the banners of the Bolshevik Party, for the decisive battle with the bourgeoisie. 
 Among those the congress elected to the Central Committee were V. 
 I. 
 Lenin, Y. 
 A. 
 Berzin, A. 
 S. 
 Bubnov, F. 
 E. 
 Dzerzhinsky, A. 
 M. 
 Kollontai, V. 
 P. 
 Milyutin, M. 
 K. 
 Muranov, V. 
 P. 
 Nogin, F. 
 A. 
 Sergeyev (Artyom), S. 
 G. 
 Shahumyan, J. 
 V. 
 Stalin, Y. 
 M. 
 Sverdlov and M. 
 S. 
 Uritsky. 
 p. 
 251 Proletary (The Proletarian)—Central Organ of the Bolshevik Party, was published daily from August 13 (26) to August 24 (September 6), 1917, instead of Pravda , closed down by the Provi-sional Government. 
 Altogether ten issues were brought out. 
 p. 
 251 The lines are from Nekrasov’s poem “Blessed Is the Unmalicious Poet”. 
 p. 
 261 The Independent Social-Democratic Party of Germany was a Centrist party founded in April 1917 by the congress in Gotha, in an at-mosphere of revolutionary upswing, which was greatly stimulated by the February revolution in Russia. 
 The opportunist leadership of the German Social-Democratic Party was losing ground among the rank and file and the party was threatened with a break-away of Left-wing elements. 
 To avert a split and the formation of a revo-lutionary party of the working class, the Centrist leaders set up the so-called Independent Party which they hoped, would help them retain their influence. 
 The Independents disguised themselves with Centrist talk in advocating unity with the social-chauvinists, and98 99 100 tended to renounce the class struggle. 
 The Labour Community, a Kautskyite organisation active in the Reichstag, formed the bulk of the Independent Party. 
 In October 1920 a split occurred in the Independent Social-Democratic Party at the Halle Congress. 
 In December 1920 a sizable number of Independents joined the Communist Party of Germany. 
 The Right-wing elements founded a separate party and took the party’s former name, Independent Social-Democratic Party of Germany. 
 This party existed till 1922. 
 p. 
 271 Izvestia of the All-Russia Congress of Peasants ’ Deputies (Izvestia Vserossiiskogo Soveta Krestyanskikh Deputatov)—the official daily newspaper of that Soviet published in Petrograd from May 9 (22) to December 1917. 
 It expressed the views of the Right wing of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party. 
 Its attitude to the October Revolu-tion was hostile. 
 It was closed down for its counter-revolutionary propaganda. 
 p. 
 278 Lenin is referring to Frederick Engels, The Peasant Question in France and Germany (Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 3, Moscow, 1973, pp. 
 469-72). 
 p. 
 284 Rabochy (The Worker)—Central Organ of the Bolshevik Party published daily from August 25 (September 7) to September 2 (15), 1917, instead of Pravda , closed down by the Provisional Govern-ment. 
 Twelve issues were published in all (including extras). 
 p. 
 293 The Mensheviks’ unity congress in Petrograd from August 19-26 (September 1-8), 1917. 
 Its aim was to unite the isolated Menshevik groups in a single party. 
 The congress was attended by defencists (those supporting Plekhanov and Potresov), internationalists (Martov’s followers) and representatives of Novaya Zhizn , which had taken an active part in convening the congress. 
 The congress passed a resolution in favour of continuing the war “to a victorious conclusion”. 
 Another resolution approved of the fact that socialists were members of the Provisional Government, and expressed confidence in the government. 
 The Central Committee elected at the congress included P. 
 B. 
 Axelrod, F. 
 I. 
 Dan, L. 
 Martov, I. 
 G. 
 Tsereteli and N. 
 S. 
 Chkheidze. 
 While the congress was in session, however, the delegates turned out to differ strongly among them-selves, with the result that the attempt to unify the Mensheviks virtually failed. 
 p. 
 294 Reference is to the June 3 coup d’état, which ushered in the period of the Stolypin reaction. 
 On June 3 (16), 1907, the tsar issued a manifesto dissolving the Second Duma and revising the Duma election law. 
 The new law greatly increased the Duma representation of the landowners and the commercial and industrial bourgeoisie, and drastically reduced the already small proportion of peasants’ and workers’ deputies. 
 It was a gross violation of the Manifesto of October 17,101 102 103 104 105 1905, and the Fundamental Law of 1906, both of which made leg-islation subject to approval by the Duma. 
 The Third Duma,elected under the new law, convened on November 1 (14), 1907. 
It was made up mostly of Black Hundreds and Octobrists. 
 p. 
 299 In the elections to the district councils in Petrograd, held late in May and early in June 1917, the Bolsheviks polled 20 per centof the votes. 
 The elections to the Petrograd City Council onAugust 20 (September 2) brought the Bolsheviks 33 per cent of thevotes. 
 p. 
 301 Spartak (Spartacus) theoretical journal of the Moscow Regional Bureau, Moscow Committee and (beginning with issue No. 
 2)Moscow District Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
), published inMoscow from May 20 (June 2) to October 29 (November 11), 1917. 
 p. 
 305 The document “ On Zimmerwald ” was written by Lenin in connection with the plenary meeting of the Party’s Central Committee, fixedfor September 3 (16). 
 Lenin considered that membership in the Zimmerwald associa-tion, most of whose members adhered to a Centrist position, ham-pered and delayed the founding of a third, Communist Interna-tional. 
 p. 
 307 In view of the elections to the Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, the workers’ section of the Soviet on August 23(September 5), 1917, raised the question of revising the system of election to the Soviet under which workers elected one delegate from 1,000 persons while soldiers elected one delegate from eachunit. 
 As a result, the soldiers had a considerably greater number ofdeputies to the Soviet than the workers. 
 The workers’ section adopt-ed a resolution saying that the system of election to the Sovietshould be revised and organised on the principle of proportional representation, that is, one delegate from every thousand voters. 
 The soldiers’ section, however, which met on August 25 (Septem-ber 7), voted down the proposal. 
 The S. 
R. 
s succeeded in puttingthrough their own resolution, which left the electoral systemintact. 
 p. 
 308 Blanquists —supporters of a trend in the French socialist move-ment, headed by Louis-Auguste Blanqui (1805-1881), the Frenchrevolutionary and utopian communist. 
 The Blanquists expectedthat “mankind will be emancipated from wage slavery not by theproletarian class struggle, but through a conspiracy of a smallminority of intellectuals” (see present edition, Vol. 
 10, p. 
 392). 
 Substituting the actions of a small group of conspirators for those of a revolutionary party, they ignored the actual situation neces-sary for a victorious insurrection, and spurned contact with themasses. 
 p. 
 309106 107 108 109 110 See Frederick Engels, Flüchtlingsliteratur. 
 II. 
 Programm der blan-quistischen Kommuneflüchtlinge , Marx/Engels, Werke , Bd. 
 18, Berlin, 1962, S. 
 528-35. 
 p. 
 309 See Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1965, p. 
 470. 
 p. 
 309 After the suppression of the Kornilov revolt the question of forming a new provisional cabinet came up for discussion. 
 The new cabinetwas expected to include Cadets in addition to Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s. 
 The Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s, fearing that they might com-pletely forfeit popular confidence, announced their refusal to joina cabinet which included Cadets. 
 On September 1 (14), 1917, theProvisional Government decided to form a Directory of five:A. 
 F. 
 Kerensky, A. 
 I. 
 Verkhovsky, D. 
 N. 
 Verderevsky, A. 
 M. 
 Ni-kitin and M. 
 I. 
 Tereshchenko. 
 Officially no Cadets were included in this cabinet, but its formation was a result of a behind-the-scenes compromise with them. 
 At a joint plenary session of the C. 
E. 
C. 
of Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers Deputies and the ExecutiveCommittee of the Congress of Peasants’ Deputies on Sep-tember 2 (15), the Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s passed a resolution insupport of the new cabinet. 
 This meant that although they had declared they would have nothing to do with the Cadets, the Men-sheviks and S. 
R. 
s again helped the landowners and capitaliststo retain power. 
 p. 
 314 The “ Draft Resolution on the Present Political Situation ” was writ-ten by Lenin for the plenary meeting of the Party’s Central Com-mittee set for September 3 (16). 
 What took place on that date was not a plenum but a regular meeting of the C. 
C. 
, which did notdiscuss the political situation. 
 In the available records of the C. 
C. 
R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
) for 1917 there is no indication of the draft havingbeen discussed by the Central Committee. 
 p. 
 315 Savage Division —nickname of a division recruited during the First World War from volunteers among the mountain tribes ofthe North Caucasus. 
 General Kornilov used it as a striking forceof the troops he led against revolutionary Petrograd. 
 p. 
 317 The All-Russia Democratic Conference was held in Petrograd between September 14 and 22 (September 27-October 5), 1917. 
 It was called by the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries to stem the risingtide of the revolution. 
 The delegates represented petty-bourgeoisparties, the compromising Soviets, the trade unions, Zemstvos,commercial and industrial circles, and troop units. 
 The Bolsheviksattended with the aim of exposing the designs of the Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
s. 
 The conference elected a pre-parliament (Provisional Council of the Republic) through which the Mensheviks and S. 
R. 
shoped to check the revolution and divert the country on to the trackof a bourgeois parliamentary system. 
111 112 113 114 115 116 On Lenin’s proposal, the Central Committee of the Party decided that the Bolsheviks should withdraw from the pre-parliament. 
Only the capitulators Kamenev, Rykov and Ryazanov, who wereagainst the Party’s course for the socialist revolution, insisted on participation in the pre-parliament. 
 The Bolsheviks exposed the treacherous activity of the pre-parliament as they trained thepeople for an armed uprising. 
 p. 
 331 Kit Kitych (literally, Whale Whaleson)—nickname of Tit Titych, a rich merchant in Alexander Ostrovsky’s comedy Shouldering Another ’s Troubles . 
 Lenin applies the nickname to capitalist ty-coons. 
 p. 
 331 The War Industries Committees , which came into being in May 1915, were formed by Russia’s big imperialist bourgeoisie to helpthe tsarist regime with the war. 
 The chairman of the Central War Industries Committee was the Octobrist leader A. 
 I. 
 Guchkov, a big capitalist. 
 Among its members were the manufacturerA. 
 I. 
 Konovalov and the banker and sugar manufacturer M. 
 I. 
 Te-reshchenko. 
 In an effort to bring the workers under its sway andinspire them with defencist sentiments, the bourgeoisie decidedto form “workers’ groups” under the committees and thereby to show that “class peace’ had been established between the bour-geoisie and the proletariat of Russia. 
 The Bolsheviks declareda boycott of the committees, and maintained it with supportfrom the majority of the workers. 
 As a result of the Bolsheviks’ explanatory work, elections to the “workers’ groups” took place only in 70 out of the 239 regional and local War Industries Committees, workers’ representatives being elected to only 36 Committees. 
 p. 
 332 Svobodnaya Zhizn (Free Life)—a newspaper with a Menshevik trend published in Petrograd from September 2-8 (15-21), 1917,instead of the suspended Novaya Zhizn . 
 p. 
 355 On August 31 (September 13), 1917, the Petrograd Soviet for the first time passed, by a majority of 279 to 115, with 50 abstentions,a motion tabled by the Bolshevik group, emphatically rejectingthe policy of compromise with the bourgeoisie. 
 The resolutioncalled for the transfer of all power to the Soviets and outlined a programme for revolutionary changes in the country. 
 A few days later the Bolshevik Party won yet another major victory. 
 OnSeptember 5 (18) the Moscow Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’Deputies carried a similar Bolshevik motion by a majority of355 votes. 
 p. 
 368 Russkoye Slovo (The Russian Word)—a daily newspaper published in Moscow from 1895 (the first, trial, issue appeared in 1894) byI. 
 D. 
 Sytin. 
 Nominally non-partisan, it upheld the interests ofthe Russian bourgeoisie from a moderately liberal point of view. 
117 118 119 120 121 In 1917 it fully supported the bourgeois Provisional Government and campaigned against Lenin and the Bolshevik Party. 
 The paper was closed down in November 1917 for carrying slanderous anti-Soviet reports. 
 From January 1918 on, it was published for a period under the titles of Novoye Slovo and Nashe Slovo . 
 It was suppressed altogether in July 1918. 
 p. 
 380 Lenin wrote The State and Revolution while underground, in August and September 1917. 
 He first spoke of the necessity for a theoreticaltreatment of the question of the state in the second half of 1916. 
 At that time he wrote the item “The Youth International” (see present edition, Vol. 
 23, pp. 
 163-66) criticising Bukharin’s un-Marxist position on the state and promising a more detailed articleon the Marxists’ attitude to the state. 
 On February 17 (New Style),1917, Lenin wrote to A. 
 M. 
 Kollontai that he had almost finishedpreparing material on the Marxists’ attitude to the state. 
 The material was written in a small hand in a blue-covered copybook entitled “Marxism on the State”. 
 It contained quotations from Marxand Engels and passages from books by Kautsky, Pannekoek andBernstein, with critical comments, conclusions and generalisa-tions by Lenin. 
 According to Lenin’s plan, The State and Revolution was to consist of seven chapters. 
 However, the seventh and last chapter, “The experience of the Russian Revolutions of 1905 and 1917”,was never written and there is only a detailed plan for it (see Lenin Miscellany XXI , 1933, pp. 
 25-26 [in Russian]). 
 Lenin wrote to the publisher that should he be “too slow in completing this, theseventh, chapter, or should it turn out to be too bulky, the first six chapters should be published separately, as Book One”. 
 The author’s pen-name, F. 
 F. 
 Ivanovsky, appeared on the first page of the manuscript. 
 Lenin proposed to use it because the Pro-visional Government would otherwise confiscate the book. 
 The workwas not published until 1918, so that the pen-name did not haveto be used. 
 A second edition, with a new section, “The Presentation of the Question by Marx in 1852”, added by the author to Chapter II, appeared in 1919. 
 p. 
 385 Fabians —members of the Fabian Society, a British reformist organisation founded in 1884. 
 It grouped mostly bourgeois intel-lectuals—scholars, writers, politicians—including Sydney and Beatrice Webb, Ramsay MacDonald and Bernard Shaw. 
 The Fabians denied the necessity for the proletarian class struggle andfor the socialist revolution. 
 They contended that the transitionfrom capitalism to socialism could only be effected through minorsocial reforms, that is, gradual changes. 
 Lenin described Fabianideas as “ an extremely opportunist trend” (see present edition, Vol. 
 13, p. 
 358). 
 In 1900 the Fabian Society became part of the British Labour Party. 
 “Fabian socialism” is a source of the Labour Party’s ide-ology. 
122 123 During the First World War the Fabians took a social-chauvinist stand. 
 For Lenin’s characterisation of Fabian principles, see Le-nin’s article “British Pacifism and the British Dislike of Theory”(present edition, Vol. 
 21, pp. 
 260-65). 
 p. 
 387 See Frederick Engels, The Origin of the Family , Private Property and the State (Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 3, Moscow, 1973, pp. 
 326-27). 
 Further below, on pp. 
 393-95, 395-99 of the volume, Lenin is quoting from the same work by Engels (op. 
 cit. 
, pp. 
 327-30). 
 p. 
 391 Gentile, or tribal, organisation of society —the primitive communal system, or the first socio-economic formation in history. 
 The tribalcommune was a community of blood relatives linked by economicand social ties. 
 The tribal system went through the matriarchal and the patriarchal periods. 
 The patriarchate culminated in prim-itive society becoming a class society and in the rise of the state. 
Relations of production under the primitive communal system werebased on social ownership of the means of production and equali-tarian distribution of all products. 
 This corresponded in the mainto the low level of the productive forces and to their character at the time. 
 For the primitive communal system, see Karl Marx, Conspectus of Lewis Morgan ’s “Ancient Society ”, and Frederick Engels, The Origin of the Family , Private Property and the State (Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 3, Moscow, 1973, pp. 
 204-334). 
 p. 
 393 See Frederick Engels, Anti-Dühring , Moscow, 1969, pp. 
 332-33. 
 Further down, on p. 
 404 of this volume, Lenin is quoting from the same work by Engels (op. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 220). 
 p. 
 401 Thirty Years ’ War (1618-48 ), the first European war, resulted from an aggravation of the antagonisms between various alignments of European states, and took the form of a struggle between Prot-estants and Catholics. 
 It began with a revolt in Bohemia againstthe tyranny of the Hapsburg monarchy and the onslaught of Catho-lic reaction. 
 The states which then entered the war formed twocamps. 
 The Pope, the Spanish and Austrian Hapsburgs and the Catholic princes of Germany, who rallied to the Catholic Church, opposed the Protestant countries—Bohemia, Denmark, Sweden,the Dutch Republic, and a number of German states that hadaccepted the Reformation. 
 The Protestant countries were backedby the French kings, enemies of the Hapsburgs. 
 Germany becamethe chief battlefield and object of military plunder and predatory claims. 
 The war ended in 1648 with the signing of the Peace Treaty of Westphalia, which completed the political dismembermentof Germany. 
 p. 
 404124 125 126 127 See Karl Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy , Moscow, 1973, pp. 
 151-52. 
 p. 
 405 See Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 1, Moscow, 1973, p. 
 137. 
 p. 
 405 Gotha Programme —the programme adopted by the Socialist Work-ers’ Party of Germany in 1875, at the Gotha Congress, which unit-ed two German socialist parties, namely, the Eisenachers—led byAugust Bebel and Wilhelm Liebknecht and influenced by Marx and Engels—and the Lassalleans. 
 The programme betrayed eclecti-cism and was opportunist, because the Eisenachers had made con-cessions to the Lassalleans on major issues and accepted Lassalleanformulations. 
 Marx in his Critique of the Gotha Programme , and Engels in his letter to Bebel of March 18-28, 1875, devastated theGotha Programme, which they regarded as a serious step back-wards compared with the Eisenach programme of 1869. 
 p. 
 405 See Karl Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy , Moscow, 1973, p. 
 151. 
 p. 
 406 See Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 1, Moscow, 1973, pp. 
 118-19 and 126. 
 p. 
 407 See Karl Marx. 
 The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 1, Moscow, 1973, p. 
 477). 
 Further below, on pp. 
 414-15 of this volume, Lenin is quoting from Engels’s preface to the third edition of the work (op. 
 cit. 
, p. 
 396). 
 p. 
 411 Die Neue Zeit (New Times)—theoretical journal of the German Social-Democratic Party, published in Stuttgart from 1883 to 1923. 
It was edited by Karl Kautsky till October 1917 and by Heinrich Cunow in the subsequent period. 
 It published some of Marx’s and Engels’s writings for the first time. 
 Engels offered advice to itseditors and often criticised them for departures from Marxism. 
 In the second half of the nineties, upon Engels’s death, the journal began systematically to publish revisionist articles,including a serial by Bernstein entitled “Problems of Socialism”, which initiated a revisionist campaign against Marxism. 
 During the First World War the journal adhered to a Centrist position,and virtually backed the social-chauvinists. 
 p. 
 416 See Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1965, p. 
 69. 
 p. 
 416 See Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 1, Moscow, 1973, p. 
 99. 
 p. 
 419128 129 130 131 132 133 134 135 136 See Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1965, pp. 
 262-63. 
 p. 
 420 See Karl Marx, The Civil War in France (Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 2, Moscow, 1973, pp. 
 217-21). 
 Further below, on pp. 
 426, 427, 432-436 of this volume, Lenin is quoting from the same work by Marx (op. 
 cit. 
, pp. 
 222, 220-23). 
 p. 
 424 The Girondists —a political grouping during the French bourgeois revolution of the late eighteenth century, expressed the interests of the moderate bourgeoisie. 
 They wavered between revolution and counter-revolution, and made deals with the monarchy. 
 p. 
 435 See Frederick Engels, The Housing Question (Karl Marx and Fre-derick Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 2, Moscow, 1973, pp. 
 317-18). 
 Further below, on pp. 
 439-40 of this volume, Lenin is quoting from the same work by Engels (op. 
 sit. 
, pp. 
 370, 355). 
 p. 
 438 Lenin is referring to the articles “L’indifferenza in materia politica” by Karl Marx and “Dell’ Autorita” by Frederick Engels ( Almanacco Republicano per l ’anno 1874 ). 
 Further below, on pp. 
 440-41, 442, 442-43 of this volume, Lenin is quoting from the same articles. 
 p. 
 440 See Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow, 1965, pp. 
 293-94. 
 p. 
 445 Erfurt Programme —the programme adopted by the German Social-Democratic Party at its Erfurt Congress in October 1891. 
 A step forward compared with the Gotha Programme (1875), it was base on Marx’s doctrine of the inevitable downfall of the capitalist mode of production and its replacement by the socialist mode. 
 It stressed the necessity for the working class to wage a political struggle, pointed out the party’s role as the leader of that struggle, and so on. 
 But it also made serious concessions to opportunism. 
 Engels criticised the original draft of the programme in detail in his work A Critique of the Draft Social-Democratic Programme of 1891 . 
 It was virtually a critique of the opportunism of the Second Inter-national as a whole. 
 But the German Social-Democratic leaders concealed Engels’s critique from the rank and file, and disregarded his highly important comments in drawing up the final text of the programme. 
 Lenin considered the fact that the Erfurt Programme said nothing about the dictatorship of the proletariat to be its chief defect and a cowardly concession to opportunism. 
 p. 
 447 The Anti-Socialist Law (Exceptional Law Against the Socialists) was enacted in Germany by the Bismarck government in 1878 to combat the working-class and socialist movement. 
 Under this law, all Social-Democratic Party organisations, all mass organisations of the workers, and the working-class press were banned, socialist137 138 139 140 141 142 143 144 literature was confiscated and the Social-Democrats were persecut-ed, to the point of banishment. 
 These repressive measures did not, however, break the Social-Democratic Party, which readjusted itself to illegal conditions. 
 Der Sozial-Demokrat , the party’s Central Organ, was published abroad and party congresses were held atregular intervals (1880, 1883 and 1887). 
 In Germany herself, the Social-Democratic organisations and groups were coming back to life underground, an illegal Central Committee leading their activities. 
 Besides, the Party widely used legal opportunities to establish closer links with the working people, and its influence was growing steadily. 
 At the Reichstag elections in 1890, it polled three times as many votes as in 1878. 
 Marx and Engels did much to help the Social-Democrats. 
 In 1890 popular pressure and the growing working-class movement led to the annulment of the Anti-Socialist Law. 
 p. 
 449 See Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 2 Moscow, 1973, pp. 
 178-89. 
 Further below, on pp. 
 454, 455, 456-58 of this volume, Lenin is quoting from the same work (op. 
 cit. 
, pp. 
 179-80, 184, 187-89). 
 p. 
 454 The Los-von-Kirche-Bewegung (the “Leave-the-Church” movement), or Kirchenaustrittsbewegung (Movement to Secede from the Church) assumed a vast scale in Germany before the First World War. 
article “Kirchenaustrittsbewegung und Sozialdemokratie” (“The Movement to Secede from the Church and Social-Democracy”) to discuss the attitude of the German Social-Democratic Party to the movement. 
 During that discussion prominent German Social-Democratic leaders failed to rebuff Göhre, who affirmed that the party should remain neutral towards the Movement to Secede from the Church and forbid its members to engage in propaganda against religion and the Church on behalf of the party. 
 Lenin took notice of the discussion while working on material for Imperialism , the Highest Stage of Capitalism (see present edition, Vol. 
 39, p. 
 591). 
 p. 
 456 Lassalleans —supporters of the German petty-bourgeois socialist Ferdinand Lassalle, members of the General Association of German Workers founded at the Congress of Workers’ Organisations, held in Leipzig in 1863, to counterbalance the bourgeois progressists who were trying to gain influence over the working class. 
 The first President of the Association was Lassalle, who formulated its programme and the fundamentals of its tactics. 
 The Association’s political programme was declared to be the struggle for universal suffrage, and its economic programme, the struggle for workers’ production associations, to be subsidised by the state. 
 In their practical activities, Lassalle and his followers adapted themselves to the hegemony of Prussia and supported the Great Power policy of Bismarck. 
 “Objectively,” wrote Engels to Marx on January 27,145 146 147In January 1914 Neue Zeit began, with the revisionist Paul Göhre’s 1865, “this was a base action and a betrayal of the whole working-class movement to the Prussians. 
” Marx and Engels frequentlyand sharply criticised the theory, tactics, and organisationalprinciples of the Lassalleans as an opportunist trend in the German working-class movement. 
 p. 
 459 See Frederick Engels, “Vorwort zur Broschüre Internationales aus dem ‘Volksstaat ’ (1871-1875 )”, Marx/Engels, Werke , Bd. 
 22, Berlin, 1963, S. 
 417-18. 
 p. 
 460 See Karl Marx, Critique of the Gotha Programme (Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works , Vol. 
 3, Moscow, 1973, p. 
 26). 
 Further below, on pp. 
 464, 470, 471-73 of this volume, Lenin is quoting from the same work by Marx (op. 
 cit. 
, pp. 
 26, 17, 19). 
 p. 
 464 Reference is to the pupils of a seminary who won notoriety by their extreme ignorance and barbarous customs. 
 They were portrayed byN. 
 G. 
 Pomyalovsky, a Russian author. 
 p. 
 474 The Hague Congress of the First International sat from September 2-7, 1872. 
 It was attended by 65 delegates, among whom were Marx and Engels. 
 The powers of the General Council and the political activity of the proletariat were among the items on the agenda. 
The Congress deliberations were marked throughout by a sharpstruggle against the Bakuninists. 
 The Congress passed a resolutionextending the General Council’s powers. 
 Its resolution “On thePolitical Activity of the Proletariat” stated that the proletariat should organise a political party of its own to ensure the triumph of the social revolution and that the winning of political power wasbecoming its great task. 
 The Congress expelled Bakunin and Guil-laume from the International as disorganisers and founders ofa new, anti-proletarian party. 
 p. 
 481 Zarya (Dawn)—a Marxist scientific and political journal published in Stuttgart in 1901-02 by the editors of Iskra . 
 Four issues appeared in three instalments. 
 p. 
 482 Reference is to the Fifth World Congress of the Second International , which met in Paris from September 23 to 27, 1900. 
 On the funda-mental issue, “The Winning of Political Power, and Alliances with Bourgeois Parties”, whose discussion was prompted by A. 
 Mille-rand becoming a member of the Waldeck-Rousseau counter-revolu-tionary government, the Congress carried a motion tabled byKautsky. 
 The resolution said that “the entry of a single Socialistinto a bourgeois Ministry cannot be considered as the normal beginning for winning political power: it can never be anything but a temporary and exceptional makeshift in an emergencysituation”. 
 Afterwards opportunists frequently referred to thispoint to justify their collaboration with the bourgeoisie. 
148 149 150 151 152 153 Zarya published (No. 
 1, April 1901) an article by Plekhanov entitled “A Few Words About the Latest World Socialist Congressin Paris. 
 An Open Letter to the Comrades Who Have EmpoweredMe”, which sharply criticised Kautsky’s resolution. 
 p. 
 482 This refers to Sydney and Beatrice Webb, Industrial Democracy . 
 p. 
 492 Socialist Monthly (Sozialistische Monatshefte)—the principal journal of the opportunists among the German Social-Democrats, a periodi-cal of international opportunism. 
 It was published in Berlin from 1897 to 1933. 
 During the world imperialist war of 1914-18 it tooka social-chauvinist stand. 
 p. 
 495154 155 THE LIFE AND WORK OF V. 
 I. 
 LENIN Outstanding Dates June -September 1917 June 3 -24 (June 16 -July 7 ) June 4 (17) June 6 (19) June 7 (20) June 8 (21)Lenin attends the First All -Russia congress of Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies. 
 Lenin speaks at the First All -Russia Congress of Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies on the attitude to the Provisional Government. 
 Lenin’s articles “Economic Dislocation and the Proletariat’s Struggle Against It” and “The Thousand and First Lie of the Capitalists” are published in Pravda No. 
 73. 
 Lenin’s articles “The Diehards of June 3 Favour an Immediate Offensive”, “An Alliance to Stop the Revolution” and “Gratitude” appear in Pravda No. 
 74. 
 Lenin attends an enlarged meeting of the Party’s Central Committee and moves a resolution for a peaceful workers’ and soldiers’ demonstration. 
 Lenin’s articles “Is There a Way to a Just Peace?”, “The Enemies of the People” and “Note” appear in Pravda No. 
 75. 
 Lenin’s articles “‘The Great Withdrawal’”, “The Use of Sticking to the Point in Polemics ”, “An Epidemic of Credulity” and “A Bird in the Hand or Two in the Bush” are published in Pravda No. 
 76. 
 June 9 (22) Night of June 9 -10 (22-23) June 11 (24) June 13 (26) June 14 (27) June 15 (28) June 16 (29) June 16 -23 (June 29 --July 6 )Lenin’s article “Introduction of Socialism or Exposure of Plunder of the State?” is published in Pravda No. 
 77. 
 Lenin speaks on the war at the First All -Russia Congress of Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies. 
 Lenin attends a meeting of the Bolshevik group at the First All -Russia Congress of Soviets and then a meeting of the C. 
C. 
 R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
). 
 On a motion tabled by Lenin, the Central Committee resolves to call off the demonstration fixed for June 10 (23). 
 Late at night Lenin prepares material for Pravda and C. 
C. 
 directives in view of the Central Com -mittee’s decision to call off the demonstration. 
 Lenin’s articles “Confused and Frightened”, “Insi -nuations”, “‘Rumours Agitating the Population’” and “A Riddle” are published in Pravda No. 
 79. 
 Lenin writes “Draft Statement by the C. 
C. 
 R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
) and the Bureau of the Bolshevik Group to the All -Russia Congress of Soviets Regarding the Ban on the Demonstration”. 
 At a meeting of the Petrograd Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
), Lenin speaks about the calling off of the demonstration. 
 Lenin’s article “The Turning -Point” and “Letter to the Editor” appear in Pravda No. 
 80. 
 Lenin’s articles “The Foreign Policy of the Russian Revolution” and “A Contradictory Stand” appear in Pravda No. 
 81. 
 Lenin’s article “The Ukraine” is published in Pravda No. 
 82. 
 Lenin’s article “The Class Origins of Present -Day and ‘Future’ Cavaignacs” is published in Pravda No. 
 83. 
 Lenin takes a leading part in the All -Russia Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
) Military Orga -nisations on the War and Home Fronts. 
 He iselected to the steering committee. 
 June 17 (30) June 18 (July 1 ) June 20 (July 3 ) Between June 20 and 23 (July 3 and 6 ) June 21 (July 4 ) June 22 (July 5 ) June 24 (July 7 ) June 25 (July 8 )Lenin writes a letter to the Stockholm Bureau of the C. 
C. 
 R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
) Abroad. 
 Lenin’s articles “How to Fight Counter -Revolu -tion”, “The Ukraine and the Defeat of the Ruling Parties of Russia”, “Prosecute Rodzyanko and Junkovsky for Concealing an Agent Provocateur!” and “Strange Misquotations” are published in Pravda No. 
 84. 
 Lenin holds a private meeting of the C. 
C. 
 R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
) to discuss the results of the June 18 (July 1) demonstration. 
 Lenin’s articles “Ruling and Responsible Parties” and “Another Commission” appear in Pravda No. 
 85. 
 Lenin’s article “The Eighteenth of June” appears in Pravda No. 
 86. 
 Lenin reports on the current situation to the All -Russia Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
) Organi -sations on the War and Home Fronts. 
The First All -Russia Congress of Soviets elects Lenin to the Central Executive Committee. 
 Lenin speaks on the agrarian question at the All -Russia Conference of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
) Military Organisations on the War and Home Fronts. 
 Lenin’s articles “The Revolution, the Offensive, and Our Party”, “In What Way Do You Socialist -Revolutionary and Menshevik Gentlemen DifferFrom Plekhanov?” and “How Rodzyanko Is Trying to Justify Himself” are published in Pravda No. 
 87. 
 Lenin’s article “To What State Have the Socialist -Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks Brought the Revolution?” is published in Pravda No. 
 88. 
 Lenin’s articles “Can ‘Jacobinism’ Frighten the Working Class?” and “The Need for an Agricultur -al Labourers’ Union in Russia” (Article One)are published in Pravda No. 
 90. 
 Lenin’s articles “The Need for an Agricultural Labourers’ Union in Russia” (Article Two) and “A Disorderly Revolution” are published in Pravda No. 
 91. 
 June 27 (July 10 ) June 29 (July 12 ) June 29 -July (July 12 -17) June 30 (July 13 ) July 1 (14) July 3 (16) Not later than July (17) July 4 (17) Night of July 4-5 (17-18) July 5 (18) July 6 (19)Lenin’s articles “A Class Shift” and “Miracles of Revolutionary Energy” are published in Pravda No. 
 92. 
 Lenin’s articles “Phrases and Facts” and “How the Capitalists Conceal Their Profits. 
 Concerning the Issue of Control” are published in Pravda No. 
 94. 
 Lenin, who is ill, spends a few days in the village of Neivola, near Mustamäki Station, Finland. 
 Lenin’s articles “Crisis Is Approaching, Disloca -tion Is Increasing” and “Just How Is It to Be Done?” are published in Pravda No. 
 95. 
 Lenin’s articles “How and Why the Peasants Were Deceived” and “Who Is Responsible?” are pub -lished in Pravda No. 
 96. 
 Lenin writes the article “What Could the Cadets Have Counted on When They Withdrew From the Cabinet?” Lenin writes the article “All Power to the Soviets!” It was published in Pravda No. 
 99 (July 18 [5]). 
 Lenin addresses demonstrators from the balcony of the Kshesinskaya Palace. 
 Lenin attends a meeting of the C. 
C. 
 R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
), which adopts an appeal for the discontinuance of the July demonstration. 
 Lenin moves to a secret address. 
Lenin writes the articles “Where Is State Power and Where Is Counter -Revolution?”, “Foul Slander by Ultra -Reactionary Newspapers and Alexinsky”, “Slander and Facts”, “Close to the Truth” and “A New Dreyfus Case?” The articles were pub -lished in Listok “Pravdy ” on July 19 (6). 
 Lenin holds a meeting of the C. 
C. 
 R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
) to discuss the July events. 
 Lenin attends a meeting of the Executive Commis -sion of the Petrograd Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
) in the lodge of the Renault (now the Krasny Oktyabr) Works. 
 July 6 -7 (19-20) July 7 (20) July 8 (21) Night of July 9-10 (22-23) July 10 (23)-August 8 (21) July 10 (23) July 11 (24) July 15 (28) Mid-JulyLenin writes “Appeal of the Executive Commission of the Petrograd Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
)”. 
 Lenin writes the article “Dreyfusiad”. 
 The Provisional Government orders Lenin’s arrest. 
 Lenin hides in the home of S. 
 Y. 
 Alliluyev, a worker. 
 Lenin writes the articles “In Refutation of Sinister Rumours” and “Three Crises”. 
 Lenin writes a letter to the Bureau of the Central Executive Committee of the All -Russia Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies protesting against the search carried out at his home. 
 Lenin writes the article “The Question of the Bolshevik Leaders Appearing in Court”. 
 Lenin leaves the home of S. 
 Y. 
 Alliluyev, a worker, in Petrograd, where he hid from July 7 (20) and illegally moves to the house of N. 
 A. 
 Yemelyanov, a worker, near Razliv Station. 
 Lenin hides in the left of Yemelyanov’s barn, near Razliv Station, but soon moves to a hut beyond Lake Razliv and lives there disguised as a mower. 
 He keeps contacts with Petrograd through the Party comrades assigned for the purpose by the Central Committee, writes articles and speeches for the Bolshevik newspapers, and works on his book The State and Revolution . 
 Lenin writes the article “The Political Situation”. 
 The article was published in Proletarskoye Dyelo No. 
 6 (August 2 [July 20]). 
 Lenin’s letter to the editors of Novaya Zhizn is published in No. 
 71 of that newspaper. 
 Lenin’s article “What Could the Cadets Have Counted on When They Withdrew From the Cabi -net?” and “Letter to the Editors of Proletarskoye Dyelo ” are published in Proletarskoye Dyelo No. 
 2. 
 Lenin writes the article “On Slogans”. 
 The article was published in pamphlet form in 1917 by the Kronstadt Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
). 
 July 19 (August 1 ) July 26 (August 8 ) July 26 and 27 (August 8 and 9 ) July 26 -August 3 (August 8 -16) July 29 (August 11 ) Late July August 3 (16) August 4 and 5 (17 and 18 ) Night of August 8-9 (21-22) August 10 (23)-September 17 (30) August 16 (29) August 17 -25 (August 30 -September 7 )Lenin’s article “Our Thanks to Prince G. 
 Y. 
 Lvov” is published in Proletarskoye Dyelo No. 
 5. 
 Lenin’s article “Three Crises” is published in Rabotnitsa No. 
 7. 
 Lenin writes the article “Constitutional Illusions”. 
 Lenin’s article “An Answer” is published in Ra-bochy i Soldat Nos. 
 3 and 4. 
 Lenin, who is underground, guides the Sixth Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
), which had electedhim honorary chairman and sends him a message of greeting. 
 The Sixth Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
) elects Lenin to the Central Committee. 
 Lenin’s article “The Beginning of Bonapartism” is published in Rabochy i Soldat No. 
 6. 
 Lenin writes the article “Lessons of the Revolu -tion”. 
 It is published in Rabochy Nos. 
 8 and 9 (September 12 and 13 [August 30 and 31]). 
 The Sixth Party Congress nominates Lenin for election to the Constituent Assembly. 
 Lenin’s article “Constitutional Illusions” is pub -lished in Rabochy i Soldat Nos. 
 11 and 12. 
 Lenin moves from Razliv to Udelnaya Station and from there, disguised as a fireman, illegally crossesthe frontier into Finland on a locomotive. 
 Lenin hides in the Finnish village of Jalkala, near Terijoki Station, then in Lahti, 130 km from Helsingfors, and lastly in Helsingfors. 
 Lenin’s letter “Kamenev’s Speech in the C. 
E. 
C. 
 on the Stockholm Conference” is published inProletary No. 
 3. 
 Lenin writes a letter to the C. 
C. 
 R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
) Bureau Abroad. 
 August 18 -19 (August 31 -September 1 ) August 19 (September 1 ) August 24 (September 6 ) August 26 (September 8 ) August 29 (September 11 ) August 30 (September 12 ) August -September September 4 (14) First half of September September 1 -3 (14-16) Not later than Septem -ber 3 (16) September 6 (19) September 10 -14 (23-27)Lenin writes the article “Rumours of a Conspiracy”. 
 Lenin’s article “They Do Not See the Wood for the Trees” is published in Proletary No. 
 6. 
 Lenin’s article “Political Blackmail” is published in Proletary No. 
 10. 
 Lenin’s articles “Paper Resolutions” and “The Stockholm Conference” are published in Rabochy No. 
 2. 
 Lenin’s article “From a Publicist’s Diary. 
 Peasants and Workers” is published in Rabochy No. 
 6. 
 Lenin’s article “Slanderers” is published in Rabochy No. 
 8. 
 Lenin writes the letter “To the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
”. 
 Lenin writes The State and Revolution. 
 The Marx -ist Theory of the State and the Tasks of the Prole -tariat in the Revolution. 
 Lenin’s article “From a Publicist’s Diary” is published in Rabochy No. 
 10. 
 Lenin writes the letters “Concerning the Party Programme”, “On Zimmerwald” and “Violationsof Democracy in Mass Organisations”. 
 Lenin writes the article “On Compromises”. 
 The article is published in Rabochy Put No. 
 3 (Sep -tember 19 [6]). 
 Lenin writes the “Draft Resolution on the Present Political Situation”. 
 The C. 
C. 
 R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
(B. 
) nominates Lenin for election as a delegate to the Democratic Confer -ence. 
 Lenin writes the pamphlet The Impending Catas -trophe and How to Combat It. 
 September 11 (24) September 1 (27) September 15 (28)The Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies elects Lenin a delegate to the Democratic Conference. 
 Lenin’s article “One of the Fundamental Questions of the Revolution” is published in Rabochy Put No. 
 10. 
 Lenin’s article “How to Guarantee the Success of the Constituent Assembly. 
 On Freedom of the Press” is published in Rabochy Put No. 
 11. 
 B. 
 n. 
 leHnH coЧnHeHnr TOM 25 На английскот языке