L E N I N COLLECTED WORKS 9 A IN ACCORDANCE WITH A DECISION OF THE NINTH CONGRESS OF THE R. 
C. 
P. 
(B. 
) AND THE SECOND CONGRESS OF SOVIETS OF THE U. 
S. 
S. 
R. 
 B. 
 n. 
 l d H n H С О Ч И Н E Н И Я И з д a н u е ч е m в е p m o e ГОСУДАРСТВ ЕНН ОЕ ИЗ ДАТ ЕЛЬ СТВО ПОЛИТИЧЕ СКОЙ ЛИ ТЕРАТУ РЫ M О С К В А V. 
 I. 
 L E N I N cOLLEcTED WORKS VOLUME 9 June–November 190C PROGRESS PUBLISHERS MOSCOW TRANSLATED THE RUSSIAN BY ABRAHAM FINEBERG AND BY JULIUS KATZER EDITED BY GEORGE HANNA First printing 1962 Second printing 1965 Third printing 1972 Fourth printing 1977 Printed in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics From Marx to Mao M L © Digital Reprints 2009 www. 
marx 2mao. 
com 13 15 17 21 24 32 3844 48 65 74 77 88 92 104 115115 122 130C O N T E N T S Preface ..................... 1905 TWO TACTICS OF SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY IN THE DEMOCRATIC REVOLUTION ...................... 
 Preface ...................... 
. 
 1. 
 An Urgent Political Question .......... 
. 
 2. 
 What Can We Learn From the Resolution of the Third Congress o f t h e R . 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 o n a Provisional R evo-lutionary Government? ............. 
. 
 3. 
 What Is Meant by “the Revolution’s Decisive Victory Over Tsarism”? ................ 
. 
 4. 
 The Abolition of the Monarchy. 
 The Republic .... 
 5. 
 How Should “the Revolution Be Advanced”? .... 
. 
 6. 
 Whence Is the Proletariat Threatened with the Danger of Finding Itself with Its Hands Tied in the Struggle Against the Inconsistent Bourgeoisie? ....... 
. 
 7. 
 The Tactics of “Eliminating the Conservatives From the Government” ................ 
 8. 
 The Osvobozhdeniye and New-Iskra Trends ...... 9. 
 What Is Meant by Being a Party of Extreme Opposition in Time of Revolution? ............. 
. 
 10. 
 “Revolutionary Communes” and the Revolutionary-Democratic Dictatorship of the Proletariat a n d t h e Peasantry ................... 
 11. 
 A Cursory Comparison Between Several of the Reso-lutions of the Third Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 and Those of the “Conference” ............. 
 12 . 
 Wi l l t he Sweep of t he Democratic Revolution Be Diminished If the Bourgeoisie Recoils From It? . 
 ... 13. 
 Conclusion. 
 Dare We Win? ............ Epilogue. 
 Once Again the Osvobozhdeniye Trend, Once Again the New-Iskra Trend ................ 
. 
 I. 
 Why Do Bourgeois Liberal Realists Praise Social-Democratic “Realists”? ................... 
 II. 
Comrade Martynov Again Gives “Profundity” to the Question III. 
The Vulgar Bourgeois and the Marxist View on Dictatorship61 CONCLUDING PARAGRAPH TO THE ARTICLE “THE PARIS COMMUNE AND THE TASKS OF THE DEMOCRATIC DICTATORSHIP” TO THE SECRETARIAT OF THE I NTERNATIONAL SOCIALIST BUREAU, BRUSSELS ................... 
 REVOLUTION TEACHES .................. WRATHFUL IMPOTENCE ................ 
. 
 ORIGINAL VARIANT OF THE PREFACE TO THE PAMPHLET WORKERS ON THE SPLIT IN THE PARTY .......... 
 PREFACE TO THE PAMPHLET WORKERS ON THE SPLIT IN THE PARTY ........................ WHILE THE PROLETARIAT I S DOI NG THE FI GHTING THE BOURGEOISIE IS STEALING TOWARDS POWER ....... 
. 
 THE BOYCOTT OF THE BULYGIN DUMA, AND INSURRECTION NOTE ON A RESOLUTION OF THE CONFERENCE OF R . 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 ORGANISATIONS ABROAD ................ 
. 
 NOTE ON M . 
 N. 
 POK ROVSKY’S ARTICLE “THE PROFESSIONAL INTELLIGENTSIA AND THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATS” ....... 
 REPLY THE PROLETARY EDITORIAL BOARD TO QUES-TIONS PUT BY COMRADE “WORKER” ............. 
 “ONENESS OF THE TSAR AND THE PEOPLE, AND OF THE PEOPLE AND THE TSAR” ................ 
 .... 
 THE BLACK HUNDREDS AND THE ORGANISATION OF AN UPRISING ...................... 
. 
 EDITORIAL EPILOGUE TO THE ARTICLE AND THE THIRD CONGRESS ON TRIAL BEFORE THE CAUCASIAN MENSHEVIKS” ....... 
 ARE THE ZEMSTVO “LIBERALS” ALREADY TURNING BACK? .... 
 THE WORKING CLASS AND REVOLUTION .......... 
. 
 PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION OF THE PAMPHLET THE TASKS OF THE RUSSIAN SOCIAL-DEMOCRATS ....... 
 NOT E ON P . 
 NI KOL A YEV’S PAMPHLET THE REVOLUTION I N RUSSIA ........................ IN THE WAKE OF THE MONARCHIST BOURGEOISIE, OR IN THEVAN OF THE REVOLUTIONARY PROLETARIAT AND PEASANTRY? A MOST LUCID EXPOSITION OF A MOST CONFUSED PLAN... KEEPING INTERNATIONAL SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY INFORMED OF OUR PARTY AFFAIRS ..................141 142 146156 161 163 169 179 188 189 190 191 200 205 206 207 209 211 212 224 227 NOTE TO THE ARTICLE “RUSSIA’S F I NANCES A N D T H E REVOLUTION” ..................... SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY’S ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE PEASANT MOVEMENT ...................... 
 WHAT OUR LIBERAL BOURGEOIS WANT, AND WHAT THEY FEAR THE THEORY OF SPONTANEOUS GENERATION ....... 
 . 
 LETTER TO THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIALIST BUREAU .... 
. 
 FRIENDS MEET ..................... ARGUE ABOUT TACTICS, BUT GIVE CLEAR SLOGANS! .... 
. 
 What Is the Advice the Social-Democrats Are Giving the Proletariat with Reference to the State Duma ?.... 
. 
 PLAYING AT PARLIAMENTARIANISM ............ THE LIBERAL UNIONS AND SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY ....... 
 THE DEFENSIVE TO THE OFFENSIVE ......... ON THE CURRENT MOMENT ................ 
 THE EDITORIAL BOARD OF THE CENTRAL ORGAN OF THE RUSSIAN SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC LABOUR PARTY ....... 
. 
 THE J ENA CONGRESS OF THE GERMAN SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC WORKERS’ PARTY ................... 
. 
 NO FALSEHOOD! OUR STRENGTH LIES IN STATING THE TRUTH! Letter to the Editorial Board ............... ON THE SO-CALLED ARMENIAN SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC WORKERS’ORGANISATION..................... THE ZEMSTVO CONGRESS ................ 
 SOCIALISM AND THE PEASANTRY ............. 
 A REPLETE BOURGEOISIE AND A CRAVING BOURGEOISIE ... THE LANDLORDS ON THE BOYCOTT OF THE DUMA ....... 
 ON THE QUESTION OF PARTY UNITY ............ AN IRATE REPLY ................... 
. 
 A NEW MENSHEVIK CONFERENCE ............. 
229 230 240 246 252253 262 263 265 281 283 286 288 290295 300 301 307 316 323 327 329 330 REPRESENTATION OF THE R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 IN THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIALIST BUREAU ................... 
 TALKS WITH OUR READERS ................ 
 DAYS OF BLOODSHED IN MOSCOW ............. 
 THE BOURGEOISIE AWAKENED ITS SLUMBER. 
 Subject for an Article .................. .... 
. 
 TO THE COMBAT COMMITTEE OF THE ST. 
 PETERSBURG COMMITTEE THE POLITICAL STRIKE AND THE STREET FIGHTING IN MOSCOWTHE LATEST IN ISKRA TACTICS, OR MOCK ELECTIONS AS A NEW INCENTIVE TO AN UPRISING ................ 
 NOT E T O M. 
 BORISOV’S ARTICLE “ ON T HE T RADE UNION MOVEMENT AND THE TASKS OF SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY” .... 
. 
 ON THE DEATH OF TRUBETSKOI .......... 
 .... 
 THE LESSONS OF THE MOSCOW EVENTS ....... 
. 
 ... “THE STRUGGLE OF THE PROLETARIAT” ....... 
. 
 ... THE YOUTH ABROAD AND THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION ... ... A LETTER TO THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIALIST BUREAU .... 
. 
 THE ALL-RUSSIA POLITICAL STRIKE ............. 
 THE FIRST RESULTS OF THE POLITICAL ALIGNMENT ... .... 
 THE HYSTERICS OF THE DEFEATED ....... 
. 
 .... 
. 
 REVOLUTIONARY RIGA’S ULTIMATUM ......... ... THE PLANS OF A BUFFOON MINISTER ......... ... THE AGGRAVATION OF THE SITUATION IN RUSSIA ....... 
 NOTES ON “THE BRITISH LABOUR MOVEMENT AND THE T RADE UNION CONGRESS” ................... 
 AN EQUILIBRIUM OF FORCES ............... A SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC SWEETHEART ............ ON P. 
 B. 
 AXELROD’S PAMPHLET THE PEOPLE ’S DUMA AND A WORKERS ’ CONGRESS . 
 Analysis of the Pamphlet ....... 
 TASKS OF REVOLUTIONARY ARMY CONTINGENTS ......332 335 336 342 344 347 356 374 375 376 388 389 390392 396 405 408 410 411 413 414416 417 420 WHAT THE LIBERALS EXPECT OF THE DUMA ....... 
. 
 THE FIRST VICTORY OF THE REVOLUTION .......... 
 THE LATEST NEWS ................... 
 NIKOLAI ERNESTOVICH BAUMAN ............. 
. 
 PETTY-BOURGEOIS AND PROLETARIAN SOCIALISM ....... 
 THE DENOUEMENT IS AT HAND ............. 
. 
 INSERT TO V. 
 KALININ’S ARTICLE “THE PEASANT CONGRESS” BETWEEN TWO BATTLES ................ 
. 
 Notes ........................ The Life and Work of V . 
 I. 
 Lenin . 
 Outstanding Dates .... 
. 
 I L L U S T R A T I O N S Cover of Lenin’s pamphlet Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution . 
 1905 .......... 
. 
 ... Page 157 of Lenin’s manuscript Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution . 
 1905 .......... 
 ... First page of Lenin’s manuscript “Socialism and the Peasant-ry”. 
 1905 ...................... 
 Front page of the newspaper Borba Proletariata , No . 
 2 , wi t h Lenin’s article “The Democratic Tasks of the Revolutionary Proletariat”. 
 1905 .......... 
. 
 .........425 427 435 436 438 447 455 457 467 493 16-17 101 304-305 385 PREFACE Volume 9 contains works written by V. 
 I. 
 Lenin in the second half (June-November) of 1905. 
 The volume includes the historic Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution in which Lenin gave a classical criticism of the Mensheviks’ tactics and amasterly exposition of the Bolsheviks’ tactics, and enrichedMarxism with a new theory of revolution. 
 Chapter II of theepilogue to the book is published in toto for the first time after the manuscript, part of which was found in 1940. 
 The volume includes the following articles: “While the Proletariat Is Doing the Fighting the Bourgeoisie Is Steal-ing Towards Power”, “The Boycott of the Bulygin Duma,and Insurrection”, “In the Wake of the Monarchist Bour-geoisie, or in the Van of the Revolutionary Proletariat and Peasantry?”, “Playing at Parliamentarianism”, “From the Defensive to the Offensive”. 
 In these articles Lenin defendsthe revolutionary tactics of the working class, gives adviceon preparations for an insurrection, and exposes the false“democratism” of the liberal bourgeoisie and the concilia-tory tactics of the Mensheviks. 
 In the articles “Social-Democracy’s Attitude Towards the Peasant Movement”, “Socialism and the Peasantry”, and“Petty-Bourgeois and Proletarian Socialism”, Lenin setsforth and explains the Bolsheviks’ strategic plan of struggleto make the bourgeois-democratic revolution develop into asocialist revolution. 
 The articles “The Political Strike and the Street Fighting in Moscow”, “The Lessons of the Moscow Events”, “TheAll-Russia Political Strike”, and “The First Victory of the Revolution”, all deal with the October political general strike. 
 Lenin’s “Preface to the Pamphlet Workers on the Split in the Party ”, “On the Question of Party Unity”, and several others are directed against the Mensheviks’ actsof schism. 
 The following works, included in the Collected Works for the first time, are published in this volume: “Concluding Paragraph to the Article ‘The Paris Commune and the Tasks of the Democratic Dictatorship’”, “Original Variant of thePreface to the Pamphlet Workers on the Split in the Party ”, “Note on a Resolution of the Conference of R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
Organisations Abroad”, “Editorial Epilogue to the Article‘The Third Congress on Trial Before the Caucasian Menshe-viks’”, “Note on P. 
 Nikolayev’s Pamphlet The Revolution in Russia ”, “On the Current Moment”, “On the So-Called Armenian Social-Democratic Workers’ Organisation”, “TheStruggle of the Proletariat”, “The Youth Abroad and theRussian Revolution”, “Notes on ‘The British Labour Move-ment and the Trade Union Congress’”, “Insert to V. 
 Ka-linin’s Article ‘The Peasant Congress’”, and the article “Between Two Battles”. 
 In the last-named article Lenin sumsup the results of the political general strike of October 1905and calls upon the Russian proletariat to rally its forcesfor the overthrow of the tsarist autocracy by means of aninsurrection of the whole people. 
 Written in June-July 1905 First published as a pamphlet in Geneva, July , 1905Published according to the text of the pamphlet checked against the manuscript PREFACE In a revolutionary period it is very difficult to keep abreast of events which provide an astonishing amount ofnew material for an appraisal of the tactical slogans of revolutionary parties. 
 The present pamphlet was written before the Odessa events. 
 * We have already pointed out in Proletary3 (No. 
 9—“Revolution Teaches ”)** that these events have forced even those Social-Democrats who createdthe “uprising-as-process” theory and who rejected propagandafor a provisional revolutionary government actually to go over, or begin to go over, to their opponents’ side. 
 Revolution undoubtedly teaches with a rapidity and thoroughnesswhich appear incredible in peaceful periods of politicaldevelopment. 
 And, what is particularly important, it teachesnot only the leaders, but the masses as well. 
 There is not the slightest doubt that the revolution will teach Social-Democratism to the masses of the workers in Russia. 
 The revolution will confirm the programme andtactics of Social-Democracy in actual practice by demon-strating the true nature of the various classes of society,by demonstrating the bourgeois character of our democracyand the real aspirations of the peasantry, who, while being revolutionary in the bourgeois-democratic sense, carry within themselves not the idea of “socialisation”, but the seedsof a new class struggle between the peasant bourgeoisieand the rural proletariat. 
 The old illusions of the oldNarodism, so clearly visible, for instance, in the draft *The reference is to the mutiny on the armoured cruiser Potem-kin. 
2 (Author’s note to the 1907 edition. 
— Ed. 
) **See p. 
 148 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 programme of the “Socialist-Revolutionary Party”4 on the question of the development of capitalism in Russia, the question of the democratic character of our “society”, and the question of the significance of a complete victory of apeasant uprising—all these illusions will be completelyand mercilessly dispelled by the revolution. 
 For the firsttime, the various classes will be given their real politicalbaptism. 
 These classes will emerge from the revolution with a definite political physiognomy, for they will have revealed themselves not only in the programme and tacticalslogans of their ideologists but also In open politicalaction by the masses. 
 Undoubtedly, the revolution will teach us and will teach the masses of the people. 
 But the question that now con-fronts a militant political party is: shall we be able to teach the revolution anything? Shall we be able to make use ofthe correctness of our Social-Democratic doctrine, of ourbond with the only thoroughly revolutionary class, theproletariat, to put a proletarian imprint on the revolution,to carry the revolution to a real and decisive victory, not in word but in deed, and to paralyse the instability, half-heartedness, and treachery of the democratic bourgeoisie? It is to this end that we must direct all our efforts, and the achievement of that end will depend, on the one hand,on the accuracy of our appraisal of the political situationand the correctness of our tactical slogans, and, on the other hand, on whether these slogans will be backed by the real fighting strength of the masses of the workers. 
 All the usual,regular, and current work of all organisations and groupsof our Party, the work of propaganda, agitation, and organ-isation, is directed towards strengthening and expandingthe ties with the masses. 
 Necessary as this work always is it cannot be considered adequate at a time of revolution. 
 In such a contingency the working class feels an instinctiveurge for open revolutionary action, and we must learn toset the aims of this action correctly, and then make theseaims as widely known and understood as possible. 
 It mustnot be forgotten that the current pessimism about our ties with the masses very often serves as a screen for bourgeois ideas regarding the proletariat’s role in the revolution. 
Undoubtedly, we still have a great deal to do in educating and organising the working class; but now the gist of the matter is: where should we place the main political emphasis in this work of education and organisation? On the trade unions and legally existing associations, or on an insurrection,on the work of creating a revolutionary army and a revo-lutionary government? Both serve to educate and organisethe working class. 
 Both are, of course, necessary. 
 But in thepresent revolution the problem amounts to this: which is to be emphasised in the work of educating and organising the working class, the former or the latter? The outcome of the revolution depends on whether the working class will play the part of a subsidiary to the bour-geoisie, a subsidiary that is powerful in the force of itsonslaught against the autocracy, but impotent politically, or whether it will play the part of leader of the people’s revolution. 
 The more intelligent representatives of thebourgeoisie are perfectly aware of this. 
 That is why Osvo-bozhdeniye 5 praises Akimovism, Economism in Social-Democracy, the trend which is now bringing the trade unions and legally existing associations to the forefront. 
 That is why Mr. 
 Struve (in Osvobozhdeniye , No. 
 72) welcomes the Akimovist tendency in the new-Iskra ideas. 
 That is why he comes down so heavily on the detested revolutionarynarrowness of the decisions of the Third Congress of theRussian Social-Democratic Labour Party. 
 It is exceptionally important at the present time for Social-Democrats to have correct tactical slogans for lead-ing the masses. 
 There is nothing more dangerous in a revo-lutionary period than belittling the importance of tacticalslogans that are sound in principle. 
 For example, Iskra 6 in No. 
 104 actually goes over to the side of its opponents in the Social-Democratic movement, and yet, at the same time, it disparages the importance of slogans and tactical decisions that are ahead of the times and indicate the pathalong which the movement is proceeding, though with anumber of failures, errors, etc. 
 On the contrary, preparationof correct tactical decisions is of immense importance for aparty which desires to lead the proletariat in the spirit of sound Marxist principles, and not merely to lag in the wake of events. 
 In the resolutions of the Third Congress ofthe Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party and of the Conference of the section that has split away from the Party, * we have the most precise, most carefully considered, and most complete expression of tactical views—views not casually expressed by individual writers, but accepted by theresponsible representatives of the Social-Democratic prole-tariat. 
 Our Party is in advance of all the others, for it hasa precise and generally accepted programme. 
 It must alsoset the other parties an example of a principled attitude to its tactical resolutions, as distinct from the opportunism of the democratic Osvobozhdeniye bourgeoisie, and the revolutionary phrase-mongering of the Socialist-Revolution-aries. 
 It was only during the revolution that they suddenlythought of coming forward with a “draft” programme andof investigating for the first time whether it is a bourgeois revolution that is going on before their eyes. 
 That is why we think it the most urgent task of the revo-lutionary Social-Democrats carefully to study the tacticalresolutions of the Third Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party and of the Conference, define whatdeviations from the principles of Marxism they contain, and get a clear understanding of the Social-Democratic proletariat’s concrete tasks in a democratic revolution. 
It is to this work that the present pamphlet is devoted. 
 Thetesting of our tactics from the standpoint of the principlesof Marxism and of the lessons of the revolution is also neces-sary for those who really desire to pave the way for unity of tactics as a basis for the future complete unity of the whole Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, and not toconfine themselves solely to verbal admonitions. 
 July 1905 N. 
 Lenin *The Third Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party (London, May 1905) was attended only by Bolsheviks, while Mensheviks alone participated in the “Conference” (Geneva, time the same). 
 In the present pamphlet the latter are frequently referred to as the “new-Iskra group” because, while continuing to publish Iskra , they declared through their then adherent Trotsky that there was a gulf between the old and the new Iskra . 
 (Author’s note to the 1907 edition. 
— Ed. 
) 1. 
 AN URGENT POLITICAL QUESTION At the present revolutionary juncture the question of the convocation of a popular constituent assembly is onthe order of the day. 
 Opinions are divided as to how this question should be solved. 
 Three political trends are taking shape. 
 The tsarist government admits the necessity of con-vening representatives of the people, but under no circum-stances does it want to permit their assembly to be popularand constituent. 
 It seems willing to agree, if we are to be-lieve the newspaper reports on the work of the Bulygin Commission, 7 to a consultative assembly, which is to be elected without freedom of agitation, and by a system ofrestrictive qualifications or one that is restricted to certainsocial estates. 
 Since it is led by the Social-Democratic Party,the revolutionary proletariat demands complete transferof power to a constituent assembly, and for this purpose strives to achieve not only universal suffrage and complete freedom to conduct agitation, but also the immediateoverthrow of the tsarist government and its replacementby a provisional revolutionary government. 
 Finally,the liberal bourgeoisie, expressing its wishes through theleaders of the so-called “Constitutional-Democratic Party”, 8 does not demand the overthrow of the tsarist government; nor does it advance the slogan of a provisional govern-ment, or insist on real guarantees that the elections will be absolutely free and fair and that the assembly of repre-sentatives will be genuinely popular and genuinely con-stituent. 
 As a matter of fact, the liberal bourgeoisie, the only serious social support of the Osvobozhdeniye trend, is striving to effect as peaceful a deal as possible between the tsar and the revolutionary people, a deal, moreover, that would give a maximum of power to itself, the bour-geoisie, and a minimum to the revolutionary people—the proletariat and the peasantry. 
 Such is the political situation at the present time. 
 Such are the three main political trends, corresponding to thethree main social forces in contemporary Russia. 
 We havealready shown on more than one occasion in Proletary (Nos. 
 3, 4, 5) * how the Osvobozhdeniye group use pseudo-democratic phrases to cover up their half-hearted, or, to put it more bluntly and plainly, their treacherous, perfidiouspolicy towards the revolution. 
 Let us now see how the Social-Democrats appraise the tasks of the moment. 
 Excellentmaterial for this is provided by the two resolutions quiterecently adopted by the Third Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party and by the “Conference” of the Party’s break-away section. 
 The question asto which of these resolutions appraises the political situa-tion more correctly and defines the tactics of the revolution-ary proletariat more correctly is of enormous importance,and every Social-Democrat who is anxious to perform his duties intelligently as propagandist, agitator, and organ-iser, must study this question with the closest attentiondisregarding all irrelevant considerations. 
 By the Party’s tactics we mean the Party’s political conduct, or the character, direction, and methods of itspolitical activity. 
 Tactical resolutions are adopted by Party congresses in order to accurately define the political con-duct of the Party as a whole with regard to new tasks or inview of a new political situation. 
 Such a new situation hasbeen created by the revolution that has started in Russia,i. 
e. 
, the complete, decisive, and open break between theoverwhelming majority of the people and the tsarist government. 
 The new question concerns the practical methods of convening a genuinely popular and a genuinelyconstituent assembly (the theoretical question concerningsuch an assembly was officially settled by Social-Democracylong ago, before all other parties, in its Party programme). 
 *“Revolutionary Struggle and Liberal Brokerage”, 1905; “The Democratic Tasks of the Revolutionary Proletariat”, 1905 and “TheFirst Steps of Bourgeois, Betrayal”, 1905. 
 See present edition, Vol. 
 8,pp. 
 486-94, 511-25. 
— Ed. 
 Since the people have broken with the government and the masses realise the necessity of setting up a new order, the party which set itself the object of overthrowing the govern-ment must necessarily consider what government shouldreplace the old, deposed government. 
 There arises a newquestion concerning a provisional revolutionary govern-ment. 
 To give a complete answer to this question the partyof the class-conscious proletariat must clarify: 1) the sig-nificance of a provisional revolutionary government in the revolution now in progress and in the entire struggleof the proletariat in general; 2) its attitude towards a provisional revolutionary government; 3) the precise condi-tions of Social-Democratic participation in this govern-ment; 4) the conditions under which pressure is to be brought to bear on this government from below , i. 
e. 
, in the event of there being no Social-Democrats in it. 
 Only when all thesequestions have been clarified, will the political conductof the party in this sphere be principled, clear, and firm. 
 Let us now consider how the resolution of the Third Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party answers these questions. 
 The following is the full text of the resolution: “Resolution on a Provisional Revolutionary Government “Whereas: 1) both the direct interests of the proletariat and those of its struggle for the ultimate aims of socialism require the fullest possible measure of political freedom, and, consequently, the replacement of the autocratic form ofgovernment by the democratic republic; 2) the establishment of a democratic republic in Russia is possible only as a result of a victorious popular insur-rection whose organ will be a provisional revolutionary government, which alone will be capable of securing com-plete freedom of agitation during the election campaign andof convening a constituent assembly that will really expressthe will of the people, an assembly elected on the basis ofuniversal and equal suffrage, direct elections and secret ballot; 3) under the present social and economic order this demo-cratic revolution in Russia will not weaken but strengthenthe domination of the bourgeoisie which at a certain juncture will inevitably go to any length to take away from the Russian proletariat as many of the gains of the revolutionary period as possible: “Therefore the Third Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party resolves: a) that it is necessary to spread among the working class a concrete idea of the most probable course of the revo-lution, and of the necessity, at a certain moment in the revolution, for the appearance of a provisional revolution-ary government, from which the proletariat will demandthe realisation of all the immediate political and economicdemands of our programme (the minimum programme); b) that subject to the alignment of forces and other factors which cannot be exactly predetermined, representa-tives of our Party may participate in the provisional revo-lutionary government for the purpose of waging a relentlessstruggle against all counter-revolutionary attempts andof defending the independent interests of the working class; c) that an indispensable condition for such participation is strict control of its representatives by the Party, and the constant safeguarding of the independence of Social-Democracy which strives for the complete socialist revo-lution, and, consequently, is irreconcilably opposed to allthe bourgeois parties; d) that irrespective of whether participation of Social-Democrats in the provisional revolutionary government is possible or not, we must propagate among the broad-est sections of the proletariat the idea that the armedproletariat, led by the Social-Democratic Party, must bringto bear constant pressure on the provisional governmentfor the purpose of defending, consolidating, and extendingthe gains of the revolution. 
 ” 2. 
 WHAT CAN WE LEARN THE RESOLUTION OF THE THIRD CONGRESS OF THE R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 ON A PROVISIONAL REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENT? As is evident from its title, the resolution of the Third Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party is devoted wholly and exclusively to the question of a pro-visional revolutionary government. 
 Hence, the participa-tion of Social-Democrats in a provisional revolutionary government constitutes part of that question. 
 On the other hand, the resolution deals with a provisional revolutionary government only, and with nothing else; consequently,the question of the “conquest of power” in general, etc. 
,does not at all come into the picture. 
 Was the Congressright in eliminating this and similar questions? Undoubt-edly it was, because the political situation in Russia does not by any means turn such questions into immediate issues. 
 On the contrary, the whole people have now raised the issueof the overthrow of the autocracy and the convocation of aconstituent assembly. 
 Party congresses should take upand decide not issues which this or that writer has happenedto mention opportunely or inopportunely, but such as are of vital political importance by reason of the prevailing conditions and the objective course of social develop-ment. 
 Of what significance is a provisional revolutionary govern-ment in the present revolution and in the general struggleof the proletariat? The resolution of the Congress explains this by pointing at the very outset to the need for the “fullest possible measure of political liberty”, both from thestandpoint of the immediate interests of the proletariat andfrom the standpoint of the “final aims of socialism”. 
 And com-plete political liberty requires that the tsarist autocracy bereplaced by a democratic republic, as our Party programme has already recognised. 
 The stress the Congress resolution lays on the slogan of a democratic republic is necessaryboth as a matter of logic and in point of principle, for it isprecisely complete liberty that the proletariat, as theforemost champion of democracy, is striving to attain. 
 More-over, it is all the more advisable to stress this at the present time, because right now the monarchists, namely, the so-called Constitutional-“Democratic” or the Osvobozhdeniye Party in our country, are flying the flag of “democracy”. 
To establish a republic it is absolutely necessary to havean assembly of people’s representatives, which must be apopular (i. 
e. 
, elected on the basis of universal and equal suffrage, direct elections, and secret ballot), and consti-tuent assembly. 
 That is exactly what is recognised fur-ther on in the Congress resolution. 
 However the resolution does not stop at that. 
 To establish a new order “that will really express the will of the people” it is not enough to term a representative assembly a constituent assembly. 
 Such an assembly must have the authority and power to “con-stitute”. 
 Conscious of this the Congress resolution does notconfine itself to the formal slogan of a “constituent assem-bly”, but adds the material conditions which alone willenable such an assembly to carry out its task properly. 
 This specification of the conditions enabling an assembly that is constituent in name to become one in fact is imperativelynecessary, for, as we have more than once pointed out,the liberal bourgeoisie, as represented by the Constitu-tional-Monarchist Party, is deliberately distorting the sloganof a popular constituent assembly, and reducing it to a hollow phrase. 
 The Congress resolution states that a provisional revo-lutionary government alone , and one, moreover, that will be the organ of a victorious popular insurrection, can secure fullfreedom to conduct an election campaign and convene anassembly that will really express the will of the people. 
 Is this thesis correct? Whoever took it into his head to dis-pute it would have to assert that it is possible for the tsaristgovernment not to side with reaction, that it is capableof being neutral during the elections, that it will see to itthat the will of the people really finds expression. 
 Suchassertions are so absurd that no one would venture to defend them openly; but they are being surreptitiously smuggled in under liberal colours, by our Osvobozhdeniye gentry. 
 Somebody must convene the constituent assembly; some-body must guarantee the freedom and fairness of theelections; somebody must invest such an assembly with fullpower and authority. 
 Only a revolutionary government, which is the organ of the insurrection, can desire this in all sincerity, and be capable of doing all that is required toachieve this. 
 The tsarist government will inevitably oppose it. 
A liberal government which has come to terms with the tsarand which does not rely in full on the popular uprising,cannot sincerely desire this, and could not accomplish it, even if it most sincerely desired to. 
 Therefore, the Congress resolution gives the only correct and entirely consistentdemocratic slogan. 
 But an appraisal of a provisional revolutionary govern-ment’s significance would be incomplete and wrong if the class nature of the democratic revolution were lost sight of. 
 The resolution, therefore, adds that a revolution willstrengthen the rule of the bourgeoisie. 
 This is inevitableunder the present, i. 
e. 
, capitalist, social and economic,system. 
 And the strengthening of the bourgeoisie’s rule overa proletariat that has secured some measure of political liberty must inevitably lead to a desperate struggle between them for power, must lead to desperate attempts on the partof the bourgeoisie “to take away from the proletariat thegains of the revolutionary period”. 
 Therefore, the proletar-iat, which is in the van of the struggle for democracy andheads that struggle, must not for a single moment forget the new antagonisms inherent in bourgeois democracy, or the new struggle. 
 Thus, the section of the resolution which we have just reviewed fully appraises the significance of a provisionalrevolutionary government both in its relation to thestruggle for freedom and for a republic, in its relation to a constituent assembly, and in its relation to the demo-cratic revolution which clears the ground for a new classstruggle. 
 The next question is that of the proletariat’s attitude in general towards a provisional revolutionary government. 
The Congress resolution answers this first of all by directly advising the Party to spread among the working class the conviction that a provisional revolutionary governmentis necessary. 
 The working class must be made aware of thisnecessity. 
 Whereas the “democratic” bourgeoisie keeps inthe background the question of the overthrow of the tsaristgovernment, we must bring it to the fore and insist on the need for a provisional revolutionary government. 
 More-over, we must outline for such a government a programmeof action that will conform with the objective conditionsof the present period and with the aims of proletarian democ-racy. 
 This programme is the entire minimum programme of our Party, the programme of the immediate political and economic reforms which, on the one hand, can be fully realised on the basis of the existing social andeconomic relationships and, on the other hand, are requisite for the next step forward, for the achievement of social-ism. 
 Thus, the resolution clearly defines the nature and the purpose of a provisional revolutionary government. 
 Inorigin and basic character such a government must be theorgan of a popular uprising. 
 Its formal purpose must beto serve as an instrument for convening a nationalconstituent assembly. 
 The content of its activities must be the implementation of the minimum programme of proletarian democracy, the only programme capable of safeguardingthe interests of a people that has risen in revolt againstthe autocracy. 
 It might be argued that a provisional government, being only provisional, cannot carry out a constructive programme that has not yet received the approval of the entire people. 
 Such an argument would merely be thesophistry of reactionaries and “absolutists”. 
 To refrain fromcarrying out a constructive programme means toleratingthe existence of the feudal regime of a corrupt autocracy. 
Such a regime could be tolerated only by a government of traitors to the cause of the revolution, but not by a govern-ment that is the organ of a popular insurrection. 
 It wouldbe mockery for anyone to propose that we should refrainfrom exercising freedom of assembly pending the confir-mation of such freedom by a constituent assembly, on theplea that the constituent assembly might not confirm freedom of assembly. 
 It is equal mockery to object to the immediate execution of the minimum programme by aprovisional revolutionary government. 
 Finally, we will note that the resolution, by making implementation of the minimum programme the provisionalrevolutionary government’s task, eliminates the absurd and semi-anarchist ideas of giving immediate effect to the maximum programme, and the conquest of power for asocialist revolution. 
 The degree of Russia’s economic develop-ment (an objective condition), and the degree of class-consciousness and organisation of the broad masses of the pro-letariat (a subjective condition inseparably bound up with the objective condition) make the immediate and complete emancipation of the working class impossible. 
 Only the mostignorant people can close their eyes to the bourgeois nature of the democratic revolution which is now taking place; only the most naïve optimists can forget how little as yet the masses of the workers are informed about the aims of socialism and the methods of achieving it. 
 We are all convinced thatthe emancipation of the working classes must be won bythe working classes themselves; a socialist revolution isout of the question unless the masses become class-consciousand organised, trained, and educated in an open class struggle against the entire bourgeoisie. 
 Replying to the anarchists’ objections that we are putting off the socialistrevolution, we say: we are not putting it off, but are takingthe first step towards it in the only possible way, along theonly correct path, namely, the path of a democratic repub-lic. 
 Whoever wants to reach socialism by any other path than that of political democracy, will inevitably arrive at conclusions that are absurd and reactionary both in theeconomic and the political sense. 
 If any workers ask us atthe appropriate moment why we should not go ahead andcarry out our maximum programme we shall answer bypointing out how far from socialism the masses of the demo-cratically-minded people still are, how undeveloped class antagonisms still are, and how unorganised the proletariansstill are. 
 Organise hundreds of thousands of workers allover Russia; get the millions to sympathise with our pro-gramme! Try to do this without confining yourselves to high-sounding but hollow anarchist phrases—and you will see at once that achievement of this organisation and the spread of this socialist enlightenment depend on thefullest possible achievement of democratic transforma-tions. 
 Let us continue. 
 Once the significance of a provisional revolutionary government and the attitude of the proletar-iat towards it have been made clear, the following question arises: is it permissible for us to participate in such agovernment (action from above) and, if so, under whatconditions? What should be our action from below? Theresolution supplies precise answers to both these questions. 
It emphatically declares that it is permissible in principle for Social-Democrats to participate in a provisional revo-lutionary government (during the period of a democraticrevolution, the period of struggle for a republic). 
 By this declaration we once and for all dissociate ourselves both from the anarchists, who answer this question in the negative in principle, and from the tail-enders in Social-Democracy (like Martynov and the new-Iskra supporters), who have tried to frighten us with the prospect of a situation in which it might prove necessary for us to participate in such agovernment. 
 By this declaration the Third Congress of theRussian Social-Democratic Labour Party irrevocably rejected the new-Iskra idea that the participation of Social-Democrats in a provisional revolutionary government wouldbe a variety of Millerandism, 9 that it is impermissible in principle, as sanctifying the bourgeois order, etc. 
 It stands to reason, however, that the question of per-missibility in principle does not solve the question of prac-tical expediency. 
 Under what conditions is this new form of struggle—the struggle “from above”, recognised by theParty Congress—expedient? It goes without saying thatit is impossible at present to speak of concrete conditions,such as the relation of forces, etc. 
, and the resolution, nat-urally, refrains from defining these conditions in advance. 
 No intelligent person would venture at present to predict anything on this subject. 
 What we can and must do is todetermine the nature and aim of our participation. 
 That iswhat is done in the resolution, which points to the twopurposes for which we participate: 1) a relentless struggleagainst counter-revolutionary attempts, and 2) the defence of the independent interests of the working class. 
 At a time when the liberal bourgeoisie is beginning to talk with suchzeal about the psychology of reaction (see Mr. 
 Struve’smost instructive “Open Letter” in Osvobozhdeniye , No. 
 71) in an attempt to frighten the revolutionary people andinduce it to show compliance towards the autocracy—at such a time it is particularly appropriate for the party of the proletariat to call attention to the task of waging a realwar against counter-revolution. 
 In the final analysis forcealone settles the great problems of political liberty and theclass struggle, and it is our business to prepare and organisethis force and to employ it actively, not only for defence but also for attack. 
 The long reign of political reaction in Europe, which has lasted almost uninterruptedly since thedays of the Paris Commune, has made us too greatly accustomed to the idea that action can proceed only “from below”, has too greatly inured us to seeing only defensive struggles. 
 We have now undoubtedly entered a new era— a period of political upheavals and revolutions has begun. 
In a period such as that which Russia is now passing through,it is impermissible to confine ourselves to old, stereo-typed formulas. 
 We must propagate the idea of actionfrom above, must prepare for the most energetic, offensive action, and must study the conditions for and forms of such action. 
 The Congress resolution brings two of theseconditions into the forefront: one refers to the formal aspectof Social-Democratic participation in a provisional revolu-tionary government (strict control by the Party over itsrepresentatives), the other, to the nature of such partici-pation (without for an instant losing sight of the aim of effecting a complete socialist revolution). 
 Having thus explained all aspects of the Party’s policy with regard to action “from above”—this new, hithertoalmost unprecedented method of struggle—the resolutionalso provides for the eventuality that we shall not be able to act from above. 
 We must in any case exercise pressure on the provisional revolutionary government from below. 
To be able to exercise this pressure from below, the prole-tariat must be armed—for in a revolutionary situation mat-ters develop with exceptional rapidity to the stage of opencivil war—and must be led by the Social-Democratic Party. 
 The object of its armed pressure is “to defend, consolidate, and extend the gains of the revolution”, i. 
e. 
, those gainswhich from the standpoint of the proletariat’s interests,must consist in fulfilling the whole of our minimumprogramme. 
 With this, we conclude our brief analysis of the Third Congress resolution on a provisional revolutionary govern-ment. 
 As the reader will see, the resolution explains theimportance of this new question, the attitude of the party ofthe proletariat towards it, and the policy the party mustpursue both within a provisional revolutionary governmentand outside it. 
 Let us now consider the corresponding resolution of the “Conference”. 
 3. 
 WHAT IS MEANT BY “THE REVOLUTION’S DECISIVE VICTORY OVER TSARISM”? The resolution of the “Conference” is devoted to the ques-tion: “ The conquest of power and participation in a provi-sional government . 
”* As we have already pointed out, there is confusion in the very manner in which the question is presented. 
 On the one hand, the question is presented in a narrow way: it deals only with our participation in a provisional government and not with the Party’s tasks inregard to a provisional revolutionary government in general. 
On the other hand, two totally different questions are con-fused, viz. 
, the question of our participation in one of thestages of the democratic revolution and the question of the socialist revolution. 
 Indeed, the “conquest of power” by Social-Democracy is precisely a socialist revolution, norcan it be anything else if we use these words in their directand usual meaning. 
 If, however, we are to understand thesewords to mean the conquest of power for a democratic revo-lution and not for a socialist revolution, then what is the point in talking not only about participation in a provisional revolutionary government but also about the“conquest of power” in general ? Obviously our “conferees” were themselves not very certain as to what they should talkabout—the democratic or the socialist revolution. 
 Thosewho have followed the literature on this question know that this confusion was started by Comrade Martynov in his notorious Two Dictatorships ; the new-Iskrists are reluctant to recall the manner in which this question was presented(even before January 9) 10 in that model of tail-ender writing. 
 Nevertheless, there can be no doubt that it exerted anideological influence on the Conference. 
 But enough about the title of the resolution. 
 Its contents reveal errors incomparably more serious and profound. 
 Hereis the first part: “A decisive victory of the revolution over tsarism may be marked either by the establishment of a provisional *The full text of this resolution can be reconstructed by the reader from the quotations given on pp. 
 400, 403, 407, 431, and 433 of the pamphlet. 
 (Author’s note to the 1907 edition. 
 See pp. 
 32-33, 38-39, 44, 78, 82 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
) government, which will emerge from a victorious popular insurrection, or by the revolutionary initiative of a repre-sentative institution of one kind or another, which, under direct revolutionary pressure from the people, decides toset up a popular constituent assembly. 
” Thus, we are told that a decisive victory of the revolu-tion over tsarism may be marked either by a victoriousinsurrection, or ... by a representative institution’s deci-sion to set up a constituent assembly! What does that mean? How are we to understand it? A decisive victory maybe marked by a “decision” to set up a constituent assem-bly?? And such a “victory” is put side by side with the es-tablishment of a provisional government which will “emergefrom a victorious popular insurrection”!! The Conference failed to note that a victorious popular insurrection and the establishment of a provisional government would signify the victory of the revolution in actual fact , whereas a “decision” to set up a constituent assembly would signifya victory of the revolution in words only. 
 The Conference of the new-Iskra Mensheviks fell into the very error that the liberals, the Osvobozhdeniye group, are constantly making. 
 The Osvobozhdeniye group prattle about a “constituent” assembly, bashfully shutting their eyesto the fact that power and authority remain in the handsof the tsar and forgetting that to “constitute” one mustpossess the power to do so. 
 The Conference also forgot that it is a far cry from a “decision” adopted by representatives— no matter who they are—to the fulfilment of that decision. 
The Conference also forgot that while power remains in thehands of the tsar all decisions of any representatives what-soever will remain empty and miserable prattle, as was thecase with the “decisions” of the Frankfort Parliament, famous in the history of the German Revolution of 1848. 
 In his Neue Rheinische Zeitung 11 Marx, the representative of the revolutionary proletariat, castigated the FrankfortOsvobozhdeniye -type liberals with merciless sarcasm, pre-cisely because they uttered fine words, adopted all sorts of democratic “decisions”, “constituted” all kinds of liber-ties, while in fact they left power in the hands of the kingand failed to organise an armed struggle against the mili-tary forces at the king’s disposal. 
 And while the Frankfort-Osvobozhdeniye liberals were prattling, the king bided his time and consolidated his military forces, and the counter-revolution relying on real force utterly routed the democrats, with all their fine “decisions”. 
 The Conference put on a par with a decisive victory the very thing that lacks the essential condition for victory. 
How was it possible for Social-Democrats, who recognisethe republican programme of our Party, to commit such an error? To understand this strange phenomenon we must turn to the Third Congress’s resolution on the break-awaysection of the Party. 
 * This resolution refers to the fact that various trends “akin to Economism” exist in our Party. 
Our “conferees” (it is not fortuitous that they are under theideological guidance of Martynov) talk of the revolution in exactly the same way as the Economists talked of the polit-ical struggle or the eight-hour day. 
 The Economists immedi-ately brought forward the “theory of stages”: 1) the struggle *We cite this resolution in full. 
 “The Congress places on record that since the time of the Party’s fight against Economism certain trends have survived in the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 which are akin to Economismin varying degrees and respects and betray a common tendency to belittle the importance of the class-conscious elements in the prole-tarian struggle and to subordinate it to the element of spontaneity. 
On questions of organisation the representatives of these trends put forward, in theory, the organisation-as-process principle which is out of harmony with methodically conducted Party work, while inpractice they systematically deviate from Party discipline in very many cases, and in other cases preach to the least enlightened section of the Party the idea of a wide application of the elective principle,without taking into consideration the objective conditions of Russian life, and so strive to undermine the only basis for Party ties that is possible at the present time. 
 In tactical questions they betray a striv-ing to narrow the scope of Party work, declaring their opposition to the Party pursuing completely independent tactics in relation to the liberal-bourgeois parties, denying that it is possible and desirablefor our Party to assume the role of organiser in the people’s insurrec-tion and opposing the participation of the Party in a provisional democratic-revolutionary government under any conditions whatsoever. 
 “The Congress instructs all Party members everywhere to conduct an energetic ideological struggle against such partial deviations fromthe principles of revolutionary Social-Democracy; at the same time, however, it is of the opinion that persons who share such views to any degree may belong to Party organisations on the indispensablecondition that they recognise the Party congresses and the PartyRules and wholly submit to Party discipline. 
” (Author’s note to the1907 edition. 
— Ed. 
) for rights, 2) political agitation, 3) political struggle; or, 1) a ten-hour day, 2) a nine-hour day, 3) an eight-hour day. 
 The results of this “tactics-as-process” are sufficiently well known to all. 
 Now we are invited to make a preliminaryand neat division of the revolution as well into the follow-ing stages: 1) the tsar convenes a representative institu-tion; 2) this institution “decides” under pressure of the“people” to set up a constituent assembly; 3) ... the Men-sheviks have not yet agreed among themselves as to the third stage; they have forgotten that the revolutionary pres-sure of the people will meet with the counter-revolutionarypressure of tsarism and that therefore either the “decision”will remain unfulfilled or the issue will be decided afterall by the victory or the defeat of a popular insurrection. 
 The Conference resolution duplicates the following Econ-omist reasoning: a decisive victory of the workers may bemarked either by the realisation of the eight-hour day in a revolutionary way, or by the granting of a ten-hourday and a “decision” to go over to a nine-hour day.... 
 Theduplication is perfect. 
 The objection may be made to us that the authors of the resolution did not mean to place on a par the victory of an insurrection and the “decision” of a representative insti-tution convened by the tsar, and that they only wanted to provide for the Party’s tactics in either case. 
 To this weshall answer: 1) The text of the resolution plainly and unam-biguously describes the decision of a representative insti-tution as “a decisive victory of the revolution over tsarism”. 
Perhaps that is the result of careless wording; perhaps it could be corrected after consulting the minutes, but, until corrected, the present wording can have only one meaning,and that meaning is entirely in keeping with the Osvobozhde-niye line of reasoning, 2) The Osvobozhdeniye line of reason-ing into which the authors of the resolution have driftedstands out in far greater relief in other literary productions of the new-Iskra group. 
 For instance, in its article “The Zemsky Sobor * and our Tactics”, Sotsial-Demokrat ,12 organ of the Tiflis Committee (published in the Georgian lan-guage; praised by Iskra in No. 
 100), goes so far as to say *National Assembly. 
— Ed. 
 that “tactics” “which would make the Zemsky Sobor our centre of action” (about the convocation of which, we may add, nothing definite is known as yet!) “ are more to our advantage ” than the “tactics” of insurrection and the es-tablishment of a provisional revolutionary government. 
We shall again refer to this article later. 
 3) No objectioncan be made to a preliminary discussion of the tactics theParty should adopt both in the event of the victory of the revolution and in the event of its defeat, both in the event of a successful insurrection and in the event of the insur-rection failing to develop into a serious force. 
 It is possiblethat the tsarist government will succeed in convening a repre-sentative assembly for the purpose of striking a deal withthe liberal bourgeoisie; providing for that eventuality, the Third Congress resolution speaks plainly about “hypocrit-ical policy”, “pseudo-democracy”, “a travesty of popularrepresentation, such as the so-called Zemsky Sobor”. 
 * But the whole point is that this is not said in a resolution ona provisional revolutionary government, for it had nothingto do with a provisional revolutionary government. 
 This eventuality defers the problem of the insurrection and of *The following is the text of this resolution on the attitude towards the tactics of the government on the eve of the revolution: “Whereas for purposes of self-preservation, the government during the present revolutionary period while intensifying the usualmeasures of repression directed mainly against the class-consciouselements of the proletariat, at the same time 1) tries by means ofconcessions and promises of reform to corrupt the working classpolitically and thereby to divert it from the revolutionary struggle; 2) with the same object clothes its hypocritical policy of concessions in pseudo-democratic forms, ranging from an invitation to the workersto elect their representatives to commissions and conferences, to theestablishment of a travesty of popular representation, such as theso-called Zemsky Sobor; 3) organises the so-called Black Hundreds 13 and incites against the revolution all those elements of the people in general who are reactionary, ignorant, or blinded by racial or religious hatred: “The Third Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 resolves to call on All Party organisations: a) while exposing the reactionary purpose of the government’s concessions to emphasise in their propaganda and agitation the fact that on the one hand, these concessions were wrested by force, and, on the other, that it is absolutely impossible for the autocracy togrant reforms satisfactory to the proletariat; the establishment of a provisional revolutionary govern-ment; it alters this problem, etc. 
 The point at issue today is not that all kinds of combinations are possible, that both victory and defeat are possible or that there may be director circuitous paths; the point is that it is impermissiblefor a Social-Democrat to cause confusion in workers’ mindsas to which is the genuinely revolutionary path; that it isimpermissible to describe as a decisive victory, as Osvobo-zhdeniye does, something which lacks the main condition for victory. 
 It is possible that we shall win even the eight-hour day, not at one stroke, but only in a long and round-about way; but what would you say of a man who calls suchimpotence, such weakness as renders the proletariat inca-pable of counteracting procrastination, delays, haggling, treachery, and reaction—a victory for the workers? It is possible that the Russian revolution will end in an “abortiveconstitution”, as was once stated in Vperyod , * but can this justify a Social-Democrat, who on the eve of a decisivestruggle would call this abortion a “decisive victory overtsarism”? It is possible that at worst we shall not only fail to win a republic but that even the constitution will be illusory, a constitution “ à la Shipov”, 14 but would it be pardonable for a Social-Democrat to tone down our repub-lican slogan? Of course, the new-Iskrists have not as yet gone so far as to tone it down. 
 But the degree to which the revolutionary workers the real significance of these governmental measures and to show that it is necessary for the proletariat to convene by revolution-ary means a constituent assembly on the basis of universal and equal suffrage, direct elections and secret ballot; c) to organise the proletariat for the immediate realisation in a revolutionay way of the eight-hour working day and of the otherimmediate demands of the working class; d) to organise armed resistance to the actions of the Black Hundreds and, in general, of all reactionary elements led by the government. 
” (Author’s note to the 1907 edition. 
— Ed. 
) *The newspaper Vperyod , which was published in Geneva, began to appear in January 1905 as the organ of the Bolshevik section ofthe Party. 
 From January to May eighteen issues appeared. 
 In Mayby virtue of the decision of the Third Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, Proletary replaced Vperyod as the Central Organ of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 (This Congress took place in London, in May; the Mensheviks did not appear there but organised their own spirit has abandoned them, the degree to which lifeless pedantry has blinded them to the militant tasks of the moment, is most vividly shown by the fact that in their reso-lution they, of all things, forgot to say a word about the republic. 
 This is incredible but it is a fact. 
 All the slogansof Social-Democracy were endorsed, repeated, explained,and presented in detail in the various resolutions of theConference—even the election of shop-stewards and depu-ties by the workers was not forgotten, but they simply found no occasion to mention the republic in a resolution ona provisional revolutionary government. 
 To talk of the“victory” of the people’s insurrection, of the establishmentof a provisional government without indicating what these“steps” and acts have to do with winning a republic amounts to writing a resolution with the intention of crawling along in the wake of the proletarian movement, and not of givingguidance to the proletariat’s struggle. 
 To sum up: the first part of the resolution 1) gave no explanation whatever of the significance of a provisionalrevolutionary government from the standpoint of the struggle for a republic and of securing a genuinely popular and genuinely constituent assembly; 2) quite confused thedemocratic consciousness of the proletariat by placing ona par with revolution’s decisive victory over tsarism a stateof affairs in which precisely the main condition for a realvictory is lacking. 
 4. 
 THE ABOLITION OF THE MONARCHY. 
 THE REPUBLIC Let us go over to the next section of the resolution: “... in either case such a victory will inaugurate a new phase in the revolutionary epoch. 
 “The final abolition of the whole regime of the monarchy and the social estates in the process of mutual struggle betweenthe elements of politically emancipated bourgeois societyfor the satisfaction of their social interests and for the direct acquisition of power—such is the task in this new phase which the objective conditions of social developmentspontaneously evoke. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR “Therefore, a provisional government that would under-take to carry out the tasks of this revolution, bourgeois in its historical nature, would, in regulating the mutual struggle between antagonistic classes of a nation in theprocess of emancipation, not only have to advance revo-lutionary development, but also to combat factors in thatdevelopment threatening the foundations of the capitalistsystem. 
” Let us examine this section which forms an independent part of the resolution. 
 The basic idea in the arguments quot-ed above coincides with the one set forth in the third clauseof the Congress resolution. 
 However, collation of these partsof the two resolutions will at once reveal the followingradical difference between them. 
 The Congress resolution, which briefly describes the social and economic basis of the revolution, concentrates attention entirely on the clear-cutstruggle of classes for definite gains, and places in the fore-front the militant tasks of the proletariat. 
 The resolutionof the Conference, which carries a long, nebulous, and con-fused description of the socio-economic basis of the revo-lution, speaks very vaguely about a struggle for definite gains, and leaves the militant tasks of the proletariat com-pletely in the background. 
 The resolution of the Conferencespeaks of the old order in the process of mutual struggleamong the various elements of society. 
 The Congress reso-lution says that we, the party of the proletariat, must effect this abolition; that only establishment of a democratic republic signifies genuine abolition of the old order; that wemust win that republic; that we shall fight for it and forcomplete liberty, not only against the autocracy, but alsoagainst the bourgeoisie, when it attempts (and it will surelydo so) to wrest our gains from us. 
 The Congress resolution calls on a definite class to wage a struggle for a precisely defined immediate aim. 
 The Conference resolution dis-courses on the mutual struggle of various forces. 
 One reso-lution expresses the psychology of active struggle, the otherthat of the passive onlooker; one resounds with the call forlive action, the other is steeped in lifeless pedantry. 
 Both resolutions state that the present revolution is only our first step, which will be followed by a second; but from this,one resolution draws the conclusion that we must take this first step all the sooner, get it over all the-sooner, win a republic, mercilessly crush the counter-revolution, and prepare the ground for the second step. 
 The other resolution, however, oozes, so to speak, with verbose descriptionsof the first step and (excuse the crude expression) simplymasticates it. 
 The Congress resolution takes the old, yeteternally new, ideas of Marxism (the bourgeois nature of ademocratic revolution) as a preface or first premise, whence it draws conclusions as to the progressive tasks of the pro-gressive class, which is fighting both for the democraticand for the socialist revolution. 
 The Conference resolutiondoes not go beyond the preface, chewing it over and overagain, and trying to be clever about it. 
 This is the very distinction which has long divided the Russian Marxists into two wings: the moralising and the militant wings of the old days of “legal Marxism”, and theeconomic and political wings of the period of the nascentmass movement. 
 From the correct Marxist premise con-cerning the deep economic roots of the class struggle ingeneral and of the political struggle in particular, the Economists have drawn the singular conclusion that we must turn our backs on the political struggle and retard itsdevelopment, narrow its scope, and reduce its aims. 
 Thepolitical wing, on the contrary, has drawn a different con-clusion from these same premises, namely, that the deeperthe roots of our present struggle, the more widely, the more boldly, the more resolutely, and with greater initiative must we wage this struggle. 
 We have the very same con-troversy before us now, only under different circumstancesand in a different form. 
 From the premises that a demo-cratic revolution is far from being a socialist revolution,that the poor and needy are by no means the only ones to be “interested” in it, that it is deeply rooted in the ines-capable needs and requirements of the whole of bourgeois society—from these premises we draw the conclusion thatthe advanced class must formulate its democratic aims allthe more boldly, express them all the more sharply andcompletely, put forward the immediate slogan of a republic, and popularise the idea of the need to establish a provi-sional revolutionary government and to crush the counter-revolution ruthlessly. 
 Our opponents, the new-Iskra group, /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR however, deduce from these very same premises that the democratic conclusions should not be expressed fully, that the republic may be omitted from the practical slogans, that we can refrain from popularising the idea of the needfor a provisional revolutionary government, that a meredecision to convene a constituent assembly can be termeda decisive victory, that there is no need to advance the taskof combating counter-revolution as our active aim, so that it may be submerged in a nebulous (and, as we shall presently see, wrongly formulated) reference to a “processof mutual struggle”. 
 This is not the language of politicalleaders, but of archive fogeys. 
 The more closely one examines the various formulations in the resolution of the new-Iskra group, the clearer its afore-mentioned basic features become. 
 We are told, for in-stance, of a “process of mutual struggle between the elementsof politically emancipated bourgeois society”. 
 Bearing inmind the subject this resolution deals with (a provisionalrevolutionary government) one asks in astonishment, “Ifyou are referring to the process of mutual struggle, how can you keep silent about the elements which are politically enslaving bourgeois society? Do the ‘conferees’ really imag-ine that, since they have assumed the revolution will bevictorious, these elements have already disappeared?” Suchan idea would be absurd in general and an expression of thegreatest political naïveté and political short-sightedness in particular. 
 After the revolution’s victory over counter-revolution the latter will not disappear; on the contrary,it will inevitably start a new and even more desperatestruggle. 
 Since the purpose of our resolution is to analysethe tasks that will confront us when the revolution isvictorious, it is our duty to devote tremendous attention to the tasks of repelling counter-revolutionary attacks (as is done in the Congress resolution), and not to submerge theseimmediate, urgent, and vital political tasks of a militantparty in general discussions on what will happen after the present revolutionary period, or what will happen whena “politically emancipated society” already exists. 
 Just as the Economists would, by repeating the truism that politics are subordinated to economics, cover up theirincapacity to understand urgent political tasks, so the new-Iskra group, by repeating the truism that struggles will take place in a politically emancipated society, cover up their incapacity to understand the urgent revolutionary tasks of that society’s political emancipation . 
 Take the expression “the final abolition of the whole regime of the monarchy and the social estates”. 
 In plainlanguage the final abolition of the monarchist system meansthe establishment of a democratic republic. 
 But our good Martynov and his admirers think that this expression is far too clear and simple. 
 They insist on making it “deeper”and putting it more “cleverly ”. 
 As a result, we get, on the one hand, ridiculous and vain efforts to appear profound;on the other hand, we get a description instead of a slogan,a kind of melancholy retrospection instead of a stirring appeal to march forward. 
 We get the impression not of living people eager to fight for a republic here and now,but of so many withered mummies who, sub specie aetern-itatis , * consider the question from the plusquamperfectum viewpoint. 
 Let us continue: “... the provisional government ... would undertake to carry out the tasks of this ... bourgeois revo-lution...”. 
 Here we at once see the result of our confereeshaving overlooked a concrete question confronting theproletariat’s political leaders. 
 The concrete question of a pro-visional revolutionary government has been obscured fromtheir field of vision by the question of the future series of governments which will carry out the aims of the bourgeois revolution in general. 
 If you want to consider the question“historically”, the example of any European country willshow you that it was a series of governments, by no means“provisional”, that carried out the historical aims of thebourgeois revolution, that even governments which defeated the revolution were nevertheless forced to carry out the historical aims of that defeated revolution. 
 But what youspeak of is not called a “provisional revolutionary govern-ment”: that is the name given to the government of a revolu-tionary epoch, one that immediately replaces the over-thrown government and rests on the people’s insurrection, *From the viewpoint of eternity (Latin). 
— Ed. 
 and not on some kind of representative institution coming from the people. 
 A provisional revolutionary government is the organ of struggle for the immediate victory of the revolution, for the immediate repulsion of attempts at counter-revolution, and not at all an organ for the implemen-tation of the historical aims of the bourgeois revolution ingeneral. 
 Let us leave it to the future historians of a futureRusskaya Starina15 to determine exactly what aims of the bourgeois revolution we, or some government or other, shall have achieved—there will be time enough to do thatthirty years from now; at present we must put forwardslogans and give practical directives for the struggle for arepublic and for the proletariat’s most active participationin that struggle. 
 For the reasons stated, the final propositions in the fore-going section of the resolution quoted above are also un-satisfactory. 
 The expression that the provisional governmentwould have to “regulate” the mutual struggle among theantagonistic classes is most inapt, or at any rate awkwardlyput; Marxists should not use such liberal-Osvobozhdeniye formulas, which would have us believe that it is possible to have governments which serve not as organs of the classstruggle but as its “regulators”. 
 ...The government would“not only have to advance revolutionary development butalso to combat factors in that development threatening thefoundations of the capitalist system”. 
 But it is the prole-tariat, in whose name the resolution speaks, that consti-tutes this “factor”! Instead of indicating just how the prole-tariat should “advance revolutionary development” at thepresent time (advance it farther than the constitutionalistbourgeoisie would care to go), instead of advice to makedefinite preparations for the struggle against the bourgeoisie when the latter turns against the conquests of the revo-lution, we are offered a general description of a process, adescription which says nothing about the concrete aims ofour activity. 
 The new-Iskra manner of expressing its views reminds one of Marx’s opinion (stated in his famous Theseson Feuerbach) of the old materialism, which was alien to the ideas of dialectics. 
 The philosophers have only inter-preted the world, in various ways, said Marx; the point, how-ever, is to change it. 
 16 Similarly, the new-Iskra group can give a tolerable description and explanation of the process of struggle taking place before their eyes, but they are altogether incapable of giving a correct slogan for this struggle. 
 Good marchers but poor leaders, they disparage thematerialist conception of history by ignoring the active,leading, and guiding part which can and must be played inhistory by parties that have realised the material prerequi-sites of a revolution and have placed themselves at the head of the progressive classes. 
 5. 
 HOW SHOULD “THE REVOLUTION BE ADVANCED”? Let us quote the next section of the resolution:“Under such conditions, Social-Democracy must strive to maintain throughout the revolution a position whichwill best of all ensure it the possibility of advancing therevolution, will not tie the hands of Social-Democracy inits struggle against the inconsistent and self-seeking policyof the bourgeois parties, and will preserve it from being dissolved in bourgeois democracy. 
 “Therefore, Social-Democracy must not set itself the aim of seizing or sharing power in the provisional government, butmust remain the party of extreme revolutionary oppo-sition. 
” The advice to occupy a position which best ensures the possibility of advancing the revolution pleases us very much indeed. 
 We would only desire that this piece of good adviceshould be accompanied by a direct indication as to howSocial-Democracy should further advance the revolutionright now, in the present political situation, in a period ofrumours, conjectures, and talk and schemes about the con-vocation of the people’s representatives. 
 Can the revolution now be further advanced by those who fail to understandthe danger of the Osvobozhdeniye theory of “compromise” between the people and the tsar, by those who call a mere“decision” to convene a constituent assembly a victory,who do not set themselves the task of carrying on active propaganda of the idea of the need for a provisional revolutionary government, or who leave the slogan of ademocratic republic in the background? Such people actually pull the revolution back , because, as far as practical politics are concerned, they have stopped at the level of the Osvobozhdeniye stand. 
 What is the use of their recognising a programme which demands that the autocracy be replacedby a republic, if in a resolution on tactics that definesthe Party’s present and immediate tasks in the period ofrevolution they omit the slogan of a struggle for a republic?It is the Osvobozhdeniye position, the position of the consti-tutionalist bourgeoisie, that is now actually characterised by the fact that a decision to convene a popular constituentassembly is considered a decisive victory, while a prudentsilence is maintained on the subject of a provisionalrevolutionary government and a republic! To advance the revolution, to take it beyond the limits to which the monarch-ist bourgeoisie advances it, it is necessary actively to produce, emphasise, and bring into the forefront slogansthat will preclude the “inconsistency” of bourgeois democracy. 
 At present there are only two such slogans: 1) a provisional revolutionary government, and 2) a republic, because theslogan of a popular constituent assembly has been accepted by the monarchist bourgeoisie (see the programme of the Osvobozhdeniye League) and accepted for the very purpose of devitalising the revolution, preventing its complete vic-tory, and enabling the big bourgeoisie to strike a huckster’sbargain with tsarism. 
 And now we see that of the two slo-gans, which alone are capable of advancing the revolution, the Conference completely forgot the slogan of a republic, and plainly put the slogan of a provisional revolutionarygovernment on a par with the Osvobozhdeniye slogan of a popular constituent assembly, calling both the one andthe other “a decisive victory of the revolution”!! Indeed, such is the undoubted fact, which, we are sure, will serve as a landmark for the future historian of Russian Social-Democracy. 
 The Conference of Social-Democratsheld in May 1905 passed a resolution which contains finewords about the necessity of advancing the democraticrevolution, but in fact pulls it back and goes no fartherthan the democratic slogans of the monarchist bour-geoisie. 
 The new-Iskra group likes to accuse us of ignoring the danger of the proletariat becoming dissolved in bourgeois democracy. 
 We should like to see the person who would undertake to prove this charge on the basis of the text ofthe resolutions passed by the Third Congress of the RussianSocial-Democratic Labour Party. 
 Our reply to our opponentsis—a Social-Democratic Party which operates in a bour-geois society cannot take part in politics without marching,in certain cases, side by side with bourgeois democracy. 
 The difference between us in this respect is that we marchside by side with the revolutionary and republican bour-geoisie, without merging with it, whereas you march sideby side with the liberal and the monarchist bourgeoisie , without merging with it either. 
 That is how matters stand . 
 The tactical slogans you have formulated in the name of the Conference coincide with the slogans of the “Constitutional-Democratic” Party, i. 
e. 
, the party of the monarchist bour-geoisie ; moreover, you have not even noticed or realised this coincidence, thus actually following in the wake of the Osvobozhdeniye fraternity . 
 The tactical slogans we have formulated in the name of the Third Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic LabourParty coincide with the slogans of the democratic-revo-lutionary and republican bourgeoisie. 
 In Russia this bour-geoisie and petty bourgeoisie have not yet formed themselvesinto a big people’s party. 
 * But only one who is utterly ignorant of what is now taking place in Russia can doubtthat elements of such a party exist. 
 We intend to guide (ifthe great Russian revolution makes progress) not onlythe proletariat, organised by the Social-Democratic Party,but also this petty bourgeoisie, which is capable of marchingside by side with us. 
 Through its resolution the Conference unconsciously descends to the level of the liberal and monarchist bourgeoisie. 
 Through its resolution, the Party Congress consciously raises to its own level those elements of revolutionary democracy *The Socialist-Revolutionaries are a terrorist group of intellec-tuals rather than the embryo of such a party, although the objective significance of this group’s activities can be reduced to this verytask of achieving the aims of the revolutionary and republican bour-geoisie. 
 that are capable of waging a struggle, and not acting as brokers. 
 Such elements are mostly to be found among the peasants. 
 In classifying the big social groups according to their polit-ical tendencies we can, without danger of serious error,identify revolutionary and republican democracy with themass of the peasants—of course, in the same sense and withthe same reservations and implied conditions that we canidentify the working class with Social-Democracy. 
 In otherwords, we can formulate our conclusions in the followingterms as well: in a revolutionary period the Conference,through its nation-wide * political slogans, unconsciously descends to the level of the mass of the landlords . 
 Through its country-wide political slogans, the Party Congress raises the mass of the peasants to a revolutionary level . 
 To anyone who, because of this conclusion, would accuse us of a pen-chant for paradoxes, we issue the following challenge: lethim refute the proposition that, if we are not strong enoughto bring the revolution to a successful conclusion, if therevolution ends in a “decisive victory” in the Osvobozhdeniye sense, i. 
e. 
, only in the form of a representative assemblyconvened by the tsar, one that could be called a constituentassembly only in derision—then that will be a revolutionin which the landlord and big bourgeois element will preponderate. 
 On the other hand, if we are destined to livethrough a really great revolution, if history does not allowa “miscarriage” this time, if we are strong enough to carrythe revolution to a successful conclusion, to a decisive vic-tory, not in the Osvobozhdeniye or the new-Iskra sense of the word, then that will be a revolution in which thepeasant and proletarian element will preponderate. 
 Some people may, perhaps, interpret our admission that such a preponderance is possible as renunciation of the viewthat the impending revolution will be bourgeois in charac-ter. 
 This is very likely, considering how this concept ismisused in Iskra . 
 For this reason it will not be at all super-fluous to dwell on this question. 
 *We are not referring here to the special peasant slogans which have been dealt with in separate resolutions. 
 6. 
 WHENCE IS THE PROLETARIAT THREATENED WITH THE DANGER OF FINDING ITSELF WITH ITS HANDS TIED IN THE STRUGGLE AGAINST THE INCONSISTENT BOURGEOISIE? Marxists are absolutely convinced of the bourgeois char-acter of the Russian revolution. 
 What does that mean? Itmeans that the democratic reforms in the political system, and the social and economic reforms that have become a necessity for Russia, do not in themselves imply the under-mining of capitalism, the undermining of bourgeois rule;on the contrary, they will, for the first time, really clearthe ground for a wide and rapid, European, and not Asiatic,development of capitalism; they will, for the first time, make it possible for the bourgeoisie to rule as a class. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionaries cannot grasp this idea, for theydo not know the ABC of the laws of development of commod-ity and capitalist production; they fail to see that even thecomplete success of a peasant insurrection, even the redis-tribution of the whole of the land in favour of the peasants and in accordance with their desires (“general redistri-bution” or something of the kind) will not destroy capitalismat all, but will, on the contrary, give an impetus to itsdevelopment and hasten the class disintegration of the peas-antry itself. 
 Failure to grasp this truth makes the Socialist-Revolutionaries unconscious ideologists of the petty bourgeoisie. 
 Insistence on this truth is of enormous impor-tance for Social-Democracy not only from the standpointof theory but also from that of practical politics, for itfollows therefrom that complete class independence of theparty of the proletariat in the present “general democratic”movement is an indispensable condition. 
 But it does not by any means follow that a democratic revolution (bourgeois in its social and economic essence)would not be of enormous interest to the proletariat. 
 It does not follow that the democratic revolution could not takeplace both in a form advantageous mainly to the big capital-ist, the financial magnate, and the “enlightened” landlord, and in a form advantageous to the peasant and the worker. 
 The new-Iskra group completely misunderstands the meaning and significance of bourgeois revolution as a category. 
 The idea that is constantly running through their arguments is that a bourgeois revolution is one that can be advantageous only to the bourgeoisie. 
 And yet nothing can be more erroneous than such an idea. 
 A bourgeois revolutionis a revolution which does not depart from the frameworkof the bourgeois, i. 
e. 
, capitalist, socio-economic system. 
A bourgeois revolution expresses the needs of capitalistdevelopment, and, far from destroying the foundations of capitalism, it effects the contrary—it broadens and deepens them. 
 This revolution, therefore, expresses the interestsnot only of the working class but of the entire bourgeoisieas well. 
 Since the rule of the bourgeoisie over the workingclass is inevitable under capitalism, it can well be said thata bourgeois revolution expresses the interests not so much of the proletariat as of the bourgeoisie. 
 But it is quite absurd to think that a bourgeois revolution does not at all expressproletarian interests. 
 This absurd idea boils down either tothe hoary Narodnik theory that a bourgeois revolution runscounter to the interests of the proletariat, and that, there-fore, we do not need bourgeois political liberty; or to anarchism which denies any participation of the proletariat in bourgeois politics, in a bourgeois revolution and in bour-geois parliamentarianism. 
 From the standpoint of theorythis idea disregards the elementary propositions of Marxismconcerning the inevitability of capitalist development on thebasis of commodity production. 
 Marxism teaches us that at a certain stage of its development a society which is based on commodity production and has commercial intercoursewith civilised capitalist nations must inevitably take theroad of capitalism. 
 Marxism has irrevocably broken withthe Narodnik and anarchist gibberish that Russia, forinstance, can bypass capitalist development, escape from capitalism, or skip it in some way other than that of the class struggle, on the basis and within the framework of thissame capitalism. 
 All these principles of Marxism have been proved and explained in minute detail in general and with regard toRussia in particular. 
 And from these principles it follows that the idea of seeking salvation for the working class in anything save the further development of capitalism isreactionary . 
 In countries like Russia the working class suffers not so much from capitalism as from the insufficient development of capitalism. 
 The working class is, therefore, most certainly interested in the broadest, freest, and most rapid development of capitalism. 
 The removal of all theremnants of the old order which hamper the broad, free, andrapid development of capitalism is of absolute advantage to the working class. 
 The bourgeois revolution is preciselyan upheaval that most resolutely sweeps away survivals of the past, survivals of the serf-owning system (which include not only the autocracy but the monarchy as well), andmost fully guarantees the broadest, freest, and most rapiddevelopment of capitalism. 
 That is why a bourgeois revolution is in the highest degree advantageous to the proletariat . 
 A bourgeois revolution is absolutely necessary in the interests of the proletariat. 
 The more complete, determined, and consistent the bour-geois revolution, the more assured will the proletariat’sstruggle be against the bourgeoisie and for socialism. 
 Onlythose who are ignorant of the ABC of scientific socialismcan regard this conclusion as new, strange, or paradoxical. 
 And from this conclusion, among other things, follows the thesis that in a certain sense a bourgeois revolution is more advantageous to the proletariat than to the bourgeoisie. 
 This thesis is unquestionably correct in the following sense:it is to the advantage of the bourgeoisie to rely on certainremnants of the past, as against the proletariat, for in-stance, on the monarchy, the standing army, etc. 
 It is to the advantage of the bourgeoisie for the bourgeois revolutionnot to sweep away all remnants of the past too resolutely,but keep some of them, i. 
e. 
, for this revolution not to befully consistent, not complete, and not to be determinedand relentless. 
 Social-Democrats often express this idea somewhat differently by stating that the bourgeoisie betrays its own self, that the bourgeoisie betrays the cause ofliberty, that the bourgeoisie is incapable of being consist-ently democratic. 
 It is of greater advantage to the bourgeoi-sie for the necessary changes in the direction of bourgeoisdemocracy to take place more slowly, more gradually, more cautiously, less resolutely, by means of reforms and not by means of revolution; for these changes to spare the“venerable” institutions of the serf-owning system (such as the monarchy) as much as possible; for these changes to develop as little as possible the independent revolutionary activity, initiative, and energy of the common people, i. 
e. 
, the peasantry and especially the workers, for otherwise itwill be easier for the workers, as the French say, “to changethe rifle from one shoulder to the other”, i. 
e. 
, to turn againstthe bourgeoisie the weapon the bourgeois revolution willsupply them with, the liberty the revolution will bring, and the democratic institutions that will spring up on ground cleared of the serf-owning system. 
 On the other hand, it is more advantageous to the working class for the necessary changes in the direction ofbourgeois democracy to take place by way of revolution andnot by way of reform, because the way of reform is one of delay, procrastination, the painfully slow decomposition of the putrid parts of the national organism. 
 It is the prole-tariat and the peasantry that suffer first of all and most ofall from that putrefaction. 
 The revolutionary path is one ofrapid amputation, which is the least painful to the proletar-iat, the path of the immediate removal of what is putres-cent, the path of least compliance with and consideration for the monarchy and the abominable, vile, rotten, andnoxious institutions that go with it. 
 So it is not only because of the censorship, not only “for fear of the Jews”, that our bourgeois-liberal press deplores thepossibility of the revolutionary path, fears the revolution, tries to frighten the tsar with the bogey of revolution, seeks to avoid revolution, and grovels and toadies for thesake of miserable reforms as the foundation of the reformistpath. 
 This standpoint is shared not only by Russkiye Vedomosti , 17 Syn Otechestva ,18 Nasha Zhizn ,19 and Nashi Dni,20 but also by the illegal, uncensored Osvobozhdeniye . 
 The very position the bourgeoisie holds as a class in capital-ist society inevitably leads to its inconsistency in a demo-cratic revolution. 
 The very position the proletariat holdsas a class compels it to be consistently democratic. 
 Thebourgeoisie looks backward in fear of democratic progresswhich threatens to strengthen the proletariat. 
 The proletariat has nothing to lose but its chains, but with the aid of democratism it has the whole world to win. 
 That is whythe more consistent the bourgeois revolution is in achieving its democratic transformations, the less will it limit itself to what is of advantage exclusively to the bourgeoisie. 
 The more consistent the bourgeois revolution, the more does it guarantee the proletariat and the peasantry the benefitsaccruing from the democratic revolution. 
 Marxism teaches the proletarian not to keep aloof from the bourgeois revolution, not to be indifferent to it, notto allow the leadership of the revolution to be assumed by the bourgeoisie but, on the contrary, to take a most energetic part in it, to fight most resolutely for consistent proletar-ian democratism, for the revolution to be carried to itsconclusion. 
 We cannot get out of the bourgeois-democraticboundaries of the Russian revolution, but we can vastlyextend these boundaries, and within these boundaries we can and must fight for the interests of the proletariat, for its immediate needs and for conditions that will make itpossible to prepare its forces for the future complete vic-tory. 
 There is bourgeois democracy and bourgeois democracy. 
The Zemstvo monarchist who favours an upper chamberand “asks” for universal suffrage, while secretly, on the sly, striking a bargain with tsarism for a docked constitu-tion, is a bourgeois democrat too. 
 The peasant, who hastaken up arms against the landlords and the governmentofficials, and with a “naïve republicanism” proposes “to sendthe tsar packing”, * is also a bourgeois democrat. 
 There are bourgeois-democratic regimes like the one in Germany, and also like the one in England; like the one in Austria and also like those in America and Switzerland. 
 He wouldbe a fine Marxist indeed, who in a period of democraticrevolution failed to see this difference between the degreesof democratism and the difference between its forms, andconfined himself to “clever” remarks to the effect that, after all, this is “a bourgeois revolution”, the fruit of “bourgeois revolution”. 
 Our new-Iskrists are just such clever fellows, who actu-ally flaunt their short-sightedness. 
 They confine themselvesto disquisitions on the bourgeois character of revolution,just when and where it is necessary to be able to draw a distinction between republican-revolutionary and monarch-*See Osvobozhdeniye , No. 
 71, p. 
 337, footnote 2. 
 ist-liberal bourgeois democracy, to say nothing of the distinction between inconsistent bourgeois democratism and consistent proletarian democratism. 
 They are satisfied—as if they had really become like the “man in the muffler”21—with doleful talk about a “process of mutual struggle of antago-nistic classes”, when the question is one of providingdemocratic leadership in the present revolution, of empha-sising progressive democratic slogans, as distinct from the treacherous slogans of Mr. 
 Struve and Co. 
, of bluntly and straightforwardly stating the immediate aims of the reallyrevolutionary struggle of the proletariat and the peasantryas distinct from the liberal haggling of the landlords andmanufacturers. 
 Such now is the gist of the matter, whichyou, gentlemen, have missed, namely: will our revolution result in a real, immense victory, or merely in a wretched deal; will it go so far as the revolutionary-democratic dic-tatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry, or will it“peter out” in a liberal constitution à la Shipov? At first sight it may appear that in raising this question we are deviating entirely from our subject. 
 However, that may appear so only at first sight. 
 As a matter of fact, it is precisely this question that lies at the root of the differencein principle which has already become clearly markedbetween the Social-Democratic tactics of the Third Congressof the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party and thetactics initiated by the Conference of the new-Iskra support-ers. 
 The latter have already taken not two but three steps back resurrecting the mistakes of Economism in solvingproblems that are incomparably more complex, moreimportant, and more vital to the workers’ party, viz. 
,questions of its tactics in time of revolution. 
 That is whywe must analyse the question we have raised with all due attention. 
 The above-quoted section of the new-Iskrists’ resolution points to the danger of Social-Democracy tying its ownhands in the struggle against the inconsistent policy of thebourgeoisie, of its becoming dissolved in bourgeois democ-racy. 
 The thought of this danger pervades all specifically new-Iskrist literature; it lies at the very heart of the principle involved in our Party split (ever since the bickering inthe split wag completely overshadowed by the turn towards Economism). 
 Without any equivocation we admit that this danger really exists, that just at the present time, at the height of the Russian revolution, this danger has become particularly grave. 
 The pressing and extremely responsibleduty that devolves on all of us theoreticians or—as I shouldprefer to say of myself—publicists of Social-Democracyis to find out from what direction this danger actually threatens. 
 For the source of our disagreement is not a dispute as to whether such a danger exists, but the dispute as to whether it is caused by the so-called tail-ism of the“Minority” or the so-called revolutionism of the “Majority”. 
 To remove all misinterpretations and misunderstandings let us first of all note that the danger to which we are refer-ring lies not in the subjective, but in the objective aspect of the matter, not in the formal stand which Social-Democ-racy will take in the struggle, but in the material outcomeof the entire present revolutionary struggle. 
 The questionis not whether this or that Social-Democratic group willwant to dissolve in bourgeois democracy, or whether theyrealise that they are doing so. 
 Nobody suggests that. 
 We do not suspect any Social-Democrat of harbouring such a desire, and this is not at all a matter of desire. 
 Nor is it aquestion of whether this or that Social-Democratic group willformally retain its separate identity, individuality, andindependence of bourgeois democracy throughout the courseof the revolution. 
 They may not merely proclaim such “independence”, but may even retain it formally, and yet it may turn out that their hands will nevertheless be tied in the struggle against the inconsistency of the bourgeoisie. 
The ultimate political outcome of the revolution may proveto be that, despite the formal “independence” of Social-Democracy, despite its complete organisational individu-ality as a separate party, it will in fact not be independent; it will not be able to place the imprint of its proletarianindependence on the course of events; it will prove so weakthat, on the whole and in the last analysis, its “dissolution”in bourgeois democracy will nevertheless be a historicalfact. 
 That is what constitutes the real danger. 
 Now let us see from what direction the danger threatens—from the devi-ation of Social-Democracy, as represented by the new Iskra , to the Right, as we believe; or from the deviation of Social-Democracy, as represented by the “Majority”, Vperyod , etc. 
, to the Left—as the new-Iskra group believes. 
 The answer to this question, as we have pointed out, is determined by the objective combination of the oper-ation of the various social forces. 
 The character of theseforces has been defined theoretically by the Marxist analysisof Russian life; at present it is being determined in practice by open action by groups and classes in the course of the revolution. 
 Now the entire theoretical analysis made by theMarxists long before the period we are now passing through,as well as all the practical observations of the developmentof revolutionary events, show that, from the standpoint ofobjective conditions, there are two possible courses and two possible outcomes of the revolution in Russia. 
 The transfor-mation of the economic and political system in Russia alongbourgeois-democratic lines is inevitable and inescapable. 
 Nopower on earth can prevent such a transformation, but thecombined action of the existing forces which are effectingit may result in either of two things, may bring about either of two forms of that transformation. 
 Either 1) matters will end in “the revolution’s decisive victory over tsarism”,or 2) the forces will be inadequate for a decisive victoryand matters will end in a deal between tsarism andthe most “inconsistent” and most “self-seeking” elementsof the bourgeoisie. 
 By and large, all the infinite variety of details and combinations, which no one is able to foresee, lead to one outcome or the other. 
 Let us now consider these two possibilities, first, from the standpoint of their social significance and, secondly,from the standpoint of the position of Social-Democracy(its “dissolution” or “having its hands tied”) in one outcome or the other. 
 What is meant by “the revolution’s decisive victory over tsarism”? We have already seen that in using this expres-sion the new-Iskra group fail to grasp even its immediate political significance. 
 Still less do they seem to understandthe class essence of this concept. 
 Surely, we Marxists must not under any circumstances allow ourselves to be deluded by words , such as “revolution” or “the great Russian revolu-tion”, as do many revolutionary democrats (of the Gapon type). 
 We must be perfectly certain in our minds as to what real social forces are opposed to “tsarism” (which is a real force perfectly intelligible to all) and are capable of gain-ing a “decisive victory” over it. 
 The big bourgeoisie, thelandlords, the factory owners, and “society”, which followsthe Osvobozhdeniye lead, cannot be such a force. 
 We see that they do not even want a decisive victory. 
 We know thatowing to their class position they are incapable of waging a decisive struggle against tsarism; they are too heavily fettered by private property, by capital and land toenter into a decisive struggle. 
 They stand in too great needof tsarism, with its bureaucratic, police, and military forcesfor use against the proletariat and the peasantry, to wantit to be destroyed. 
 No, the only force capable of gaining “a decisive victory over tsarism”, is the people , i. 
e. 
, the prole-tariat and the peasantry, if we take the main, big forces, anddistribute the rural and urban petty bourgeoisie (also partof “the people”) between the two. 
 “The revolution’s deci-sive victory over tsarism” means the establishment of therevolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry . 
 Our new-Iskra group cannot escape from this conclusion, which Vperyod indicated long ago. 
 No other force is capable of gaining a decisive victory over tsarism. 
 And such a victory will be precisely a dictatorship, i. 
e. 
, it must inevitably rely on military force, on the arming ofthe masses, on an insurrection, and not on institutions of one kind or another established in a “lawful” or “peaceful” way. 
 It can be only a dictatorship, for realisation of thechanges urgently and absolutely indispensable to the prole-tariat and the peasantry will evoke desperate resistancefrom the landlords, the big bourgeoisie, and tsarism. 
 With-out a dictatorship it is impossible to break down that resistance and repel counter-revolutionary attempts. 
 But of course it will be a democratic, not a socialist dictatorship. 
It will be unable (without a series of intermediary stages ofrevolutionary development) to affect the foundations ofcapitalism. 
 At best, it may bring about a radical redistri-bution of landed property in favour of the peasantry, establish consistent and full democracy, including the forma-tion of a republic, eradicate all the oppressive features ofAsiatic bondage, not only in rural but also in factory life, lay the foundation for a thorough improvement in the conditions of the workers and for a rise in their standard of living, and—last but not least—carry the revolutionary conflagration into Europe. 
 Such a victory will not yet by anymeans transform our bourgeois revolution into a socialistrevolution; the democratic revolution will not immediatelyoverstep the bounds of bourgeois social and economic relation-ships; nevertheless, the significance of such a victory for the future development of Russia and of the whole world will be immense. 
 Nothing will raise the revolutionary energy ofthe world proletariat so much, nothing will shorten the pathleading to its complete victory to such an extent, as thisdecisive victory of the revolution that has now started inRussia. 
 How far such a victory is probable is another question. 
 We are not in the least inclined to be unreasonably opti-mistic on that score; we do not for a moment forget the im-mense difficulties of this task, but, since we are out to fight,we must desire victory and be able to point out the rightroad to it. 
 Trends capable of leading to such a victory undoubtedly exist. 
 True, our influence on the masses of the proletariat—the Social-Democratic influence—is as yetvery, very inadequate; the revolutionary influence on themass of the peasantry is quite insignificant; the proletarians,and especially the peasants, are still frightfully disunited,backward, and ignorant. 
 However, revolution unites rapidly and enlightens rapidly. 
 Every step in its development rouses the masses and attracts them with irresistible force to theside of the revolutionary programme, as the only programmethat fully and consistently expresses their real and vitalinterests. 
 According to a law of mechanics, action and reaction are always equal. 
 In history too, the destructive force of a revolution is to a considerable degree dependent on howstrong and protracted the suppression of the striving forliberty has been, and how profound is the contradictionbetween the outmoded “superstructure” and the living forces ofour times. 
 The international political situation, too, is in many respects taking shape in a way most advantageous to the Russian revolution. 
 The workers’ and peasants’ insur-rection has already begun; it is sporadic, spontaneous, and weak, but it unquestionably and undoubtedly proves the existence of forces capable of waging a decisive struggle-and marching towards a decisive victory. 
 If these forces prove inadequate tsarism will have time to conclude a deal, which is already being prepared at thetwo extremes by the Bulygins and the Struves. 
 Then thewhole matter will end in a docked constitution, or, if theworst comes to the worst, even in a travesty of a consti-tution. 
 This, too, will be a “bourgeois revolution”, but it will be a miscarriage, a premature birth, an abortion. 
 Social-Democracy entertains no illusions on that score; it knowsthe treacherous nature of the bourgeoisie; it will not loseheart or abandon its persistent, patient, and sustained workof giving the proletariat class training, even in the most drab, humdrum days of bourgeois-constitutional “Shipov” bliss. 
 Such an outcome would be more or less similar to thatof almost all the nineteenth-century democratic revolutionsin Europe, and our Party development would then proceedalong the arduous, long, but familiar and beaten track. 
 The question now arises: in which outcome of the two possible will Social-Democracy find its hands actually tied in the struggle against the inconsistent and self-seekingbourgeoisie, find itself actually “dissolved”, or almost so,in bourgeois democracy? It is sufficient to put this question clearly to have a reply without a moment’s difficulty. 
 If the bourgeoisie succeeds in frustrating the Russian revolution by coming to terms with tsarism, Social-Democracywill find its hands actually tied in the struggle againstthe inconsistent bourgeoisie; Social-Democracy will finditself “dissolved” in bourgeois democracy in the sense thatthe proletariat will not succeed in placing its clear imprint on the revolution, will not succeed in settling accounts with tsarism in the proletarian or, as Marx once said, “inthe plebeian manner”. 
 If the revolution gains a decisive victory—then we shall settle accounts with tsarism in the Jacobin, or, if you like,in the plebeian way. 
 “The whole French terrorism,” wrote Marx in 1848 in the famous Neue Rheinische Zeitung , “was nothing but a plebeian manner of settling accounts with the enemies of the bourgeoisie, with absolutism, feudalism, and philistinism” (see Marx, Nachlass , Mehring’s edition, Vol. 
 III, p. 
 211). 
22 Have those people who in a period of a democratic revolution try to frighten the Social-Democratic workers in Russia with the bogey of “Jacobinism” evergiven thought to the significance of these words of Marx? The new-Iskra group, the Girondists of contemporary Russian Social-Democracy, does not merge with the Osvobozh-deniye group, but actually, by reason of the nature of its slogans, it follows in the wake of the latter. 
 And the Osvobozh-deniye group, i. 
e. 
, the representatives of the liberal bour-geoisie, wishes to settle accounts with the autocracy in areformist manner, gently and compliantly, so as not to offendthe aristocracy, the nobles, or the Court—cautiously,without breaking anything—kindly and politely as befits gentlemen in white gloves (like the ones Mr. 
 Petrunkevich borrowed from a bashi-bazouk to wear at the reception of“representatives of the people” [?] held by Nicholas theBloodstained, see Proletary , No. 
 5 *). 
 The Jacobins of contemporary Social-Democracy—the Bolsheviks, the Vperyod supporters, the “Congress” group, Proletary supporters—or whatever else we may call them— wish by their slogans to raise the revolutionary and repub-lican petty bourgeoisie, and especially the peasantry, tothe level of the consistent democratism of the proletariat,which fully retains its individuality as a class. 
 They wantthe people, i. 
e. 
, the proletariat and the peasantry, to settle accounts with the monarchy and the aristocracy in the “plebeian way”, ruthlessly destroying the enemies of liberty,crushing their resistance by force, making no concessionswhatever to the accursed heritage of serf-ownership, Asiaticbarbarism, and human degradation. 
 This, of course, does not mean that we necessarily propose to imitate the Jacobins of 1793, and borrow their views,programme, slogans, and methods of action. 
 Nothing ofthe kind. 
 Our programme is not an old one but a new—theminimum programme of the Russian Social-DemocraticLabour Party. 
 We have a new slogan: the revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry. 
 If we live to see the real victory of the revolution we shall * Vol. 
 8, pp. 
 526-30. 
— Ed. 
“‘Revolutionaries’ in Kid Gloves”, 1905. 
 See present edition, also have new methods of action in keeping with the nature and aims of the working-class party that is striving for a complete socialist revolution. 
 By our parallel we merely want to explain that the representatives of the progressiveclass of the twentieth century, the proletariat, i. 
e. 
, theSocial-Democrats, are divided into two wings (the oppor-tunist and the revolutionary) similar to those into which therepresentatives of the progressive class of the eighteenth century, the bourgeoisie, were divided, i. 
e. 
, the Girondists and the Jacobins. 
 Only in the event of a complete victory of the democratic revolution will the proletariat have its hands free in thestruggle against the inconsistent bourgeoisie; only in thatevent will it not become “dissolved” in bourgeois democracy, but will leave its proletarian, or rather proletarian-peasant, imprint on the whole revolution. 
 In a word, to avoid finding itself with its hands tied in the struggle against the inconsistent bourgeois democ-racy the proletariat must be class-conscious and strongenough to rouse the peasantry to revolutionary conscious-ness, guide its assault, and thereby independently pursue the line of consistent proletarian democratism. 
 That is how matters stand in the question—so ineptly dealt with by the new-Iskra group—of the danger of our hands being tied in the struggle against the inconsistentbourgeoisie. 
 The bourgeoisie will always be inconsistent. 
 There is nothing more naïve and futile than attempts to set forth conditions and points * which, if satisfied, would enable us to consider that the bourgeois democrat is a sincerefriend of the people. 
 Only the proletariat can be a con-sistent fighter for democracy. 
 It can become a victoriousfighter for democracy only if the peasant masses join its revolutionary struggle. 
 If the proletariat is not strong enough for this the bourgeoisie will be at the head of thedemocratic revolution and will impart an inconsistent and self-seeking nature to it. 
 Nothing but a revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantrycan prevent this. 
 *As was attempted by Starover in his resolution, annulled by the Third Congress,23 and as the Conference attempts in an equally poor resolution. 
 Thus, we arrive at the indubitable conclusion that it is the new-Iskra tactics which, by its objective significance, is playing into the hands of the bourgeois democrats . 
 The preaching of organisational diffuseness which goes to thelength of plebiscites, the principle of compromise, andthe divorcement of Party literature from the Party; be-littling of the aims of insurrection; confusing of the popu-lar political slogans of the revolutionary proletariat with those of the monarchist bourgeoisie; distortion of the requisites for “revolution’s decisive victory over tsarism”—an these taken together produce that very policy of tail-ismin a revolutionary period, which bewilders the proletariat,disorganises it, confuses its understanding, and belittlesthe tactics of Social-Democracy instead of pointing out the only way to victory and getting all the revolutionary and republican elements of the people to adhere tothe proletariat’s slogan. 
 To bear out this conclusion, reached by us through analysis of the resolution, let us approach this same questionfrom other angles. 
 Let us first see how in the Georgian Sotsial-Demokrat a naïve and outspoken Menshevik illustrates the new-Iskra tactics. 
 Secondly, let us see who is actu-ally making use of the new-Iskra slogans in the present political situation. 
 7. 
 THE TACTICS OF “ELIMINATING THE CONSERVATIVES THE GOVERNMENT” The article in the organ of the Tiflis Menshevik “Com-mittee” ( Sotsial-Demokrat , No. 
 1), to which we have just referred, is entitled “The Zemsky Sobor and Our Tactics”. 
 Its author has not yet entirely forgotten our programme;he advances the slogan of a republic, but this is how hediscusses tactics: “It is possible to point to two ways of achieving this goal” (a re-public): “either completely ignore the Zemsky Sobor that is beingconvened by the government and defeat the government by force ofarms, form a revolutionary government and convene a constituent assembly, or declare the Zemsky Sobor the centre of our action, in-fluencing its composition and activities, by force of arms, forcibly compelling it to declare itself a constituent assembly, or convene a constituent assembly through it. 
 These two tactics differ very sharplyfrom each other. 
 Let us see which of them is of more advantage to us. 
” This is how the Russian new-Iskrists set forth ideas subsequently incorporated in the resolution we have analysed. 
 Note that this was written before the battle of Tsushima,24 when the Bulygin “scheme” had not yet seen the light of day. 
 Even the liberals were losing patience andvoicing their distrust from the pages of the legal press; however, a Social-Democrat of the new-Iskra brand has proved more credulous than the liberals. 
 He declares thatthe Zemsky Sobor “is being convened” and trusts the tsarso much that he proposes to make this as yet non-existentZemsky Sobor (or, possibly, “State Duma” or “AdvisoryLegislative Assembly”?) the centre of our action. 
 Beingmore outspoken and straightforward than the authors ofthe resolution adopted at the Conference, our Tiflisian doesnot put the two “tactics” (which he expounds with inimitablenaïveté) on a par, but declares that the second is of greater“advantage”. 
 Just listen: “The first tactic. 
 As you know, the coming revolution is a bour-geois revolution, i. 
e. 
, its purpose is to effect such chances in the present system as are of interest not only to the proletariat but to thewhole of bourgeois society. 
 All classes are opposed to the government, even the capitalists themselves. 
 The militant proletariat and the militant bourgeoisie are in a certain sense marching together andjointly attacking the autocracy from different sides. 
 The government is completely isolated and has no public sympathy. 
 For this reason it is very easy to destroy it. 
 The Russian proletariat, as a whole, isnot yet sufficiently class-conscious and organised to be able to carry out the revolution by itself. 
 And even if it were able to do so it would carry through a proletarian (socialist) revolution and not a bourgeoisrevolution. 
 Hence, it is in our interest that the government should remain without allies, that it should be unable to divide the oppo-sition, join hands with the bourgeoisie, and leave the proletariat inisolation.... 
” So it is in the interests of the proletariat that the tsar-ist government should be unable to divide the bourgeoisie and the proletariat! Is it not by mistake that this Georgianorgan is called Sotsial-Demokrat instead of Osvobozhdeniye ? And note its peerless philosophy of democratic revolution!Is it not obvious that this poor Tiflisian is hopelessly con-fused by the pedantic tail-ist interpretation of the concept “bourgeois revolution”? He discusses the question of the possible isolation of the proletariat in a democratic revo-lution, and forgets ... forgets a trifle ... the peasantry! Of the possible allies of the proletariat he knows and favours the Zemstvo landlords, but is not aware of the peasants. 
 And this in the Caucasus! Well, were we not right when we said thatin its reasoning the new Iskra was sinking to the level of the monarchist bourgeoisie instead of raising the revolutionarypeasantry to the position of our ally? “...Otherwise the defeat of the proletariat and the victory of the government are inevitable. 
 This is just what the autocracy is striving for. 
 In its Zemsky Sobor it will undoubtedly attract to its side repre-sentatives of the nobility, the Zemstvos, the cities, the universities, and similar bourgeois institutions. 
 It will try to appease them with petty concessions, and thereby reconcile them to itself. 
 Strengthenedin this way, it will direct all its blows against the working people, who will have been isolated. 
 It is our duty to prevent such an unfor-tunate outcome. 
 But can this be done by the first method? Let usassume that we paid no attention whatever to the Zemsky Sobor, but started to prepare for insurrection ourselves, and one fine day came out in the streets armed and ready for battle. 
 The result wouldbe that we would be confronted not with one but with two enemies: the government and the Zemsky Sobor. 
 While we were preparing, they were able to come to terms, enter into an agreement with each other,draw up a constitution advantageous to themselves, and divide power between them. 
 This tactic is of direct advantage to the government, and we must reject it in the most energetic fashion.... 
” Now this is frank! So we must resolutely reject the “tactics” of preparing an insurrection because “meanwhile” thegovernment would come to terms with the bourgeoisie. 
 Canone find in the old literature of the most rabid Econo-mism anything that would even approximate such a disgrace to revolutionary Social-Democracy? It is a fact that insur-rections and outbreaks by workers and peasants are occur-ring, first in one place and then in another. 
 The ZemskySobor, however, is a Bulygin promise. 
 And the Sotsial-Demokrat of the city of Tiflis decides that the tactic of preparing an insurrection should be rejected, and a “centre of influence” should be awaited—the Zemsky Sobor.... 
 “...The second tactic, on the contrary, consists in bringing the Zemsky Sobor under our supervision, in not giving it the opportunity to act according to its own will, and enter into an agreement withthe government. 
 * *By what means can the Zemstvo people be deprived of their own will? Perhaps by use of a special sort of litmus-paper? “We support the Zemsky Sobor inasmuch as it fights the autocracy, and we fight it whenever it becomes reconciled with the autocracy. 
By energetic intervention and by force we shall bring about a splitamong the deputies, * rally the radicals to our side, eliminate the conservatives from the government, and thus put the whole Zemsky Sobor on the path of revolution. 
 Thanks to such tactics, the govern-ment will always remain isolated, the opposition will be strong, andthe establishment of a democratic system will thereby be facilitated. 
” Well, well! Let anyone now say that we exaggerate the new-Iskrists’ turn to the most vulgar semblance of Economism. 
 This is positively like the famous powder forexterminating flies: first you catch your fly, stick it on thefly-paper, and the sly will die. 
 Bring about a split among thedeputies of the Zemsky Sobor by force , “eliminate the conserv-atives from the government”—and the whole Zemsky Sobor will take the path of revolution .... 
 No “Jacobin” armed insurrection of any sort, but just like that, in genteel, almostparliamentary fashion, “influencing” the members of the Zemsky Sobor . 
 Poor Russia! It has been said that she always wears the old-fashioned bonnets that Europe has discarded. 
 We have no parliament as yet, even Bulygin has not yet promised one, but we have any amount of parliamentary cretinism. 
 25 “...How should this intervention be effected? First of all, we shall demand that the Zemsky Sobor be convened on the basis of universaland equal suffrage, direct elections by secret ballot. 
 Simultaneouslywith the announcement ** of this electoral procedure, complete freedom to carry on the election campaign, i. 
e. 
, freedom of assembly, speech and the press, the inviolability of electors and candidates, and the release of all political prisoners, must be made law. 
 *** The elections themselves must be fixed as late as possible, to give us sufficient timeto inform and prepare the people. 
 And since the drafting of the regu-lations governing the convocation of the Sobor has been entrustedto a commission headed by Bulygin, Minister of the Interior, we should also exert pressure on this commission and on its members. 
 **** If the Bulygin Commission refuses to satisfy our demands ***** and *Heavens! This is certainly rendering tactics “profound”! There are no forces available to fight in the streets, but it is possible“to bring about a split among the deputies” “by force”. 
 Listen,comrade from Tiflis, lie if you must, but there’s a limit.... 
 **In Iskra ? *** By Nicholas? **** So this is what is meant by the tactic of “eliminating the conservatives from the government”! ***** But surely such a thing cannot happen if we follow this correct and profound tactic! grants suffrage only to property owners, then we must intervene in these elections and by revolutionary means make the voters electprogressive candidates and in the Zemsky Sobor demand a constituentassembly. 
 Finally, we must by all possible measures—demonstrations, strikes, and insurrection if need be—compel the Zemsky Sobor to convene a constituent assembly or declare itself to be such. 
 The armedproletariat must be the defender of the constituent assembly, andtogether * both will march forward to a democratic republic. 
 “Such is the Social-Democratic tactics, and it alone will secure us victory. 
” Let not the reader imagine that this incredible nonsense comes from some new-Iskra maiden writer, a man with no authority or influence. 
 No, this is stated in the organ of an entire committee of new-Iskra supporters, the Tiflis Commit-tee. 
 More than that. 
 This nonsense has been openly endorsed by Iskra , in No. 
 100 of which we read the following about that issue of the Sotsial-Demokrat : “The first issue is edited in a lively and talented manner. 
 The experienced hand of a capable editor and writer isperceptible.... 
 It may be said with all confidence that the news-paper will carry out brilliantly the task it has set itself . 
” Yes! If that task is to show clearly to all and sundry the utter ideological decay of the new-Iskra trend, then it has indeed been carried out “brilliantly”. 
 No one could haveexpressed new-Iskra degradation to liberal bourgeois oppor-tunism in a more “lively, talented, and capable” manner. 
 8. 
 THE OSVOBOZHDENIYE AND NEW-ISKRA TRENDS Let us now proceed to another striking confirmation of the political significance of the new-Iskra trend. 
 In a splendid, remarkable, and most instructive article, entitled “How to Find Oneself” ( Osvobozhdeniye , No. 
 71), Mr. 
 Struve wages war against the “programmatic revolution-ism” of our extreme parties. 
 Mr. 
 Struve is particularly displeased with me personally. 
 ** As far as I am concerned, *Both the armed proletariat and the conservatives “eliminated from the government”? **“In comparison with the revolutionism of Mr. 
 Lenin and his associates the revolutionism of the West-European Social-Democracy of Bebel, and even of Kautsky, is opportunism; but the foundations of even this already toned-down revolutionism have been underminedand washed away by history. 
” A most irate thrust. 
 Only Mr. 
 Struve Mr. 
 Struve could not have pleased me more: I could not wish for a better ally in the fight against the renascent Economism of the new-Iskra group and the absence of prin-ciples displayed by the Socialist-Revolutionaries. 
 On someother occasion we shall relate how Mr. 
 Struve and Osvobozh-deniye have proved in practice how utterly reactionary are the “amendments” to Marxism made in the Socialist-Revo-lutionaries’ draft programme. 
 We have already repeatedly * spoken of the honest, faithful and real service rendered to should not think he can lay all the blame on me, as he could on an opponent no longer alive. 
 I have only to challenge Mr. 
 Struve, thoughI am sure he will never accept such a challenge, to answer the followingquestions. 
 When and where did I call the “revolutionism of Bebeland Kautsky” opportunism? When and where did I ever claim to have created any sort of special trend in international Social-Democracy not identical with the trend of Bebel and Kautsky? When and where have there been brought to light differences between me, on the onehand, and Bebel and Kautsky, on the other—differences even slightlyapproximating in gravity the differences between Bebel and Kautsky,for instance, on the agrarian question in Breslau? 26 Let Mr. 
 Struve try to answer these three questions. 
 To our readers we say: the liberal bourgeoisie everywhere and always resorts to the method of assuring its adherents in a given country that the Social-Democrats of that country are most unreason-able, whereas their comrades in a neighbouring country are “goody-goodies”. 
 The German bourgeoisie has hundreds of times held up “goody-goody” French socialists as models for the Bebels and the Kautskys. 
 The French bourgeoisie quite recently pointed to “goody-goody”Bebel as a model for the French socialists. 
 That is an old trick, Mr. 
Struve! You will find only children and ignoramuses swallowing suchbait. 
 The complete unanimity of international revolutionary Social-Democracy on all major questions of programme and tactics is a most incontrovertible fact. 
 *Let us remind the reader that the article “What Should Not Be Done” ( Iskra , No. 
 52) was vociferously hailed by Osvobozhdeniye as a “noteworthy turn” towards concessions to the opportunists. 
 Theprinciples underlying the new-Iskra ideas were especially lauded by Osvobozhdeniye in an item on the split among Russian Social-Democrats. 
 Commenting on Trotsky’s pamphlet, Our Political Tasks , Osvobozhdeniye noted the similarity between this author’s ideas and what was once written and said by the Rabocheye Dyelo writers Krichevsky, Martynov, Akimov (see the leaflet entitled “An ObligingLiberal” published by Vperyod ). 
 Osvobozhdeniye welcomed Martynov’s pamphlet on the two dictatorships (see the item in Vperyod , No. 
 9). 
 Finally, Starover’s belated complaints about the old slogan of the old Iskra , “first draw a line of demarcation and then unite”, met with particular sympathy from Osvobozhdeniye . 
 me by Mr. 
 Struve whenever he approved of the new-Iskra trend in principle , and we shall now speak of that once more. 
 Mr. 
 Struve’s article contains a number of very inter-esting statements, which we can note here only in passing. 
He intends “to create Russian democracy by relying onclass collaboration and not on class struggle”, in which case“the socially privileged intelligentsia” (something like the “cultured nobility” to which Mr. 
 Struve makes obeisance with the grace of a true high-society ... lackey) will bring “the weight of its social position” (the weight of its money-bags) to this “non-class” party. 
 Mr. 
 Struve expresses the desire to acquaint the youth with the worthlessness “of the hackneyed radical opinion that the bourgeoisie has becomefrightened and has betrayed the proletariat and the cause of liberty”. 
 (We welcome this desire with all our heart. 
 Nothing can confirm the correctness of this Marxist “hack-neyed opinion” better than a war waged against it by Mr. 
 Struve. 
 Please, Mr. 
 Struve, don’t put off this splendid plan of yours!) For the purposes of our subject it is important to note the practical slogans now being warred against by this po-litically sensitive representative of the Russian bourgeoisiewho is so responsive to the slightest change in the weather. 
 First, he is warring against the slogan of republicanism. 
 Mr. 
 Struve is firmly convinced that this slogan is “incompre-hensible and foreign to the mass of the people” (he has forgotten to add: comprehensible to, but not to the advantage of, the bourgeoisie!). 
 We should like to see what reply Mr. 
 Struvewould get from the workers in our study circles and at our mass meetings. 
 Or perhaps the workers are not the people? And what about the peasants? They are sometimes given towhat Mr. 
 Struve calls “naïve republicanism” (“to send the tsar packing”)—yet the liberal bourgeoisie believes that naïve republicanism will be replaced not by enlightened republicanism, but by enlightened monarchism! Ca dépend , Mr. 
 Struve; it will depend on circumstances. 
 Both tsarism and the bourgeoisie cannot but oppose a radical improvementin the condition of the peasantry at the expense of the landed estates, whereas the working class cannot but assist the peasantry in this respect. 
 Secondly, Mr. 
 Struve asserts that “in a civil war the attacker is always in the wrong”. 
 This idea verges closely on the above-mentioned new-Iskra trends. 
 We will not say, of course, that in civil war it is always advantageous to attack; no, sometimes defensive tactics is obligatory for the time being . 
 But to apply to the Russia of 1905 a propo-sition like the one Mr. 
 Struve has made means precisely todemonstrate a little of the “hackneyed radical opinion” (“the bourgeoisie takes fright and betrays the cause of liberty”). 
 Whoever now refuses to attack the autocracy andreaction, whoever fails to prepare for such an attack, andwhoever does not advocate it, has no right to call himself anadherent of revolution. 
 Mr. 
 Struve condemns the slogans: “secrecy” and “rioting” (a riot being “an insurrection in miniature”). 
 Mr. 
 Struve des-pises both of these—and he does so from the standpointof “the approach to the masses”. 
 We should like to ask Mr. 
Struve whether he can point to any passage in, for instance,What Is To Be Done? —the work, from his standpoint, of an extreme revolutionary—which advocates rioting. 
 As regards “secrecy”, is there really much difference between, for example, us and Mr. 
 Struve? Are we not both working on “illegal”newspapers which are being smuggled into Russia “secretly”and serve the “secret” groups of either the Osvobozhdeniye League or the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
? Our workers’ mass meetingsare often held “secretly”—we do commit that sin. 
 But what about the meetings held by gentlemen of the Osvobozhde-niye League? Have you any grounds to brag, Mr. 
 Struve, and look down upon contemptible partisans of contemptiblesecrecy? True, strict secrecy is required in supplying the workers with arms. 
 On this point Mr. 
 Struve is rather more out-spoken. 
 Just listen: “As regards insurrection, or a revolution in the technical sense, only mass propaganda in favour of ademocratic programme can create the socio-psychologicalconditions for a general armed uprising. 
 Thus, even fromthe point of view of an insurrection being the inevitable consummation of the present struggle for emancipation— a view I do not share—the imbuing of the masses with ideas of democratic reform is a most fundamental and mostnecessary task. 
” Mr. 
 Struve tries to evade the issue. 
 He speaks of the inevitability of an insurrection instead of speaking of its necessity for the victory of the revolution. 
 An insurrection— unprepared, spontaneous, sporadic—has already begun. 
No one can positively vouch that it will develop into a full-fledged and integral insurrection of the people, for thatdepends on the state of the revolutionary forces (which can befully gauged only in the course of the struggle itself), on the behaviour of the government and the bourgeoisie, and on a number of other circumstances, which cannot be estimatedwith precision. 
 It is pointless to speak of inevitability, in themeaning of absolute certainty with regard to some concreteevent, to which Mr. 
 Struve would reduce the matter. 
 Whatyou must speak of, if you would be a partisan of revo-lution, is whether insurrection is necessary for the victory of the revolution, whether it is necessary to proclaim it vigorously,to advocate it and make immediate and energetic prepa-rations for it. 
 Mr. 
 Struve cannot fail to understand this differ-ence: he does not, for instance, obscure the question of theneed for universal suffrage—which to a democrat is indis-putable—by questioning the inevitability of its attainment in the course of the present revolution—which, to peopleengaged in political activity, is disputable and of littleaccount. 
 By evading the issue of the need for an insurrection,Mr. 
 Struve reveals the innermost essence of the liberal bour-geoisie’s political stand. 
 In the first place, the bourgeoisie would prefer to come to terms with the autocracy rather than crush it; secondly, the bourgeoisie, in all cases, shifts thearmed struggle on to the workers’ shoulders. 
 That is thereal meaning of Mr. 
 Struve’s evasiveness. 
 That is why hebacks out of the question of the need for an insurrection,towards the question of its “socio-psychological conditions”, and preliminary “propaganda”. 
 Just as in the Frankfort Par-liament of 1848 the bourgeois windbags were busy drawingup resolutions, declarations, and decisions, engaging in“mass propaganda” and preparing the “socio-psychologicalconditions” when it was a matter of repelling the govern-ment’s armed forces, when the movement had “led to the necessity” of an armed struggle, when verbal persuasion alone (which is a hundredfold necessary during the preparatoryperiod) had become banal, bourgeois inactivity and cowardice /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR —so Mr. 
 Struve also evades the question of insurrection, and takes cover behind phrases . 
 Mr. 
 Struve shows us reveal-ingly what many Social-Democrats turn a blind eye to, namely, that a revolutionary period differs from ordinary,everyday, preparatory periods in history in that the temper,excitement, and convictions of the masses must and doexpress themselves in action . 
 Vulgar revolutionism fails to see that words are action, too; this proposition is indisputable when applied to history in general , or to those periods of history when no open polit-ical mass action takes place. 
 No putsches of any sort canreplace or artificially evoke such action. 
 Tail-ist revolution-aries fail to understand that when a revolutionary periodhas set in, when the old “superstructure” has cracked from top to bottom, when open political action by the classes and masses that are creating a new superstructure for themselveshas become a fact, and when civil war has begun—it isapathy, lifelessness, pedantry, or else betrayal of the revo-lution and treachery to it to confine oneself to “words” in the old way , without advancing the direct slogan on the need to pass over to “action”, and to try to avoid action by pleading the need for “psychological conditions” and “propaganda”in general. 
 The democratic bourgeoisie’s Frankfort wind-bags are a memorable historical example of just suchtreachery or of just such pedantic stupidity. 
 Would you like an instance provided by the history of the Social-Democratic movement in Russia to explain this difference between vulgar revolutionism and tail-ism inrevolutionaries? We shall provide you with such an expla-nation. 
 Call to mind the years 1901 and 1902, which are sorecent, but already seem ancient history to us today. 
 Demon-strations had begun. 
 Vulgar revolutionism had raised a wail about “assault tactics” ( Rabocheye Dyelo 27), “blood-thirsty leaflets” were being issued (of Berlin origin, if mymemory does not fail me), and attacks were being madeon the “literary pretentiousness” and armchair nature of theidea of agitation being conducted on a country-wide scalethrough a newspaper (Nadezhdin). 
 28 On the contrary, rev-olutionaries’ tail-ism found expression at the time in the teaching that “the economic struggle is the best means of political agitation”. 
 How did the revolutionary Social-Democrats behave? They attacked both these trends. 
 They condemned pyrotechnic methods and the cries about assault tactics, for it was, or should have been, obvious to all that open mass action was a matter of the morrow. 
 They con-demned tail-ism and openly issued the slogan even of a popular insurrection, not in the meaning of a direct appeal(Mr. 
 Struve would not discover any appeal to “riot” in ourutterances of that period), but in the meaning of a necessary deduction, the meaning of “propaganda” (of which Mr. 
 Struve has only now bethought himself—our worthy Mr. 
 Struveis always several years behind the times), in the senseof preparing those very “socio-psychological conditions”on which the representatives of the bewildered and huckster-ing bourgeoisie are now “sadly and inappropriately” hold-ing forth. 
 At that time propaganda and agitation, agitation and propaganda were really brought to the fore by the objec-tive state of affairs. 
 At that time work on an all-Russia political newspaper, the weekly publication of which seemedan ideal, could be proposed (and was proposed in What Is To Be Done? ) as the touchstone of the work of preparing for an insurrection. 
 At that time slogans advocating mass agitation instead of direct armed action, preparation of the socio-psychological conditions for insurrection instead of pyrotechnics were revolutionary Social-Democracy’s onlycorrect slogans. 
 At the present time these slogans have been overtaken by events; the movement has left them behind; they have become tatters, rags fit only to cover Osvobozhde-niye hypocrisy and new-Iskra tail-ism! Or perhaps I am mistaken? Perhaps the revolution has not yet begun? Perhaps the time has not yet arrived for openpolitical action by the classes? Perhaps there is no civil waryet, and the criticism of weapons should not yet be the necessary and obligatory successor, heir, trustee, and consum-mator of the weapon of criticism? Get out of your study, look about you, and seek your answer in the streets. 
 Has not the government itself startedcivil war by everywhere shooting down crowds of peacefuland unarmed citizens? Have not the armed Black Hundreds come out as an “argument” of the autocracy? Has not the bourgeoisie—even the bourgeoisie—recognised the need fora citizens’ militia? Does not Mr. 
 Struve himself, the ideally moderate and punctilious Mr. 
 Struve, say (alas, he does so only to evade the issue!) that “the open nature of revo-lutionary action” (that’s what we are like today!) “is now one of the most important conditions for exerting an educationalinfluence upon the mass of the people”? Those who have eyes to see can have no doubt as to how the question of an insurrection must now be presented by par-tisans of revolution. 
 Examine the three presentations of this question provided in those organs of the free press that are at all capable of influencing the masses . 
 Presentation one. 
 The resolution of the Third Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party. 
 * It is publicly acknowledged and declared that the general *The following is the text in full: “1. 
 Whereas the proletariat being, by virtue of its position, the foremost and only consistently revolutionary class, is therefore called upon to play the leading role in the general democratic revolutionary movement in Russia; “2. 
 Whereas this movement at the present time has already led to the necessity of an armed uprising; “3. 
 Whereas the proletariat will inevitably take the most energetic part in this uprising, which participation will decide the destiny of the revolution in Russia; “4. 
 Whereas the proletariat can play the leading role in this revolution only if it is united in a single and independent political forceunder the banner of the Social-Democratic Labour Party, whichdirects its struggle both ideologically and practically; “5. 
 Whereas only the performance of this role will ensure to the proletariat the most advantageous conditions for the struggle for socialism, against the propertied classes of bourgeois-democraticRussia; “Therefore the Third Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 holds that the task of organising the proletariat for direct struggle against theautocracy by means of the armed uprising is one of the major and most urgent tasks of the Party at the present revolutionary moment. 
 “Accordingly, the Congress instructs all Party organisations: “a) to explain to the proletariat by means of propaganda and agitation, not only the political significance, but the practicalorganisational aspect of the impending armed uprising, “b) to explain in that propaganda and agitation the role of mass political strikes, which may be of great importance at the beginning and during the progress of the uprising, and “c) to take the most energetic steps towards arming the prole-tariat, as well as drawing up a plan of the armed uprising and of directleadership thereof, for which purpose special groups of Party workersshould be formed as and when necessary. 
” (Author’s note to the 1907 democratic revolutionary movement has already brought about the necessity of an insurrection. 
 The organisation of the proletariat for an insurrection has been placed on the order of the day as one of the essential, principal, andindispensable tasks of the Party. 
 Instructions have been issued for most energetic measures to be taken to arm the proletar-iat and ensure the possibility of direct leadership of theinsurrection. 
 Presentation two. 
 An article in Osvobozhdeniye , with a statement of principles, by the “leader of the Russianconstitutionalists” (as Mr. 
 Struve was recently described by soinfluential an organ of the European bourgeoisie as Frank-furter Zeitung 29) or the leader of the Russian progressive bourgeoisie. 
 He does not share the opinion that an insurrec-tion is inevitable. 
 Secret activity and rioting are the specific methods of unreasonable revolutionism. 
 Republicanismis the method of stunning. 
 An insurrection is really a mere technical question, whereas “the fundamental and most necessary task” is to carry on mass propaganda and to pre-pare the socio-psychological conditions. 
 Presentation three. 
 The resolution of the new-Iskra Conference. 
 Our task is to prepare an insurrection. 
 A plannedinsurrection is out of the question. 
 Favourable conditions for an insurrection are created by the disorganisation of the government, by our agitation, and by our organisation. 
 Onlythen “can technical combat preparations acquire more or less serious significance”. 
 Is that all? Yes, that is all. 
 Whether insurrection has become necessary is something the new-Iskra leaders of the proletariat do not yet know. 
 Whether the task of organising the proletariat for the immediate struggle is an urgent oneis not yet clear to them. 
 It is not necessary to urge the adop-tion of the most energetic measures; it is far more important (in 1905, and not in 1902) to explain in general outline underwhat conditions these measures “may” acquire “more or less serious” significance.... 
 Do you see now, comrades of the new Iskra , where your turn to Martynovism has led you? Do you realise that your political philosophy has proved a rehash of the Osvobozhdeniye philosophy?—that (against your will, and without your being bourgeoisie? Is it now clear to you that, while repeating stale truths and perfecting yourselves in sophistry, you have lost sight of the fact that—in the memorable words of Pyotr Struve’s memorable article—“the open nature of revo-lutionary action is now one of the most important conditions for exerting an educational influence upon the mass of thepeople”? 9. 
 WHAT IS MEANT BY BEING A PARTY OF EXTREME OPPOSITION IN TIME OF REVOLUTION? Let us return to the resolution on a provisional govern-ment. 
 We have shown that new-Iskrist tactics does not pushthe revolution forward—the possibility of which they would like to ensure by their resolution—but pull it back. 
 We have shown that it is precisely this tactics that ties the hands of Social-Democracy in the struggle against the inconsistentbourgeoisie and does not prevent its being dissolved inbourgeois democracy. 
 The false premises of the resolutionnaturally lead to the following false conclusion: “Therefore, Social-Democracy must not set itself the aim of seizing or sharing power in the provisional government, but must remainthe party of extreme revolutionary opposition. 
” Consider thefirst half of this conclusion, which contains a statement ofaims. 
 Do the new-Iskrists declare that the revolution’sdecisive victory over tsarism is the aim of Social-Democratic activity? They do. 
 They are unable correctly to formulate the conditions of a decisive victory, and lapse into theOsvobozhdeniye formulation, but they do set themselves this aim. 
 Further, do they associate a provisional governmentwith insurrection? Yes, they do so directly by stating thata provisional government “will emerge from a victorious popular insurrection”. 
 Finally, do they set themselves the aim of guiding the insurrection? Yes, they do. 
 LikeMr. 
 Struve they evade the admission that an insurrectionis an urgent necessity, but at the same time, unlikeMr. 
 Struve, they say that “Social-Democracy strives tosubordinate it (the insurrection) to its influence and leadership and to use it in the interests of the working class”. 
 How nicely this hangs together, does it not? We set our-selves the aim of subordinating the insurrection of both the proletarian and non-proletarian masses to our influence and our leadership, and of using it in our interests. 
 Hence, we set ourselves the aim of leading, in the insurrection both the proletariat, and the revolutionary bourgeoisie and pettybourgeoisie (“the non-proletarian groups”), i. 
e. 
, of “ sharing ” the leadership of the insurrection between the Social-Democ-racy and the revolutionary bourgeoisie. 
 We set ourselvesthe aim of securing victory for the insurrection, which is to lead to the establishment of a provisional government (“which will emerge from a victorious popular insurrection”). 
Therefore ... therefore we must not set ourselves the aim of seizing power or of sharing it in a provisional revolutionarygovernment!! Our friends cannot make their arguments dovetail. 
 They vacillate between the standpoint of Mr. 
 Struve, who evades the issue of an insurrection, and the standpoint of revolu-tionary Social-Democracy, which calls upon us to undertakethis urgent task. 
 They vacillate between anarchism, whichon principle condemns all participation in a provisionalrevolutionary government as betrayal of the proletariat, and Marxism, which demands such participation, given Social-Democracy’s guiding influence in the insurrection. 
 * They have no independent stand whatever: neither that ofMr. 
 Struve, who wants to come to terms with tsarism and is,therefore, compelled to resort to evasions and subterfugeson the question of insurrection, nor that of the anarchists, who condemn all action “from above” and all participation in a bourgeois revolution. 
 The new-Iskra group confuses a deal with tsarism and a victory over the latter. 
 They wantto take part in a bourgeois revolution. 
 They have gonesomewhat beyond Martynov’s Two Dictatorships . 
 They even consent to lead an insurrection of the people—in order to renounce that leadership immediately after victory is won (or, perhaps, immediately before the victory?), i. 
e. 
, in order not to avail themselves of the fruits of victory , but to turn all these fruits over entirely to the bourgeoisie . 
 This is what they call “using the insurrection in the interests of theworking class...”. 
 *See Proletary , No. 
 3, “On the Provisional Revolutionary Government”, article two, 1905. 
 (See present edition, Vol. 
 8, pp. 
 474-81. 
— Ed. 
) There is no need to dwell on this muddle any longer. 
 It will be more useful to examine how this muddle origi-nated in the formulation which reads: “remain the party of extreme revolutionary opposition”. 
 This is one of the familiar propositions of international revolutionary Social-Democracy. 
 It is a perfectly correctproposition. 
 It has become a common place to all opponentsof revisionism or opportunism in parliamentary countries. 
 It has become generally accepted as the legitimate and neces-sary rebuff to “parliamentary cretinism”, to Millerandism,Bernsteinism, 30 and Italian reformism of the Turati brand. 
 Our good new-Iskrists have learned this excellent proposi-tion by heart and are zealously applying it ... quite inap-propriately . 
 Categories of the parliamentary struggle are introduced into resolutions written for conditions in which no parliament exists. 
 The concept “opposition’, which is thereflection and the expression of a political situation in whichno one seriously speaks of an insurrection , is meaninglessly applied to a situation in which insurrection has begun and in which all supporters of revolution are thinking and talking about leadership in it. 
 The desire to “ remain ” with the old methods, i. 
e. 
, action only “from below”, is voiced withpomp and clamour precisely at a time when the revolution has confronted us with the necessity, in the event of avictorious insurrection, of acting from above . 
 No, our new-Iskra group is decidedly out of luck! Even when they formulate a correct Social-Democratic proposi-tion they do not know how to apply it correctly. 
 They havefailed to understand that when the revolution gets underway, and there are civil war and insurrectionary outbursts,but still no parliament, terms and concepts of parliamentarystruggle undergo a transformation and turn into their oppo-sites. 
 They do not realise that in the conditions under examination amendments are introduced by means of streetdemonstrations, interpellations are made by means of offen-sive action by armed citizens, and opposition to the govern-ment is effected by the forcible overthrow of that government. 
 Just as the well-known hero of our folk epos repeated good advice when it was out of place, our admirers of Martynov repeat the lessons of peaceful parliamentarianism at a timewhen, as they themselves state, actual hostilities have begun. 
 There is nothing more ridiculous than this pompous advance-ment of the slogan of “extreme opposition” in a resolution which begins by referring to a “decisive victory of the revo-lution” and to a “popular insurrection”! Try to conceive,gentlemen, what it means to be the “extreme opposition”in a period of insurrection. 
 Does it mean exposing the govern-ment, or deposing it? Does it mean voting against thegovernment, or defeating its armed forces in open battle? Does it mean refusing to replenish the government’s exchequer, or the revolutionary seizure of that exchequer forthe needs of the uprising, to arm the workers and peasants,and to convoke a constituent assembly? Are you not begin-ning to understand, gentlemen, that the term “extreme oppo-sition” expresses only negative actions—exposing, voting against, refusing? Why is that so? Because this term applies only to the parliamentary struggle and, moreover, in aperiod when no one makes “decisive victory” the immediateobject of the struggle. 
 Are you not beginning to understandthat things change cardinally in this respect, from the momentthe politically oppressed people launch a determined attack along the whole front in desperate struggle for victory? The workers ask us: Must the urgent business of insurrec-tion be energetically begun? What is to be done to makethe incipient insurrection victorious? What use should bemade of victory? What programme can and should then beimplemented? The new-Iskrists, who are making Marxism more profound, answer: we must remain the party of extreme revolutionary opposition.... 
 Well, were we not rightin calling these knights past masters of philistinism? 10. 
 “REVOLUTIONARY COMMUNES” AND THE REVOLUTIONARY-DEMOCRATIC DICTATORSHIP OF THE PROLETARIAT AND THE PEASANTRY The Conference of the new-Iskra group did not keep to the anarchist stand into which the new Iskra had talked itself (action only “from below”, not “from below and from above”). 
The absurdity of admitting the possibility of an insurrec-tion and not admitting the possibility of victory and par-ticipation in a provisional revolutionary government wastoo glaring. 
 The resolution, therefore, introduced certain reservations and restrictions into the Martynov-Martov solu-tion of the question. 
 Let us consider these reservations, as stated in the following section of the resolution: “This tactic” (“to remain the party of extreme revolution-ary opposition”) “does not, of course, in any way excludethe expediency of a partial and episodic seizure of powerand the establishment of revolutionary communes in onecity or another, or in one district or another, exclusively for the purpose of helping to spread the insurrection and of disrupting the government. 
” If that is the case, it means the admission in principle of action not only from below, but also from above. 
 It meansthat the proposition laid down in L. 
 Martov’s well-knownfeuilleton i n Iskra (No. 
 93) is discarded, and that the tactics of Vperyod , i. 
e. 
, not only “from below”, but also “from above”, is acknowledged as correct. 
 Further, the seizure of power (even if partial, episodic, etc. 
) obviously presupposes participation not only ofSocial-Democrats, and not only of the proletariat. 
 Thisfollows from the fact that it is not the proletariat alone that is interested and takes an active part in a democratic revolu-tion. 
 It follows from the insurrection being a “popular” one,as is stated at the beginning of the resolution under exam-ination, with “non-proletarian groups” (the words usedin the Conference resolution on the uprising), i. 
e. 
, the bour-geoisie, also taking part in it. 
 Hence, the principle that any participation of socialists in a provisional revolutionary government jointly with the petty bourgeoisie is betrayalof the working class was thrown overboard by the Conference , which is what Vperyod sought to achieve. 
 “Betrayal” does not cease to be betrayal because the action constituting it ispartial, episodic, local, etc. 
 Hence, the idea that participa-tion in a provisional revolutionary government is tanta-mount to vulgar Jaurèsism was thrown overboard by the Conference, which is what Vperyod sought to achieve. 
 31 A government does not cease to be a government because itspower extends not to many cities but to a single city, notto many districts but to a single district, or because of the name it bears. 
 Thus, the theoretical presentation of this question , as attempted by the new Iskra , was discarded by the Conference. 
 Let us see whether the restrictions the Conference imposed on the formation of revolutionary governments and on participation in them, which are now admitted in principle, are reasonable. 
 We are not aware of the distinction between“episodic” and “provisional”. 
 * We are afraid that the former word, which is “new” and foreign, is merely a screen forlack of clear thinking. 
 It seems “more profound”, but actually it is only more obscure and confused. 
 What is the difference between the “expediency” of a partial “seizure of power” in a city or district, and participation in a provisionalrevolutionary government of the entire state? Do not “cities”include a city like St. 
 Petersburg where the events ofJanuary 9 took place? Do not districts include the Caucasus,which is bigger than many a state? Will not the problems (which at one time embarrassed the new Iskra ) of what to do with the prisons, the police, the treasury, etc. 
, confrontus the moment we “seize power” even in a single city, let alonein a district? No one will deny, of course, that if we lacksufficient forces, if the insurrection is not wholly successful,or if the victory is indecisive, provisional revolutionary governments may possibly be set up in individual localities, in individual cities and the like. 
 But what has all that gotto do with the point at issue, gentlemen? Do not you your-selves, in the beginning of the resolution, speak of a “de-cisive victory of the revolution”, a “victorious popularinsurrection ”?? Since when have Social-Democrats taken over the job of the anarchists: splitting the attention and the aims of the proletariat, and directing its attention to the“partial”, instead of the general, the single, the integral,and the complete? While presupposing “seizure of power”in a city, you yourselves speak of “extending the insur-rection”—to another city, may we venture to think?—to all cities, may we dare to hope? Your conclusions, gentlemen, are as unsound and haphazard, as contradictory and confused,as your premises. 
 The Third Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
gave an exhaustive and clear answer to the question ofa provisional revolutionary government in general. 
 Thisanswer covers all cases of local provisional governments as *The first word was in scholarly use at the time, while the second was, and still is, colloquial Russian. 
— Tr. 
 well. 
 However, by artificially and arbitrarily isolating a part of the question, the Conference’s answer merely evades the issue as a whole (and that unsuccessfully), and creates confusion. 
 What is meant by “revolutionary communes”? Does this concept differ from “a provisional revolutionary government”,and, if so, in what respect? The gentlemen of the Conferencedo not know themselves. 
 Confusion of revolutionary thought leads them, as very often happens, to revolutionary phrase-mongering . 
 Indeed, the use of the words “revolution-ary commune” in a resolution passed by representatives ofSocial-Democracy is revolutionary phrase-mongering andnothing else. 
 Marx often condemned such phrase-mongeringin which some “charming” terms from the outworn past are used to conceal the tasks of the future. 
 In such cases the charm of a term which has already played its part in historybecomes so much useless and harmful tinsel, a child’s rattle. 
We must give the workers and the whole people a clear andunambiguous notion as to why we want a provisional revolu-tionary government to be set up, and exactly what changes we shall bring about if we exercise decisive influence on the government on the very day following the victory of thepopular insurrection which has already commenced. 
 Theseare questions confronting political leaders. 
 The Third Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 replied to these questions with absolute clarity, and drew up a complete pro-gramme of these changes—our Party’s minimum programme. 
 The word “commune”, however, gives no answer at all;it only confuses people’s minds with the distant echo ofa sonorous phrase or empty rhetoric. 
 The more we cherish,for instance, the memory of the Paris Commune of 1871,the less permissible is it to refer to it offhand, without an-alysing its mistakes and the special conditions attending it. 
 To do so would mean repeating the absurd example of theBlanquists—whom Engels ridiculed—who (in 1874, in their“Manifesto”) paid homage to every act of the Commune. 
 32 What reply will a conferee give to a worker who asks himabout this “revolutionary commune”, the one that is men-tioned in the resolution? He will only be able to tell him that this is the name by which a certain workers’ government isknown in history, a government that was unable, and could not at that time, distinguish between the elements of a democratic revolution and a socialist revolution, a govern-ment that confused the tasks of fighting for a republic with those of fighting for socialism, was unable to launch anenergetic military offensive against Versailles, made amistake in failing to seize the Bank of France, etc. 
 In short,whether in your answer you refer to the Paris Commune or tosome other commune, your answer will be: it was a govern-ment such as ours should not be . 
 A fine answer, indeed! Does it not testify to pedantic moralising and impotence on thepart of a revolutionary, when a resolution says nothing aboutthe practical programme of the Party and inappropriatelybegins giving lessons from history? Does this not reveal thevery mistake we have unsuccessfully been accused of, i. 
e. 
, confusing a democratic revolution with a socialist revo-lution, between which none of the “communes” was able todistinguish? Extending the insurrection and disorganising the gov-ernment are presented as the “exclusive” aim of a provision-al government (so inappropriately termed a “commune”). 
 Taken in its literal sense, the word “exclusive” eliminates all other aims; it is an echo of the absurd theory of “only frombelow”. 
 Such elimination of other aims is another instanceof short-sightedness and lack of reflection. 
 A “revolutionarycommune”, i. 
e. 
, a revolutionary government, even if onlyin a single city, will inevitably have to administer (even if provisionally, “partly, episodically”) all affairs of state and it is the height of folly to hide one’s head under one’swing and refuse to see this. 
 This government will have toenact an eight-hour working day, establish workers’ inspec-tion of factories, institute free universal education, introducethe election of judges, set up peasant committees, etc. 
; in a word, it will certainly have to carry out a number of reforms. 
 To designate these reforms as “helping to spread theinsurrection” would be playing with words and deliberatelycausing greater confusion in a matter that calls forabsolute clarity. 
 -The concluding part of the new-Iskra Conference resolution provides no fresh material for a criticism of basic Economist trends that have been revived in our Party, but it does illustrate, from a somewhat different angle, what has been said above. 
 Here is that concluding part:“Only in one event should Social-Democracy on its own initiative direct its efforts towards seizing power and holdingit as long as possible—namely, in the event of the revolutionspreading to the advanced countries of Western Europe, where conditions for the achievement of socialism have already reached a certain [?] degree of maturity. 
 In that eventthe limited historical scope of the Russian revolution canbe considerably widened and the possibility will arise ofentering on the path of socialist reforms. 
 “By basing its tactics on the expectation that during the entire revolutionary period the Social-Democratic Party will retain its stand of extreme revolutionary opposition toall governments that may succeed one another in the courseof the revolution, Social-Democracy will best be able toprepare itself to utilise governmental power if it falls [??]into its hands. 
” The basic idea here is the one repeatedly formulated by Vperyod , which has stated that we must not be afraid (as Martynov is) of Social-Democracy’s complete victory in ademocratic revolution, i. 
e. 
, of a revolutionary-democraticdictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry, for such avictory will enable us to rouse Europe; after throwing off the yoke of the bourgeoisie, the socialist proletariat of Europe will in its turn help us to accomplish the socialist revolution. 
But see how the new-Iskra rendering impairs this idea. 
 We shall not dwell on details; on the absurd assumption thatpower could “fall” into the hands of a class-conscious partywhich considers seizure of power harmful tactics; on the fact that in Europe the conditions for socialism have reached not a certain degree of maturity, but maturity in general;on the fact that our Party programme knows no socialistreforms, but only the socialist revolution. 
 Let us takethe principal and basic difference between Vperyod ’s idea and the one presented in the resolution. 
 Vperyod set the revo-lutionary proletariat of Russia an active task: winning the battle for democracy and using this victory to bring therevolution into Europe. 
 The resolution fails to grasp this link between our “decisive victory” (not in the new-Iskra sense) and the revolution in Europe, and, therefore, it does not speak of the tasks of the proletariat or the prospects of the latter ’s victory, but of one of the possibilities in general: “in the event of the revolution spreading.... 
” Vperyod point-edly and definitely indicated—and this was incorporatedin the resolution of the Third Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party—how “governmental power” can and must “be utilised” in the interests of the proletariat, bearing in mind what can be achieved immediately, at a givenstage of social development, and what must first be achievedas a democratic prerequisite of the struggle for socialism. 
Here, too, the resolution lags hopelessly behind when itstates: “will be able to prepare itself to utilise”, but fails to say how it will be able, how it will prepare itself, and to utilise for what purpose . 
 We have no doubt, for instance, that the new-Iskrists may be “able to prepare themselves toutilise” their leading position in the Party, but the pointis that so far their experience of that utilisation, theirpreparation, does not hold out much hope of possibility becoming reality.... 
 Vperyod stated quite definitely wherein lies the real “possibility of retaining power”—namely, in the revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry;in their joint mass strength, which is capable of out-weighing all the forces of counter-revolution; in the inevitable concurrence of their interests in democratic reforms. 
 Here, too, the resolution of the Conference gives us nothingpositive; it merely evades the issue. 
 Surely, the possibility ofretaining power in Russia must be determined by thecomposition of the social forces in Russia herself, by thecircumstances of the democratic revolution now taking place in our country. 
 A victory of the proletariat in Europe (it is still quite a far cry from bringing the revolution into Europeto the victory of the proletariat) will give rise to a desperatecounter-revolutionary struggle on the part of the Russianbourgeoisie—yet the resolution of the new-Iskrists does notsay a word about this counter-revolutionary force whose sig-nificance was appraised in the resolution of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
’s Third Congress. 
 If, in our fight for a republic and democracy,we could not rely upon the peasantry as well as upon the proletariat, the prospect of our “retaining power” would be hopeless. 
 But if it is not hopeless, if the “revolution’s decisive victory over tsarism” opens up such a possibility, then we must indicate it, call actively for its transformation into reality,and issue practical slogans not only for the contingency of the revolution being brought into Europe, but also for thepurpose of taking it there. 
 The reference made by tail-ist Social-Democrats to the “limited historical scope of the Russian revolution” merely serves to cover up their limited understanding of the aims of this democratic revolution,and of the proletariat’s leading role in it! One of the objections raised to the slogan of “the revolu-tionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and thepeasantry” is that dictatorship presupposes a “single will” (Iskra , No. 
 95), and that there can be no single will of the proletariat and the petty bourgeoisie. 
 This objection isunsound, for it is based on an abstract, “metaphysical” inter-pretation of the term “single will”. 
 There may be a singlewill in one respect and not in another. 
 The absence of unityon questions of socialism and in the struggle for socialism does not preclude singleness of will on questions of democracy and in the struggle for a republic. 
 To forget this wouldbe tantamount to forgetting the logical and historical differ-ence between a democratic revolution and a socialist revo-lution. 
 To forget this would be tantamount to forgetting thecharacter of the democratic revolution as one of the whole people : if it is “of the whole people”, that means that there is “singleness of will” precisely in so far as this revolutionmeets the needs and requirements of the whole people. 
Beyond the bounds of democratism there can be no question ofthe proletariat and the peasant bourgeoisie having a singlewill. 
 Class struggle between them is inevitable, but it is in a democratic republic that this struggle will be the most thoroughgoing and widespread struggle of the people for socialism . 
 Like everything else in the world, the revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantryhas a past and a future. 
 Its past is autocracy, serfdom,monarchy, and privilege. 
 In the struggle against this past, in the struggle against counter-revolution, a “single will” of the proletariat and the peasantry is possible, for herethere is unity of interests. 
 Its future is the struggle against private property, the struggle of the wage-worker against the employer, the struggle for socialism. 
 Here singleness of will is impossible. 
 * Here the path before us lies not from autocracy to a republic, but from a petty-bourgeois democratic republic to socialism. 
 Of course, in actual historical circumstances, the elements of the past become interwoven with those of the future; the two paths cross. 
 Wage-labour with its struggle againstprivate property exists under the autocracy as well; it arises even under serfdom. 
 But this does not in the least prevent us from logically and historically distinguishingbetween the major stages of development. 
 We all contrapose bourgeois revolution and socialist revolution; we all insist on the absolute necessity of strictly distinguishing betweenthem; however, can it be denied that in the course of histo-ry individual, particular elements of the two revolutions become interwoven? Has the period of democratic revolutionsin Europe not been familiar with a number of socialist move-ments and attempts to establish socialism? And will not the future socialist revolution in Europe still have tocomplete a great deal left undone in the field of democratism? A Social-Democrat must never for a moment forget that the proletariat will inevitably have to wage a class struggle for socialism even against the most democratic and republi-can bourgeoisie and petty bourgeoisie. 
 This is beyond doubt. 
Hence, the absolute necessity of a separate, independent, strictly class party of Social-Democracy. 
 Hence, the temporary nature of our tactics of “striking a joint blow” with thebourgeoisie and the duty of keeping a strict watch “over our ally, as over an enemy”, etc. 
 All this also leaves no room for doubt. 
 However, it would be ridiculous and reactionary todeduce from this that we must forget, ignore, or neglect tasks which, although transient and temporary, are vital at the *The development of capitalism, more extensive and rapid in conditions of liberty, will inevitably soon put an end to singlenessof will; that will take place the sooner, the earlier counter-revo-lution and reaction are crushed. 
 present time. 
 The struggle against the autocracy is a tempor-ary and transient task for socialists, but to ignore or neg-lect this task in any way amounts to betrayal of socialism and service to reaction. 
 The revolutionary-democratic dic-tatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry is unquestion-ably only a transient, temporary socialist aim, but to ignorethis aim in the period of a democratic revolution wouldbe downright reactionary. 
 Concrete political aims must be set in concrete circum-stances. 
 All things are relative, all things flow, and all thingschange. 
 German Social-Democracy does not put into itsprogramme the demand for a republic. 
 The situation inGermany is such that this question can in practice hardlybe separated from that of socialism (although with regard to Germany too, Engels in his comments on the draft of the Erfurt Programme in 1891 warned against belittling theimportance of a republic and of the struggle for a republic!). 
 33 In Russian Social-Democracy the question of eliminating thedemand for a republic from its programme and its agitationhas never even arisen, for in our country there can be no talk of an indissoluble link between the question of a republic and that of socialism. 
 It was quite natural for a GermanSocial-Democrat of 1898 not to place special emphasis onthe question of a republic, and this evokes neither surprisenor condemnation. 
 But in 1848 a German Social-Democratwho would have relegated to the background the question of a republic would have been a downright traitor to the revolution. 
 There is no such thing as abstract truth. 
 Truthis always concrete. 
 The time will come when the struggle against the Russian autocracy will end, and the period of democratic revolutionwill have passed in Russia; it will then be ridiculous even to speak of “singleness of will” of the proletariat and the peasantry, about a democratic dictatorship, etc. 
 When thattime comes we shall deal directly with the question of thesocialist dictatorship of the proletariat and speak of it ingreater detail. 
 At present the party of the advanced classcannot but strive most energetically for the democratic revolution’s decisive victory over tsarism. 
 And a decisive victory means nothing else than the revolutionary-democraticdictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry. 
 N o t e 34 1) We would remind the reader that in the polemic between Iskra and Vperyod , the former referred, among other things, to Engels’s letter to Turati, in which Engels warnedthe (future) leader of the Italian reformists against con-fusing the democratic revolution with the socialist. 
 35 The impending revolution in Italy, Engels wrote about the polit-ical situation in Italy in 1894, would be a petty-bourgeois, democratic and not a socialist revolution. 
 Iskra reproached Vperyod with having departed from the principle laid down by Engels. 
 This reproach was unjustified, because, on thewhole, Vperyod (No. 
 14) * fully acknowledged the correctness of Marx’s theory of the distinction between the three mainforces in nineteenth-century revolutions. 
 According to this theory, the following forces take a stand against the old order, against the autocracy, feudalism, and the serf-owningsystem: 1) the liberal big bourgeoisie, 2) the radical pettybourgeoisie, 3) the proletariat. 
 The first fights for nothingmore than a constitutional monarchy; the second, for ademocratic republic; the third, for a socialist revolution. 
 To confuse the petty bourgeoisie’s struggle for a complete demo-cratic revolution with the proletariat’s struggle for a socialistrevolution threatens the socialist with political bankruptcy. 
Marx’s warning to this effect is quite justified. 
 It is,however, precisely for this very reason that the slogan of“revolutionary communes” is erroneous, because the very mistake made by the communes known to history was that of confusing the democratic revolution with the socialist revo-lution. 
 On the other hand, our slogan—a revolutionary dem-ocratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry—fully safeguards us against this mistake. 
 While recognisingthe incontestably bourgeois nature of a revolution incapable of directly overstepping the bounds of a mere democratic revolution our slogan advances this particular revolution and strives to give it forms most advantageous to the proletariat;consequently, it strives to make the utmost of the democraticrevolution in order to attain the greatest success in theproletariat’s further struggle for socialism. 
 *“Social-Democracy and the Provisional Revolutionary Govern-ment”, 1905. 
 See present edition, Vol. 
 8, pp. 
 275-92. 
— Ed. 
 11. 
 A CURSORY COMPARISON BETWEEN SEVERAL OF THE RESOLUTIONS OF THE THIRD CONGRESS OF THE R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 AND THOSE OF THE “CONFERENCE” The question of the provisional revolutionary govern-ment is at present the pivotal tactical question of the Social-Democratic movement. 
 It is neither possible nor necessaryto dwell in similar detail on the other resolutions of the Con-ference. 
 We shall confine ourselves merely to referring briefly to several points which confirm the difference in principle,analysed above, between the tactical trend in the resolutionsof the Third Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 and that in theConference resolutions. 
 Take the question of the attitude towards the government’s tactics on the eve of revolution. 
 Once again you will find a comprehensive answer to this question in a resolution ofthe Third Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 This resolution takesinto account all the multifarious conditions and tasks ofthe particular moment: exposure of the hypocrisy of the gov-ernment’s concessions; utilisation of “travesties of popular representation”; the revolutionary realisation of the working class’s urgent demands (the principal one being the eight-hour working day), and, finally, resistance to the BlackHundreds. 
 In the Conference resolutions this question isdealt with piecemeal in several sections: “resistance to theevil forces of reaction” is mentioned only in the preamble to the resolution on the attitude towards other parties. 
 Par-ticipation in elections to representative bodies is consideredapart from tsarism’s “compromises” with the bourgeoisie. 
Instead of calling for the achievement of an eight-hourworking day by revolutionary means a special resolution withthe pretentious title “On the Economic Struggle” merely repeats (after high-flown and very stupid phrases about “the central place occupied by the labour question in Russianpublic life”) the old slogan of campaigning for “the leg-islative institution of an eight-hour day”. 
 The inadequacyand the belatedness of this slogan at the present time aretoo obvious to require proof. 
 The question of open political action. 
 The Third Congress takes into consideration the impending radical change in our activities. 
 Secret activities and the development of the underground organisation must on no account be aban-doned: this would be playing into the hands of the police and be of the utmost advantage to the government. 
 But at the same time we must give thought to open action as well. 
Expedient forms of such action and, consequently, specialbodies—less secret—must be prepared immediately for this purpose. 
 Legal and semi-legal associations must be made useof with a view to transforming them, as far as possible, into bases for the future open Social-Democratic Labour Party in Russia. 
 Here, too, the Conference splits up the issue and fails to bring forward any integral slogans. 
 What strikes theeye is the ridiculous instruction to the Organising Committeeto see to the “placement” of legally functioning publicists. 
 Then there is the totally absurd decision “to subordinate to our influence the democratic newspapers that set themselvesthe aim of rendering assistance to the working-class move-ment”. 
 This is the professed aim of all our legal liberalnewspapers, nearly all of which are of the Osvobozhdeniye trend. 
 Why should not the Iskra Editorial Board themselves make a start in carrying out their advice and give us an example of how to subordinate Osvobozhdeniye to Social-Democratic influence? Instead of the slogan of utilisinglegally existing associations so as to establish bases for theParty , we are given, first, a particular piece of advice about “trade” unions only (Party members must be active in them), and, secondly, advice to guide “the revolutionary organisa-tions of the workers” =“unofficially constituted organi-sations” =“revolutionary workers’ clubs”. 
 How these “clubs” have come to be classed as unofficially constituted organi-sations, and what these “clubs” really are—goodness onlyknows. 
 Instead of definite and clear instructions from a supreme Party body we have some thoughts jotted down at random and some rough drafts made by men of letters. 
 There isno complete picture of the beginning of the Party’s transitionto an entirely new basis in all its work. 
 The “peasant question” was presented in entirely differ-ent ways by the Party Congress and the Conference. 
 The Congress drew up a resolution on the “attitude to the peasant movement~; the Conference—on “work among the peas-ants”. 
 In the one case prominence is given to the task of guiding the entire revolutionary-democratic movement in the general national interests of the struggle against tsarism. 
 In the other case the question is reduced to mere “work” among a particular section of society. 
 In the one case acentral practical slogan for our agitation is advanced callingfor the immediate organisation of revolutionary peasantcommittees in order to carry out all democratic changes. 
In the other, a “demand for the organisation of committees” is to be presented to a constituent assembly. 
 Why should we wait for this constituent assembly? Will it really be consti-tuent? Will it be stable without the preliminary and simul-taneous establishment of revolutionary peasant committees?The Conference has lost sight of all these questions. 
 Itsdecisions all reflect the general idea which we have been following up—namely, that in the bourgeois revolution we must do only our own special work, without pursuing theaim of guiding the entire democratic movement, and ofconducting that movement independently. 
 Just as the Econo-mists were constantly falling into the fallacy that the econom-ic struggle is for the Social-Democrats, while the political struggle is for the liberals, so the new-Iskra supporters, in all their reasonings, keep falling into the idea that we shouldmodestly sit in a corner out of the way of the bourgeoisrevolution, with the bourgeoisie doing the active work ofcarrying out the revolution. 
 Finally, note must also be taken of the resolution on the attitude towards other parties. 
 The resolution of the Third Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 speaks of exposing all limited-ness and inadequacy in the bourgeois movement foremancipation, without entertaining the naïve idea of enumer-ating, from congress to congress, every possible instanceof such limitedness, or of drawing a line of distinction between bad bourgeois and good bourgeois. 
 Repeating the mistake made by Starover the Conference persistently searchedfor that line and developed the famous “litmus-paper”theory. 
 Starover proceeded from a very good idea—that ofpresenting the severest possible conditions to the bourgeoisie. 
Only he forgot that any attempt to separate in advance bourgeois democrats that deserve approval, agreements, etc. 
, from those that do not deserve them leads to a “formula”which is immediately scrapped by developments and intro-duces confusion into proletarian class-consciousness. 
 From real unity in the struggle the emphasis is shifted to declar-ations, promises, and slogans. 
 Starover held that “universal and equal suffrage, direct elections and the secret ballot”was such a radical slogan. 
 Hardly had two years elapsedwhen the “litmus-paper” proved its uselessness and the sloganof universal suffrage was taken over by the Osvobozhdeniye group, who thereby not only came no closer to Social-Democracy, but, on the contrary, tried by means of that very slogan to mislead the workers and divert them from socialism. 
 Now the new-Iskrists are presenting “conditions” that are even “severer”. 
 They are “demanding” from the enemiesof tsarism “energetic and unequivocal [!?] support of everydetermined action by the organised proletariat”, etc. 
, up to, and including, “active participation in the self-arming of the people”. 
 The line has been carried much further—but never-theless this line is again already obsolete , at once revealing its uselessness. 
 Why, for instance, is there no slogan for arepublic? How is it that the Social-Democrats—in theinterests of “relentless revolutionary war against all the foundations of the system of social estates and the monarchy” —“demand” from the bourgeois democrats anything youlike except the struggle for a republic? That this question is not mere captiousness, that the new-Iskrists’ mistake is of vital political significance is provedby the Russian Liberation Union (see Proletary , No. 
 4). 
 * These “enemies of tsarism” will meet in full all the “require-ments” of the new-Iskra supporters. 
 And yet we have shown that the Osvobozhdeniye spirit reigns in the programme (or lack of programme) of this Russian Liberation Union,and that the Osvobozhdeniye group can easily take it in tow. 
 However, in the concluding section of the resolution the *Proletary , No. 
 4, which appeared on June 4, 1905, contained a lengthy article entitled “A New Revolutionary Workers’ Associa-tion”, (see present, edition, Vol. 
 8, pp. 
 499-510. 
— Ed. 
). 
 The article gives the contents of the appeals issued by this union, whichassumed the name of the “Russian Liberation Union” and set itselfthe aim of convening a constituent assembly with the aid of an insurrection. 
 Further, the article defines the attitude of Social-Democrats to such non-party unions. 
 In what measure this union reallyexisted and what its fate was in the revolution is absolutely unknownto us. 
 (Author’s note to the 1907 edition. 
— Ed. 
) Conference declares that “Social-Democracy will continue to oppose, as hypocritical friends of the people , all those political parties which, though they display a liberal and democratic banner, refuse to render genuine support to the revolution-ary struggle of the proletariat”. 
 The Russian LiberationUnion not only does not withhold this support, but offersit most insistently. 
 Is that a guarantee that the leaders ofthis union are not “hypocritical friends of the people”, even though they are “liberationists”. 
 You see: by inventing “conditions” in advance, and pre-senting “demands” that are ludicrous by reason of theirredoubtable impotence, the new-Iskrists immediately putthemselves in a ridiculous position. 
 Their conditions anddemands immediately prove inadequate when it comes to an appraisal of living realities. 
 Their chase after formulas is hopeless, for no formula can embrace all the variousmanifestations of hypocrisy, inconsistency, and narrow-mindedness displayed by the bourgeois democrats. 
 It is not aquestion of “litmus-paper”, forms, or written and printeddemands, nor is it a question of drawing, in advance, a line of distinction between hypocritical and sincere “friends of the people”; it is a question of real unity in the struggle, ofthe Social-Democrats unabatingly criticising every “uncer-tain” step taken by bourgeois democracy. 
 What is needed for“genuine consolidation of all the social forces interestedin democratic change” is not the “points” over which the Conference laboured so assiduously and so vainly, but the ability to put forward genuinely revolutionary slogans. 
 Forthis slogans are needed that will raise the revolutionary andrepublican bourgeoisie to the level of the proletariat, andnot lower the aims of the proletariat to the level of themonarchist bourgeoisie. 
 What is needed for this is the most energetic participation in the insurrection, not sophistical evasion of the urgent task of an insurrection. 
 12. 
 WILL THE SWEEP OF THE DEMOCRATIC REVOLUTION BE DIMINISHED IF THE BOURGEOISIE RECOILS IT? The foregoing lines were already written when a copy came to hand of the resolutions adopted by the Caucasian Confer-ence of the new-Iskrists, and published by Iskra . 
 Even if we tried we could not invent anything better pour la bonne bouche (as a titbit). 
 The editors of Iskra remark with full justice: “On the fundamental question of tactics the Caucasian Conference alsoarrived at a decision analogous ” (in truth!) “to that adopted by the All-Russia Conference” (i. 
e. 
, of the new-Iskra group). 
 “The question of Social-Democracy’s attitude towards a pro-visional revolutionary government has been settled by the Caucasian Comrades in the spirit of most outspoken oppo-sition to the new method advocated by the Vperyod group and the delegates of the so-called Congress who joined it. 
” “Itmust be admitted that the formulation of the proletarianparty’s tactics in a bourgeois revolution, as given by theConference, is most apt . 
” What is true is true. 
 No one could have given a more “apt” formulation of the fundamental error of the new-Iskra group. 
 We shall quote this formulation in full, first mentioningparenthetically the blossoms, and then, at the end, the fruit. 
 Here is the resolution on a provisional government adopted by the Caucasian Conference of new-Iskra supporters: “Whereas we consider it to be our task to take advantage of the revolutionary situation so as to deepen [of course!They should have added: “ à la Martynov!”] Social-Democratic consciousness in the proletariat [only to render the con-sciousness more profound, and not to win a republic? Whata “profound” conception of revolution!] and in order to secure for the Party complete freedom to criticise the nascent bour-geois-state system [it is not our business to secure a republic!Our business is only to secure freedom of criticism. 
 Anarch-ist ideas engender anarchist language: “bourgeois-state”system!], the Conference declares itself against the formationof a Social-Democratic provisional government, and entering such a government [recall the resolution passed by the Bakuninists ten months before the Spanish revolution andreferred to by Engels: see Proletary , No. 
 3] 36, and considers it to be the most expedient course to exercise pressure fromwithout [from below and not from above] upon the bourgeoisprovisional government in order to secure a feasible measure [!?] of democratisation of the state system. 
 The Conference believes that the formation of a provisional governmentby Social-Democrats, or their entering such a government would lead, on the one hand, to the masses of the proletariat becoming disappointed in the Social-Democratic Party and abandoning it, because the Social-Democrats, despite the sei-zure of power, would not be able to satisfy the pressing needsof the working class, including the establishment of social-ism [a republic is not a pressing need! The authors in theirinnocence do not notice that they are speaking purely anarch-ist language, as if they were repudiating participation in bourgeois revolutions!], and, on the other hand, w o u l d c a u s e t h e b o u r g e o i s c l a s s e s t o r e c o i lf r o m t h e r e v o l u t i o n a n d t h u s d i m i n i s hi t s s w e e p . 
” That is the crux of the matter. 
 That is where anarchist ideas become interwoven (as is constantly the case among the West-European Bernsteinians too) with the sheerest opportunism. 
 Just imagine: these people will not entera provisional government because that would cause thebourgeoisie to recoil from the revolution, thereby di-minishing the sweep of the revolution! Here, indeed, wehave the new-Iskra philosophy as a whole, in a pure and con-sistent form: since the revolution is a bourgeois revolution, we must bow to bourgeois philistinism and make way forit. 
 If we are even in part, even for a moment, guided by theconsideration that our participation may cause the bourgeoisieto recoil, we thereby simply hand over leadership of therevolution entirely to the bourgeois classes. 
 We thereby place the proletariat entirely under the tutelage of the bourgeoisie (while retaining complete “freedom of criticism”!!)compelling the proletariat to be moderate and meek, sothat the bourgeoisie should not recoil. 
 We emasculate themost vital needs of the proletariat, namely, its politicalneeds—which the Economists and their imitators have never properly understood—so as not to make the bourgeoisie recoil. 
 We go over completely from the platform ofrevolutionary struggle for the achievement of democracyto the extent required by the proletariat, to a platform ofchaffering with the bourgeoisie, buying the bourgeoisie’svoluntary consent (“so that it should not recoil”) at the price of our principles, by betraying the revolution. 
 In two short lines, the Caucasian new-Iskrists managed to express the gist of the tactic of betraying revolution and converting the proletariat into a wretched appendage of the bourgeois classes. 
 That which we deduced above from the errors of the new-Iskra tendency we now see elevated to a clear and definite principle, viz. 
, following in the wakeof the monarchist bourgeoisie. 
 Since the establishment ofa republic would make the bourgeoisie recoil (and is alreadydoing so—Mr. 
 Struve is an example), down with the fightfor a republic. 
 Since every energetic and consistent democrat-ic demand on the part of the proletariat makes the bour-geoisie recoil, always and everywhere in the world—hide inyour lairs, working-men; act only from without; do notdream of using, in the interests of the revolution, the instru-ments and weapons of the “bourgeois-state” system; reservefor yourselves “freedom of criticism”! The fundamental fallacy in their very conception of the term “bourgeois revolution” has come to the surface. 
 TheMartynov or new-Iskra “conception” of this term leads directly to the proletariat’s cause being betrayed to thebourgeoisie. 
 Those who have forgotten the old Economism and do not study or remember it will find it difficult to under-stand the present resurgence of Economism. 
 Call to mindthe Bernsteinian Credo . 
 37 From “purely proletarian” views and programmes its authors drew the following conclusion:we Social-Democrats must concern ourselves with economics,with the real working-class cause, with freedom to criti-cise all political chicanery, with really rendering Social-Democratic work more profound. 
 Politics are for theliberals. 
 God save us from falling into “revolutionism”: thatwill make the bourgeoisie recoil. 
 Those who will re-readthe whole Credo or the Separate Supplement to No. 
 9 of Rabochaya Mysl (September 1899) 38 will discern the entire course of this reasoning. 
 Today we have the same thing, only on a large scale, applied to an appraisal of the whole of the “great” Russianrevolution—alas, vulgarised and reduced in advance to atravesty by the theoreticians of orthodox philistinism! WeSocial-Democrats must concern ourselves with freedom of criticism, with making class-consciousness more profound, with action from without. 
 They, the bourgeois classes,must have freedom to act, a free field for revolutionary (read: liberal) leadership, freedom to effect “reforms” from above. 
 These vulgarisers of Marxism have-never given thought to what Marx said about the need to replace the weapon ofcriticism by the criticism of weapons. 
 39 Taking the name of Marx in vain they, in actual fact, draw up resolutions ontactics wholly in the spirit of the Frankfort bourgeoiswindbags, who freely criticised absolutism and deepened democratic consciousness, but failed to understand that a time of revolution is a time of action, of action from bothabove and below. 
 By turning Marxism into sophistry theyhave turned the ideology of the advanced, the most deter-mined, and energetic revolutionary class into an ideology ofits most backward strata, of those who shrink from difficult revolutionary-democratic tasks, and leave them to Messrs. 
 the Struves to take care of. 
 If the bourgeois classes recoil from revolution because Social-Democrats enter a revolutionary government theywill thereby “diminish the sweep” of the revolution. 
 Listen to that, Russian workers: the sweep of the revolution will be the mightier if it is effected by the Struves, who are not scared of the Social-Democrats, and do not wantvictory over tsarism, but want to come to terms with it. 
The sweep of the revolution will be mightier if the first ofthe two possible outcomes outlined above eventuates, i. 
e. 
,if the monarchist bourgeoisie comes to terms with the autocracy on a “constitution” à la Shipov! Social-Democrats, who write such disgraceful things in resolutions for the guidance of the whole Party, or whoapprove of such “apt” resolutions, are so blinded by sophistry,which has utterly driven the living spirit out of Marxism,that they fail to notice that these resolutions turn all their other fine words into empty phrases. 
 Take any of their articles in Iskra , or even the notorious pamphlet written by our notorious Martynov—there you will read about a popular insurrection, about carrying the revolution to completion , about striving to rely upon the common people in the struggle against the inconsistent bourgeoisie. 
 However, all these excellent things become miserable phrases as soon as you accept or approve the idea that “the sweep of the revolution”will be “diminished” as a consequence of the bourgeoisie’s alienation. 
 These are the alternatives, gentlemen: either we, together with the people, must strive to carry out the revolution and win complete victory over tsarism despite the inconsistent, self-seeking, and cowardly bourgeoisie, orelse we do not accept this “despite”, and are afraid that thebourgeoisie may “recoil” from the revolution; in the secondcase we are betraying the proletariat and the people to thebourgeoisie—the inconsistent, self-seeking, and cowardly bourgeoisie. 
 Don’t take it into your heads to misinterpret my words. 
 Don’t shrill that you are being accused of deliberate treach-ery. 
 No, you have always crawled towards the marsh,and have at last crawled into it, just as unconsciously as theEconomists of old, who were irresistibly and irrevocably drawn down the inclined plane of “deeper” Marxism, until it at last became an anti-revolutionary, soulless, and life-less intellectual pose. 
 Have you, gentlemen, ever given thought to real social forces that determine “the sweep of the revolution”? Letus disregard the foreign political forces, the international combinations, which have developed very favourably for us at the present time, but which we all leave out of the dis-cussion, and rightly so, inasmuch as we are concerned withthe question of Russia’s internal forces. 
 Examine theseinternal social forces. 
 Aligned against the revolution arethe autocracy, the imperial court, the police, the bureaucra-cy, the army, and a handful of the aristocracy. 
 The deeper the indignation of the people grows, the less reliable thetroops become, and the more the bureaucracy wavers. 
 More-over, the bourgeoisie, on the whole, is now in favour ofrevolution, zealously speechifying about liberty and holdingforth more and more frequently in the name of the people and even in the name of the revolution. 
 * But we Marxists all know from theory and from daily and hourly observationof our liberals, Zemstvo people, and Osvobozhdeniye support-ers that the bourgeoisie is inconsistent, self-seeking, andcowardly in its support of the revolution. 
 The bourgeoisie,in the mass, will inevitably turn towards counter-revolution, *Of interest in this connection is Mr. 
 Struve’s open letter to Jaurès recently published by the latter in l’Humanité40 and by Mr. 
 Struve in Osvobozhdeniye , No. 
 72. 
 towards the autocracy, against the revolution, and against the people, as soon as its narrow, selfish interests are met, as soon as it “recoils” from consistent democracy (and it is already recoiling from it! ). 
 There remains the “people”, that is, the proletariat and the peasantry: the prole-tariat alone can be relied on to march on to the end, for itgoes far beyond the democratic revolution. 
 That is whythe proletariat fights in the forefront for a republic and con-temptuously rejects stupid and unworthy advice to take into account the possibility of the bourgeoisie recoiling. 
 The peas-antry includes a great number of semi-proletarian as wellas petty-bourgeois elements. 
 This makes it also unstable,compelling the proletariat to rally in a strictly class party. 
However, the instability of the peasantry differs radically from that of the bourgeoisie, for at present the peasantry is interested not so much in the absolute preservation of pri-vate property as in the confiscation of the landed estates, oneof the principal forms of private property. 
 Without therebybecoming socialist, or ceasing to be petty-bourgeois, thepeasantry is capable of becoming a wholehearted and most radical adherent of the democratic revolution. 
 The peasantry will inevitably become such if only the course of revo-lutionary events, which brings it enlightenment, is notprematurely cut short by the treachery of the bourgeoisieand the defeat of the proletariat. 
 Subject to this conditionthe peasantry will inevitably become a bulwark of the revo-lution and the republic, for only a completely victorious revolution can give the peasantry everything in the sphere of agrarian reforms— everything that the peasants desire, dream of, and truly need (not for the abolition of capitalismas the “Socialist-Revolutionaries” imagine, but) in order toemerge from the mire of semi-serfdom, from the gloom of oppression and servitude, in order to improve their living conditions, as much as they can be improved within thesystem of commodity production. 
 Moreover, it is not only by the prospect of radical agrarian reform that the peasantry is attached to the revolution, butby all its general and permanent interests as well. 
 Even when fighting with the proletariat, the peasantry stands in need of democracy, for only a democratic system is capableof accurately expressing its interests and ensuring its pre-dominance as a mass, as the majority. 
 The more enlightened the peasantry becomes (and since the war with Japan it is becoming enlightened at a pace unsuspected by many who are accustomed to measure enlightenment with the schoolyardstick), the more consistently and resolutely will it standfor a thoroughgoing democratic revolution; for, unlike thebourgeoisie, it has nothing to fear from the people’s suprema-cy, but on the contrary stands to gain by it. 
 A democratic republic will become the peasantry’s ideal as soon as it begins to throw off its naïve monarchism, because the consciousmonarchism of the bourgeois stockjobbers (with an upperchamber, etc. 
) implies for the peasantry the same absenceof rights and the same oppression and ignorance as it sufferstoday, only slightly polished over with the varnish of European constitutionalism. 
 That is why, as a class, the bourgeoisie naturally and inev-itably tends to come under the wing of the liberal-monarch-ist party, while the peasantry, in the mass, tends to comeunder the leadership of the revolutionary and republicanparty. 
 That is why the bourgeoisie is incapable of carrying through the democratic revolution to its consummation, while the peasantry is capable of doing so, and we mustexert all our efforts to help it do so. 
 The objection may be raised that this goes without saying, is all ABC, something that all Social-Democrats understandperfectly well. 
 No, that is not the case; it is not understood by those who can talk about “the diminishing sweep” of the revolution as a consequence of the bourgeoisie falling awayfrom it. 
 Such people repeat the words of our agrarian pro-gramme, which they have learned by rote without understand-ing their meaning, for otherwise they would not be fright-ened by the concept of the revolutionary-democratic dicta-torship of the proletariat and the peasantry, which inevitably follows from the entire Marxist world outlook and fromour programme; otherwise they would not restrict the sweepof the great Russian revolution to the limits to which thebourgeoisie is prepared to go. 
 Such people defeat theirabstract Marxist revolutionary phrases by their concrete anti-Marxist and anti-revolutionary resolutions. 
 Those who really understand the role of the peasantry in a victorious Russian revolution would not dream of saying that the sweep of the revolution will be diminished if the bourgeoisie recoils from it. 
 For, in actual fact, the Russian revolution will begin to assume its real sweep, and will really assume the widest revolutionary sweep possible in the epochof bourgeois-democratic revolution, only when the bourgeoi-sie recoils from it and when the masses of the peasantry comeout as active revolutionaries side by side with the proletariat. 
To be consistently carried through to the end, our democratic revolution must rely on forces capable of paralysing the inevitable inconsistency of the bourgeoisie (i. 
e. 
, capableprecisely of “making it recoil from the revolution”, which theCaucasian adherents of Iskra fear so much because of their thoughtlessness). 
 The proletariat must carry the democratic revolution to completion , allying to itself the mass of the peasantry in order to crush the autocracy ’s resistance by force and paralyse the bourgeoisie ’s instability. 
 The proletariat must accomplish the socialist revolution, allying to itself the mass of the semi-proletarian elements of the population, so as to crush thebourgeoisie ’s resistance by force and paralyse the instability of the peasantry and the petty bourgeoisie. 
 Such are the tasks of the proletariat, so narrowly presented by the new-Iskra group in all their arguments and resolutions on the sweep ofthe revolution. 
 One circumstance, however, should not be forgotten, one that is frequently lost sight of in discussions about the “sweep” of the revolution. 
 It should not be forgotten that it is not a question of the difficulties presented by this problem, but theway in which its solution is to be sought and attained. 
 It isnot a question of whether it is easy or difficult to render thesweep of the revolution mighty and invincible, but of how toact so as to make that sweep more powerful. 
 It is on the funda-mental nature of our activities, the direction they should follow, that our views differ. 
 We emphasise this because inat-tentive and unscrupulous people only too frequently confusetwo different problems, viz. 
, that of the direction to befollowed, i. 
e. 
, the choice of one of two different roads, andthat of the ease of attaining our goal, or the nearness of its attainment along a given road. 
 In the foregoing we have not dealt with this last problem at all because it has not evoked any disagreement or differ-Page 157 of Lenin’s manuscript Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution . 
 1905 Reduced /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR ences in the Party. 
 The problem itself is, of course, extremely important and deserving of the most serious attention from all Social-Democrats. 
 It would be unforgivable optimism to forget the difficulties involved in drawing into the move-ment the masses not only of the working class, but also of thepeasantry. 
 These difficulties have more than once wreckedefforts to carry through a democratic revolution to completion,the inconsistent and self-seeking bourgeoisie triumphing most of all, because it has “made capital” in the shape of monarchist protection against the people, at the same time“preserving the virginity” of liberalism ... or of the Osvobozh-deniye trend. 
 However, difficulty does not imply impossi-bility. 
 The important thing is to be confident that the pathchosen is the right one, this confidence multiplying a hundred-fold revolutionary energy and revolutionary enthusiasm, which can perform miracles. 
 The depth of the rift among present-day Social-Democrats on the question of the path to be chosen can at once be seen bycomparing the Caucasian resolution of the new-Iskra support-ers with the resolution of the Third Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party. 
 The Congress resolution says: the bourgeoisie is inconsistent and will without fail tryto deprive us of the gains of the revolution. 
 Therefore, makemore energetic preparations for the fight, comrades and work-ers! Arm yourselves, win the peasantry over to your side!We shall not, without a struggle, surrender our revolutionary gains to the self-seeking bourgeoisie. 
 The resolution of the Caucasian new-Iskra supporters says: the bourgeoisie is inconsistent and may recoil from the revolution. 
 Therefore,comrades and workers, please do not think of joining aprovisional government, for, if you do, the bourgeoisie willcertainly recoil, and the sweep of the revolution will thereby be diminished! One side says: advance the revolution to its consummation despite resistance or passivity on the part of the inconsistentbourgeoisie. 
 The other side says: do not think of independently advanc-ing the revolution to completion, for if you do, the incon-sistent bourgeoisie will recoil from it. 
 Are these not two diametrically opposite paths? Is it not obvious that one set of tactics absolutely excludes the other, that the first tactics is the only correct tactics of revolution-ary Social-Democracy, while the second is in fact purely Osvobozhdeniye tactics? 13. 
 CONCLUSION. 
 DARE WE WIN? People who are superficially acquainted with the state of affairs in Russian Social-Democracy, or who judge as mere onlookers, with no knowledge of the whole history of our inner-Party struggle since the days of Economism, very oftendismiss the disagreements on tactics which have now takenshape, especially after the Third Congress, with the simpleargument that there are two natural, inevitable, and quitereconcilable trends in every Social-Democratic movement. 
 One side, they say, lays special emphasis on the ordinary, current, and everyday work, on the necessity of developingpropaganda and agitation, of preparing forces, deepeningthe movement, etc. 
, while the other side lays emphasison the militant, general political, revolutionary tasksof the movement, points to the necessity of insurrection, and advances the slogans of a revolutionary democratic dictator-ship, and a provisional revolutionary government. 
 Neitherside should exaggerate, they say; extremes are bad in bothcases (and, generally speaking, everywhere in the world),etc. 
, etc. 
 The cheap truism of the pedestrian (and “political” in quo-tation marks) wisdom undoubtedly contained in such argu-ments, too often conceals an inability to understand the urgentand acute needs of the Party. 
 Take the present-day tacticaldifferences among Russian Social-Democrats. 
 Of course,the special emphasis on the everyday, routine aspect of thework, such as we see in the new-Iskra arguments about tac-tics, could not of itself present any danger or give rise to any divergence of opinion regarding tactical slogans. 
 But it issufficient to compare the resolutions of the Third Congressof the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party with the Con-ference resolutions for this divergence to become striking. 
 What, then, is the trouble? In the first place, it is not enough to speak in the abstract of two currents in the move-ment, and of the harmfulness of extremes. 
 One must knowconcretely what ails a given movement at a given time, and what constitutes the real political danger to the Party at the present time. 
 Secondly, one must know what real political forces profit by the tactical slogans advanced—or perhaps by the absence of certain slogans. 
 If one were to listen to thenew-Iskrists one would arrive at the conclusion that theSocial-Democratic Party is threatened with the danger ofthrowing overboard propaganda and agitation, the economicstruggle, and criticism of bourgeois democracy, the danger of becoming inordinately absorbed in military preparations, armed attacks, the seizure of power, etc. 
 Actually, however,real danger is threatening the Party from an entirely differentquarter. 
 Anyone who is at all familiar with the state of themovement, anyone who follows it carefully and thoughtfully,cannot fail to see the ridiculous aspect of the new-Iskrists’ fears. 
 The entire work of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party has already taken definite and unvarying shape,which absolutely guarantees that our main attention will befixed on propaganda and agitation, extemporaneous and massmeetings, the distribution of leaflets and pamphlets, assist-ing in the economic struggle and championing the slogans of that struggle. 
 There is not a single Party committee, not a single district committee, not a single central delegates’meeting or a single factory group where ninety-nine per centof all the attention, energy, and time is not always and in-variably devoted to these functions, which have become firmlyestablished ever since the middle of the nineties. 
 Only those who are entirely unfamiliar with the movement do not know that. 
 Only very naïve or ill-informed people will ac-cept new Iskra ’s repetition of stale truths at their face value, when that is done with an air of great importance. 
 The fact is that, far from displaying excessive zeal with regard to the tasks of insurrection, to general political slogans and to giving leadership to the entire popular revolution, we, on the contrary, display a most striking backwardness in this very respect, a backwardness which constitutesour greatest weakness and is a real danger to the movement,which may degenerate, and in some places is degenerating,from one that is revolutionary in deed into one that is revo-lutionary in word. 
 Among the many, many hundreds of or-ganisations, groups, and circles that are conducting the workof the Party you will not find one which has not, since its very inception, conducted the kind of day-by-day work the new-Iskra wiseacres now talk of with the air of people who have discovered new truths. 
 On the other hand, you will find only an insignificant percentage of groups and circlesthat have understood the tasks an insurrection entails, havebegun to carry them out, and have realised the necessityof leading the entire popular revolution against tsarism, thenecessity of advancing certain definite progressive slogans and no other, for that purpose. 
 We have incredibly fallen behind our progressive and genuinely revolutionary tasks; in very many instances wehave not even become aware of them; here and there wehave failed to notice that revolutionary bourgeois democracyhas gained strength owing to our backwardness in this respect. 
 But, with their backs turned to the course of events and the requirements of the times, the new-Iskra writers keep insistently repeating: “Don’t forget the old! Don’t let your-selves be carried away by the new!” This is the unvaryingleit-motiv in all the important resolutions of the Conference; whereas in the Congress resolutions you just as unvaryingly read: while confirming the old (but not stopping to masticate it over and over again precisely because it is old and hasalready been settled and recorded in literature, in resolutionsand by experience), we bring forward a new task, draw atten-tion to it, issue a new slogan, and demand that genuinelyrevolutionary Social-Democrats immediately set to work to put it into effect. 
 That is how matters really stand with regard to the question of the two trends in Social-Democratic tactics. 
 Therevolutionary period has presented new tasks, which only thetotally blind can fail to see. 
 Some Social-Democrats unhesi-tatingly recognise these tasks and place them on the order of the day, declaring: the armed uprising brooks no delay; prepare yourselves for it immediately and energetically;remember that it is indispensable for a decisive victory;bring forward slogans for a republic, for a provisional govern-ment, for a revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the pro-letariat and the peasantry. 
 Other Social-Democrats, however, draw back, mark time, write prefaces instead of giving slogans; instead of seeing what is new, while confirmingwhat is old, they masticate the latter tediously and at great length, inventing pretexts to avoid the new, unable to determine the conditions for a decisive victory or to bring forward slogans which alone are in line with a striving to achieve full victory. 
 The political outcome of this tail-ism stares us in the face. 
 The fable about a rapprochement between the “majority” of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party and revolution-ary bourgeois democracy remains a fable unconfirmed by a single political fact, by a single important resolution of the “Bolsheviks” or a single document of the Third Congressof the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party. 
 On the otherhand, the opportunist, monarchist bourgeoisie, as represent-ed by the Osvobozhdeniye , has long been welcoming the trends in the “principles” advocated by the new-Iskra group, and is now actually using their stream to drive its ~ill and is adopting their catchwords and “ideas”, which are directedagainst “secrecy” and “riots”, against exaggerating the “tech-nical” aspect of the revolution, against openly proclaimingthe slogan of insurrection, against the “revolutionism”of extreme demands, etc. 
, etc. 
 The resolution of an entire Conference of “Menshevik” Social-Democrats in the Caucasus and the endorsement of that resolution by the editors of thenew Iskra sums up the whole matter politically in no mis-takable way: what if the bourgeoisie should recoil in case theproletariat takes part in a revolutionary-democratic dic-tatorship! This puts the matter in a nutshell and gives the finishing touches to the proletariat’s transformation into an appendage to the monarchist bourgeoisie. 
 The political significance of the new Iskra ’s tail-ism is thereby proved in fact—not by a casual observation from some individualbut by a resolution especially endorsed by an entire trend. 
 Anyone who gives thought to these facts will understand the real significance of stock references to two sides and two trends in the Social-Democratic movement. 
 For a full-scalestudy of these trends one should take Bernsteinism. 
 In exactlythe same way the Bernsteinians have been dinning into ourears that it is they who understand the proletariat’s true needsand the tasks of building up its forces, the task of deepening all the work, preparing the elements of a new society, and the task of propaganda and agitation. 
 Bernstein says: we demanda frank recognition of that which is, thus sanctifying “move-ment” without any “ultimate aim”, sanctifying defensive tac-tics alone, preaching the tactics of fear “lest the bourgeoisie recoil”. 
 So the Bernsteinians raised an outcry against the “Jacobinism” of the revolutionary Social-Democrats, against“publicists” who fail to understand the “workers’ initiative”,etc. 
, etc. 
 In reality, as everyone knows, revolutionary Social-Democrats have never even thought of abandoning day-by-day, petty work, the mustering of forces, etc. 
, etc. 
 All they demanded was a clear understanding of the ultimate aim, a clear presentation of the revolutionary tasks; theywanted to raise the semi-proletarian and semi-petty-bourgeois strata to the revolutionary level of the proletariat—not to reduce the latter level to that of opportunist consid-erations such as “lest the bourgeoisie recoil”. 
 Perhaps the most vivid expression of this rift between the intellectual oppor-tunist wing and the proletarian revolutionary wing of theParty was the question: dürfen wir siegen? “Dare we win?” Is it permissible for us to win? Would it not be dangerousfor us to win? Ought we to win? This question, so strange atfirst sight, was however raised and had to be raised, because the opportunists were afraid of victory, were frightening the proletariat away from it, predicting that trouble wouldcome of it and ridiculing slogans that straightforwardlycalled for it. 
 The same fundamental division into an intellectual-opportunist and proletarian-revolutionary trend exists among us too, with the very material difference, however, that here we are faced with the question of a democratic, not of a so-cialist revolution. 
 The question “dare we win?”, which seemsso absurd at first sight, has been raised among us as well. 
It has been raised by Martynov in his Two Dictatorships , wherein he prophesies dire misfortune if we prepare well for an insurrection, and carry it out quite successfully. 
 The ques-tion has been raised in all the new-Iskra literature dealing with a provisional revolutionary government, and persist-ent if futile efforts have all the time been made to liken Mil-lerand’s participation in a bourgeois-opportunist governmentto Varlin’s 41 participation in a petty-bourgeois revolution-ary government. 
 It is embodied in the resolution: “lest the bourgeoisie recoil”. 
 And although Kautsky, for instance,now tries to wax ironical and says that our dispute about a provisional revolutionary government is like sharing out the meat before the bear is killed, this irony only proves that even clever and revolutionary Social-Democrats are liable to put their foot in it when they talk about something theyknow of only by hearsay. 
 German Social-Democracy is notyet so near to killing its bear (carrying out a socialist revo-lution), but the dispute as to whether we “dare” kill the bearhas been of enormous importance from the point of view of principles and of practical politics. 
 Russian Social-Demo-crats are not yet so close to being able to “kill their bear”(carry out a democratic revolution), but the question as towhether we “dare” kill it is of extreme importance to thewhole future of Russia and that of Russian Social-Democracy. 
An army cannot be energetically and successfully mustered and led unless we are sure that we “dare” win. 
 Take our old Economists. 
 They, too, clamoured that their opponents were conspirators and Jacobins (see Rabocheye Dyelo , especially No. 
 10, and Martynov’s speech at the Second Congress, in the debate on the programme), that byplunging into politics they were divorcing themselves from the masses, that they were losing sight of the fundamentals of the working-class movement, ignoring the workers’ initia-tive, etc. 
, etc. 
 In reality these supporters of “workers’ initia-tive” were opportunist intellectuals, who tried to foist on theworkers their own narrow and philistine conception of thetasks of the proletariat. 
 In reality the opponents of Econo-mism, as everyone can see from the old Iskra , did not neglect or relegate into the background any of the aspects of Social-Democratic work, nor did they in the least forget the economicstruggle; at the same time they were able to present theurgent and immediate political tasks in their full scope andthus opposed the transformation of the workers’ party into an “economic” appendage to the liberal bourgeoisie. 
 The Economists learned by rote that politics are based on economics and “understood” this to mean that the polit-ical struggle should be reduced to the level of the economicstruggle. 
 The new-Iskrists have learned by rote that in itseconomic essence, the democratic revolution is a bourgeois revolution, and “understand” this to mean that the democratic aims of the proletariat should be lowered to the level ofbourgeois moderation, a level beyond which “the bourgeoisie will recoil”. 
 On the pretext of deepening their work, on the pretext of rousing the workers’ initiative and pursuing a purely class policy, the Economists were actually delivering the working class into the hands of the liberal-bourgeoispoliticians, i. 
e. 
, were leading the Party along a path whoseobjective significance was exactly such. 
 On the samepretexts the new-Iskrists are actually betraying to the bour-geoisie the interests of the proletariat in the democratic revolution, i. 
e. 
, are leading the Party along a path whose objective significance is exactly such. 
 The Economiststhought that leadership in the political struggle was not theconcern of Social-Democrats, but, properly speaking, thatof the liberals. 
 The new-Iskrists think that the activeconduct of the democratic revolution is no concern of the Social-Democrats, but, properly speaking, that of the democratic bourgeoisie, for, they argue, the proletariat’sguidance and pre-eminent part will “diminish the sweep” ofthe revolution. 
 In short, the new-Iskrists are imitators of Economism, not only in having their origin at the Second Party Congress, but also in the manner in which they now present the tacti-cal tasks of the proletariat in the democratic revolution. 
They, too, constitute an intellectual-opportunist wing ofthe Party. 
 In the sphere of organisation they made theirdébut with the anarchist individualism of intellectuals and ended up with “disorganisation-as-process”, establishing in the “Rules” 42 adopted by the Conference the separation of Party publishing activities from the Party organisation, andan indirect and practically four-stage system of elections,a system of Bonapartist plebiscites instead of democraticrepresentation, and finally the principle of “agreements”between the part and the whole. 
 In Party tactics they slid down the same inclined plane. 
 In the “plan of the Zemstvo campaign” they declared that addresses to the Zemstvo-istswere “the highest type of demonstration”, and discernedonly two active forces on the political scene (on the eveof January 9!)—the government and the bourgeois democrats. 
They made the urgent task of arming the people “more pro-found” by replacing a direct and practical slogan with a call to arm the people with a burning desire to arm themselves. 
In their official resolutions they have distorted and emascu-lated the tasks connected with an insurrection, with the establishment of a provisional government, and with a revolutionary-democratic dictatorship. 
 “Lest the bourgeoi-sie recoil”—this final chord of their latest resolution throwsclear light on the question of where their path is leadingthe Party. 
 In its social and economic essence, the democratic rev-olution in Russia is a bourgeois revolution. 
 It is, how-ever, not enough merely to repeat this correct Marxist proposition. 
 It has to be properly understood and properlyapplied to political slogans. 
 In general, all political libertyfounded on present-day, i. 
e. 
, capitalist, relations of pro-duction is bourgeois liberty. 
 The demand for liberty expressesprimarily the interests of the bourgeoisie. 
 Its representa-tives were the first to raise this demand. 
 Its supporters have everywhere used like masters the liberty they acquired,reducing it to moderate and meticulous bourgeois doses,combining it with the most subtle suppression of the revo-lutionary proletariat in peaceful times, and with savagesuppression in times of storm. 
 But only rebel Narodniks, anarchists, and Economists could conclude therefrom that the struggle for liberty shouldbe negated or disparaged. 
 These intellectualist-philistinedoctrines could be foisted on the proletariat only for a timeand against its will. 
 The proletariat has always realised in-stinctively that it needs political liberty, needs it more than anyone else, although the immediate effect of that liberty will be to strengthen and organise the bourgeoisie. 
 It is notby evading the class struggle that the proletariat expectsto find its salvation, but by developing it, by extending itsscope, its consciousness, organisation, and resoluteness. 
Whoever disparages the tasks of the political struggle trans-forms the Social-Democrat from a tribune of the people into a trade union secretary. 
 Whoever disparages the proletariantasks in a democratic bourgeois revolution transforms theSocial-Democrat from a leader of the people’s revolutioninto a leader of a free labour union. 
 Yes, the people ’s revolution. 
 Social-Democracy has fought, and is quite rightly fighting, against the bourgeois-democratic abuse of the word “people”. 
 It demands thatthis word shall not be used to cover up failure to understand class antagonisms within the people. 
 It insists categori-cally on the need for complete class independence for the party of the proletariat. 
 However, it does not divide the “people” into “classes” so that the advanced class will becomelocked up within itself, will confine itself within narrowlimits, and emasculate its activity for fear that the economicrulers of the world will recoil; it does that so that the ad-anced class, which does not suffer from the half-heartedness, vacillation, and indecision of the intermediate classes, should fight with all the greater energy and enthusiasm forthe cause of the whole people, at the head of the wholepeople. 
 That is what the present-day new-Iskrists so often fail to understand, people who substitute for active political slogans in the democratic revolution a mere pedantic repetition of the word “class”, declined in all cases andgenders! The democratic revolution is bourgeois in nature. 
 The slogan of a general redistribution, or “land and freedom”—that most widespread slogan of the peasant masses, downtrod-den and ignorant, yet passionately yearning for light and happiness—is a bourgeois slogan. 
 But we Marxists shouldknow that there is not, nor can there be, any other path to realfreedom for the proletariat and the peasantry, than the pathof bourgeois freedom and bourgeois progress. 
 We must notforget that there is not, nor can there be at the present time, any other means of bringing socialism nearer, than complete political liberty, than a democratic republic, than the revo-lutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and thepeasantry. 
 As representatives of the advanced and only revo-lutionary class, revolutionary without any reservations,doubts, or looking back, we must confront the whole of the people with the tasks of the democratic revolution as exten-sively and boldly as possible and with the utmost initiative. 
To disparage these tasks means making a travesty of theo-retical Marxism, distorting it in philistine fashion, whilein practical politics it means placing the cause of therevolution into the hands of the bourgeoisie, which will inevitably recoil from the task of consistently effecting the revolution. 
 The difficulties that lie on the road to completevictory of the revolution are very great. 
 No one will be able to blame the proletariat’s representatives if, when they have done everything in their power, their efforts are defeated by the resistance of reaction, the treachery of the bourgeoisie, and the ignorance of the masses. 
 But everybody, and, aboveall, the class-conscious proletariat will condemn Social-Democracy if it curtails the revolutionary energy of thedemocratic revolution and dampens revolutionary ardourbecause it is afraid to win, because it is actuated by the consideration: lest the bourgeoisie recoil. 
 Revolutions are the locomotives of history, said Marx. 
 43 Revolutions are festivals of the oppressed and the exploited. 
At no other time are the mass of the people in a position tocome forward so actively as creators of a new social order, asat a time of revolution. 
 At such times the people are capable of performing miracles, if judged by the limited, philistine yardstick of gradualist progress. 
 But it is essential thatleaders of the revolutionary parties, too, should advance theiraims more comprehensively and boldly at such a time, sothat their slogans shall always be in advance of the revolu-tionary initiative of the masses, serve as a beacon, reveal to them our democratic and socialist ideal in all its magnitude and splendour, and show them the shortest and most directroute to complete, absolute, and decisive victory. 
 Let usleave to the opportunists of the Osvobozhdeniye bourgeoisie the task of inventing roundabout, circuitous paths of compro-mise, out of fear of the revolution and of the direct path. 
 If we are forcibly compelled to drag ourselves along such paths we shall be able to fulfil our duty in petty, everydaywork also. 
 But first let the choice of path be decided in ruth-less struggle. 
 We shall be traitors, betrayers of the revolution,if we do not use this festive energy of the masses and theirrevolutionary ardour to wage a ruthless and self-sacrificing struggle for the direct and decisive path. 
 Let the bourgeois opportunists contemplate the future reaction with cravenfear. 
 The workers will not be intimidated either by thethought that reaction intends to be terrible, or that the bour-geoisie proposes to recoil. 
 The workers do not expect tomake deals; they are not asking for petty concessions. 
 What they are striving towards is ruthlessly to crush the reac-tionary forces, i. 
e. 
, to set up a revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry . 
 Of course, in stormy times greater dangers threaten the ship of our Party than in periods of the smooth “sail-ing” of liberal progress, which means the painfully steady sucking of the working class’s life-blood by its exploit-ers. 
 Of course, the tasks of the revolutionary-democraticdictatorship are infinitely more difficult and more complexthan the tasks of an “extreme opposition”, or of an exclusivelyparliamentary struggle. 
 But whoever is consciously capable of preferring smooth sailing and the course of safe “opposition” in the present revolutionary situation hadbetter abandon Social-Democratic work for a while, hadbetter wait until the revolution is over, until the festivedays have passed, when humdrum, everyday life starts again,and his narrow routine standards no longer strike such an abominably discordant note, or constitute such an ugly distortion of the tasks of the advanced class. 
 At the head of the whole people, and particularly of the peasantry—for complete freedom, for a consistent demo-cratic revolution, for a republic! At the head of all the toil-ers and the exploited—for socialism! Such in practice must be the policy of the revolutionary proletariat, such is the class slogan which must permeate and determine the solutionof every tactical problem, every practical step of the work-ers’ party during the revolution. 
 EPILOGUE ONCE AGAIN THE OSVOBOZHDENIYE TREND, ONCE AGAIN THE NEW-ISKRA TREND Osvobozhdeniye , Nos. 
 71-72, and Iskra , Nos. 
 102-103, provide a wealth of additional material on the question dealt with in Chapter 8 of our pamphlet. 
 Since it is quite impossible here to make use of all this rich material we shallconfine ourselves to the most important points only: firstly,the kind of “realism” in Social-Democracy that Osvobozhde-niye praises, and why the latter should praise it; secondly, the relationship between the concepts of revolution and dictatorship. 
 1. 
 WHY DO BOURGEOIS LIBERAL REALISTS PRAISE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC “REALISTS”? Articles entitled “The Split in Russian Social-Democ-racy” and “The Triumph of Common Sense” ( Osvobozhde-niye , No. 
 72) express an opinion on Social-Democracy held by representatives of the liberal bourgeoisie, an opinionof remarkable value to class-conscious proletarians. 
 Wecannot too strongly recommend to every Social-Democratthat he should read these articles in full and ponder over every sentence in them. 
 We shall first of all reproduce the most important propositions in these two articles. 
 “It is fairly difficult,” writes Osvobozhdeniye , “for an outside ob-server to grasp the real political meaning of the differences that havesplit the Social-Democratic Party into two factions. 
 A definition ofthe ‘Majority’ faction as the more radical and unswerving, as distinct from the ‘Minority’ which allows of certain compromises in the interests of the cause, is not quite exact, and in any case does notprovide an exhaustive characterisation. 
 At any rate the traditionaldogmas of Marxist orthodoxy are observed by the Minority factionwith even greater zeal, perhaps, than by the Lenin faction. 
 The following characterisation would appear to us to be more accurate. 
 The fundamental political temper of the ‘Majority’ is abstract revo-lutionism, rebelliousness, and eagerness to stir up insurrection among the popular masses by any and every means and to immediately seizepower on their behalf, to a certain extent this brings the ‘Leninists’ close to the Socialist-Revolutionaries and makes the idea of a Russian revolution of the whole people overshadow in their minds the idea ofthe class struggle. 
 While in practice abjuring much of the narrow-mindedness of the Social-Democratic doctrine, the ‘Leninists’ are, on the other hand, thoroughly imbued with the narrow-mindednessof revolutionism; they renounce all practical work except the prepa-ration of an immediate insurrection, ignore on principle all forms of legal and semi-legal agitation and any kind of practically usefulcompromise with other oppositional trends. 
 On the contrary, the Mi-nority, while steadfastly adhering to the doctrine of Marxism, at the same time preserves the realistic elements of the Marxist world out-look. 
 Contraposing the interests of the ‘proletariat’ to those of the bourgeoisie is the fundamental idea of this group. 
 On the other hand, however, the proletariat’s struggle is conceived—of course withincertain bounds dictated by the immutable dogmas of Social-Democracy —in realistically sober fashion, with a clear realisation of all the concrete conditions and aims of this struggle. 
 Neither of the twofactions pursues its basic point of view quite consistently, for in their ideological and political activities they are bound by the stringent formulas of the Social-Democratic catechism, which prevent the‘Leninists’ from becoming unswerving rebels after the fashion of, at least, some Socialist-Revolutionaries, and the ‘ Iskra group’ from becoming practical leaders of the real political movement of theworking class. 
” After quoting the contents of the most important resolutions the Osvobozhdeniye writer goes on to illustrate his general “ideas” with several concrete remarks about them. 
 In comparison with the Third Congress, he says, “the Minority Conference takes a totally different attitude towards an insurrection”. 
 “In connection with theattitude towards an insurrection” there is a difference in the respective resolutions on a provisional government. 
 “A similar difference is revealed with regard to the workers’ trade unions. 
 In their resolutionthe ‘Leninists’ have not said a single word about this most important starting-point in the political education and organisation of the working class. 
 The Minority, on the contrary, drew up a veryweighty resolution. 
” With regard to the liberals, both factions, he says, see eye to eye, but the Third Congress “repeats almost word for word the Plekhanov resolution on the attitude towards the liberals,adopted at the Second Congress, and rejects the Starover resolution adopted by the same Congress, which was more favourably inclined towards the liberals”. 
 Although the Congress and the Conferenceresolutions on the peasant movement coincide on the whole, “the ‘Majority’ lays more emphasis on the idea of the revolutionary con-fiscation of the landlords’ estates and other land, while the ‘Minority’wants to make the demand for democratic state and administrative Finally, Osvobozhdeniye cites from No. 
 100 of Iskra a Menshevik resolution, whose main clause reads as follows: “Since underground work alone does not at present secure adequate participation of the masses in Party life, and in some degree leads to the masses as suchbeing contraposed to the Party as an illegal organisation, the latter must assume leadership of the trade union struggle of the workers on a legal basis, strictly linking up this struggle with the Social-Democratic tasks. 
” Commenting on this resolution Osvobozhdeniye exclaims: “We heartily welcome this resolution as a triumph of common sense, as evidence that a definite section of the Social-DemocraticParty is beginning to see the light with regard to tactics. 
” The reader now has before him all the noteworthy opin-ions of Osvobozhdeniye . 
 It would, of course, be a most grave error to regard these opinions as correct in the sense of corre-sponding to the objective truth. 
 Mistakes in them will easilybe detected by every Social-Democrat at every step. 
 It would be naïve to forget that these opinions are thoroughly imbued with the liberal bourgeoisie’s interests and points of view,and that in this sense they are utterly biased and tendentious. 
 They reflect the Social-Democrats’ views in the same way as objects are reflected in a concave or convex mirror. 
 Itwould, however, be an even greater mistake to forget that in the final analysis these bourgeois-distorted opinions reflect the actual interests of the bourgeoisie, which, as a class,undoubtedly understands correctly which trends in Social-Democracy are advantageous, close, akin, and agreeable to it, and which trends are harmful, distant, alien, and anti-pathetic. 
 A bourgeois philosopher or a bourgeois publicist will never understand Social-Democracy properly, whether it is Menshevik or Bolshevik Social-Democracy. 
 But if heis at all a sensible publicist, his class instinct will not fail him, and he will always grasp the essence of what one trend or another in the Social-Democratic movement may mean tothe bourgeoisie, although he may present it in a distorted way. 
 That is why our enemy’s class instinct, his class opinion always deserves the closest attention from everyclass-conscious proletarian. 
 What, then, does the Russian bourgeoisie’s class instinct, as voiced by Osvobozhdeniye adherents, tell us? It quite definitely expresses its satisfaction with the trend resented by the new Iskra , praising it for realism, sober-its resolutions, its having begun to see the light on questions of tactics, its practicalness, etc. 
—and it expresses dissatis-faction with the trend of the Third Congress, censuring it for its narrow-mindedness, revolutionism, rebelliousness,its repudiation of practically useful compromises, etc. 
 Theclass instinct of the bourgeoisie suggests to it exactly whathas been repeatedly proved in our literature with the aidof most precise facts, namely, that the new-Iskra supporters are the opportunist wing of the present-day Russian Social-Democratic movement, and their opponents—the revolution-ary wing. 
 The liberals cannot but sympathise with the trendsin the former, and cannot but censure the trends in the lat-ter. 
 As ideologists of the bourgeoisie the liberals understandperfectly well that the bourgeoisie stands to gain by the “practicalness, sober-mindedness, and soundness” of the working class, by actually restricting its field of activitywithin the framework of capitalism, reforms, the trade unionstruggle, etc. 
 The proletariat’s “revolutionary narrow-mind-edness”, its endeavours to win the leadership in a popularRussian revolution in order to promote its own class aims—these things are dangerous and frightening to the bourgeoisie. 
 That this is the actual significance of the word “realism” in its Osvobozhdeniye sense is evident, among other things, from the way it was previously used by Osvobozhdeniye and by Mr. 
 Struve. 
 Iskra itself could not but admit that such was the significance of Osvobozhdeniye ’s “realism”. 
 Take, for instance, the article entitled “High Time!” in thesupplement to Iskra , No. 
 73-74. 
 The author of this article (a consistent exponent of the views of the “Marsh” at theSecond Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic LabourParty) frankly expressed the opinion that “at the Congress Akimov played the part of the ghost of opportunism rather than of its real representative”. 
 And the editors of Iskra were forthwith obliged to correct the author of the article“High Time!” by stating in a note: “This opinion cannot be agreed with. 
 Comrade Akimov’s views on the programme bear the clear imprint of opportunism, which fact is admitted even by the Osvobozhdeniye critic, who—in one of its recent issues—stated that Comrade Akimov is an adherent of the‘realist’—read: revisionist—tendency. 
” Thus, Iskra itself is perfectly aware that Osvobozhde-niye ’s “realism” is simply opportunism and nothing else. 
 If in attacking “liberal realism” ( Iskra , No. 
 102) Iskra now says nothing about its having been praised by the liberals for its realism, this silence is explained by the circumstancethat such praise is bitterer than any censure. 
 Suchpraise (which Osvobozhdeniye uttered not by mere chance and not for the first time) actually proves the affinity between liberal realism and those tendencies of Social-Democratic “realism” (read: opportunism) that stand out in every reso-lution of the new-Iskrists, in consequence of the fallacy oftheir entire tactical stand. 
 Indeed, the Russian bourgeoisie has already fully revealed its inconsistency and cupidity in the “popular” revolution —has revealed it in Mr. 
 Struve’s arguments, in the entire tenor and content of the bulk of liberal newspapers,and in the nature of the political utterances of most Zemstvomembers, the bulk of the intellectuals, and in general of allthe adherents of Messrs. 
 Trubetskoi, Petrunkevich, Rodichev,and Co. 
 Of course, the bourgeoisie does not always reveal a clear understanding, but by and large, its class instinct enables it to realise perfectly well that, on the one hand, theproletariat and the “people” are useful for its revolution as cannon fodder, as a battering-ram against the autocracy,but that, on the other hand, the proletariat and the revolu-tionary peasantry will be terribly dangerous to it if they win a “decisive victory over tsarism” and carry the democratic revolution to completion. 
 That is why the bourgeoisie strainsevery effort to induce the proletariat to be content with a“modest” role in the revolution, to be more sober-minded,practical, and realistic, and let its activities be guidedby the principle, “lest the bourgeoisie recoil”. 
 Intellectual bourgeois know full well that they will not be able to get rid of the working-class movement. 
 Thatis why they do not at all come out against the working-class movement as such, or against the proletariat’s classstruggle as such—no, they even pay lip service to the rightto strike and to a genteel class struggle, since they under-stand the working-class movement and the class struggle in the Brentano or Hirsch-Duncker sense. 
 In other wordsthey are fully prepared to “yield” to the workers the right to strike and freedom of association (which in fact has already been almost won by the workers themselves), if only the work-ers renounce their “rebelliousness”, their “narrow-minded revolutionism”, their hostility to “compromises of practicaluse”, their claims and aspirations to place upon the “revolu-tion of the whole Russian people” the imprint of their class struggle, the imprint of proletarian consistency, proletariandetermination, and “plebeian Jacobinism”. 
 That is why intellectual bourgeois all over Russia are exerting every effort, resorting to thousands of ways and means—books, * lectures, speeches, talks, etc. 
, etc. 
—to imbue the workerswith the ideas of (bourgeois) sober-mindedness, (liberal)practicalness, (opportunist) realism, (Brentano) class struggle,(Hirsch-Duncker) trade unions, 44 etc. 
 The last two slogans are particularly convenient for the bourgeois of the “Constitutional-Democratic” Party, the Osvobozhdeniye party, since in appearance they coincide with Marxist slogans,and, with some minor omissions and slight distortions, caneasily be confused with and sometimes even passed off asSocial-Democratic slogans. 
 For instance, the legal liberal newspaper Rassvet (which we shall some day try to discuss in greater detail with Proletary readers) frequently says such “outspoken” things about the class struggle, the possibledeception of the proletariat by the bourgeoisie, the working-class movement, the proletariat’s initiative, etc. 
, etc. 
, thatthe inattentive reader or unenlightened worker might easily be led to believe that its “Social-Democratism” is genuine. 
 Actually, however, it is a bourgeois imitation of Social-Democratism, an opportunist distortion and perversion of theconcept of the class struggle. 
 At the root of all this gigantic bourgeois subterfuge (gigantic in the extent of its influence on the masses) lies an urge to reduce the working-class movement mainly to a trade union movement, to keep it as far away as possible from anindependent policy (i. 
e. 
, one that is revolutionary and di-rected towards a democratic dictatorship), “to make the ideaof the class struggle overshadow, in the workers’ minds, theidea of a Russian revolution of the whole people”. 
 *Cf. 
 Prokopovich, The Labour Question in Russia . 
 As the reader will perceive, we have turned the Osvo-bozhdeniye formulation upside down. 
 This is an excellent formulation, one that excellently expresses two views upon the proletariat’s role in a democratic revolution—thebourgeois view and the Social-Democratic view. 
 The bour-geoisie wants to confine the proletariat to the trade unionmovement, and thereby to “make the idea of the ( Brentano ) class struggle overshadow in its mind the idea of a Russian revolution of the whole people”—fully in the spirit of the Bernsteinian authors of the Credo , who tried to make the idea of a “purely working-class movement” overshadowin the workers’ minds the idea of political struggle. 
 Onthe contrary, Social-Democracy wants to develop the pro-letariat’s class struggle to the level of leadership in the Russian revolution of the whole people, i. 
e. 
, to bring that revolution to the democratic dictatorship of the proletariatand the peasantry. 
 The revolution in our country is one of the whole people, says the bourgeoisie to the proletariat. 
 As a separate class,you should, therefore, confine yourselves to your class struggle; in the name of “common sense” you should devote your attention mainly to the trade unions and their legali-sation; you should consider these trade unions as “the mostimportant starting-point in your political education andorganisation”; in a revolutionary situation you should for themost part draw up “sound” resolutions like the new-Iskra resolution; you should give heed to resolutions “more favourably inclined towards the liberals”; you should showpreference for leaders with a tendency to become “practicalleaders of the real political movement of the working class”,and should “preserve the realistic elements of the Marxistworld outlook” (if you have unfortunately already become infected with the “stringent formulas” of this ‘unscientific” catechism). 
 The revolution in our country is one of the whole people, the Social-Democrats say to the proletariat. 
 As the mostprogressive and the only thoroughly revolutionary class, youshould strive to play not merely a most active part in it, but the leading part as well. 
 Therefore, you must not confine yourself within a narrowly conceived framework of the classstruggle, understood mainly as the trade union movement; on the contrary, you must strive to extend the framework and the content of your class struggle so as to make it include not only all the aims of the present, democratic Russian revolution of the whole people, but the aims of the sub-sequent socialist revolution as well. 
 Therefore, without ignor-ing the trade union movement, or refusing to take advantageof even the slightest legal opportunities, you must ina revolutionary period bring into the forefront the tasks of an insurrection and the formation of a revolutionary army and a revolutionary government, as being the only wayto the people’s complete victory over tsarism, to the achieve-ment of a democratic republic and genuine political freedom. 
 It would be superfluous to speak about the half-hearted and inconsistent stand, naturally so pleasing to the bour-geoisie, taken on this question by the new-Iskra resolutions because of their mistaken “line”. 
 II. 
 COMRADE MARTYNOV AGAIN GIVES “PROFUNDITY” TO THE QUESTION Let us pass on to Martynov’s articles in Nos. 
 102 and 103 of Iskra . 
 We shall, of course, make no reply to Martynov’s attempts to prove the incorrectness of our interpretation,and the correctness of his own interpretation, of a numberof quotations from Engels and Marx. 
 These attempts areso trivial, Martynov’s subterfuges so obvious, and the ques-tion so clear that it would be of no interest to dwell on this point again. 
 Every thoughtful reader will be able easily tosee through the simple wiles employed by Martynov in hisfull retreat, especially when the complete translationsof Engels’s pamphlet The Bakuninists at Work and Marx’s Address of the Central Committee to the Communist League of March 1850, 45 now being prepared by a group of Prole-tary collaborators, are published. 
 A single quotation from Martynov’s article will suffice to make his retreat clear tothe reader. 
 “Iskra ‘admits’,” says Martynov in No. 
 103, “that setting up a provisional government is a possible and expedient way of furthering the revolution, but denies the expediency of Social-Democrats participating in a bourgeois provisional government, precisely so as to be able, in the future, to gain complete control of the state machinery for a socialist revolution. 
” In other words, Iskra now admits the absurdity of all its fears concerning a revolutionary government’s responsibility for the exchequer and the banks, concerning thedanger and impossibility of taking over the “prisons”, etc. 
But Iskra is only muddling things as previously, confusing democratic with socialist dictatorship. 
 This muddle isunavoidable; it is a means to cover up the retreat. 
 But among the muddle-heads of the new Iskra Martynov stands out as Muddle-head No. 
 1, as a muddle-head oftalent, if one might say so. 
 By confusing the question byhis laboured efforts to “give it profundity”, he almost in-variably “arrives” at new formulations which lay bare all thefalseness of the stand he has taken. 
 You will remember how in the days of Economism he rendered Plekhanov “more profound” and created the formulation: “economic struggleagainst the employers and the government”. 
 In all Economistliterature it would be difficult to find a more apt expressionof this trend’s falseness. 
 It is the same today. 
 Martynovserves the new Iskra zealously and almost every time he opens his mouth he furnishes us with new and excellent material for an appraisal of the new Iskra ’s false position. 
 In No. 
 102 he says that Lenin “has imperceptibly put the conceptof dictatorship in place of that of revolution” (p. 
 3, col. 
 2). 
 In essence, all the accusations the new-Iskrists have levelled at us can be reduced to this one. 
 Indeed, we are grateful to Martynov for this accusation! He has rendered us most invaluable service in the struggle against the new-Iskra ideas by formulating his accusation in this way! We must positively beg the editors of Iskra to let Martynov loose against us more often for the purpose of making theattacks on Proletary “more profound”, and for a “truly prin-cipled” formulation of these attacks. 
 For the more Martynov exerts himself to argue on the plane of principles, the worsedo his arguments appear, and the more clearly does he revealthe gaps in the new-Iskra trend, the more successfully does he perform on himself and on his friends the useful reductio ad absurdum pedagogical operation (reducing the principles of the new Iskra to an absurdity). 
 Vperyod and Proletary use the concepts of dictatorship and revolution “interchangeably”. 
 Iskra does not want such “interchangeability”. 
 Just so, most esteemed Comrade Mar-tynov! You have unwittingly stated a great truth. 
 With this new formulation you have confirmed our contention that Iskra is lagging behind the revolution and straying into an Osvobozhdeniye formulation of its tasks, whereas Vperyod and Proletary are issuing slogans that advance the demo-cratic revolution. 
 Is this something you don’t understand, Comrade Marty-nov? In view of the importance of the question we shall try to give you a detailed explanation. 
 The bourgeois character of the democratic revolution expresses itself, among other things, in the fact that a numberof classes, groups, and sections of society which fully stand forrecognition of private property and commodity production and are incapable of going beyond these bounds, are compelled by force of circumstances to recognise the uselessness ofthe autocracy and of the whole feudal order in general, andjoin in the demand for liberty. 
 The bourgeois character ofthis liberty, which is demanded by “society” and advocated in a flood of words (and only words!) from the landowners and the capitalists, is manifesting itself more and more clearly. 
 At the same time the radical difference between theworkers’ and the bourgeoisie’s struggle for liberty, betweenproletarian and liberal democratism, is also becoming morepalpable. 
 The working class and its class-conscious represent-atives are marching forward and carrying this struggle forward, not only unafraid of bringing it to completion, but striving to go far beyond the uttermost limits of the demo-cratic revolution. 
 Inconsistent and selfish, the bourgeoisieaccepts the slogans of liberty hypocritically and only inpart. 
 Doomed to inevitable failure are all attempts to estab-lish, by some particular line or by drawing up particular “points” (like those in Starover’s resolution or that of the conferees), the limits beyond which this hypocrisy of the bour-geois friends of liberty, or, rather, this betrayal of libertyby its bourgeois friends, begins. 
 That is because the bourgeoi-sie, caught between two fires (the autocracy and the proletar-iat), is capable of changing its position and slogans by a thousand ways and means, adapting itself by moving an inch to the left or an inch to the right, haggling and chaffer-ing all the time. 
 The task of proletarian democratism is not to invent such lifeless “points”, but to criticise the devel-oping political situation ceaselessly, to expose the ever new and unforeseeable inconsistencies and betrayals on the part of the bourgeoisie. 
 Recall the history of Mr. 
 Struve’s political pronounce-ments in the illegal press, the history of Social-Democracy’swar with him, and you will clearly see how these tasks havebeen carried out by Social-Democracy, the champion of proletarian democratism. 
 Mr. 
 Struve began with a purely Shipov slogan: “Rights and an Authoritative Zemstvo”(see my article in Zarya , “The Persecutors of the Zemstvo and the Hannibals of Liberalism” *). 
 Social-Democracy exposed him and drove him towards a definitely constitutionalistprogramme. 
 When these “shoves” took effect, thanks to the particularly rapid progress of revolutionary events, the struggle shifted to the next problem of democratism: not merely a constitution in general, but one providing foruniversal and equal suffrage, direct elections, and a secretballot. 
 When we “captured” this new position from the“enemy” (the adoption of universal suffrage by the Osvobozhde-niye League) we began to press further; we showed up the hypocrisy and falseness of a two-chamber system, and the factthat universal suffrage had not been fully recognised by theOsvobozhdeniye League; we pointed to their monarchism and showed up the huckstering nature of their democratism, or,in other words, the bartering away of the interests of the great Russian revolution by these Osvobozhdeniye heroes of the money-bag. 
 Finally, the autocracy’s obduracy, the tremendous prog-ress of the civil war, and the hopelessness of the plight towhich the monarchists have reduced Russia have begunto penetrate into even the thickest of skulls. 
 The revolution became a fact. 
 It was no longer necessary to be a revolution-ary to acknowledge the revolution. 
 The autocratic govern-ment has actually been disintegrating before our eyes. 
 Ashas justly been remarked in the legal press by a certainliberal (Mr. 
 Gredeskul), actual disobedience to this govern-ment has set in. 
 Notwithstanding its apparent might the *First published in 1901. 
 See present edition, Vol. 
 5, pp. 
 31-80. 
— Ed. 
 autocracy has proved impotent; the events attending the de-veloping revolution have simply begun to thrust aside this parasitic organism, which is rotting alive. 
 Compelled to base their activities (or, to put it more correctly, their shadypolitical deals) on relationships as they are actually takingshape, the liberal bourgeois have begun to see the necessity of recognising the revolution . 
 They do so not because they are revolutionaries, but despite the fact that they are not revolu-tionaries. 
 They do so of necessity and against their will, glaring angrily at the success of the revolution, and level-ling the accusation of revolutionism against the autocracy,which does not want to strike a bargain, but wants a life-and-death struggle. 
 Born hucksters, they hate struggle andrevolution, but circumstances force them to stand on the ground of revolution, for there is no other ground under their feet. 
 We are witnessing a highly instructive and highly comical spectacle. 
 The bourgeois liberal prostitutes are tryingto drape themselves in the toga of revolution. 
 The Osvobozh-deniye people— risum teneatis , amici ! *—the Osvobozhde-niye people are beginning to speak in the name of the revolution! They are beginning to assure us that they “donot fear revolution” (Mr. 
 Struve in Osvobozhdeniye , No. 
 72)!!! They are voicing their claim “to be at the head of therevolution”!!! This is a most significant phenomenon, one that char-acterises not only an advance in bourgeois liberalism, but even more so the advance of the real successes of the revo-lutionary movement, which has compelled recognition. 
 Even the bourgeoisie is beginning to feel that it is more toits advantage to take its stand on the side of the revolution,for the autocracy is so shaky. 
 On the other hand, however, this phenomenon, which testifies to the new and higher level reached by the entire movement, sets us new and highertasks as well. 
 The bourgeoisie’s recognition of the revolutioncannot be sincere, irrespective of the personal integrity ofone bourgeois ideologist or another. 
 The bourgeoisie cannotbut bring selfishness and inconsistency, the spirit of chaffer-ing and petty reactionary dodges even into this higher *Restrain your laughter, friends! stage of the movement. 
 We must now formulate the imme-diate concrete tasks of the revolution in a different way, in the name of our programme, and in amplification of our pro-gramme. 
 What was adequate yesterday is inadequate today . 
 Yesterday, perhaps, the demand for the recognition of therevolution was adequate as an advanced democratic slogan. 
Today that is not enough. 
 The revolution has forced evenMr. 
 Struve to recognise it. 
 The advanced class must now de-fine exactly the very content of the urgent and pressing tasks of this revolution. 
 While recognising the revolution, Messrs. 
the Struves again and again show their asses’ ears andstrike up the old tune about the possibility of a peacefuloutcome, about Nicholas calling on the Osvobozhdeniye group to take power, etc. 
, etc. 
 The Osvobozhdeniye people rec-ognise the revolution so as to emasculate and betray it the more safely for themselves. 
 It is now our duty to show theproletariat and the whole people the inadequacy of theslogan of “revolution”; we must show how necessary it is tohave a clear and unambiguous, consistent, and determineddefinition of the very content of the revolution. 
 And this definition is provided by the one slogan that is capable of correctly expressing a “decisive victory” of the revolution,the slogan of the revolutionary-democratic dictatorship ofthe proletariat and the peasantry. 
 46 Abuse of terms is a most common practice in politics. 
 The name “socialist”, for example, has often been appro-priated by supporters of English bourgeois liberalism (“We are all socialists now,” * said Harcourt), by supporters of Bismarck, and by friends of Pope Leo XIII. 
 The term “revo-lution” also fully lends itself to abuse, and, at a certain stagein the development of the movement, such abuse is inevi-table. 
 When Mr. 
 Struve began to speak in the name of revo-lution we could not but recall Thiers. 
 A few days before the February revolution this monstrous gnome, this mostperfect embodiment of the bourgeoisie’s political venalitysensed that a storm was brewing among the people, and an-nounced from the parliamentary tribune that he was of the party of revolution ! (See Marx’s The Civil War in France . 
 47) The political significance of Osvobozhdeniye ’s joining the *These words are in English in the original. 
— Ed. 
 party of revolution is exactly the same as Thiers’s. 
 When the Russian Thiers begin to speak of their belonging to the party of revolution, that means that the slogan of revolution has become inadequate, is meaningless, and defines no taskssince the revolution has become a fact, and the most diverseelements are going over to its side. 
 Indeed, what is revolution from the Marxist point of view? The forcible demolition of the obsolete political superstructure, the contradiction between which and the new relations of production have caused its collapse at a certainmoment. 
 The contradiction between the autocracy and theentire structure of capitalist Russia and all the needs of herbourgeois-democratic development has now caused itscollapse, all the more severe owing to the lengthy period in which this contradiction was artificially sustained. 
 The superstructure is cracking at every joint, is yielding topressure, and growing weaker. 
 Through the representatives ofthe most diverse classes and groups, the people must now,by their own efforts, build themselves a new superstructure. 
At a certain stage of development, the uselessness of the old superstructure becomes obvious to all; the revolution is recognised by all. 
 The task now is to define which classes must build the new superstructure, and how they are to build it. 
 If this is not defined the slogan of revolution is empty andmeaningless at the present time; for the feebleness of theautocracy makes “revolutionaries” even of the Grand Dukes and of Moskovskiye Vedomosti ! 48 If this is not defined there can be no talk about the advanced democratic tasks of theadvanced class. 
 The slogan “the democratic dictatorshipof the proletariat and the peasantry” provides that definition. 
This slogan defines the classes upon which the new “builders”of the new superstructure can and must rely, the character of the new superstructure (a “democratic” as distinct from a socialist dictatorship), and how it is to be built (dictatorship,i. 
e. 
, the forcible suppression of resistance by force and thearming of the revolutionary classes of the people). 
 Whoevernow refuses to recognise this slogan of revolutionary-demo-cratic dictatorship, the slogan of a revolutionary army, of a revolutionary government, and of revolutionary peasant com-mittees, either hopelessly fails to understand the tasks of therevolution, is unable to define the new and higher tasks evoked by the present situation, or is deceiving the people, betraying the revolution, and misusing the slogan of “revolution”. 
 Comrade Martynov and his friends are instances of the former, and Mr. 
 Struve and the whole of the “Constitutional-Democratic” Zemstvo party—of the latter case. 
 Comrade Martynov was so sharp and shrewd that he charged us with having made the concepts of dictatorship and revolution “interchangeable” just at a time when the develop-ment of the revolution required that its tasks be defined bythe slogan of dictatorship. 
 Comrade Martynov has again beenso unlucky as to be left behind, stranded at the stage beforethe last, at the level reached by Osvobozhdeniye ; for recog-nition of “revolution” (in word) and refusal to recognise the democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry (i. 
e. 
, revolution in deed) today amounts to taking the polit-ical stand of Osvobozhdeniye , i. 
e. 
, is to the interests of the liberal monarchist bourgeoisie. 
 Through Mr. 
 Struve theliberal bourgeoisie is now expressing itself in favour ofrevolution. 
 Through the revolutionary Social-Democrats the class-conscious proletariat is demanding a dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry. 
 And at this stage the new-Iskra wiseacre intervenes in the controversy and yells: “Don’t dare make the ideas of dictatorship and revolution ‘inter-changeable’!” Well, is it not true that the false stand taken bythe new-Iskrists dooms them to be constantly dragging along at the tail-end of Osvobozhdeniye trend? We have shown that the Osvobozhdeniye people are ascend-ing (not without prodding from the Social-Democrats)step by step in the matter of recognising democratism. 
 Atfirst, the issue in dispute between us was: Shipovism (rightsand an authoritative Zemstvo) or constitutionalism? Then it was: limited suffrage or universal suffrage? Later: recog-nition of the revolution or a huckster’s bargain with theautocracy? Finally, it is now: recognition of the revolutionwithout the dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasant-ry, or recognition of the demand for a dictatorship of theseclasses in the democratic revolution? It is possible and prob-able that the Osvobozhdeniye people (it makes no difference whether these are present ones, or their successors in theLeft wing of the bourgeois democrats) will ascend another /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR step, i. 
e. 
, recognise in due course (perhaps by the time Com-rade Martynov ascends another step) the slogan of dictator-ship as well. 
 This will inevitably be the case if the Russian revolution continues to forge ahead, and achieves a decisivevictory. 
 What will the position of Social-Democracy thenbe? The complete victory of the present revolution will markthe end of the democratic revolution and the beginning of adetermined struggle for a socialist revolution. 
 Satisfaction of the present-day demands of the peasantry, the utter rout of reaction and the achievement of a democratic republic willmark the utter limit of the revolutionism of the bourgeoisie,and even that of the petty bourgeoisie, and the beginningof the proletariat’s real struggle for socialism. 
 The morecomplete the democratic revolution, the sooner, the more widespread, the cleaner, and the more determined will the development of this new struggle be. 
 The slogan of a “demo-cratic” dictatorship expresses the historically limited natureof the present revolution and the necessity of a new struggleon the basis of the new order for the complete emancipationof the working class from all oppression and all exploitation. 
 In other words, when the democratic bourgeoisie or petty bourgeoisie ascends another step, when not only the revo-lution but the complete victory of the revolution becomes anaccomplished fact, we shall “change” (perhaps amid the hor-rified cries of new and future Martynovs) the slogan of thedemocratic dictatorship to the slogan of a socialist dictator-ship of the proletariat, i. 
e. 
, of a full socialist revolution. 
 III. 
 THE VULGAR BOURGEOIS AND THE IST VIEWS ON DICTATORSHIP In his notes to Marx’s articles from the Neue Rhein-ische Zeitung of 1848, which he published, Mehring49 tells us that one of the reproaches levelled at this newspaper bybourgeois publications was that it had allegedly demanded“the immediate introduction of a dictatorship as the solemeans of achieving democracy” (Marx, Nachlass , Vol. 
 III, p. 
 53). 
 From the vulgar bourgeois standpoint the terms dic-tatorship and democracy are mutually exclusive. 
 Failing tounderstand the theory of class struggle and accustomed to seeing in the political arena the petty squabbling of the various bourgeois circles and coteries, the bourgeois under-stands by dictatorship the annulment of all liberties and guarantees of democracy, arbitrariness of every kind, andevery sort of abuse of power in a dictator’s personal interests. 
In fact, it is precisely this vulgar bourgeois view that ismanifested in the writings of our Martynov, who winds up his“new campaign” in the new Iskra by attributing the partial-ity of Vperyod and Proletary for the slogan of dictatorship to Lenin’s “passionate desire to try his luck” ( Iskra , No. 
 103, p. 
 3, col. 
 2). 
 In order to explain to Martynov the meaning ofthe term class dictatorship, as distinct from personal dicta-torship, and the tasks of a democratic dictatorship, as dis-tinct from those of a socialist dictatorship, it would not be amiss to dwell on the views of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung . 
 “After a revolution,” wrote the Neue Rheinische Zeitung on September 14, 1848, “every provisional organisation ofthe state requires a dictatorship and an energetic dictator-ship at that. 
 From the very beginning we have reproachedCamphausen” (the head of the Ministry after March 18, 1848) “for not acting dictatorially, for not having immediately smashed up and eliminated the remnants of the oldinstitutions. 
 And while Herr Camphausen was lullinghimself with constitutional illusions the defeated party (i. 
e. 
,the party of reaction) strengthened its positions in thebureaucracy and in the army, and here and there even began to venture upon open struggle. 
” 50 These words, Mehring justly remarks, sum up in a few propositions all that was propounded in detail in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung in long articles on the Camphausen Ministry. 
 What do these words of Marx tell us? That a provi-sional revolutionary government must act dictatorially (a proposition which Iskra was totally unable to grasp since it was fighting shy of the slogan of dictatorship), and that thetask of such a dictatorship is to destroy the remnants of theold institutions (which is precisely what was clearly stated inthe resolution of the Third Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party on the struggle against counter-revolution and was omitted in the resolution of the Con-ference, as shown above). 
 Thirdly, and lastly, it follows fromthese words that Marx castigated the bourgeois democrats for entertaining “constitutional illusions” in a period of revolution and open civil war. 
 The meaning of these words becomes particularly obvious from the article in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung of June 6, 1848. 
 “A constituent national assembly,” Marx wrote, “must first of all be an active,revolutionary-active assembly. 
 The Frankfort Assembly,however, is busying itself with school exercises in parliamen-tarianism while allowing the government to act. 
 Let us assume that this learned assembly succeeds, after mature considera-tion, in evolving the best possible agenda and the bestconstitution, but what is the use of the best possibleagenda and of the best possible constitution, if the Germangovernments have in the meantime placed the bayonet on theagenda?” 51 That is the meaning of the slogan: dictatorship. 
 We can judge from this what Marx’s attitude would have beentowards resolutions which call a “decision to organise aconstituent assembly” a decisive victory, or which invite usto “remain the party of extreme revolutionary opposition”! Major questions in the life of nations are settled only by force. 
 The reactionary classes themselves are usually the first to resort to violence, to civil war; they are the first to“place the bayonet on the agenda”, as the Russian autocracyhas systematically and unswervingly been doing everywhereever since January 9. 
 And since such a situation has arisen,since the bayonet has really become the main point on the political agenda, since insurrection has proved imperative and urgent—constitutional illusions and school exercises inparliamentarianism become merely a screen for the bourgeoisbetrayal of the revolution, a screen to conceal the fact thatthe bourgeoisie is “recoiling” from the revolution. 
 It isprecisely the slogan of dictatorship that the genuinely revolutionary class must advance, in that case. 
 On the question of the tasks of this dictatorship Marx wrote in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung : “The National Assem-bly should have acted dictatorially against the reactionaryattempts of the obsolete governments; and thus gain foritself the power of public opinion against which all bay-onets and rifle butts would be shattered.... 
 But this Assembly bores the German people instead of carrying them with itor being carried away by them. 
” 52 In Marx’s opinion, the National Assembly should have “eliminated from the re-gime actually existing in Germany everything that contra-dicted the principle of the sovereignty of the people”, and then it should have “established the revolutionary groundon which it stands in order to make the sovereignty of thepeople, won by the revolution, secure against all attacks”. 
 53 Consequently, in their content the tasks which Marx set a revolutionary government or dictatorship in 1848 amounted first and foremost to a democratic revolution: defence against counter-revolution and the actual elimina-tion of everything that contradicted the sovereignty ofthe people. 
 That is nothing else than a revolutionary-democratic dictatorship. 
 To proceed: which classes, in Marx’s opinion, could and should have achieved this task (to fully exercise in deed the principle of the people’s sovereignty and beat offthe attacks of the counter-revolution)? Marx speaks of the“people”. 
 But we know that he always fought ruthlesslyagainst petty-bourgeois illusions about the unity of the“people” and the absence of a class struggle within the people. 
 In using the word “people” Marx did not thereby gloss over class distinctions, but united definite elements capableof bringing the revolution to completion. 
 After the victory of the Berlin proletariat on March 18, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung wrote, the results of the revolution proved twofold: “On the one hand, the arming of the people, the right of association, the actual achievement of the sovereignty of the people; on the other hand, theretention of the monarchy and the Camphausen-HansemannMinistry, i. 
e. 
, the government of representatives of the bigbourgeoisie. 
 Thus, the revolution had two series of results,which had inevitably to diverge. 
 The people had achieved victory; they had won liberties of a decisively democratic nature, but immediate power did not pass into their hands,but into the hands of the big bourgeoisie. 
 In short, therevolution was not consummated. 
 The people let repre-sentatives of the big bourgeoisie form a ministry, and theserepresentatives of the big bourgeoisie at once showed what they were after by offering an alliance to the old Prussian nobility and bureaucracy. 
 Arnim, Canitz, and Schwerinjoined the ministry. 
 “The upper bourgeoisie , ever anti-revolutionary , concluded a defensive and offensive alliance with the reactionaries for fear of the people , that is to say , the workers and the democratic bourgeoisie . 
” (Italics ours. 
)54 Thus, not only a “decision to organise a constituent assembly”, but even its actual convocation is insufficientfor a decisive victory of the revolution! Even after a par-tial victory in an armed struggle (the victory of the Berlin workers over the troops on March 18, 1848) an “incomplete” revolution, a revolution “that has not been carried tocompletion”, is possible. 
 On what, then, does its completiondepend? It depends on whose hands immediate power passesinto, into the hands of the Petrunkeviches and Rodichevs,that is to say, the Camphausens and the Hansemanns, or into the hands of the people , i. 
e. 
, the workers and the democratic bourgeoisie. 
 In the first instance, the bourgeoisiewill possess power, and the proletariat—“freedom of crit-icism”, freedom to “remain the party of extreme revo-lutionary opposition”. 
 Immediately after the victory thebourgeoisie will conclude an alliance with the reaction-aries (this would inevitably happen in Russia too, if, for example, the St. 
 Petersburg workers gained only a partialvictory in street fighting with the troops and left it to Messrs. 
Petrunkeviches and Co. 
 to form a government). 
 In thesecond instance, a revolutionary-democratic dictatorship,i. 
e. 
, the complete victory of the revolution, would be possible. 
 It now remains to define more precisely what Marx really meant by “democratic bourgeoisie” ( demokratische Bürgerschaft ), which, together with the workers, he called the people, in contradistinction to the big bour-geoisie. 
 A clear answer to this question is supplied by the fol-lowing passage from an article in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung of July 29, 1848: “...The German Revolution of 1848 is only a parody of the French Revolution of1789. 
 “On August 4, 1789, three weeks after the storming of the Bastille, the French people in a single day prevailed over all feudal burdens. 
 “On July 11, 1848, four months after the March barri-cades, the feudal burdens prevailed over the German people. 
 Teste Gierke cum Hansemanno . 
* “The French bourgeoisie of 1789 did not for a moment leave its allies, the peasants, in the lurch. 
 It knew that its rule was grounded in the destruction of feudalism in the countryside, the creation of a free landowning ( grund-besitzenden ) peasant class. 
 “The German bourgeoisie of 1848 is, without the least compunction, betraying the peasants, who are its most natural allies, the flesh of its flesh, and without whom it is powerless against the aristocracy. 
 “The continuance of feudal rights, their sanction under the guise of (illusory) redemption—such is the result of the German Revolution of 1848. 
 The mountain brought forth a mouse. 
”55 This is a very instructive passage, which provides us with four important propositions: 1) The uncompleted German revolution differs from the completed French revolution in that the German bourgeoisie betrayed not only democracy in general, but also the peasantry in partic-ular. 
 2) The creation of a free class of peasants is the foun-dation for the consummation of a democratic revolution. 
 3) The creation of such a class means the abolition of feudal services, the destruction of feudalism, but does not yet mean a socialist revolution. 
 4) The peasants are the “most natural” allies of the bourgeoisie, that is to say, of the democratic bourgeoisie, which without them is “powerless” against reaction. 
 With the proper allowances for concrete national peculi-arities and with serfdom substituted for feudalism, all *“Witnesses: Herr Gierke together with Herr Hansemann. 
” Hansemann was a Minister who represented the party of the big bourgeoisie (Russian counterpart: Trubetskoi or Rodichev, and the like); Gierke was Minister of Agriculture in the Hansemann Cabinet,who drew up a plan, a “bold” plan for “abolishing feudal burdens”, professedly “without compensation”, but in fact for abolishing only the minor and unimportant burdens, while preserving or grantingcompensation for the more essential ones. 
 Herr Gierke was something like the Russian Kablukovs, Manuilovs, Hertzensteins, and similar bourgeois liberal friends of the muzhik, who desire the “extension ofpeasant landownership” but do not wish to offend the landlords. 
 these propositions are fully applicable to the Russia of 1905. 
 There is no doubt that by learning from the experience of Germany as elucidated by Marx, we can arrive at no other slogan for a decisive victory of the revolution than: a rev-olutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat andthe peasantry. 
 There is no doubt that the proletariat andthe peasantry are the chief components of the “people” ascontrasted by Marx in 1848 to the resisting reactionaries and the treacherous bourgeoisie. 
 There is no doubt that in Russia, too, the liberal bourgeoisie and the gentlemen ofthe Osvobozhdeniye League are betraying and will betray the peasantry, i. 
e. 
, will confine themselves to a pseudo-reform and take the side of the landlords in the decisivebattle between them and the peasantry. 
 In this struggle only the proletariat is capable of supporting the peasantry to the end. 
 There is no doubt, finally, that in Russia, too, thesuccess of the peasants’ struggle, i. 
e. 
, the transfer of thewhole of the land to the peasantry, will signify a completedemocratic revolution, and constitute the social basis ofthe revolution carried through to its completion, but this will by no means be a socialist revolution, or the “sociali-sation” that the ideologists of the petty bourgeoisie, theSocialist-Revolutionaries, talk about. 
 The success of thepeasant insurrection, the victory of the democratic revolutionwill merely clear the way for a genuine and decisive strugglefor socialism, on the basis of a democratic republic. 
 In this struggle the peasantry, as a landowning class, will play the same treacherous, unstable part as is now being played bythe bourgeoisie in the struggle for democracy. 
 To forget thisis to forget socialism, to deceive oneself and others, regard-ing the real interests and tasks of the proletariat. 
 In order to leave no gaps in the presentation of the views held by Marx in 1848, it is necessary to note one essential difference between German Social-Democracy of that time(or the Communist Party of the proletariat, to use thelanguage of that period) and present-day Russian Social-Democracy. 
 Here is what Mehring says: “The Neue Rheinische Zeitung appeared in the political arena as the ‘organ of democracy’. 
 There is no mistaking the trend running through all its articles. 
 But in the directsense it championed the interests of the bourgeois revolu-tion against absolutism and feudalism more than the interests of the proletariat against those of the bourgeoisie. 
 Very little is to be found in its columns about an independent working-class movement during the years of the revolution,although one should not forget that along with it thereappeared, twice a week, under the editorship of Moll andSchapper, a special organ of the Cologne Workers’ League. 
 56 At any rate, the present-day reader will be struck by the little attention the Neue Rheinische Zeitung paid to the German working-class movement of its day, although StephanBorn, its most capable mind, was a pupil of Marx and Engelsin Paris and Brussels, and in 1848 was their newspaper’sBerlin correspondent. 
 In his Memoirs Born says that Marx and Engels never expressed a single word in disapproval of his agitation among the workers. 
 However, subsequent statements by Engels make it appear quite probable that theywere at least dissatisfied with the methods of this agitation. 
Their dissatisfaction was justified inasmuch as Born wasobliged to make many concessions to the as yet totally un-developed class-consciousness of the proletariat in the greater part of Germany, concessions which do not stand the test of criticism from the viewpoint of the Communist Mani-festo . 
 Their dissatisfaction was unjustified inasmuch as Born managed nonetheless to maintain his agitation on a relativelyhigh plane.... 
 Without doubt, Marx and Engels were his-torically and politically right in thinking that the primary interest of the working class was to drive the bourgeois revolution as far forward as possible.... 
 Nevertheless, remark-able proof of how the elementary instinct of the working-class movement is able to correct conceptions of the mostbrilliant thinkers is provided by the fact that in April 1849they declared in favour of a specific workers’ organisation and decided to participate in a workers’ congress which was being prepared especially by the East Elbe (Eastern Prussia)proletariat. 
” Thus, it was only in April 1849, after a revolutionary newspaper had been appearing for almost a year (the Neue Rheinische Zeitung began publication on June 1, 1848) that Marx and Engels declared in favour of a special workers’ organisation! Until then they were merely running an “organof democracy” unlinked by any organisational ties with an independent workers’ party. 
 This fact, monstrous and im-probable as it may appear from our present-day standpoint, clearly shows us the enormous difference between the German Social-Democratic Party of those days and the RussianSocial-Democratic Labour Party of today. 
 This fact showshow much less the proletarian features of the movement,the proletarian current within it, were in evidence in theGerman democratic revolution (because of the backwardness of Germany in 1848 both economically and politically— her disunity as a state). 
 This should not be forgotten in ap-praising Marx’s repeated declarations during this periodand somewhat later about the need for organising an inde-pendent proletarian party. 
 Marx arrived at this practicalconclusion only as a result of the experience of the democrat-ic revolution, almost a year later—so philistine, so petty-bourgeois was the whole atmosphere in Germany at the time. 
To us this conclusion is the well-known and solid gain ofhalf a century’s experience of international Social-Democ-racy—a gain on the basis of which we began to organise the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party. 
 In our case there can be no question, for instance, of revolutionary proletarian newspapers standing outside the Social-Demo-cratic Party of the proletariat, or of their appearing even fora moment simply as “organs of democracy”. 
 But the contrast which hardly began to reveal itself between Marx and Stephan Born exists in our case in a form which is the more developed by reason of the more powerful manifestation of the proletarian current in the democraticstream of our revolution. 
 Speaking of the probable dissat-isfaction of Marx and Engels with the agitation conductedby Stephan Born, Mehring expresses himself too mildly andtoo evasively. 
 Here is what Engels wrote of Born in 1885 (in his preface to the Enthüllungen über den Kommunisten-prozess zu Köln , Zürich, 1885 *): The members of the Communist League57 everywhere stood at the head of the extreme democratic movement,proving thereby that the League was an excellent school ofrevolutionary activity. 
 “The compositor Stephan Born, who had worked in Brussels and Paris as an active member of *Revelations About the Cologne Communist Trial , Zürich, 1885. 
— Ed. 
 the League, founded a Workers’ Brotherhood [ Arbeiter-verbrüderung ] in Berlin which became fairly widespread and existed until 1850. 
 Born, a very talented young man, who, however, was too much in a hurry to become a politicalfigure, ‘fraternised’ with the most miscellaneous ragtagand bob-tail [ Krethi und Plethi ] in order to get a crowd together, and was not at all the man who could bring unityinto the conflicting tendencies, light into the chaos. 
 Conse-quently, in the official publications of the association the views represented in the Communist Manifesto were mingled hodge-podge with guild recollections and guild aspirations,fragments of Louis Blanc and Proudhon, protectionism, etc. 
;in short, they wanted to please everybody [ allen alles sein ]. 
 In particular , strikes , trade unions , and producers ’ co-operatives were set going , and it was forgotten that above all it was a question of first conquering , by means of political victories , the field in which alone such things could be re-alised on a lasting basis. 
 [Italics mine. 
] When, afterwards,the victories of the reaction made the leaders of the Brother-hood realise the necessity of taking a direct part in the revo-lutionary struggle, they were naturally left in the lurch by the confused mass which they had grouped around them-selves. 
 Born took part in the Dresden uprising in May 1849,and had a lucky escape. 
 But, in contrast to the great polit-ical movement of the proletariat, the Workers’ Brotherhoodproved to be a pure Sonderbund (separate league), which to a large extent existed only on paper and played such a subordinate role that the reaction did not find it necessary tosuppress it until 1850, and its surviving branches untilseveral years later. 
 Born, whose real name was Buttermilch, * *In translating Engels I made a mistake in the first edition by taking the word Buttermilch to be not a proper noun but a common noun. 
 This mistake naturally afforded great delight to the Menshe-viks. 
 Koltsov wrote that I had “rendered Engels more profound”(reprinted in Two Years , a collection of articles) and Plekhanov even now recalls this mistake in Tovarishch 58—in short, it afforded an excellent pretext to slur over the question of the two tendencies in the working-class movement of 1848 in Germany, the Born tendency (akin to our Economists) and the Marxist tendency. 
 To take advantage ofthe mistake of an opponent, even if it concerns Born’s name, is morethan natural. 
 But to use a correction to a translation to slur overthe substance of the question of the two tactics is to dodge the real issue. 
 (Author’s note to the 1907 edition. 
— Ed. 
) has not become a political figure but a petty Swiss profes-sor, who no longer translates Marx into guild language, but the meek Renan into his own fulsome German. 
”59 That is how Engels judged the two tactics of Social-Democracy in the democratic revolution! Our new-Iskrists are also leaning towards Economism and with such unreasonable zeal as to earn the praises ofthe monarchist bourgeoisie for “seeing the light”. 
 They too gather a motley crowd around themselves, flattering the Economists, demagogically attracting the undeveloped massesby the slogans of “initiative”, “democracy”, “autonomy”,etc. 
, etc. 
; their workers’ unions, too, often exist only on thepages of the Khlestakov-type 60 new Iskra . 
 Their slogans and resolutions betray a similar failure to understand the tasks of the “great political movement of the proletariat”. 
 CONCLUDING PARAGRAPH TO THE ARTICLE “THE PARIS COMMUNE AND THE TASKS OF THE DEMOCRATIC DICTATORSHIP ”61 This article teaches us, first and foremost, that for representatives of the socialist proletariat to take part in arevolutionary government together with the petty bourgeoi-sie is fully permissible in principle, and, in certain condi-tions, even obligatory. 
 It shows us further that the real taskthe Commune had to perform was primarily the achievementof the democratic and not the socialist dictatorship, theimplementation of our “minimum programme”. 
 Finally, thearticle reminds us that when we study the lessons of the Paris Commune we should imitate not the mistakes it made (the failure to seize the Bank of France and to launch an offen-sive against Versailles, the lack of a clear programme, etc. 
),but its successful practical measures, which indicate thecorrect road. 
 It is not the word “Commune” that we mustadopt from the great fighters of 1871; we should not blindly repeat each of their slogans; what we must do is to single out those programmatic and practical slogans that bear uponthe state of affairs in Russia and can be formulated in thewords “a revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the pro-letariat and the peasantry”. 
 Proletary , No. 
 8, Published according to July 17 (4), 1905 the text in Proletary TO THE SECRETARIAT OF THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIALIST BUREAU, BRUSSELS Geneva, July 24, 1905 Dear Comrades, We received your letter of June 28 several days ago, with some interesting documents (letters from Comrades Bebel and Plekhanov) enclosed, but being extremely busy we were unable to reply at once. 
 I. 
 As regards Comrade Plekhanov’s letter, we are obliged to make the following observations: 1) Comrade Plekhanov’s assertion that since the Second Congress of our Party (August 1903) we have differed only on the question of organisation is not in full keeping with the facts. 
 The “Minority” at the Second Congress (headedby Comrades Axelrod, Vera Zasulich, and Martov) actuallysplit the Party immediately after the Congress by declaringa boycott of the central bodies elected by the Congressand by setting up a secret “Minority” organisation, which was dissolved only in the autumn of 1904. 
 Comrade Plekhanov himself, who sided with us at the Second Congress of theParty and at the Congress of the League of Russian Social-Democracy Abroad (October 1903), evidently held a some-what different opinion concerning our differences when hepublicly stated in Iskra , No. 
 52 (November 1903) that we must make skilful concessions to the “revisionists” (Plekhanov’s expression) in order to avoid a split in the Party. 
 2) The assertion that the Third Congress of the Party was convened “quite arbitrarily” does not correspond to thefacts either. 
 According to Party Rules, the Council is obligedto call a congress if so demanded by half of the commit-tees. 
 As you know from the resolutions of the Third Congress, which have been translated into French, the Council ignoredthe Party Rules. 
 The Party committees and the “Bureau of Majority Committees”62 which they elected were morally and formally obliged to convene the Congress, even against the will of the Council, which did nothing to convene it. 
 3) You know from the selfsame resolutions of the Third Congress that it was not “something like half of the dulyauthorised organisations” that were represented at the Con-gress, but a considerable majority of the biggest committees. 
4) It is true that there are comrades in our Party who are referred to in jest as the “Marsh”. 
 Its members were con-tinually changing sides during the controversies within ourParty. 
 The first of these turncoats was Plekhanov, who wentover from the Majority to the Minority in November 1903,only to leave the Minority on May 29 of this year, when heresigned from Iskra ’s Editorial Board. 
 We do not approve of changing sides like that, but think we cannot be blamed if after much vacillation members of the “Marsh” are inclinedto follow us. 
 5) In his letter to the Bureau (June 16, 1905)Comrade Plekhanov most inappropriately forgot to mentionhis letter of May 29, 1905, published in Iskra (No. 
 101), a complete and exact translation of which we have already forwarded to you. 
 6) When he says that the other section in the Party is grouped around Iskra , the Party’s former Cen-tral Organ, Comrade Plekhanov again forgot to add that the“Minority” Conference (May 1905) annulled the Rules drawnup at the Second Congress, and failed to set up a new CentralOrgan. 
 We think that the International Socialist Bureau should have a complete translation of all resolutions of that conference. 
 If Iskra refuses to send them to the Bureau we are prepared to do so ourselves. 
 7) Comrade Plekhanovstates that only the two remaining members of the CentralCommittee (the others had been arrested) declared them-selves in favour of convening the Third Congress. 
 Comrade Plekhanov’s letter is dated June 16, 1905. 
 The next day, June 17, No. 
 4 of Proletary , the Central Organ of the Party, which had been set up by the Third Congress,published the following statement: “After reading theCentral Committee’s Open Letter to Comrade Plekhanov,Chairman of the Party Council, and being in full agreement with the Central Committee, we consider it necessary— for reasons which comrades acquainted with the state ofaffairs in the Party will understand—publicly to declare our solidarity with the Central Committee. 
” Signed (pseudo-nyms): Ma, Bem, Vladimir, Innokenty, Andrei, Voron. 
 We may inform you in confidence that these pseudonyms belong to the arrested members of the Central Committee. 
63 Consequently, as soon as the members of the Central Commit-tee learned of the conflict between the Central Committeeand Comrade Plekhanov (and, therefore, the Council as well)regarding the convocation of the Congress, most of them at once declared in favour of the Central Committee and against Comrade Plekhanov. 
 We earnestly request the InternationalSecretariat to inform us whether Comrade Plekhanovdeemed it necessary to acquaint the Bureau with this impor-tant statement by the arrested members of the Central Com-mittee, which completely refutes the assertions contained in Comrade Plekhanov’s letter of June 16. 
 8) Comrade Plekhanov is mistaken in saying that both groups asked him to go onrepresenting the Party in the International Bureau. 
 To datethe Central Committee of our Party has not made any suchrequest. 
 As we informed you a few days ago, this questionhas not yet been finally decided, although it stands on the order of the day. 
 9) Comrade Plekhanov thinks that it is not difficult for him to be impartial in the question of ourdifferences. 
 After what has been set forth above, however,we believe that he finds it quite difficult, and at the presentmoment, at any rate, next to impossible. 
 64 II. 
 I pass on to Comrade Bebel’s proposal on the subject of our affairs. 
 Here I must make the following observations: 1) I am only one of the members of the Central Committee and theresponsible editor of Proletary , the Party’s Central Organ. 
 I can act for the whole of the Central Committee only in regardto our affairs abroad and certain other matters specially entrusted to me. 
 In any case, all my decisions may be an-nulled by a general meeting of the Central Committee. 
 There-fore, I cannot decide on the question of the Bureau’s inter-vention in the affairs of our Party. 
 However, I immediatelyforwarded your letter, as well as the letters of ComradesBebel and Plekhanov, to Russia, to all the members of the Central Committee. 
 2) In order to speed up the Central Committee’s reply it would be very useful to obtain certainnecessary explanations from the Bureau: a) should the term “intervention” be taken to mean only conciliatory medi-ation, and advice having merely moral, and not binding, force; b) or does the Bureau have in view a binding ruling by a court of arbitration; c) does the Bureau’s ExecutiveCommittee propose to submit our differences to the generalmeeting of the International Socialist Bureau for finaldecision, without right of appeal? 3) On my part I considerit my duty to inform the Bureau that shortly before the Third Congress Comrade Bebel made a similar proposal to me and to those who share my views offering his services or the servicesof the entire Executive Committee of the German Party(Parteivorstand ), as arbitrator in the dispute between the Majority and the Minority in our Party. 
 I replied that the Party Congress would take place soon and that I personally could not decide for the Party or in its name. 
 The Bureau of Majority Committees rejected Bebel’s offer. 
 The Third Congress passed no decision on this offer,and thereby tacitly endorsed the reply given by the Bureauof Majority Committees. 
 4) Since the International Bureauconsiders it proper to obtain its information from “cer-tain German newspapers”, I am compelled to state that nearly all German socialist papers, especially Die Neue Zeit and Leipziger Volkszeitung , 65 are entirely on the side of the “Minority”, and present our affairs in a very one-sided andinaccurate way. 
 Kautsky, for instance, also calls himselfimpartial, and yet, in actual fact, he went so far as to refuse to publish in the Neue Zeit a refutation of an article by Rosa Luxemburg, in which she defended disruption in the Party. 
 66 In Leipziger Volkszeitung Kautsky even urged that the Ger-man pamphlet with the translation of the resolutions of theThird Congress should not be circulated!! After this it iseasy to understand why many comrades in Russia are inclined to regard the German Social-Democratic Party as partial and extremely prejudiced in the question of the split inthe ranks of Russian Social-Democracy. 
 Accept, dear comrades, our fraternal greeting. 
 Vl. 
 Ulyanov (N. 
 Lenin ) First published in 1925 Published according to in the magazine the text in the magazine Krasnaya Letopis , No. 
 1 and checked against the typewritten French version REVOLUTION TEACHES Differences within or between political parties are usually resolved not only by polemics over principles, but also by the course of political developments. 
 In particular, differ-ences on a party’s tactics, i. 
e. 
, its political conduct, areoften resolved by those with incorrect opinions going overin fact to the correct path of struggle, under the pressureof the course of developments that simply brush aside errone-ous opinions, making them pointless and devoid of any interest. 
 This, of course, does not mean that fundamental differences on questions of tactics do not call for explanationsof principles, explanations which alone can keep the Partyequal to its theoretical convictions. 
 No. 
 This means onlythat decisions made with regard to tactics must be verified a s often as possible in the light of new political events. 
 Such verification is necessary from the standpoint of both theory and practice: from the standpoint of theory in orderto ascertain in fact whether the decisions taken have beencorrect, and what amendments to these decisions subsequentpolitical events make necessary; from the standpoint ofpractice, in order to learn how to use the decisions as a proper guide, to learn to consider them as directives for practical application. 
 A revolutionary period, more than any other, provides material for such verification, thanks to the tremendousspeed of political development and the sharpness of politicalclashes. 
 In a revolutionary period the old “superstructure” falls apart, and, in full view of everyone, a new one is created by the independent action of the most diverse social forces,which reveal their true nature in practice. 
 Thus, the Russian revolution, too, provides us almost weekly with an amazing wealth of political material for verifying previously-made tactical decisions, and for drawing most instructive lessons with regard to our entirepractical activities. 
 Take the Odessa events. 
 An attemptat insurrection has failed. 
 A bitter reverse, a severedefeat. 
 But what a world of difference there is betweenthis set-back in the struggle and the set-backs in the efforts made by the Shipovs, Trubetskois, Petrunkeviches, Struves, and all such bourgeois flunkeys of the tsar, to strikea deal! Engels once said that defeated armies learn theirlessons well. 
 These splendid words apply in far greater meas-ure to revolutionary armies, whose replacements come fromthe progressive classes. 
 Until the old, corrupt superstruc-ture, whose putrefaction infects the whole people, is swept away, each new defeat will produce ever new armies offighters. 
 Of course, there also exists mankind’s far widercollective experience, which has left its impress upon thehistory of international democracy and of internationalSocial-Democracy, and has been systematised by the foremost representatives of revolutionary thought. 
 Our Party draws on that experience for material to be used in its everydaypropaganda and agitation. 
 But while society is based onthe oppression and exploitation of millions of workingpeople, only the few can learn directly from that experience. 
The masses have to learn mostly from their own experience, paying dearly for every lesson. 
 The lesson of January 9 was a hard one, but it revolutionised the temper of the entireproletariat of the whole of Russia. 
 The lesson of the Odessauprising is a hard one, but, with sentiments already revolu-tionised, it will now teach the revolutionary proletariat notonly how to fight but also how to win. 
 Regarding the Odessa events we say: the revolutionary army has been defeated— long live the revolutionary army! We have already stated in No. 
 7 of our paper that the Odessa uprising has shed new light on our slogans callingfor a revolutionary army and a revolutionary government. 
 * In the preceding number we spoke about the military lessons *“The Revolutionary Army and the Revolutionary Government”, 1905. 
 See present edition, Vol. 
 8, pp. 
 560-68. 
— Ed. 
 of the uprising (Comrade V. 
S. 
’s article). 
 In this issue we dwell once more on some of its political lessons (the article “Urban Revolution”). 
 We must now deal with the verification of our recent tactical decisions in the doubleaspect of theoretical correctness and practical expediencywe have spoken of above. 
 Insurrection and a revolutionary government are the most vital political questions of the present time. 
 These are questions that Social-Democrats have most of all discussed and argued about among themselves. 
 It was to these ques-tions that the main resolutions of the Third Congress of theR. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 and of the Conference of the break-away sectionof the Party were devoted. 
 It may now be asked: in whatlight do these differences appear after the Odessa uprising? Anyone who will now go to the trouble of re-reading, on the one hand, the statements and articles on this uprising,and, on the other, the four resolutions on issues of insur-rection and of a provisional government adopted by the PartyCongress and by the new-Iskrists’ Conference will at oncenotice how, under the influence of events, the latter have in actual fact begun to side with their opponents, i. 
e. 
, to act not according to their own resolutions, but accordingto those of the Third Congress. 
 There is no better critic ofan erroneous doctrine than the course of revolutionary events. 
 Under the influence of these events Iskra ’s Editorial Board has issued a leaflet entitled “The First Victory of the Revolution”, addressed to “Russian citizens, workers, and peasants”. 
 Here is the most important passage in the leaflet: “The time has come to act boldly and to support the soldiers’ bold rebellion with all our might. 
 It is boldness that will now win the day! “Therefore, call open meetings of the people and bring them tidings of the collapse of tsarism’s military prop! Wherever possible seize municipal institutions and make them the bulwark of the people’srevolutionary government! Oust the tsarist officials and appointgeneral elections to bodies of revolutionary government, to whichyou will entrust the provisional administration of public affairspending the final victory over the tsar’s government and the establish-ment of a new political regime. 
 Seize the branches of the State Bank and the arsenals and arm the people! Establish contacts between thecities, between town and countryside, and let armed citizens hastento each other’s assistance wherever aid is needed! Take the prisonsand free the champions of our cause imprisoned there—they willswell your ranks! Proclaim everywhere the overthrow of the tsarist monarchy and its replacement by a free democratic republic! Arise, citizens! The hour of liberation has struck! Long live the revolution!Long live the democratic republic! Long live the revolutionary army!Down with the autocracy!” Thus, we have before us a determined, open, and clear call for an armed uprising of the whole people. 
 We also havehere an equally determined call—though, regrettably, inex-plicit and incompletely worded—to form a provisional revolutionary government. 
 Let us first consider the ques-tion of an uprising. 
 Is there any difference in principle between the way this question was handled by the Third Congress and by theConference? Undoubtedly there is. 
 We have already dealtwith this in Proletary , No. 
 6 (“A Third Step Back” *) and we shall now refer, furthermore, to the instructive testimony of Osvobozhdeniye . 
 In No. 
 72 of the magazine we read that the “Majority” is lapsing into “abstract revolutionism,rebelliousness, an eagerness to stir up insurrection amongthe popular masses by any and every means, and to immedi-ately seize power on their behalf”. 
 “On the contrary, the Minority, while steadfastly adhering to the dogma of Marx-ism, at the same time preserves the realistic elements of theMarxist world outlook. 
” This opinion of liberals who havegone through the preparatory school of Marxism and throughBernsteinism is extremely valuable. 
 The liberal bourgeoishave always reproached the revolutionary wing of Social-Democracy with “abstract revolutionism and rebellious-ness” and have always praised the opportunist wing for its“realism” in stating the question. 
 Iskra itself has had to admit (see No. 
 73, note referring to Mr. 
 Struve’s approvalof the “realism” of Comrade Akimov’s pamphlet) that,when spoken by the Osvobozhdeniye League members, “realist” means “ opportunist ”. 
 The Osvobozhdeniye League members know only pedestrian realism; the revolutionary dialectics ofMarxist realism, which emphasises the urgent tasks of theadvanced class, and discovers in the existing state of thingsthose elements that will lead to its overthrow, areabsolutely alien to them. 
 Therefore, Osvobozhdeniye ’s characterisation of the two trends in Social-Democracy once *First published in 1905. 
 See present edition, Vol. 
 8, pp. 
 544-54. 
— Ed. 
 more confirms a fact proved by our literature, namely, that the “Majority” is the revolutionary wing of Russian Social-Democracy, and the “Minority” its opportunist wing. 
 Osvobozhdeniye definitely admits that, compared with the Congress, “the Conference of the Minority regards in-surrection in a quite different way”. 
 Indeed, the Conferenceresolution in the first place defeats its own purpose by nowdenying the possibility of a planned uprising (Clause 1), now admitting it (par. 
 d), and, in the second place, confines itself to a mere enumeration of the general conditions for “preparing an uprising” such as: a) extending agitation;b) strengthening the ties with the mass movement; c) pro-moting a revolutionary consciousness; d) establishing con-nections between the various localities; e) winning over non-proletarian groups to support the proletariat. 
 The Congress resolution, on the contrary, outspokenly proclaimspositive slogans, recognises that the movement has already made insurrection imperative, and calls for the organisation of the proletariat for the immediate struggle, for the adop-tion of the most energetic measures to arm it, for the expla-nation through propaganda and agitation “not only of the political significance” of the uprising (in essence, the reso-lution of the Conference confines itself to this), but also itspractical and organisational aspect. 
 For a clearer understanding of the difference between the two solutions of the problem let us recall the evolution of Social-Democratic views on insurrection since the very inception of the mass working-class movement. 
 Thefirst stage: 1897. 
 In his Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats Lenin states that “to decide at the present time the questionof what methods the Social-Democracy will resort tofor the direct overthrow of the autocracy, whether it will choose an uprising, or a widespread political strike, or some other form of attack, would be akin to generals calling acouncil of war before they have mustered an army” (p. 
 18). 
 * Here, as we see, there is not the slightest reference to prepa-rations for an uprising; what is spoken of is merely themustering of an army, i. 
e. 
, propaganda, agitation, and organisation in general. 
 *First published in pamphlet form in Geneva, 1898. 
 See present edition, Vol. 
 2, p. 
 342. 
— Ed. 
 The second stage: 1902. 
 In Lenin’s What Is To Be Done? we read: “...Picture to yourselves a popular uprising. 
 Probably everyone will now (February 1902) agree that we mustthink of this and prepare for it. 
 But how ? Surely the Central Committee cannot appoint agents to all localities for thepurpose of preparing the uprising! Even if we had a CentralCommittee it could achieve absolutely nothing by such appointments under present-day Russian conditions. 
 But a network of agents that would form in the course of establish-ing and distributing the common newspaper would not haveto “sit about and wait” for the call for an uprising, but couldcarry on the regular activity that would guarantee the high-est probability of success in the event of an uprising. 
 Such activity would strengthen our contacts with the broadest strata of the working masses and with all social strata thatare discontented with the autocracy, which is of such impor-tance for an uprising. 
 Precisely such activity would serveto cultivate the ability to estimate correctly the generalpolitical situation and, consequently, the ability to select the proper moment for an uprising. 
 Precisely such activity would train all local organisations to respond simultaneously to the same political questions, incidents, and events thatagitate the whole of Russia and to react to such ‘incidents’in the most vigorous, uniform, and expedient manner pos-sible; for an uprising is in essence the most vigorous, most uniform, and most expedient ‘answer’ of the entire people to the government. 
 Lastly, it is precisely such activity thatwould train all revolutionary organisations throughoutRussia to maintain the most continuous, and at the sametime the most secret, contacts with one another, thus creat-ing real Party unity; for without such contacts it will be impossible collectively to discuss the plan for the uprising and to take the necessary preparatory measures on itseve, measures that must be kept in the strictest secrecy”(pp. 
 136-37 *). 
 What points does this reasoning bring out with regard to the question of an uprising? 1) The absurdity of the idea of “preparing” an uprising by appointing special agents *First published in Iskra , 1902. 
 See present edition, Vol. 
 5, pp. 
 515-16. 
— Ed. 
 who would “sit around and wait” for the call. 
 2) The neces-sity of contacts established in the course of work done in common between people and organisations engaged in the regular work. 
 3) The necessity of strengthening the tiesbetween the proletarian (workers) and the non-proletarian(all the discontented) sections of the population in thecourse of such work. 
 4) The necessity of jointly cultivat-ing the ability to appraise correctly the political situation and to “react” to political events in the most expedient manner. 
 5) The need for actual unification of all localrevolutionary organisations. 
 Consequently, the slogan of preparations for an upris-ing is already plainly advanced, but as yet there is no direct call to rise, no recognition that the movement “has already led up to” the necessity for an uprising, that it is necessary to arm immediately, to organise ourselves incombat squads, etc. 
 Before us is an analysis of those veryconditions for preparing an uprising which are repeated almost literally in the Conference resolution (in 1905!!). 
 The third stage: 1905. 
 A further step forward is made in the newspaper Vperyod and later on in the resolution of the Third Congress. 
 Besides general political preparations for an uprising, a direct slogan is issued, namely, that we should immediately organise and arm for an uprising,and that special (combat) squads should be formed, as themovement “has already led to the necessity of an armed uprising” (Clause 2 of the Congress resolution). 
 This piece of historical information leads us to three indubitable conclusions: 1) The assertion of the liberal bour-geoisie, the Osvobozhdeniye League, that we are lapsing into “ abstract revolutionism and rebelliousness” is a downright lie. 
 We have always raised, and are now raising, this question not in an “abstract” way, but on a concrete basis , answering it differently in 1897, in 1902, and in 1905. 
 The accusation of rebelliousness is an opportunistphrase of the liberal bourgeois gentry, who are preparingto betray the interests of the revolution and to play it falseat a time of decisive conflict with the autocracy. 
 2) The Conference of the new-Iskrists stopped short at the second stage in the evolution of the question of insurrection. 
In 1905 it merely reiterated what had been enough in 1902. 
 It lagged some three years behind revolutionary develop-ments. 
 3) Under the influence of the lessons of life, namely, the Odessa uprising, the new-Iskrists have in fact acknowledged the necessity of acting according to the Con-gress resolution and not according to their own, i. 
e. 
, theyhave recognised that the task of an insurrection is anurgent one, that a direct call must be made forthwith forthe immediate organisation of an uprising and for the arming of the people. 
 The revolution has dislodged a backward Social-Demo-cratic doctrine at one stroke. 
 Another obstacle to practicalunity in work in common with the new-Iskrists has beenremoved, which, of course, does not yet mean thatdifferences on principles have been entirely eliminated. 
 We cannot be content to have our tactical slogans limp behind events and to their being adapted to events after their occur-rence. 
 We must have slogans that lead us forward, light up thepath before us, and raise us above the immediate tasks of themoment. 
 To wage a consistent and sustained struggle theparty of the proletariat cannot determine its tactics from occasion to occasion. 
 In its tactical decisions it must com-bine fidelity to the principles of Marxism with due regardfor the progressive tasks of the revolutionary class. 
 Take another urgent political question, that of a pro-visional revolutionary government. 
 Here we see, perhaps,even more clearly that in its leaflet the Iskra Editorial Board has in fact abandoned the slogans of the Conference and has accepted the tactical slogans of the Third Congress. 
The absurd theory of “not setting ourselves the aim ofseizing” (for a democratic revolution) “or sharing powerin a provisional government” has gone by the board, for theleaflet makes a direct appeal for the “seizure of municipal institutions” and the organisation of a “provisional admin-istration of public affairs”. 
 The absurd slogan of “remain-ing a party of extreme revolutionary opposition” (absurdin a period of revolution, although quite appropriate ina period of parliamentary struggle alone) has in fact beenshelved, for the Odessa events have forced Iskra to realise that during an insurrection it is ridiculous to confine one-self to this slogan, that it is necessary to call energeti-cally for an uprising, for its vigorous prosecution and for the use of revolutionary power. 
 The absurd slogan of “revolu-tionary communes” has also been discarded, for the events in Odessa have forced Iskra to realise that this slogan merely serves to confuse the democratic revolution with thesocialist. 
 To confuse these two very different thingswould be sheer adventurism, testifying to complete ob-scurity in theoretical thinking, and capable of hamperingimplementation of essential practical measures facilitating the working-class struggle for socialism in a democratic republic. 
 Call to mind the polemic between the new Iskra and Vperyod , the former’s tactics of action “only from below”, as opposed to the Vperyod tactics of action “both from below and from above”, and you will see that Iskra has accepted our solution of the question by now itself calling for action from above. 
 Remember Iskra ’s apprehensions that we might discredit ourselves by assuming responsibility for thetreasury, finances, etc. 
—and you will see that, though ourarguments failed to convince Iskra , the events did convince it of the correctness of those arguments, for in the leaflet quoted above Iskra clearly recommends “seizure of branches of the State Bank”. 
 The absurd theory that a revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry,their joint participation in a provisional revolution-ary government constitutes “treason to the proletariat”or “vulgar Jaurèsism (Millerandism)” has simply been for-gotten by the new-Iskrists, who are themselves now calling upon the workers and peasants to seize municipal institu-tions, branches of the State Bank and arsenals “to arm thewhole people” (apparently, this time meaning to arm withweapons and not merely with a “burning desire to arm them-selves”), to proclaim the overthrow of the tsarist monarchy, etc. 
—in a word, to act wholly in accordance with the programme provided in the resolution of the Third Congress,to act precisely as is indicated by the slogan calling for arevolutionary-democratic dictatorship and a provisionalrevolutionary government. 
 True, Iskra mentions neither of these slogans in its leaflet. 
 It enumerates and describes actions whose sum is characteristic of a provisional revolutionary government, butavoids mentioning the term. 
 That is to be regretted. 
 In /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR actual fact it accepts this slogan, but the absence of a clear term can only create vacillation and uncertainty, and sow confusion in fighters’ minds. 
 Fear of the words “revolutionary government” and “revolutionary power” is apurely anarchist fear, and unworthy of a Marxist. 
 To“seize” institutions and banks, “appoint elections”, establish“provisional administration”, and “proclaim the over-throw of the monarchy”—for all this the first and absolutely necessary step is the proclamation of a provisional revolu-tionary government to unite all the military and politicalactivities of the revolutionary people and direct theseactivities towards a single aim. 
 Unless there is such unity,unless the provisional government is universally recognisedby the revolutionary people, unless it assumes all power, any “seizure” of institutions and any “proclamation” of a republic will remain merely an outburst of senselessrebelliousness. 
 Unless it is concentrated by the revolution-ary government the people’s revolutionary energy willmerely dissipate after the first success of the uprisingsquander itself on trifles, and lose its national scope. 
 It will be unable to cope with the task of keeping what has been seized, or of giving effect to what has been proclaimed. 
 We repeat: Social-Democrats who do not recognise the decisions of the Third Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 havebeen in actual fact forced by the course of events to actin full accordance with the slogans proclaimed by the Congress and to throw the Conference’s slogans by the board. 
 Revolution teaches. 
 It is our duty to make the most of thelessons it provides, frame our tactical slogans in conformitywith our conduct and our immediate aims, give the massesa proper understanding of those immediate aims, andstart most extensively organising the workers everywhere to fight in an uprising, create a revolutionary army, and form a provisional revolutionary government! Proletary , No. 
 9, Published according to July 26 (13), 1905 the text in Proletary WRATHFUL IMPOTENCE No. 
 104 of Iskra carries a retort to our feuilleton “ A Third Step Back” * (Proletary , No. 
 6), which spoke quite calmly of the new-Iskra group having made use of a printing-press, supplies, and funds in the name of the Party,but having refused to return Party property. 
 The stateIskra has been reduced to by its irritation over this state-ment is to be seen in the language it has been using,which is reminiscent of the Bund’s inimitable brand of vituperation. 
 Iskra has courteously applied to us such terms as “filthy swab”, “slanderous cowards”, and so on and soforth. 
 All this reminds one of the way Engels once charac-terised the polemic waged by a certain variety of émigrés : “Each word is like a chamber-pot, and not an empty oneat that” ( Jedes Wort—ein Nachttopf und kein leerer ). 
 67 We have, of course, not forgotten the French saying, “Abuse is the argument of those who are wrong”. 
 We shall ask theunbiased reader calmly to pass judgement on the causeof all this fuss. 
 The new-Iskrists have made no reply to aletter from the Central Committee asking them, after theThird Congress, to return Party property. 
 They do not rec-ognise the Third Congress or the Central Committee’s turn towards the Bolsheviks. 
 That is all so. 
 However, the onlyconclusion to be drawn from such non-recognition is that,as the new-Iskrists see it, they should return not all Partyproperty, but only part of it. 
 This is so obvious that in itsretort Iskra itself now speaks of “the possibility of dividing up all Party property”. 
 If that is the case, our dear oppo-*See present edition, Vol. 
 8, pp. 
 544-54. 
— Ed. 
 nents, why could you not have replied to the Central Com-mittee’s letter in that vein? Otherwise, it is beyond doubt that, however energetic the expressions you have used, the Majority has rendered a full account of all its affairsby publishing the minutes of the Third Congress, while youhave rendered no account to anybody concerning the use ofParty property, have published no minutes at all, but haveonly used bad language. 
 Consider in a moment of calm the impression such behaviour must produce on all thinking people. 
 Further, the Central Committee’s turn towards the Congress is displeasing to Iskra . 
 That is natural. 
 But this turn is not the first to have taken place. 
 A year ago, inAugust 1904, the Central Committee sided with the Minority. 
 A year ago we stated in print and publicly that we did not recognise the legality of the Central Committee’s actions. 
It may be asked: How did we then behave with respect toParty property? We handed over the printing-press , stores , and funds to the Mensheviks . 
 Iskra may hurl as much abuse as it likes, but facts are facts. 
 We rendered due account and turned the property over to our opponents wishing to fight in the Party spirit and to get a congress called. 
 Ouropponents have been steering clear of a congress and haverendered no account to anybody (except their own adherents,and even to them in private, for no minutes of the “Con-ference” were kept, in the first place, and in the second, nothing is known either of its agenda or of the scope of its powers, i. 
e. 
, the degree in which its decisions are bindingupon the Mensheviks themselves). 
 The struggle within our Party has ended in a split; it is now merely a struggle between two parties, one of whichis in the throes of organisation-as-process. 
 Today, looking back at the history of the struggle prior to the split, anybody (of course of those who study the history of their Party using the documents, and do not merely give ear to oldwives’ tales, in the way practised by many who come herefrom Russia)—anybody can clearly see the general nature ofthe struggle. 
 The Majority, which has been accused of “for-malism”, bureaucratism, and so on, has surrendered all its formal privileges and bureaucratic institutions to its op-ponents—first the Central Organ’s Editorial Board, then the Party Council, and finally the Central Committee. 
 The Con-gress is the only thing it has refused to give up. 
 The out-come has been that the Bolsheviks have restored the Party (or rather, as the new-Iskrists naturally think, have createdtheir own Party), founding all their Party institutions wholly on the voluntary consent of Party workers—first theBureau of Majority Committees, then Vperyod , and, finally, the Third Party Congress. 
 Our opponents, on the contrary, are holding on to their formal privileges and bureaucratic institutions given to them out of commiseration. 
 Considerthe following fact: have not Lenin and Plekhanov madethem the gift of the Central Organ’s Editorial Board? Whenit calls itself the Central Organ of the Party, Proletary bases its claim on the Third Congress decisions which are not recognised by the Mensheviks, but have been clearly, precisely, and definitely recognised by the Party Majoritywhose composition is known to all. 
 For its part, Iskra , which styles itself “Central Organ of the Party”, basesthat claim on the decisions of the Second Congress, whichtoday are recognised neither by the Bolsheviks (we have replaced them by the decisions of the Third Congress), nor by the Mensheviks !! That is the gist of the whole matter! After all, it was the Menshevik Conference that revoked theRules of the Second Congress. 
 It is the new-Iskra group that is now clinging to a heading rejected by its own adherents! Even Plekhanov himself, who could never see eye to eye with the new-Iskrists in matters of principle, but has madecountless personal concessions to them, launched morethan his share of attacks against the Bolsheviks, for whichthe new-Iskrists have been bowing and scraping to him—even Plekhanov has declared that the Conference has dealt a death blow at the central institutions, and has preferred to wash his hands of the matter. 
 As for the new-Iskra people, they go on calling themselves the “Central Organ”, and railagainst those who tell them that their Party stand is notmerely wrong but downright indecent. 
 The abusive languagethat has provided the occasion for this writing is the psychologically inevitable consequence of a dim realisation of that indecency. 
 We shall remind the reader that evenMr. 
 Struve, who has often voiced sympathy in principle with Trotsky, Starover, Akimov, and Martynov, and with the new-Iskra trends in general and the new-Iskra Conference in particular—even Mr. 
 Struve was in his time obliged to acknowledge that their stand is not quite a correct one, orrather quite an incorrect one (see Osvobozhdeniye , No. 
 57). 
 We are well aware that the mass of Social-Democrats, especially the workers, are most dissatisfied with the split(but then, who can be pleased with it?), and are ready to look for a solution “ wherever possible ”. 
 We fully understand this frame of mind and have every respect for it, but wewould warn all and sundry that a frame of mind is notenough. 
 The formula “wherever possible” is worthless, forit lacks the chief thing—an understanding of the means o f putting an end to the split. 
 Bitter words, attempts to create a “third something”, neither Bolshevik nor Menshevik, will not help matters, but will only introduce greater con-fusion. 
 The example provided over the last two years by sopowerful a personality as Plekhanov is a practical illustra-tion of this. 
 Let bitter words be resorted to by GermanSocial-Democrats, who, like Karl Kautsky, have, in the main, learnt of the split in the Party from biased sources. 
 Their ignorance may be pardoned, though their claims tojudge things they know nothing of are, of course, unpar-donable. 
 Russian Social-Democrats must at last learn todespise those whose only recourse is to bitter words, whochop and change, hold forth on the subject of “peace”, but reveal their impotence when it comes to doing something real for the cause of peace. 
 The real path to peace andunity in the Party does not lie through hasty agreements,which will lead to new conflicts and to new and worse con-fusion, but through thorough and factual ascertainment o f the tactical and organisational tendencies of both sides. 
 In this respect we are most satisfied with the new-Iskra Conference, which has revealed the irreparable disintegra-tion of the new-Iskra trend. 
 Their tail-ism in questions of tactics has been smashed by the revolution, and their“organisation-as-process” has become a laughing-stock. 
 Theyhave been left, on the one hand, by Plekhanov, who has evidently been “enlightened” by the Conference not only with regard to its organisational significance but also withregard to adherence to principle on the part of the new-Iskrists. 
 On the other hand, they have been abandoned by Akimov, who has called the promises or “principles” of the St. 
 Petersburg Mensheviks “ a hollow phrase ” (Posledniye Izvestia ,68 No. 
 235). 
 The Party’s Third Congress has rallied the ranks of one of the sides. 
 The other side has been smashed by theConference itself. 
 It remains for us only to advise the “con-ciliators” to study the history of the split, examine thecauses of the failure of Plekhanov’s conciliation, and refrain from putting new wine into old bottles. 
 Proletary , No. 
 9, Published according to July 26 (13), 1905 the text in Proletary ORIGINAL VARIANT OF THE PREFACE TO THE PAMPHLET WORKERS ON THE SPLIT IN THE PARTY 69 C O V E R : T h e V o i c e o f t h e W o r k e r s a n d t h e S p l i t i n t h e P a r t y Published by the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Contents: I. 
 Preface by the Editorial Board of Proletary . 
 II. 
 Letter from an Odessa Worker. 
 III. 
 Reply to a Letter from a Worker. 
 By Abramov . 
 IV. 
 Open Letter from the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 to the Organising Committee. 
 PREFACE In No. 
 8 of Proletary we mentioned the forthcoming pub-lication of a letter from an Odessa worker, who, in our opinion,has expressed the temper of a fairly large number of workers. 
In reply to this letter we are publishing, in the first place,an article by Comrade Abramov of the Proletary staff “Reply to a Letter from a Worker”, and in the second place, “An Open Letter to the Organising Committee” from the Cen-tral Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, 70 which was recently released in Russia and featured in No. 
 10 of Proletary . 
 As for us, we would emphasise only one thing—unifica-tion is essential. 
 “Worker” is quite right in insisting on this. 
 However, insistence is not sufficient; what is needed is the ability to bring about unification, the strength to achieveunification. 
 It is not hard to stand aside and form a third party or neutral group. 
 That will not bring unification clos-er, but will only defer it; it will not simplify the present confused state of affairs, but will only make it more con-fused. 
 The decisions made at the Conference of the Minorityor new-Iskrists give no direct or clear answer to the questionof precisely how unification can and should be achieved. 
 The decisions of the Third Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 providethat answer in the shape of the Party Rules, which fully guarantee the Minority’s rights. 
 It would be ridiculous to consider that answer infallible or ideal. 
 But anyone whowould not merely talk of unification but really work for itsachievement through effective measures and proposals shouldnot limit himself to reproaches and reproofs, should not in-crease the split by forming a third party, but should set about preparing his answer to the question of the conditions and forms of unification. 
 That is a far more difficult matter thanthe preaching of peace and love, but then it is far moreuseful. 
 Editorial Board of “Proletary ” Written in July 1905 First published in 1926 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany V the manuscript PREFACE TO THE PAMPHLET WORKERS ON THE SPLIT IN THE PARTY When, in Proletary (No. 
 8), we promised to publish in full a letter signed “A Worker, One of Many”, we had no idea who he was. 
 We do know that the ideas expressed by him are really shared by many workers, and this was sufficientreason for us to decide to publish his letter. 
 Now we learnfrom Iskra , No. 
 105 that the author of the letter “formerly considered himself one of the Minority”, that “he had fora long time past been a bitter enemy of the so-called Major-ity”. 
 So much the better. 
 So much more valuable to us is this former Menshevik’s admission that well-meant inten-tions as to “proletarian initiative” were just so many “finewords”; so much more precious is his outright condemnationof the intellectual’s “Manilovism”. 
 71 This is an indubitable sign that the Mensheviks’ demagogy, their indiscriminate promises of boons of every description—autonomy, initia-tive, democracy, etc. 
—are, as should have been expected,beginning to weary class-conscious workers and evoke theirlegitimate distrust and criticism. 
 Another highly characteristic fact, and one which we are sure will turn many more Menshevik workers into “former Mensheviks”, is that Iskra has seen in this letter from “Worker” a “fist from below”! This is a fact that is verymuch worth considering. 
 What has a “fist” to do with it anyway? Does this “dread-ful word”, which the Mensheviks have worked almost todeath, denote certain definite organisational concepts, or does it simply express the intellectual’s annoyance at, or outburst against, any strong organisation which would holdintellectual caprices in check? What does the author of the letter want? He wants the split to be closed. 
 Does Iskra sympathise with this aim? Yes, it states so plainly. 
 Does it consider that this can be achieved right now? Yes, it does, for it declares: “Differ-ences (in tactics) are not so great as to justify a split. 
” That being the case, why does Iskra again bring up the tactical differences in its reply to “Worker”, mentioningeven the “Plan of the Zemstvo Campaign” which was buried in the Iskra bulletins published “for Party members only” and in Plekhanov’s “confidential” pamphlet? What is the pointof this? “Worker” does not deny the necessity of polemicsand disputes, nor do the Bolsheviks deny it! And the PartyRules adopted at the Third Congress clearly establish theright of every committee to publish literature. 
 After all, the question revolves around what should be done for tac-tical disagreements not to lead to a split, i. 
e. 
, to a break inthe organisational ties. 
 Why then does Iskra evade this clearly presented question, by dragging in irrelevantarguments about tactical differences? Is it not, perhaps,because “Worker” would rule out any irrelevant chatter that they speak of his “fist”? A mere desire to put an end to the split is not sufficient to end it. 
 It is necessary to know how to do it. 
 Putting an end to the split means merging in a single organisation. 
 And whoever really wants to bring the split speedily to anend must not confine himself to complaints, reproaches, re-criminations, exclamations, and declamations about the split (as is done by “Worker” and also by Plekhanov, for instance,since he has found himself in the Marsh)—he must immedi-ately start developing the type of that common and united organisation. 
 The weak point in the letter from “Worker” is that the author merely bewails the split, but makes no definite proposals for specific organisational measures to close it. 
 In-stead of remedying this defect, Iskra aggravates it by yelling in “panic”: “A fist?”, at the mere idea voiced by “Worker” concerning obligatory recognition of common organisationalrules!! The split is not justified by the differences, says “Worker”. 
 That is true, Iskra agrees. 
 This, “Worker” continues, means that it is now necessary to spin a rope so strong(fie, for shame! What grossly mechanical terms I am using! What a “fistic” idea! But bear up a moment, comrades of Iskra , don’t fall into a swoon at the idea of “nooses” and other such horrors!) that it would firmly bind both sections and keep them tied together despite tactical differences. 
 In reply to this Iskra has another fit of hysterics, and screams: “A fist!” We, on our part, say in reply: You are right, Comrade Worker! You reason in a business-like way. 
 A new, strong rope is needed. 
 But go further, take the next step: begin to consider what sort of rope this should be, what exactly this common organisation, which is to be obligatory (help! the “fist” again!) upon both sections, should be like. 
 Comrade Worker did not go far enough in specifying his organisational proposals (because the question of closing the split is an exclusively organisational question, provided both sides acknowledge that tactical differences do not justify a split!); Iskra , however, finds that he went too far, so far, indeed, that it has again raised the cry about a fist!! Once more we ask our readers: In point of fact, what is the real meaning of this notorious “fist”, which, one might say, is scaring the new Iskra out of its wits? Does this fist express any definite organisational ideas, or is itmerely the intellectual’s blind and ridiculous fear of any kind of “ties” imposed by any organisation that is obliga-tory upon all members of the Party? We leave it to the class-conscious workers to decide this question for themselves, and shall proceed. 
 The real difficulty in a merger, assuming both sides sincerely desire it, is the following. 
 In the first place,organisational standards, Party Rules absolutely binding onall, should be laid down; secondly, all parallel, competinglocal and central Party organisations and institutions should be merged. 
 So far only the Third Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 has attempted to solve the first of these problems, by establish-ing rules providing constitutional guarantees for the rightsof any minority. 
 The Third Congress has, so to say, provideda place in the Party for every minority that accepts the Party programme, tactics, and discipline of organisation. 
 The Bolsheviks have taken care to provide the Mensheviks aswell with a definite place in a united Party. 
 We cannot say the same of the Mensheviks: their rules provide for no consti-tutional guarantees whatever of the rights of any minority in the Party. 
 It goes without saying that no Bolshevik regards the Rules adopted by the Third Congress as ideal or infallible. 
Whoever thinks the Rules have to be changed should comeforward with a draft of clear-cut amendments—this would bea practical step towards closing the split; it would be some-thing more than mere complaints and recriminations. 
 We may, perhaps, be asked, why we have not ourselves started doing this with regard to the Rules adopted by the“Conference”. 
 Our answer is that we have started to do so:see Proletary , No. 
 6, “A Third Step Back”. 
 * We are prepared to repeat the fundamental principles of organisation , rec-ognition of which is, in our opinion, necessary for a merger: 1) Submission of the minority to the majority (not to beconfused with the “Minority” and the “Majority” in quota-tion marks! Here we deal with the principle of Party organ-isation in general, not with the fusion of the “Minority”with the “Majority”, which we shall speak of later. 
 It is possible, speaking in the abstract, to visualise the merger between an equal number of both “Mensheviks” and “Bolshe-viks”, but even such a merger is impossible unless the submis-sion of the minority to the majority is recognised in principle and as obligatory ). 
 2) The congress, i. 
e. 
, an assembly of elected delegates from all duly authorised organisations must be the Party’s supreme organ, moreover, any decision by these elected delegates must be final (this is the principleof democratic representation, as opposed to the principle ofconsultative conferences whose decisions are submitted tothe organisations for endorsement, i. 
e. 
, a plebiscite). 
 3) Elec-tions to the Party’s central body (or bodies) must be by direct vote and must be held at a congress. 
 Elections out-side a congress, two-stage elections, etc. 
, are impermissible. 
4) All Party publications, both local and central, must becompletely subordinate to both the Party Congress and therelevant central or local organisation of the Party. 
 Exist-ence of Party publications organisationally unconnected with the Party is impermissible. 
 5) There must be an *See present edition, Vol. 
 8, pp. 
 544-54. 
— Ed. 
 absolutely clear definition of what membership of the Party implies. 
 6) In like manner, the rights of any Party minority must also be clearly defined in the Party Rules. 
 Such, in our opinion, are the absolutely indispensable organisational principles, without recognition of which nomerger is possible. 
 We should like to hear the opinion of“A Worker, One of Many” in the matter, and, in general, ofall in favour of fusion. 
 We may be asked: What about the question of the com-mittees’ attitude towards provincial organisations? Whatabout the elective principle? Our reply is that no funda-mental principles of organisation are involved in this matter,once the absolute application of the elective principle is notsuggested. 
 That is something the Mensheviks have not suggested. 
 In conditions of political liberty the elective prin-ciple will be necessary, but, for the present, even the Rulesadopted by the “Conference” have not introduced it for thecommittees. 
 One definition or another of the rights andpowers of the provincial organisations is not a question ofprinciple (assuming, of course, that what is said is actually carried out, that there is no indulgence in demagogy and merely “fine words”). 
 The Third Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
tried to give an exact definition of what is meant by commit-tees and provincial organisations, a definition of the relationsbetween them. 
 Any proposals for certain changes, amend-ments, or deletions would be quite calmly discussed by any Bolshevik. 
 So far as I am aware, there are no “intransigents” in our midst on any point of the question, and the minutesof the Third Congress will bear out this assertion. 
 The next and probably no less difficult question is how to merge all parallel organisations. 
 In conditions of polit-ical liberty this would be easy, since we would have Party organisations with a certain number of definitely known members. 
 With a secret organisation it is different. 
 Es-tablishment of membership is all the more difficult, themore lightly membership is sometimes understood, and, themore often recourse is made to demagogy, to fictitious enrol-ment in the Party of people who are not class-conscious. 
 We think that the comrades working on the spot and well acquainted with the state of affairs should have the final sayon how these difficulties are to be overcome. 
 The temporary absence of members of organisations, who are “on holiday” in prison, are in exile, or abroad, is another impediment that should be taken into account. 
 Then there is, of course, the considerable difficulty of merging the central bodies. 
Without a single guiding centre, without a single centralpress organ, real unity of the Party is impossible. 
 In thisrespect the question stands as follows: either the class-con-scious workers, ignoring all plaints about fists, will succeed in forcing the actual minority in the Party to advocate their views, without disorganising the work, in the various bodiesof the local committees, at conferences, congresses, meetings,etc. 
; or the class-conscious Social-Democratic workers willnot be able to cope with this task at present (generally speak-ing, they will undoubtedly and inevitably manage to cope with it: this is vouched for by the entire labour movement of Russia)—and in that event only agreements, and notfusion, will be possible between rival centres and rival organs. 
 In conclusion, we shall repeat: it is not by means of complaints and accusations, not by forming new, thirdparties or groups, circles, etc. 
 (similar to the one Plekhanov has now founded with his new Party publishing organisation 72 outside the Party), that Comrade Worker and those who share his views must strive to achieve their aims. 
 The formationof a third party or new groups will only complicate and con-fuse matters. 
 Preparation of concrete terms of fusion mustbe started: when all Party groups and organisations, all class-conscious workers, set about this, they will undoubted-ly be able to work out reasonable terms, and not only workthem out, but force the Party leaders (disregarding allplaints about fists) to submit to these terms. 
 In addition to Comrade Worker’s letter we are publishing an Open Letter from the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 to the Organising Committee, as a first step towards a prac-tical solution of the problem of a possible closing of thesplit. 
 Editorial Board of “Proletary ” July 1905 First published in 1905 in a pamphlet issued by the Central Published according to Committee of the Russian the text of the pamphlet Social-Democratic Labour Party WHILE THE PROLETARIAT IS DOING THE FIGHTING THE BOURGEOISIE IS STEALING TOWARDS POWER In war-time the diplomats stand idle, but when hostili-ties are over they are very much in the picture, casting upthe results, making out the bills, and acting the honestbroker. 
 Something of the kind is under way in the Russian revo-lution as well. 
 During the armed clashes between the people and the forces of autocracy, the liberal bourgeois lie low; they are against violence either from above or from below,and are opposed both to the authorities’ acts of despotismand to mob anarchy. 
 It is only when the fighting is overthat they appear on the scene, their political decisionsclearly reflecting the change in the political situation brought about by the fighting. 
 After January 9 the liberal bourgeoisie turned “pink”; it has now begun to go “red” followingthe Odessa events, which (in connection with events in theCaucasus, Poland, etc. 
) point to a steep rise in the people’sinsurrection against the autocracy during six months ofrevolution. 
 Highly instructive in this respect are three recent liberal congresses. 
 The most conservative of them was that ofthe merchants and manufacturers, who are most trusted by the autocracy and are undisturbed by the police. 
 They crit-icise and condemn the Bulygin scheme and demand a consti-tution, but, as far as we can judge from the incompleteinformation available, they do not even raise the questionof boycotting the Bulygin elections. 
 The most radical ofthe three was a delegate Congress of the Union of Unions 73 held in secret within a stone’s throw of St. 
 Petersburg, but on non-Russian soil—in Finland. 
 Congress members are said to have taken the precaution of concealing their papers, police searches at the border yielding no results. 
 Bya majority vote (though there seems to have been a sizableminority) this Congress approved a thorough and determinedboycott of the Bulygin elections and called for a widespreadcampaign for universal suffrage. 
 In the middle stood the most “influential”, fanfared, and vociferous of the three, the Zemstvo and Municipal Con-gress, which enjoyed almost legal status. 
 The police drew upa protocol just as a matter of form, their demand that theCongress break up merely evoking smiles. 
 But newspapers thatbegan to report the Congress were either suspended ( Slovo )74 or cautioned ( Russkiye Vedomosti ). 
 According to Mr. 
 Pyotr Dolgorukov’s concluding address as reported in The Times , the Congress was attended by 216 delegates. 
 Reports on itsproceedings were cabled to all parts of the world by foreigncorrespondents. 
 No opinion whatever was expressed on themain political issue—a boycott of the Bulygin “constitu-tion”. 
 According to British newspapers, the majority stood for a boycott, but the Organising Committee was against it. 
A compromise was reached, leaving the question open pend-ing publication of the Bulygin scheme, after which a newcongress was to be convened by telegraph. 
 Naturally, theBulygin scheme was strongly condemned by the Congress, which adopted the Osvobozhdeniye draft constitution (pro-viding for a monarchy and a two-chamber system), rejectedan appeal to the tsar, and decided to “appeal to the people”. 
 We are not yet in possession of the latter appeal. 
 Ac-cording to the foreign press, it amounts to a survey, couched inmoderate terms, of events since the November Zemstvo Congress, as well as a list of facts revealing the government’s unconscionable procrastination, its broken promises, andcynical flouting of the demands of public opinion. 
 Besidesan appeal to the people, an almost unanimous resolution waspassed calling for resistance to the government’s unjust andarbitrary acts. 
 “In view of the arbitrary acts of the Admin-istration and the constant violation of the rights of the public,” the resolution declares, “the Congress deems itincumbent upon all to defend the natural rights of man by peaceful means, including resistance to the acts of the authorities violating these rights, although such acts may be based on the letter of the law. 
” (We quote from The Times . 
) So our liberal bourgeoisie has beyond doubt taken a step to the left. 
 The revolution marches on—the bourgeoisdemocrats hobble along in the rear. 
 The true nature ofthis democracy, as bourgeois democracy, representing the propertied classes’ interests and inconsistently and self-interestedly defending the cause of freedom, is being re-vealed ever more clearly, even though bourgeois democracyis going “red” and sometimes attempts to use “almost revolu-tionary” language. 
 Indeed, postponement of a decision on the boycott of the Bulygin constitution can denote nothing but a desire to go on haggling with the autocracy, a lack of self-confidence within the majority which seemed to emerge in favour of aboycott, and a tacit admission that, while asking fornothing short of a constitution, the landowners and themerchants would, probably, agree to something less. 
 Even if acongress of liberal bourgeois does not venture to break at once with the autocracy and the Bulygin farce, what can be expected of that congress of all and sundry bourgeois whichis to be styled the Bulygin “Duma” and will be elected (ifever elected it will be!) under every kind of pressure fromthe autocratic government? That is exactly how the autocratic government looks upon this act of the liberals, which it considers merely an episode in the bourgeoisie’s chaffering. 
 On the one hand,the autocracy, in view of the liberals’ discontent, is “add-ing to” its promises—the Bulygin scheme, according toreports in the foreign press, is to include a number of new“liberal” changes. 
 On the other hand, the autocracy is reply-ing to Zemstvo discontent with a new threat: characteristic in this respect is a Times report, which says that Bulygin and Goremykin propose, as a measure against Zemstvo“radicalism”, to stir up the peasants against “the quality” bypromising them extra land in the name of the tsar, and holdinga “people’s” plebiscite (with the aid of the Rural Superintend-ents 75), on the question of whether or not the elections should be held on a social-estate basis. 
 This report is, of course,just a rumour set afloat, probably with a definite purpose, but there can be no doubt that the government is not afraid to resort to the grossest, most brutal, and most unbridled demagogy; nor is it afraid of an uprising by “masses on the rampage” and the dregs of society, while the liberalsare afraid of the people rising up against their oppressors,against the heroes of plunder, looting, and bashi-bazoukatrocities. 
 The government has long been shedding blood ina way and on a scale that have no precedent, yet the liber-als respond by saying they want to prevent bloodshed! After a reply of this kind, is not any hired thug entitled todespise them as bourgeois hagglers? After this, is it notridiculous to adopt a resolution calling for an appeal to thepeople and recognising “peaceful resistance” to violence andarbitrary acts? The government is distributing arms right and left, and bribing all comers to beat up and massacre Jews, “democrats”, Armenians, Poles, and so on. 
 But our“democrats” still think that campaigning for “peacefulresistance” is a “revolutionary” step! In No. 
 73 of Osvobozhdeniye , which we have just received, Mr. 
 Struve is ireful against Mr. 
 Suvorin 76 for the latter’s condescendingly patting Mr. 
 Ivan Petrunkevich on the back and suggesting that such liberals should be mollified withposts in ministries and government departments. 
 Mr. 
 Struveis indignant, for it is precisely Mr. 
 Petrunkevich and hisZemstvo supporters (“who, before history and the nation,have committed themselves to a programme”—What kind of programme? Where did they commit themselves?) that he has designated for ministerial posts in some future Cabi-net to be formed by the Constitutional-Democratic Party. 
We, however, hold that the way in which the Petrunkevichesbehaved both at their reception by the tsar and at theZemstvo Congress of July 6 (19) has given even the Suvorins good reason to despise such “democrats”. 
 “Every sincere and thinking liberal in Russia demands a revolution,” Mr. 
 Struvewrites. 
 For our part we shall add that if in July 1905 this“demand for a revolution” is voiced in a resolution onpeaceable methods of resistance then the Suvorins haveevery right to despise and sneer at such a “demand” and at such “revolutionaries”. 
 Mr. 
 Struve will, probably, retort that events which have until now swung our liberals to the left will in due course carry them farther still. 
 Here is what he has written in the selfsame No. 
 73: “Conditions for the army’s physical intervention in the political struggle will actually be provided only when theautocratic monarchy clashes with a nation organised throughpopular representation. 
 The army will then have to choosebetween the government and the nation, and the choice willnot be difficult or mistaken. 
” This peaceful idyll looks very much like putting revo-lution off until the Greek calends. 
 77 Who is to organise the nation in a popular representation? The autocracy? But thelatter consents to organise only the Bulygin Duma, whichyou yourselves are protesting against and refuse to recogniseas popular representation! Or, perhaps, the “nation” will itself organise representation of the people? If so, why is it that the liberals are dead set against a provisional revo-lutionary government, which can rely only on a revolutionaryarmy? Why is it that, while at their congress they spoke inthe name of the people, the liberals are taking no step thatwould signify the nation being organised in a popular representation? If, gentlemen, you really represent the people and not the bourgeoisie which betrays the interests ofthe people in the revolution, why don’t you appeal to thearmy? Why don’t you announce a break with the autocraticmonarchy? Why do you shut your eyes to the inevitabilityof a decisive struggle between the army of revolution and the army of tsarism? The reason is that you are afraid of the revolutionary people; you address them in trite words, while in actual factyou reckon and haggle with the autocracy. 
 Additional proofof that is provided by the talks held by Mr. 
 Golovin, Chair-man of the Zemstvo Congress’s Organising Committee, with Kozlov, Governor General of Moscow. 
 Mr. 
 Golovin assured Kozlov that rumours of any intent to turn the Congress intoa constituent assembly were absurd. 
 What does that mean?It means in effect that a representative of organised bourgeoisdemocracy gave his pledge to a representative of the autocracythat bourgeois democracy has no intention of breaking with the autocracy! Only political tyros will fail to realise that an undertaking not to declare the Congress a consti-tuent assembly was tantamount to promising to refrain from all genuinely revolutionary measures: Kozlov, of course, shied not at the words “constituent assembly” but at acts that could exacerbate the conflict and lead to the people and the army beginning a determined struggle againsttsarism. 
 Is it not political hypocrisy for you to call your-selves revolutionaries, talk of appealing to the people andplacing no more reliance in the tsar, while in actual fact youreassure the tsar’s servants as to your intentions? Oh, those florid liberal phrases! How many were uttered at the Congress by Mr. 
 Petrunkevich, leader of the “Con-stitutional-Democratic” Party! Let us see what commitmentsto “history and the nation” he has assumed. 
 The source isThe Times . 
 Mr. 
 de Roberti spoke in favour of petitioning the tsar. 
 This was opposed by Petrunkevich, Novosiltsev, Shakhovskoi, and Rodichev. 
 A ballot produced only six votes for a peti-tion. 
 Mr. 
 Petrunkevich had said that “when they went toPeterhof on June 6 (19), they still hoped the tsar would under-stand the terrible dangers of the situation and do somethingto avert them. 
 All hope in that direction must be abandoned. 
 There remained only one issue. 
 Till now they had hoped for reform from above, but henceforth their only hope wasin the people. 
 ( Loud applause . 
) They must tell them the truth in plain and homely words. 
 The inability and impotence ofthe government had promoted revolution. 
 That was a factwhich they all had to recognise. 
 Their duty was to use every effort to prevent the accompaniment of bloodshed. 
 Many of them had devoted long years to the service of theircountrymen; they must go boldly to the people, no longer tothe tsar. 
” On the following day Mr. 
 Petrunkevich continued:“We must break out of the narrow confines of our activities andgo to the peasant. 
 Till now we hoped for reforms from above, but, while we waited, time was doing its work. 
 Expedited by the government revolution has overtaken us. 
 Yesterdaytwo of our members were so much frightened by the wordrevolution that they left the Congress, but we must face thesituation manfully. 
 We cannot wait with folded arms. 
 Theobjection has been raised that any appeal to the nation by the Zemstvos and Municipal Councils will amount to agita-tion that stirs up unrest. 
 But does calm reign in the vil-lages? No, unrest already exists there, and of the worst kind. 
 We cannot keep the storm in check, but we must at least try to avert too much turmoil. 
 We must tell the people that it is useless to destroy factories and estates. 
 We cannot regard such destruction as mere vandalism: it is the peasants’blind and ignorant way of remedying an evil which theyinstinctively feel but are unable to understand. 
 The authori-ties may reply with the knout. 
 It is nevertheless our dutyto go to the people. 
 We should have done that earlier. 
 The Zemstvos have been in existence for forty years without coming into close and intimate contact with the peasants. 
Let us lose no time in rectifying this error. 
 We must tellthe peasant that we stand with him. 
” Excellent, Mr. 
 Petrunkevich! You stand with the peas-ants, with the people; you recognise the revolution as a fact, and have abandoned all hope in the tsar.... 
 Good luck to you, gentlemen! Only ... only, what exactly do you mean?You say you are not with the tsar, but with the people, so therefore you promise Governor General Kozlov that the Con-gress will not act as a constituent assembly, i. 
e. 
, as a bodythat is genuinely and actually representative of the people. 
 You recognise the revolution, so therefore you reply with peaceful methods of resistance to the atrocities, killings, andpillage perpetrated by the government’s servants. 
 Yougo to the peasant and stand with the peasant, so therefore you confine yourselves to a most vague programme, whoseonly promise is that the peasants may buy back land, given the landlords’ consent. 
 You are not with the tsar, but with the people, so therefore you accept a draft constitution which, in the first place, provides for a monarchy and thetsar’s control of the army and the bureaucracy, and, in thesecond place, guarantees in advance the political supremacyof the landlords and the big bourgeoisie through an upper chamber. 
 * The liberal bourgeoisie is turning to the people. 
 That is true. 
 It has been forced to do so, for without the peopleit is powerless to fight the autocracy. 
 But it is also afraid ofthe revolutionary people; it does not turn to the latter as arepresentative of their interests, or as a new and ardent *See the leaflet “Three Constitutions” published by our news-paper. 
 (See present edition, Vol. 
 8, pp. 
 557-58. 
— Ed. 
) comrade-in-arms, but as a chafferer, a stockjobber, who dashes from one belligerent to the other. 
 Today it is with the tsar and implores him on behalf of the “people” to grant a monarch-ist constitution, at the same time cravenly renouncing thepeople, “unrest”, “sedition”, and revolution. 
 On the morrowit threatens the tsar at its congress, threatens him witha monarchist constitution, and with peaceable resistance tohis bayonets. 
 And yet, gentlemen, you are surprised that the tsar’s servants have taken the measure of your craven, petty, double-dealing souls. 
 You are afraid to remainwithout a tsar, but the tsar is not afraid to remain withoutyou. 
 You are afraid of a decisive struggle; the tsar is notafraid of that, but wants it; he is himself provoking andcommencing the struggle; he wants a test of strength before he yields. 
 It is quite natural for the tsar to despise you. 
 It is quite natural for his contempt to be conveyed to youby his lackeys, the Suvorins, who patronisingly pat yourMr. 
 Petrunkevich on the back. 
 You deserve this contempt,for you are not fighting on the people’s side, but are onlystealing towards power behind the backs of the revolutionary people. 
 On occasions foreign correspondents and bourgeois pub-licists grasp the gist of the matter very aptly, althoughtheir rendering is somewhat peculiar. 
 M. 
 Gaston Leroux hasundertaken to present the Zemstvo views in Matin 78: “There is disorder above and disorder below; we alone are people of order,” he writes. 
 That, indeed, is what the Zemstvos think. 
 Translated into plain Russian that means: Both aboveand below, there are people ready to do the fighting, but asfor us, we are honest brokers—we are stealing towardspower. 
 We are waiting in the hope that our March 18 willalso come round, that the people will at least once defeat the government in street fighting, and that, like the German lib-eral bourgeoisie, we shall get an opportunity to take overpower, following the first victory of the people. 
 Then, afterbecoming a force against the autocracy, we shall turn againstthe revolutionary people and strike a deal with the tsar,against the people. 
 Our draft constitution is a ready-made programme of such a deal. 
 Quite a skilful calculation! One has sometimes to say of the revolutionary people that which the Romans said of Hannibal: “You know how to win victories, but you don’t know how to profit by them. 
” A victorious rising will not yet be a victory of the people unless it leads to a revolu-tionary upheaval, to the complete overthrow of the autocracy,to the ousting of the inconsistent and selfish bourgeoisie,and to a revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the pro-letariat and the peasantry. 
 Le Temps , organ of the French conservative bourgeoisie, has straightforwardly advised the Zemstvos to put a speedy end to the conflict by coming to terms with the tsar (editor-ial of July 24, New Style). 
 Reforms, it says, are impossiblewithout a union of moral force and material force. 
 Onlythe government has material force. 
 The Zemstvos are amoral force. 
 This is an excellent rendering of bourgeois views—and excellent confirmation of our analysis of Zemstvo policy. 
The bourgeois has forgotten a petty detail, the people, thescores of millions of workers and peasants, whose labourcreates all the bourgeoisie’s wealth, and who are fightingfor the liberty they need as they do light or air. 
 The bour-geois has been entitled to forget them, inasmuch as they have not yet proved their “material force” by defeating thegovernment. 
 No major historical issue has ever beendecided otherwise than by “material force”, and the tsaristautocracy, we repeat, is itself starting the struggle bychallenging the people to a test of strength. 
 The French bourgeoisie is advising the Russian bourgeoi-sie to come speedily to terms with the tsar. 
 It is afraid,albeit vicariously, of a decisive struggle. 
 If the peopleare victorious it remains to be seen whether they willallow the Petrunkeviches to take power, although the latterare stealing towards it. 
 It cannot be gauged in advance how decisive the victory will be and what consequences it will have—and this fully accounts for the bourgeoisie’s timidity. 
 All over Russia the proletariat is preparing for the decisive struggle. 
 It is marshalling its forces; it learns andgains strength after each new clash; past encounters haveall ended in failure, but have invariably led to fresh and stronger attacks. 
 The proletariat is marching to victory and rousing the peasantry to follow its leadership. 
 Relyingon the peasantry it will paralyse the instability and treachery of the bourgeoisie, brush aside bourgeois bidders for power, crush the autocracy by force, and eradicate from Russian life all traces of the accursed system of serf-ownership. 
 When that time comes we shall win for the peoplenot a monarchist constitution, which secures political privi-leges for the bourgeoisie—no, we shall win for Russia arepublic, with full liberty for all oppressed nationalities,for the peasants and the workers. 
 We shall then use all the revolutionary energy of the proletariat for the boldest and most far-reaching struggle for socialism, for the completeemancipation of all toilers from exploitation of any kind. 
 Proletary , No. 
 10, Published according to August 2 (July 20), 1905 the text in Proletary THE BOYCOTT OF THE BULYGIN DUMA, AND INSURRECTION At present the political situation in Russia is as follows: the Bulygin Duma may soon be convened—a consultativeassembly of representatives of the landlords and the big bourgeoisie, elected under the supervision and with the assistance of the autocratic government’s servants on thebasis of an electoral system so indirect, so blatantly basedon property and social-estate qualifications, that it is sheermockery of the idea of popular representation. 
 What shouldour attitude towards this Duma be? The liberal democrats give two replies to this question. 
 The Left wing, represented by the “Union of Unions”—mostly representatives of thebourgeois intelligentsia—is in favour of boycotting thisDuma, of abstaining from participation in the elections,and of taking advantage of the opportunity for increasedagitation for a democratic constitution on the basis of universal suffrage. 
 The Right wing, as represented by the Zemstvo and Municipal Congress of July, or, to be morecorrect, by a certain section of that Congress, is opposed toa boycott and favours participation in the elections andgetting as many of its candidates as possible elected to theDuma. 
 True, the Congress has not yet passed any resolution on this question and has postponed the matter until the next Congress which is to be convened by telegraph followingpromulgation of the Bulygin “constitution”. 
 However, theopinion of liberal democracy’s Right wing has alreadytaken shape. 
 Revolutionary democracy, i. 
e. 
, in the main, the proletar-iat, and Social-Democracy, the vehicle of its conscious expression, is, by and large, fully in favour of insurrection. 
 This difference in tactics has been correctly appraised by Osvobozhdeniye , organ of the liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie. 
 Its latest issue (No. 
 74), on the one hand roundly condemns “open advocacy of insurrection” as “insane and criminal”;on the other hand it criticises the idea of a boycott as“fruitless for practical purposes” and expresses the convic-tion that not only the Zemstvo section of the Constitutional-“Democratic” (read: Monarchist) Party but the Union of Unions, too, will “pass their state examination”, i. 
e. 
, abandon the idea of a boycott. 
 The question arises: what attitude should the party of the class-conscious proletariat take towards the idea ofa boycott, and what tactical slogan should it bring intothe foreground for the masses of the people? For a reply to this question we must first of all call to mind the essence and radical significance of the Bulygin “constitution”. 
It is, in fact, tsarism’s deal with the landlords and bigbourgeoisie, who, in return for innocent, pseudo-constitu-tional sops that are quite innocuous to the autocracy, areto be gradually drawn away from the revolution, i. 
e. 
, from the fighting people, and reconciled with the autocracy. 
 The possibility of such a deal cannot be doubted, since all ourConstitutional-“Democratic” Party is eager to preserve themonarchy and the upper chamber (i. 
e. 
, in advance to securefor the moneyed “upper ten thousand” political privilegesand political domination in the country’s system of state). 
 Moreover, such a deal is sooner or later inevitable in one form or another, at least with a section of the bourgeoisie,for it is prescribed by the very class position of the bour-geoisie in the capitalist system. 
 The only question is whenand how this deal will take place. 
 The task confronting theparty of the proletariat is to delay conclusion of this deal for as long as possible, to split up the bourgeoisie as much as possible, to derive from the bourgeoisie’s tempo-rary appeals to the people the greatest possible advantagefor the revolution, and meanwhile to prepare the forces ofthe revolutionary people (the proletariat and the peasantry)for the forcible overthrow of the autocracy and for the alien-ation, the neutralisation of the treacherous bourgeoisie. 
 In fact, the gist of the bourgeoisie’s political position is, as we have frequently pointed out, that it stands between the tsar and the people, and would play the part of the “honest broker” and steal into power behind the back of the militant people. 
 That is why the bourgeoisie appeals to the tsar one day, and to the people the next, making“serious” and “business-like” proposals for a political dealto the former, and addressing empty phrases about liberty(Mr. 
 I. 
 Petrunkevich’s speeches at the July Congress) tothe latter. 
 It is to our advantage that the bourgeoisie should appeal to the people, for by doing so it provides material that will help to rouse and enlighten politically those hugebackward masses of people to reach whom through Social-Democratic agitation would be sheer utopianism for thetime being. 
 Let the bourgeoisie stir up those that are mostbackward; let it break the soil here and there; we shall untiringly sow the seeds of Social-Democracy in that soil. 
 Everywhere in the West, in its struggle against autocracy thebourgeoisie was compelled to rouse the people’s politicalconsciousness, while at the same time striving to sow theseeds of bourgeois theories among the working class. 
 It isfor us to take advantage of the bourgeoisie’s work of destroy-ing the autocracy and systematically enlighten the working class concerning its socialist aims and the irreconcilableantagonism between its interests and those of the bourgeoisie. 
 Hence it is clear that our tactics at present should first of all consist in support for the idea of a boycott. 
 The veryquestion of a boycott lies within the bounds of bourgeois democracy. 
 The working class is not directly interested in it, but it is definitely interested in supporting that sectionof bourgeois democracy which is more revolutionary; it isinterested in extending and intensifying political agitation. 
A boycott of the Duma means a more vigorous appeal to thepeople by the bourgeoisie, a development of its agitation, a greater number of opportunities for our agitation, and a more intense political crisis, which is the source of the revo-lutionary movement. 
 The participation of the liberal bour-geoisie in the Duma means a slackening in its agitation atthe present time, its appealing more to the tsar than to thepeople, and the approach of a counter-revolutionary deal between the tsar and the bourgeoisie. 
 Even if it is not prevented from meeting, the Bulygin Duma must of necessity give rise to political conflicts that the proletariat should not fail to take advantage of—but that is a matter for the future. 
 It would be ridiculous to renounce utilising this bourgeois-bureaucratic Duma for pur-poses of agitation and struggle, but at the moment that isnot the point. 
 At present the Left wing of bourgeois democ-racy itself has raised the issue of waging a direct and immedi-ate struggle against the Duma by means of a boycott,and we must exert all our efforts to support this more deter-mined onslaught. 
 We must take the bourgeois democrats, the Osvobozhdeniye people, at their word, give the widest publicity to their “Petrunkevich-like” phrases about anappeal to the people, expose them to the people, and showthat the first and least real test of these phrases was thequestion of whether we should boycott the Duma (i. 
e. 
, turn in protest to the people) or accept the Duma (i. 
e. 
, abstain from protesting, go once more to the tsar, andaccept this travesty of popular representation). 
 Secondly, we must exert every effort to make the boycott of real use in extending and intensifying agitation,so that it shall not be reduced to mere passive abstention from voting. 
 If we are not mistaken this idea is already fairly widespread among the comrades working in Russia,who express it in the words: an active boycott. 
 As distinct from passive abstention, an active boycott should imply in-creasing agitation tenfold, organising meetings everywhere,taking advantage of election meetings, even if we have to force our way into them, holding demonstrations, political strikes, and so on and so forth. 
 It goes without saying thatto further agitation and struggle in this connection, tempo-rary agreements with various groups of revolutionary bour-geois democrats, generally permitted by a number of ourParty resolutions, are especially expedient. 
 But here we must, on the one hand, steadfastly preserve the class individuality of the party of the proletariat, and must not for a singlemoment abandon our Social-Democratic criticism of ourbourgeois allies; on the other hand, we should be failingin our duty as the party of the advanced class if in ouragitation we failed to produce an advanced revolutionary slogan at the present stage of the democratic revolution. 
 That is our third direct and immediate political task. 
 As we have already said, “an active boycott” means agitation, recruiting, organising revolutionary forces on a larger scale, with redoubled energy, and bringing redoubled pres-sure to bear. 
 Such work, however, is unthinkable without a clear, precise, and immediate slogan. 
 Only an armed uprisingcan be that slogan. 
 The government’s convocation of a crudelyfaked “popular” representative body provides excellentopportunities for agitation for a truly popular representa-tive body, for making the broadest masses of the people understand that at present (after the tsar’s frauds and his mockery of the people) only a provisional revolutionary gov-ernment can convene a truly representative body, and thatto establish such a government the victory of an insurrec-tion and the actual overthrow of tsarist rule are necessary. 
It would be hard to imagine a better time for widespread agitation for an uprising and in order to conduct that agitation full clarity regarding the programme of a pro-visional revolutionary government is also necessary. 
 Thisprogramme should consist of the six points which we have indicated previously (see Proletary , No. 
 7, “The Revolutionary Army and the Revolutionary Government” *): 1) convocation of a popular constituent assembly; 2) arming of the people;3) political freedom—the immediate repeal of all laws thatcontradict it; 4) complete cultural and political freedomfor all oppressed and disfranchised nationalities—the Russianpeople cannot win liberty for themselves without fightingfor the liberty of the other nationalities; 5) an eight-hour working day; 6) the establishment of peasant commit-tees for the support and implementation of all democraticreforms, among them agrarian reforms, up to and includingthe confiscation of the landlords’ land. 
 To sum up: the most energetic support for the idea of a boycott; exposure of the Right wing of bourgeois democracy, which rejects the boycott, as traitors; making the boycott an active one, i. 
e. 
, building up a most widespread agitation;advocating an insurrection and calling for the immediateorganisation of combat squads and contingents of a revolution-ary army for the overthrow of the autocracy and theestablishment of a provisional revolutionary government; spreading and popularising the fundamental and absolutely *See present edition, Vol. 
 8, pp. 
 566-67. 
— Ed. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR obligatory programme of this provisional revolutionary government, a programme which is to serve as the banner of the uprising and as a model for all future repetitions of the Odessa events. 
 Such should be the tactics of the party of the class-conscious proletariat. 
 In order to make this tactics perfectlyclear and to achieve unity we must also deal with Iskra ’s tactics. 
 It is set forth in No. 
 106 of that paper in an article entitled “Defence or Attack”. 
 We shall not take up the minor and partial differences, which will dissolve at the firstattempts to take action; we shall deal only with the funda-mental difference. 
 While quite correctly condemning apassive boycott, the Iskra contraposes to it the idea of the immediate “organisation of revolutionary self-government bodies”, as a “possible prologue to an uprising”. 
 In Iskra ’s opinion we must “seize the right to carry on agitation inthe election campaign by establishing workers’ agitationcommittees”. 
 These committees “must set themselves the aimof organising popular elections of revolutionary deputies bygoing outside the ‘legal’ limits which will be established by Ministerial Bills”, we must “cover the country with a network of revolutionary self-government bodies”. 
 Such a slogan is absolutely useless. 
 Viewed in the light of the political tasks in general it is a jumble, while in thelight of the immediate political situation it brings grist tothe mill of the Osvobozhdeniye trend. 
 The organisation of revolutionary self-government, the election of their own deputies by the people is not the prologue to an uprising, but its epilogue . 
 To attempt to bring about this organi-sation now, before an uprising and apart from an uprising,means setting oneself absurd aims and causing confusion inthe minds of the revolutionary proletariat. 
 It is first of all necessary to win the victory in an uprising (if only in a single city) and to establish a provisional revolutionary govern-ment, so that the latter, as the organ of the uprising and therecognised leader of the revolutionary people, should beable to get down to the organisation of revolutionary self-government. 
 To obscure the slogan of insurrection or relegate it into the background by proposing a slogan demanding the organisation of a revolutionary self-government is some-thing like giving advice that the fly should first be caught and then stuck on the fly-paper. 
 If during the celebrated Odessa events our Odessa comrades had been advised to organise not a revolutionary army, but the election of deputies by the people of Odessa as a prologue to an uprising, thosecomrades would undoubtedly have laughed such adviceto scorn. 
 Iskra is repeating the mistake made by the Econo-mists, who wished to see in the “struggle for rights”a prologue to the struggle against the autocracy. 
 Iskra is reverting to the misadventure of the unfortunate “plan of the Zemstvo campaign”, which obscured the sloganof insurrection with the theory of a “higher type ofdemonstration”. 
 This is not the place to dwell on the origin of Iskra ’s tactical blunder. 
 We shall refer the interested reader to N. 
 Lenin’s pamphlet Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution . 
 It is more important here to point out how the slogan of the new Iskra lapses into that of Os-vobozhdeniye . 
 In actual practice attempts to organise popular elections of deputies before the uprising is victo-rious would only play into the hands of the Osvobozhdeniye people with the result that the Social-Democrats would be trailing behind them. 
 Until replaced by a provisional revo-lutionary government the autocracy will not permit theworkers and the people to conduct any elections that can inany way be called popular (and Social-Democrats will notagree to a travesty of “popular” elections under the autoc-racy); but the Osvobozhdeniye League, Zemstvo members and the municipal councillors will conduct elections andblatantly pass them off as “popular”, and as an expressionof “revolutionary self-government”. 
 The line now takenby the liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie consists in trying toavert an uprising, compel the autocracy to recognise the Zemstvo elections as popular elections without the people’s victory over tsarism and convert the Zemstvo and municipalself-government bodies into organs of “revolutionary” (inthe Petrunkevich sense) “self-government”, without a realrevolution. 
 An excellent expression of this line is to be foundin No. 
 74 of Osvobozhdeniye . 
 It would be hard to imagine anything more disgusting than this ideologist of the cowardly bourgeoisie, who asserts that advocacy of insurrection “de-moralises” both the army and the people! And this is said at a time when even the blind can see that it is only through an uprising that the ordinary Russian citizen and soldier can save himself from utter demoralisation and vindicate his right to citizenship! The bourgeois Manilov pictures tohimself an Arcadian idyll in which the mere pressure of“public opinion” alone “will compel the government tomake concession after concession, until finally it can go nofurther and will have to hand over the power to a constituent assembly elected on the basis of universal and equal suffrage, direct elections, and a secret ballot, as is demanded bysociety ...” (! with an upper chamber?). 
 “There is nothing atall improbable in this peaceful [!!] transition of powerfrom the present government to a national constituentassembly, which will organise state and governmental power on a new basis. 
” And this masterly philosophy of the cringing bourgeoisie is rounded off with the advice that thearmy, particularly the officers, should be won over; that apeople’s militia be established “without official authorisa-tion”, and that local self-government bodies (read: of land-lords and capitalists) should be set up as “elements of a future provisional government”. 
 There is method in this muddle. 
 What the bourgeoisie wants is to be given power “peacefully”, without a popular uprising , which may prove victorious, win a republic and genuine liberty, arm the proletariat, and rouse millionsof peasants. 
 To obscure the slogan of insurrection, to abandon it and make others follow suit, to advise the imme-diate establishment, by way of a “prologue”, of popularself-government (to which only the Trubetskois, Petrunke-viches, Fyodorovs, and the like will be admitted)—that iswhat the bourgeoisie needs in order to betray the revolutionand strike a bargain with the tsar (a monarchy with an upper chamber) against the “mob”. 
 Liberal Manilovism, there-fore, voices the innermost thoughts of the money-bags, theirmost profound interests. 
 Iskra ’s Social-Democratic Manilovism expressed merely the thoughtlessness of a section of the Social-Democrats,their departure from the proletariat’s only revolutionary tactics, viz. 
, ruthless exposure of the bourgeois-opportunist illusions that peaceful concessions from tsarism are possible,that popular self-government can be instituted without the autocracy being overthrown, and that election of deputies by the people is possible as a prologue to an uprising. 
 No, we must clearly and resolutely show the necessity of an insurrection in the present state of affairs; we must issuea direct call for an uprising (without, of course, fixing thedate beforehand) and call for the immediate organisa-tion of a revolutionary army. 
 Only the boldest and mostwidespread organisation of such an army can be the prologue to an uprising. 
 Only an uprising can actually guarantee the victory of the revolution; of course, those who know thelocal conditions will always caution against attempts at apremature uprising. 
 The real organisation of real people’sself-government can take place only as the epilogue of avictorious uprising. 
 Proletary , No. 
 12, Published according to August 16 (3), 1905 the text in Proletary NOTE ON A RESOLUTION OF THE CONFERENCE OF R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 ORGANISATIONS ABROAD79 From the Editors . 
 The measure in which the Central Com-mittee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 is working energetically for unityis to be seen in its Open Letter to the Organising Committee,which is published in the present issue. 
 We would only liketo remind the reader that for unification a common groundof organisation is needed. 
 The only such ground we are aware of to date is the Rules of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, which were adopted at the Party’s Third Congress, and fully guarantee thelegitimate rights of a minority. 
 Proletary , No. 
 12, Published according to August 16 (3), 1905 the text in Proletary NOTE ON M. 
 N. 
 POKROVSKY ’S ARTICLE “THE PROFESSIONAL INTELLIGENTSIA AND THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATS ” It seems to us that the differences between the author of the article entitled “The Osvobozhdeniye People at Work” and Comrade “ Uchitel ”80 are not as great as the latter thinks. 
 Anybody of long standing in the revolutionary movementbecomes accustomed to the political struggle between varioustrends, acquires definite views of his own, and is, naturally, inclined to presuppose equally definite views in others, whom he classes as members of this or that “party” becauseof some opinion—or lack of opinion—of theirs on a partic-ular question. 
 It stands to reason that an agitator at publicmeetings would do well to take into account not only the“political”, but also the “pedagogical” point of view, place himself in the position of his audience, explain more than “decry”, etc. 
 Extremes are bad everywhere, but if the choicelay with us, we would prefer narrow and intolerant con-cision to mild and limp diffuseness. 
 It is only flabby andweak-kneed characters who will be frightened away from usby fear of “tyranny”. 
 Anyone who has the least “go” in him will soon see for himself, and be shown by events, that clear-cut and sharply expressed political opinions concerninga “mythical Osvobozhdeniye member” are fully justified and that he himself considered this typical Osvobozhdeniye me m-ber “mythical” only because of lack of political experience. 
Comrade “ Uchitel ”, whose suggestions are very helpful in view of his knowledge of the environment, himself speaks of the rapidity with which “bitter truths are assimilated”. 
 Proletary , No. 
 13, Published according to August 22 (9), 1905 the text in Proletary REPLY THE PROLETARY EDITORIAL BOARD TO QUESTIONS PUT BY COMRADE “WORKER ”81 From the Editors . 
 We reply to the comrade’s questions: 1) yes, it will both lead and govern, pending convocation of a popular constituent assembly; 2) in circumstancesin which this participation will ensure the possibilityof “a relentless struggle against all counter-revolutionaryattempts, and also of defence of the independent inter-ests of the working class” (from the resolution of the Third Congress); 3) the Third Congress resolution on insurrection speaks clearly of the necessity “to explain to the proletariat bymeans of propaganda and agitation not only the political significance but the practical-organisational aspect of the impending armed uprising”. 
 This means that the political con-sciousness of the masses must be developed, and the political significance of the uprising must be made clear to them. 
 That, however, is not enough. 
 The masses must be called upon tobegin an armed struggle and at once to arm and organise incontingents of the revolutionary army. 
 Further, we must tellthe author of the letter that an explanation of the resolutionsof the Congress and the Conference regarding a provisional revolutionary government is given in a pamphlet by N. 
 Lenin, Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revo-lution . 
 Finally, we can say with reference to the split that the author’s indignation is perfectly justified. 
 We advisehim to work for general recognition of single rules for Partyorganisations, and to do that regardless of all intellectualist plaints of both the fist from above and the fist from below, work towards that end not secretly, not through intrigues,or by founding new groups or a new party, but openly, di-rectly, within the framework of any R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 organisation. 
 Proletary , No. 
 13, Published according to August 22 (9), 1905 the text in Proletary “ONENESS OF THE TSAR AND THE PEOPLE, AND OF THE PEOPLE AND THE TSAR ” In Proletary , No. 
 12, which appeared on August 3 (16), we spoke of the possibility of the Bulygin Duma being con-vened in the near future, and analysed the tactics of Social-Democracy towards it. 
 * The Bulygin scheme has now become law and the Manifesto of August 6 (19) has proclaimed thata “State Duma” will be called “no later than mid-January1906”. 
 It is on the anniversary of January 9, when the St. 
 Peters-burg workers placed the seal of their blood on the beginningof the revolution in Russia and showed their determi-nation to fight desperately for its victory—it is on theanniversary of that great day that the tsar proposes to convenethis grossly faked, police-sifted assembly of landowners, capitalists, and a negligible number of rich peasants who cringe to the authorities. 
 The tsar intends to consult thisassembly as one consisting of representatives of the“people”. 
 But the entire working class, all the millions oftoilers and those who are not householders are completelybarred from the elections of the “people’s representatives”. 
 We shall wait and see whether the tsar is right in banking thus on the impotence of the working class.... 
 Until the revolutionary proletariat has armed itself and defeated the autocratic government nothing more couldhave been expected than this sop to the big bourgeoisie,one that costs the tsar nothing and commits him to nothing. 
 Even this sop would, probably, not have been given at this time, if the ominous question of war or peace had not loomedlarge. 
 Without consulting the landlords and capitalists,the autocratic government does not venture either to imposeon the people the burden of the senseless continuation of *See pp. 
 179-87 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 the war, or to work out measures to shift the entire burden of paying for the war from the shoulders of the rich to the shoulders of the workers and peasants. 
 As for the provisions of the State Duma Act, they fully confirm our worst expectations. 
 It is not known as yetwhether this Duma will actually be convened. 
 Such doles caneasily be taken away again, and the autocratic monarchs ofevery country have made and broken similar promises by the score. 
 It is not yet known to what extent this future Duma, if it meets at all and is not wrecked, will be able tobecome the centre of really far-reaching political agitationamong the masses of the people, against the autocracy. 
 Butthere can be no doubt that the very provisions of the newState Duma Act furnish us with a wealth of material with which to conduct agitation, explain the nature of the autoc-racy, disclose its class basis, reveal the irreconcilabilityof its interests with those of the people, and spread andpopularise our revolutionary-democratic demands. 
 It maybe stated without exaggeration that the Manifesto and Actof August 6 (19) ought now to become a vademecum to every political agitator, every class-conscious worker, for it faithfully reflects all the infamy, viciousness, Asiaticbarbarity, violence, and exploitation that pervade the wholesocial and political system of Russia. 
 Practically everysentence in the Manifesto and the Act provides excellentbasis for the most comprehensive and convincing political commentaries, which will stimulate democratic thought and revolutionary consciousness. 
 As the Russian saying runs: “Leave it alone and it won’t stink. 
” When one reads the Manifesto and the State DumaAct one feels as though a mass of sewage that has been accu-mulating since time immemorial were being stirred up under one’s very nose. 
 Centuries of oppression of the working people, the ignorance and downtrodden state of the people, and thestagnation in economic life and all fields of culture haveenabled the autocracy to maintain its position. 
 This formedthe background for the untrammelled development and hypo-critical dissemination of the doctrine of “the indissoluble oneness of the tsar and the people and the oneness of thepeople and the tsar”, the doctrine that the tsar’s autocratic power stands above all social estates and classes of the nation, above the division of the people into rich and poor, and expresses the general interests of the entire nation. 
 What we now have before us is a practical attempt to display this “oneness” in the most diffident and embryonicfashion, through simple consultation with the “elected representatives of the whole of Russia”. 
 And what do we see?We at once see that “the oneness of the tsar and the people” is possible only through the medium of an army of bureau-crats and policemen who see to it that the muzzle put on thepeople is kept firmly in place. 
 This “oneness” requires thatthe people should not dare to open their mouths. 
 By“people” is meant only the landlords and capitalists, whoare allowed to take part in the two-stage elections (voting first for electors, by rural districts or city wards, and these electors in their turn elect the members of the State Duma). 
Peasant householders are classed among the people only after having been sifted through four-stage elections, under the supervision and with the assistance and instruction ofthe Marshals of the Nobility, 82 the Rural Superintendents, and police officials. 
 First the householders elect members of the volost assembly; then the volost assemblies electdelegates from the volosts, two from each assembly; thenthese volost delegates elect the gubernia electors. 
 Finally,the gubernia electors of the peasants, together with thegubernia electors of the landlords and (urban) capitalists elect the members of the State Duma! Almost everywhere the peas-ants constitute a minority of the gubernia electors. 
 Theyare guaranteed the election of only one member of the StateDuma from each gubernia, who has to be a peasant, i. 
e. 
, 51seats out of 412 (in the 51 gubernias of European Russia). 
 The entire urban working class , all the village poor , agri-cultural labourers , and peasants who are not householders , take no part whatever in any elections . 
 The oneness of the tsar and the people is in effect the oneness of the tsar and the landlords and capitalists, witha handful of rich peasants thrown in, and with all electionsplaced under the strictest police control. 
 Freedom of speech, of the press, of assembly, and of association, without which elections are a mere farce, are not even mentioned. 
 The State Duma has no rights whatever, for none of its decisions are binding, being merely of an advisory nature. 
 All its decisions are submitted for consideration and ap-proval to the Council of State, i. 
e. 
, again to the bureaucrats. 
 It is only a flimsy annexe to the bureaucratic and policeedifice. 
 The public are not admitted to sittings of the StateDuma. 
 Reports on the proceedings of the State Duma maybe published in the press only when its sittings are notheld in camera ; any session may be closed, however, by an official order, which means that the Minister has merely to qualify the matter under consideration as a state secret. 
 The new State Duma is the same old Russian police sta-tion, only on a larger scale. 
 The rich landlord and capital-ist manufacturer (on rare occasions, a rich peasant) areadmitted for “consultation” to the “open” sittings of the police station (or the Rural Superintendent, or factory inspector, etc. 
); they always have the right to submit theiropinion for the “gracious attention” of the Emperor ... I meanthe police inspector. 
 As for “the common people”, the cityworkers and the rural poor, it goes without saying that theyare never admitted to any kind of “consultation” whatever. 
 The only difference is that there are many police stations and everything in them is kept out of sight, whereas there isonly one State Duma, and it has now become necessary topublish the rules governing its election and the extent ofits rights. 
 Publication of this is, we repeat, in itself anexcellent exposure of the utter viciousness of the tsarist autocracy. 
 From the standpoint of the people’s interests the State Duma is the most barefaced mockery of “popular represen-tation”. 
 And, as if to emphasise this mockery we have, ontop of this, such facts as Mr. 
 Durnovo’s speech, the arrestof Mr. 
 Milyukov and Co. 
, the scandalous statement made by Mr. 
 Sharapov. 
 In his speech Mr. 
 Durnovo, the new Governor General of Moscow, who is being rapturously hailed by thereactionary press, blurted out the real plans of the govern-ment, which, besides the August 6 Manifesto and the StateDuma Act, issued an ukase on the same day, revoking the“ukase to the Senate” of February 18, 1905. 
 The ukase of February 18 permitted private individuals to work out projects and propositions designed to improve organisationof the state. 
 Zemstvo members and representatives of the intelligentsia appealed to this ukase whenever they held meetings, conferences, and congresses tolerated by the police. 
 Now this ukase has been revoked, and all “projects and propositions designed to improve organisation of thestate” must be “submitted” to the autocratic government“according to the procedure provided for in establishingthe State Duma”! This means the end of agitation, the endof meetings, and congresses. 
 There is a State Duma; and there is nothing more to discuss. 
 This is just what Mr. 
 Dur-novo stated when he declared that they would no longertolerate Zemstvo congresses of any kind. 
 The liberals of our “Constitutional-Democratic” (read: Mon-archist) Party find themselves duped again. 
 They countedon a constitution, and now they are forbidden to carry on any agitation for a constitution on the occasion of the “granting” of an institution which makes a mockery of constitution! Mr. 
 Sharapov has blurted out still more. 
 In his govern-ment-subsidised paper ( Russkoye Dyelo ) he suggests nothing less than the stationing of Cossacks in the palace where the Duma is to sit ... to provide against the contingency of “unseemly” behaviour on the part of the Duma. 
 The oneness of the tsar and the people requires that the latter’s represent-atives should speak and act as the tsar wishes. 
 Otherwisethe Cossacks will disperse the Duma. 
 Otherwise the membersof the Duma may be arrested, even without the assistanceof the Cossacks, before they ever get into the Duma. 
 The Manifesto on the oneness of the tsar with the people appeared on Saturday, August 6. 
 On Sunday, August 7,Mr. 
 Milyukov, one of the leaders of the moderate wing of the Osvobozhdeniye League or the “Constitutional-Democratic” (read: Monarchist) Party, was arrested near St. 
 Petersburg,together with some ten of his political colleagues. 
 They are to be prosecuted for membership of the Union of Unions. 
 In all probability they will soon be released, but it will bean easy matter to shut the doors of the Duma against them:all that is needed is to announce that they are “under courtinvestigation”...! The Russian people are getting their first little lessons in constitutionalism. 
 All these laws on the elections of popular representatives are not worth a brass farthing untilthe sovereignty of the people has actually been won and there is complete freedom of speech, the press, assembly, and association, until citizens are armed and are able to safeguard the inviolability of the person. 
 We have said above that the State Duma is a mockery of popular repre-sentation. 
 That is undoubtedly so from the standpoint ofthe theory of the sovereignty of the people . 
 But this theory is recognised neither by the autocratic government nor bythe monarchist-liberal bourgeoisie (the Osvobozhdeniye League or the Constitutional-Monarchist Party). 
 In present-day Russia we have before us three political theories, of whose significance we shall yet speak on more than one occasion. 
These are: 1) The theory of the tsar’s consultation with the people (or “the oneness of the tsar and the people, and ofthe people and the tsar”, as it is put in the Manifesto of August 6). 
 2) The theory of an agreement between the tsar and the people (the programme of the Osvobozhdeniye League and the Zemstvo Congress). 
 3) The theory of the sovereignty of the people (the programme of Social-Democracy, as well as of revolutionary democracy in general). 
 From the standpoint of the consultation theory it is quite natural that the tsar should consult only those he wishes to, and only by the methods he wishes. 
 The State Duma is asplendid object lesson showing whom the tsar wants toconsult and how. 
 From the standpoint of the theory of anagreement , the tsar is not subject to the will of the people; he must only take it into account. 
 But how he is to take it into account and to what extent, cannot be gathered from the Osvobozhdeniye theory of “agreement”, and whilst power is in the tsar’s hands the Osvobozhdeniye bourgeoisie is inev-itably condemned to the wretched position of a cadger, ora go-between, who would use the people’s victories againstthe people. 
 From the angle of the sovereignty of the people full freedom of agitation and election should first be secured in practice, and then a really popular constituent assemblyconvened, i. 
e. 
, an assembly elected by universal and equalsuffrage, direct elections, and secret ballot, and endowedwith complete power—full, integral, and indivisible power—an assembly which will actually express the sovereignty of the people. 
 This brings us to our slogan of agitation (the slogan of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
) on the State Duma. 
 Who can really guar-antee freedom of elections and full power to a constituent assembly? Only the armed people, organised in a revolution-ary army , which has won over to its side all decent and honest elements in the tsar’s army, has overcome the tsar’sforces and substituted a provisional revolutionary govern-ment for the tsar’s autocratic government. 
 The setting up of the State Duma, which, on the one hand, “lures” thepeople with the idea of a representative form of government, and, on the other hand, is the crudest counterfeit of popular representation, will prove an inexhaustible source of themost widespread revolutionary agitation among the masses,will serve as an excellent occasion for meetings, demon-strations, political strikes, etc. 
 The slogan for all thisagitation will be: insurrection, the immediate formation of combat squads and contingents of a revolutionary army, the overthrow of tsarist rule, and the establishment of a provi-sional revolutionary government which is to convene apopular constituent assembly. 
 The timing of the uprising willdepend, of course, on local conditions. 
 We can only statethat, generally speaking, it is now in the interests of the revolutionary proletariat to put off somewhat the timing of an uprising: the workers are being armed gradually, thetroops are becoming more and more unreliable, the war crisisis reaching its climax (war or an onerous peace), and in suchconditions premature attempts at insurrection may causeenormous harm. 
 In conclusion, it remains for us to draw a comparison be-tween the tactical slogan briefly outlined above, and otherslogans. 
 As we have already stated in Proletary , No. 
 12, our slogan coincides with what the majority of the comradesworking in Russia understand by the term “active boycott”. 
The tactics of Iskra , which in its No. 
 106 recommended the immediate setting up of revolutionary self-government bodies and election by the people of their own represent-atives as a possible prologue to an uprising, is absolutelyerroneous. 
 So long as the forces for an armed uprising andits victory are still lacking, it is ridiculous even to speak ofrevolutionary people’s self-government. 
 That is not the pro-logue to an uprising, but its epilogue. 
 Such erroneous tactics would merely play into the hands of the Osvobozhdeniye bourgeoisie, in the first place by obscuring or shelving the slogan of an uprising, and replacing it with the slogan of the organisation of revolutionary self-government. 
 In the second place, it would make it easier for the liberal bourgeois to represent their (Zemstvo and municipal) elections as popular elections, since there can be no popular elections so long asthe tsar retains power, and the liberals may yet succeed incarrying out Zemstvo and municipal elections despiteMr. 
 Durnovo’s threats. 
 The proletariat has been barred from the Duma elections. 
 Actually, the proletariat has no need to boycott the Duma,since by its very institution this tsarist Duma is itself boy-cotting the proletariat. 
 It is to the proletariat’s advantage,however, to support that section of the bourgeois democratswhich is inclined to prefer revolutionary action to hag-gling, and which favours boycotting the Duma and more intensive agitation among the people for a protest againstthis Duma. 
 The proletariat must not pass over in silencethis first betrayal or inconsistency on the part of the bour-geois democrats, which is expressed in the fact that theirrepresentatives talk of boycotting the Duma (at the July Zemstvo Congress the first voting even showed a majority in favour of a boycott), utter pompous phrases about appealingto the people and not to the tsar (Mr. 
 I. 
 Petrunkevich at thatsame Congress), whereas in reality they are prepared to over-look this new flouting of the people’s demands, without mak-ing a protest in the real sense of the word or giving it wide publicity, and to abandon the idea of a boycott and enter the Duma. 
 The proletariat cannot but refute the false phrasesthat are now so much in vogue in articles published in thelegal liberal press (see, for instance, Rus of August 7), which has entered the fray against the idea of a boycott. 
The gentlemen of the liberal press are corrupting the people with their assurances that the peaceful path, a “peace-ful clash of opinions” is possible (why is it that Milyukovcould not struggle “peacefully” against Sharapov, gentlemen,why?). 
 The gentlemen of the liberal press are deceiving thepeople when they declare that the Zemstvos “can to acertain extent [!] paralyse [!!] the pressure which will, un-doubtedly, be brought to bear on the peasant electors by the Rural Superintendents and by the local authorities ingeneral”. 
 ( Rus , loc. 
 cit. 
) The liberal journalists are wholly distorting the role of the State Duma in the Russian revolution, when they compare it with the Prussian Chamber of the period of the budget conflict with Bismarck (1863). 
 Actually, if one is to make a comparison at all, onemust take as an example not a constitutional period buta period of struggle for a constitution, a period of incipientrevolution. 
 To do otherwise means to skip directly froma period when the bourgeoisie is revolutionary into a period when the bourgeoisie has made its peace with reaction. 
 (cf. 
 Proletary , No. 
 5 on the comparison drawn between our Messrs. 
 Petrunkeviches and Mr. 
 Andrássy, “oncea revolutionary” and subsequently a Minister. 
 *) The State Duma brings to mind the Prussian “United Landtag” (Diet)established on February 3, 1847 , one year before the revolu-tion. 
 The Prussian liberals of those days were also preparing —although they never actually got round to it—to boycottthis consultative chamber of landlords, and were askingthe people: “ Annehmen oder ablehnen? ” (“Accept or De-cline?”—the title of a pamphlet by Heinrich Simon, a bour-geois liberal, which was published in 1847. 
) The Prussian United Landtag met (the first session was opened on April 11, 1847, and closed on June 26, 1847) and gave rise to aseries of clashes between the constitutionalists and theautocratic government; nevertheless it remained a lifelessinstitution, until the revolutionary people , headed by the pro-letariat of Berlin , defeated the royal army in the uprising of March 18, 1848 . 
 Then the State Duma ... I mean the United Landtag—went up in smoke. 
 An assembly of people’srepresentatives was then convened (unfortunately not by arevolutionary government but by the king, whom the heroicworkers of Berlin had “not finished off”) on the basis ofuniversal suffrage with relative freedom to carry on agitation. 
 Let the bourgeois betrayers of the revolution enter this still-born State Duma. 
 The proletariat of Russia will inten-sify its agitation and its preparations for our Russian March18, 1848 (or better still, August 10, 1792). 
 Proletary , No. 
 14, Published according to August 29 (16), 1905 the text in Proletary *See present edition, Vol. 
 8, pp. 
 526-30. 
— Ed. 
 THE BLACK HUNDREDS AND THE ORGANISATION OF AN UPRISING The events in Nizhni-Novgorod and Balashov have at-tracted general attention. 
 In the previous issue we publisheda detailed account of the Nizhni-Novgorod massacre; in thisissue we are giving an account of the massacre in Balashov. 
 The misdeeds of the Black Hundreds are on the increase, and Social-Democrats would do well to turn their attention tothis phenomenon and its significance in the general courseof revolutionary development. 
 As a supplement to the cor-respondence from Samara, the following leaflet, issued bythe Borisoglebsk group of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, is of interest: “Workers and inhabitants of the town of Borisoglebsk! The Ba-lashov and Nizhni-Novgorod events, in which the police have proved their ability to organise a massacre of all who hold dissenting views,have shown you the gravity of the situation the revolution isconfronting us with. 
 The time for words and platonic criticism has passed. 
 By force of circumstances, the government drives us from words to deeds. 
 It sees that the revolutionary movement has advanced beyondthe point where it could be fought against, as has been the case hith-erto, by the police and the gendarmerie alone. 
 It realises that in thestruggle against the ‘internal foe’ the regular armed forces of theMinistry of the Interior will not be sufficient. 
 The entire population of the Russian Empire has become an ‘internal foe’ and ‘rebellious’, and the government is obliged to enlist volunteers for the regulararmy. 
 But in this wholesale enlistment into ‘government service’of tramps, rowdies, hawkers, and similar disreputable characters,who recognise no bureaucratic restrictions whatever, our governmenthas at the same time been forced to change its time-honoured methods of influencing the masses and the time-honoured secret methods of the immediate struggle against the revolution. 
 What’s sauce for thegoose is sauce for the gander. 
 Hitherto our government confined itselfto waging a struggle against the printed word. 
 It now itself publishesproclamations in the Moskovskiye Vedomosti , Russkoye Dyelo , Grazhda-nin, Dyen , and other official organs. 
 Hitherto our government only hunted down agitators. 
 It now itself sends out prelates, generals, Sharapovs, Gringmuts, and other agitators of its own to conduct agitation among the people. 
 Hitherto our government only throttled all organisation. 
 It now itself organises unions of the Russian people,leagues of patriots, and unions of monarchists. 
 Hitherto our govern-ment trembled at the mere thought of an uprising. 
 It now itself organises uprisings of the Black Hundreds, and hopes to provoke acivil war. 
 Terrified at the prospect of the impending revolution the government has seized on such of the latter’s weapons as organisation, propaganda, and agitation. 
 With the aid of these double-edgedweapons and with the help of the Black Hundreds, the government is beginning to stage scenes of popular indignation, of counter-revolution. 
 After a ‘try-out’ in the marginal provinces it is now beginning atour of the heart of Russia. 
 We have recently witnessed such scenes in Nizhni-Novgorod and in Balashov, and it cannot be said that the autocracy met with no success there. 
 ‘Revolutionary’ methods ofstruggle proved efficacious, many enemies of the autocracy were murdered or manhandled and the population was terrorised by this legalised terrorism on the part of our government. 
 “There can be no doubt that the experiment will be further extended. 
 The laurels won by some of the Black Hundreds will give the others no rest until they too will have put their strength to the test. 
 Where there is revolution there is counter-revolution too, and, therefore,Borisoglebsk must also be prepared to experience the organisingskill of the eminent representatives of the Black-Hundred trend. 
 Wehave reason to expect also in Borisoglebsk pogroms against the Jews,against the workers, and against the intellectuals; therefore, in preparation for proper resistance to the ‘illegal measures’ which the government has adopted to suppress the revolutionary movement, theBorisoglebsk group is starting a subscription for the organisation ofarmed self-defence, and invites all those whose sympathies do notlie with the government and the Black Hundreds to help in theorganisation of self-defence groups with money and arms. 
” In fact, civil war is being forced on the population by the government itself. 
 It is a fact that “tramps, rowdies, andhawkers” are being taken into government service. 
 Underthese circumstances bourgeois talk by the Osvobozhdeniye League about the crime and folly of advocating insurrection, about the harmfulness of organising self-defence ( Osvobozh-deniye , No. 
 74) is now not merely inordinate political plati-tudinarianism, or justification of the autocracy and (in actualfact) servility to Moskovskiye Vedomosti . 
 But, in addition to this, it is impotent peevishness on the part of the Osvobozhde-niye dodderers whom the revolutionary movement has relent-lessly consigned to the scrap heap or some old curiosity shop—the place most suitable for them. 
 Theoretical discussions on the necessity of an uprising may and should be held, and the tactical resolutions on this question should be the outcome of careful thought and deliberation; meanwhile it should not be forgotten that spontaneous events take theirown authoritative course regardless of all philosophising. 
It should not be forgotten that all the tremendous contra-dictions that have been piling up in Russian life for centu-ries are now developing with irresistible force bringing the masses to the fore and relegating outworn and dead teachings about peaceful progress to the rubbish heap. 
 Opportunistsof all sorts like to tell us: learn from life. 
 Unfortunately,what they mean by life is only the standing water of peace-ful periods, of times of stagnation, when life makes scarcelyany progress whatever. 
 These blind people always lag behind the lessons of revolutionary life. 
 Their dead doctrines always fall behind the stormy torrent of revolution, whichexpresses the most far-reaching demands of life, those in-volving the most vital interests of the masses. 
 See, for instance, how ridiculous, in face of these lessons given by life, are the plaints being made by a certain section of Social-Democracy about the danger of a conspiratorial view of the uprising, about a narrow “Jacobin” approachto the question of its necessity, about exaggerating theimportance and role of material forces in the impendingpolitical events. 
 These plaints started on the eve of aninsurrection becoming a most real and vital necessity to the people, just when the masses, who stand farthest from all “conspiracies”, began to be drawn into an insurrection be-cause of the misdeeds of the Black Hundreds. 
 A bad doctrine is splendidly rectified by a good revolution . 
 In the new Iskra one can read feeble witticisms (or are they sneers?) of apurely Burenin type 83 about the publication of a special military pamphlet discussing the military questions of the revolution and even going into the question of day and nightattacks, about thought having to be given to the matter ofheadquarters for the uprising, and of about having membersof the organisation “on duty” to get timely information of anypogrom, of any “enemy” action, and to give proper and timely orders to our fighting forces, to the organised revolutionary proletariat. 
 And at the same time, as if in derision of the lifelessdoctrine of the Mensheviks abroad, we see the actions of the Mensheviks in Russia. 
 We read that in Ekaterinoslav (see Proletary , No. 
 13) an agreement was concluded between the Bolsheviks, the Mensheviks, and the Bund,84 in anticipation of violence (a pogrom by the Black Hundreds was expected!Is there a city or village in Russia today that is notexpecting something of that kind?). 
 “Joint collection ofmoney for the purchase of arms, a joint plan of action, etc. 
”What kind of plan this was is evidenced by the fact that at the Bryansk Works, for instance, the Social-Democrats, at a meeting of five hundred workers, called for the organisa-tion of resistance. 
 “Then in the evening the organised workersof the Bryansk Works were quartered in various houses;patrols were stationed, a headquarters was appointed, etc. 
—in short, we were in complete fighting trim” (incidentally, they let each other know the “location of the headquarters of each organisation” of the three mentioned above). 
 It is at their own comrades, who are engaged in practical work, that the new-Iskra journalists are sneering. 
 However much you may turn up your noses, gentlemen at the question of night attacks and similar purely tactical military questions, however much you may pull wry faces about the “plan” of assigning secretaries of organisations,or their members in general, to stand on duty to providefor any military exigency—life goes its own way, revolutionteaches, taking in hand and shaking up the most inveteratepedants. 
 During civil war military questions must of ne-cessity be studied down to the last detail, and the interest the workers show in these questions is a most legitimate andhealthy phenomenon. 
 Headquarters (or members of theorganisations on duty) must of necessity be organised. 
 The stationing of patrols and the billeting of squads are all purelymilitary functions; they are all initial operations of a revolutionary army and constitute the organisation of an insurrection, the organisation of revolutionary rule , which matures and becomes stronger through these small prepa-rations, through these minor clashes, testing its own strength,learning to fight, training itself for victory—a victory thatwill come the sooner and the more probably, the more pro-found the general political crisis becomes, the stronger the discontent, disaffection, and vacillation within the ranks ofthe tsarist army. 
 Social-Democratic comrades all over Russia must and will follow on an ever wider scale the example set by the com-rades of Ekaterinoslav and Borisoglebsk. 
 The appeal for aid in money and arms is most timely. 
 There are everincreasing numbers of people to whom all “plans” and evenrevolutionary ideas of any sort are quite alien, but whonevertheless see and feel the necessity for an armed struggle when they witness the atrocities perpetrated by the police, the Cossacks, and the Black Hundreds against unarmed citi-zens. 
 There is no choice, all other ways are blocked. 
 Onecannot help being agitated by what is taking place in Rus-sia at the present time; one cannot help thinking of war andof revolution, and whoever is agitated, whoever thinks, who-ever takes an interest, is obliged to join one armed camp or the other. 
 You may be beaten up, maimed, or murdered no matter in what supremely peaceful and scrupulously lawfulway you behave. 
 Revolution does not recognise neutrals. 
The struggle has already flared up. 
 It is a life-and-deathstruggle between the old Russia, the Russia of slavery, serf-dom, and autocracy, and the new, young, people’s Russia, the Russia of the toiling masses, who are reaching out to-wards light and freedom, in order afterwards to start onceagain a struggle for the complete emancipation of mankindfrom all oppression and all exploitation. 
 May the day of the insurrection of the people come soon! Proletary , No. 
 14, Published according to August 29 (16), 1905 the text in Proletary EDITORIAL EPILOGUE TO THE ARTICLE “THE THIRD CONGRESS ON TRIAL BEFORE THE CAUCASIAN MENSHEVIKS ” In reproducing this article from the organ of the Caucasian League of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 ( Borba Prole-tariata ,85 No. 
 1 in Russian; No. 
 6 has appeared in the Armenian language, and No. 
 9 in Georgian) we shall forour part add that the Caucasian Mensheviks were practi-cally the first to come out in the press not merely withgroundless abuse against the Congress (in the new-Iskra spirit), but with an attempt to question the representation of absolutely definite Party committees. 
 In its organ theCaucasian Union has calmly and with close reasoningrefuted the Mensheviks’ arguments and splendidly proved thecomplete validity of the Third Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
,even if the five mandates disputed by the Mensheviks were considered non-valid. 
 Proletary , No. 
 14, Published according to August 29 (16), 1905 the text in Proletary ARE THE ZEMSTVO “LIBERALS ” ALREADY TURNING BACK? We have just read a message from the St. 
 Petersburg correspondent of the liberal bourgeois Frankfurter Zeitung dated August 8 (21) to the effect that the Congress of Zem-stvo and municipal leaders, which by decision of the JulyCongress was to have met immediately after publication ofthe Bulygin scheme and was already fixed for the end ofAugust, will not take place . 
 What would you think the reason is? It is because on August 6 the tsar withdrew his ukase to the Senate, dated February 18, 1905! The correspondent goes on to say: “This absolutely inexplicable [??— Editorial Board of “Proletary ”] cowardice on the part of the Zemstvo representatives has aroused general amazement in politicalquarters here, since at a moment like the present nobody wasinclined to expect such flabbiness in the Zemstvos. 
 That is why the news I have sent has not yet been given full cre-dence, and people are cautious in their attitude towards it. 
”We long ago foretold that the government would not findit hard to win the liberal bourgeois over to its side and makethem “recoil from the revolution”. 
 Proletary , No. 
 14, Published according to August 29 (16), 1905 the text in Proletary THE WORKING CLASS AND REVOLUTION 1. 
 The democratic and the socialist revolution. 
 2. 
 The bourgeois nature of the democratic revolution. 
 (“Bourgeois and socialist revolution. 
”) 3. 
 The tasks of Social-Democracy as an independent class party of the proletariat. 
 4. 
 The role of the peasantry in the democratic revolution. 
 5. 
 Insurrection and the revolutionary army. 
 6. 
 The revolutionary government. 
 Its tasks. 
 7. 
 The revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the pro-letariat and the peasantry. 
 1. 
α) The aims of the working class. 
 β) S o c i a l -D e m o c-r a c y . 
 Our programme. 
 γ) The m a x i m u m and δ) the m i n i m u m programme. 
 {A description of it (compare 6 points *)} ε) The democratic and the bourgeois revolution. 
 2. 
T h e b o u r g e o i s a n d t h e s o c i a l i s t r e v o l u t i o n . 
 Why is the democratic revolution bourgeois in nature?α) Commodity and capitalist production. 
 β) The economic essence. 
 γ) The Constitutional-Democratic Party, its pro-gramme, and its class essence. 
 A c l a s s p a r t y . 
 Zemstvo congresses. 
 Unions of intellectuals. 
 The legal press. 
δ) Bourgeois advice to the proletariat: the trade union struggle, etc. 
 3. 
 Conclusions from the above. 
 A n i n d e p e n d e n t c l a s s p a r t y . 
 Organisation—trade union and Party , agitational, and military . 
 Marxism: “a doctrine”. 
 4. 
 The peasantry’s special interests. 
 Remnants of serf-ownership. 
 Why is the role of the peasantry in thedemocratic revolution of particular importance? The *See p. 
 183 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 “general redistribution” and its significance. 
 The peasants are the workers’ natural allies. 
 The peasantry’s petty-bourgeois nature . 
 5. 
 The uprising. 
 Moral and material force. 
 Arming of the people. 
 M i l i t a r y organisation (military problems, etc. 
). 
 The revolutionary army. 
 (Example:Nizhni-Novgorod and Ekaterinoslav) ((bombs, arms)). 
 6. 
 The revolutionary government, the o r g a n of uprising. 
 The significance of a revolutionary government and revo-lutionary p o w e r . 
 Participation in a revolutionary government. 
 The programme of a revolutionarygovernment: 6 p o i n t s . 
 G e t E u r o p e m o v i n g . 
 7. 
 What is dictatorship? Dictatorship of a c l a s s and dictatorship of an individual. 
 Democratic dictatorship. 
 Classes. 
 Written in August 1905 First published in 1926 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany V the manuscript PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION OF THE PAMPHLET THE TASKS OF THE RUSSIAN SOCIAL -DEMOCRATS The third edition of this pamphlet appears at a moment in the development of the revolution in Russia which differsconsiderably from 1897, when it was written, and from 1902,when its second edition appeared. 
 It need hardly be saidthat the pamphlet gives only a general outline of the tasksof Social-Democracy as a whole, and not a concrete exposi-tion of the present-day tasks that stem from the present state of the working-class and revolutionary movements, andalso from the state of the Russian Social-DemocraticLabour Party. 
 The present-day tasks of our Party are dealtwith in my pamphlet Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution (Geneva, 1905). 
 A comparison of the two pamphlets will enable the reader to judge whether the author’s views on the general tasks of Social-Democracyand the special tasks of the given moment have beendeveloping with consistency. 
 That such a comparison is notuseless is shown, incidentally, by the recent crude sally madeby Mr. 
 Struve, leader of our liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie, who in Osvobozhdeniye accuses revolutionary Social-Democ-racy (as represented by the Third Congress of the RussianSocial-Democratic Labour Party) of presenting the questionof an insurrection in a manner befitting seditionists andrevolutionaries in the abstract. 
 We have already stated inProletary (No. 
 9, “Revolution Teaches”) that a simple com-parison of The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats (1897), What Is To Be Done? (1902), and Proletary (1905) will refute the accusation of the Osvobozhdeniye gentry, and will show the connection between the development of Social-Democratic views on an insurrection and the development of the revolutionary movement in Russia. 
 The Osvobozhde-niye accusation is merely a crude opportunist sally on the part of the supporters of a liberal monarchy, who are tryingto cover up their betrayal of the revolution, their betrayalof the people’s interests, and their desire to strike a bargainwith the tsarist government. 
 N. 
 Lenin August 1905 First published in the autumn of 1905 Published according to in a pamphlet issued by the text of the pamphlet the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR NOTE ON P. 
 NIKOLAYEV ’S PAMPHLET THE REVOLUTION IN RUSSIA86 This pamphlet was written before August 6. 
 The State Duma has now been set up. 
 The working class and all thepoor have no right at all to elect Duma members. 
 The rich landlords and the merchants elect Duma members through gubernia electors. 
 The peasants elect even gubernia electorsnot directly, but through uyezd delegates elected at volostmeetings. 
 Freedom of election, of the press, and of assemblyis non-existent. 
 The police retain full power. 
 The Dumamakes decisions that are not binding on the government, but are merely advisory, i. 
e. 
, the Duma has no power at all. 
 First published Published according to in the autumn of 1905 the manuscript IN THE WAKE OF THE MONARCHIST BOURGEOISIE, OR IN THE VAN OF THE REVOLUTIONARY PROLETARIAT AND PEASANTRY? Social-Democracy’s tactics towards the State Duma still heads all the questions of the revolutionary struggle on the agenda of the day. 
 The differences which have arisenbetween the opportunist ( Iskra ) and the revolutionary ( Prole-tary ) wings of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 on the score of these tactics must be analysed most painstakingly not for the sakeof captious polemising (which sometimes degenerates into a squabble), but for the purpose of thoroughly elucidating the question and assisting the comrades on the spot towork out the most exact, definite, and uniform sloganspossible. 
 First of all, a few words on the origin of these differences. 
 Even before the State Duma Act had been promulgated, we set forth in Proletary , No. 
 12 the fundamentals of our tactics and of our differences with Iskra . 
 We demanded: 1) support for the idea of a boycott, in the sense of increasedagitation and an appeal to the people, in the sense of theproletariat’s support for the Left wing of bourgeois democ-racy, and constant exposure of the treachery of its Right wing; 2) an active boycott at all costs, and not “passive abstention”, i. 
e. 
, “increasing agitation tenfold”, going sofar as “to force our way into election meetings”, and, finally,3) “a clear, precise, and immediate agitational slogan”,namely, for an armed uprising, a revolutionary army, anda provisional revolutionary government. 
 We categorically rejected the slogan of Iskra (No. 
 106) for “organisation of a revolutionary self-government”, as confusing and asplaying into the hands of the Osvobozhdeniye League, i. 
e. 
, the monarchist bourgeoisie. 
 At the same time, anticipating, as it were, that Iskra would once more “beget” more dif-ferences we immediately added that we agreed with Iskra ’s condemnation of the idea of a passive boycott. 
 So if Iskra , No. 
 108, now drops sundry hints about a theory of “non-interference”, “absenteeism”, “abstention”, “foldedarms”, and the like, we must first of all brush aside “objec-tions” of this sort, since this is not polemising, but merely an attempt to “get under the opponent’s skin”. 
 By such methods of “polemising”, culminating in the aspersion thatsome of the leaders would like to get into a provisionalgovernment themselves, the new Iskra has long evoked a very definite attitude towards itself among the widest circlesof Social-Democrats. 
 Thus, the essence of the differences is that Iskra does not accept our slogan of agitation, which we consider the mainslogan (for an armed uprising, a revolutionary army, and aprovisional revolutionary government). 
 Proletary , on the other hand, considers it absolutely impermissible “to obscureor relegate into the background the slogan of insurrection by bringing forward the slogan of revolutionary self-government” ( Proletary , No. 
 12). 
 All the other points of disagreement are relatively less important. 
 On the contrary,what is especially important is that (as has been the caseon more than one occasion) in No. 
 108 Iskra begins to back out, to twist and turn; to the slogan of revolutionary self-government it adds the slogan of “active militant action by the masses of the people” (wherein this differs from an armeduprising God only knows). 
 Iskra goes even so far as to say that the “organisation of a revolutionary self-govern-ment is the only means of really ‘organising’ an uprisingof the whole people”. 
 Iskra , No. 
 108, is dated August 13 (26); and on August 24 (N. 
 S. 
) the Vienna Arbeiter Zeitung carried an article by Comrade Martov setting forth Iskra ’s “plan” wholly in the spirit of No. 
 106, and not in the spiritof the “amendments” in No. 
 108. 
 We are giving below * a translation of the most important parts of this invaluablearticle by Comrade Martov, as a specimen of “Social-Democratic Manilovism”. 
 *See pp. 
 224-26 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 Let us try to unravel this tangle. 
 To make matters clear it is necessary first of all to realise what forces are at present “making history” for the Russian Revolution, and just how they are doing it. 
 The autocracyhas adopted the theory of “consultation” between the tsarand the people. 
 Desirous of consulting with a police-screenedhandful of persons elected by the landowners and shop-keepers, the autocracy is beginning with desperate ferocity to suppress the revolution. 
 Broader circles of the monarchist bourgeoisie are in favour of the theory of compromisebetween the tsar and the people (the Osvobozhdeniye League, or the Constitutional-“Democratic” Party). 
 By this theorythe bourgeoisie is showing its treachery to the revolution,its readiness first to support it and then to unite with the reactionaries against it. 
 The Revolutionary proletariat, inasmuch as it is led by Social-Democracy, demands thesovereignty of the people , i. 
e. 
, the complete destruction of the forces of reaction, and, above all, the actual overthrowof the tsarist government and its replacement by a provi-sional revolutionary government. 
 The proletariat strives (often without being aware of it, but unswervingly and ener-getically) to win over the peasantry, and with the latter’sassistance to carry forward the revolution to complete vic-tory, despite the bourgeoisie’s instability and treachery. 
 The State Duma is undoubtedly a concession to the revo-lution, but a concession made (and this is still more indu-bitable) so as to suppress the Revolution and withhold a constitution. 
 The bourgeois “compromisers” want to achievea constitution so as to suppress the revolution; this desire ofthe liberal bourgeoisie, which is an inevitable result of itsclass position, has been most clearly expressed by Mr. 
 Vino-gradov (in Russkiye Vedomosti ). 
 The question now arises: under such circumstances, what is the significance of the decision to boycott the Duma,passed by the Union of Unions (see Proletary , No. 
 14), i. 
e. 
, by the most comprehensive organisation of the bourgeoisintelligentsia? By and large, the bourgeois intelligentsiaalso wants “a compromise”. 
 That is why, as Proletary has repeatedly pointed out, it too vacillates between reaction and revolution, between haggling and fighting, betweena deal with the tsar and an uprising against him. 
 Nor can it be otherwise, in view of the class position of the bourgeois intelligentsia. 
 However, it would be a mistake to forget that this intelligentsia is more capable of expressing the essen-tial interests of the bourgeois class as a whole, in theirbroadest implications, as distinct from the temporary andnarrow interests of the bourgeoisie’s “upper crust”. 
 Theintelligentsia is more capable of expressing the interests ofthe masses of the petty bourgeoisie and the peasantry. 
 With all its vacillations, it is therefore more capable of waging a revolutionary struggle against the autocracy, and,provided it draws closer to the people , it could become an important force in this struggle. 
 Powerless by itself, it couldnevertheless give quite considerable sections of the pettybourgeoisie and the peasantry just what they lack— knowledge, programme, guidance, and organisation. 
 Thus, the essence of the “boycott” idea, as it first arose in the Union of Unions, is that the big bourgeoisie ’s first step towards consultation , towards compromise with the tsar has inevitably led to the petty-bourgeois intelligentsia ’s first step towards drawing close to the revolutionary people . 
 The landlords and capitalists have swung to the right, while the bourgeois intelligentsia, representing the pettybourgeoisie, has swung to the left. 
 The former are going tothe tsar, although they have by no means given up theirintention of threatening him again and again with the mightof the people. 
 The bourgeois intelligentsia is considering whether it should not rather go to the people, without as yet finally breaking with the theory of “compromise”, andwithout fully taking the revolutionary path. 
 Such is the essence of the boycott idea, which, as we have pointed out in Proletary , No. 
 12, arose among the bourgeois democrats. 
 Only very short-sighted and superficial people could discern in this idea non-interference, absenteeism, abstention, and so on. 
 The bourgeois intelligentsia neednot abstain , since the high property qualification actually keeps it out of the State Duma. 
 In its resolution on the boy-cott the bourgeois intelligentsia makes “the mobilisationof all the democratic elements of the country” its most important point. 
 The bourgeois intelligentsia is the most active, resolute, and militant element of the Osvobozhdeniye League, the Constitutional-”Democratic” Party. 
 To accuse this intelligentsia of abstention, etc. 
, because of its boycott idea, or even to refuse to support its idea and to develop it means to display short-sightedness and thus play into the hands of the monarchist big bourgeoisie, whose organ,Osvobozhdeniye , has good reason to combat the idea of a boycott. 
 Besides the general and basic considerations, the correct-ness of the view just outlined is supported by the valuable admissions of Mr. 
 S. 
S. 
87 in Osvobozhdeniye , No. 
 75. 
 It is highly significant that Mr. 
 S. 
S. 
 describes advocates of the boycott idea as the “radical” group, and opponents of thatidea as the “moderate” group. 
 He accuses the former of a“Narodnaya Volya attitude”, of repeating the mistakes ofthe “active revolutionary groups” (an accusation doing honour to those it is levelled against by Osvobozhdeniye ); about the latter he states flatly that they stand “between twofires”, between the autocracy and the “social [ sic!] revo-lution”, poor Mr. 
 S. 
 S. 
 being so terrified that he has very nearlymistaken the democratic republic for a social revolution!But the most valuable admission by Mr. 
 S. 
 S. 
 is the follow-ing: for the radicals—he says, comparing the Congress of the Union of Unions with the Zemstvo Congress—“every-thing undoubtedly centred [mark this!] around the demandto amend the electoral system, whereas for the more moderate group the main interest lay in extending the rightsof the Duma ”. 
 This sums up matters in a nutshell! Mr. 
 S. 
 S. 
 has blurted out the innermost “thoughts” of the landlords and capital-ists, which we have laid bare hundreds of times. 
 Their“main interest” lies not in getting the people to take part inthe elections (they are afraid of that), but in extending therights of the Duma, i. 
e. 
, in converting the assembly of the big bourgeoisie from a consultative into a legislative body. 
 That is the crux of the matter. 
 The big bourgeoisie willnever be satisfied with a “consultative” Duma. 
 Hence, theinevitability of constitutional conflicts in the State Duma. 
But the big bourgeoisie can never become a true and depend-able supporter of people’s sovereignty. 
 It will always be taking the constitution (for itself) with one hand, and taking away the rights of the people, or opposing the extensionof popular rights, with the other. 
 The big bourgeoisie cannot but strive for a constitution that secures privileges for the big bourgeoisie. 
 The radical intelligentsia cannot but strive to express the interests of the broader strata of the petty bourgeoisie and the peasantry. 
 Once it got the bird in thehand the Right wing of bourgeois democracy immediatelybegan to see reason, and, as we have seen, is already re-nouncing “illegal” congresses. 
 The Left wing saw itself withouteven a bird in the hand; it saw that the landlords and capi-talists, having taken advantage of the services of the “third element” 88 (agitation, propaganda, organisation of the press, etc. 
), are now prepared to betray it, directing their effortsin the State Duma not towards securing the people’s rightsbut towards securing their own rights, which militate againstthose of the people. 
 And now sensing incipient treachery the bourgeois intelligentsia brands the State Duma as an “audacious challenge” made by the government to all thepeoples of Russia, declares a boycott, and counsels “themobilisation of the democratic elements”. 
 Under such conditions the Social-Democrats would be playing the part of political simpletons if they were to attack the idea of a boycott. 
 The revolutionary proletari-at’s unerring class instinct has prompted most of the com-rades in Russia to adopt the idea of an active boycott. 
 This means supporting the Left wing and drawing it closer to us , means endeavouring to single out the elements of revolutionary democracy , so as to strike at the autocracy together with them. 
 The radical intelligentsia has held out a finger to us—we must catch it by the hand! If the boycottis not mere bragging, if mobilisation is more than a word,if indignation at the audacious challenge is not just mummery,then you must break with the “compromisers”, come over tothe theory of the sovereignty of the people, and adopt, adopt in deed , the only consistent and integral slogans of revo-lutionary democracy—an armed uprising, a revolutionaryarmy, and a provisional revolutionary government. 
 To makeall those who indeed accept these slogans join us, and topillory all who remain on the side of the “compromisers”—such is the only correct tactics of the revolutionary proletariat. 
 Our new-Iskrists have failed to see both the class origin and the real political significance of the boycott idea, and have opened fire ... into the air. 
 Comrade Cherevanin writes in No. 
 108: “As is evident from the bulletins of the Don Committee and the St. 
 Petersburg group, both these organisa-tions [N. 
 B. 
: Menshevik organisations. 
 Note by the Proletary Editorial Board] have declared for the boycott. 
 They con-sider participation in elections to such a Duma a disgrace,treason to the cause of the revolution, and they condemnin advance those liberals who will take part in the elections. 
 Thus , the very possibility of making the State Duma a weapon of the democratic revolution is precluded , and agitation directed towards that end is evidently rejected . 
” The words we have italicised reveal the mistake indicated just now. 
Those who rant against “non-intervention” are only obscuring the really important question of the methods of intervention. 
 There are two methods of intervention, two types of slogans. 
 The first method is: “increasing agitation tenfold, organis-ing meetings everywhere, taking advantage of electionmeetings, even if we have to force our way into them, hold-ing demonstrations, political strikes, and so on and soforth”. 
 ( Proletary , No. 
 12. 
) We have already explained the slogans of this campaign of agitation. 
 The other method is: to demand “a revolutionary pledge to enter the State Dumafor the purpose of bringing about its transformation intoa revolutionary assembly which will depose the autocracyand convene a constituent assembly” (Comrade Cherevaninin Iskra , No. 
 108), or “to bring pressure to bear on the electors so that only resolute advocates of democratic and free representation should be elected to the Duma” (ComradeMartov in the Vienna Arbeiter Zeitung ). 
 It is just this difference in methods that reflects the differ-ence in the “two tactics” of Social-Democracy. 
 The opportun-ist wing of Social-Democracy is always inclined to “bring pressure to bear” on bourgeois democracy by demanding pledges from it. 
 The revolutionary wing of Social-Democracy “brings pressure to bear” on bourgeois democracy and impelsit to the left by condemning it for its shifts to the right , by spreading among the masses the slogan of a determinedrevolution. 
 The theory of “demanding pledges”, this famous Starover litmus-test theory, is sheer naïveté and can only serve to sow confusion among the proletariat and corruptit. 
 Whom will Comrade Cherevanin hold responsible for the carrying out of the “pledges” he has received? Perhaps God Almighty? Can it be that Comrade Cherevanin does not know that under the pressure of material class interests all pledges will go by the board? Is it not childishness on thepart of the selfsame Comrade Cherevanin to think that thebourgeois deputies to the State Duma can be bound to therevolutionary proletariat by means of “binding instruc-tions”? And if Comrade Martov were to begin actually to carry out his plan he would have to announce to the work-ing class that certain members of the given assembly oflandlords are “resolute advocates of free and democraticrepresentation!” To make such announcements would meansowing the greatest political corruption! And now note another thing: all these “revolutionary pledges” on the part of the Petrunkeviches, Rodichevs, and tutti quanti , all these “binding instructions”, all these pledges “resolutely to support democratic and free repre-sentation” (could anyone have picked a more general, vague,and nebulous phrase?) would be demanded and given in the name of Social-Democracy and behind the proletariat ’s back . 
 After all, this cannot be done openly, for even in free countries, where agitation is carried on openly, politicalfigures are bound not so much by private deals as by party programmes; in our case we do not and shall not have definite and established parties at the elections to the State Duma!Just see, comrades of the new Iskra , what a mess you have again managed to get into: you keep repeating “the masses”, “to the masses”, “with the masses”, “the initiative of themasses”, but in fact your “plan” boils down to secret dealsobliging Mr. 
 Petrunkevich to be not a traitor to the revolu-tion but its “resolute” advocate! The new-Iskrists have themselves reduced their position to absurdity. 
 No one, anywhere in Russia, even among their followers, would dream of concluding deals on the basis ofthose absurd “revolutionary pledges”. 
 No. 
 This is not theway to intervene. 
 You must intervene by ruthlessly branding the theory of compromise and the bourgeois compromisers,all those Petrunkeviches, etc. 
 Expose their bourgeois betrayal of the revolution and unite the revolutionary forces for an uprising against the autocracy ( and, to be on the safe side , against the Duma as well )—that is the only reliable method of really “bringing pressure to bear” on the Duma, of really paving the way for the victory of the revo-lution. 
 It is only with such a slogan that we should inter-vene in the election campaign, not for electioneering pur-poses, deals, or pledges, but in order to preach insurrection. 
And it is only the real strength of the armed people thatwill enable us to take advantage of possible and probablefuture conflicts within the State Duma, or between the State Duma and the tsar, in the interests of the revolution (and not of a strictly bourgeois constitution). 
 Less confidencein the State Duma, gentlemen, and more confidence inthe forces of the proletariat which is now arming it-self! We have now come to the slogan of the organisation of revolutionary self-government bodies. 
 Let us examine it more closely. 
 In the first place it is wrong from a purely theoretical standpoint to give pre-eminence to the slogan of revolution-ary self-government instead of the slogan of the people’ssovereignty. 
 The former bears on the administration, the second on the organisation of the state. 
 The former is, there-fore, compatible with the treacherous bourgeois theoryof “compromise” (a self-governing people headed by the tsar,“who reigns but does not govern”); the latter is whollyincompatible with it. 
 The first is acceptable to theOsvobozhdeniye League, the second is not. 
 In the second place, it is utterly absurd to identify the organisation of revolutionary self-government with theorganisation of a people’s uprising. 
 An uprising is civilwar, and war requires an army, whereas self-governmentdoes not in itself require an army. 
 There are countries witha system of self-government, but without an army. 
 And revolutionary self-government does not require a revo-lutionary army where a revolution takes place in the Nor-wegian fashion: the king was “sacked” and a plebiscite held. 
But when the people are oppressed by a despotic governmentwhich relies on an army and starts civil war, then to iden-tify revolutionary self-government with a revolutionary army, to advocate the former and to maintain silence about the latter, is almost indecent and signifies either betrayal ofthe revolution or the utmost stupidity. 
 Thirdly, history also confirms the truth (incidentally, a self-evident truth) that only the complete and decisive victory of an uprising can make it fully possible to establish genuine self-government. 
 Would the municipal revolutionin France in July 1789 have been possible if on July14 the people of Paris, who had risen in arms, had notdefeated the royal troops, taken the Bastille, and completelysmashed the resistance of the autocracy? Or will the new-Iskrists, perhaps, cite in this connection the example of the city of Montpellier, where the municipal revolution, theestablishment of revolutionary local self-government tookplace peacefully, and a vote of thanks to the intendantwas even passed for the kindness with which he had assistedin his own deposition? Does the new Iskra perhaps expect that during our Duma election campaign we shall thank the governors for having eliminated themselves before the capture of the Russian Bastilles? Is it not significant that in the France of 1789 the period of the municipal revolutiontook place when the emigration of reactionaries was under way, while in our country the slogan of revolutionary self-government instead of the slogan of an uprising is being advanced at a time when the emigration of revo-lutionaries is still going on? When a certain Russian high official was asked why an amnesty was not granted on August6 he replied: “Why should we set free 10,000 people whomit took us considerable trouble to arrest and who tomorrow would start a desperate struggle against us?” This dignitary reasoned intelligently, whereas those who speak about“revolutionary self-government” before the release of these10,000 reason unintelligently. 
 Fourthly, present-day Russian life plainly shows the inadequacy of the slogan of “revolutionary self-government” and the need for a direct and definite slogan of insur-rection. 
 Consider what took place in Smolensk on August2 (Old Style). 
 The Municipal Council declared the billetingof the Cossacks contrary to law, stopped all payments tothem, organised a city militia to protect the population,and appealed to the soldiers to refrain from violence against citizens. 
 We should like to know whether our good new-Iskrists find this adequate. 
 Should not this militia be re-garded as a revolutionary army , as an organ of attack as well as of defence?—and of attack not only against the Smolensk Cossack detachment, but against the autocratic government in general? Should not this idea of proclaiming a revolutionary army and its tasks be popularised? Can theadministration of the city of Smolensk by genuine govern-ment of the people be considered secure until a revolutionary army has won a decisive victory over the tsarist army? Fifthly, the facts prove incontrovertibly that the slogan of revolutionary self-government instead of the slogan of insurrection, or as implying (?) the slogan of insurrection,is not only “acceptable” to the Osvobozhdeniye League, but has actually been accepted by it. 
 Take Osvobozhdeniye , No. 
 74. 
 You will find there a sweeping condemnation of the“senseless and criminal advocacy of insurrection” and at the same time a plea for city militias and the establishment of local self-government bodies as elements of a future provi-sional government (cf. 
 Proletary , No. 
 12). 
 No matter how one approaches the question, it will invariably turn out that the new slogan of the new Iskra is an Osvobozhdeniye slogan. 
 The Social-Democrats who either relegate to the background or reject a slogan calling for an armed uprising, a revolutionary army, and a provisionalgovernment in favour of one demanding the organisation ofrevolutionary self-government are trailing along in the wakeof the monarchist bourgeoisie, instead of marching in thevan of the revolutionary proletariat and peasantry. 
 We are accused of stubbornly “hammering away” at the same slogans. 
 We think such an accusation a compliment. 
For it is plainly our task to hammer away persistently atvital political slogans, while spreading the general truthsof the Social-Democratic programme. 
 We succeeded in givingthe widest publicity to the “quartet” formula so repug-nant to the liberals (universal and equal suffrage, direct elections and a secret ballot). 
 We acquainted the masses ofthe working people with the “sextet” of political liberties(freedom of speech, conscience, the press, assembly,association, and the right to strike). 
 We must now repeatmillions and billions of times the “trio” of immediate revo-lutionary tasks (an armed uprising, a revolutionary army, and a provisional revolutionary government). 
 The popularforces which will accomplish these tasks are shooting up spontaneously, not only with every day but with every hour that passes. 
 Attempted uprisings are becoming more frequent, their organisation is growing, and arming is proceeding apace. 
 From the ranks of the workers and peasants clad in rusticcoats, city suits, and uniforms nameless heroes are emerging,people fused with the mass and ever more deeply imbuedwith a noble obsession to liberate the people. 
 It is our busi-ness to see to it that all these rivulets merge into a mighty torrent, that the light of a class-conscious, direct, clear, and precise revolutionary programme of our immediate tasksbe thrown on the spontaneous movement, multiplying itsstrength tenfold. 
 To sum up. 
 Our tactics with regard to the State Duma may be formulated in five points: 1) intensified agitation in connection with the State Duma Act and the elections to the Duma, the organisation of meetings, utilisation of theelection campaign, demonstrations, etc. 
, etc. 
; 2) the centringof this entire agitational campaign on slogans calling for aninsurrection, a revolutionary army, and a provisional revo-lutionary government; popularisation of the programme of this provisional government; 3) gaining the adherence for the promotion of this agitation and of the armed struggle ofall revolutionary democratic elements, and of such elementsonly, i. 
e. 
, only those who accept the above-mentionedslogans in deed; 4) support of the boycott idea, which aroseamong the Left-wing bourgeois democrats, with the purpose of making it an active boycott in the sense of the most wide-spread agitation as described above; winning over theLeft-wing representatives of bourgeois democracy to therevolutionary-democratic programme and to activitieswhich will draw them closer to the petty bourgeoisie and thepeasantry; 5) ruthless exposure of the bourgeois theory of “compromise” and the bourgeois “compromisers”, and their denunciation to the broadest masses of workers and peasants;making public and explaining every treacherous andirresolute step they take, both before and after they enter theDuma; warning the working class against these bourgeoisbetrayers of the revolution. 
 Proletary , No. 
 15, Published according to September 5 (August 23), 1905 the text in Proletary A MOST LUCID EXPOSITION OF A MOST CONFUSED PLAN In a leading article * we pointed out what a muddle the new-Iskra ’s new plan for a “Duma campaign” is. 
 Here is a most lucid exposition of it given by Martov himself in the Vienna Arbeiter Zeitung89 (of August 24, New Style). 
 (The italics everywhere are Martov’s own. 
) “The plan is as follows,” says Comrade Martov, referring to its “endorsement by many organisations in Russia”. 
 “Working-classorganisations are to assume the initiative in establishing people ’s agitation committees , to be elected by all elements of the population that are not satisfied with the tsar’s reform. 
 The task of such commit-tees consists first of all in developing agitation for genuine popular representation throughout the country. 
 These committees are to be set up formally for the purpose of enabling the mass of the populationto take part in the forthcoming elections. 
 Since by virtue of theelectoral law they are barred from direct participation in the elections, the citizens may take part indirectly by communicating theiropinions and demands to the more exclusive bodies of privileged voters. 
 The committees bring pressure to bear on the electoral body with the object of getting only resolute advocates of democratic and free repre-sentation elected to the Duma. 
 At the same time the committees strive to set up, apart from the ‘legal’ representative body, an illegal representative body which would be able at the right moment to come forward as the country’s provisional organ of the people ’s will . 
 The committees call on the population to elect their representatives by universal suffrage ; at a given moment these representatives should gather in some one city and proclaim themselves a constituent assembly . 
 Such is, so to say, the ideal objective of this campaign. 
 Whethermatters will get so far as this or not, a movement along these lineswill serve to organise revolutionary self-government, which will smash the shackles of tsarist legality, and lay the foundation for the future triumph of the revolution. 
 Little by little the rudiments of *See pp. 
 212-23 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 such revolutionary self-government are arising all over Russia, as, for instance, has already happened at the present time in two Cauca-sian gubernias where the official authorities are being boycotted by the entire population, and the latter is being governed by its ownelected authorities. 
 (In parentheses: the peasants of Guria demand that these authorities be endorsed by our Committee . 
) “The abolition of the autocracy, which does not wish to inaugurate a constitutional era voluntarily, must proceed by way of setting upsuch publicly functioning self-government bodies everywhere. 
 Itgoes without saying that opportunities for this are engendered by theincreasing disorganisation of the government apparatus and thegrowth of an effective power ( wirkenden Kraft ) among the people. 
” We recommend this peerless plan to the comrades as the ideal objective of the monarchist (Osvobozhdeniye ) bourgeoisie , as the ideal objective of liquidating the Russian proletarian-peasant revolution by the liberal landlords . 
 As we have pointed out hundreds of times, the Osvobozhde-niye League, i. 
e. 
, the monarchist bourgeoisie, wants just such a “liquidation” as would bring about the transfer of power to the bourgeoisie without a popular uprising, or, at any rate, without the complete victory of an uprising of thepeople. 
 Manilovist plans for “elections” while the autocracyremains in power play entirely into the hands of the liberal bourgeoisie , which alone is capable of producing anything at all resembling such elections. 
 We shall dwell on the details of this ridiculous plan only briefly. 
 Is it not naïve to forget that self-government in theCaucasus (not in two gubernias, but in a few volosts) restson an armed uprising ? Is it not puerile to imagine that what is possible in a few mountain villages in a remote frontierdistrict is possible in the heart of Russia without the people’s victory over the autocracy? Is not this plan of multi-stage “elections” while power remains in the hands of the autocratic government , a bit of superb pedantry ? “The dissatisfied elements of the population” (?) elect people’s agitation com-mittees (without a programme, without clear slogans). 
 Thecommittees set up an “illegal representative body” (in all probability, simply replacing the illegal organisation of the Socialist Labour Party by an Osvobozhdeniye organisation!). 
 It is obvious that the substitution of the obscure term, “ organ of the people ’s will ”, for the clear revolutionary term, “a provisional government as the organ of the uprising”, is simply playing into the hands of the Zemstvo-bourgeois party. 
 Universal elections to a constituent assembly on the initiative of “illegal” committees, while Trepov90 and Co. 
 are left in power is an idea which is altogether infantile. 
 In disputes it is sometimes useful to have a “devil’s advocate”—one who defends an absurd view which is re-jected by everyone. 
 Iskra has now assumed this role. 
 Its plan is most helpful for educational purposes in refuting absurdities at meetings of study circles, extemporaneous meetings, mass meetings, etc. 
; it is very helpful for thepurpose of bringing out more distinctly the contrast betweenthe slogans of the revolutionary proletariat and thoseof the monarchist liberal bourgeoisie. 
 Proletary , No. 
 15, Published according to September 5 (August 23), 1905 the text in Proletary KEEPING INTERNATIONAL SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY INFORMED OF OUR PARTY AFFAIRS K e e p i n g i n t e r n a t i o n a l S o c i a l-D e m o c-r a c y i n f o r m e d of our Party affairs is one of the most important duties of all Social-Democrats living abroad. 
 We remind the comrades of this and appeal for the most energetic agitation in defence of the stand taken by the Third Congressof the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 This agitation must be conducted inde-fatigably, on any pretext, on any suitable occasion, and inpositively all study circles of workers abroad, as well aswith individual members of foreign Social-Democratic parties. 
 This agitation must be conducted in ways that are worthy of conscious Social-Democrats and members of aworkers’ party. 
 It must be based on the principle of full information concerning the documentary aspect of the mat-ter. 
 Priority should be given to the circulation of the ThirdCongress resolutions published in the French language (the supplement to the newspaper Le Socialiste of June 25, 1905. 
 Address of Le Socialiste , central organ of the French socialists: Rue de la Corderie 16, Paris ) as well as in the German language (the pamphlet Bericht über den 3. 
 Partei-tag; publisher’s address: Birk et Co . 
, Buchdruckerei und Verlagsanstalt , München , Vittelsbacherplatz 2. 
 Preis 20 p f. 
). 
 Both the French and the German translations are also available from the Party office. 
 In addition to this basic material, the most important documents and articles from our literature should also betranslated. 
 In doing so we must constantly expose the in-decency of the Khlestakov-like new Iskra . 
 The latter has not published, either in French or in German, the full text of its Conference resolutions (which reveals its usurping arrogation of the title of Central Organ). 
 Iskra has pub-lished in the European Social-Democratic press such “statis-tics” about organised labour that evoke nothing but laughter (suffice it to say that the new Iskra has not yet made so bold as to make these “statistics” public in Russian, for fear ofdisgracing itself, but we have printed these statistics in fullin No. 
 9 of Proletary ). 
 91 Iskra is now circulating among all colonies abroad a letter over the Editorial Board’s signature containing the same brand of amusing Khlestakovian claims regarding the Minority’s forces, claims which have beenshamefacedly withheld from Russian readers of our Social-Democratic newspapers. 
 Publicity-mongers should be foughtagainst to the utmost, but that struggle should be con-ducted in a dignified way, so as to get the public fully informed , and make matters as clear as possible, without the least boasting and literary bombast, without falling intogossip and private allusions which cannot stand the light ofpublicity. 
 Proletary , No. 
 15, Published according to September 5 (August 23), 1905 the text in Proletary NOTE TO THE ARTICLE “RUSSIA ’S FINANCES AND THE REVOLUTION ” From the Editorial Board . 
 Rudolf Martin’s book The Future of Russia and Japan , which recently appeared in Berlin, is splendid confirmation of the conclusions drawnby the author of this article. 
 We have as yet had no oppor-tunity to examine this book, and shall, therefore, merely take note of its main arguments as reported in the foreignpress. 
 The author’s approach to the matter is one of purescholarship and devoid of any political sympathies. 
 A sta-tistician by profession, he has made a thorough study ofRussia’s financial standing and arrives at the conclusion that a declaration of insolvency is inevitable, whether the war goes on or whether peace is concluded. 
 Russian agricul-ture is in a state of complete decline, a capital of 50 thou-sand million rubles being required to put it on its feet again. 
Over the next ten years the budget deficit will amount toat least 300 million rubles annually. 
 Russia’s national debt, estimated by the author at approximately eight thousand million rubles today, will reach 12 thousand million rublesin five years’ time. 
 There is nothing with which to pay theinterest on the loans because nobody will now give Russiaany money. 
 The parallel between the Russia of 1905 andthe France of Louis XVI is simply amazing. 
 Rudolf Martin strongly advises Germany to get all Russian loans off her hands at the earliest opportunity (in America, ifpossible)—loans in which 1,500 million rubles’ worth ofGerman money has been invested. 
 The European bour-geoisie is hurrying to escape, foreseeing the inevitability of aRussian collapse. 
 Proletary , No. 
 15, Published according to September 5 (August 23), 1905 the text in Proletary SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY’S ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE PEASANT MOVEMENT The tremendous importance of the peasant movement in the democratic revolution Russia is now passing through has been repeatedly explained in the entire Social-Demo-cratic press. 
 As is well known, the Third Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 passed a special resolution on this question in order to define more exactly and to co-ordinate the activi-ties of the whole party of the class-conscious proletariat with regard to the peasant movement of today. 
 Although the resolution was drawn up in advance (the first draft was published in Vperyod , No. 
 11, March 10 [23], 1905 *), and although it was carefully gone over at the Party Congress, which took pains to formulate the views already established throughout the Russian Social-Democratic movement— the resolution has nevertheless perplexed a number of comrades working in Russia. 
 The Saratov Committee has unanimously declared this resolution unacceptable (see Pro-letary , No. 
 10). 
92 It is to be regretted that an explanation of this verdict, as requested by us at the time, has not yet been forthcoming. 
 We only know that the Saratov Commit-tee has declared also unacceptable the agrarian resolution passed by the new-Iskra Conference—consequently they are dissatisfied by what is common to both resolutions, not by what distinguishes them. 
 New material on this question is provided by a letter we have received from a Moscow comrade (issued in the form of a hectographed leaflet). 
 We print this letter in full: *“The Proletariat and the Peasantry”, 1905. 
 See present edition, Vol. 
 8, pp. 
 235-36. 
— Ed. 
 AN OPEN LETTER TO THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE AND TO THE COMRADES WORKING IN THE RURAL DISTRICTS Comrades, The regional organisation of the Moscow Committee has taken up work among the peasants. 
 The lack of experience in organising such work, the special conditions prevailing in the rural districtsof Central Russia, and also the lack of clarity in the directives containedin the resolutions of the Third Congress on this question, and thealmost complete absence of material in the periodical and other presson work among the peasantry, compel us to appeal to the Central Committee to send us detailed directives, covering both the theo-retical aspect and the practical questions involved, while we askcomrades who are doing similar work to acquaint us with thepractical knowledge your experience has given you. 
 We consider it necessary to inform you about the misgivings that have arisen among us after reading the resolution of the Third Congress “on the attitude towards the peasant movement”, and about the organisational plan which we are already beginning to apply inour work in the rural districts. 
 “§ a) To carry on propaganda among the mass of the people, explaining that Social-Democracy aims at giving the most energeticsupport to all revolutionary measures taken by the peasantry and likely to improve their condition, measures including confiscation of land belonging to the landlords, the state, the church, the monas-teries, and the imperial family” (from the resolution of the ThirdCongress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
). 
 First of all, this paragraph does not clarify how Party organisa-tions will, or should, carry on their propaganda. 
 Propaganda requires, first and foremost, an organisation standing very close to those who are to be propagandised. 
 Whether this organisation should consistof committees of the rural proletariat, or whether other organisationalforms of oral and printed propaganda are possible—this questionremains unanswered. 
 The same applies to the promise to give energetic support. 
 To give support, and energetic support at that, is also possible only if local organisations exist. 
 To us the question of “energetic support”seems in general very vague. 
 Can Social-Democracy support theexpropriation of landlords’ estates that are farmed most intensivelywith the use of machinery, cultivating high-grade crops, etc. 
? Thetransfer of such estates to petty-bourgeois proprietors, however im-portant improvement of their condition may be, would be a step back from the standpoint of the capitalist development of the given estate. 
In our opinion we as Social-Democrats should have made a reservationon this matter of “support”: “provided the expropriation of this landand its transfer to peasant (petty-bourgeois) ownership results in ahigher form of economic development on these estates. 
” Further: “§ d) To strive for the independent organisation of the rural prole-tariat, for its fusion with the urban proletariat under the banner of the Social-Democratic Party, and for the inclusion of its represent-atives in the peasant committees. 
” Doubts arise with regard to the latter part of this paragraph. 
 The fact is that bourgeois-democratic organisations such as the PeasantUnion, and reactionary-utopian organisations such as the Socialist-Revolutionaries organise under their banner both bourgeois and proletarian elements of the peasantry. 
 By bringing into such “peasant”committees our representatives from rural proletarian organisations we shall be contradicting ourselves, our stand regarding a bloc, etc. 
 Here, too, we believe, amendments, and very serious ones, are needed. 
 These are a few general remarks on the resolutions of the Third Congress. 
 These should be analysed as soon and in as great detail aspossible. 
 As regards the plan for a “rural” organisation in our Regional Organisation, we must say that we have to work under conditionswhich are not even mentioned in the resolutions of the Third Congress. 
 First of all, it should be noted that the territory we cover—Moscow Gubernia and the adjoining uyezds of neighbouring gubernias—ismainly an industrial area with a relatively low level of handicraft industry and with a very small section of the population engaged exclusively in agriculture. 
 Huge textile mills, each employing 10,000 to 15,000 workers, alternate with small factories, employing 500 to 1,000 workers and scattered in out-of-the-way hamlets and villages. 
 One would think that in such conditions Social-Democracy wouldfind here a most favourable field for its activities, but facts have proved that so superficial an assumption does not hold water. 
 Although some of the factories have been in existence for 40 or 50 years, theoverwhelming majority of our “proletariat” have not yet become divorced from the land. 
 The “village” has such a strong hold over them, that none of the psychological and other characteristics acquiredby a “pure” proletarian in the course of collective work develops among our proletarians. 
 The farming carried on by our “proletarians” is of a peculiarly linsey-woolsey type. 
 A weaver employed in a millhires a labourer to till his patch of land. 
 His wife (if she is not working at the mill), his children, and the aged and invalid members of the family work on this same piece of land, and he himself will work onit when he becomes old or maimed, or is discharged for violent or suspicious behaviour. 
 Such “proletarians” can hardly be called pro-letarians. 
 Their economic status is that of paupers; their ideologyis that of petty bourgeois. 
 They are ignorant and conservative. 
 It is from such that Black-Hundred elements are recruited. 
 However, even among these people class-consciousness has begun to awaken oflate. 
 Through the agency of “pure” proletarians we are endeavouring to rouse these ignorant masses from their age-old slumber, and not without success. 
 Our contacts are increasing in number, and in placesour foothold is becoming firmer, the paupers are coming under our influence, beginning to adopt our ideology, both in the factory and in the village. 
 And we believe that it will not be unorthodox to formorganisations in an environment that is not “purely” proletarian. 
 and organise only the rural “proletariat”, we would have to disband our organisation and those in the neighbouring districts. 
 We know we shall have difficulties in struggling against the urge to expropriate the arable and other land neglected by the landlords, or those landswhich the holy fathers in cowl and cassock have not been able to farm properly. 
 We know that bourgeois democracy, from the “democratic”-monarchist faction (such a faction exists in Ruza Uyezd) down tothe “Peasant” Union, will fight us for influence among the “paupers”, but we shall arm the latter to oppose the former. 
 We shall make use of all Social-Democratic forces in the region, both intellectual andproletarian, to set up and consolidate our Social-Democratic commit-tees of “paupers”. 
 And we shall do this in accordance with the follow-ing plan. 
 In each uyezd town, or big industrial centre we shall setup uyezd committees of groups coming under the Regional Organi-sation. 
 In addition to setting up factory committees in its district the uyezd committee will also set up “peasant” committees. 
 Forreasons of secrecy these committees should not have many people on them and should be made up of the most revolutionary and capable pauperised peasants. 
 Wherever there are both factories and peasants,workers and peasants should be organised in a single subgroup committee. 
 In the first place, such committees should have a clear and exact idea of local conditions: A) Agrarian relationships: 1) peasant allot-ments, leases, form of tenure (communal, by households, etc. 
); 2) the neighbouring land: a) to whom it belongs; b) the amount of land;c) what relation the peasants have to this land; d) on what terms the land is held: 1) labour rent, 2) excessive rent for “cut-off lands”, etc. 
; e) indebtedness to kulaks, landlords, etc. 
 B) Imposts, taxes, therate of assessment of peasant and landlord lands respectively. 
 C) Migra-tory labour and handicraft industries, passports, whether there is winter hiring, 93 etc. 
 D) Local factories and plants: the working conditions there; 1) wages, 2) working hours, 3) the attitude of the management, 4) housing conditions, etc. 
 E) The administration: the Rural Superintendents, the volost headman, the clerk, the volostjudges, constables, the priest. 
 F) The Zemstvo: councillors representing the peasants, Zemstvo employees: the teacher, the doctor, libraries, schools, tea-rooms. 
 G) Volost assemblies: their composition andprocedure. 
 H) Organisations: the Peasant Union, Socialist-Revo-lutionaries, Social-Democrats. 
 After familiarising itself with all these data the Peasant Social-Democratic Committee is obliged to get such decisions passed by the assemblies as may be necessitated by any abnormal state of affairs. 
 This committee should simultaneously carry on among the massesintense propaganda and agitation for the ideas of Social-Democracy, organise study circles, impromptu meetings, mass meetings, dis-tribute leaflets and other literature, collect funds for the Party, andkeep in touch with the Regional Organisation through the uyezd group. 
 I we succeed in setting up a number of such committees the suc-cess of Social-Democracy will be assured. 
 Regional Organiser /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR It goes without saying that we shall not undertake the task of working out the detailed practical directives to which the comrade refers: this is a matter for the comrades on the spot and for the central body in Russia which isguiding the practical work. 
 We propose to take the oppor-tunity presented by our Moscow comrade’s interesting letterto explain the resolution of the Third Congress and theurgent tasks of the Party in general. 
 It is obvious from the letter that the misunderstandings caused by the resolution of the Third Congress are only partly due to doubts in thefield of theory. 
 Another source is the new question, which has not arisen before, about the relations between the “revo-lutionary peasant committees” and the “ Social-Democratic Committees ” which are working among the peasants. 
 The very posing of this question testifies to the big step forward made in Social-Democratic work among the peasants. 
Questions of—relatively speaking—detail are now beingbrought into the foreground by the practical requirementsof “rural” agitation, which is striking root and assumingstable and permanent forms. 
 And the author of the letter keeps forgetting that when he blames the Congress resolution for lack of clarity, he is in fact seeking an answer to a ques-tion which the Congress of the Party did not raise and couldnot have raised. 
 For instance, the author is not quite right when he says that both propagation of our ideas and support for the peas-ant movement are possible “only” if local organisations exist. 
 Of course such organisations are desirable, and as thework increases they will become necessary; but such workis possible and necessary even where no such organisa-tions exist. 
 In all our activities, even when carried onexclusively among the urban proletariat, we must never lose sight of the peasant question and must disseminate the declaration made by the entire party of the class-conscious proletariat in the person of the Third Congress, namely, that we support a peasant uprising. 
 The peasants mustlearn this—from literature, from the workers, from specialorganisations, etc. 
 The peasants must learn that in giving this support the Social-Democratic proletariat will not stop short of any form of confiscation of the land (i. 
e. 
, expro-priation without compensation to the owners). 
 A question of theory has in this connection been raised by the author of the letter, whether the expropriation of the big estates and their transfer to “peasant, petty-bourgeois ownership” should not be specifically qualified. 
 Butby proposing such a reservation the author has arbitrarilylimited the purport of the resolution of the Third Congress. 
There is not a word in the resolution about the Social-Democratic Party undertaking to support transfer of the con-fiscated land to petty-bourgeois proprietors. 
 The resolution states: we support ... “up to and including confiscation”,i. 
e. 
, including expropriation without compensation; how-ever, the resolution does not in any way decide to whom theexpropriated land is to be given. 
 It was not by chance thatthe question was left open: it is obvious from the articles in Vperyod (Nos. 
 11, 12, 15 *) that it was deemed unwise to decide this question in advance. 
 It was stated there, forinstance, that under a democratic republic Social-Democracycannot pledge itself and have its hands tied with regard tonationalisation of the land. 
 Indeed, it is the revolutionary-democratic aspect of the peasant uprisings and a particular organisation of the rural proletariat in a class party that at present form the crux of the matter for us, as distinct from the petty-bourgeoisSocialist-Revolutionaries. 
 It is not schemes of a “generalredistribution” or nationalisation that is the kernel of thequestion; the essential thing is that the peasantry see the need for, and accomplish, the revolutionary demolition of the old order. 
 That is why the Socialist-Revolutionariesare pressing for “socialisation”, etc. 
, while we are pressingfor revolutionary peasant committees : without the latter, we say, all reforms amount to nothing. 
 With them and sup-ported by them the victory of the peasant uprising is possible. 
 We must help the peasant uprising in every way, up to and including confiscation of the land, but certainly not including all sorts of petty-bourgeois schemes . 
 We support the peasant movement to the extent that it is revolutionary-democratic. 
 We are making ready (doing so now, at once) *“The Proletariat and the Peasantry”, 1905; “On Our Agrarian Programme”, 1905; “The Agrarian Programme of the Liberals”, 1905. 
 See present edition, Vol. 
 8, pp. 
 231-36, 246-51, 315-22. 
— Ed. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR to fight it when, and to the extent that, it becomes reaction-ary and anti-proletarian. 
 The essence of Marxism lies in that double task, which only those who do not understand Marxism can vulgarise or compress into a single and simpletask. 
 Let us take a concrete instance. 
 Let us assume that the peasant uprising has been victorious. 
 The revolutionarypeasant committees and the provisional revolutionary gov-ernment (relying, in part, on these very committees) can proceed to any confiscation of big property. 
 We are in favourof confiscation, as we have already declared. 
 But to whomshall we recommend giving the confiscated land. 
 On thisquestion we have not committed ourselves nor shall we everdo so by declarations like those rashly proposed by the author of the letter. 
 The latter has forgotten that the same resolution of the Third Congress speaks of “ purging the revolutionary-democratic content of the peasant movement ofall reactionary admixtures ”—that is one point—and, sec-ondly, of the need “ in all cases and under all circumstances for the independent organisation of the rural proletariat ”. 
 These are our directives. 
 There will always be reactionary admixtures in the peasant movement, and we declare waron them in advance. 
 Class antagonism between the ruralproletariat and the peasant bourgeoisie is unavoidable, andwe disclose it in advance, explain it, and prepare for the struggle on the basis of that antagonism . 
 One of the immediate causes of such a struggle may very likely be provided by the question: to whom shall the confiscated land be given,and how? We do not gloss over that question, nor do wepromise equalitarian distribution, “socialisation”, etc. 
 Whatwe do say is that this is a question we shall fight out later on,fight again, on a new field and with other allies. 
 There, we shall certainly be with the rural proletariat, with the entire working class, against the peasant bourgeoisie. 
 In practice this may mean the transfer of the land to the classof petty peasant proprietors—wherever big estates based onbondage and feudal servitude still prevail, and there areas yet no material conditions for large-scale socialist pro-duction; it may mean nationalisation—given complete victory of the democratic revolution—or the big capitalistestates being transferred to workers ’ associations , for from the democratic revolution we shall at once, and precisely in accordance with the measure of our strength, the strength of the class-conscious and organised proletariat, begin to pass to the socialist revolution. 
 We stand for uninterruptedrevolution. 
 We shall not stop half-way. 
 If we do not nowand immediately promise all sorts of “socialisation”, thatis because we know the actual conditions for that task tobe accomplished, and we do not gloss over the new class struggle burgeoning within the peasantry, but reveal that struggle. 
 At first we support the peasantry en masse against the landlords, support it to the hilt and with all means, in-cluding confiscation, and then (it would be better to say,at the same time) we support the proletariat against the peasantry en masse . 
 To try to calculate now what the com-bination of forces will be within the peasantry “on the dayafter” the revolution (the democratic revolution) is emptyutopianism. 
 Without falling into adventurism or goingagainst our conscience in matters of science, without striv-ing for cheap popularity we can and do assert only one thing : we shall bend every effort to help the entire peasantry achieve the democratic revolution, in order thereby to make it easier for us, the party of the proletariat, to pass on as quickly as possible to the new and higher task—the socialistrevolution. 
 We promise no harmony, no equalitarianismor “socialisation” following the victory of the present peasant uprising, on the contrary, we “promise” a new struggle, new inequality, the new revolution we are striv-ing for. 
 Our doctrine is less “sweet” than the legends of theSocialist-Revolutionaries, but let those who want to befed solely on sweets join the Socialist-Revolutionaries;we shall say to such people: good riddance. 
 In our opinion this Marxist point of view settles also the question of the committees. 
 In our opinion there should be no Social-Democratic peasant committees. 
 If they are Social-Democratic, that means they are not purely peasantcommittees; if they are peasant committees, that means theyare not purely proletarian, not Social-Democratic commit-tees. 
 There is a host of such who would confuse the two, but we are not of their number. 
 Wherever possible we shallstrive to set up our committees, committees of the Social-Democratic Labour Party . 
 They will consist of peasants, paupers, intellectuals, prostitutes (a worker recently asked us in a letter why not carry on agitation among the prosti-tutes), soldiers, teachers, workers—in short, all Social-Democrats , and none but Social-Democrats . 
 These committees will conduct the whole of Social-Democratic work, inits full scope, striving, however, to organise the rural pro-letariat especially and particularly, since the Social-Demo-cratic Party is the class party of the proletariat. 
 To consider it “unorthodox” to organise a proletariat which has notentirely freed itself from various relics of the past is atremendous delusion , and we would like to think that the relevant passages of the letter are due to a mere misunder-standing. 
 The urban and industrial proletariat will inev-itably be the nucleus of our Social-Democratic Labour Party, but we must attract to it, enlighten, and organiseall who labour and are exploited, as stated in ourprogramme—all without exception: handicraftsmen, pau-pers, beggars, servants, tramps, prostitutes—of course,subject to the necessary and obligatory condition that they join the Social-Democratic movement and not that the Social-Democratic movement join them, that theyadopt the standpoint of the proletariat, and not that theproletariat adopt theirs. 
 The reader may ask—what is the point, then, of having revolutionary peasant committees? Does this mean that they are not necessary? No, they are necessary. 
 Our ideal is purely Social-Democratic committees in all rural districts,and then agreement between them and all revolutionary-democratic elements, groups, and circles of the peasantryfor the purpose of establishing revolutionary committees. 
There is a perfect analogy here to the independence of the Social-Democratic Labour Party in the towns and its al-liance with all the revolutionary democrats for the purposeof insurrection. 
 We are in favour of a peasant uprising. 
 Weare absolutely opposed to the mixing and merging of hetero-geneous class elements and heterogeneous parties. 
 We holdthat for the purpose of insurrection Social-Democracy should give an impetus to all revolutionary democracy, should help it all to organise, should march shoulder to shoul-der with it, but without merging with it, to the barricades in the cities, and against the landlords and the police in the villages. 
 Long live the insurrection in town and country against the autocracy! Long live revolutionary Social-Democracy,the vanguard of all revolutionary democracy in the presentrevolution! Proletary , No. 
 16, Published according to September 14 (1), 1905 the text in Proletary WHAT OUR LIBERAL BOURGEOIS WANT, AND WHAT THEY FEAR In Russia political education of the people and the intelli-gentsia hardly exists as yet. 
 Clear political convictions and firm party opinions have as yet scarcely developed in ourcountry. 
 People in Russia are too ready to give credenceto any protest against the autocracy and frown upon anycriticism of the character and substance of that protest,regarding such criticism as something that maliciously disunites the movement for emancipation. 
 It is not surpris-ing, therefore, that under this general flag of emancipationthe Osvobozhdeniye * too, which is published under the edi-torship of Mr. 
 Struve, has a wide circulation among all andsundry free-thinking intellectuals who resent any analysisof the class content of Osvobozhdeniye liberalism. 
 And yet, Osvobozhdeniye liberalism is merely a more systematic, uncensored expression of the fundamentalfeatures of Russian liberalism as a whole. 
 The farther therevolution advances, the more that liberalism exposesitself, and the more unpardonable is the fear of looking thetruth full in the face and understanding the real essence of that liberalism. 
 The “Political Letters” of the well-known historian Mr. 
 Pavel Vinogradov, published in Russkiye Vedomosti (August 5), the well-known liberal organ, are highly characteristic in this respect. 
 No less characteristicis the fact that other liberal newspapers, like Nasha Zhizn , quoted excerpts from this admirable piece of writing, without a single word of indignation or protest. 
 Mr. 
 Pavel *Osvobozhdeniye —Russian for “emancipation, liberation”. 
— Tr. 
 Vinogradov has expressed in bold relief, in a way rarely to be met, the interests, tactics, and psychology of the self-seeking bourgeoisie; his outspokenness might, perhaps, be considered inappropriate by certain of the shrewder liberals,but then that makes it all the more valuable to class-conscious workers. 
 Here are the concluding words of Mr. 
Vinogradov’s article, which express its very quintessence: “I do not know whether Russia will succeed in reaching the new system along a road close to that taken by Germany in 1848, but Ihave no doubt that every effort must be exerted to enter upon thisroad, and not upon the one chosen by France in 1789. 
 “Along the latter path Russian society—raw, poorly organised, and torn by internecine strife—will encounter tremendous dangers,if not its doom. 
 To wait until we get object lessons on the subject ofpower, order, national unity, and social organisation is undesirable,the more so since these object lessons will be given either by thepolice sergeant, who will have gained new strength, or by the German corporal, whom anarchy in Russia will provide with a providential mission. 
” That is what the Russian bourgeois is thinking of most of all: the tremendous dangers of the “road” of 1789! The bourgeois has no objection to the path taken by Germany in 1848, but he will exert “every effort” to avoid the path takenby France. 
 An instructive pronouncement, one which pro-vides much food for thought. 
 What is the radical difference between the two roads? It is that the bourgeois-democratic revolution carried out by France in 1789, and by Germany in 1848, was brought to its consummation in the first case, but not in thesecond. 
 The first ended in a republic and complete liberty,whereas the second stopped short without smashing themonarchy and reaction. 
 The second proceeded under theleadership mainly of the liberal bourgeoisie, which took the insufficiently mature working class in tow, whereas the first was carried out, at least to a certain extent, by therevolutionarily active mass of the people, the workers andpeasants, who, for a time at least, pushed the respectableand moderate bourgeoisie aside. 
 The second led rapidly tothe “pacification” of the country, i. 
e. 
, the suppression of the revolutionary people and the triumph of “the police sergeant and the corporal”; whereas for a certain period thefirst placed power in the hands of the revolutionary people which crushed the resistance of “the police sergeants and the corporals”. 
 And now a learned lackey of the Russian bourgeoisie comes out in a “highly respectable” liberal organ with awarning against the first road, the “French”. 
 The learnedhistorian wants the “German” road, and is quite outspokenabout it. 
 He knows perfectly well that the German road didnot escape an armed uprising of the people. 
 In 1848 and 1849 there were a number of uprisings and even provisional revolutionary governments in Germany. 
 But none of these uprisings was fully victorious . 
 The most successful of them, the Berlin uprising of March 18, 1848, terminated not inthe overthrow of the royal power, but in concessions granted by the king, who remained in power and very soon managed to recover from his partial defeat and withdraw all these concessions. 
 And so, the learned historian of the bourgeoisie does not fear an uprising of the people. 
 He fears the victory of the people . 
 He is not afraid of the people administering a slight lesson to the reactionaries and the bureaucracy, the bu-reaucracy which he hates so much. 
 He is afraid of the people overthrowing the reactionary government . 
 He hates the autoc-racy and desires its overthrow with all his heart; it is notfrom the preservation of the autocracy, not from the poi-soning of the people’s organism by the slow putrefaction of thestill living parasite of monarchist rule that he expects the doom of Russia, but from the complete victory of the people . 
 This man of cheap-jack scholarship knows that a time of revolution is a time of object lessons for the people,but he does not want object lessons on the destruction of reaction , and tries to scare us with object lessons on the destruction of the revolution . 
 He is scared to death of the road which has led to the complete victory of the revo-lution, even for a short time, and yearns with all his heartfor an outcome like the German, in which reaction securedcomplete victory for a long, long time. 
 He does not welcome revolution in Russia, but merely tries to find extenuating circumstances for it. 
 He desires not a victorious revolution, but an unsuccessful revolution. 
 He considers reaction a phenomenon that is in order andlegitimate, natural and durable, reliable and reasonable. 
 He regards revolution as a phenomenon that is illegitimate, fantastic, and unnatural, one that can at best be justified to a certain degree on the grounds of the instability, the “weakness”, the “unsoundness” of the autocratic government. 
This “objective” historian regards revolution not as themost lawful right of the people, but merely as a sinful anddangerous method of correcting the extremes of reaction. 
 Inhis opinion a revolution which has been completely victori-ous is “anarchy”, whereas completely victorious reaction is not anarchy, but merely a slight exaggeration of certainnecessary functions of the state. 
 He knows of no other“rule” but a monarchy, no other “system” and no other“social organisation” but those of the bourgeoisie. 
 Of theEuropean forces which revolution in Russia will “provide with a providential mission” he knows only the “German corporal”, but he neither knows nor cares to know the German Social-Democratic worker . 
 He detests most of all the “presumption” of those who “are preparing to outstrip theWestern bourgeoisie” (the Professor writes the word bour-geoisie in ironical quotation marks as if to say: what a stupid term to apply to European—Eu-ro-pe-an—civili-sation!). 
 This “objective historian” smugly closes his eyes tothe fact that it is precisely because of the old abominationof the Russian autocracy that Europe has for decadesand decades been marking time and even retrogressingpolitically. 
 He fears the object lesson of the “police sergeant who will have gained new strength” and therefore—O leader of the people! O statesman!—he utters a warningabove all against resolutely smashing all the “forces” of thecontemporary police sergeant. 
 What contemptible servility!What a despicable betrayal of the revolution, dishedup with the sauce of a pseudo-scholarly and pseudo-objec-tive analysis of the question! Scratch a Russian and you will find a Tartar, said Napoleon. 
 We say, scratch a Rus-sian liberal bourgeois and you will find a police sergeant ina brand-new uniform, who is permitted to retain nine-tenthsof his old strength for the very profound, “scholarly”, and “objective” reason that otherwise, he may, perhaps, want to “gain new strength”! Every bourgeois ideologist has the soul of a thoroughgoing huckster; he does not think of destroy-ing the forces of reaction and of the “police sergeant”, but of bribing this police sergeant, of greasing his palm and appeasing him by striking a bargain with him as quickly as possible. 
 How inimitably this most learned ideologist of the bour-geoisie corroborates all that we have so often said in Pro-letary about the nature and character of Russian liberalism!Unlike the European bourgeoisie, which was revolutionaryin its time and went over to the side of reaction decades later, our home-grown wiseacres immediately skip revolu-tion, or want to do so, and arrive at the moderate and tidyrule of the reactionary bourgeoisie. 
 The bourgeoisie doesnot and, because of its class position, cannot want revolu-tion. 
 It merely wants to strike a bargain with the monarchyagainst the revolutionary people; it merely wants to steal to power behind the backs of that people. 
 And what an instructive lesson this liberal bourgeois sage teaches those doctrinaire Social-Democrats who havegone as far as the following resolution, which was adoptedby the Caucasian supporters of the new Iskra and specially approved by the Editorial Board of Iskra in a special supplement. 
 This resolution (together with Iskra ’s approval) is given in full in N. 
 Lenin’s Two Tactics (pp. 
 68-69), * but since many comrades in Russia are not acquainted with this resolution, and since the Iskra Editorial Board refused to publish this, in their opinion, so “very apt” resolution,we reproduce it here in full so as to edify all Social-Democrats and put Iskra to shame: “Whereas we consider it to be our task to take advantage of the revolutionary situation so as to deepen Social-Democratic consciousness in the proletariat, and in order tosecure for the Party complete freedom to criticise the nascentbourgeois-state system, the Conference” (the Caucasian new-Iskra Conference) “declares itself against the formation of a Social-Democratic provisional government, and enteringsuch a government, and considers it to be the most expedientcourse to exercise pressure from without upon the bourgeoisprovisional government in order to secure a feasible measureof democratisation of the state system. 
 The Conference believes that the formation of a provisional government by *See pp. 
 93-94 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 Social-Democrats, or their entering such a government, would lead, on the one hand, to the masses of the proletariat becoming disappointed in the Social-Democratic Party and abandoning it, because the Social-Democrats, despite theseizure of power, would not be able to satisfy the pressingneeds of the working class, including the establishment ofsocialism, and, on the other hand, would cause the bourgeois classes to recoil from the revolution and thus diminish its sweep . 
” This is a shameful resolution, for (against the will and mind of its authors, who have stepped on to the inclinedplane of opportunism) it expresses a betrayal of the interestsof the working class to the bourgeoisie. 
 This resolutionsanctifies the conversion of the proletariat into the tail-end of the bourgeoisie for the duration of the democratic revolution. 
 One need but place this resolution side byside with the passage from Mr. 
 Vinogradov’s article quotedabove (and anybody will find hundreds and thousandsof similar passages in the writings of the liberal publicists)to realise what a marsh the new-Iskrists have got into. 
 Mr. 
 Vinogradov, this typical ideologist of the bourgeoisie, has already recoiled from the cause of the revolution. 
 Has he not thereby diminished the “sweep of the revolution”,gentlemen of the new Iskra ? Should you not go penitently to the Vinogradovs and beg them, at the price of your refraining from leading the revolution , not “to recoil from the revolution ”? Proletary , No. 
 16, Published according to September 14 (1), 1905 the text in Proletary THE THEORY OF SPONTANEOUS GENERATION “Iskra has shown that a constituent assembly can be formed by way of spontaneous generation, without the aidof any government whatever, and consequently without the aid of a provisional government as well. 
 Henceforth this terrible problem may be regarded as settled, and all dis-putes in connection with it must cease. 
” Thus runs the Bund statement made in No. 
 247 of Posledniye Izvestia , dated September 1 (August 19). 
 Unless this is irony, no better “development” of Iskra ’s views could be imagined. 
 In any case, the theory of “spontaneous genera-tion” has been established, the “terrible problem” has beensettled, and disputes “must cease”. 
 What a blessing! Weshall now live without disputes about this terrible ques-tion, cherishing this new, recently discovered, and simpletheory of “spontaneous generation”, a theory as clear as the eyes of a child. 
 True, this theory of spontaneous generation was not generated spontaneously, but appeared to thecommon view as the fruit of cohabitation between the Bundand the new Iskra —but after all what is important is not the origin, but the value of a theory! How slow-witted were those unfortunate Russian Social-Democrats who discussed this “terrible question” both at the Third Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 and at the Confer-ence of new-Iskrists: some of these discussed at length thequestion of a provisional government for the purpose o f generating, but not spontaneously, a constituent assembly. 
Others (the Conference resolution) thought it possible that “the revolution’s decisive victory over tsarism may be marked” also by the “decision of some representativeinstitution to call, under the direct revolutionary pres-sure of the people, a constituent assembly”. 
 No one, however, not even the new Iskra ’s Editorial Board, who attended the Conference in full together with Plekhanov, could ever have thought up what “‘ Iskra ’ has now shown ”, and what the Bund has now summarised, confirmed, andchristened with a magnificent name. 
 Like all great discov-eries, the theory of the spontaneous generation of a con-stituent assembly immediately sheds light on what was utter confusion. 
 Now everything has become clear. 
 There is no need to think of a revolutionary provisional government(remember Iskra ’s famous dictum: let not the combination of the words “long live” and “government” defile yourlips); there is no need to make the members of the StateDuma give a “revolutionary pledge” to “transform the State Duma into a revolutionary assembly” (Cherevanin, in Iskra , No. 
 108). 
 A constituent assembly can be gen-erated spontaneously!! It will be immaculately brought forth by the people themselves, who will not defile them-selves with any “intermediary” by way of a government,even a provisional, even a revolutionary one. 
 This will be birth “without original sin”, by the pure method of general elections with no “Jacobin” struggle for power, with nodefilement of the holy cause through betrayal by bourgeoisrepresentative assemblies, and even without any coarsemidwives, who hitherto in this profane, sinful, and uncleanworld had punctually appeared on the scene every time the old society was pregnant with a new one. 
 Hail spontaneous generation! Let all the revolutionary peoples of all Russia now appreciate its “possibility”—andconsequently its necessity to them as the most rational, easy, and simple road to freedom! Let a monument be speedilyerected in honour of the Bund and the new Iskra , the sponta-neous progenitors of the theory of spontaneous generation! But however much we may be blinded by the glaring light of this new scientific discovery, we must touch up oncertain base features in this sublime creation. 
 Just as themoon is very badly made in Hamburg, 94 so too new theories are fabricated none too carefully at the editorial office of Posledniye Izvestia . 
 The recipe is a simple one, long a favourite with people who could never be accused of harbour-ing a single original thought—take contrasting views, mix them, and divide into two parts! From Proletary we take the criticism of popular elections under the autocracy, from Iskra —condemnation of the “terrible problem”; from Proletary — the active boycott, from Iskra —the uselessness of insurrection as a slogan ... “like a bee that gathers a fee from each flower-ing tree”. 
 And the good Bundists are smugly preening them-selves, rejoicing at the termination of disputes on the terribleproblem, and admiring themselves: how superior they are to the narrow and biased views of both contending parties! It doesn’t work out, comrades of the Bund. 
 You have shown no other “way of spontaneous generation” than thatof the new Iskra . 
 And as regards the latter, you yourselves have had to admit that “under the autocracy and againstthe will of the government, which holds the entire machinery of state in its hands”, elections of popular represen-tatives can only be farcical elections. 
 Do not abandon us half-way, O creators of the new theory; tell us in what“way” other than the new Iskra ’s you “visualise” “sponta-neous generation”? In opposition to Iskra , Proletary wrote that the only people who will be able to conduct elections under the autoc-racy are the Osvobozhdeniye League, who will willingly call them popular elections. 
 * The Bund replies: “This argument does not hold water, since it is beyond doubt that the autoc-racy will allow no one—not even the Osvobozhdeniye League—to conduct elections except within limits established by law. 
” We may respectfully remark: the Zemstvos, munici-pal councillors, and members of “unions” have held, andare holding, elections. 
 That is a fact. 
 Their numerousbureaux provide proof of it. 
 The Bund writes: “We should not start agitation against the Duma and for an insurrection in general [!] since insurrection, as merely a means of effecting a political revo-lution, cannot in this case [and not “in general”?] serve asa slogan for agitation. 
 We can and must reply to the Dumaby extending and intensifying political agitation for aconstituent assembly to be elected on the basis of universal,etc. 
, suffrage. 
” To this we answer: in the first place, had the Bundists done a little thinking, or even simply consulted *See p. 
 198 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 our Party programme, they would have seen that a consti-tuent assembly, too, is only a “means”. 
 It is illogical to declare one “means” suitable as a slogan, and another unsuitable “in general”. 
 Secondly, we have already for a long time pastrepeatedly explained in detail that a slogan calling for aconstituent assembly alone is inadequate, since it hasbecome an Osvobozhdeniye slogan, the slogan of the bourgeois “compromisers” (see Proletary , Nos. 
 3 and 4 *). 
 It is quite natural for the liberal monarchist bourgeoisie to gloss over the question of the method of convening a constituent assembly. 
 For representatives of the revolutionary prole-tariat it is totally impermissible. 
 The theory of spontaneousgeneration fully befits the former, but as regards the latter,it can only disgrace them in the eyes of class-conscious workers. 
 The Bund’s final argument: “An armed uprising is imper-ative, and we must keep on preparing for it all the time. 
However, we are as yet unable to launch an uprising, there-fore [!!] there is no point in linking it up with the Duma. 
”To this we reply: 1) to acknowledge that insurrection and preparations for it are imperative and at the same time to turn up one’s nose contemptuously at the question of “combatsquads” (“taken from the Vperyod arsenal”, as the Bund writes) means to defeat one’s own purpose and reveal alack of thought in one’s writings. 
 2) A provisional revolu-tionary government is an organ of insurrection. 
 This prin-ciple, which is clearly expressed in a resolution of the Third Congress, was accepted in essence by the new-Iskra Con-ference too, although, in our opinion, it was less aptly put(a provisional revolutionary government “emerging from avictorious popular insurrection”: both logic and historicalexperience show that it is possible to have provisional revolutionary governments as organs of insurrection which are far from victorious, or which are not completely victori-ous; moreover, a provisional revolutionary government doesnot only “emerge” from an uprising, but also directs it). 
The Bundists do not attempt to dispute this proposition, *“Revolutionary Struggle and Liberal Brokerage”, “The Demo-cratic Tasks of the Revolutionary Proletariat”. 
 See present edition, Vol. 
 8, pp. 
 492-93, 511-18. 
— Ed. 
 and indeed it cannot be disputed. 
 To recognise that an uprising and preparations for it are imperative, and at the same time to demand the cessation of disputes about the “terrible problem” of a provisional government meansto write without thinking. 
 3) The phrase about the forma-tion of a constituent assembly “without the aid of anygovernment whatever, and consequently, without the aidof a provisional government as well” is an anarchist one. 
 It is wholly on a level with the famous Iskra phrase about “defiling” the lips by combining the words “long live” with“government”. 
 It shows a failure to understand the signifi-cance of a revolutionary government as one of the greatestand finest “ means ” of effecting a political revolution. 
 The paltry “liberalism” flaunted here by the Bund in emulation of Iskra (that is to say, we can manage without any govern-ment, even a provisional one!) is sheer anarchist liberalism. 
The formation of a constituent assembly without the aid of an uprising is an idea worthy only of bourgeois philis-tines, as even the comrades of the Bund realise. 
 Moreover,an uprising without the aid of a provisional revolutionary government can be neither an uprising of the whole people nor a victorious uprising. 
 Again and again we must statewith regret that the Bundists’ conclusions do not hangtogether. 
 4) If it is necessary to prepare for an uprising,such preparation must of necessity include the dissemina-tion and explanation of slogans calling for an armed upris-ing of the people, the formation of a revolutionary army, and the establishment of a provisional revolutionary govern-ment. 
 We must ourselves study new methods of struggle,their conditions, their forms, their dangers, their practicalrealisation, etc. 
, and enlighten the masses on these mat-ters. 
 5) The proposition: “we are as yet unable to launch an uprising” is wrong. 
 The Potemkin events have proved rather that we are unable to prevent premature outbreaks of the uprising that is being prepared . 
 The Potemkin sailors were less prepared than those on other ships, and the sweepof the uprising was less than it might have been. 
 What isthe conclusion to be drawn from this? First, that the task of preparing an uprising should include that of preventing premature outbreaks of an uprising that is being or hasalmost been prepared. 
 Secondly, that the uprising now developing spontaneously is outstripping the purposeful and planned work we are doing to prepare it. 
 We are unable now to restrain the insurrectionary outbreaks which occur here and there sporadically, disconnectedly, and sponta-neously. 
 So much the more are we in duty bound to speed up dissemination and explanation of all the political tasks and political requisites of a successful uprising. 
 All themore ill-advised, therefore, are suggestions that an end be put to the disputes about the “terrible problem” of a provisional government. 
 6) Is the idea that “there is nopoint in linking up insurrection with the Duma” correct?No, it is wrong. 
 To determine beforehand just when theuprising should take place is absurd, especially for us whoare living abroad. 
 In this sense there can be no question of any “linking up”, as has been repeatedly pointed out by Proletary . 
 But agitation in favour of insurrection and advocacy of the latter must of necessity be “linked up” with all the important political events which are stirringthe people. 
 Our entire dispute now centres on the sloganof agitation which should be made the hub of our “Duma” agitation campaign. 
 Is the Duma an event of that kind? Undoubtedly, it is. 
 Will the workers and peasants ask us:What would be the best reply to the Duma? Undoubtedly,they will, and are even doing so already. 
 How are we toreply to these questions? Not by referring to spontaneousgeneration (which can only be treated as a joke), but by explaining the conditions, forms, prerequisites, tasks, and organs of an insurrection . 
 The more we achieve by such explanations, the more likely will it be that theinevitable insurrectionary outbreaks will be able to developmore smoothly and rapidly into a successful and victoriousuprising. 
 Proletary , No. 
 16, Published according to September 14 (1), 1905 the text in Proletary LETTER TO THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIALIST BUREAU September 16, 1905 Dear Comrade, All your letters proposing that the International Social-ist Bureau intervene to reconcile the two groups in our Party have been forwarded to the Central Committee inRussia. 
 I am now in a position to inform you that theCentral Committee is prepared to take part in the confer-ence referred to, on condition that it will be confined toa preliminary exchange of views. 
 I hope the delegates of the Central Committee will arrive in Geneva or Berlin in the very near future, probably in September. 
 However, I must inform you that the Central Committee is preparing to conclude an agreement with the OrganisingCommittee in Russia, which is the executive body of theMinority in the Party. 
 Preliminary negotiations have already taken place, and both parties have arrived at an understanding concerning sums contributed to the cause ofthe Russian revolution by organisations abroad. 
 The textof this agreement was forwarded to you a fortnight ago. 
 Since only full understanding between the comrades in Russia can guarantee a lasting reconciliation, it would be advisabie to await the outcome of these negotiations before calling the conference you mention in your letter to us. 
 Vladimir Ulyanov (N. 
 Lenin ) First published in 1929 Published according to the text in in the second and third the second and third editions of the editions of V. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s Collected Works which has been Collected Works , checked against a French typewritten Vol. 
 8 copy of the text FRIENDS MEET During the last few days foreign papers, which are very carefully following the development of the political crisisin Russia, have published a number of interesting reports on the activities of the Zemstvos and the Osvobozhdeniye League. 
 Here is what they say: “After a two-hour discussion the St. 
 Petersburg Con-ference of Marshals of the Nobility arrived at completeagreement with the Minister of the Interior concerning theelections” to the State Duma ( Vossische Zeitung , 95 September 16). 
 “Reports from all the gubernias and cities of Russia show that most electors are utterly indifferent to the polit-ical rights granted them” ( ibid . 
). 
 Golovin (Chairman of the Moscow Gubernia Zemstvo Board) is conducting nego-tiations with Durnovo (Governor General of Moscow)concerning permission to hold a Zemstvo Congress. 
 Durnovo told Golovin that he was in full sympathy with the Zemstvos, but that he had been ordered to exert everyeffort to prevent the Congress. 
 Golovin made reference tothe Congress of Professors. 
 Durnovo replied that “this is analtogether different matter, since the students had to bepersuaded to resume their studies at all events” ( Frank-furter Zeitung , September 17). 
 “The Zemstvo Congress has been authorised to meet in Moscow on the 25th inst. 
 inorder to discuss the electoral programme, provided it keepsstrictly to that subject. 
” ( The Times , September 18, cable-gram from St. 
 Petersburg. 
) “M. 
 Golovin today visited theGovernor General with reference to the forthcoming Zemstvo Congress. 
 His Excellency stated that the Congress would be permitted to assemble, but that the programme must beconfined to three points—first, the participation of the Zemstvos and towns in the elections to the State Duma; secondly, the organisation of the electoral campaign; and, thirdly, the participation of the Zemstvos and towns in the work of assisting in relief work in famine-strickendistricts. 
” ( Ibid . 
, cablegram from Moscow. 
) Friends have met and come to terms. 
 An agreement has been reached between Golovin (the leader of the Zemstvoparty) and Durnovo. 
 Only infants could fail to see that the agreement is based on mutual concessions, on the prin-ciple of do ut des (I give you that you may give me). 
 What the autocracy has conceded is clear: it has permitted theCongress. 
 What has been conceded by the Zemstvo party(or is it the Osvobozhdeniye Party? God alone knows! And is it worth while finding out?) no one mentions. 
 The bourgeoi-sie has every reason to conceal its negotiations with the autocracy. 
 But even if we do not know the details, theparticulars, we are fully aware of the gist of the concessions made by the bourgeoisie. 
 The bourgeoisie has promised the autocracy to moderate its revolutionary fervour which con-sisted in Petrunkevich having been regarded in Court circles as a former revolutionary.... 
 The bourgeoisie has promised a discount in return for a discount . 
 We do not know how big this discount is. 
 However, we do know that the “bar-gaining price” asked for by the bourgeoisie was twofold: forthe people—a monarchist constitution with two chambers;for the tsar—the convocation of people’s representatives, nothing more (since the celebrated Zemstvo delegation did not dare to ask Nicholas II for more). 
 It is on this doublebargaining price that the bourgeoisie has now promisedthe autocracy a discount. 
 The bourgeoisie has promised to be dutiful, loyal, and law-abiding . 
 * Friends met and came to an agreement. 
 About the same time, other friends began to meet and come to terms. 
 The St. 
 Petersburg correspondent of the *Foreign papers of September 21 (N. 
 S. 
) reported from St. 
 Peters-burg that the Bureau of the Zemstvo Congress had received many withdrawals from participation in the September 25 Congress on theground that its programme had been considerably curtailed by the government . 
 We cannot vouch for the accuracy of this information, but even if it is only a rumour, it undoubtedly confirms our viewson the significance of the negotiations between Golovin and Durnovo. 
 Frankfurter Zeitung , a Bourse paper (September 15), reports that a secret congress of the Osvobozhdeniye League has taken place, evidently in Moscow. 
 “At this meeting it was decided that the Osvobozhdeniye League should be turned into a democratic-constitutional party. 
 A motion to this effect was tabled by Zemstvo members belonging to theOsvobozhdeniye League, and was carried unanimously by the Congress” (or was it a conference?). 
 “Thereupon forty members of the League were elected to draft and edit the party programme . 
 This commission is to start work soon. 
” The question of the State Duma was discussed. 
 After alively debate it was decided to take part in the elections “on condition, however, that party members elected par-ticipate in the State Duma not in order to concern themselves with current affairs, but for the purpose of continuing the struggle within the Duma itself”. 
 In the course of the debatesit was pointed out that a widespread (or far-reaching—weitgehencier ) boycott is impossible, and only a boycott of that nature would have any sense. 
 (Is it possible, gentlemen,that no one cried out at your meeting: “Don’t say ‘I cannot’, say ‘I don’t want to!’”—Note by the Editors of Proletary . 
) However, the meeting holds that the State Duma is a goodarena for the propaganda of democratic ideas. 
 “A true friendof the people,” according to the minutes of the meeting, “afriend of freedom, will enter the State Duma only for thepurpose of fighting for a constitutional state. 
” (Remember S. 
S. 
 of Osvobozhdeniye , who explained to all and sundry that for the radical intelligentsia extension of suffrage isthe focal point, whereas for the Zemstvos, for the landlords,and capitalists, it is the extension of the rights of the StateDuma. 
—Editors of Proletary . 
) “At the same time the meeting pointed out that the democratic members of the Duma should bear in mind that in this struggle there must be a com-plete break with the existing government ” (the italics are in the original) “and such a break should not be feared. 
 Thesedecisions of the meeting will, of course, be printed andcirculated. 
” (The Editors of Proletary have so far obtained neither this leaflet nor any information about it from Russia. 
) “In view of the far-reaching influence of the Osvobozhdentsi , as members of the Osvobozhdeniye League call themselves, who count among their number representatives of the most diverse strata of society and who are headed by Zemstvo leaders, their election campaign among circles of society closest to them and qualified to vote acquires great importance. 
 There is no doubt that a strong nucleusof these Osvobozhdentsi will penetrate into the State Duma and constitute its Left wing, as soon as the StateDuma turns into a body genuinely representative of thepeople. 
 If these radicals succeed in winning the candi-dates of the moderate Zemstvos and the towns over to their side, a constituent assembly may eventually beproclaimed. 
 “The participation of Russian political parties in the elections is thus apparently a settled matter, for the Unionof Unions has also finally declared itself in favour of par-ticipation. 
 Only the Jewish Bund is campaigning against the Duma elections, and at big meetings held in variouscities ... the workers in general have taken a categoricalstand against the State Duma, from which they are ex-cluded. 
” That is how the correspondent of a German bourgeois newspaper writes the history of the Russian revolution. 
 His reports, probably, contain errors of detail, but by andlarge they are undoubtedly close to the truth—of course,so far as facts, not predictions, are concerned. 
 What is the real significance of the facts he describes?The Russian bourgeoisie, as we have pointed out hundreds of times, is acting as intermediary between the tsar and the people, between the government and the revolution, ina desire to make use of the latter in order to secure powerfor itself in its own class interests. 
 Therefore, until it attains power, it is bound to strive for “friendship” both with the tsar and with the revolution. 
 And that is what it is doing. 
 The dignitary Golovin is sent to strike up a friendship with Durnovo. 
 An anonymous scribbler is sent to strikeup a friendship with the “people”, with the revolution. 
In the first case friends met and came to terms. 
 Inthe second case they hold out their hands, nod theirheads in friendly fashion, promise to be true friends of the people, friends of liberty, swear to take part in the Duma only for the sake of the struggle and nothing but thestruggle, avow that they will make a complete and final break with the existing government, and hold out even the prospect of a constituent assembly being proclaimed. 
 They act the radical, dance attendance on revolutionaries, and make up to them in order to win the title of friends ofthe people and of liberty; they are prepared to promise any-thing— on the off-chance of someone swallowing the bait ! The bait has been swallowed. 
 The new Iskra with Parvus at its head has done that. 
 Friends have met and begun nego-tiations about an agreement. 
 Cherevanin cries out (in Iskra , No. 
 108): “We must make the Osvobozhdeniye League members who are entering the Duma give us a revolutionarypledge. 
” “We agree, we quite agree,” is the reply. 
 “We shallproclaim a constituent assembly. 
” Martov (in the ViennaArbeiter Zeitung translated into Russian in Proletary , No. 
 15) seconds Cherevanin: “Pressure must be brought to bear so that only resolute advocates of free and democratic repre-sentation are elected. 
” “Of course, of course,” the Osvobozhde-niye League replies, “honest to God, we are most resolute people; we are out for a complete break with the existinggovernment. 
” “We must remind them that they are in duty bound to express the interests of the people,” Parvus, our Ledru-Rollin 96 thunders. 
 “They must be forced to express the interests of the people. 
”—“Most assuredly,” the Osvo-bozhdeniye League replies. 
 “We even have it recorded in the minutes that we are true friends of the people, friendsof liberty. 
” “Political parties must be formed,” Parvus demands. 
 “Done,” the Osvobozhdeniye League replies. 
 “We are already called the Constitutional-DemocraticParty. 
” “A clear programme is needed,” Parvus persists. 
“Why, of course,” the Osvobozhdeniye League replies, “we have set forty men to write a programme, and are only tooglad to do it ...” “An agreement on Social-Democratic support for the Osvobozhdeniye League must be concluded,” all the new-Iskra crowd wind up in chorus. 
 The Osvobozhdeniye League is moved to tears. 
 Golovin pays a call on Durnovoto tender his congratulations. 
 Which of them are the buffoons, and which the dupes?All the mistakes of Iskra ’s tactics in the Duma question have now led up to a natural and inevitable finale. 
 The disgraceful part played by Iskra in its war against the idea of an active boycott is now obvious to each and all. 
 There is no doubt now as to who benefited by Iskra ’s tactics. 
 The idea of an active boycott has been buried by the majority of the monarchist bourgeoisie. 
 Iskra ’s tactics will inevi-tably be buried by the majority of Russian Social-Democrats. 
 Parvus let his tongue run away with him to the extent of talking about a formal agreement with the Osvobozhde-niye League (the “democrats”), about joint political responsi-bility binding them and the Social-Democrats, and about Social-Democratic support for the Osvobozhdeniye League on the basis of precisely defined conditions and demands—even new-Iskrists will, probably, repudiate this absurdand disgraceful talk. 
 Parvus, however, has simply givenfranker and blunter expression to the idea underlying the new-Iskra views. 
 The formal support he proposes is merely the inevitable consequence of the moral support the new Iskra has all along been giving the monarchist bourgeoisie by condemning an active boycott of the Duma, by justi-fying and championing the idea of democrats entering theDuma, and by playing at parliamentarianism when no parlia-ment whatever exists. 
 It has been well said: we have no parliament as yet, but we have parliamentary cretinismgalore. 
 The fundamental error of the new-Iskrists has come to the fore. 
 They have constantly turned a blind eye to thetheory of compromise , the political theory underlying the Osvobozhdeniye trend, and the truest and most profound expression of the Russian bourgeoisie’s class stand andclass interests. 
 They have kept harping on only one aspectof the matter—the conflicts between the bourgeoisie andthe autocracy, with complete disregard of the other aspect—the compromise between the bourgeoisie and the autocracy, against the people, the proletariat, and the revolution. 
 And yet it is precisely this second aspect that is coming moreand more to the fore acquiring ever greater and morefundamental importance with each advance of the Russianrevolution, each month of a situation which is so intolerableto bourgeois adherents of law and order. 
 The fundamental error of the new-Iskrists led them to a radically incorrect appraisal of the ways in which Social-Democracy should take advantage of the conflicts between the bourgeoisie and the autocracy, and the ways of fanning the flames of these conflicts by our efforts. 
 Yes, it is our absolute duty to fan the flames of these conflicts at all times, be it without a Duma, or prior to a Duma, or in theDuma itself, if it ever meets. 
 But the new-Iskrists do notsee where the proper means are to be found. 
 Instead of encouraging the flames by breaking the windows and allow-ing fresh air—the workers’ uprisings—to rush in, they sweat at making toy bellows and fanning the revolutionary zeal of the Osvobozhdeniye people by presenting them with farcical demands and conditions. 
 Indeed, it is our duty to support the bourgeoisie whenever it acts in a revolutionary way. 
 But with us this supporthas always consisted (remember the attitude of Zarya and the old Iskra towards Osvobozhdeniye ), and, as far as revolutionary Social-Democrats are concerned, will alwaysconsist, first and foremost, in ruthlessly exposing and brand-ing every false step of this “democratic”—save the mark!—bourgeoisie. 
 If it is at all possible for us to exert influence onthe democratism of the bourgeoisie, that influence will have effect only when all acts of treachery, all the bourgeoisie’s errors, its unfulfilled promises and fine words that arebelied by events and deeds, are stigmatised on everyoccasion when a bourgeois democrat speaks to workers orpolitically conscious peasants. 
 Since this bourgeoisie, whichonly yesterday was proclaiming from the house-tops that it would boycott the Duma, has today already basely retract-ed its promises, changed its decisions, redrafted its reso-lutions, and come to an agreement with the Durnovos abouta legal mode of action, we must withhold moral supportof these liars and lackeys of the autocracy, prevent themfrom getting away with broken promises and making new ones to the workers (which will likewise be cast to the wind the moment the Duma becomes a legislative instead of aconsultative body). 
 No, we must brand them and impressupon the whole of the proletariat that fresh betrayals onthe part of these bourgeois “democrats”, who reconcile theconstitution with Trepov, and Social-Democracy with Osvobozhdeniye politics, are inescapable and inevitable. 
 We must demonstrate and prove to all the workers—usingthe instance of the bourgeois betrayal of the people on the question of the boycott, as well as other examples—we must demonstrate that all these Petrunkeviches and the like are already full-fledged Cavaignacs and Thiers. 
97 Let us assume that we shall not cope with the task of frustrating this Duma before it makes an appearance. 
 Letus assume that the Duma meets. 
 Constitutional conflictswithin it will be inevitable, for the bourgeoisie is certain toaspire to power. 
 Even then, we must support this aspira-tion, since the proletariat also has something to gain from a constitutional system too, because the rule of the bour-geoisie as a class will clear the ground for our struggle forsocialism. 
 That is all true. 
 But this is just where our radicaldivergence of opinion from the new Iskra begins, not ends. 
 This divergence is not on the question of whether support should be given to bourgeois democrats, but on the question of the means of giving that support in a revolutionary epochand of exerting pressure on them. 
 By justifying their treach-ery or shutting one’s eyes to it, by hastening to makedeals with them, rushing to play at parliamentarianism,exacting promises and pledges from them, you achieve only one thing— they exert pressure on you , not you on them ! We have lived to see the revolution. 
 The time of mere literarypressure is gone; the time of parliamentary pressure has notyet arrived. 
 It is only an uprising that can exercise effective , not paltry pressure. 
 When civil war spreads over the whole country, pressure is exercised by armed force, by giving battle, and then any other attempt to bring pressure to bear amounts to hollow and wretched phrase-mongering. 
Nobody has yet ventured to assert that the period of insur-rection has passed in Russia. 
 And since that is so, anyavoidance of the tasks of a rising, any argument against itsnecessity, any “watering-down” of our demands to the bour-geois democrats that they participate in the uprising, means laying down our arms at the feet of the bourgeoisie, convert-ing the proletariat into an appendage of the bourgeoisie. 
Nowhere in the world has the proletariat as yet ever laiddown its arms when a serious struggle has commenced, norhas it ever yet yielded to the accursed heritage of oppression and exploitation without measuring swords with the enemy. 
 Such are now our means and hopes of bringing pressure tobear. 
 No one can foretell the outcome of the struggle. 
 If the proletariat is victorious—it will be the workers and peas-ants who will make the revolution, and not the Golovins and Struves. 
 If the proletariat is defeated—the bourgeoisie will obtain new constitutional rewards for assisting theautocracy in this struggle. 
 Then and only then a new erawill be inaugurated, a new generation will come forward,European history will repeat itself, parliamentarianismwill for a time become the real touchstone of all politics. 
 If you want to exercise pressure now, then prepare for insurrection, preach it, and organise it. 
 Only an uprisingholds out the possibility that the Duma farce will not bethe end of the Russian bourgeois revolution, but the begin-ning of a complete democratic upheaval, which will kindlethe fire of proletarian revolutions all over the world. 
 Only an uprising can guarantee that our “United Landtag” will become the prelude to a constituent assembly of a non-Frankfort type, that the revolution will not end in a mereMarch 18 (1848), that we shall have not only a July 14(1789), but also an August 10 (1792). 
 Only an uprising, andnot pledges obtained from the Osvobozhdeniye League mem-bers, can be a surety that from the ranks of the latter there will emerge individual Johann Jacobys, 98 who, finally dis-gusted by the loathsomeness of the Golovin’s cringing andfawning, will at the last minute march in the ranks of theproletariat and the peasantry to fight for the revolution. 
 Proletary , No. 
 18, Published according to September 26 (13), 1905 the text in Proletary ARGUE ABOUT TACTICS, BUT GIVE CLEAR SLOGANS! The argument about the tactics in respect of the State Duma is becoming more and more heated. 
 The differences between Iskra and Proletary are becoming ever deeper, especially since Parvus’s article in Iskra . 
 Tactics must be debated, but in this the utmost clarity must be striven for. 
 Questions of tactics are questions ofthe Party’s political conduct. 
 A line of conduct can and should be grounded in theory, in historical references, in an analysis of the entire political situation, etc. 
 But in all these discussions the party of a class engaged in a struggleshould never lose sight of the need for absolutely clearanswers— which do not permit of a double interpretation —to concrete questions of our political conduct: “yes” or “no”?Should this or that be done right now, at the given moment, or should it not be done? Such clear replies are essential to prevent differences from being exaggerated or confused, and also to makedefinitely known to the working class the specific kindof advice being offered it by this or that group of Social-Democrats at a given moment. 
 With a view to introducing complete clarity into our controversy with Iskra we have drawn up the following list of concrete questions concerning the political conduct ofthe Social-Democrats in the present Duma election campaign. 
We do not in the least claim that this list is complete, andwould welcome suggestions for amending, changing, or subdividing any of the questions. 
 It stands to reason that what is said here concerning election meetings applies to allmeetings in general. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR WHAT IS THE ADVICE THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATS ARE GIVING THE PROLETARIAT WITH REFERENCE TO THE STATE DUMA? Iskra Proletary 1. 
 Should workers endeavour to gain entry to election meetings? Yes Yes 2. 
 Should workers endeavour to gain entry to election meetingseven by force? Yes Yes 3. 
 Should we speak at such meet-ings about the uselessness of theDuma and explain all the aims and the entire programme of Social-Democracy? Yes Yes 4. 
 Should the workers and the people as a whole be called uponat such meetings to rise up in armsand form a revolutionary army and provisional Revolutionary govern-ment? ? Yes 5. 
 Should these slogans (point 4) be made the focus of our whole“Duma” campaign? No Yes 6. 
 Should Osvobozhdeniye League members (or “Constitutional-Demo-crats”) entering the State Dumabe denounced as bourgeois traitorswho are pursuing a policy of “com-promise” with the tsar? No Yes 7. 
 Should we Social-Democrats tell the people that it would be preferable to elect to the StateDuma the Petrunkeviches ratherthan the Stakhevich, etc. 
? Yes No 8. 
 Should we conclude any agree-ment whatever with the Osvobozh-deniye League on our support of the latter on the basis of certainconditions, demands, pledges, etc. 
? Yes No Iskra Proletary 9. 
 Should we make the slogan of “revolutionary self-government” thecentral point of our agitation? Yes No 10. 
 Should we call upon the people immediately to elect, on thebasis of universal suffrage, bodies of revolutionary self-government and through these a constituentassembly? Yes No 11. 
 Should we elect Social-Demo-cratic election committees? Shouldwe put up Social-Democratic candi-dates for the State Duma? Yes No Proletary , No. 
 18, Published according to September 26 (13), 1905 the text in Proletary PLAYING AT PARLIAMENTARIANISM We have on repeated occasions (in Proletary , No. 
 12, before promulgation of the State Duma Act, and in Nos. 
 14to 17 after August 6) enlarged on our tactics with regard to the State Duma, and now we must consider them anew in their relation to the new views expressed by Parvus (specialreprint from Iskra , No. 
 110, the article: “Social-Democracy and the State Duma”). 
 Let us first follow Parvus’s main arguments step by step. 
 He begins his article by stating, “We must fight to the last against a packed parliament, that mixture of baseness and paltriness”, and to this true statement he immediately addsthe following, which is no less true: “We can overthrow theState Duma ... only by a popular uprising. 
 Likewise, it isonly by a popular uprising that we can force the govern-ment to change the election laws and extend the rights of the Duma. 
” Excellent. 
 What, it may be asked, should be our slogans of agitation with regard to the State Duma? What are the main and particularly important forms of organi-sation for the struggle against the mixture of baseness and paltriness? Parvus puts the question in essentially the sameway when he says: “What we, for our part, can contribute to the preparation of an uprising is agitation and organisation. 
” And here is how he answers the first part of this question,about the attitude to election meetings. 
 “If we interfere with these meetings,” writes Parvus, “if we disrupt them, we shall merely be rendering a serviceto the government. 
” So Parvus is opposed to having the workers interfere with the attempts of a handful of landlords and merchantsto limit the subject of discussion at election meetings to the base and paltry State Duma? He is against workers taking advantage of the election meetings in order to criticise the “base” State Duma and to expound their Social-Democratic views and their slogans? So it seems, but, immediately after the sentence quoted, Parvus states something that is already quite different. 
“What is not given to the workers voluntarily,” we read inhis article, “they must take by force. 
 They must show up at assemblies of voters en masse and transform them into workers ’ meetings . 
” (The italics in the quotations are ours throughout— Editorial Board of “Proletary ”. 
) “ Instead of discussing whether to elect Ivan Fomich or Foma Ivanich,they will put political questions on the agenda. 
” (Parvusprobably wanted to say Social-Democratic questions, for the question of the election of Ivan or Foma is also a politi-cal question. 
) “At these meetings we can discuss the policyof the government, the tactics of the liberals, the classstruggle, and the State Duma itself. 
 All this will lead tothe masses becoming revolutionised. 
” Now see how it all works out in Parvus’s article. 
 On the one hand, we must not interfere with the meetings of the Trubetskois, Petrunkeviches, and Stakhoviches. 
 At the endof his article Parvus definitely condemns the idea of a boy-cott. 
 On the other hand, we must show up at the meetings1) by force; 2) “ transform ” the meetings of the Petrunkeviches and Stakhoviches into “workers’ meetings”; 3) instead of discussing the question for which the meetings have been called (whether to elect Foma or Ivan?), we must discuss ourSocial-Democratic questions—the class struggle, socialism,and, of course, the need for a popular uprising, therequisites for it, its aims, means and methods, weapons,and its organs, such as a revolutionary army and a revo-lutionary government. 
 We say “of course”, for even though he did not say a word about preaching insurrection at theelection meetings, Parvus himself acknowledged at theoutset that we must fight to the last and that we can attainour immediate objects only by means of an uprising. 
 It is obvious that Parvus has got into a tangle. 
 He fights against the idea of a boycott, does not advise interfering with meetings and disrupting them, and yet simultaneously,side by side with this, he advises breaking into meetings by force (does this not mean “disrupting”?), transforming them into workers’ meetings (does this not mean “inter-fering” with the Petrunkeviches and Stakhoviches?), and discussing not the Duma , but our own Social-Democratic, revolutionary questions, which the Petrunkeviches do notwant to discuss seriously, but which the workers and class-conscious peasants are very eager to discuss, and undoubt-edly will discuss. 
 Why has Parvus got into such a tangle? Because he has failed to understand the point at issue. 
 He set out to fightagainst the idea of a boycott, imagining that a boycottmeans mere abstention, rejection of the idea of utilisingelection meetings for the purposes of our agitation. 
 Yet no one, even in the legal press, let alone the illegal press, advocates such a passive boycott. 
 Parvus reveals utter ignorance of Russian political problems when he confuses apassive and an active boycott, when, in discussing theboycott, he does not devote a single word to an analysisof the second kind of boycott . 
 We have more than once spoken of the conventional meaning of the term “an active boycott”, and stated that there is no need for the workers to boycott the Duma, sincethe Duma itself is boycotting them. 
 We, however, clearlydefined the real content of this conventional term from thevery outset, as far back as a month and a half ago, when wewrote in Proletary , No. 
 12, prior to the promulgation of the State Duma Act: “As distinct from passive abstention, an active boycott should imply increasing agitation ten-fold, organising meetings everywhere, taking advantage ofelection meetings, even if we have to force our way intothem, holding demonstrations, political strikes, and soon and so forth. 
” And somewhat further: “‘An active boy-cott’” (we give this term in quotation marks as a conven-tional term) “means agitation, recruiting, organising therevolutionary forces on a larger scale, with redoubled energyand bringing triple pressure to bear. 
” This is expressed so clearly that only people completely alien to Russian political problems could fail to under-stand it, or people with hopelessly confused thinking, Konfusionsräthe (“councillors of confusion”), as the Ger-mans say. 
 Now then, what is it that Parvus really wants? When he advises breaking into election meetings by force, trans-forming them into workers’ meetings, discussing Social-Democratic questions and insurrection, “instead of dis-cussing whether to elect Ivan Fomich or Foma Ivanich”(note “instead of” and not “together with, in addition to”),what he is advising is an active boycott. 
 As you see, Parvusmet with a slight mishap: he was heading for one door, but stumbled through another. 
 He declared war on the idea of a boycott, but himself declared (on the question of electionmeetings) in favour of an active boycott, i. 
e. 
, the onlykind of boycott that was discussed in the Russian politicalpress. 
 Of course, Parvus may object that conventional terms are not binding on him. 
 Formally, such an objection would be justified, but it is worthless in essence. 
 One must surelyknow what is under discussion. 
 We are not going to quibbleabout words, but here we are dealing with political termswhich have already taken root in Russia, on the sceneof action—a fait accompli that must be reckoned with. 
 Any Social-Democratic writer abroad who took it into his head to ignore slogans which develop on the scene ofaction would merely be displaying narrow-minded andsterile literary conceit. 
 We repeat: no one in Russia everspoke, and no one ever wrote in the revolutionary press,of any other boycott but an active one. 
 Parvus might be fully entitled to criticise the term, reject its conventional meaning, or interpret it differently, etc. 
, but to ignore it,or to distort the meaning it has already acquired, meansconfusing the issue. 
 We have pointed out above that Parvus says “not together with” but “instead of”. 
 What Parvus advises is not bringing forward our Social-Democratic questions and the question of an uprising together with that of having Fomaor Ivan elected, but bringing forward the question of theclass struggle and an uprising instead of the question of elections. 
 This distinction between “not together with”and “instead of” is highly significant and calls for atten-tion, the more so that, as is shown by the further content of his article, it might have entered Parvus’s head to changethe wording and say: not instead of but together with. 
 We must consider two questions: 1) Is it possible to discuss, at election meetings, the election of Ivan or of Foma “together with” the class struggle, socialism, and insurrec-tion? 2) If that is possible, should the former and the latterquestions be discussed together, or the latter in place of theformer? Anyone who is familiar with Russian conditionswill scarcely be at a loss in replying to these two questions. 
Getting into election meetings and transforming them into workers’ meetings calls for the use of force, i. 
e. 
, crushing the resistance of the police and the military first of all. 
In the more or less important workers’ centres (and it isonly there that the workers’ Social-Democratic Party cancount on leading a really broad, popular movement), theresistance of the police and the military will be most serious. 
 It would be plain folly on our part to shut our eyes to this. 
 Parvus himself says that the “election agitation may atany moment turn into a revolutionary uprising”. 
 If that isso, then it is our duty to take stock of our forces and adaptthem to this very task of insurrection , and not to the task of furthering the election of Foma as against Ivan to the State Duma. 
 If that is so, the main and central slogan of our entire Duma campaign of agitation should be one calling foran insurrection, a revolutionary army, and a revolutionarygovernment. 
 If that is so, then it is our duty, before andabove all else, to advocate and explain these very slogansat each and every meeting. 
 Hence, Parvus once again blows up his own argument in, on the one hand, expecting an uprising “at any moment”, and, on the other, maintainingcomplete silence about propaganda of insurrection and ananalysis of its prerequisites, methods, and organs as the“mainspring” of the Duma campaign. 
 To proceed. 
 Let us consider another contingency, possible in individual centres, especially the smaller. 
 Let us assume that attempts to force our way into meetings do not give riseto a serious struggle against the government, or go so far asan insurrection. 
 Let us assume that in individual instancesthese attempts are crowned with success. 
 In that case, wemust in the first place not lose sight of an institution called martial law . 
 To every partial victory of the people over the police and the military, the government retaliates, as isprobably known even to Parvus, by proclaiming martial law. 
 Does this prospect frighten us? No, because it is a step that brings the uprising nearer and renders the entire struggle in general more acute. 
 Does it frighten the Zemstvos and the Duma electors generally? It undoubtedly does, for itwould facilitate the arrest of the Milyukovs, for it providesthe government with pretexts for banning some electionmeetings, and perhaps all meetings and the whole Dumato boot! Consequently, it all boils down again to the fact that some want an uprising, advocate it, make preparations for it, agitate for it, organise insurrectionary detachments, etc. 
,whereas others do not want an uprising, struggle againstthe idea of insurrection, condemn the advocacy of insur-rection as mad and criminal, etc. 
 Is Parvus really ignorantof the fact that these “others” are all Osvobozhdeniye League members , i. 
e. 
, even the extreme Left wing of the bourgeois democrats who may get into the Duma?? And (this in the second place) if Parvus does know this, then he must also know the following. 
 Resistance to for-cible entry into election meetings and to their transformationinto workers’ meetings will be offered not only (and some-times even not so much) by the police and the military but by the Zemstvo and “Osvobozhdeniye ” people themselves . 
 Only infants can shut their eyes to this. 
 The Zemstvo andthe Osvobozhdeniye people pose the question more clearly and directly than some Social-Democrats do: either preparean uprising and make it the hub of our agitation and all our work, or go over to the Duma platform and make it the basis of all political struggle. 
 The Zemstvo and Osvobozh-deniye people have already solved this question, as we have often pointed out and emphasised in Proletary , beginning with No. 
 12. 
 They call meetings precisely and solely inorder to discuss the election of Foma or Ivan, Petrunkevich or Stakhovich, and to adopt a programme of “struggle” (“struggle” in quotation marks, struggle while wearing alackey’s white gloves) based on the Duma, and not oninsurrection. 
 The Zemstvo and Osvobozhdeniye people (we are linking the two together purposely, for there are nogrounds for drawing any political distinction between them) will certainly not be averse to admitting revolutionaries and Social-Democrats to a meeting of theirs (only when andwhere this can be done without recourse to any considerable degree of force!!), if they can find among them stupid people who are ready to promise “support” to Foma as against Ivan, to Petrunkevich as against Stakhovich. 
 But the Zemstvos will never tolerate any attempts to have their meetings transformed into workers’ meetings, to have their meetings turned into revolutionary mass meetings, to make open anddirect appeals for armed insurrection from their tribune. 
 It is even somewhat awkward to go into elaborate explana-tions of this obvious truth, but it has to be masticated for the benefit of Parvus and Iskra . 
 The Zemstvo and Osvobozh-deniye people will inevitably resist such use being made of their meetings, although these bourgeois hagglers will ofcourse offer resistance not by force, but by safer, “peaceful”,and circuitous means. 
 They will enter into no deals with people who promise them “popular” support for Petrunkevich against Stakhovich, for Stakhovich against Gringmut,otherwise than on condition that election meetings are notturned into workers’ meetings, that their platform is notused for a call to insurrection. 
 If they learn that workersare coming to their meetings (and they almost always will find this out, since one cannot conceal a mass demonstra-tion) some of them will straightaway inform the authori-ties, others will take to urging the Social-Democrats torefrain, a third group will hasten to assure the Governor that“they are not to blame”, that they want a Duma, want toenter the Duma, and that they have always, through their “faithful colleague” Mr. 
 Struve, condemned the “mad and criminal” advocacy of insurrection; a fourth group willadvise changing the time and plane of the meeting; a fifthgroup, those who are “bolder” and shrewder politically, willdiscreetly say that they will be delighted to hear the work-ers, will thank the Social-Democratic speaker, will scrape and bow to the “people”, will make high-flown, pretentious, and emotion-charged speeches assuring each and all thatthey are always for the people, heart and soul for the people,that they are with the people and not with the tsar, that“their” Petrunkevich said so a long time ago, that they“fully agree” with the Social-Democratic speaker about the “baseness and paltriness” of the State Duma, but that it is necessary, in the splendid words of that highly esteemedparliamentarian, Parvus, who so appropriately transplants to non-parliamentary Russia the parliamentary patterns of the Vollmar alliances between the Social-Democrats and the Catholics—that it is necessary “not to interfere with the election campaign, but rather to extend it”; extending itmeans not senselessly jeopardising the fate of the StateDuma, but getting the whole people to “support” Foma’selection instead of Ivan’s, the election of Petrunkevich andRodichev instead of Stakhovich, Stakhovich instead of Gringmut, and so on. 
 In a word, the more stupid and the more cowardly the Zemstvos will be, the less chance will there be of theirlistening to Parvus at their election meeting. 
 The moreintelligent and bolder the Zemstvo people, the more chanceof that will there be, and also the more chances, that, in his role of supporter of Foma against Ivan, Parvus will have proved the dupe. 
 No, my dear Parvus! So long as there is no parliament in Russia, applying the tactics of parliamentarianism to Russiameans so much unbecoming playing at parliamentarianism,means turning into hangers-on to the landlords, instead of being leaders of the revolutionary workers and politically conscious peasants. 
 To enter into secret deals with theRodichevs and the Petrunkeviches about support for themagainst Stakhovich, as a substitute for temporary agreementsbetween open political parties, which are non-existent inour country, means sowing corruption in the workers’ midst. 
 To the direct and clear slogan of the Zemstvo and Osvo -bozhdeniye people—down with criminal advocacy of insurrec-tion, let us work in the Duma and through the Duma—wemust reply with our direct and clear slogan—down withthe bourgeois betrayers of liberty, the Osvobozhdeniye gentry and their like, down with the Duma, and hail the armed uprising! To combine the insurrection slogan and “participation” in the elections of Foma or Ivan means introducing utterconfusion, under the pretext of “comprehensiveness” and“multiformity” of agitation, and “flexibility” and “responsive-ness” of slogans; in practice such a combination amounts to Manilovism. 
 In practice, Parvus’s and Martov’s appear-ance before the Zemstvos in “support” of Petrunkevichagainst Stakhovich (admitting the possibility of exceptional cases when such an appearance would be at all feasible) will not be an open appearance before the mass of the people, but the backstage appearance of a duped leader of the work-ers before a handful of betrayers of the workers. 
 From thestandpoint of theory or of the general principles of ourtactics, to combine these slogans now, at the given moment,is a variety of parliamentary cretinism. 
 For us revolutionarySocial-Democrats insurrection is not an absolute slogan, but a concrete one. 
 We put it off in 1897, in 1902 we put it forward in the sense of general preparations, and onlyafter January 9, 1905, did we advance it as a direct appeal. 
We do not forget that Marx was in favour of an uprising in1848, whereas in 1850 he condemned the ravings and phrase-mongering about an uprising 99; that before the war of 1870-71 Liebknecht denounced participation in the Reichs-tag, whereas after the war he participated in it himself. 
We at once stated in Proletary , No. 
 12, that it would be ridiculous to renounce for the future all struggle based onthe Duma. 
 We know that not only a parliament but even atravesty of a parliament may, when the conditions for an uprising are lacking, become the focal point of all our agitation for the entire period when an uprising is out ofthe question. 
 However, we demand a clear and precise presentation of the question. 
 If you think that the period of insurrectionis over in Russia—say so, and uphold your opinion openly. 
 We shall appraise and discuss it thoroughly and calmly, from every angle, from the standpoint of the concrete con-ditions. 
 But when you yourselves talk of the possibilityof an uprising “at any moment” and of its necessity—thenwe denounce, and shall continue to denounce as miserableManilovism, all the various disquisitions against an active boycott of the Duma. 
 If an uprising is possible and neces-sary, then that is precisely what we must make the centralslogan of the whole of our campaign around the Duma;-then we must expose the venal soul of a “Frankfort Parlia-ment windbag” in every Osvobozhdeniye adherent who shuns this slogan of insurrection. 
 If an uprising is possible and necessary, that means there can be no legal centre for a legal struggle for the aims of the uprising, nor can Manilov-like phrase-mongering take its place. 
 If an uprising is possible and necessary, it means that the government “ has placed the bayonet as the main point on the agenda ”, has launched civil war, proclaimed martial law as a form of counter-criticism of democratic criticism; under such circumstances,to take the “near-parliamentary” signboard of the StateDuma seriously, to begin to play a shady and furtive two-some at parliamentarianism with the Petrunkeviches, meanssubstituting the political chicanery of clowning intellectuals for the policy of the revolutionary proletariat. 
 Having shown the basic falsity of Parvus’s position, we can deal only briefly with a few of the most glaringmanifestations of this falsity. 
 Parvus writes: “Before the elections or after the elections, a legal basis for the exist-ence of political parties is created in connection with theState Duma. 
” That is not true. 
 What is actually beingcreated now is a “legal basis” for governmental manipulation of elections. 
 That basis is termed: 1) the Rural Superintendent(peasant elections are entirely under his thumb); 2) the secret police (the arrest of Milyukov); 3) martial law. 
 When a “legal basis for the existence of political parties”(including the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party)is created in fact , and not in the language of journalists, then we shall have to reconsider the whole question ofinsurrection, for to us insurrection is only one of the im-portant means, but one that is not always obligatory, of clearing the way for the struggle for socialism. 
 “It is necessary to come out immediately, not as individ-ual social groups, not as lawyers, engineers, or Zemstvomembers, but as liberal, democratic, Social-Democratic,parties—officially and openly. 
 The representatives of the various tendencies could come to an agreement among themselves in this respect, just as agreements are made between the various parties in a parliament. 
” Yes, this they can do, only not openly but in secret, for if Parvus has forgotten Trepov, Trepov has not forgotten Parvus. 
 What Parvus terms a parliamentary agreement (sometimes indispensable to Social-Democrats in a parlia-mentary country) is in present-day Russia, in September 1905, the most contemptible playing at parliamentarianism. 
 The betrayers of the revolution are now making an agreement between the Osvobozhdeniye supporters and the revolutionaries their prime objective; the supporters of revolution—an agreement between the Social-Democrats andall revolutionary democrats, i. 
e. 
, supporters of an uprising. 
If the new Iskra , Parvus, and Plekhanov * now enter into a “parliamentary” agreement with the Osvobozhdeniye group (about the latter forming a party—see above, the article entitled “Friends Meet” **), we shall publicly declare that these Social-Democrats have lost all sense of reality andmust go by the board. 
 We shall then conclude an agreementwith the revolutionary democrats on the basis of jointagitation for an uprising, for its preparation, and accom-plishment. 
 We have already shown, in an analysis of the new-Iskra resolutions (Lenin: Two Tactics ), that Iskra is descending to the level of the liberal landlord, whereas Proletary i s raising and inspiring the revolutionary peasant. 
 *** “Each party should organise its own election committee for the conduct of the election campaign throughout the country. 
 The parties should agree among themselves about practical measures for extending freedom of speech, ofassembly, and so forth, during the elections. 
 They shouldbind themselves by joint political responsibility” (justlisten, fellow-workers! The new-Iskra group want to bind you to the Petrunkeviches! Down with the Petrunkeviches and the new-Iskrists!) “so that if an official representative of any political party is prosecuted as such by the police oris condemned in court, the representatives of all the other[!] parties should declare their solidarity with him and alltogether organise [!] a popular [??] protest and, if possible,[mark this!] a popular uprising in his defence. 
” Good riddance to you, my dear Parvus! Organise protests and an uprising with the Petrunkeviches (democrats) and *We mention Plekhanov because he has stated in print that Iskra ’s tactic is better than Proletary ’s. 
 True, Plekhanov makes no mention of the new -“Iskra ” resolutions and those of the Third Congress; how-ever, dodges and evasions on the part of a Social-Democratic writerare a circumstance that enhances rather than extenuates the blameattaching to him. 
 **See pp. 
 254-55 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 *** See p. 
 47 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 the Stakhoviches (liberals)—our ways have parted. 
 It is with the revolutionary democrats that we shall do that . 
 Only, while you are about it, change your slogans as well, most esteemed heroes of “parliamentary agreement”. 
 Insteadof the slogan “an uprising is imperative”, just say: “anuprising, if possible , will supplement the protests”. 
 Then all the Osvobozhdeniye supporters will agree with you! Instead of the slogan “universal and equal suffrage, direct elections and secret ballot”, advance the following: “ If possible , the government should guarantee direct, equal, universal and secret suffrage”. 
 Good riddance to you, gentle-men! We shall patiently wait for Parvus, Petrunkevich,Stakhovich, and Martov to “organise a popular protest and,if possible, a popular uprising” in defence of Milyukov. 
 For in our “near-parliamentary” era it seems to be more timely, gentlemen, to defend Mr. 
 Milyukov than thehundreds and thousands of workers who are being arrestedand beaten up!... Parvus declares categorically: “We have no chance what-ever of getting our representatives elected to the Duma independently. 
” Yet he writes: “If, however, election commit-tees prove unfeasible, we shall still have to bend every effortto put up our own candidates. 
” Despite the qualificationsdemanded Parvus believes that “in individual cases thepossibility of putting up Social-Democratic candidates isnot excluded”. 
 “One or two Social-Democratic candidates, irrespective of where they may be put up, will become a political slogan for the whole country. 
” Thank you for at least being clear. 
 But then, what stands in your way, gentlemen? The newspaper Rus long ago put forward its candidates, all those Stakhoviches, Petrunke-viches, and other betrayers of the revolution who cool their heels in Mr. 
 Durnovo’s antechamber. 
 Why is Iskra silent? Why does it not go from words to deeds? Why does it notput forward Axelrod, Starover, Parvus, and Martov as candi-dates for the State Duma? Try it, gentlemen, conduct anexperiment, experimentum in corpore vili . 
 * Try it, and we shall see at once which of us is right: you who believe that these candidates will become “a slogan for the whole *An experiment on a vile body. 
— Ed. 
 country”, or we who believe that at the present time these candidates will only play the role of buffoons. 
 Parvus writes: “The government has given a handful of people the right to elect a body which is to manage theaffairs of the whole nation. 
 This imposes on the artificiallyselected voters the duty of using their exclusive right withdue regard to the opinion of the popular masses and ofnot being guided by arbitrary personal” (but by class and party?) “considerations. 
 Our task is to remind them of this duty, force [!!l them to perform it, and we must stop atnothing in carrying out this task. 
” This reasoning, quite naturally supplemented by the assurance that the tactics of (active) boycott expresses disbeliefin the “revolutionary forces of the country” ( sic!), is funda-mentally wrong. 
 It is a typically bourgeois-sentimentalist presentation of the question that all Social-Democrats shouldrise up against. 
 Parvus’s reasoning is bourgeois, for he fails tosee the class essence of the Duma—the agreement between thebourgeoisie and the autocracy. 
 Parvus’s reasoning is so muchempty and sentimental phrase-mongering, for he is prepared —even if fleetingly—to take seriously the false words of the Osvobozhdeniye adherents that they desire to “act with due regard to the opinion of the popular masses”. 
 The esteemedParvus is some three years behind the times. 
 When the liber-als had no press and no illegal organisation, whereas we pos-sessed both, we helped them in their political development. 
 History will not fail to record this service among the deeds of the Social-Democratic movement. 
 But from politicalsucklings the liberals have now become the chief politicalwirepullers and have shown their treachery to the revo-lution in deed. 
 To lay the main stress at the present time not on the need to expose the treachery of the bourgeois “compromisers”, but to remind them of their “duty” to manage the affairs ( not of the bourgeoisie , but) of the whole people, means toadying to the Osvobozhdeniye League! It is only they who can seriously seek an expression of “the revolutionaryforces of the country” in the State Duma. 
 The Social-Democrats know that the best we can achieve now is the neu-tralisation, the paralysing of the bourgeoisie’s efforts at treachery. 
 The Zemstvo and the Osvobozhdeniye people are not “a revolutionary force of the country”, and you should feel ashamed to be ignorant of that, Comrade Parvus. 
 The prole-tariat and the peasantry, which is fighting against the land-lords, are now the only revolutionary force in the democratic revolution. 
 The formulation of the conditions of proletarian support for the Osvobozhdeniye League is the gem of gems in Parvus’s remarkable article. 
 “It is necessary,” writes Parvus, “to im-pose definite political demands on the opposition candidates who wish to avail themselves of our support. 
” “These might, for instance, be: 1) the demand in the Duma itself that it beimmediately dissolved and a constituent assembly convened,elected on the basis of universal, equal, and direct suffrageby secret ballot; 2) the denial of all military and financialcredits to the government until this demand is fulfilled. 
” (A poor Russian translation from the German, but the meaning is clear. 
) One downward step is followed by another. 
 One misstep on to an inclined plane, and the fall becomes headlong. 
 Oursupermen like Parvus and Plekhanov, who hold themselvesaloof from both sections of the Party, loftily ignore those very new-Iskra resolutions for which they are morally and politically responsible. 
 These supermen imagine themselvessuperior to both the “Majority” and the “Minority”; in actualfact they are inferior to both, since to all the shortcomings in the Majority they have been able to add the shortcomings inthe Minority, as well as all the shortcomings of the turncoat . 
 Take Parvus. 
 He has always gone hand in glove with Iskra , even when the plan of the Zemstvo campaign and of January 9 opened his eyes, though not for long, to its oppor-tunist stand. 
 Nevertheless, Parvus wanted to be considered a“conciliator”—most likely because of the fact that when,after January 9, he began to advance the slogan calling for a provisional government, the Bolsheviks were obliged to cor-rect him and point out that his slogans contained elementsof phrase-mongering. 
 “No tsar, but a workers’ government!”Parvus vociferated under the impression of January 9. 
“Without the people, but with a liberal Duma!” is what hispresent “tactics” amount to after August 6. 
 No, comrade, we shall not base our tactics on fleeting impulses, bowing to the exigencies of the moment! Parvus has now concocted “new” conditions for the liberals. 
 Poor new-Iskrists, how exhausted they must feel after concocting “conditions” for an agreement with the Osvobozh-deniye League! At the Second Congress, Starover (see his reso-lution, which was rejected by the Third Congress) concoctedone set of conditions, which immediately fell through, forneither in the plan of the Zemstvo campaign, nor now havethese conditions been advanced in full by any of the new-Iskrists who wrote about an “agreement” with the Osvobozh-deniye League. 
 The new-Iskra Conference advanced other and stricter conditions in the resolution on the attitude tothe liberals. 
 Parvus of the Iskra bears moral responsibility for this resolution—but what do literary supermen carefor mere resolutions drawn up with the participation ofresponsible representatives of the proletariat! Supermen snap their fingers at Party resolutions! The new-Iskra resolution on the attitude to opposition parties states in black and white that the Social-Democrats“demand of all enemies of tsarism”: “1) Active and unequivocal support of all determined action by the organised proletariat directed towards dealing fresh blows at tsarism. 
” In proposing an “agreement” with the Osvobozhdeniye League and promising them “support”, Parvus demandsnothing of the kind. 
 “2) Open recognition and unqualified support of the demand for a popular constituent assembly elected on the basis of universal, etc. 
, suffrage, and open action against all parties and groups that are trying to curtail the rights of the people , whether it be by limiting suffrage or by accepting the grant ofa monarchist constitution in lieu of a constituent assembly. 
”Parvus repudiates the whole of the second part of theseconditions. 
 He even completely disregards the question of whom the Osvobozhdeniye League members in the Duma should “demand the convocation” of a constituent assembly from. 
From the tsar, no doubt? But why shouldn’t you convoke ityourselves, esteemed heroes of “parliamentary agreement”?Or are you no longer opposed to having it “ granted ” by the tsar? “3) Resolute support of the working-class struggle against the government and the magnates of capital, for the right tostrike and the right of association. 
” Parvus exempts the Osvobozhdeniye League from this “condition”, evidently on the occasion of the Duma’s convoca-tion and the injuriousness of the tactic—“the worse, the better” (although in the same breath Parvus mockingly assuresthe reader that it would be worse if the Duma had legislativerights, i. 
e. 
, that the one step towards something better, theone the Osvobozhdeniye League is striving for, is a step for the worse!!). 
 “4) Open resistance to all attempts by the government and the feudal nobility to suppress the peasant revolutionarymovement by measures of barbarous violence against thepersons and property of the peasants. 
”Why have you forgotten this condition, my good Parvus?Can it be that you are no longer prepared to put this excellent demand to Petrunkevich? Stakhovich? Rodichev? Milyukov? Struve? “5) Refusal to support any measures intended to preserve, in a free Russia, any restrictions of the rights of individualnationalities and any traces of national oppression. 
” And “6) Active participation in helping the people to arm them-selves for the fight against reaction, and support for theSocial-Democrats’ endeavours to organise an armed massstruggle. 
” Why, my dear Parvus, have you forgotten these conditions? Proletary , No. 
 18, Published according to September 26 (13), 1905 the manuscript THE LIBERAL UNIONS AND SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY100 Of what importance are the “trade unions” of intellectuals to the proletariat, and should we Social-Democrats join themso as to fight against any beclouding of the workers’ class-consciousness? The “trade” unions of intellectuals and the Union of Unions are political organisations. 
 In fact, they are liberal unions. 
 These unions constitute, on the whole, the nucleus of the so-called Constitutional-Democratic, i. 
e. 
, bourgeois-liberal,Party. 
 A most important duty now falls to us: to exert every effort to instil a party spirit into the proletariat, to weld its vanguard into a genuine political party absolutely independent of all other parties, and absolutely its ownmaster. 
 It is therefore incumbent upon us to exercise extremecaution in taking any step likely to cause confusion in clear-cut and definite Party relations. 
 The entire liberal bourgeoi-sie is now doing its very utmost to prevent the formation of a fully independent class party of the proletariat in order to“unite” and “merge” the entire “liberation” movement in a single stream of democratism with the purpose of concealingthe bourgeois nature of that democratism. 
 Under these circumstances it would be a great mistake for members of the Social-Democratic Party to enter the lib-eral unions. 
 It would place them in the extremely false posi-tion of being members of two different and mutually hostileparties. 
 One cannot serve two gods. 
 One cannot belong to twoparties. 
 Owing to the absence of political liberty in our coun-try, and in the gloom of the autocratic regime, it is very easy to confuse the parties; the interests of the bourgeoisie demand such confusion. 
 The interests of the proletariat demand adefinite and clear demarcation of the parties. 
 At present it is impossible to obtain genuine and not merely verbal guaran-tees that groups of Social-Democrats joining intellectualist “trade” unions would preserve complete independence, remain members of the Russian Social-Democratic LabourParty alone and of no other party, who would account fortheir every step to their party organisation. 
 The chances are a hundred to one that these members would not be able topreserve their independence, that they would be obliged to resort to shifts, which are useless from the standpoint of results, and injurious as serving to corrupt the still youngparty spirit of the workers. 
 Proletary , No. 
 18, Published according to September 26 (13), 1905 the text in Proletary THE DEFENSIVE TO THE OFFENSIVE The special correspondent of Le Temps , a highly reputable conservative paper, wired the following to that paper fromSt. 
 Petersburg on September 21 (8): “The night before last a group of 70 persons attacked the Riga Central Prison, cut the telephone wires and, using rope ladders, made their way into the prison yard, where after a stiff engagement twoprison warders were killed and three seriously wounded. 
 The demon-strators then freed two political prisoners who were to be court-martialled and expected to be sentenced to death. 
 During the pursuit ofthe demonstrators, who managed to escape, except for two who were arrested, one policeman was killed and several others wounded. 
” And so matters are moving ahead! Despite the incredible and utterly indescribable difficulties, headway is being madein the matter of getting armed. 
 Individual terrorism, bredof intellectualist impotence, is gradually becoming a thingof the past. 
 Instead of spending tens of thousands of rubles and a vast amount of revolutionary energy on the assassina-tion of some Sergei 101 (who probably did more to make Moscow revolutionary-minded than many revolutionaries),on assassinations “in the name of the people”—militaryoperations together with the people are now commencing. 
 It is by engaging in such operations that the pioneers of armed struggle become fused with the masses not merely in word but in deed, assume leadership of the combat squads andcontingents of the proletariat, train in the crucible of civilwar dozens of popular leaders who, tomorrow, on the day of the workers’ uprising, will be able to help with theirexperience and their heroic courage thousands and tens of thousands of workers. 
 Hail the heroes of the Riga revolutionary contingent! May their success serve as encouragement and example to Social-Democratic workers throughout Russia. 
 Long live the pioneers of the people’s revolutionary army! See how successful the venture of the Riga revolutionaries was even from a purely military standpoint. 
 The enemylosses are three killed and probably five to ten wounded. 
 Ourloss is only two men, who were probably wounded and thustaken prisoner by the enemy. 
 Our trophies are two revolution-ary leaders rescued from prison. 
 This is indeed a brilliant victory!! It is a real victory, scored in a battle against an enemy armed to the teeth. 
 It is no longer a plot againstsome detested individual, no act of vengeance or desperation,no mere “intimidation”—no, it was a well thought-out andprepared commencement of operations by a contingent of therevolutionary army, planned with due regard for the correla-tion of forces. 
 The number of such contingents of 25 to 75 men each can be increased to several dozen in every big city,and frequently in the suburbs of a big city. 
 Workers willjoin them in hundreds; it is only necessary to begin extensivepropaganda of this idea immediately, form such contingents,supply them with all sorts of weapons, ranging from knives and revolvers to bombs, and give these contingents military training and education. 
 Fortunately, the time has passed when revolution was “made” by individual revolutionary terrorists, because thepeople were not revolutionary. 
 The bomb has ceased to bethe weapon of the solitary “bomb thrower”, and is becoming an essential weapon of the people . 
 With the improvements in military matériel the technique of street fighting is also changing, and necessarily so. 
 At present time we are all(and very wisely so) making a study of how to put up barri-cades and defend them. 
 Though this old work is useful, wemust not overlook the newest developments in military weap-ons. 
 The progress made in the use of explosives has resulted in a number of innovations in gunnery. 
 The Japanese provedstronger than the Russians partly because they were able tomake much better use of explosives. 
 Extensive use of highexplosives was one of the characteristic features of the recentwar. 
 And the Japanese, now recognised throughout the world as experts in military matters, have now adopted the hand bomb , which they used with such telling effect against Port Arthur. 
 Let us learn from the Japanese! Let us not lose heart because of the grave set-backs that have attended attempts to transport large quantities of arms. 
 No failures can sap the energy of those who feel and actually see how intimately they are bound up with the revolutionary class, and realisethat truly the whole people has now risen in defence of theirimmediate objectives. 
 Bombs can be manufactured anywhereand everywhere. 
 They are now being produced in Russia on afar larger scale than any of us know (and every member of the Social-Democratic organisation undoubtedly knows of more than one instance of such workshops being set up). 
They are manufactured on an incomparably larger scale thanis known to the police (and the latter undoubtedly know morethan the revolutionaries in each separate organisation). 
 Noforce will be able to stand up to contingents of a revolution-ary army armed with bombs, contingents that one fine night will launch simultaneously several such attacks as the one inRiga, and will be backed—and this is the last and most im-portant condition—by the rising of hundreds of thousandsof workers who have not forgotten the “peaceful” 9th ofJanuary, and who long for an armed January 9. 
 Matters in Russia are obviously heading towards that. 
 Consider reports in the legal newspapers about bombs beingfound in the baggage of peaceful steamer passengers, Readabout the hundreds of attacks on the police and the military, about the scores killed on the spot and the scores seriously injured during the last two months. 
 Even correspondents of the treacherous bourgeois Osvobozhdeniye , which is so busy condemning the “mad” and “criminal” advocacy of insurrec-tion, admit that never before have tragic events been soimminent as they are now. 
 To work, comrades! Let each stand at his post! Let every workers’ circle bear in mind that any day events may require that it take a leading part in the final and decisive battle. 
 Proletary , No. 
 18, Published according to September 26 (13), 1905 the text in Proletary ON THE CURRENT MOMENT The determined stand taken by the Smolensk Municipal Council has been held up by Proletary , in issue No. 
 15, * as an instance of what might be called “revolutionary self-government” (which Iskra confuses with the slogan of a popular uprising). 
 The Council declared the billeting of theCossacks contrary to law, stopped all payments to them, or-ganised a city militia to protect the population, and appealedto the soldiers to refrain from violence against citizens. 
 To illustrate the workings of the same idea and to charac-terise the moment we are living through, we shall quote from l’Humanité a resolution passed by the Kerch Municipal Council in connection with the recent pogrom in that city. 
 The Council decreed: 1) that sympathy be expressed to the Jewish inhabitants on the casualties (killed and injured)and the material losses incurred; 2) that two scholarships be established at the local Gymnasium in memory of pupils killed during the disturbances; 3) inasmuch as the localauthorities proved incapable and little disposed to protectthe lives and property of the population, that payments forthe upkeep of the police be discontinued from local funds;4) that a sum of 1,500 rubles be distributed among the poorer Jews who had suffered most during the disturbances; 5) that the harbour-master be commended as the only localofficial who had energetically and humanely prevented thefurther spread of the mass manhandling; 6) that the Ministerfor the Interior be informed of the authorities’ unlawfulbehaviour during the disturbances, and a Senate investiga-tion be demanded. 
 *See pp 221-22 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 In the measure that the Kerch Municipal Council has, of its own free will, extended the scope of the powers it is enti-tled to by law, and in the measure that it is participating in the revolutionary life of the whole country, it is embarkingupon really “revolutionary self-government”. 
 But where arethe guarantees that that self-government will turn into one by the people ? And should we Social-Democrats emphasise this “piece of revolution” as the main slogan of agitation, or speak of a complete and decisive victory of the revolution, which is impossible without an uprising? Proletary , No. 
 18, Published according to September 26 (13), 1905 the text in Proletary THE EDITORIAL BOARD OF THE CENTRAL ORGAN OF THE RUSSIAN SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC LABOUR PARTY Comrades, We wish to draw your attention to one of the methods of co-operation between the Central Organ and the press of thevarious localities, in the matter of agitation. 
 The CentralOrgan is very often accused of being out of touch with themovement, being couched in unpopular language, etc. 
, etc. 
 There is of course some truth in these reproaches, and we are fully aware that our work, which is conducted from afar, isinadequate in such an eventful period. 
 However, our isola-tion is in part due to the infrequent and irregular communi-cations between the Central Organ and the masses of local Social-Democrats, and to insufficient co-operation between the two. 
 We quite agree that we are not helping you sufficiently, but then, neither are you giving us enough help. 
 We now wantto draw your attention in a comradely way to the eliminationof one of these shortcomings. 
 The comrades on the spot do not make sufficient use of the Central Organ for purposes of agitation. 
 The Central Organ arrives late, and the number of copies received is small. 
 It is therefore necessary more frequently: 1) to havearticles and items reprinted in local bulletins; 2) more oftento adapt or paraphrase in more popular language the slogans(and articles) of the Central Organ, in local bulletins, in doingwhich you may complement, alter, abridge them, etc. 
, since you, who are on the spot, can see what is best, and all Party publications belong to the Party as a whole; 3) to quote the Central Organ in local bulletins more often, so as to familiarise the masses with the title of the Central Organ, with the idea of having their own permanent paper, the idea of having their own ideological centre, of always being able to turn to it, etc. 
, etc. 
 You should on all occasions endeavourto indicate in your bulletins that the very same idea was pro-pounded in such and such an article in Proletary , or that news to the same effect is contained in such and such of the lettersit has published, etc. 
, etc. 
 This is most important for the purpose of familiarising the masses with our Central Organ, and widening our entire sphere of influence. 
 The local committees have often republished articles, se-lecting whatever appealed to them most. 
 What is particularlyimportant now is to have uniform slogans (on the attitude towards the liberals, the Osvobozhdeniye League, their “theory of agreement”, their draft constitution, etc. 
; on the question of a revolutionary army and the programme of a revolutionarygovernment; on the boycott of the State Duma, etc. 
, etc. 
). 
You should try to make every possible use of the Central Organin your local agitation, not only by republishing but also byp a r a p h r a s i n g its idea and slogans in your bulletins, developing or amending them to conform with the local condi-tions, etc. 
 This is extremely important for establishing actualco-operation between us, for exchanging opinions, correctingour slogans and acquainting the masses of the workers with the fact that we have a permanent Central Organ of theParty. 
 We earnestly request that this letter be read and discussed in absolutely all organisations and study circles of theParty, down to the very lowest. 
 The Editorial Board of “Proletary ” Rabochy ,102 No. 
 2, Published according to September 1905 the manuscript THE JENA CONGRESS OF THE GERMAN SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC WORKERS ’ PARTY Congresses of the German Social-Democrats have long become events whose importance goes far beyond the con-fines of the German labour movement. 
 The German Social-Democratic movement ranks first in respect of organisation,integrality and coherence, and the extent and rich content ofits Marxist literature. 
 It is natural that under such circum-stances resolutions of the German Social-Democratic congresses also frequently acquire almost international significance. 
 Such was the case with the question of the latest opportunisttendencies in socialism (Bernsteinism). 
 The decision of theDresden Social-Democratic Congress, which confirmed theold and tested tactics of revolutionary Social-Democracy,was adopted by the Amsterdam International Socialist Con-gress, and has now become the common decision of the whole class-conscious proletariat throughout the world. 
 Such isnow the case too. 
 The question of a mass political strike—themain question at the Jena Congress—is agitating the entireinternational Social-Democratic movement. 
 It has beenbrought to the fore lately by events in a number of countries, including Russia, and even perhaps Russia in particular. 
 The German Social-Democrats’ decision will undoubtedlyexercise considerable influence on the entire internationallabour movement by giving support and strength to therevolutionary spirit of militant workers. 
 However, let us first take brief note of the other and less important questions discussed and decided by the Jena Congress. 
 First of all, it considered the question of Partyorganisation. 
 We shall not of course dwell here on the details of the revision of the German Party Rules. 
 It is important that the highly characteristic basic feature of this revision should be stressed, i. 
e. 
, the tendency towards further, more comprehensive and stricter application of the principle ofcentralism , the establishment of a stronger organisation . 
 This tendency found expression, first, in the inclusion in theRules of a direct provision to the effect that every Social-Democrat is obliged to belong to a Party organisation, with the exception of cases when this is precluded by very serious reasons. 
 Secondly, it found expression in the institution of asystem of Social-Democratic local branches instead of thesystem of delegates, the replacement of the principle of one-man authority and confidence in an individual, by the prin-ciple of collective, organisational links. 
 Thirdly, it expressed itself in a decision to the effect that all Party organisations must contribute 25 per cent of their revenue to the Party’scentral treasury. 
 On the whole, this obviously shows that the growth of the Social-Democratic movement and of its revolutionaryspirit necessarily and inevitably leads to the more consistent establishment of centralism. 
 In this respect the development of the German Social-Democratic movement is highlyinstructive to us Russians. 
 Not so long ago organisationalquestions occupied a disproportionate place among currentproblems of Party life, and to some extent this holds true ofthe present as well. 
 Since the Third Congress two organisa-tional tendencies in the Party have become fully defined. 
 One is towards consistent centralism and consistent extensionof the democratic principle in Party organisations, not forthe sake of demagogy, or because it sounds good, but inorder to put this into effect as Social-Democracy’s free fieldof activity extends in Russia. 
 The other tendency is towards diffusiveness of organisation, “vagueness of organisation”, whose injuriousness is now understood even by Plekhanov,who defended it for such a long time (let us hope that eventswill soon force him to understand likewise the connectionbetween this vagueness of organisation and vagueness oftactics). 
 Recall the disputes about Clause 1 of our Rules. 
 The Con-ference of the new-Iskrists, who had been previously ferventlydefending the “idea” underlying their mistaken formulation of this clause, now simply discarded all the clause and the idea as a whole. 
 The Third Congress confirmed the principle of centralism and organisational ties. 
 The new-Iskrists immediately attempted to put on a basis of general principlesthe question whether every Party member must belong to anorganisation. 
 We now see that the Germans—opportunistsand revolutionaries alike—do not even question the legitimacyof such a requirement as a matter of principle . 
 When they brought this requirement (that every Party member must belong to a Party organisation) straight into their Rules,they explained the need of exceptions to this rule , not by considerations of principle but by the absence of sufficient freedom in Germany! Vollmar, who at Jena delivered the report or the organisational question, justified toleration of exceptions to the rule on the ground that it would be impos-sible for such people (petty officials) to belong to the Social-Democratic Party openly . 
 It goes without saying that the situation in Russia is different: since there is no freedom allorganisations are equally secret. 
 Under conditions of revo-lutionary freedom it is particularly important that parties be quite distinct from each other, and that no “diffusiveness” be permitted in this respect. 
 However the principle of thedesirability of stronger organisational ties remains unshaken. 
 As regards the delegate system, which the German Social-Democrats have now discarded, its existence was dueentirely to the Exceptional Law Against the Socialists. 
 The farther this law receded into the past, the more natural and inevitable became the transition to a Party system basedon direct links between organisations, instead of on linksthrough delegates. 
 Another question that came up for discussion at Jena prior to the question of political strike is also highly instructive for Russia. 
 This was the question of the May Day celebra-tions, or, to be more exact (to take the gist of the matter andnot the item that gave rise to the discussion), the question ofthe relation of the trade union movement to the Social-Democratic Party. 
 Proletary has spoken several times about the profound impression made on German Social-Democrats and not only on them alone, by the Cologne Trade Union Congress. 
 103 It became more than evident at this Congress that even in Germany, where the traditions of Marxism and its influence are strongest, anti-socialist tendencies, tendencies towards “pure trade-unionism” of the British, i. 
e. 
, absolutely bourgeois type, are developing in the trade unions—mark you, Social-Democratic trade unions. 
 That is why from the question of a May Day demonstration in itsliteral sense, there inevitably arose at the Jena Congress thequestion of trade-unionism and Social-Democracy, the ques-tion of Economism, to speak in terms of trends within the Russian Social-Democratic movement. 
 Fischer, who delivered the report on the question of May Day, frankly stated that it would be a bad mistake to ignorethe fact that in the trade unions the socialist spirit is disap-pearing now here, now there. 
 Things had gone so far that, forinstance, Bringmann, representative of the carpenters’ union, had uttered and published statements like the following: “The strike on May Day is like a foreign body in thehuman body. 
” “In the given circumstances the trade unionsare the sole means for improving the condition of the work-ers”, etc. 
 And these “symptoms of disease”, as Fischer aptlytermed them, are being supplemented by a number of others. 
 In Germany, as in Russia and indeed everywhere, a narrow trade-unionism, or Economism, is linking up with oppor-tunism (revisionism). 
 The newspaper published by this samecarpenters’ union wrote about the crumbling foundationsof scientific socialism, the erroneousness of the theory ofcrises, the theory of collapse, etc. 
 The revisionist Calwer did not call on the workers to show discontent or increase their demands, but to be modest, etc. 
, etc. 
 Liebknecht metwith approval from the Congress when he spoke against theidea of the trade unions’ “neutrality”, and remarked that“Bebel, it is true, also spoke in favour of neutrality, but,in my opinion, this is one of the few points on which Bebel does not have the backing of the majority of the Party”. 
 Bebel himself denied that he had advised the trade unions to be neutral with regard to the Social-Democratic movement. 
Bebel fully recognised the danger of narrow trade-unionism. 
He went on to say that he knew even worse examples of thiscraft union apathy: young trade union leaders go so far as to jeer at the Party in general, at socialism in general, at the theory of the class struggle. 
 These statements of Bebel’sevoked general indignation at the Social-Democratic Congress. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR There was loud applause when he resolutely declared: “Com-rades, be on your guard, think of what you are doing; you are travelling a fatal path, which in the end will lead to your doom. 
” It thus stands to the credit of the German Social-Democrat-ic movement that it faced the danger squarely. 
 It did notgloss over the extremes of Economism, or invent lame excusesand subterfuges (such as were so abundantly invented by our Plekhanov, for instance, after the Second Congress). 
 No, it bluntly named the disease, resolutely condemned the injuri-ous tendencies, and straightforwardly and openly calledon all Party members to combat them. 
 This is instructive toRussian Social-Democrats, some of whom have earned thepraise of Mr. 
 Struve for having begun to “see the light” on the question of the trade union movement. 
 Written in September 1905 First published in 1924 Published according to in the magazine Pod Znamenem the manuscript Marxizma (Under the Banner of Marxism ), No. 
 2 NO FALSEHOOD! OUR STRENGTH LIES IN STATING THE TRUTH! LETTER TO THIS EDITORIAL BOARD104 “We are not strong enough to launch an uprising ... there-fore there is no point in linking it up with the Duma ... a constituent assembly should be the battle-cry of our agita-tion. 
” That is what the Bund wrote, and no adequate replywas provided by the author of the article in No. 
 16. 
 * These words of the Bund’s are an excellent reflection of philistinism within the Social-Democratic movement, phil-istinism in the sense of banality, the golden mean, insipid-ity, generalities, mediocrity (qualities that have alwaysbeen characteristic of the Bund, which, as is known, playedthe part of an ideological parasite in 1897-1900, in 1901-03,in 1904, and now in 1905). 
 That is the current view, the commonly accepted stand-point, “common sense” (“the triumph of common sense” in O s v o b o z h d e n i y e and “seeing the light”). 
 This is a tremendous falsehood , the exposure of which is of the utmost import to the Russian revolution and to theclass-conscious proletariat, as the only possible creator of a victorious revolution . 
 We are not strong enough to launch an uprising; therefore we should not link it up with anything; therefore the slogan must not call for an armed uprising, but for aconstituent assembly. 
 It is just like saying: “Naked and unfortunate, hungry and tormented, we are unable to emerge from the swamp in which *See pp. 
 246-51 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 we are perishing, and ascend to the mountain top where there is light and sunshine, clean air and all the fruits of the earth. 
 We have no ladder, and without it we cannot ascend. 
 We are unable to acquire a ladder. 
 Therefore we should not linkup our struggle for an ascent with the slogan of obtaining(respective , making) a ladder. 
 Therefore our slogan should be ‘To the mountain top, to the mountain top: there happinessand deliverance, air and light, new spirit and vigour await us’. 
” Since there is no ladder, without which an ascent is impos-sible— therefore you should not make the acquisition of a ladder your slogan, and work on making one—therefore theslogan should be: “Get to the summit; to the mountain top,there happiness, etc. 
, await you!” “As ever, weakness had taken refuge in a belief in mira-cles,” as Marx said! 105 Is it the weakness of the proletariat, or the weak thinking of the Bund and the new Iskra that is now taking refuge in a bellef in miracles, in the belief that the mountain can bescaled without a ladder, in the belief that a constituent assembly is possible without an uprising? Such belief is that of the insane. 
 Without an armed uprising a constituent assembly is a phantasm, a phrase, a lie, a Frank-fort talking shop. 
 The deceit and falsity of the Osvobozhdeniye trend, of that first b o u r g e o i s s l o g a n in Russia to assume a broadly political, mass-political, popular form, consist in that very support of a belief in miracles, in the support of that lie. 
 Forthe liberal bourgeoisie needs the lie, since to it that is no lie,but the greatest of truths, the truth of its class interests, thetruth of bourgeois liberty, the truth of capitalist equality,the holy of holies of the huckster fraternity. 
 This is its (the bourgeoisie’s) truth, for what it needs is not the victory of the people, or the mountain top but a swamp for the masses; it wants the bosses and money-bags to beseated on the backs of the common people; it needs not avictory, but a deal, a compromise with the enemy =a sell-out to the enemy. 
 For the bourgeoisie this is no “miracle”, but reality, the reality of treason to the revolution, not of the victory of therevolution. 
 “...We are not strong enough to acquire a ladder ... we are not strong enough to launch an uprising. 
” Is that the case, gentlemen? If that is the case , then recast a l l your propaganda and agitation, begin to speak to the workers and the entire peoplein new and different words, in language framed in a new and different way. 
 Tell the people: workers of St. 
 Petersburg, Riga, Warsaw, Odessa, Tiflis ... we are not strong enough to launch a rising and be victorious in a rising. 
 Therefore there is no point i n thinking, no point in vain talking about a popular constitu-ent assembly . 
 Don’t debase grand words with petty subter-fuges. 
 Don’t cover up your weakness with a belief in mira-cles. 
 Proclaim your weakness aloud to one and all—a fault confessed is half redressed. 
 False rhetoric and false boastful-ness spell moral ruin and lead unfailingly to political extinc-tion. 
 Workers! We are too weak to bring about an uprising and win victory in one! Therefore stop all talk about a popular constituent assembly , drive away those liars who speak about it, expose the treachery of the Osvobozhdeniye gentry, the “Duma enthusiasts”, the Constitutional-Democrats, and therest of the vile crew, for it is only i n w o r d that they want a popular constituent assembly; actually they want an as-sembly directed against the people , one that will not constitute anything new, but will merely patch up the old, one that will not give you new garments, a new life, a new weapon for the great new struggle, but will give you only tinsel overyour old rags, only mirages and deceptions, popguns insteadof rifles and chains instead of weapons. 
 Workers! We are too weak for an uprising. 
 Therefore, do not talk and do not let the Osvobozhdeniye prostitutes, the Constitutional-Democrats , and Duma supporters talk of a r e v o l u t i o n ; do not allow those bourgeois scoundrels to sully a great popular concept with their claptrap. 
 We are weak? That means that we have no revolution,nor can there be one . 
 That is not a revolution of the people, but swindling of the people by the Petrunkeviches and a pack of liberal lackeys of the tsar. 
 That is not a struggle for liberty, but a bartering away of the people’s freedom inexchange for parliamentary seats for the Osvobozhdeniye League. 
 That is not the beginning of a new life, but perpetuation of the old starvation and drudgery, the old stagnancy, and putrefaction. 
 We are not strong enough to bring about an uprising, fellow-workers! We are not strong enough to rouse the peopleto the pitch of revolution! We are not strong enough toattain freedom.... 
 We have only enough strength to jostlethe enemy, but not to overthrow him, to jostle him in such a way that Petrunkevich will be able to take a seat beside him. 
 Hence, away with all talk about revolution, liberty,and popular representation; whoever talks of these thingswithout actually working at the ladder needed to attain to these things, at the uprising needed to win them, is a liarand a humbug, who is merely deceiving you. 
 We are weak, fellow-workers! We are backed only by the proletariat, and by the millions of peasants who havestarted a scattered and unarmed struggle in their blind andignorant way. 
 Against us are the entire Court clique and all the workers and peasants clad in soldiers’ uniform and * To sum up. 
 We are weak. 
 Weakness seeks salvation in a belief in miracles. 
 That is a fact which emerges from theBund’s statements, from Iskra ’s plan. 
 But what is the fact, gentlemen? Is it the weakness of the forces of the proletariat of all Russia or the weak thinking of the Bundists and the new-Iskrists? Speak the truth: 1) There is no revolution. 
 There is only a deal between the liberal bourgeoisie and the tsar.... 
 2) There is no struggle for liberty. 
 There is only the bar-tering away of the people’s freedom. 
 3) There is no struggle for popular representation. 
 There is only representation for the money-bag . 
 We are weak ... from this inevitably follows all treachery to the r e v o l u t i o n . 
 If you want a revolution, freedom, popular representa-tion ... y o u m u s t b e s t r o n g . 
 *This sentence is unfinished in the MS. 
— Ed. 
 You are weak? Revolution is for the strong! Our lot is to remain in rags. 
 You are weak? Only the strong win free-dom. 
 The weak will always remain slaves . 
 The ex-perience of all his-tory. 
 You are weak? You will be represented by your masters, theslave-owners, the exploit-ers. 
 “Representation” is either conquest by the strong, or a scrap of paper, a hoax, b l i n d f o l d i n gt h e o n e w h o i sw e a k s o a s t o d u l lh i s f a c u l t i e s . 
 . 
 . 
 . 
 Written in September 1905 First published in 1926 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany V the manuscriptStarting from the end ω) Who is weak? The forces of the proletariat, the minds of the Iskristsand Bundists? χ) Do you want a revolu-tion? Then you must b e strong! ξ) We must speak the t r u t h : therein lies o u r strength, and the masses , t h e p e o p l e , the multi-tude will decide in actual practice, after the struggle,whether we have strength. 
 Have we strength?Or are we weak. 
 ω) Who is weak. 
 ON THE SO-CALLED ARMENIAN SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC WORKERS ’ ORGANISATION We are in receipt of a letter from the Central Commit-tee, informing us that the Armenian Social-DemocraticWorkers’ Organisation has expressed a desire to sign theresolution adopted at the conference of all Social-Democratic parties. 
 106 The Central Committee, however, does not agree to accept this signature, because it was opposed to the par-ticipation in the conference of this organisation, whichis purely foreign and has no serious links within Russia. 
We hope soon to publish in Proletary more detailed in-formation concerning the true nature of this organisation. 
 For the time being we shall merely observe that all those who wish to help a really Social-Democratic movementamong the Armenian workers in the Caucasus should havedealings only with the Caucasian organisations of theR. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, which publish Armenian literature in theCaucasus, and not in Geneva. 
 Written in September-October 1905 First published in 1931 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany XVI the manuscript THE ZEMSTVO CONGRESS On Monday, September 12 (25), there opened in Moscow a Zemstvo and Municipal Congress, which discussed andfinally determined the attitude to the Duma. 
 Like previousZemstvo congresses, this Congress marks a further step inthe political development and political organisation of the Russian bourgeoisie. 
 That is why every class-conscious worker must give attention to this birth of a bourgeois constitutionalparty. 
 The political development of the proletariat as aclass has always and everywhere proceeded hand in hand withthe political development of the bourgeoisie as a class. 
 But besides this general significance, the Zemstvo Con-gress is also of tremendous importance in connection with the burning question of our attitude towards the Duma. 
A compromise between the bourgeoisie and tsarism, or theformer’s more resolute struggle against the latter—such isthe gist of this question, which, as is known, is giving riseto differences on Social-Democracy’s tactics too. 
 To begin with, let us remind the reader that at their pre-ceding Congress the Zemstvo people roundly condemnedthe Bulygin Duma, and accepted the well-known Osvobozh-deniye draft constitution (a monarchy and a two-chamber system). 
 The question of boycotting the Duma was at firstdecided in the affirmative by the majority, but later it was reconsidered and deferred until the next congress, which was to be called immediately following the promulgation of the State Duma Act—there was even talk of calling itby telegraph. 
 In fact, the Congress was not called for along time. 
 At first, as we noted in Proletary , No. 
 14, rumour had it that the Zemstvos had cancelled the Congress. 
 Later, the public learned of the negotiations between Mr. 
 Golovin and Durnovo, which we described and appraised in the preceding issue of Proletary ,* and which resulted in the police permitting the Congress. 
 The Congress was therefore held under conditions entirely different from the preceding, which had been banned by the police, who had threatened todisperse it, had made out a report and, after the Congress,ordered a Senate investigation. 
 This time the Zemstvos andthe police came to terms and reached an agreement in advance. 
 To give the reader a better idea of the significance of the difference between “then” and “now”, let us remind him of the statement that appeared in the latest issue of Osvobozh-deniye . 
 Mr. 
 “Independent” (probably, independent of the police?) wrote the following in No. 
 76, in full accord withthe author of the leading article in that issue: “There shouldbe no question of any sort of compromise whatever. 
 As be-fore, liberty must be won and not begged for.... 
 We should not—and this is in the highest degree important—fora moment renounce either the former methods of struggleor the positions that have already been won. 
 If compromisesare possible here too, then that possibility must be removedimmediately and in good earnest. 
 All that has till now been done to organise the forces of emancipation must also be done in the future.... 
 The activities of the congresses, unions,and assemblies should continue in the same spirit and inthe same direction as hitherto. 
” It is impossible to express oneself more clearly. 
 After August 6, the organ of the Zemstvo or “Constitutional-Democratic” Party resolutely and unconditionally expresses itself against renouncing the former methods of struggle . 
 How-ever, the gist of the false stand taken by the liberal bourgeoi-sie lies in the fact that, along with a desire for liberty, theyno less ardently desire a deal with tsarism. 
 That is whythey say one thing and do another. 
 In order “not to renounce the former methods of struggle”, they should be boycotting the Duma. 
 After renouncing the boycott, it was logicallyinevitable for them to renounce some of the “former methods of struggle”. 
 Osvobozhdeniye began to fulminate against com-promises at the very moment Golovin was making a compro-mise with Durnovo. 
 Osvobozhdeniye began to vociferate, “we should not for a moment renounce”, just when the Zemstvo Congress renounced the former freedom of its sessions. 
 On *See pp. 
 253-61 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 the occasion of the “granting” of a Duma, that purported inception of liberty, the Zemstvos agreed to confer less freely. 
 And indeed: 1) the programme for the Congress was cut down by Mr. 
 Durnovo, i. 
e. 
, by the police; 2) the chairmanpromised to adjourn the Congress in the event of a discussionon questions not on the agenda authorised by the police;3) the Congress consented to hold its sittings in the pres-ence of a police agent—sent by Durnovo ( chef de cabinet )— who was empowered to close the Congress if the “terms” of the agreement between Mr. 
 Golovin and Mr. 
 Durnovo wereinfringed; 4) also on pain of closure of the Congress, policeforbade all “seditious outcries” (according to a wire from thespecial correspondent of the conservative paper Le Temps , who added that all these terms were faithfully observed ). 
 It goes without saying that since we derive our information from foreign newspapers we cannot vouch for the absoluteaccuracy or the exhaustive nature of this information. 
But there are no grounds for doubting that on the whole itis accurate. 
 On the contrary, Mr. 
 Golovin (who certainly didnot intend his negotiations with Durnovo to become known to the public!) most likely promised the police even more regarding the loyal behaviour of the Zemstvos! The undeniable fact is that Osvobozhdeniye ’s words are ut-terly at variance with the deeds of its adherents. 
 Osvobozh-deniye ’s journalists harangue against the police, while the wirepullers most amicably arrange matters with the police. 
 The beginning of the Zemstvo campaign for the Duma elections coincided with the beginning of agreement betweenthe Zemstvo bourgeoisie and the autocracy. 
 Foreign correspondents speak unanimously of the peace-ful nature of this Zemstvo Congress as compared with the preceding. 
 Only one speaker, or according to other informa-tion two, favoured boycotting the Duma. 
 The majority stood for participation (we stated in No. 
 12 * of Proletary , even before the Duma Act was promulgated, that the ZemstvoRight wing had already made up its mind on this question). 
The majority considered that non-participation in the elec-tions would be a “sign of timidity”—a view fully shared, as we know, by Parvus and the new Iskra . 
 On the other hand, * See pp. 
 179-87 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 our Zemstvos displayed their boldness ... by coming to terms with the police.... 
 The Congress adopted a resolution which, instead of con-demning the Duma, merely states (we are at a loss to saywhether timidly or boldly) that the “Duma will not be apopular representative body in the literal sense of the term”. 
Russian citizens are invited to unite on the programmesadopted at previous Zemstvo Congresses and to carry on their struggle on the basis of the Duma. 
 The resolution does not say a single word about fighting outside the Duma andapart from the Duma: that is what the Osvobozhdeniye writer, who is “independent” of the police, calls “not for a momentrenouncing the former methods of struggle.... 
” Moderating their formerly excessive “revolutionary” zeal, the Zemstvos are applying their efforts to “constructive” work in connection with the Duma. 
 They have drawn up adetailed political programme (we are not yet in possession ofits complete text); they have endeavoured to cover up theirretreat from democracy by reiterating the main points ofmoderate constitutionalism; they have dealt in detail with the question of the election campaign, the organisation of local and central election committees, drawing up lists ofcandidates, etc. 
 After all this is it still not clear what the landlord and merchant liberalism of the Zemstvos and Osvobozhdeniye League is driving at? What they want is: to start discarding, one by one, the militant demands of democracy, everything that guaranteesthe rights of the revolutionary people, that develops andextends the struggle for liberty (while maintaining silence inthe resolution about the struggle apart from the Duma,etc. 
); to start clinching all such demands of democracy that secure power for the bourgeoisie alone (snug berths in the Duma above all)! Less agitation among the people and moreactivity in the Duma! As William Stead, that “liberal” who but yesterday was an admirer of the autocracy, so aptly put it (see his letterto The Times of September 26), external peace called for peace within the country, peace between the tsar and the liberal bourgeoisie, such as was proclaimed by the Law ofAugust 6! By their behaviour the Zemstvos are proving that they are willing to make peace , although, of course, by no means immediately or in all respects. 
 “Mr. 
 Mikhail Sta-khovich, a friend and colleague of Shipov’s,” wrote the Temps correspondent on September 27, “is counting on the creationof a party of the centre, which would favour the autocracyand a consultative Duma; he asserts that many members ofthe extreme parties” (!! what aspersion on the Osvobozhdeniye supporters— Editors of “Proletary ”) “are prepared to join this party. 
” Mr. 
 Stakhovich’s assertion is confirmed not only by the statements of many legally published news-papers, but even more so by the Zemstvo gentlemen’s deeds . 
 The Times correspondent informs us on September 26 that Mr. 
 M. 
 Stakhovich was present at the Congress. 
 “The lastnamed is still a strong believer in the victory of the moderate elements, indeed, the almost total absence of the usual fiery denunciations of the government, except casual [!!] ref-erences to the horrors of the Caucasus, rather confirms hisforecast. 
” The same correspondent of this conservative Britishpaper writes: “The temper of the Assembly offers a sin-gular contrast to the sentiment dominating the July Congress, when a large number of delegates advocated a boycott of the government [Duma] scheme. 
” Can it be that Iskra will still refuse to abandon its erroneous opinion that those who favoured a boycott wanted passiveabstention, whereas the Stakhoviches, who favour participa-tion, want a serious struggle? Will it really continue even now to stand, together with Parvus, for an agreement with the Osvobozhdeniye adherents and support for them, after they have obviously begun to come to terms with the Durnovos? P. 
 S. 
 In all fairness it must be said that more and more information keeps coming in showing that the Russian new-Iskrists do not agree with the new Iskra . 
 We have just received a leaflet issued by the St. 
 Petersburg (Menshevik) group, entitled: “The State Duma or a Constituent Assembly. 
”Together with criticism of the Duma we find here the slogan“Down with the Duma!” The workers’ representatives areurged to tell the liberals “that they must not recognise theState Duma”, “that they must renounce their right [the print in the leaflet is not legible] of election to the Duma”, that they must help the workers “to arm for thestruggle against the Black Hundreds and the State Duma”. 
 The St. 
 Petersburg Mensheviks have thus adopted the slogan of an active boycott. 
 Here too, as in the well-known case of the “Zemstvo campaign plan”,107 Iskra is at variance with its adherents in Russia. 
 Only in one respect do the St. 
 Peters-burg Mensheviks come close to Iskra : they urge the workers immediately to elect “representatives in factories, work-shops, and departments, just as they did for the Shidlovsky 108 Commission.... 
 When they meet, let our representatives wage a struggle against the State Duma, just as our delegates in the Shidlovsky Commission fought against that cunning trapset by the autocracy. 
” This slogan is very similar to theIskra slogan calling for “revolutionary self-government”, although the comrades of the St. 
 Petersburg group do not,of course, use this inept and high-sounding phrase. 
 We have no doubt but that the St. 
 Petersburg workers will see the erroneousness of this slogan and a false analogy with the Shid-lovsky Commission. 
 At that time the workers were boycottingthe Commission; now the Duma is boycotting the workers. 
 While the tsar retains power, revolutionary self-govern-ment can be only a fragment of the revolution (the decision of the Smolensk Municipal Council, etc. 
). 
 Making it the main slogan of the revolutionary proletariat means,sowing confusion and playing into the hands of the Osvobozh-deniye people. 
 In developing, extending, strengthening, and spreading the organisation of the revolutionary forces of the proletariat and the peasantry, we must not confuse this organisation of war, this organisation of an uprising, with self-government . 
 In purpose, manner of origin, and char-acter, the organisation of an armed uprising, the organisationof a revolutionary army, is quite unlike the organisation of revolutionary self-government. 
 The more zealouslythe liberal bourgeoisie, the Osvobozhdeniye gentry, endeavour to curtail, blur, and dock the consistent revolutionary-democratic slogans, the more clearly and directly must webring forward such slogans—the convocation of a popularconstituent assembly by a provisional revolutionarygovernment, the organisation of an armed uprising, and arevolutionary army for the overthrow of tsarist rule. 
 Proletary , No. 
 19, Published according to October 3 (September 20), 1905 the text in Proletary SOCIALISM AND THE PEASANTRY The revolution Russia is going through is a revolution of the entire people. 
 The interests of the whole people have comeinto irreconcilable conflict with those of a handful of men con-stituting the autocratic government or backing it. 
 The very existence of present-day society, which is based on commodityproduction and wherein the interests of the various classesand population groups are extremely varied and conflicting,calls for the destruction of the autocracy, the establishmentof political liberty, and the open and direct expression of the dominating classes’ interests in the organisation and admin-istration of the state. 
 Bourgeois in its social and economicessence, the democratic revolution cannot but express theneeds of all bourgeois society. 
 However, this society, which now seems a united whole in the struggle against the autocracy, is itself irremediably split by the chasm between capital and labour. 
 The people that have risen against the autocracy are not a unitedpeople. 
 Employers and wage-workers, the insignificantnumber of the rich (“the upper ten thousand”) and the tens ofmillions of those who toil and own no property—these areindeed “two nations”, as was said by a far-sighted Englishman as long ago as the first half of the nineteenth century. 
 109 The struggle between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie standson the order of the day throughout Europe. 
 This struggle haslong spread to Russia as well. 
 In present-day Russia it is nottwo contending forces that form the content of the revolu-tion, but two distinct and different social wars: one waged within the present autocratic-feudal system, the other within the future bourgeois-democratic system, whose birth we arealready witnessing. 
 One is the struggle of the entire people for freedom (the freedom of bourgeois society), for democracy, i. 
e. 
, the sovereignty of the people; the other is the class struggle of the proletariat against the bourgeoisie for a socialist organisation of society. 
 An arduous and formidable task thus devolves on the socialists—to wage two wars simultaneously, wars that aretotally different in their nature, their aims, and the composi-tion of the social forces capable of playing a decisive part in either of them. 
 The Social-Democratic movement has explicitly set itself this difficult task, and has definitely copedwith it thanks to its having based its entire programme onscientific socialism, i. 
e. 
, Marxism, and thanks to its havingbecome one of the contingents of the army of world Social-Democracy, which has verified, confirmed, explained, and developed in detail the principles of Marxism on the basis of the experience of so many democratic and socialist movementsin the most diverse countries of Europe. 
 Revolutionary Social-Democracy has long indicated and proved the bourgeois nature of Russian democratism, rangingfrom the liberal-Narodnik to the Osvobozhdeniye varieties. 
 It has always pointed out that it is inevitable for bourgeois democratism to be half-hearted, limited, and narrow. 
 For theperiod of the democratic revolution it has set the socialistproletariat the task of winning the peasant masses over to itsside, and, paralysing the bourgeoisie’s instability, of smashingand crushing the autocracy. 
 A decisive victory of the democratic revolution is possible only in the form of a revo-lutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and thepeasantry. 
 But the sooner this victory is achieved, and thefuller it is, the faster and the more profoundly will freshcontradictions and a fresh class struggle develop within thefully democratised bourgeois system. 
 The more completely we achieve the democratic revolution, the closer shall we approach the tasks of the socialist revolution, the moreacute and incisive will be the proletariat’s struggle againstthe very foundations of bourgeois society. 
 The Social-Democrats must wage a relentless struggle against any departure from this presentation of the revolutionary-democratic and socialist tasks of the proletariat. 
 It is absurd to ignore the democratic, i. 
e. 
, essentially bourgeois,nature of the present revolution, and hence it is absurd to bring forward such slogans as the one calling for the establish-ment of revolutionary communes. 
 It is absurd and reactionary to belittle the tasks of the proletariat’s participation— and leading participation at that—in the democratic revo-lution, by shunning, for instance, the slogan of a revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry. 
It is absurd to confuse the tasks and prerequisites of ademocratic revolution with those of a socialist revolution, which, we repeat, differ both in their nature and in the composition of the social forces taking part in them. 
 It is on this last mentioned mistake that we propose to dwell in detail. 
 The undeveloped state of the class contradic-tions in the people in general, and in the peasantry in partic-ular, is an unavoidable phenomenon in the epoch of a demo-cratic revolution, which for the first time lays the founda-tions for a really extensive development of capitalism. 
 Thislack of economic development results in the survival andrevival, in one form or another, of the backward forms of a so-cialism which is petty-bourgeois, for it idealises reforms thatdo not go beyond the framework of petty-bourgeois relation-ships. 
 The mass of the peasants do not and cannot realise that the fullest “freedom” and the “justest” distribution even ofall the land, far from destroying capitalism, will, on thecontrary, create the conditions for a particularly extensiveand powerful development of capitalism. 
 Whereas Social-Democracy singles out and supports only the revolutionary-democratic substance of these peasant aspirations, petty-bourgeois socialism elevates to a theory this politicalbackwardness of the peasants, confusing or jumbling togetherthe prerequisites and the tasks of a genuine democraticrevolution with those of an imaginary socialist revolution. 
 The most striking expression of this vague petty-bourgeois ideology is the programme, or rather draft programme, of the “Socialist-Revolutionaries”, who made the more hasteto proclaim themselves a party, the less developed amongthem were the forms and prerequisites for a party. 
 When ana-lysing their draft programme (see Vperyod , No. 
 3 *) we already had occasion to point out that the Socialist-Revolution-aries’ views are rooted in the old Russian Narodnik ideas. 
 *“From Narodism to Marxism”, 1905. 
 See present edition, Vol. 
 8, pp. 
 83-89. 
— Ed. 
 However, as the entire economic development of Russia, the entire course of the Russian revolution, is remorsely and ruthlessly cutting the ground from under the foundations of pure Narodism day by day and hour by hour, the views ofthe Socialist-Revolutionaries inevitably tend to becomeeclectic. 
 They are trying to patch up the rents in the Na-rodnik ideas with bits of fashionable opportunist “criticism”of Marxism, but this does not make the tattered garment wear any the better. 
 All in all, their programme is nothing but an absolutely lifeless and self-contradictory document,which is merely an expression of a stage in the history ofRussian socialism on the road from the Russia of serfdom tobourgeois Russia, the road “from Narodism to Marxism”. 
This definition, which typifies a number of more or less small streams of contemporary revolutionary thought, is also applicable to the latest draft agrarian programme of thePolish Socialist Party (P. 
S. 
P. 
), published in No. 
 6-8 ofPrzed 9wit. 
 * The draft divides the agrarian programme into two parts. 
 Part I sets forth “reforms for the realisation of which social conditions have already matured”; Part II—“formulates the consummation and integration of the agrarian reformsset forth in Part I”. 
 Part I, in its turn, is subdivided intothree sections: A) labour protection—demands for the benefitof the agricultural proletariat; B) agrarian reforms (in thenarrow sense, or, so to say, peasant demands), and C) protec-tion of the rural population (self-government, etc. 
). 
 This programme takes a step towards Marxism in attempt-ing to single out something in the nature of a minimum fromthe maximum programme—then in providing a whollyindependent formulation of demands of a purely proletariannature; further, the preamble to the programme recognises that it is wholly inadmissible for socialists to “flatter the proprietory instincts of the peasant masses”. 
 As a matter offact, if the truth contained in this latter proposition had beengiven sufficient thought and carried to its logical conclusion,that would have inevitably resulted in a strictly Marxistprogramme. 
 The trouble is that the P. 
S. 
P. 
 which draws its ideas just as willingly from the fount of opportunist criticism *The Dawn . 
—Ed. 
 of Marxism is not a consistently proletarian party. 
 “Since it has not been proved that landed property tends to concentrate,” we read in the preamble to the programme, “it is inconceivable to champion this form of economy withabsolute sincerity and assurance, and to convince the peasantthat the small farms will inevitably disappear. 
” This is nothing but an echo of bourgeois political economy. 
 Bourgeois economists are doing their utmost to instil in the small peasant the idea that capitalism is compatible with the well-being of the small independent farmer. 
That is why they veil the general question of commodityproduction, the yoke of capital, and the decline and degra-dation of small peasant farming by stressing the particularquestion of the concentration of landed property. 
 They shut their eyes to the fact that large-scale production in specialised branches of agriculture producing for the market is alsodeveloping on small and medium-sized holdings, and thatownership of this kind is deteriorating because of greaterleasing of land, as well as under the burden of mortgagesand the pressure of usury. 
 They obscure the indisputable fact of the technical superiority of large-scale production in agriculture and the fall in the peasant’s living standardsin his struggle against capitalism. 
 There is nothing in theP. 
S. 
P. 
 statements but a repetition of these bourgeoisprejudices, resurrected by the present-day Davids. 
 110 The unsoundness of theoretical views affects the practical programme as well. 
 Take Part I—the agrarian reforms in the narrow sense of the term. 
 On the one hand, you read inClause 5: “The abolition of all restrictions on the purchase ofland allotments,” and in 6: “The abolition of szarwark 111 and obligatory cartage (compulsory services). 
” These are purelyMarxist minimum demands. 
 By presenting them (especially Clause 5) the P. 
S. 
P. 
 is making a step forward in comparison with our Socialist-Revolutionaries, who in company withMoskovskiye Vedomosti have a weakness for the vaunted “in-alienability of land allotments”. 
 By presenting these demandsthe P. 
S. 
P. 
 is verging on the Marxist idea regarding thestruggle against remnants of serfdom, as the basis and content of the present-day peasant movement. 
 Although the P. 
S. 
P. 
 verges on to this idea, it is far from fully and consciouslyaccepting it. 
 The main clauses of the minimum programme under consideration read as follows: “1) nationalisation through con-fiscation of the royal and state demesnes112 as well as estates belonging to the clergy; 2) nationalisation of the big landedestates in the absence of direct heirs; 3) nationalisation offorests, rivers, and lakes. 
” These demands have all the defectsof a programme whose main demand at present is the na-tionalisation of the land. 
 So long as full political liberty and sovereignty of the people do not exist, whilst there is no demo-cratic republic, it is both premature and inexpedient topresent the demand for nationalisation, since nationalisationmeans transference to the state, and the present state is apolice and class state; the state of tomorrow will in any casebe a class state. 
 As a slogan meant to lead forward towards democratisation, this demand is quite useless, for it does not place the stress on the peasants’ relations to the landlords (thepeasants take the land of the landlords) but on the landlords’relations to the state. 
 This presentation of the question istotally wrong at a time like the present, when the peasantsare fighting in a revolutionary way for the land, against both the landlords and the landlords’ state. 
 Revolutionary peasant committees for confiscation, as instruments of confis-cation—this is the only slogan that meets the needs of such atime and promotes the class struggle against the landlords,a struggle indissolubly bound up with the revolutionarydestruction of the landlords’ state. 
 The other clauses of the agrarian minimum programme in the draft programme of the P. 
S. 
P. 
 are as follows: “4) limita-tion of property rights, inasmuch as they become an impedi-ment to all improvements in agriculture, should such im-provements be considered necessary by the majority of thoseconcerned; ... 7) nationalisation of insurance of grain crops against fire and hail, and of cattle against epidemics; 8) leg-islation for state assistance in the formation of agriculturalartels and co-operatives; 9) agricultural schools. 
” These clauses are quite in the spirit of the Socialist-Revo-lutionaries, or (what amounts to the same thing) of bourgeoisreformism. 
 There is nothing revolutionary about them. 
 They are, of course, progressive—no one disputes that—but pro-gressive in the interests of property-owners. 
 For a socialistto advance them means nothing but flattering proprietory instincts. 
 To advance them is the same as demanding state aid to trusts, cartels, syndicates, and manufacturers’ associ-ations, which are no less “progressive” than co-operatives, insurance, etc. 
, in agriculture. 
 All this is capitalist progress. 
To show concern for that is not our affair, but that of theemployers, the entrepreneurs . 
 Proletarian socialism, as distinct from petty-bourgeois socialism, leaves it to theCounts de Rocquigny, the landowning Zemstvo members, etc. 
, to take care of the co-operatives of the landowners, big and little—and concerns itself entirely and exclusively withwage-workers ’ co-operatives for the purpose of fighting the landowners . 
 Let us now consider Part II of the programme. 
 It consists of only one point: “Nationalisation of the big landed estates through confiscation. 
 The arable land and pastures thus acquired by the people must be divided up into allotments andturned over to the landless peasants and those with smallholdings, on guaranteed long-term leases. 
” A fine “consummation”, indeed! Under the guise of “consum-mation and integration of agrarian reforms” a party calling itself socialist proposes what is by no means a socialist organisation of society, but rather an absurd petty-bourgeoisutopia. 
 Here we have a most telling example of complete con-fusion of the democratic and the socialist revolutions, andcomplete failure to understand the difference in their aims. 
The transfer of the land from the landlords to the peasants may be—and in fact has in Europe everywhere been—a com-ponent part of the democratic revolution, one of the stagesin the bourgeois revolution, but only bourgeois radicals cancall it “consummation” or “final realisation”. 
 The redistribu-tion of land among the various categories of proprietors,among the various classes of farmers, may be advantageous and necessary for the victory of democracy, the complete eradication of all traces of serf-ownership, for raising theliving standards of the masses, accelerating the developmentof capitalism, etc. 
; the most resolute support of a measurelike that may be incumbent upon the socialist proletariatin the epoch of a democratic revolution, but only socialist production and not petty peasant production, can constitute a “consummation and final realisation”. 
 “Guaranteeing”small-peasant leaseholds whilst commodity production and capitalism are preserved, is nothing but a reactionary petty-bourgeois utopia. 
 We see now that the P. 
S. 
P. 
’s fundamental error is not peculiar to that Party alone, is not an isolated instance or some-thing fortuitous. 
 It expresses in a clearer and more distinctform (than the vaunted “socialisation” of the Socialist-Revo-lutionaries, which they themselves are unable to understand)the basic error of all Russian Narodism, all Russian bourgeois liberalism and radicalism in the agrarian question, including the bourgeois liberalism and radicalism that found expres-sion in the discussions at the recent (September) ZemstvoCongress in Moscow. 
 This basic error may be expressed as follows:In the presentation of immediate aims the programme of the P. 
S. 
P. 
 is not revolutionary. 
 In its ultimate aims it is not socialist . 
 In other words: a failure to understand the difference be-tween a democratic revolution and a socialist revolution leadsto a failure to express the genuinely revolutionary aspect ofthe democratic aims, while all the nebulousness of the bour-geois-democratic world outlook is brought into the socialist aims. 
 The result is a slogan which is not revolutionary enoughfor a democrat, and inexcusably confused for a socialist. 
 On the other hand, Social-Democracy’s programme meets all requirements both of support for genuinely revolutionarydemocratism and the presentation of a clear socialist aim. 
 In the present-day peasant movement we see a struggle against serfdom, a struggle against the landlords and thelandlords’ state. 
 We give full support to this struggle. 
 Theonly correct slogan for such support is: confiscation throughrevolutionary peasant committees. 
 What should be done withthe confiscated land is a secondary question. 
 It is not we who will settle this question, but the peasants. 
 When it comes to being settled a struggle will begin between the proletariatand the bourgeoisie within the peasantry. 
 That is why weeither leave this question open (which is so displeasing to thepetty-bourgeois projectors) or merely indicate the beginning of the road to be taken, by demanding the return of the cut-off lands 113 (in which unthinking people see an obstacle to the movement, despite the numerous explanations given by theSocial-Democrats). 
 There is only one way to make the agrarian reform, which is unavoidable in present-day Russia, play a revolutionary-democratic role: it must be effected on the revolutionary initiative of the peasants themselves, despite the landlordsand the bureaucracy, and despite the state, i. 
e. 
, it must beeffected by revolutionary means. 
 The very worst distributionof land after a reform of this sort will be better from all standpoints than what we have at present. 
 And this is the road we indicate when we make our prime demand the establishment of revolutionary peasant committees. 
 But at the same time we say to the rural proletariat: “The most radical victory of the peasants, which you musthelp with all your force to achieve, will not rid you of poverty. 
This can be achieved only by one means: the victory of the entire proletariat—both industrial and agricultural— over the entire bourgeoisie and the formation of a socialistsociety. 
” Together with the peasant proprietors, against the land-lords and the landlords’ state; together with the urban prole-tariat, against the entire bourgeoisie and all the peasant proprietors. 
 Such is the slogan of the class-conscious rural proletariat. 
 And if the petty proprietors do not immediatelyaccept this slogan, or even if they refuse to accept it altogether,it will nevertheless become the workers’ slogan, willinevitably be borne out by the entire course of the revolu-tion, will rid us of petty-bourgeois illusions, and will clearly and definitely indicate to us our socialist goal. 
 Proletary , No. 
 20, Published according to October 10 (September 27), 1905 the text in Proletary A REPLETE BOURGEOISIE AND A CRAVING BOURGEOISIE Le Temps , one of the most influential organs of the French conservative bourgeoisie, is waging a most desperate cam-paign against socialism, and it is a rare day on which one fails to see in its columns the names of Marx, Bebel, Guesde and Jaurès, accompanied by the most vicious comment andvituperation. 
 Le Temps cannot speak of socialism without trembling with rage. 
 The newspaper is following what well-intentioned Euro-peans call the Russian “crisis”, with the utmost attention, and never fails to offer edifying counsel to la nation amie et alliée —the “friendly and allied nation”. 
 Thus on the present occasion, too, it devotes its leading article to the recentZemstvo Congress. 
 It recalls the preceding July Congress andcannot refrain even in retrospect from expressing its dis-satisfaction. 
 It was, you see, “a spectacle of utter incoherence of ideas and of complete incertitude of intention”; the Buly-gin scheme was already known, but the delegates neverthe-less confined themselves to “violent speeches”, without beingable to come to a decision on the question of boycott orparticipation. 
 The organ of the French ruling bourgeoisie evenreminds the Zemstvo delegates with irritation that they had no mandates! On the contrary, what a smile of satisfaction has now come over the face of the bourgeois who is replete with polit-ical power! How graciously he hastens to shake the noblehand of his confrère who as yet is only craving for political power, but who is already revealing his “maturity”! The boycott has been rejected, and now nothing more is being said about the absence of mandates. 
 “The decision of the Zemstvodelegates,” says Le Temps , “does them credit.... 
 It shows that the political education of the most enlightened elements of the Russian people is progressing, and that they are abandoning vague plans of political prestidigitation, to enter boldly on the path of necessary evolution. 
” The bourgeois who is replete with political power and who has experience of what real victories of the people, theworkers and peasants, lead to in revolutions, has no hesita-tion in declaring the September Congress of the liberal land-lords and merchants a victory of evolution over revolution. 
 He praises the “moderation” of the Congress. 
 He points with evident satisfaction to the rejection of the resolutionson “parcelling up the land” and on suffrage for women. 
 “Thewisdom and moderation of these decisions clearly indicatethat the opinions of the extreme parties did not prevail at this Congress. 
 The programme agreed on is sufficiently democratic to disarm the revolutionaries . 
 Since the Zemstvo Congress expects to put its plans into effect solely by lawfulmeans, its programme may also rally those reformists whompersonal issues will not cut off from the rest of the Congress. 
” The replete bourgeois slaps the craving bourgeois encoura-gingly on the shoulder—to have advanced a programme “sufficiently democratic” to throw dust into people’s eyesand disarm the revolutionaries , and have taken the path of legality, that is in plain and straightforward language to havecome to terms with the Trepovs and Romanovs—that istrue statesman-like wisdom. 
 That the hopes which the shrewd bourgeois places in simple-minded revolutionaries are not quite groundless hasbeen proved by our wiseacres of the new Iskra . 
 They have dropped the reins and dashed into a trap; they are eagerlyproposing to exact democratic pledges from the moderatebourgeois, who are now prepared heart and soul to promise anything and to pledge themselves to anything. 
 It is not only in struggle between hostile parties, but even in the strugglewithin the socialist parties (as we found from experienceafter the Second Congress) that all promises go by the board,once the more or less substantial interests of the contendingparties are involved. 
 As the English saying goes—promises like pie-crust are leaven to be broken. 
 * *This phrase is in English in the original. 
— Ed. 
 What did Iskra ’s tactics with regard to the Duma boil down to? To the ideological and tactical disarmament of the revolutionaries . 
 The wiseacres of the opportunist Iskra worked for this disarmament by denouncing the idea of anactive boycott, substituting (fully in the spirit of Novoye Vremya , 114 and almost in the same terms) a passive boycott for an active, preaching confidence and trustfulness in theMilyukovs and Stakhoviches who now embrace each other, and replacing the revolutionary slogan of insurrection with Osvobozhdeniye ’s bourgeois twaddle, such as the “revolutionary self-government of citizens”. 
 It is only the blind who can still fail to see what a swamp Iskra has floundered into. 
 In the illegal press it is completely isolated, with only Osvobozhdeniye on its side. 
 The Bund, which even Martov and Axelrod will not suspect of any liking for the “ Vperyod arsenal”, has come out resolutely for an active boycott. 
 In the legal press all the scoundrels and allthe moderate liberals have united against the radicalbourgeois who have voiced sympathy with the boycott andare disposed towards the peasantry in a most friendly way. 
 Well, did Lenin tell any falsehood when, in analysing the new-Iskra resolutions, he said in his Two Tactics that “Iskra ” is descending to the level of the liberal landlords , while Proletary is endeavouring to raise the level of the revo-lutionary peasants? We have mentioned Novoye Vremya . 
 Both that reptile of an organ and Moskovskiye Vedomosti are waging a desperate struggle against the idea of a boycott, thereby revealing toall and sundry the Duma’s actual political significance. 
 Asa sample, here is a typical outburst by Novoye Vremya , which we shall dwell on the more readily as it is sheddingnew light on the abysmal bourgeois vileness displayed by even such a “respectable” liberal organ as Russkiye Vedomosti . 
 Mr. 
 Yollos, its well-known Berlin correspondent, deals with the Jena Congress in No. 
 247. 
 To begin with, his philis-tine soul rejoices at the fact that there has appeared sucha kind-hearted and fair-minded bourgeois liberal, the wealthyAbbe, who has made to the city of Jena the gift of a People’s House, in which all parties, including even the Social-Democrats, are free to meet. 
 And Mr. 
 Yollos draws the moral:“One can benefit the people outside definite party bounds too. 
” That, of course, is true. 
 But what are we to say of a writer, who, at a time of desperate party struggle in Russia, indulges in praise of non-partisanship? Doesn’t Mr. 
 Yollos really understand that this is a piece of the worst politicaltactlessness, since he is thereby playing into the hands ofNovoye Vremya ? The true meaning of this philistine delight in non-partisanship will, however, become apparent tothe reader from the following statement by Mr. 
 Yollos: “Needless to say there are political conditions under which it is useful for the time being to keep ultimate aims to oneself , and to bear in mind the immediate aims common tosocialism and to liberalism. 
” Now that is frank! Thank you, Mr. 
 Yollos, for at least being explicit! It remains for us, whenever addressing the workers, to make use of such declaration at all times and on all occasions to show up the bourgeois nature of Russian liberalism, and to make clear to the workers the needfor an independent party of the proletariat, one that is undeviatingly hostile to the bourgeoisie, even the mostliberal. 
 But all these tirades by our “democrat” are nothing com-pared with what is to come. 
 Mr. 
 Yollos does not confine him-self to advising the proletariat “to keep its ultimate aims toitself for the time being”, i. 
e. 
, renounce socialism. 
 No, he alsoadvises renouncing the idea of bringing the present politicalrevolution to its consummation. 
 Mr. 
 Yollos cites a speech by Bebel and plays up the passage in which Bebel expresses doubt as to whether we can succeed in transforming Russiainto a civilised state “so soon”, while at the same time declar-ing that the old autocratic regime will never return, and“the old Russia is no longer possible”. 
 Concerning this passageMr. 
 Yollos writes the following: “I do not consider Bebel an authority on Russian affairs, but I must observe that in this part of his speech he differs favourably from Kautskyand several other doctrinaires who recommend Revolution in Permanenz (uninterrupted revolution). 
 As a clever man and politician who realises what concrete forms a state of unin-terrupted anarchy assumes in the life of a nation, Bebel sees progress primarily in the promotion of cultural aims, and his words make it quite clear that he draws no line of demar-cation and certainly erects no barriers between the Russian intelligentsia and the Russian proletariat, at any rate before the elementary rights of man have been secured. 
” First of all this is a libel on Bebel , a libel fully in the style of Novoye Vremya . 
 Bebel always and unequivocally draws a “line of demarcation” between bourgeois and proletariandemocratism; Mr. 
 Yollos cannot be ignorant of that. 
 Bebeldistinguishes in no uncertain fashion between the bourgeoisintelligentsia and the Social-Democratic intelligentsia. 
 To assure the Russian reader that Bebel, while fighting for “culture”, ever hushes up the mendacity and treachery of thebourgeois democrats on the one hand, and the socialist aimsof the working class on the other, means slandering in thegrossest manner the leader of revolutionary Social-Democracyin Germany. 
 Secondly, it does not at all follow from Bebel’s speech that he regards the Russian revolution otherwise than Kautsky. 
The “favourable difference” in this respect between Bebeland Kautsky is a sheer fabrication by Mr. 
 Yollos, who hasextracted and distorted a single passage in Bebel’s speech,while maintaining silence about Bebel’s numerous declara-tions fully in favour of the Russian revolution and its decisive victory. 
 Thirdly—and for us this is the most interesting feature of the stand taken by Russkiye Vedomosti —Mr. 
 Yollos’s outburst shows that he is afraid of a decisive victory of the revo-lution in Russia. 
 Mr. 
 Yollos says that “uninterrupted revo-lution” is “uninterrupted anarchy”. 
 To say that means saying that revolution is sedition; to say that means becoming atraitor to the revolution . 
 And let not the Osvobozhdeniye diplomatists, who are so fond of asserting that they have noenemies on their left, try to tell us that this is only anaccidental slip on the part of Russkiye Vedomosti . 
 That is not true. 
 It is an expression of the most profound sentiments and the most deep-rooted interests of the liberal landlordand the liberal manufacturer. 
 It is the same thing as the state-ment made by Mr. 
 Vinogradov, who is calling for a struggleto prevent the Russian revolution from entering on thepath of 1789. 
 It is the same as the servility of Mr. 
 Trubetskoi, who told the tsar that he disapproved of sedition. 
 This is no slip. 
 It is the sole truthful statement in words on the count-less disgraceful deeds of our bourgeois democrats, who are /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR wearied of “uninterrupted anarchy”, are beginning to long for law and order , are already tired of “fighting” (even though they never did any fighting), and already recoil from revolu-tion at the mere sight of workers and peasants actuallyrising for actual battle, eager to strike blows, and notreceive them. 
 The bourgeois democrats are prepared towink at the misdeeds of the Trepovs and the slaughter ofunarmed people; they are not afraid of that, but of “anarchy” of a quite different kind, when power will no longer be wielded by Trepov or by Petrunkevich and Rodichev, and theuprising of the peasants and workers will be victorious . 
 The bourgeois democrats rally to the Duma idea so eagerly forthe very reason that they see in it an earnest of the betrayalof the revolution, an earnest of the prevention of the complete victory of the revolution—that terrible “uninterrupted anarchy”. 
 Novoye Vremya provides evidence of the fact that our analysis of the liberals’ psychology is a faithful one. 
 Thesedyed-in-the-wool lackeys of the Trepovs took immediate noteof Russkiye Vedomosti ’s baseness and hastened to heartily embrace their confrères . 
 It is precisely this lie of Mr. 
 Yollos’s about Bebel “differing favourably” from Kautsky that Novoye Vremya of September 13 (26) cites approvingly, remarking in its turn: “Thus, our radical ‘absentees’ will have to exclude Bebel too from the number of their allies. 
” This is a perfectly legitimate conclusion. 
 The professional Novoye Vremya traitors have correctly appraised the sum and substance of the “slip” made by Russkiye Vedomosti . 
 Moreover, Novoye Vremya , that past master of politics, at once drew a conclusion with regard to the Duma . 
 Although Mr. 
 Yollos did not say a word about Bebel’s views on the boycott, Novoye Vremya nevertheless labelled as “absentees” those in favour of the boycott. 
 Novoye Vremya supplemented the libel against Bebel with a libel against the “radicals”, expressing,however, the absolutely correct opinion that the “radicalabsentees’” tactics are governed by the idea of the completevictory of the revolution, the idea of uninterrupted revolu-tion, whereas the pro-Duma liberals are prompted by the fear of “uninterrupted anarchy”. 
 Novoye Vremya is right. 
 Trepov’s lackeys were fully justified in catching Mr. 
 Yollos in the act and telling him: If you do not want “uninterrupted anarchy” then it follows that you are my ally, and no democratic bombast will dissuade me of this. 
 Ours is a minor family quarrel—against the “doctrinaires”, the supporters of “unin-terrupted anarchy”, however, we shall be at one! Will Iskra fail to realise even now that in reproaching the boycott supporters with abstention, i. 
e. 
, absenteeism , it was talking after the Novoye Vremya fashion? Can it fail to realise that this concurrence of its slogans with those of Novoye Vremya proves that there is something fundamentally false in its stand? The replete European bourgeoisie lauds the moderation of the Russian bourgeoisie, which is craving for power. 
Trepov’s lackeys laud Mr. 
 Yollos of Russkiye Vedomosti f or censuring the idea of “uninterrupted anarchy”. 
 The Novoye Vremya and new-Iskra gentry scoff at “absenteeism”.... 
 Proletary , No. 
 20, Published according to October 10 (September 27), 1905 the text in Proletary THE LANDLORDS ON THE BOYCOTT OF THE DUMA The abridged minutes of the July Zemstvo Congress have been published in No. 
 76 of Osvobozhdeniye . 
 At present, when the question of the tactics towards the State Duma is in the limelight, this material is most noteworthy, for it isunique in showing just how the Zemstvo and Osvobozhdeniye people discussed the boycott issue. 
 Certainly no one doubtsthat prior to the conclusion of peace—the appearance of theDuma Act—they were, or tried to appear, more revolution-ary than they are at present. 
 Nevertheless, the nature of their arguments is most useful for a verification of our ownappraisal of the issue. 
 After all, this is probably the first casein Russian political history of concrete political stepsbeing discussed simultaneously by both opposition andrevolutionary parties. 
 It is quite natural that the bourgeois democrats were impelled to raise the boycott issue not by the generalprogramme of their struggle or by the interests of definiteclasses, but primarily by a vague feeling of embarrassment,of shame at the contradictory and false position they haveplaced themselves in. 
 “How can we take part in something we have ourselves condemned?” Mr. 
 Shishkov asked. 
 “Why, the people will think that we endorse the scheme. 
” As yousee, this liberal’s very first thought of the boycott is linkedwith the question of the people—he feels instinctively thatto go into the Duma means wronging the people. 
 He cannotget rid of gleams of good intentions to march with the people. 
 Mr. 
 Rayevsky, another speaker, puts the question on a more abstract plane: “We have always been steadfast in principle,but in tactics we are entering into a compromise. 
 It will turn out that we condemned the Bulygin scheme and yet are bent on becoming representatives of the people. 
 We shall not tread this slippery path. 
” This, of course, is a slight exaggeration on the part of Mr. 
 Rayevsky, for theOsvobozhdeniye League has never been steadfast in principle. 
 It is also incorrect to reduce the question to a bare repudi-ation of compromise: revolutionary Social-Democrats whohave absorbed the spirit of Marxism would have told this speaker that it is ridiculous to absolutely reject compro-mises that are imposed by life itself, and that this is notthe point at issue; what matters is a clear understanding andpersistent pursuit of the aims of the struggle under all cir-cumstances. 
 However, we repeat, any materialistic presen-tation of the problem is basically alien to a bourgeois democrat. 
 His doubts are merely a symptom of the deep split within the various strata of bourgeois democracy. 
 Mr. 
 Rodichev, the phrase-monger who spoke after Mr. 
 Rayevsky, settled the question very simply: “At one timewe protested against the new Zemstvo regulations, yet weentered the Zemstvos.... 
 If we had the forces with which to effect a boycott, we should declare one” (and is not this “lack of forces”, gentlemen, due to the fact that theinterests of the property-owners are hostile to an unyieldingstruggle against the autocracy, and hostile to the workersand peasants?).... 
 “The first rule of military art is to get awayin time...” (believe it or not, that is what this knight of liberalism from Tver actually said! And yet the liberals jeer at Kuropatkin). 
 “There will be a boycott if we, after enter-ing the Duma, make the following our first decision: ‘Weare leaving. 
 This is not a genuine representation, which youcan no longer do without. 
 Give us a real representation!’”That would be a real “boycott”. 
 (Why, of course! To say “give us”!—could anything be more “real” for a Zemstvo Balalaikin? 115 No wonder they laughed so heartily when Mr. 
 Golovin told them how “easily he had dispelled” theGovernor of Moscow’s apprehensions lest the ZemstvoCongress declare itself a constituent assembly. 
) Mr. 
 Kolyubakin said: “The preceding speakers put the question as follows: ‘Either go into the Bulygin Duma, or do nothing at all’” ( Iskra puts the question exactly like these “preceding speakers” of the monarchist bourgeoisie’s right wing). 
 “We must appeal to the people, who will be unani-mously opposed to the Bulygin Duma.... 
 Appeal to the people, exercise freedom of speech and of assembly in actual practice. 
 But by entering a disreputable institution you aredisgracing yourselves. 
 You will be in the minority there,and this minority will disgrace itself in the eyes of thepopulation. 
” In this speech one again senses the link betweenthe boycott idea and an appeal to the peasantry, the signifi-cance of that idea as a turn away from the tsar and towards the people. 
 And with admirable candour, Mr. 
 Shchepkinhastened to rejoin to Mr. 
 Kolyubakin’s speech, which heso thoroughly understood: “Never mind if we make a mistakein the eyes of the people, if only we save the cause” (... the cause of the bourgeoisie , would probably have been the work-ers’ interjection had they been present at this illustrious gathering). 
 “I do not dispute that we may soon have to treadthe revolutionary path. 
 But the draft drawn up by the Bu-reau” (the draft resolution against a boycott) “seeks to avoidthis, since we are not revolutionary either by upbringingor by inclination” (class upbringing, class inclination). 
 Mr. 
 Shchepkin argues wisely! Better than the whole new-Iskra lot taken together, he understands that the crux of the matter is not the choice of ways and means, but thedisparity of aims. 
 It is necessary to “save the cause” of lawand order—that is what really matters. 
 The revolutionarypath, which may lead to the victory of the workers and peasants, cannot be risked. 
 On the other hand, that magniloquent windbag Mr. 
 de Roberti talks exactly like a new-Iskra adherent: “What is to be done if, owing to its inefficacy, the draft becomeslaw? An armed uprising?” (Come, come, Mr. 
 Roberti, howcan one “link up an uprising with the Duma!”? What a pity you are not acquainted with our Bund, which would have explained to you that the two cannot be linked together. 
)“That, I believe, will undoubtedly come in due time. 
 But atpresent, resistance can either be merely passive, or passivewhile always ready to become active. 
” (Oh, what a charmingradical! He ought to borrow the slogan “revolutionary self-government” from the new-Iskra —what arias he could render on this theme, what arias!...) ... “to elect only thosewho would enter with the determination to effect a revolution at all costs”. 
 That’s the kind of people we are! Well, were we wrong when we said that Parvus met a friend in such an Osvobozhdeniye man, or that the new-Iskra had risen to the bait of the high-flown phrases of the magniloquent landedproprietors? Proletary , No. 
 20, Published according to October 10 (September 27), 1905 the text in Proletary ON THE QUESTION OF PARTY UNITY116 On our part, we can only welcome the perfectly clear and definite presentation of the question by the Central Commit-tee—either fusion with the Party on the basis of the deci-sions of the Third Congress, or a unity congress. 
 The Organ-ising Committee will have to make the final choice. 
 If itrejects entry into the Party on the basis of the decisions of theThird Congress, then the preparation and elaboration of theterms for a unity congress should be begun at once. 
 To thisend, both sides should first of all declare formally and quite explicitly that in principle the convening of two congresses at the same time and in the same place has been deemed neces-sary; secondly, it should likewise be formally establishedthat all organisations in each section of the Party must unre-servedly submit to decisions of the congress of their ownsection. 
 In other words, both congresses should be of binding and not merely advisory significance to their respective Party sections; thirdly, the basis on which the congresses areto be convened should be definitely established in advance,i. 
e. 
, what organisations are to send delegates and howmany delegates with the right to vote each may send (forthe section of the Party that has recognised the Third Congress, points 2 and 3 have already been defined in the Rules of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 as adopted by that congress); fourth-ly, negotiations should at once be started on the time andplace of the congress (the congresses themselves willdecide as to the terms on which they will fuse, and the timeof fusion); fifthly, it is extremely important that work should at once begin on drawing up a most explicit and detailed draft proposal on fusion, which should be submittedfor decision to both congresses. 
 This is a matter of imperative necessity. 
 The experience of other parties and of our own shows clearly that unless a draft proposal or draft proposals for fusion are prepared, published, and thoroughly discussed beforehand, it will be quite impossible for the congressesto come to a decision on so difficult a question. 
 So, it is now up to the Organising Committee, and its decision will be eagerly awaited by all who favour unity. 
 Proletary , No. 
 20, Published according to October 10 (September 27), 1905 the text in Proletary AN IRATE REPLY Our article, “The Theory of Spontaneous Generation” (Proletary , No. 
 16 *), has evoked an extremely irate reply from the Bund. 
 The latter even ran short of its own supplyof virulent words and borrowed some from Plekhanov, thatwell-known opponent of coarse polemics. 
 What is the trouble?Why is the Bund so incensed? It is so because we, on the one hand, mentioned the possibility of there being irony in the Bund’s praise for Iskra , and, on the other hand, ridiculed the Bund’s solidarity with Iskra on a number of questions. 
 It is such duplicity that the Bund imputes to us, accusingus of prestidigitation, etc. 
, while maintaining complete silence about all our analysis of the Bund’s indubitably unironical and just as indubitably incorrect arguments. 
 Why has the Bund maintained silence over this analysis of thecrux of a question it has itself raised? That is because thisanalysis reveals the duplicity in the stand of the Bund itself , which, on the one hand, has renounced Iskra ’s “Duma” tactics, and, on the other, has in dead earnest repeated a num-ber of Iskra ’s mistakes. 
 What the irate Bund puts down to our duplicity should in fact be put down to the duplicity of the Bund’s own stand on the question of whether our slogan should be the convocation of a constituent assembly by aprovisional revolutionary government, or by the tsar or bythe State Duma, or whether it should be the spontaneous generation of this constituent assembly. 
 We have shown that the Bund is all muddled on this issue . 
 Till this very moment the Bund has not provided a straight-forward answer. 
 And if the Bund is now railing because wehave held up a mirror to it, we can only answer by quotingthe saying: “It’s no use blaming the mirror if.... 
” Proletary , No. 
 20, Published according to October 10 (September 27), 1905 the text in Proletary *See pp. 
 246-51 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 A NEW MENSHEVIK CONFERENCE We are in receipt of hectographed copies of the resolu-tions passed by the “Southern Constituent [!?] Conference”of the Mensheviks. 
 117 The most important of these resolu-tions (on the State Duma) will be dealt with by us on some other occasion. 
 For the present we shall only note that ofthe two main points of Iskra ’s “Duma” tactics the Conference rejected “pressure for the election of resolute people tothe State Duma” (like Martov, Cherevanin, and Parvus), butaccepted “organisation of nation-wide popular elections to a constituent assembly”. 
 Three resolutions were adopted on the composition of Iskra ’s Editorial Board, yet the ques-tion was not settled. 
 One resolution asks Axelrod not to leavethe Editorial Board; another requests Plekhanov to returnto the Board (the Conference—probably without humorousintention—expressing “surprise” at Plekhanov’s resignation); the third thanks Iskra , expresses complete confidence in it, etc. 
, but refers the question of the composition of theEditorial Board to an “all-Russia constituent conferencefor final decision”. 
 The “First All-Russia Conference”, as isknown, “referred” this question for decision to the localorganisations. 
 The latter “refer” it to the decision of a constituent conference.... 
 This is probably what is called doing away with red tape and formalities.... 
 In the meantimeIskra continues calling itself the Central Organ, although even its own supporters have not conferred such a title onit. 
 A convenient position this, indeed! The organisational Rules of the Southern Conference are a copy of the Rules we are already familiar with, but contain some minor changes. 
 A new clause has been added: “Partycongresses, which must be convened as far as possible once a year, are the supreme organ of the Party. 
” We heartily welcome this amendment. 
 In connection with the new and excellent point that the “Central Committee shall be elected at the Congress”, and also with the excellent desire to havethe question of the Editorial Board decided at the Congress(be it even in the future), this amendment shows progresstowards the decisions of the Third Congress. 
 Let us hopethat in another four months the next “constituent” confer-ence will also set up the procedure for convening congresses, these supreme organs of the Party.... 
 On the question of unitythe Conference unfortunately beats about the bush, withoutgiving a clear reply to the question: “Do you want to uniteon the basis of the Third Congress? If not, do you want toprepare two congresses to assemble at the same time and in the same place?” Let us hope that the next “constituent” conference (preferably in something under four months !)will decide the matter. 
 Proletary , No. 
 20, Published according to October 10 (September 27), 1905 the text in Proletary REPRESENTATION OF THE R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 IN THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIALIST BUREAU “The Southern Constituent Conference” of the Menshe-viks has passed the following resolution on this question: “After acquainting itself with documents which show that Comrade Lenin, without taking any steps towardsreaching an agreement with the ‘Minority’ on the question ofR. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 representation in the International Bureau,has made this question an issue there between the two sections of the Party, and has laid stress on minor points of sectional differences, the Conference of Southern Organisa-tions expresses its profound regret on this score. 
 At the sametime it requests Comrade Plekhanov to continue representingour section of the Party in the International Bureau andurges all ‘Majority’ organisations immediately to give their opinion on this question, and for their part to authorise Comrade Plekhanov to act as such representative in theinterests of the unity which we are striving to attain, and topreserve with regard to all other socialist parties in allother countries the prestige of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, which isequally dear to all of us. 
” This resolution compels the undersigned to state the actual facts of the case: 1) The Mensheviks cannot but knowthat all agreements are contingent on the Central Committeelocated in Russia. 
 By deliberately referring to “ComradeLenin” alone, they are telling an untruth. 
 2) Immediatelyafter the Third Congress, two members of the Central Commit-tee in Russia applied to Plekhanov in person, expressing the wish that he act both as representative of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in the International Bureau and as editor of a theoretical organ. 
 Plekhanov refused. 
 The phrase “without ... any steps” is based on a departure from the truth. 
 3) When, after this refusal, Plekhanov resigned from the Iskra Editorial Board he declared in print (May 29), without writing to the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, that he would consent to represent only both sections of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, and likewise through the press asked those who recognise theThird Congress whether they agreed to this. 
 4) Proletary ’s Editorial Board immediately published Plekhanov’s state-ment (in No. 
 5 of June 26 [13]), adding that this questionhad been referred to the Central Committee for decision. 
5) Pending the Central Committee’s decision on this question,I got in touch with the International Bureau, on behalf ofthe Central Committee, in order to inform the International Bureau about the Third Congress, and to inform the Central Committee about the work of the International Bureau;at the same time I stated that the question of R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
representation on the International Bureau had not yet beensettled. 
 * In other words, the Central Committee maintained contacts with the International Bureau through its rep-resentative abroad, pending a decision on the question of a special representative on the Bureau. 
 6) When I plainlyand explicitly informed the International Bureau of theprovisional nature of my relations with it, I raised no ques-tion whatever of a “struggle” or “differences”, but confined myself exclusively to communicating the decisions of the Third Congress, which I was absolutely bound to do. 
 7) On June 16 Plekhanov sent a letter to the International Bureau in which he (a) erroneously asserted that he had already beenauthorised by both groups to act as their representativeand (b) set forth the history of the split from the time of theSecond Congress, telling this story with many digressions from the truth, wholly in the Menshevik spirit, and calling the convocation of the Third Congress by the Central Commit-tee “an utterly arbitrary act”, dubbing the conciliators inour Party “the Marsh”, and stating that “something like halfthe organisations ‘with full rights’” were represented at theCongress, which was a “combination of ultra-centralists and the Marsh”, etc. 
 *“A Letter to the International Socialist Bureau”, 1905. 
 See present edition, Vol. 
 8, p. 
 456. 
— Ed. 
 8) I refuted this letter of Plekhanov’s point by point in my letter of July 24, 1905 to the International Bureau. 
 * (I learned of Plekhanov’s letter only a month after it had been sent by him, when the International Bureau sent me acopy. 
) On the question of the “Marsh” I wrote in my letterto the following effect. 
 “It is true that there is a ‘Marsh’in our Party. 
 Its members were continually changing sidesduring the controversies within our Party. 
 The first of these turncoats was Plekhanov, who went over from the Majority to the Minority in November 1903, only to leave the Minorityon May 29 of this year, when he resigned from Iskra ’s Edi-torial Board. 
 We do not approve of changing sides like that,but think we cannot be blamed if, after much vacillation,irresolute people who were members of the ‘Marsh’, are inclined to follow us. 
” Dealing with the state of affairs after the split, I referred, in the same letter, to the necessity ofproviding the International Bureau with “a completetranslation of all resolutions of the Conference”. 
 “If Iskra refuses to send the translation to the Bureau,” I added, “we areprepared to do so ourselves. 
” Let the readers now judge for themselves whether Ple-khanov’s behaviour is anything like impartial, and whetherthe statement of the facts by the new conference bears anyrelation to the truth. 
 Who is to blame for undermining theprestige of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
? For taking the initiative inacquainting the International Bureau with the history of the split after the Second Congress? For stressing “sectional differences”?? N. 
 Lenin P. 
 S. 
 To satisfy the Southern Conference’s desire to learn the opinion of the Majority organisations, we are publishing elsewhere in this issue the resolution of the Kostroma Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, 118 forwarded to us in August 1905. 
 The Editors have not received any other resolutionson this question. 
 Proletary , No. 
 20, Published according to October 10 (September 27), 1905 the text in Proletary *See pp. 
 142-45 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 TALKS WITH OUR READERS119 From the Editors . 
 We are publishing excerpts from a letter written by a comrade who is a member of one of our Partycommittees. 
 This comrade is one of the few that not only write to the Central Organ, but speak of their understanding of tactics and of the way they apply this tactics. 
 Without such talks, not intended specially for publication, it isimpossible to work out uniform Party tactics in common. 
Without such an exchange of opinions with those engaged inpractical work, the editorial board of a paper brought out abroad will never be the real mouthpiece of the whole Party. 
 That is why we are publishing an opinion expressed by acomrade who is familiar with a small part of the mostrecent literature, because we wish to encourage the largestpossible number of practical workers to talk to us andexchange opinions on all Party problems. 
 Proletary , No. 
 20, Published according to October 10 (September 27), 1905 the text in Proletary DAYS OF BLOODSHED IN MOSCOW120 Geneva, October 10 (September 27), 1905 A new outbreak of the workers’ insurrection—a mass strike and street fighting in Moscow. 
 On January 9 the first peal of revolutionary action by the proletariat thun-dered forth in the capital. 
 The rumbling of this thunderclapreverberated throughout Russia, and with unparalleledrapidity roused over a million proletarians to titanic battle. 
St. 
 Petersburg was followed by the outlying regions, where oppression of local nationalities had rendered the already insufferable political yoke still more intolerable. 
 Riga, Poland,Odessa, the Caucasus—all in turn became centres ofinsurrection which spread and gained in intensity with everymonth, with every week. 
 It has now reached the centre ofRussia, the heart of the “true Russian” regions, whose sta-bility had longest been movingly eulogised by the reaction-aries. 
 A number of circumstances explain this relativestability, i. 
e. 
, backwardness, in the Russian central regions. 
These are: the less developed forms of big industry whichinvolves masses of workers but is less divorced from the landand has in less measure concentrated proletarians in intellectual centres; the greater distances from foreign countries; the absence of national discord. 
 The labour move-ment, which manifested itself with such great force in thisregion as far back as 1885-86, seemed to have died down fora long time, and the obstacles presented by the particularlydifficult local conditions of work frustrated the efforts of the Social-Democrats scores of times. 
 But at last things began to move in the central areas too. 
 The Ivanovo-Voznesensk strike 121 has revealed an unex-pectedly high degree of political maturity in the workers. 
 Ever since this strike the entire central industrial region has been in a state of unrest, which has been steadily develop-ing, gaining in intensity and sweep. 
 This unrest has nowbegun to manifest itself openly in the form of an uprising. 
Without any doubt the outbreak was intensified by therevolutionary students in Moscow, who have just passed aresolution, quite analogous to the St. 
 Petersburg resolution, branding the State Duma, calling for a struggle on behalf of a republic and for the establishment of a provisional revo-lutionary government. 
 The “liberal” professors, who had justselected a most liberal rector, the notorious Mr. 
 Trubetskoi,closed the University under the pressure of police threats;as they themselves said, they were afraid of a repetition of the Tiflis shambles 122 within the University walls. 
 They thereby merely precipitated bloodshed in the streets,outside the University. 
 As far as we can judge from the brief telegrams in the foreign press, the course of events in Moscow was the“customary” one, which has, so to speak, become the regular thing ever since January 9. 
 It began with a compositors’ strike, which spread rapidly. 
 On Saturday, September 24(October 7), the printing-shops, electric trams, and tobaccofactories were already at a standstill. 
 No newspapers appea-red, and a general strike of factory and railway workers wasexpected. 
 In the evening big demonstrations were held, attended, besides the compositors, by workers of other trades, students, and so on. 
 The Cossacks and gendarmes dispersedthe demonstrators time and again, but they kept reassem-bling. 
 Many policemen were injured; the demonstrators usedstones and revolvers; an officer in command of the gen-darmes was severely injured. 
 One Cossack officer and one gendarme were killed, and so on. 
 On Saturday the bakers joined the strike. 
On Sunday, September 25 (October 8), events at once took an ominous turn. 
 From 11 a. 
 m. 
 workers began to assem-ble in the streets—especially on Strastnoi Boulevard andelsewhere. 
 The crowd sang the Marseillaise . 
 Printing-shops which refused to go on strike were wrecked. 
 It was only after overcoming stubborn resistance that the Cossacksmanaged to disperse the demonstrators. 
 A crowd of about 400, consisting chiefly of bakery apprentices assembled in front of Filippov’s shop, near the Governor General’s residence. 
 The crowd was attacked by Cossacks. 
 The workers made their way into houses, climbedon to roofs, and showered the Cossacks with stones. 
 TheCossacks opened fire at the roofs and, unable to dislodge theworkers, resorted to a regular siege. 
 One house was surround-ed. 
 A detachment of police and two companies of grena-diers made a flank movement, penetrated into the house from the rear and finally occupied the roof too. 
 One hundred andninety-two apprentices were arrested. 
 Eight of them wereinjured and two workers were killed (we repeat that theseare all telegraphic reports in the foreign press, of course, farfrom complete and providing only an approximate idea of the scale of the fighting). 
 A reputable Belgian newspaper has published a report that janitors were busy cleaning thestreets of traces of blood. 
 This minor detail, it says, testi-fies to the seriousness of the struggle more than lengthyreports can. 
 St. 
 Petersburg papers seem to have been allowed to write about the massacre in Tverskaya Street. 
 However, on the very next day the censor became frightened of pub-licity, so that official reports as of Monday, September 26(October 9) stated that there had been no serious disturb-ances in Moscow. 
 A different story was contained in telephonemessages reaching St. 
 Petersburg newspapers. 
 It appears that the crowd reassembled near the Governor General’s house, where sharp clashes took place. 
 The Cossacks openedfire several times. 
 As they dismounted to fire, their horsestrampled on many people. 
 In the evening crowds of workersthronged the boulevards, shouting revolutionary slogansand holding red banners aloft. 
 The crowd wrecked bakers’ and gunsmiths’ shops. 
 They were finally dispersed by the police. 
 Many were injured. 
 A company of soldiers arestanding guard at the Central Telegraph office. 
 The bakers’strike has become general. 
 Unrest among the students isstill mounting, their assemblies growing ever larger andmore revolutionary. 
 The St. 
 Petersburg correspondent of The Times reports that leaflets with a call to fight have been circulated in St. 
 Petersburg, that unrest is rife amongthe bakers there, that a demonstration has been fixed for Saturday, October 1 (14), and that the public are greatly alarmed. 
 Meagre as this information is, it nevertheless leads us to the conclusion that the insurrectionary outbreak inMoscow is not a relatively high stage of the movement, com-pared with the others. 
 No previously trained and well-armedrevolutionary contingents were in evidence; no section ofthe troops went over to the side of the people, nor was wide use made of bombs, the “new” type of popular armament (which created such panic among the Cossacks and soldiersin Tiflis on September 26 [October 9]). 
 In the absence ofany of these conditions, it was impossible to count either onthe arming of a large number of workers, or on the victoryof the uprising. 
 As we have already pointed out, the Mos-cow events are of moment for quite a different reason: they mark the baptism of fire of a big centre, the involvementof an enormous industrial region in a serious struggle. 
 The uprising in Russia does not and cannot, of course, advance at an even and regular rate. 
 The outstanding fea-ture of the St. 
 Petersburg events of January 9 was the rapid and unanimous movement of huge masses, unarmed and not out for battle, who nevertheless received a great lesson inthe struggle. 
 In Poland and in the Caucasus the movementis characterised by great stubbornness and the relativelymore frequent use of arms and bombs by the population. 
The events in Odessa were distinguished by the fact that part of the troops went over to the rebels. 
 In all cases and at all times, the movement has been essentially proletarian,inseparably merged with the mass strike. 
 In Moscow themovement proceeded along the same lines, as was thecase in a number of other and smaller industrial centres. 
 The question which naturally arises now is: will the revolutionary movement stop at the stage of development it has already reached, a stage which has become “customary”and familiar, or will it advance to a higher level? If weventure into the field of appraisal of such intricate andincalculable events as those of the Russian revolution, weshall inevitably arrive at the conclusion that the second alternative is infinitely the more probable. 
 True, even the present form of struggle, already rehearsed if we may usesuch an expression—guerilla warfare, constant strikes, wearing down the enemy in street fighting, now in this part of the country, now in another—this form of struggle has also yielded and continues to yield very important results. 
 No state is able to withstand à la longue * a stubborn struggle of this sort, which brings industrial life to a standstill,introduces utter demoralisation into the bureaucracy and thearmy, and spreads dissatisfaction with the existing state ofaffairs among all sections of the people. 
 Still less is the Russian autocratic government capable of enduring such a struggle. 
 We may be quite confident that a persistentcontinuation of the struggle, even in forms that have alreadybeen created by the working-class movement, will inevitablybring about the collapse of tsarism. 
 However, it is highly improbable that the revolutionary movement in present-day Russia will halt at the stage it has already reached. 
 On the contrary, all the facts indicaterather that this is only an initial stage in the struggle. 
 Farfrom all the consequences of the shameful and ruinouswar have as yet been felt by the people. 
 The economic crisisin the cities and famine in the villages are exacerbating pub-lic feeling. 
 Judging by available information, the Manchu-rian army is in an extremely revolutionary temper, and thegovernment is afraid to bring it back—yet it is impossiblenot to bring it back in view of the danger of new and evenmore serious uprisings. 
 Never before has political agitationamong the workers and peasants in Russia been so wide-spread, so methodical, or so far-reaching. 
 The State Duma farce inevitably entails fresh defeats for the government,and fresh ill-will in the population. 
 Within the last tenmonths or so, the insurrection has grown tremendouslybefore our very eyes, and the conclusion that the uprisingwill soon reach a new and higher stage, wherein fighting detachments of revolutionaries or of mutinous military units will come to the assistance of the multitude, helping themasses to procure arms, and introducing the greatest vacil-lation into the ranks of the “tsarist” (still tsarist, but alreadyfar from wholly tsarist) troops, wherein the uprising willlead to an important victory which tsarism will be unable to recover from—this conclusion is not a figment of the *For a long time. 
— Ed. 
 imagination or a piece of wishful thinking, but one that stems directly and necessarily from the facts of the mass struggle. 
 The tsar’s troops were victorious over the workers in Moscow. 
 This victory has not enfeebled the vanquished,but has only welded them more closely together, deepenedtheir hatred, and brought them closer to the practical tasks ofa serious struggle. 
 It is one of those victories that cannot failto introduce vacillation in the ranks of the victors. 
 Only now are the troops beginning to learn, and to learn not only by looking up laws but from their own experience, thatthey are being mobilised wholly and exclusively to fight the“enemy at home”. 
 The war with Japan is over, but mobili-sation continues, mobilisation against the revolution . 
 Such mobilisation holds no terrors for us, nor do we hesitate to welcome it, for the greater the number of soldiers called upon to wage a systematic struggle against the people, themore rapidly will the political and revolutionary educationof these soldiers proceed. 
 By mobilising ever new militaryunits to wage war on the revolution, tsarism is delaying theissue, but such delay is of the greatest advantage to us, for in such protracted guerilla warfare the proletarians will learn how to fight, while the army will inevitably be drawninto political life, and the call of that life, the militant callof young Russia, is penetrating even the tightly lockeddoors of the army barracks, is awakening even the mostignorant, the most backward, and the most cowed. 
 An insurrectionary outbreak has once more been sup-pressed. 
 Once more we say: Hail the insurrection! First published in 1926 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany V the manuscript THE BOURGEOISIE AWAKENED ITS SLUMBER SUBJECT FOR AN ARTICLE Imagine a small number of people fighting against a crying and hideous evil, of which the masses of sleeping people are unaware or to which they are indifferent. 
 What should the fighters do first? 1) awaken as many of the sleepersas possible; 2) enlighten them as to the aims of their struggle,and its conditions; 3) organise them into a force capableof achieving victory; 4) teach them to make the proper useof the fruits of their victory. 
 Naturally, point 1 must precede points 2 to 4, which are impossible without 1. 
 And so we have a small number of people waking every-body, shaking up one and all . 
 Owing to the course taken by events, their efforts have been crowned with success. 
 The masses have been awakened. 
 Now it seems that a section of those who have been awakened is interested in preserving the evil, and intends either consciously to uphold it or else to preserve such of its featuresor parts as are of advantage to the given groups of theawakened. 
 Is it not natural, then, that the fighters, the heralds of battle, the awakeners, the bell-ringers of the revolution, should turn against these awakened ones, whom they them-selves have roused? Is it not natural that the fighters should then no longer waste their energies on stirring up “one and all”, but rather transfer the main attention to those whohave proved capable 1) of awakening—in the first place; 2) of assimilating the ideas of consistent struggle—in the second place; 3) of fighting in earnest and to the end—in the thirdplace? Such has been the Russian Social-Democrats’ attitude to the liberals in 1900-02 (they did the rousing), in 1902-04 (they drew distinctions among the awakened), and in 1905 (they fought against the awakened ... traitors). 
 Written late in September 1905 First published in 1926 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany V the manuscript TO THE COMBAT COMMITTEE OF THE ST. 
 PETERSBURG COMMITTEE October 16, 1905 Dear Comrades, Many thanks for sending 1) the report of the Combat Com-mittee and 2) a memorandum on the organisation of prepa-rations for insurrection $3) a scheme of the organisation. 
 After reading these documents, I think it my duty to writedirectly to the Combat Committee for a comradely exchange of opinions. 
 I need hardly say that I do not undertake to judge of the practical side of the matter; there can be no doubtthat everything possible is being done under the difficultconditions in Russia. 
 However, judging by the documents,the whole thing threatens to degenerate into officeroutine. 
 All these schemes, all these plans of organisation of the Combat Committee create the impression of red tape— forgive me my frankness, but I hope that you will notsuspect me of fault-finding. 
 Schemes, and disputes and discus-sions about the functions of the Combat Committee and itsrights, are of the least value in a matter like this. 
 What isneeded is furious energy, and again energy. 
 It horrifies me— I give you my word—it horrifies me to find that there has been talk about bombs for over six months , yet not one has been made! And it is the most learned of people who are doingthe talking.... 
 Go to the youth, gentlemen! That is the onlyremedy! Otherwise—I give you my word for it—you will betoo late (everything tells me that), and will be left with “learned” memoranda, plans, charts, schemes, and magnificent recipes, but without an organisation, without a living cause. 
Go to the youth. 
 Form fighting squads at once everywhere, among the students, and especially among the workers , etc. 
, etc. 
 Let groups be at once organised of three, ten, thirty, etc. 
, persons. 
 Let them arm themselves at once as best they can, be it with a revolver, a knife, a rag soaked inkerosene for starting fires, etc. 
 Let these detachments atonce select leaders, and as far as possible contact the Combat Committee of the St. 
 Petersburg Committee. 
 Do not demandany formalities, and, for heaven’s sake, forget all these schemes, and send all “functions, rights, and privileges” to the devil. 
 Do not make membership in the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
an absolute condition—that would be an absurd demand foran armed uprising. 
 Do not refuse to contact any group, evenif it consists of only three persons; make it the one solecondition that it should be reliable as far as police spying is concerned and prepared to fight the tsar’s troops. 
 Let the groups join the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 or associate themselves with the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 if they want to; that would be splendid. 
But I would consider it quite wrong to insist on it. 
 The role of the Combat Committee of the St. 
 Petersburg Committee should be to help these contingents of the revo-lutionary army, to serve as a “bureau” for contact purposes, etc. 
 Any contingent will willingly accept your services , but if in such a matter you begin with schemes and with talk about the “rights” of the Combat Committee, you will ruinthe whole cause; I assure you, you will ruin it irreparably. 
 You must proceed to propaganda on a wide scale. 
 Let five or ten people make the round of hundreds of workers’ and students’ study circles in a week, penetrate whereverthey can, and everywhere propose a clear, brief, direct, andsimple plan: organise combat groups immediately, armyourselves as best you can, and work with all your might;we will help you in every way we can, but do not wait for our help ; act for yourselves. 
 The principal thing in a matter like this is the initiative of the mass of small groups. 
 They will do everything. 
 With-out them your entire Combat Committee is nothing. 
 I amprepared to gauge the efficiency of the Combat Committee’swork by the number of such combat groups it is in contact with. 
 If in a month or two the Combat Committee does not have a minimum of 200 or 300 groups in St. 
 Petersburg,then it is a dead Combat Committee. 
 It will have to be /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR buried. 
 If it cannot muster a hundred or two of groups in seeth-ing times like these, then it is indeed remote from real life. 
 The propagandists must supply each group with brief and simple recipes for making bombs, give them an elementa-ry explanation of the type of the work, and then leave itall to them. 
 Squads must at once begin military training by launching operations immediately, at once. 
 Some mayat once undertake to kill a spy or blow up a police station, others to raid a bank to confiscate funds for the insurrection, others again may drill or prepare plans of localities, etc. 
 Butthe essential thing is to begin at once to learn from actualpractice: have no fear of these trial attacks. 
 They may, ofcourse, degenerate into extremes, but that is an evil of themorrow, whereas the evil today is our inertness, our doctri-naire spirit, our learned immobility, and our senile fear of initiative. 
 Let every group learn, if it is only by beatingup policemen: a score or so victims will be more thancompensated for by the fact that this will train hundreds ofexperienced fighters, who tomorrow will be leading hundredsof thousands. 
 I send you warm greetings, comrades, and wish you success. 
 I have no desire to impose my views on you, but Iconsider it my duty to tender my word of advice . 
 Yours, Lenin First published in 1926 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany V the manuscript THE POLITICAL STRIKE AND THE STREET FIGHTING IN MOSCOW The revolutionary events in Moscow have been the first flashes of lightning in a thunderstorm and they have lit up a new field of battle. 
 The promulgation of the State Duma Act and the conclusion of peace have marked the beginning ofa new period in the history of the Russian revolution. 
 Alreadyweary of the workers’ persistent struggle and disturbedby the spectre of “uninterrupted revolution”, the liberalbourgeoisie has heaved a sigh of relief and joyously caught at the sop thrown to it. 
 All along the line a struggle has begun against the idea of a boycott, and liberalism has turnedopenly towards the right. 
 Unfortunately, even among theSocial-Democrats (in the new-Iskra camp) there are unstable people who are prepared on certain terms to supportthese bourgeois traitors to the revolution, and to take the State Duma “seriously”. 
 The events in Moscow, it may be hoped, will put the sceptics to shame, and will help the doubters tomake a proper appraisal of the state of affairs on the newfield of battle. 
 Anaemic intellectuals’ dreams of the possibil-ity of popular elections under the autocracy, as well as illu-sions harboured by dull-witted liberals regarding the State Duma’s crucial importance, vanished into thin air at the very first major revolutionary action by the proletariat. 
 Our information on the Moscow events is as yet (October 12, N. 
 S. 
) very meagre. 
 It is confined to brief and oftencontradictory reports in foreign newspapers, and to censor-screened accounts of the beginning of the movement, published in the legal press. 
 One thing is certain: in its initial stage the Moscow workers’ struggle proceeded along lines that havebecome customary during the past revolutionary year. 
 The working-class movement has left its imprint on the entire Russian revolution. 
 Starting with sporadic strikes it rapidly developed into mass strikes, on the one hand, and into street demonstrations, on the other. 
 In 1905 the political strikehas become an established form of the movement, developingbefore our eyes into insurrection. 
 Whereas it took theentire working-class movement of Russia ten years to reachits present (and of course far from final) stage, the move-ment in certain parts of the country has progressed in a few days from a mere strike to a tremendous revolutionaryoutbreak. 
 The compositors’ strike in Moscow, we are informed, was started by politically backward workers. 
 But the movementimmediately slipped out of their control, and became a broad trade union movement. 
 Workers of other trades joined in. 
 Street demonstrations by workers, inevitable if only forthe purpose of letting uninformed fellow-workers learn ofthe strike, turned into political demonstrations, withrevolutionary songs and speeches. 
 Long suppressed bitter-ness against the vile farce of “popular” elections to the State Duma came to the surface. 
 The mass strike developed into a mass mobilisation of fighters for genuine liberty. 
 The rad-ical students appeared on the scene, who in Moscow passeda resolution absolutely analogous to that of the St. 
 Petersburgstudents. 
 In the language of free citizens, not of cringingofficials, this resolution very properly branded the State Duma as brazen mockery of the people, and called for a struggle for a republic, for the convocation of a genuinelypopular and genuinely constituent assembly by a revolution-ary provisional government. 
 The proletariat and progressivesections of the revolutionary democrats began streetfighting against the tsarist army and police. 
 This is how the movement developed in Moscow. 
 On Saturday, September 24 (October 7), the compositors were nolonger alone—the tobacco factories and electric trams werealso at a standstill, and a bakers’ strike had begun. 
 In theevening big demonstrations were held, attended, besidesworkers and students, by very many “outsiders” (revolution-ary workers and radical students no longer regarded each other as outsiders at open actions by the people). 
 The Cossacksand gendarmes did their utmost to disperse the demonstra-tors, who kept reassembling. 
 The crowd offered resistance to the police and the Cossacks; revolver shots were fired and many policemen were wounded. 
 On Sunday, September 25 (October 8), events at once took a formidable turn. 
 At 11 a. 
 m. 
 workers began toassemble in the streets, with the crowd singing theMarseillaise . 
 Revolutionary mass meetings were held, and printing-shops whose staff refused to strike were wrecked. 
 Bakeries and gunsmiths’ shops were attacked, for the workers needed bread to live and arms to fight for freedom (just asthe French revolutionary song has it). 
 It was only after stub-born resistance that the Cossacks managed to disperse thedemonstrators. 
 There was a regular battle in TverskayaStreet, near the Governor General’s house. 
 In front of the Filippov bakery a crowd of bakers’ apprentices assembled. 
 As the management of the bakery subsequently declared,they were going out peacefully into the street, after stoppingwork in solidarity with the other strikers. 
 A Cossackdetachment attacked the crowd, who made their way intoa house, climbed on to the roof and into the garrets, and showered the soldiers with stones. 
 There began a regular siege of the house, with the troops firing on the workers. 
All communication was cut. 
 Two companies of grenadiersmade a flank movement, penetrated into the house fromthe rear, and captured the enemy’s stronghold. 
 One hundredand ninety-two apprentices were arrested, of whom eight were injured; two workers were killed. 
 There were injured among the police and the troops, a captain of gendarmessustaining fatal injuries. 
 Naturally, this information is extremely incomplete. 
 According to private telegrams, quoted in some foreignnewspapers, the brutality of the Cossacks and soldiers knew no bounds. 
 The Filippov bakery management has protested against the unprovoked outrages perpetrated by the troops. 
A reputable Belgian newspaper has published a report thatjanitors were busy cleaning the streets of traces of blood. 
This minor detail—it says—testifies to the seriousness ofthe struggle more than lengthy reports can. 
 On the basis of information from private sources that has found its way into the press, Vorwärts 123 has stated that in Tverskaya Street 10,000 strikers clashed with an infantry battalion, which fired several volleys. 
 The ambulance service had its hands full. 
 It is estimated that no less than 50 people were killed and as many as 600 injured. 
 The arrested are reported to have been taken to army barracks, where they were merci-lessly and brutally manhandled, being made to run thegauntlet. 
 It is further reported that during the street fightingthe officers distinguished themselves by their inhumanbrutality, even towards women (a St. 
 Petersburg cable from the special correspondent of the conservative bourgeois Temps , dated October 10 [September 27]). 
 Information on the events of the subsequent days is more and more scanty. 
 The workers’ wrath mounted frightfully,the movement gathering momentum. 
 The government tookall measures to ban or slash all reports. 
 Foreign newspapers have openly written of the contradiction between the reas-suring news from the official agencies (which at one timewere believed) and the news transmitted to St. 
 Petersburgby telephone. 
 Gaston Leroux wired to the Paris Matin t ha t the censorship was performing prodigies by way of preventingthe spread of news that might be in the least alarming. 
 Monday, September 26 (October 9), he wrote, was one of the most sanguinary days in the history of Russia. 
 There wasfighting in all the main streets and even near the GovernorGeneral’s residence. 
 The demonstrators unfurled a red flag. 
Many were killed or injured. 
 The reports in other papers are contradictory. 
 Only one thing is certain—the strike is spreading and has been joined by most workers employed at the big factories, and evenin the light industries. 
 The railwaymen too have stoppedwork. 
 The strike is becoming general. 
 (Tuesday, October 10[September 27], and Wednesday. 
) The situation is extremely grave. 
 The movement is spreading to St. 
 Petersburg: the workers of the San-Galli Works have already downed tools. 
 This is as far as our information goes to date. 
 Any com-plete appraisal of the Moscow events on the strength of suchinformation is, of course, out of the question. 
 One still cannotsay whether these events are a full-scale rehearsal for a deci-sive proletarian onslaught on the autocracy, or whether they are actually the beginning of this onslaught; whether theyare only an extension of the “usual” methods of struggle described above to a new area of Central Russia, or whether they are destined to mark the beginning of a higher form of struggle and of a more decisive uprising. 
 To all appearances, the answer to these questions will be forthcoming in the near future. 
 One thing is certain:before our very eyes, the insurrection is spreading, the struggleis becoming ever more widespread, and its forms ever moreacute. 
 All over Russia the proletariat is pressing onward with heroic efforts, indicating now here, now there, in what direction the armed uprising can and, undoubtedly, willdevelop. 
 True, even the present form of struggle, alreadycreated by the movement of the working masses, is dealingvery telling blows at tsarism. 
 The civil war has assumed theform of desperately stubborn and universal guerilla warfare. 
 The working class is giving the enemy no respite, disrupting industrial life, constantly bringing the entire machineryof local government to a standstill, creating a state of alarmall over the country, and is mobilising ever new forces forthe struggle. 
 No state is able to hold out for long againstsuch an onslaught, least of all the utterly corrupt tsarist government, from which its supporters are falling away one by one. 
 And if the liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie finds thestruggle at times too persistent, if it is terrified by the civilwar and by the alarming state of uncertainty which hasgripped the country, the continuation of this state of affairs andthe prolongation of the struggle is a matter of the utmost necessity to the revolutionary proletariat. 
 If, among ideol-ogists of the bourgeoisie, people are beginning to appearwho are set on smothering the revolutionary conflagrationwith their sermons on peaceful and law-abiding progress,and are concerned with blunting the political crisis insteadof making it more acute, the class-conscious proletariat, which has never doubted the treacherous nature of the bourgeois love of freedom, will march straight ahead, rousingthe peasantry to follow it, and causing disaffection in thetsar’s army. 
 The workers’ persistent struggle, the constantstrikes and demonstrations, the partial uprisings—all these,so to say, test battles and clashes are inexorably drawing the army into political life and consequently into the sphere of revolutionary problems. 
 Experience in the struggle enlightensmore rapidly and more profoundly than years of propaganda under other circumstances. 
 The foreign war is over, but the government is obviously afraid of the return home of war prisoners and of the army in Manchuria. 
 Reports of the revolutionary temper of the latter are coming in thick andfast. 
 The proposed agricultural colonies in Siberia for officersand men of the army in Manchuria cannot but increasethe unrest, even if these plans remain on paper. 
 Mobilisa-tion has not ceased, though peace has been concluded. 
 It is becoming increasingly obvious that the army is needed wholly and exclusively against the revolution . 
 Under such circumstances, we revolutionaries do not in the least objectto the mobilisation; we are even prepared to welcomeit. 
 In delaying the denouement by involving ever more armyunits in the struggle, and in getting more and more troops used to civil war, the government is not doing away with the source of all crises, but, on the contrary, is extendingthe field for them. 
 It is winning some respite at the price ofthe inevitable extension of the field of battle and of render-ing the struggle more acute. 
 It is stirring to action the mostbackward people, the most ignorant, the most cowed, and the politically inert—and the struggle will enlighten, rouse, and enliven these people. 
 The longer the present state ofcivil war lasts, the more inevitably will large numbers ofneutrals and a nucleus of champions of revolution be drawnfrom the ranks of the army of counter-revolution. 
 The entire course of the Russian revolution during the last few months shows that the stage now reached is not, and cannot be, the peak stage. 
 The movement is still on theupgrade, as it has been ever since January 9. 
 It was thenthat for the first time we saw a movement that amazed theworld with the unanimity and solidarity of the huge massesof workers who had risen to advance political demands. 
 This movement was still quite devoid of revolutionary con-sciousness, and helpless as regards arms and military prepar-edness. 
 Poland and the Caucasus have provided an exampleof struggle on a higher plane; there the proletariat has partlybegun to fight with weapons, and hostilities have assumed aprotracted form. 
 The Odessa uprising was marked by a new and important factor needed for victory—part of the forces went over to the side of the people. 
 It is true that this did notbring immediate success; the difficult task of “co-ordinating operations of land and sea forces” (a most difficult task even for a regular army) had not yet been accomplished. 
 But the problem was posed, and by all tokens the Odessa events will not remain an isolated incident. 
 The Moscow strike showsus the spread of the struggle to a “genuinely Russian” region,whose reliability had so long delighted the hearts of thereactionaries. 
 The revolutionary action that has started inthis region is of enormous significance even if only for the fact that proletarian masses here, who are receiving their baptism of fire, have been most inert and at the same time areconcentrated in a relatively small area in numbers unequalledin any other part of Russia. 
 The movement started inSt. 
 Petersburg, spread through all the marginal regions ofRussia, and mobilised Riga, Poland, Odessa, and the Caucasus; the conflagration has now spread to the very heart of Russia. 
 The disgraceful farce of the State Duma appears all the more contemptible in comparison with this genuinelyrevolutionary action by a class ready for battle and trulyprogressive. 
 The union of the proletariat and revolutionary democracy, which we have spoken of on more than one occa-sion, is becoming a fact. 
 The radical students, who both inSt. 
 Petersburg and in Moscow adopted the slogans of revolu-tionary Social-Democracy, are the vanguard of all the demo-cratic forces. 
 Loathing the baseness of the “Constitutional-Democratic” reformists who have accepted the State Duma, these forces gravitate towards a real and decisive struggle against the accursed enemy of the Russian people ratherthan towards a policy of bargaining with the autocracy. 
 Look at the liberal professors, rectors, vice-rectors, and the entire company of Trubetskois, Manuilovs, and theirlike. 
 These people are the finest representatives of liber-alism and the Constitutional-Democratic Party, the most enlightened, the best educated, the most disinterested, theleast affected by the direct pressure and the influence of themoney-bag. 
 And how do these best people behave? Whatuse did they make of the first authority they obtained,authority they were invested with by election, their author-ity over the universities? They are already afraid of the revolution, they fear the aggravation and the extension ofthe movement, they are already trying to extinguish the fire and bring about tranquillity, thereby earning well-merited insults in the form of praise from the Princes Mesh-chersky. 
 And they were well punished, these philistines of bour-geois science. 
 They closed Moscow University, fearing ashambles on its premises. 
 They merely succeeded in precip-itating incomparably greater slaughter in the streets. 
 Theywanted to extinguish revolution in the University, but they only kindled it in the streets. 
 They got into a quandary, along with the Trepovs and the Romanovs, whom they nowhasten to persuade that freedom of assembly is needed:If you shut the University—you open the way for streetfighting. 
 If you open the University—you provide a plat-form for revolutionary mass meetings which will train new and even more determined champions of liberty. 
 How infinitely instructive is the instance of these liberal professors for an appraisal of our State Duma! Is it notclear now, from the experience of the universities, that theliberals and the Constitutional-Democrats will tremble forthe “fate of the Duma” just as much as these miserable knights of cheap-jack science tremble for the “fate of the universi-ties”? Is it not now clear that the liberals and the Constitu-tional-Democrats cannot use the Duma in any other waysave the purpose of still more extensive and still more evil-smelling preaching of peaceful and law-abiding progress?Is it not clear now how ridiculous are the hopes of trans-forming the Duma into a revolutionary assembly? Is it not clear that there is only one method of “influencing”—not specifically the Duma or specifically the universities but thewhole of the old autocratic regime—the method of the Moscow workers , the method of insurrection by the people? It is this alone that will not merely force the Manuilovs in the univer-sities to ask for freedom of assembly, and the Petrunke-viches in the Duma to ask for liberty for the people, but willwin genuine liberty for the people. 
 The Moscow events have shown the real alignment of social forces: the liberals scampered from the government tothe radicals, urging the latter to desist from the revolutionary struggle. 
 The radicals fought in the ranks of the proletariat. 
 Let us not forget this lesson: it also bears directly on theState Duma. 
 Let the Petrunkeviches and the other Constitutional-Democrats play at parliamentarianism in autocratic Russia—the workers will wage a revolutionary struggle for genuine sovereignty of the people. 
 Irrespective of how the insurrectionary outbreak in Moscow ends, the revolutionary movement will in any case emergeeven stronger than before, will spread to a wider area, andgather new forces. 
 Let us even assume that the tsarist troops are now celebrating a complete victory in Moscow—a few more such victories and the utter collapse of tsardom willbecome a fact. 
 This will then be the actual, genuine collapseof the entire heritage of serf-ownership, autocracy, andobscurantism—not the flabby, craven, and hypocritical patch-ing up of tattered rags, with which the liberal bourgeois are trying to delude themselves and others. 
 Let us even assume that tomorrow’s post will bring us the sad news thatthe insurrectionary outbreak has been crushed once again. 
We shall then exclaim: once again—hail insurrection! Proletary , No. 
 21, Published according to October 17 (4), 1905 the text in Proletary THE LATEST IN ISKRA TACTICS, OR MOCK ELECTIONS AS A NEW INCENTIVE TO AN UPRISING We have spoken many times already about the inefficacy of the Iskra tactics in the “Duma” campaign. 
 The two main lines of this tactics—the urge to support theOsvobozhdeniye League which wants to enter the Duma on the strength of certain revolutionary pledges and the releaseof a slogan calling for “revolutionary self-government ofcitizens” and for popular elections to a constituent assembly under the autocracy—are both unsound. 
 In the resolution of the Mensheviks’ “Southern Constituent [?l Conference”we at last have an attempt to formulate the Iskra tactics accurately and officially. 
 At this Conference the best of thenew-Iskra forces in Russia were represented. 
 The resolu-tion is an attempt at a business-like exposition of purely practical advice addressed to the proletariat. 
 That is why a careful analysis of this resolution is so essential, both forthe purpose of evolving a definite line of practical activityand for an appraisal of Iskra ’s tactical stand as a whole. 
 We quote the full text of the resolution: Resolution on the State Duma Adopted by the Constituent Conference of the Southern Organisations Whereas, we see the only way out of the present difficult conditions, com-patible with the interests of the whole people, in the convocation ofa constituent assembly elected on the basis of universal and equal suffrage, direct elections and a secret ballot, for the purpose of abolish-ing the autocratic regime, and establishing a democratic republicnecessary in the first place to the proletariat in its struggle against all the foundations of the bourgeois system and for the achievement 1) the system of elections to the State Duma does not enable the whole people to participate in them, the proletariat being excluded from the elections by reason of the high property qualification fixed for urban dwellers, while the peasantry—a mere section of it at that—will vote on the basis of a four-stage system, which provides the authorities with every opportunity for exerting pressure on them and whereas, 2) the whole of Russia is still deprived of all essential civil liber-ties, in the absence of which there can be no election campaign and, consequently, no elections conducted with any degree of fairness,and whereas, on the contrary, at the present time the authorities’ arbitrary procedure is everywhere becoming worse than ever before, and vast areas are one after the other placed under martial law; and,finally, whereas, 3) a system of representation which is even more of a travesty is being worked out for all the marginal regions; —the Conference urges all organisations to build up a most energetic campaign of agitation to expose the entire travesty of representation by which the autocratic government proposes to deceivethe people, and declares deliberate traitors to the people all those who are prepared to content themselves with the State Duma, and who will not at this decisive moment set themselves the task ofsupporting by their actions and tactics the revolutionary people’s demand for the convocation of a constituent assembly elected on the basis of universal and equal suffrage, direct elections and a secretballot. 
 To achieve the speediest possible realisation of the said demand, the Southern Conference recommends the following tactics to theParty organisations: 1) The launching of an energetic agitation campaign among the industrial proletariat and the peasant masses for the creation ofcomprehensive democratic organisations and their amalgamation in an all-Russia organisation with the purpose of waging an energetic struggle against the State Duma and for the establishment of apopular constituent assembly with the immediate introduction of freedom of speech, of the press, of assembly, of association, and the right to strike. 
 The establishment of this all-Russia people’s organisationshould proceed through the formation of agitation committees elected by the workers at their respective factories, and the amalgamation of these agitation committees; through the creation of similar agita-tion committees among the peasantry; through the establishment of closer ties between the urban and rural committees; through the setting up of gubernia committees and the establishment of contact betweenthem. 
 2) If this organisation proves sufficiently strong, and the working masses’ temper appropriate, the inauguration of the election campaignshould be used to organise nation-wide popular elections to a con-stituent assembly, bearing in mind the prospect that the organised movement of the people, aimed at getting these elections held, maynaturally lead to the whole people rising against tsarism, since of the elections will provide the rising with new incentives, while the people’s preliminary organisation will give the rising universality and unity. 
 3) In addition, the Conference proposes that efforts be made to secure freedom of election meetings and recommends energetic intervention in the election campaign, intervention by the people in electors’ meetings, and public discussion of the tasks confrontingrepresentatives elected to the State Duma, these discussions to be conducted by electors at mass meetings. 
 At the same time, the Social-Democratic Party must induce those sections of the population withthe right to vote in the State Duma elections, to take to the road of revolution. 
 This may find expression either in their joining an uprising led by the democratic organisations of the people, or, in the absenceof such, in their striving to transform the incipient State Duma into a revolutionary assembly that will convoke a popular constituent assembly, or facilitate its convocation by the democratic organisa-tions of the people. 
 4) Preparations should be made for exerting pressure on the State Duma along the same lines, should the mass movement fail to havebrought about the overthrow of the autocracy and the establishment of a constituent assembly by the time the Duma is finally convened. 
 Preparations should be made for an ultimatum to the State Dumademanding the convocation of a constituent assembly and the immediate introduction of freedom of speech, assembly, the press and association, and the arming of the people. 
 Preparations should bemade to back up this ultimatum with a political strike and other mass action by the people. 
 5) All this tactics shall be approved at general mass meetings, organised prior to and during the election campaign among the proletariat and the peasantry. 
 We shall not dwell on the shortcomings in the redaction of the resolution which is far too wordy. 
 Let us deal with its fundamental mistakes. 
 1. 
 The preamble speaks of the only way out of the present situation. 
 In this connection the entire stress is placedon the idea of a constituent assembly, and not a word is said as to who is to call it, so that the “way out” should be not merely on paper, but in actual fact . 
 Silence on this score amounts to Social-Democrats yielding to the Osvobozhde-niye gentry. 
 As we have repeatedly pointed out, it is the in-terests of the monarchist-liberal bourgeoisie that oblige theOsvobozhdeniye gentry to limit themselves to the convo-cation of a popular constituent assembly, and pass over in silence the question of who is to call it. 
 This, as we have repeatedly pointed out, is the very question that the develop-ing revolution has brought into the forefront, and herein at present lies the fundamental difference between the bourgeoisie’s opportunist (“compromise”) tactics and the proletariat’s revolutionary tactics. 
 By their resolution the new-Iskra supporters have furnished documentary proof of their incurable blindness in fundamental questions of tactics,and of their relapsing into Osvobozhdeniye slogans. 
 In the succeeding sections the resolution still more confuses the question of the convocation of a popular con-stituent assembly. 
 Propaganda which proclaims confidence in the State Duma on this score is downright reactionary,while to say that a constituent assembly should be convenedby a “democratic organisation of the people” is much likeproposing to call a constituent assembly through a committeeof friends of the people living on the planet Mars. 
 At their all-Russia Conference the new-Iskrists committed an unpardonable error in placing the convocation of a popularconstituent assembly by a revolutionary government on a par with its convocation by a representative institution. 
 The new-Iskrists have now gone even farther in reverse:they have not even mentioned a revolutionary provisional government. 
 Why? On what grounds? In what respect have their views changed? All this remains a mystery. 
 Instead ofdeveloping tactical directives, the Mensheviks’ conferencesmerely provide exhibitions of plunges and vacillations now tothe right, now to the left. 
 2. 
 To call “deliberate traitors to the people all those who are prepared to content themselves with the State Duma”, etc. 
, is just such a plunge ostensibly to the left, but onethat is not towards a genuinely revolutionary path, butrather towards revolutionary phrase-mongering. 
 In thefirst place, what is the point of the stinging adjective “delib-erate” (traitor)? Was Johann Jacoby, who entered the State Duma or the United Landtag in 1847 as a bourgeois liberal, and went over to the Social-Democrats after the war of 1870-71, a deliberate traitor to the people? Will any peasant whogoes into the Duma and is “prepared” to content himselfwith very, very little be a deliberate traitor? Secondly, is itreasonable to establish as criteria of treachery things like: “whoever is prepared to content himself”, “whoever does not set himself the task”, etc. 
? How does one reveal one’s“being prepared” and “setting oneself the task”—in word, or in deed? If in word, then it is necessary to obtain from those C. 
D. 
s (“Constitutional-Democrats”, as the Osvobozhdeniye gentry now call themselves) who are entering the State Duma, a written promise or revolutionary pledge (Parvus, Chereva-nin, Martov). 
 In that case the resolution should express thisidea clearly instead of being so vague about it. 
 On the otherhand, if being “prepared” is proved in deed, then why does theresolution not state openly and straightforwardly what “actions” it considers proof of this preparedness? The reason is because the resolution reflects the fundamental error of thenew Iskra , which is unable to distinguish between revolution-ary democracy and liberal-monarchist democracy. 
 Thirdly,is it rational for a militant party to talk in general aboutpersons (“all who”) instead of speaking concretely about trends or parties? At present it is of particular importance for us to expose to the proletariat that trend—the Party of Consti-tutional-Democrats—whose “actions” have already shown uswhat demands it supports, and how it does so. 
 Addressingthe workers in the name of Social-Democratic organisations,speaking to them about entrants into the Duma, and about Duma electors, etc. 
, while keeping silent about the Constitutional-Democratic Party (i. 
e. 
, the Osvobozhdeniye people) means either shilly-shallying and scheming (comingto terms on the sly with the Osvobozhdeniye people to support them on conditions stipulated by Parvus orCherevanin), or unwittingly spreading corruption among the workers and giving up the struggle against the Constitutional-Democrats. 
 Besides the historical facts regarding the activity of Osvobozhdeniye , its adherents, the Zemstvo members, and all other Constitutional-Democrats, we have no importantdata for gauging the “preparedness” of democrats from among the bourgeoisie to fight together with the people. 
 The new-Iskrists ignore these facts and dismiss the matterwith meaningless phrases. 
 Yet Plekhanov is still trying toconvince us that the organisational vagueness in Iskra ’s views is not supplemented by vagueness in tactics! The Iskra supporters have in fact not only shut their eyes to the Constitutional-Democrats’ “preparedness” to commit treachery, proved by their obvious and universallynoted turn to the right during the period between the July and September Zemstvo congresses, but have even assisted these Constitutional-Democrats by fighting against the boycott! The Iskrists are threatening hypothetical Osvobozh-deniye adherents (“all those who are prepared”, etc. 
) with “frightfully terrifying” words, but by their tactics they areassisting the genuine Osvobozhdeniye adherents. 
 This is wholly in the spirit of Rodichev, one of the Constitutional-Democratic leaders, who thunders: “We will not accept liberty from hands steeped in the blood of the people!” (this statement of Rodichev’s, uttered at a private meeting anddirected against William Stead, is now making the rounds ofthe entire foreign press)—and in the same breath demandsthat those very hands convoke a popular constituentassembly. 
 3. 
 The next fundamental error in the resolution is the slogan for “the creation of comprehensive democratic organ-isations and their amalgamation in an all-Russia organi-sation”. 
 The frivolity of the Social-Democrats who advancesuch a slogan is simply staggering. 
 What does creatingcomprehensive democratic organisations mean? It can mean one of two things: either the socialists’ organisation (the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
) being submerged in the democrats’ organisation(and the new-Iskrists cannot do that deliberately, for itwould be sheer betrayal of the proletariat)—or a temporaryalliance between the Social-Democrats and certain sectionsof the bourgeois democrats. 
 If the new-Iskrists want to advo-cate such an alliance, why do they not say so frankly and openly? Why do they hide behind the word “creation”?Why do they not specify the exact trends and groups in thebourgeois-democratic camp, with which they are urgingthe Social-Democrats to unite? Is this not a fresh example ofimpermissible vagueness of tactics , which in practice inevi-tably transforms the working class into an appendage to the bourgeois democracy? The resolution’s only definition of the nature of these “comprehensive democratic organisations” consists of astatement of the two aims set them: 1) a struggle againstthe State Duma, and 2) a struggle for a popular constituent assembly. 
 The latter aim, as lamely formulated by Iskra , i. 
e. 
, without any indication of who is to convene the popularconstituent assembly, has been fully endorsed by the Constitutional-Democrats. 
 Does this mean that the Iskrists advocate an alliance between the Social-Democrats and the Constitutional-Democrats, but are ashamed to say so openly? The former aim is formulated with an obscurity we areaccustomed to seeing only in Russian laws, which are deliber-ately designed to deceive the people. 
 What is meant by astruggle against the State Duma? If we take the expressionliterally—assuming the authors of the resolution want to express themselves unequivocally—it means a boycott of the Duma , for to fight against an institution that does not yet exist means opposing its establishment. 
 But we knowthat the Iskrists are opposed to the boycott, we see from theresolution itself that further on they no longer talk of astruggle against the State Duma, but of exerting pressure on the State Duma, of a striving to transform it into a revo-lutionary assembly, etc. 
 This means that the words “struggleagainst the State Duma” should not be taken literally,or in their narrow sense. 
 But in that case, how should theybe taken? Perhaps, as understood by Mr. 
 M. 
 Kovalevsky,who reads papers criticising the State Duma? What consti-tutes a struggle against the State Duma? That remains a mystery. 
 Our muddle-heads have said nothing precise onthis score. 
 Aware of the class-conscious workers’ mood, whichis definitely opposed to the tactic of agreements with theConstitutional-Democrats, the tactic of supporting the Dumaon certain conditions, our new-Iskrists have cravenly taken a middle course: on the one hand, they repeat the slogan “Strug-gle against the State Duma” which is popular among theproletariat and, on the other hand, they are depriving thisslogan of any exact meaning, are throwing dust into the eyesof the people, are interpreting the struggle against the Dumain the sense of exerting pressure on the Duma, etc. 
 And this wretched muddle is being advanced by the most influential of the new-Iskra organisations at a time the Osvobozhdeniye gentry are loudly protesting for the world to hear thatthey are entering the State Duma only in order to carry ona struggle and exclusively for the struggle, that they are“prepared” to make a complete break with the government! We ask the readers: has more disgraceful vacillation in tactics ever been seen anywhere in the Social-Democraticmovement? Is it possible to imagine anything more ruinous to Social-Democracy than this advocacy of “creating comprehensive democratic organisations” together with the Osvobozhdeniye people (for the Constitutional-Democrats are in agreement with the aims of such organisations as set forthby Iskra ), but without mentioning these people by name?? And Plekhanov, who has degraded himself in the eyes of all Russian revolutionary Social-Democrats by defendingIskra ’s “organisational vagueness” for almost two years, will now try to assure us that this new-Iskra tactic is good!... 4. 
 Further. 
 It is most unwise to call an alliance of compre-hensive (and amorphous) democratic organisations “an all-Russia people’s organisation” or “a democratic organisationof the people”. 
 First of all, this is incorrect theoretically. 
As we know, the Economists erred by confusing party with class. 
 Reviving old mistakes the Iskrists are now confusing the sum of democratic parties or organisations with anorganisation of the people. 
 That is empty, false, and harmfulphrase-mongering. 
 It is empty because it has no specificmeaning whatever, owing to the absence of any referenceto definite democratic parties or trends. 
 It is false because in a capitalist society even the proletariat, the most advanced class, is not in a position to create a party embracingthe entire class—and as for the whole people creating such aparty, that is entirely out of the question. 
 It is harmful be-cause it clutters up the mind with bombastic words and doesnothing to further the real work of explaining the actual significance of actual democratic parties, their class basis, the degree of their closeness to the proletariat, etc. 
 Thepresent, the period of a democratic revolution, bourgeois inits social and economic content, is a time when bourgeoisdemocrats, all Constitutional-Democrats, etc. 
, right downto the Socialist-Revolutionaries, are revealing a particular inclination to advocate “comprehensive democratic organi-sations” and in general to encourage, directly or indirectly,overtly or covertly, non-partisanship, i. 
e. 
, an absence of anystrict division between the democrats. 
 Class-consciousrepresentatives of the proletariat must fight this tendencyresolutely and ruthlessly, for it is profoundly bourgeois in essence. 
 We must bring exact party distinctions into the fore-ground, expose all confusion, show up the falsity of phrasesabout allegedly united, broad, solid democratism, phrases our liberal newspapers are teeming with. 
 In proposing an alliance with certain sections of the democrats for the achievement of definite tasks, we should single out only revo-lutionary democrats—particularly at a time like this; we should indicate what most clearly distinguishes those “pre-pared” to fight (right now, in the ranks of the revolutionaryarmy) from those who are “prepared” to bargain with theautocracy. 
 To bring home their mistake to the Iskrists, let us take a very simple example. 
 Our programme speaks of peasantcommittees. 
 The resolution of the Third Congress of theR. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 defines their role more precisely by calling themrevolutionary peasant committees (in this respect the new-Iskra Conference agreed, in essence, with the Third Congress). 
 We have set them the task of bringing about democratic reforms in general and agrarian reforms in particular, going as far as the confiscation of the landed estates by revolution-ary action . 
 The Iskra resolution now recommends a new kind of “agitation committees among the peasantry”. 
 Suchadvice is worthy not of socialist workers but of liberal bour-geois. 
 Had they been formed, such “peasant committees of agitation” would play right into the hands of the Osvobozh-deniye gentry, for their revolutionary character would be supplanted by liberalism. 
 We have already pointed out thatthe content of the agitation of these committees, as definedby Iskra (the struggle “against” the State Duma and for a popular constituent assembly), does not exceed the limits set by the Osvobozhdeniye programme. 
 Is it now clear to the new-Iskrists that by supplementing the slogan of revolution-ary peasant committees with one calling for “peasant com-mittees of agitation” it is transforming Social-Democraticslogans into Osvobozhdeniye slogans? 5. 
 Finally, we reach the main task of this “all-Russia people’s organisation”—the organisation of nation-widepopular elections to a constituent assembly. 
 Nation-widepopular elections with the autocracy left intact! And“clashes” with the autocracy provide “new incentives for anuprising”.... 
 Mock elections as a new incentive for an uprising is what this amounts to! The slogan calling for “revolutionary self-govern-ment”, and the theory of the “spontaneous generation” of a constituent assembly could not but lead to this absurdity, which is destined to become classical. 
 To speak of nation-wide popular elections under the rule of the Trepovs, i. 
e. 
, before the victory of the uprising, before the actualoverthrow of the tsarist government, is the height of Mani-lovism, and can serve only to spread incredible politicalcorruption among the workers. 
 Only people attuned to phrase-mongering by the new Iskra can accept such slogans, which crumble to dust at the merest contact with sober criticism. 
 One has only to reflect a little on precisely what ismeant by nation-wide popular elections, if the term be taken seriously; one has only to remember that they implyfreedom of agitation, keeping the entire population informed,and recognition by the entire population of the centre or local centres that will register the entire population, and canvass literally everyone, with no exceptions—one has onlyto give such things a little thought to realise that the “nation-wide popular elections” proposed by Iskra would amount to a nation-wide joke or a nation-wide swindle. 
 Not asingle deputy who could claim to have been “elected by the entire people”, i. 
e. 
, who has had 50,000 to 100,000 votes freely and consciously cast for him—not one such deputy canbe elected anywhere in Russia “in the inauguration of theelection campaign”. 
 The Iskra resolution advises the proletariat to stage a farce , and no reservations or excuses can change the farcical import of this resolution. 
 We are told that elections can be carried out only “if this organisation proves sufficient-ly strong”, only when “preliminary organisation will givethe rising universality and unity”. 
 Our answer to this isthat strength is revealed in action, not in word. 
 Prior to thevictory of an uprising it is ridiculous to talk of a force that will be able, without evoking laughter, even to proclaim “nation-wide popular elections”, let alone conduct them. 
 Noorganisation, no matter how universal or united, can ensurethe victory of an uprising unless 1) this organisationconsists of people who are really capable of insurrection (andwe have seen that the resolution advocates merely “compre-hensive”, organisations, i. 
e. 
, actually organisations of the Osvobozhdeniye type which would undoubtedly betray an uprising once it had started); and unless 2) there exist forces for the victory of the uprising (and to achieve victory, the material force of a revolutionary army is needed, besides the moral force of public opinion, the people’s welfare, etc. 
). 
 To put the main stress on this moral force and onhigh-sounding phrases about “the whole people”, whilemaintaining silence , in a call to arms, about the actual material force, is to reduce the revolutionary slogans of theproletariat to bourgeois-democratic phrase-mongering. 
 Mock elections do not constitute a “natural transition to an uprising”, but rather an artificial transition invented by a handful of intellectuals. 
 The fabrication of suchartificial transitions is absolutely similar to Nadezhdin’sold occupation—the concoction of “excitative” terroristacts. 
 In the same way, the new-Iskrists want to “excite” the people to insurrection artificially—an idea that is basically false. 
 We cannot create an organisation that will really em-brace the whole people; any elections we would take it intoour heads to appoint under the autocracy would inevitablybe a farce, and to utilise such a fabricated pretext for an uprising is just like decreeing an uprising at a moment when the people are not genuinely roused. 
 Only people who have no faith in the proletariat’s revolutionary activity, onlyintellectuals who are fond of using fancy words, could startinventing “new incentives for an uprising”, in September1905. 
 One might think that we in Russia lack genuine incentives for an uprising and need farcical ones, that there are so few cases of genuine unrest among the masses that such a sentiment has to be staged or faked! Mock elections willnever rouse the masses. 
 However, a strike, a demonstration,mutiny in the armed forces, a serious students’ outbreak,famine, mobilisation, or a conflict in the State Duma, etc. 
,etc. 
, etc. 
, can really rouse the masses, constantly, at any hour. 
 Not only is it the crassest stupidity to think of concocting “new incentives for an uprising”, but the very thought ofindicating in advance that this and no other will be the realincentive for the masses would be foolish. 
 People who havethe slightest degree of self-respect, who are in the leastearnest in what they say, would never allow themselves to concoct “new incentives for an uprising”. 
 What is lacking is not “new incentives”, my most esteemed Manilovs, but a military force, the military force of the revolutionary people (and not the people in general), consisting of 1) the armed proletariat and peasantry, 2) organised advance detachments of representatives of these classes, and 3) sections of the army that are prepared tocome over to the side of the people. 
 It is all this takentogether that constitutes a revolutionary army . 
 To talk of an uprising, of its force, of a natural transition to it, and tosay nothing of a revolutionary army is folly and muddle-headedness—and the greater the degree of the counter-revolutionary army’s mobilisation, the more that is so. 
 Toinvent “new incentives for an uprising” at a time of uprisingsin the Caucasus and on the Black Sea, in Poland and Rigameans deliberately withdrawing into one’s shell and isolat-ing oneself from the movement. 
 We are witnesses of the greatest unrest among the workers and peasants, of a series of insurrectionary outbreaks which have been steadily andwith enormous speed spreading and becoming more force-ful and more stubborn ever since January 9. 
 No one canguarantee that these outbreaks will not repeat themselvestomorrow in any big city, or any military camp, or any village. 
 On the contrary, everything goes to show that such outbreaks are probable, imminent, and inevitable. 
 Theirsuccess depends, first of all, on the success of revolutionary agitation and organisation—revolutionary and not the“comprehensively democratic” agitation and organisationthat Iskra prattles of, since among democrats there are many non-revolutionaries. 
 In the second place, success depends on the might and preparedness of the revolutionary army. 
The first condition has long been acknowledged by all, andis being applied throughout Russia by all revolutionaries,at literally all meetings of study circles, group gath-erings, impromptu and mass meetings. 
 The second condition is as yet very little recognised. 
 By reason of its class stand, the liberal bourgeoisie does not care to recognise it, andcannot afford to do so. 
 As for the revolutionaries, only thosewho are hopelessly plodding along in the wake of themonarchist bourgeoisie are silent about it. 
 “Insurrection” is an important word. 
 A call to insurrec-tion is an extremely serious call. 
 The more complex the social system, the better the organisation of state power,and the more perfected the military machine, the more impermissible is it to launch such a slogan without due thought. 
 And we have stated repeatedly that the revolution-ary Social-Democrats have long been preparing to launch it, but have launched it as a direct call only when there couldbe no doubt whatever of the gravity, widespread and deeproots of the revolutionary movement, no doubt of mattershaving literally come to a head. 
 Important words must beused with circumspection. 
 Enormous difficulties have to be faced in translating them into important deeds. 
 It is precisely for that reason that it would be unpardonable todismiss these difficulties with a mere phrase, to use Mani-lovist inventions to brush aside serious tasks or to put onone’s eyes the blinkers of sweet dreams of so-called “naturaltransitions” to these difficult tasks. 
 A revolutionary army are also important words. 
 The creation of a revolutionary army is an arduous, complex,and lengthy process. 
 But when we see that it has alreadybegun and is proceeding on all sides—though desultorilyand by fits and starts—when we know that a genuine vic-tory of the revolution is impossible without such an army, we must issue a definite and direct slogan, advocate it, make it the touchstone of the current political tasks. 
 It wouldbe a mistake to think that the revolutionary classes areinvariably strong enough to effect a revolution wheneversuch a revolution has fully matured by virtue of the condi-tions of social and economic development. 
 No, human society is not constituted so rationally or so “conveniently” for progressive elements. 
 A revolution may be ripe, andyet the forces of its creators may prove insufficient tocarry it out, in which case society decays, and thisprocess of decay sometimes drags on for very many years. 
There is no doubt that Russia is ripe for a democratic rev-olution, but it still remains to be seen whether the rev-olutionary classes have sufficient strength at present to carryit out. 
 This will be settled by the struggle, whose crucial moment is approaching at tremendous speed—if the numer-ous direct and indirect indications do not deceive us. 
The moral preponderance is indubitable—the moral force is already overwhelmingly great; without it, of course, there could be no question of any revolution whatever. 
 It is anecessary condition, but it is not sufficient . 
 Only the outcome of the struggle will show whether it will be translated into a material force sufficient to smash the very serious (we shall not close our eyes to this) resistance of the autocracy. 
 The slogan of insurrection is a slogan for decidingthe issue by material force, which in present-day Europeancivilisation can only be military force. 
 This slogan shouldnot be put forward until the general prerequisites for revo-lution have matured, until the masses have definitely shown that they have been roused and are ready to act, until the external circumstances have led to an open crisis. 
 But oncesuch a slogan has been issued, it would be an arrant disgraceto retreat from it, back to moral force again, to one of theconditions that prepare the ground for an uprising, to a“possible transition”, etc. 
, etc. 
 No, once the die is cast, all subterfuges must be done with; it must be explained directly and openly to the masses what the practical conditions for asuccessful revolution are at the present time. 
 We have by no means exhausted the list of mistakes in the Iskra resolution, which—to people who think and who do not confine themselves to “clutching at opportunities”—will long remain a sad memento of a vulgarisation ofSocial-Democracy’s tasks. 
 It seems to us more important toinvestigate the underlying source of the errors rather thanto enumerate all, including even the comparatively petty manifestations of the basic fallacy. 
 We shall therefore only note, in passing, the absurdity and reactionary natureof the idea of presenting “ultimatums” (a military term,which in the absence of a trained military force, soundslike vulgar bragging) to the Duma , of the endeavour to trans-form this Duma into a revolutionary assembly, and will *If we prove strong in the impending decisive conflict with tsarism, the State Duma will inevitably turn to the left (at least itsliberal section will do so—we are not speaking about its reactionarysection), but to attempt to influence the State Duma seriously without destroying the rule of the tsar would be just as stupid as for Japan to present “ultimatums” to China or to attach much weight to Chinese assistance without destroying the military might of Russia. 
 After March 18, 1848, the Prussian State Duma (the United Landtag)immediately affixed its signature to a paper providing for the convo-cation of a constituent assembly, but until that all “ultimatums” pass on to the general meaning of the slogan: “revolutionary self-government of the people”. 
 This slogan or rather its conversion into the focal slogan is at the root of all Iskra ’s shilly-shallying. 
 Iskra has attempted to defend it by referring to “dialectics”—the verysame Plekhanov dialectics, by virtue of which Iskra ’s “organisational vagueness” was first defended by Plekhanov,and then exposed by him! Revolutionary self-government of the people, we have said, is not a prologue to an uprising, nor is it a “naturaltransition to it”, it is its epilogue. 
 There can be no serioustalk of genuine and complete self-government unlessthe uprising is victorious. 
 And we have added that the veryidea of placing the main emphasis on state administration rather than on state organisation is reactionary, that to identify revolutionary self-government with a revolution-ary army is the height of absurdity, that a victoriousrevolutionary army necessarily presupposes a revolutionaryself-government, whereas a revolutionary self-governmentdoes not necessarily include a revolutionary army. 
 Iskra tried to defend the confusion in its deliberately chosen slogans by referring to the “dialectics” of the uncon-scious and spontaneous process. 
 Life, it says, knows of nosharply defined boundaries. 
 Labour exchanges exist evennow ( Sotsial-Demokrat ,124 No. 
 12)—here you have the elements of self-government. 
 In a dialectical process of development, the prologue and the epilogue often inter-twine, it says. 
 The latter consideration is quite true. 
 Yes, the process of actual development is always tangled, with bits of the epi-logue emerging before the true prologue. 
 But does this meanthat it is permissible for a leader of a class-conscious party to jumble the tasks of the struggle, to confuse the prologue with the epilogue? Can the dialectics of a jumbled and spon-taneous process justify confusion in the logic of consciousSocial-Democrats? Does not this imply substitution ofdialectics à la Plekhanov for Marxist dialectics? of the revolutionaries, all their “endeavours” to influence the State Duma, all their threats, were hollow phrases to the Petrunkeviches,Rodichevs, Milyukovs, and their like, who sat in that State Duma. 
 To make our idea clearer, let us take an example. 
 Let us assume that we are discussing not a democratic but a socialist revolution. 
 The crisis is maturing, the epoch of the dictatorship of the proletariat is approaching. 
 At thispoint the opportunists make the establishment of consumers’societies their central slogan, while the revolutionariesadvance a slogan calling for the conquest of politicalpower by the proletariat. 
 The opportunists argue that con-sumers’ societies constitute a real force for the proletariat, the conquest of a real economic position, and a genuine bit ofsocialism; you revolutionaries do not understand dialecticaldevelopment, the evolution of capitalism into socialism,the penetration of nuclei of socialism into the very heart ofcapitalism, the purging of capitalism by giving it a new socialist content. 
 Yes, the revolutionaries answer, we agree that in a way consumers’ societies do constitute a bit of socialism. 
 In thefirst place, socialist society is one big consumers’ societywith production for consumption organised according toplan. 
 In the second place, socialism cannot be achieved without a powerful, many-sided working-class movement, and consumers’ societies will inevitably be one of these manysides. 
 But that is not the point at all. 
 While power remainsin the hands of the bourgeoisie, consumers’ societies willremain a paltry fragment, ensuring no serious changes what-ever, introducing no decisive alterations whatever, and some-times even diverting attention from a serious struggle for revolution. 
 No one disputes the fact that the habits acquiredby the workers in consumers’ societies are very useful. 
 Butonly transfer of power to the proletariat can give full scope tothese habits. 
 Then the system of consumers’ societies willhave surplus-value at its disposal; at present the scope of this useful institution is bound to be paltry by reason of the paltry wages. 
 Then it will become a consumers’ union ofreally free workers; at present it is a union of wage-slaves,oppressed and stifled by capitalism. 
 Thus the consumers’societies are a fragment of socialism. 
 The dialectical processof development really does intrude elements of the new society, elements both material and spiritual, even under capitalism. 
 But socialists should be able to distinguish thepart from the whole; they should demand the whole in their slogan, and not a part; they must contrapose to bits of patch-work, which often divert fighters from the truly revolution-ary path, the basic requisites for a real revolution. 
 What is Iskra ’s opinion, who is right in this dispute? It is the same with the slogan calling for “revolutionary self-government” in the period of a democratic revolution. 
We are not against revolutionary self-government, we longago gave it a certain modest place in our minimum programme (see the paragraph on extensive local self-government). 
 We agree that it is a fragment of a democratic revolution, as hasalready been stated in No. 
 15 of Proletary * with reference to the Smolensk Municipal Council. 
 A democratic revolutionwould be impossible without a powerful and many-sided democratic movement, and the movement for self-government is one of those many sides. 
 However, the democratic revolution would likewise be impossible without,for example, revolutionary schools, which are as muchan indubitable sign of tsarism’s actual disintegration asare labour exchanges, which exist despite the police ban,as the unrest among the clergy, as local self-government instituted in violation of the law, etc. 
 Comrades of the Iskra , consider what conclusion should be drawn from all this! Is it that all these elements of disintegration should besummed up in an integral slogan of insurrection? Or that theslogan of insurrection should be mutilated by tying it downto one of the elements, namely, self-government? “The organisation of revolutionary self-government, or, what amounts to the same, the organisation of popularforces for an uprising,” wrote the audacious Iskra (No. 
 109, page 2, line 1). 
 That is just like saying that organisingrevolutionary schools means organising forces for an uprising,that organising unrest among the clergy means organis-ing forces for an uprising, or that organising consumers’ societies means organising forces for a socialist revolution. 
No, you are poor dialecticians, comrades of the Iskra . 
 You are unable to reason dialectically, although you are verywell able to twist and squirm, like Plekhanov, when it comesto the question of the organisational and tactical vague-ness of your views. 
 You have overlooked the fact that, *See pp. 
 221-22 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR given victory of the uprising, all these fragments of revolution will inevitably merge in an integral and complete “epilogue” to the uprising, whereas if the uprising is not victorious these fragments will remain fragments, paltry,changing nothing, and satisfying only the philistines. 
 The moral is: 1) Both on the eve of a socialist revolution and on the eve of a democratic revolution, opportunists inthe Social-Democratic movement have a bad habit of working themselves up over a single petty fragment of a big process, exalting this fragment to the status of the whole,and subordinating the whole to this fragment, thereby muti-lating the whole, and thereby themselves becoming toadies tothe inconsistent and cowardly reformists. 
 2) The dialecticsof the spontaneous process, which is always and necessarily confused, does not justify confusion in logical conclusions and political slogans which are quite often (but not neces-sarily) confused. 
 P. 
 S. 
 This article was already in the page proofs when we received the resolutions of the Southern Constituent Conference, published abroad by Iskra . 
 The text of the resolution on the State Duma differs somewhat from the onepublished in Russia, which we have reproduced above. 
 Butthese differences are not essential, and do not affect ourcriticism in any way. 
 Proletary , No. 
 21, Published according to October 17 (4), 1905 the text in Proletary NOTE TO M. 
 BORISOV ’S ARTICLE “ON THE TRADE UNION MOVEMENT AND THE TASKS OF SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY ”125 It is with pleasure that we publish this article by a comrade engaged in practical work in Russia, since an all-round discussion of the trade union question is now on theorder of the day. 
 Only the experience of the whole Party,constantly illuminated by the theory of Marxism, can helpwork out the forms of Social-Democratic trade unions mostsuited to Russian conditions. 
 It is likewise necessary to learn from the lessons given us by our enemies. 
 The bour-geoisie of the whole world was jubilant over the “craftunion” tendencies of the Cologne Congress, hoping to divertthe workers from socialism to “pure”, i. 
e. 
, bourgeois, trade-unionism. 
 In Russia, even Moskovskiye Vedomosti has learned to sing this tune. 
 And once the bourgeoisie begins to praise any one of us for having “seen the light” or for “zeal” in respect of a “rational” trade union movement, itis a sure sign that there are shortcomings in our work. 
 Thisis just how Comrade M. 
 Borisov puts the question, namely,that we should fulfil our socialist duty in every respect,and by no means allow such shortcomings. 
 Proletary , No. 
 21, Published according to October 17 (4), 1905 the text in Proletary ON THE DEATH OF TRUBETSKOI The liberal Frankfurter Zeitung was highly indignant at the consistently revolutionary resolution adopted by theMoscow students, who demanded that a constituent assemblybe convened not by the tsar, not by the State Duma, and not even (let not the comrades of the new Iskra get wrath-ful at this!) by a “democratic organisation of the people”,but by a provisional revolutionary government. 
 In thisconnection the liberal German stockbrokers bewailed the“immaturity” of the students, etc. 
 This very same paper nowcarries a telegram about Trubetskoi’s death ( Abendblatt , Octo-ber 13) and remarks: “It is possible that they had treated him (Trubetskoi) to a scene at the Ministry of Public Education. 
”Poor Trubetskoi! To aim at liberty for the people and todie of a “scene” in a tsarist minister’s antechamber.... 
 Weare prepared to admit that this is too cruel a punishmenteven for a Russian liberal. 
 Only, would it not be better and more dignified, gentlemen, for the supporters of popular liberty to discontinue all dealings with the government ofbutchers and spies? Is it not better to fall in a straightfor-ward, honest, open street fighting—fighting which enlightensand educates the people—against vipers without whosedestruction genuine liberty is impossible, rather than to die of “scenes” while conversing with the Trepovs and their contemptible lackeys? Written in mid-October 1905 First published in 1926 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany V the manuscript THE LESSONS OF THE MOSCOW EVENTS The rising tide of revolutionary enthusiasm among the Moscow proletariat, so vividly expressed in the politicalstrike and in the street fighting, has not yet subsided. 
 The strike continues. 
 It has to some extent spread to St. 
 Peters-burg, where the compositors are striking in sympathy withtheir Moscow comrades. 
 It is still uncertain whether thepresent movement will subside and await the next rise ofthe tide, or whether it will be of a sustained character. 
 Butcertain results of the Moscow events, and very instructive ones at that, are already apparent, and it would be worth while to dwell on them. 
 On the whole, the movement in Moscow did not attain the pitch of a decisive battle between the revolutionaryworkers and the tsarist forces. 
 It consisted only of smallskirmishes at the outposts, part perhaps of a military demonstration in the civil war, but it was not one of those battles that determine the outcome of a war. 
 Of the twosuppositions we advanced a week ago, it is apparently thefirst that is being justified, namely, that what we are wit-nessing is not the beginning of the decisive onslaught, butonly a rehearsal. 
 This rehearsal has nevertheless fully revealed all the characters in the historical drama, thus spotlighting the probable—and in part even inevitable—development of the drama itself. 
 The Moscow events were inaugurated by incidents which at first glance appear to have been of a purely academiccharacter. 
 The government conferred partial “autonomy”, or alleged autonomy, on the universities. 
 The professorate were granted self-government, and the students weregranted the right of assembly. 
 Thus a small breach was forced in the general system of autocratic-feudal oppres-sion. 
 New revolutionary currents immediately swept into this breach with unexpected force. 
 A miserable concession, a paltry reform, granted with the object of blunting theedge of the political antagonisms and of “reconciling”robbers and robbed, actually served to stimulate the struggletremendously, and increase the number of its participants. 
Workers flocked to the students’ gatherings, which began to develop into popular revolutionary meetings, where the proletariat, the foremost class in the struggle for liberty,predominated. 
 The government was outraged. 
 The“respectable” liberals who had received professorial self-government began to scurry back and forth between the revo-lutionary students and the government of police rule and the knout. 
 The liberals made use of liberty in order to betray liberty, restrain the students from extending and intensify-ing the struggle, and appeal for “order”—this in the faceof the bashi-bazouks and Black Hundreds, the Trepovs and theRomanovs! The liberals made use of self-government soas to do the work of the butchers of the people, and to close the University, that holy sanctuary of “science” permitted by the knout-wielders, which the students defiled by allowingthe “rabble” to enter it for discussion of questions “unau-thorised” by the autocratic gang. 
 The self-governing liberalsbetrayed the people and liberty, because they feared carnagein the University. 
 They were punished in exemplary fashion for their contemptible cowardice. 
 By closing the revolution-ary University they opened the way to revolution in thestreets. 
 Wretched pedants that they are, they were ready tojubilate in concert with rascals like Glazov over the factthat they had managed to extinguish the conflagration in theschool. 
 But as a matter of fact they only started a conflag-ration in a huge industrial city. 
 These manikins on stilts forbade the workers to go to the students, but they onlydrove the students to the revolutionary workers. 
 They ap-praised all political matters from the standpoint of their ownchicken coop, which reeks of age-old hidebound officialism. 
They implored the students to spare this chicken coop. 
 The first fresh breeze—the manifestation of the free and youthful revolutionary elements—was enough for the chicken coopto be forgotten, for the breeze freshened and grew into a blast against the tsarist autocracy, the prime source of all officialism and all the humiliations heaped upon the Rus-sian people. 
 And even now, when the first danger has passed and the storm has clearly subsided, the lackeys of the autoc-racy still quake at the mere recollection of the chasm thatyawned before them during the days of bloodshed in Moscow. 
“It is not yet a conflagration, but that it is arson is alreadybeyond question,” mutters Mr. 
 Menshikov in the servile Novoye Vremya (of September 30). 
 “It is not yet a revolu-tion ... but it is already the prologue to a revolution. 
” “‘It ison the move,’ [Mr. 
 Menshikov] argued in April. 
 And whatfrightful strides ‘it’ has since made! The popular element hasbeen stirred to its very depths.... 
” Yes, the Trepovs and the Romanovs, together with the treacherous liberal bourgeoisie, have got themselves into a predicament. 
 Open the University—and you provide aplatform for popular revolutionary meetings, and renderinvaluable service to the Social-Democrats. 
 Close the Uni-versity down—and you open the way for a street struggle. 
And so our knights of the knout dash to and fro, gnashing their teeth. 
 They reopen Moscow University, pretending that they want to allow the students to maintain order them-selves during street processions; they turn a blind eye torevolutionary self-government of the students, who aredividing into Social-Democrats, Socialist-Revolutionaries,etc. 
, thus bringing about proper political representation in the student “parliament” (and, we are confident, will not confine themselves to revolutionary self-government, butwill immediately and in dead earnest set about organisingand equipping contingents of a revolutionary army). 
 To-gether with Trepov, the liberal professors are dashing to andfro, hastening one day to persuade the students to be more moderate, and the next day to persuade the knout-wielders to be more lenient. 
 The scurryings of both of these give usthe greatest satisfaction; they show that a fine revolution-ary breeze must be blowing if the political commanders andthe political turncoats are staggering about on the upperdeck in such a lively manner. 
 But besides legitimate pride and legitimate satisfaction, true revolutionists must derive something else from theMoscow events—an understanding of the social forces oper-ating in the Russian revolution and just how they operate, and a clearer idea of the forms they take when they operate. 
 Call to mind the political sequence of the Moscow events, and you will see a remarkably typical picture of the wholerevolution, one that is characteristic of the class relation-ships. 
 Here is the sequence: a small breach is forced inthe old order; the government tries to mend the breach withpetty concessions, illusory “reforms”, etc. 
; instead of calming down, the struggle becomes even more acute and wide-spread; the liberal bourgeoisie wavers and dashes from onething to another, urging the revolutionists to desist fromrevolution, and the police to desist from reaction; headed bythe proletariat, the revolutionary people arrive on the scene,and the open struggle gives rise to a new political situa-tion; the conflict shifts to the newly won battlefield—a more elevated and broader field—a new breach is made in theenemy strongholds, and in that way the movement proceedsto an ever higher plane. 
 A general retreat on the part of thegovernment is taking place before our eyes, as Moskovskiye Vedomosti aptly remarked recently. 
 A certain liberal news-paper 126 rather cleverly added: a retreat under cover of rearguard action. 
 On October 3 (16) the St. 
 Petersburg cor-respondent of the liberal Berlin Vossische Zeitung wired to his paper about his interview with Trepov’s chef de cabinet . 
 As the police underling told the correspondent: “You cannotexpect the government to follow a consistent plan of action, since every day brings with it events that could not have been foreseen. 
 The government is obliged to manoeuvre. 
Force cannot crush the present movement which may lastfor two months or two years. 
” Indeed the government’s tactics have now become quite clear. 
 They indubitably lie in manoeuvring and retreating under cover of rearguard action. 
 Such tactics are quite correct from the standpoint of the autocracy’s interests. 
It would be a grievous error and a fatal illusion forrevolutionists to forget that the government can stillcontinue to retreat for a very long time to come, withoutlosing what is most essential. 
 The example of the abor-tive, unfinished semi-revolution in Germany, in 1848—an example to which we shall return in the next issue ofProletary , and which we shall never tire of recalling—shows that even if it retreats so far as to convoke a ( nominally ) constituent assembly, the government will still retain sufficient strength to defeat the revolution in the final and decisive battle. 
 That is why, in studying theMoscow events, the most recent in a long series ofconflicts in our civil war, we must soberly consider thedevelopments, prepare with the maximum of energy andpersistence for a long and desperate war, and be on our guard against such allies that are already turncoat allies. 
 When absolutely nothing decisive has as yet been won, whenthe enemy still has an enormous area for further advanta-geous and safe retreats, when battles are becoming ever moreserious—confidence in such allies, attempts to concludeagreements with them or simply to support them on certain conditions may prove not only stupid but even treacherous to the proletariat. 
 Indeed, was the liberal professors’ behaviour before and during the Moscow events fortuitous? Was it an exception,or is it the rule for the entire Constitutional-DemocraticParty? Does this behaviour express the individual pecu-liarities of a given group of the liberal bourgeoisie, or does it express the fundamental interests of this entire class ingeneral? Among socialists there can be no two opinions onthese questions, but not all socialists know how to consist-ently pursue genuinely socialist tactics. 
 For a clearer understanding of the gist of the matter, let us take the liberals’ own exposition of their tactics. 
 They avoid coming out against the Social-Democrats or evenspeaking directly about them in the columns of the Russianpress. 
 But here is an interesting report in the BerlinVossische Zeitung , which undoubtedly is more outspoken in its expression of the liberals’ views: “Extremely stormy student disturbances have reoccurred both in St. 
 Petersburg and in Moscow since the very beginning of theacademic year, although autonomy has been granted—belatedly, it istrue—to the universities and other higher educational institutions. 
Moreover, in Moscow these disturbances are accompanied by a wide-spread workers’ movement. 
 These disturbances indicate that a newphase has begun in the Russian revolutionary movement. 
 The courseof the student meetings and their resolutions show that the studentshave adopted the watchword of the Social-Democratic leaders toconvert the universities into popular meeting places, and thus spread revolution among wide sections of the population. 
 The Moscow students have already shown how this is being put into effect: theyinvited to the University premises such large numbers of workers andother persons who have no connection with the University that the students themselves were in a minority. 
 It stands to reason that such a state of affairs cannot go on for long under the existing conditions. 
The government will close the universities rather than tolerate suchmeetings. 
 This is so obvious that at first glance it appears incon-ceivable that the Social-Democratic leaders could have issued such awatchword. 
 They knew perfectly well what this would lead to, but what they wanted was for the government to close the universities. 
 For what purpose? Simply because they intend to hinder the liberal movement by all available means. 
 They admit that they are notstrong enough to effect any major political action with their ownforces; therefore the liberals and radicals must not do anything either,for that would allegedly only harm the socialist proletariat. 
 The latter must win its rights for itself. 
 The Russian Social-Democratic Party may take great pride in these ‘inflexible’ ( unbeugsame ) tactics, but they must appear very short-sighted to any unprejudiced observer;they will scarcely lead Russian Social-Democracy to victories. 
 It isquite incomprehensible what it will gain by the closing of the uni-versities, which is inevitable if the present tactics continue. 
 On the other hand, it is of the utmost importance to all progressive parties that there should be no interruption in the work of the universitiesand higher schools. 
 The protracted strikes of students and professorshave already caused great damage to Russian culture. 
 It is imperativethat academic work be resumed. 
 Autonomy has enabled the professorsto conduct their classes freely. 
 That is why the professors of all uni-versities and higher schools are agreed that it is necessary to start tuition once more and in energetic fashion. 
 They are exerting alltheir influence to persuade the students to abandon their efforts togive effect to the Social-Democratic watchword. 
” Thus, the struggle between bourgeois liberalism (the Constitutional-Democrats) and the Social-Democrats hastaken definite shape. 
 Do not hinder the liberal movement! Such is the slogan so splendidly expressed in the article quoted above. 
 What does this liberal movement amount to?It is a retrograde movement , for the professors use and desire to use the freedom of the universities not for revolutionarypropaganda, but for counter-revolutionary propaganda; not to fan the conflagration, but to extinguish it; not to extend the field of battle, but to draw the masses away from decisive struggle and induce them to collaborate peacefully withthe Trepovs. 
 With the struggle becoming more acute, the“liberal” movement (as we have seen in practice) has becomemarked by desertion from revolution to reaction. 
 Of course, the liberals are, in a way, useful to us, since they introduce vacillation into the ranks of the Trepovs and other lackeys of Romanov. 
 This good, however, will be outweighed by the harm they cause by bringing vacillation into our ranks,unless we make a clean break with the Constitutional-Democrats, and brand every hesitant step they take. 
 Theirknowledge, or, more frequently, their sense of their domi-nant position in the existing economic system has led the liberals to aspire to dominate the revolution as well. 
 They say that each step aimed at continuing, extending and in-tensifying the revolution and taking it farther than the mostordinary patchwork is a “hindrance ” to the liberal movement. 
 Fearful for the fate of the so-called freedom of the univer-sities granted by Trepov, they are today fighting against revolutionary freedom. 
 Fearful for the legal “freedom of assembly” which the government will grant tomorrow in apolice-distorted form, they will hold us back from using theseassemblies for genuinely proletarian aims. 
 Fearful for thefate of the State Duma, they already displayed wise modera-tion at the September Congress, and continue to display it now by combating the idea of a boycott; why, they say, you must not hinder us from getting things done in the StateDuma! It must be confessed that, to the shame of Social-Democracy, there have been opportunists in its ranks whofell for this bait by reason of their doctrinaire and lifeless distortion of Marxism! They argue that the revolution is a bourgeois one and therefore ... therefore we must retraceour steps in the measure the bourgeoisie succeeds in ob-taining concessions from tsarism. 
 To this day the new-Iskrists have not seen the real significance of the State Duma,because they are themselves drawing back and therefore naturally do not notice the Constitutional-Democrats’ regression. 
 That the Iskrists have already retraced theirsteps since the promulgation of the State Duma Act is anindisputable fact. 
 Prior to the State Duma Act they neverthought of placing the question of an agreement with theConstitutional-Democrats on the order of the day. 
 After the State Duma Act they (Parvus, Cherevanin and Martov) raised this question, and not merely as a matter of theory,but in an immediately practical form. 
 Prior to the State Duma Act they presented quite stringent conditions to the democrats (right up to co-operation in arming the people, etc. 
). 
 After the State Duma Act they immediately reduced the conditions, confining themselves to a promise to convertthe Black-Hundred or the liberal Duma into a revolutionaryone. 
 Prior to the State Duma Act the reply their officialresolution gave to the question as to who should convoke thepopular constituent assembly was: either a provisional revolutionary government or a representative institution. 
 After the State Duma Act they deleted the provisional revo-lutionary government, and they now say: either “demo-cratic” (like the Constitutional-Democrats?) “organisationsof the people” (?), or ... or the State Duma. 
 We thus see infact how the new-Iskrists are guided by their magnificent principle: the revolution is a bourgeois revolution—there-fore, comrades, watch out lest the bourgeoisie recoil! The Moscow events, which for the first time since the State Duma Act have shown the real nature of the Constitutional-Democrats’ tactics at grave political junc-tures, have also shown that Social-Democracy’s opportunist appendage, which we have described, is inevitably being transformed into a mere appendage to the bourgeoisie. 
We have just said: a Black-Hundred or a liberal State Duma. 
To an Iskra supporter these words would appear mon-strous, for he considers distinction between a Black-HundredState Duma and a liberal State Duma highly important. 
 But these selfsame Moscow events have disclosed the fal-laciousness of this “parliamentary” idea, which had been soinappropriately advanced in a pre-parliamentary period. 
The Moscow events have shown that the liberal turncoathas actually played the part of a Trepov. 
 The closing ofthe University, which would have been decreed by Trepov yesterday, has been carried out today by Messrs. 
 Manuilov and Trubetskoi. 
 Is it not clear that the “Duma” liberals willalso scurry back and forth between Trepov and Romanov,on the one hand, and the revolutionary people on the other?Is it not clear that the slightest support for liberal turncoatsis something befitting only political simpletons? Under a parliamentary system it is often necessary to support a more liberal party against a less liberal one. 
 Butduring a revolutionary struggle for a parliamentary system it is treachery to support liberal turncoats who are “reconciling” Trepov with the revolution. 
 The events in Moscow have revealed in practice the align-ment of social forces that Proletary has spoken of so many times: the socialist proletariat and the vanguard of revolu-tionary bourgeois democracy have waged a struggle , while the liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie has conducted negotia-tions . 
 Therefore, fellow-workers, study the lessons of the Moscow events, and do so most attentively. 
 For it is in this way, and inevitably so, that matters will take their coursethroughout the whole of the Russian revolution. 
 We mustrally more solidly than ever in a genuinely socialist party,which shall consciously express the interests of the workingclass, and not drift along in the wake of the masses. 
 In the struggle we must place reliance only on revolutionary dem-ocrats, permit agreements with them alone, and carry outthese agreements only on the field of battle against theTrepovs and Romanov. 
 We must bend every effort to rouse,in addition to the students, who are the vanguard of revo-lutionary democracy, also those broad masses of the people whose movement is not only democratic in a general way (today every turncoat calls himself a democrat), but agenuinely revolutionary movement—namely, the masses ofthe peasantry. 
 We must remember that the liberals and Con-stitutional-Democrats, who are bringing vacillation into theranks of supporters of the autocracy, will inevitably strive in every way to bring vacillation into our ranks as well. 
 Only an open revolutionary struggle which consigns allliberal chicken coops and all liberal Dumas to the rubbishheap will be of serious and decisive consequence. 
 There-fore, prepare for ever new battles, without losing a singlemoment! Arm as best you can; immediately form squads of fighters who will be prepared to battle with devoted energy against the accursed autocracy; remember that tomorrow orthe following day events will certainly call you to rise inrevolt, and the question now is only whether you will be ableto take prepared and united action, or whether you will becaught off your guard and disunited! The events in Moscow have once again and for the hundredth time confuted the sceptics. 
 They have shown thatwe are still inclined to underestimate the revolutionary Front page of the newspaper Borba Proletariata , No. 
 2, with Lenin’s article “The Democratic Tasks of the Revolutionary Proletariat”. 
 1905 Reduced activity of the masses. 
 They will bring round many of those who have already begun to waver, who have begun to lose faith in the idea of an uprising after the conclusion of peace and the granting of a Duma. 
 No, it is precisely now that theuprising is gaining ground and increasing in intensity withunparalleled rapidity. 
 Let us all be at our posts when theimminent explosion comes, one in comparison with whichboth January 9 and the memorable Odessa days will seem mere child’s play. 
 Proletary , No. 
 22, Published according to October 24 (11), 1905 the text in Proletary “THE STRUGGLE OF THE PROLETARIAT ”127 In the article “Reply to Sotsial-Demokrat ” we should like to mention the splendid way in which the problem of thecelebrated “introduction of a consciousness from without”had been posed. 
 The author divides the problem into fourindependent parts: 1) The philosophical problem of therelation of man’s consciousness to his social being—social being determines consciousness. 
 Corresponding to the exist-ence of two classes, two kinds of consciousness are evolved—the bourgeois and the socialist. 
 Socialist consciousnesscorresponds to the position of the proletariat. 
 2) “Whocan and does evolve this socialist consciousness (scientificsocialism)?” “Contemporary socialist consciousness can arise only on the basis of profound scientific knowledge” (Kautsky), i. 
e. 
, its evolution “is a matter for a few Social-Democraticintellectuals who possess the necessary means and time”. 
3) How does this consciousness penetrate into the prole-tariat? “It is here that Social-Democracy (and not onlySocial-Democratic intellectuals) comes in, and introduces socialist consciousness into the working-class movement. 
” 4) What does Social-Democracy meet with when it comesto the proletariat with the message of socialism? It meetswith an instinctive urge towards socialism. 
 “Together with the proletariat, a tendency towards socialism is of necessityengendered both among the proletarians themselves, and among those who adopt the viewpoint of the proletariat; this accounts for the birth of an urge towards socialism”(Kautsky). 
 From this the Menshevik draws the followingridiculous conclusion: “Hence it is clear that socialism isnot introduced into the proletariat from without, but, onthe contrary, comes from the proletariat and enters the minds of those who adopt the views of the proletariat”! Proletary , No. 
 22, Published according to October 24 (11), 1905 the text in Proletary THE YOUTH ABROAD AND THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION The letter from an out-of-the-way place, calling upon all to return to Russia from abroad ( Proletary , No. 
 19) has evoked a reply from Comrade “Revolutionary”, writing toProletary from Berne. 
 Comrade “Revolutionary” insists on importance of theory in the movement, the need to study, and the like. 
 We of course fully agree with him in the mat-ter, and that was just the sense of our reservation regardingthe above-mentioned letter. 
 128 Comrade “Revolutionary” advises the Party to organise at some place, for examplein Geneva, something in the nature of a university, for the youth to be able to engage in serious studies. 
 There have been many such plans, but their implementation meetswith too many practical difficulties. 
 Proletary , No. 
 22, Published according to October 24 (11), 1905 the text in Proletary A LETTER TO THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIALIST BUREAU Geneva, October 27, 1905 Dear Comrade, On June 28 you sent us Comrade Bebel’s proposal concern-ing the differences in our Party. 
 On July 24 I wrote to you * that I could not give you a reply on behalf of the Central Committee of our Party, asI am only one of the members of the Committee, and askedthe Bureau to clear up a few points for me. 
 In reply I received a letter from Citizen Huysmans, dated August 5, in which he writes that the Executive Committee’s interven-tion is directed only towards moral suasion. 
 I immediatelyinformed the Central Committee of our Party of the exactnature of Bebel’s proposal. 
 I am now in receipt of a replyfrom the Central Committee, which accepts your offer and appoints as its representatives Comrades Vasilyev, Schmidt, 129 and Lenin. 
 Comrade Schmidt is in Russia. 
 We must there-fore be informed in advance of the date fixed for theconference (at least three weeks ahead of time). 
 The other two delegates are in Switzerland. 
Accept, etc. 
 V. 
 Ulyanov (Lenin ) P. 
 S. 
 I have just received another letter informing me that Comrade Schmidt will soon leave for abroad (arriving prob-ably in November) in order to settle a number of matters pertaining to our Party. 
 It is therefore of the utmost impor-*See pp. 
 142-45 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 tance for me to obtain as soon as possible the reply of the other section of our Party concerning the date for the con-ference. 
 It is extremely difficult for members of our Party working in Russia to go abroad, which makes it desirablethat the date on which the conference is to be convenedshould be fixed now, in other words, that the other sectionand the members of the International Bureau advise us asearly as possible when they propose to call this conference. 
 First published in 1929 Published according to the in the second and third editions text in the second and third of V. 
 I. 
 Lenin’s Collected Works , editions of the Collected Works , Vol. 
 8 which has been checked against a French typewritten copy of the text THE ALL-RUSSIA POLITICAL STRIKE Geneva, October 26 (13) The barometer indicates a storm—that is what is stated in today’s foreign newspapers, which carry telegraphicdispatches on the mighty growth of the all-Russia political strike . 
 Nor is it only the barometer that indicates a storm: everything has been dislodged by the mighty whirlwind of a concerted proletarian onslaught. 
 The revolution is pro-gressing at astonishing speed, unfolding an amazing wealthof events, and if we wanted to give our reader a detailedaccount of the last three or four days, we should have to writea whole book. 
 However, we shall leave it to future genera-tions to write detailed history. 
 We are witnesses of thrilling scenes of one of the greatest of civil wars, wars for liberty, mankind has ever experienced, and we must live at highertempo so as to devote all our energies to this war. 
 The storm has burst—and how insignificant do the liberal and democratic speeches, suppositions, conjecturesand plans about the Duma seem now. 
 How out-of-date have all our disputes about the Duma already become—in the space of a few days, a few hours! Some of us doubtedwhether the revolutionary proletariat was sufficiently strongto frustrate the infamous farce staged by police ministers;some of us were afraid to speak with all boldness about boy-cotting the elections. 
 But, as it turns out, elections have not yet started everywhere, and already a mere wave of the hand has been enough to rock the whole house of cards. 
 Amere wave of the hand has forced not only the liberals and the craven Osvobozhdeniye gentry, but even Mr. 
 Witte, head of the new “liberal” tsarist government, to talk (true, so far only to talk ) of reforms that would undermine all the artful devices of the entire Bulygin farce. 
 This hand, whose wave brought such an upheaval in the Duma question, is that of the Russian proletariat. 
 A Germansocialist song runs as follows: “ All the wheels stand still if your mighty arm so will . 
” This mighty arm has now been raised. 
 Our indications and predictions on the political mass strike’s enormous importance to the armed uprising havebeen strikingly borne out. 
 The all-Russia political strike has this time really involved the whole country, unitingall the peoples of the accursed Russian “Empire” in the heroic rising of a class that is the most oppressed and the most advanced. 
 Proletarians of all nations of this empire of oppression and violence are now mustering in a great army—an army of liberty and an army of socialism. 
 Moscow andSt. 
 Petersburg share the honour of having taken revolutionaryproletarian initiative. 
 Both capitals have gone on strike. 
Finland is striking. 
 Headed by Riga, the Baltic provinces have joined the movement. 
 Heroic Poland has again joined the ranks of the strikers, as if in mockery of the impotent rageof her enemies, who imagined that they could crush her withtheir blows and have, instead, only welded her revolutionaryforces more closely together. 
 The Crimea is rising (Simfero-pol), and also the South. 
 In Ekaterinoslav barricades are being erected, and blood is being shed. 
 The Volga region (Saratov, Simbirsk, Nizhni-Novgorod) is on strike, and thestrike is spreading both to the central agricultural provinces(Voronezh) and to the industrial Centre (Yaroslavl). 
 A modest delegation of the Railwaymen’s Union has taken the lead of this army of workers, many million strong and speaking many languages. 
 On a stage where political comedies were played by the liberals, with their highflownand cowardly speeches to the tsar, and with their smirkingand scraping to Witte—on this stage a worker suddenlymakes an appearance and presents his ultimatum t o Mr. 
 Witte, the new head of the new “liberal” tsarist govern-ment. 
 The railway workers’ delegation refused to await that “board of burghers”, the State Duma. 
 The workers’delegation did not even care to waste valuable time on /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR “criticism” of this Punch-and-Judy show. 
 The workers’ delegation first prepared criticism by deeds —the political strike—and then declared to the buffoon of a minister: “There can be only one solution—the convocation of aconstituent assembly, elected on the basis of universaland direct suffrage. 
 ” The buffoon-minister spoke, to use the apt expression of the railway workers themselves, “like a real hidebound bureaucrat, hedging as usual, and not committing himself to anything definite”. 
 He promised decrees on freedom ofthe press, but rejected universal suffrage; according toforeign press reports, he declared a constituent assembly“impossible at present”. 
 The workers’ delegation called a general strike. 
 After leaving the Minister the workers’ delegation went to the University, where political meetings attended by some tenthousand people were taking place. 
 The proletariat madegood use of the platform placed at its disposal by the revo-lutionary students. 
 At the first systematic and free politicalmass meetings held in Russia, in all cities, at schools and factories, and in the streets, the answer given by the buffoon-minister was discussed, and speeches centred around thetask of waging a resolute armed struggle, which would makethe convocation of a constituent assembly both “possible”and necessary . 
 The foreign bourgeois press, including even the most liberal newspapers, is horrified by the “terroristic and seditious” slogans proclaimed by speakers at the free popular meetings, as though the tsar’s government, by allits policy of oppression, had not itself made insurrectionimperative and inevitable. 
 The uprising is drawing near, is evolving from the all-Russia political strike before our very eyes. 
 The appoint-ment of a buffoon-minister, who assures the workers that a popular constituent assembly is impossible “at present”clearly shows the growth of the revolutionary forces, andthe decline of the forces of the tsar’s government. 
 Theautocracy is no longer strong enough to come out against the revolution openly. 
 The revolution is not yet strong enough to deal the enemy a decisive blow. 
 This fluctuation of almost evenly balanced forces inevitably engenders confusion amongthe authorities, makes for transitions from repression to concession, to laws providing for freedom of the press and freedom of assembly. 
 Forward, then, to a new, still more widespread and per-sistent struggle—the enemy must not be given a chance topull himself together! The proletariat has already performedwonders for the victory of the revolution. 
 The all-Russiapolitical strike has brought this victory tremendously closer,causing the enemy to toss about on his death-bed. 
 However, we are very far indeed from having done everything that we can and must do for final victory. 
 The struggle is approach-ing, but has not yet reached its real climax. 
 At this verymoment the working class is rising, mobilising and arming,on a scale hitherto unparalleled. 
 And it will finally sweepaway the abhorrent autocracy, send all the buffoons of ministers packing, set up its own provisional revolutionary government, and show all the peoples of Russia how “possible”and necessary it is, just “at present”, to convoke a trulypopular and truly constituent assembly. 
 Proletary , No. 
 23, Published according to October 31 (18), 1905 the text in Proletary THE FIRST RESULTS OF THE POLITICAL ALIGNMENT The account of the Conference of Social-Democratic Parties and Organisations in Russia published in our previous issue affords an opportunity of drawing certain conclusions, at least preliminary, regarding the present-daypolitical alignment. 
 The Conference of Social-DemocraticParties and Organisations (the Central Committee of theRussian Social-Democratic Labour Party, the Bund, theLettish Social-Democratic Labour Party, the Polish Social-Democratic Party, and the revolutionary Ukrainian Party) unanimously accepted the tactic of an active boycott ofthe State Duma. 
 The necessity for increased agitation againstthe State Duma in the direct sense of that word, the neces-sity to agitate against all parties favouring participationin the State Duma, and, finally, the imperativeness of pre-paring for armed uprising have now, it may be said without exaggeration, been recognised by the entire revolutionarySocial-Democratic movement, irrespective of national dis-tinctions. 
 The principles underlying the tactics adoptedby the C. 
C. 
 of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 and advocated by us inProletary , beginning with No. 
 12 of our paper, i. 
e. 
, for the last two and a half months, now underlie the tactics of practically the entire Social-Democratic movement inRussia, with one lamentable exception. 
 This exception, as the reader knows, is the Iskra and the “Minority”, which has seceded from the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 The“Organising Committee”—its practical centre—was repre-sented at the Conference. 
 We do not know how its delegate voted, but it is a fact that the Organising Committeerefused to endorse the Conference’s resolution. 
 This was to be expected after the Southern “Constituent” Conference of new-Iskrists adopted its extremely unwise and fundamen-tally opportunist resolution on the State Duma, which we analysed in detail in Proletary , No. 
 21. 
 * In this way, the political alignment is quite clear. 
 The question of the attitude towards the State Duma has occa-sioned what is probably the first joint discussion of politicaltactics by the opposition and the revolutionary parties, by the legal and the illegal press. 
 This is a giant stride forward in comparison with the previous period in the movement. 
Formerly, a gulf separated the opposition from the revolu-tionaries, legal work from illegal work. 
 The movement hasmade such tremendous progress during the last ten monthsor so that the gulf has in considerable measure been removed. 
 The revolutionary struggle has carried the “legal” opposition on to the crest of the wave, almost to recognising that arevolution is on. 
 Hitherto, strictly speaking, we could noteven discuss tactics or the behaviour of political partieswith representatives of the legal opposition, for in fact therewere no parties except the revolutionary and illegal, and “political activities” coincided fully with those of “political offenders”, if one disregards the “activities” of the autocracyand its henchmen. 
 Now, the State Duma has naturallyand inevitably become a subject of discussion for themass of the people—for people of all shades of opinion,all tendencies and parties. 
 The revolutionary struggle has cleared the road for revolutionary discussion in the legal press, at Zemstvo meetings, student assemblies, and workers’mass meetings. 
 Practically the first to start the discussion on the attitude to the State Duma were the Zemstvos and the radical intel-ligentsia, who are most directly concerned with the sop thrown by the tsar, and who were best informed of it—even prior to the publication of the Manifesto of August 6. 
 Thediscussion then spread to the whole political press inRussia, both the free (i. 
e. 
, illegal) press which gave frank andfull expression to all its arguments and slogans, and to thelegal press, which wrote in Aesopian language for a boycott, and openly against it. 
 *See pp. 
 356-73 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 The political alignment, that precursor of a demarcation between the political parties and classes of all the peoples of Russia, began to take shape on the boycott issue. 
 Should the Duma be entered, or not? Should the Duma be nipped inthe bud, or accepted? Should the struggle be waged withinthe Duma, on the basis of the Duma, or outside the Duma,apart from the Duma, against the Duma? That was the ines-capable issue both for the privileged handful of the elector-ate and for the masses, “who had no rights”. 
 Today we have on this issue, which was of course tackled from a thousandvarious points of view and with thousands of variations and“dissenting opinions”, the returns supplied by a “canvass” of public opinion as presented by the entire press and by theaggregate of the declarations made by all the various political organisations, political meetings, assemblies, etc. 
 These returns are as follows:Views on the Duma fall into three clearly defined main categories, which fully correspond to the three main andbasic social forces involved in the present revolution: theviews of the Black Hundreds (the autocracy), of the liberals (the bourgeoisie), and of the revolutionaries (the proletariat). 
 The Black Hundreds seized on the Duma as the bestmeans, most likely the only possible or even conceivablemeans, of saving the autocracy. 
 The liberals criticised theDuma adversely, but accepted it, being irresistibly drawn tolawful paths and to compromise with the tsar. 
 Headed by the proletariat, the revolutionary people, denounced the Duma, proclaimed an active boycott of it, and by their deedshave already shown that they are striving to convert thisactive boycott into an armed uprising. 
 It would be worth our while to dwell on these three main categories in somewhat greater detail. 
 As regards the Black Hundreds, it might have been expected (and this expectation was expressed by peopleinclined to take the Duma in all earnest, even, if we are notmistaken, the Iskra group) that the supporters of the autoc-racy would directly or indirectly sympathise with a boy-cott, or absenteeism, as our servile press frequently puts it. 
 These people might have been expected to say in effect: Let them boycott the Duma; so much the better for us, forin that case the Duma will be composed more completely of Black-Hundred elements. 
 Since there are conservative organs in Russia capable of denouncing tsarist ministers for excessive liberalism, and voicing discontent with “an excessively weak” government, such a view could easilybe expressed just as clearly as many views held by consti-tutionalists, or even more clearly. 
 But it was here that amistake made itself felt, a mistake made by people who tookthe Duma seriously, and began to talk of a struggle on the basis of the Duma, of supporting a struggle in the Duma, etc. 
 It could be seen immediately that the autocracy was terriblyin need of a legal Duma opposition, that it was terribly afraidof a boycott. 
 Why? The answer is very simple: because ithad become absolutely clear that it was utterly impossibleto govern the country without coming to terms with at least a section of the bourgeoisie as a class. 
 It was impossible to govern the country, to obtain money, or to continueexisting without coming to terms with the Right wing ofthe bourgeoisie. 
 Irrespective of our autocracy’s Asiaticsavagery, and the many features of antediluvian barbarismit has retained in such an unusually pure form throughout the centuries, the autocratic government is nevertheless the government of a capitalist country, linked with Europe,with international markets and international capital bythousands of inseverable ties. 
 The dependence of the autoc-racy on the bourgeoisie of All Russia is a supreme materialdependence, which may be concealed behind hundreds of medieval annexes, or weakened by millions of bribes doled out to individuals or groups by the Court (titles, sine-cures, concessions, sops, favours, etc. 
, etc. 
, etc. 
), but at everycrisis in the people’s life it must manifest itself with decisiveforce. 
 It is not a matter of mere chance that we now see Mr. 
 Witte currying favour with the liberals, delivering liberal speeches, which are reported in the legal press, conducting“informal negotiations with Mr. 
 Gessen”, the leader of theConstitutional-Democrats (the cable from the St. 
 Petersburgcorrespondent of The Times ), or that we see the foreign press teeming with news about the tsar’s liberal plans. 
 Of course, there is no end of lies and intrigues in all this, but then the tsarist government, and for that matter any bour-geois government, cannot make a single step in its policies without resorting to lies and intrigues. 
 Of course, there is a great deal of the most shabby chicanery, occasioned by the arrival in St. 
 Petersburg of representatives of French and German bankers to negotiate a new loan of 500,000,000 rublesof which the tsarist government stands in dire need. 
 Butthen the entire system of governmental dependence on thebourgeoisie inevitably engenders cases of chicanery inconnection with all the various deals and trickery accompa-nying this dependence. 
 It is imperative for the autocracy to “make peace” with the bourgeoisie, and it is obliged to exert itself to this end; natu-rally, in this connection it wants to dupe public opinion inEurope and Russia. 
 And the State Duma is a splendid meansfor achieving this end. 
 A legal bourgeois opposition in the Duma is just the façade for a state system recognised by the bourgeoisie, a façade that might help the autocracy toextricate itself from its predicament. 
 This explains why Moskovskiye Vedomosti , that organ of conservative opposition to the government, speaks of theDuma boycott not with malicious joy or derision, but with a gnashing of teeth and the rage of despair. 
 This explains why Novoye Vremya , organ of the Black Hundreds, attacks the “absentees” and tries to enlist even Bebel for the struggleagainst the idea of a boycott ( Proletary , No. 
 20 *). 
 The Black Hundreds are afraid of a boycott , and only the blind or those out to justify the liberals can now deny that the boycott would be fully successful if it were endorsed by the leading figures of the Zemstvo and municipal congresses. 
 But the gist of the matter is that the liberal bourgeoisie’s fundamental interests as a class incline it towards the mon-archy, a two-chamber system, law and order, and moderation,towards a struggle against the “horrors” of an “uninterrupted revolution”, the “horrors” of a revolution after the French model.... 
 The turn taken by the liberal bourgeoisie, theOsvobozhdeniye adherents and the Constitutional-Democrats away from radical phrases about a boycott towards a deter-mined war against it, is the first major political step by the Russian bourgeoisie as a class, a step which reveals its treacherous nature, its “criminal intent”—to perpetrate *See p. 
 321 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 treachery against the revolution. 
 This is no mere intent (for which alone no law can hold one accountable, as some smart lawyer among the Osvobozhdeniye gentry would probably object), but an actual attempt to commit this crime, andeven a consummation of the crime. 
 We are living at a veryrapid pace now. 
 The times have long gone when it was neces-sary for us to rouse the bourgeoisie to political awareness in general (though such times are quite recent according to ordinary chronology, which is inapplicable to revolution). 
 Gone, even, are the times when it was necessary for us to help the bourgeoisie to organise itself into a political opposition. 
They are now awakened, have organised themselves, and anentirely different task stands on the order of the day, a greattask which only the tremendous strides of the revolution have made real and possible—that of reaching an agreement with the tsar (the task of capital) and that of neutralisingtreacherous capital (the task of labour). 
 It is this task that the revolutionary proletariat, which is marching at the head of the revolutionary people, hasassumed, while remaining true to its duty of awakening, encouraging and rousing its “mates” in the struggle against medievalism and serfdom, and at the same time passingon from less revolutionary to more revolutionary “mates”. 
It is not the Duma that has been “taken in earnest” bythe revolutionary proletariat under the guidance of Social-Democracy, but those words, promises and slogans about a Duma boycott which popped out of the mouths of the radical windbags of the bourgeoisie by reason of their levity,extreme youthfulness and exuberance. 
 The proletariat hastranslated boycott talk into reality; it has done so by openlyand unequivocally raising the standard of armed uprising;it has done so by inaugurating not only the broadest pos-sible agitation, but open street fighting as well (in Moscow); it has done so by fraternising with the radical youth, thevanguard of the masses, the peasant masses in particular,whose class characteristics have not yet fully taken shape,but which are infinitely oppressed and exploited. 
 Withoutentering into any agreements or concluding any pacts, the socialist proletariat has united with the awakened sections of revolutionary bourgeois democracy, for the accomplish-ment of a practical militant task. 
 During the great Moscow events (great as a portent, not in themselves), the prole-tariat and the revolutionary democrats did the fighting, while the liberals, the Osvobozhdeniye people and the Constitutional-Democrats conducted negotiations with theautocracy. 
 The political alignment has become quite clear: for the Duma, to preserve the autocracy; for the Duma, to limit theautocracy; against the Duma, to destroy the autocracy. 
 In other words: for the Duma, to suppress the revolution; for the Duma, to halt the revolution; against the Duma, tobring the revolution to a victorious conclusion. 
 There was an exception—a sad and regrettable exception —which marred the distinctness of the class alignment(thereby, like all exceptions proving the general rule). 
 This was the opportunist wing of the Social-Democratic movement, as represented by the new Iskra . 
 However, this exception too—the narrow sphere of illegal organisationsabroad—stemmed from a very important and very instructivelogical development, which we predicted. 
 The Conferencewhich we mentioned above united the revolutionary Social-Democrats. 
 Iskra remained united —not by virtue of an agreement, but by virtue of the course of events—with Osvobozhdeniye . 
 In the illegal press, the revolutionary Social-Democrats and the extreme Left wing of the revolu-tionary bourgeois democrats came out for an active boycott. 
It was the opportunist Social-Democrats and the extreme Right wing of the bourgeois democrats who declared against the boycott. 
 Thus we have confirmation of what was shown in the analysis of the most important of the new-Iskra resolutions on tactics (see Lenin’s Two Tactics ), * namely, that Iskra i s descending to the level of the liberal landlords, whereas Proletary is raising the masses of the peasants to its own level; Iskra is descending to the liberal bourgeoisie, whereas Proletary is raising the revolutionary petty bourgeoisie. 
 Anyone familiar with Social-Democratic literature knows the catch phrase long ago launched by Iskra —the Bolshe-viks and Proletary have veered towards the Socialist-*See p. 
 47 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 Revolutionaries, towards the extreme bourgeois democrats. 
 There is a grain of truth in this, as there is in all catch phrases. 
 It does not express mere chagrin on the part of the Iskrists; it reflects an actual phenomenon, but does so as aconcave mirror would reflect an object. 
 This actual phenom-enon is the fact that the Mensheviks and the Bolsheviks represent respectively the opportunist and the revolution-ary wings of the Russian Social-Democratic movement. 
 Since the Iskrists turned to opportunism, they were bound to arrive at the conclusion that the Bolsheviks are“Jacobins” (to use a term of eighteenth-century politicaldivisions). 
 These accusations merely confirm our view on the Right and Left wings of the present-day Social-Democraticmovement. 
 These accusations by the opportunists are just as flattering to us as was the accusation hurled at us by Rabochaya Mysl in 1900 to the effect that we were following in the footsteps of Narodnaya Volya. 
 The actual way inwhich political tendencies throughout Russia are groupedpolitically on a major question of tactics has proved inpractice the correctness of our appraisal of Iskra ’s stand ever since the Second Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 The alignment of illegal parties effected at the Confer-ence of all Social-Democrats thus naturally supplementsthe alignment of all parties on the Duma question. 
 If theIskrists have proved a regrettable exception, the fact thatthey are only an exception gives us new faith in the validity of the rule, in the victory of revolutionary Social-Democracy, in the realisation of the consistent slogans of the Russianrevolution. 
 Although the liberals’ banality and the vul-garisation of Marxism by some Marxists may at momentsof gloom seem an omen that our revolution too will turnout to be a banal, abortive, and incomplete revolution like the German Revolution of 1848, nevertheless the vitality of the principles of revolutionary Social-Democracy inspiresus with a stimulating faith, and the actions of the heroicworking class uphold that faith. 
 The revolution draws asplendid line of division between political tendencies, servesas a splendid reductio ad absurdum of erroneous opinions. 
 So far the revolution in Russia has been progressing in such a way as to justify the hopes for its complete victoryinspired by the present situation at home and abroad. 
 And the sight of the autocracy’s consternation and the liberals’ confusion, the sight of the bold revolutionary energy of the proletariat, which is taking the peasantry in tow, lead us to believe that “our train will go as the German never did”. 
130 Proletary , No. 
 23, Published according to October 31 (18), 1905 the text in Proletary as verified against the manuscript THE HYSTERICS OF THE DEFEATED Our article, “The First Results of the Political Align-ment”, had already been written when we received No. 
 112 of Iskra , which contains a sort of overwrought, spiteful, tearful and fuming article full of conceits, entitled “TheFruits of Parochialism”. 
 What else can you call this articlebut a fit of hysterics. 
 It is quite impossible to discern eventhe shadow of reasoning in this hysterical shriek. 
 What has parochialism to do with it, dear Iskra comrades, when you yourselves , of your own free will , attended the Conference of the various Social-Democratic parties and organisations inRussia? Just give the matter a little thought, if you havenot entirely lost the capacity to think; give it at least somethought when your fit of hysterics is over! Surely if you con-sented to attend the Conference, if your delegate was there, that means that you yourselves regarded this Conference as a serious matter, a Party matter of the utmost importance tothe proletariat. 
 You are only discrediting yourselves forgood and all in the eyes of intelligent workers when youstart fulminating after being defeated at a Conference you yourselves acknowledged as serious and necessary by your voluntary participation! You are displeased with the fact that the Conference, in your opinion, condemned your tactics too sharply, by callingparticipation in the Duma treason to the cause of liberty?But were you not aware, dear Iskra comrades, that you were going to attend a Conference together with the Central Com-mittee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, and that Proletary , organ of this Central Committee, has for ever so long, both in pam-phlets and in articles, been showing up your transformation into toadies of the monarchist liberal party? You were perfectly well aware of that, dear Iskra comrades, and if you are now infuriated beyond all reason, we are really unable to help you. 
 After all, it is an inescapable and indisputablefact that of all the illegal parties, organisations, tendenciesand press organs of all the peoples of Russia, only you haveremained in the company of Osvobozhdeniye . 
 It is this fact that constitutes the severest indictment against you, an indictment so severe that history has rarely known its equal; yet you imagined that the words “treason to the cause of liberty” were the source of this severity! You have lost your head so much that after your defeat at the Conference you have raised a hullabaloo about theharmfulness of federalism in organisation, such as is cherished by the Bund and other national Social-Democratic groups. 
 How unwise this is of you, dear Iskra comrades, for you are thereby only stressing the gravity of your defeat. 
 And, indeed, just think, dear Iskra comrades, who is it that for two years has been advocating organisationalvagueness and amorphousness, the principles of compromise and decentralisation? You yourselves, the new-Iskrists. 
 And it was the federalists of the Bund and of the Lettish andPolish Social-Democratic Labour Parties who at the timeplayed up in the press all your disorganising catchwordsagainst the so-called excesses of centralism, and so on and soforth. 
 And, it is likewise a fact, an inescapable and indis-putable fact, that all the federalists of the above-mentioned parties wrote and published articles in the spirit of theMinority! Just see, dear Iskra comrades, how inappropriate-ly you have brought up the subject of federalism: you havethereby stressed the fact that your erstwhile well-wishersof the Social-Democratic Bund and the Lettish and Polish parties were forced to desert you, being unable to put up with the utter banality of your Duma tactics! No, dearIskra comrades, if you just think matters over, after calming down, you will yourselves see what is obvious to all—it is notthe “Majority” that has come over to federalism, but theBund and the Lettish and Polish Social-Democrats who, influenced by the objective logic of the revolutionary events, have arrived at a standpoint that has always been upheld bythe “Majority”. 
 Of course, dear Iskra comrades, you have sustained a telling defeat. 
 That, however, is not due to any spiteful machinations on the part of the Majority or the Polish Social-Democrats, etc. 
, but rather to the hopeless muddlethat manifested itself already in the resolutions on tacticsadopted by the All-Russia Conference of Mensheviks. 
 So longas you stand on the basis of these resolutions, you willinevitably find yourselves the “ sole companion ” of Osvobozh-deniye , against all Social-Democrats and even against all revolutionary democrats. 
 Proletary , No. 
 23, Published according to October 31 (18), 1905 the text in Proletary as verified against the manuscript REVOLUTIONARY RIGA’S ULTIMATUM The German newspapers, which usually devote much attention to events in the Baltic provinces, have reportedthe following instructive fact. 
 Things are happening at the Riga Polytechnic, as they are at all other higher educational institutions: student assemblies have turned into politicalmeetings. 
 The students are organising into a combatantforce of the revolution. 
 The liberal bigwigs are turning uptheir noses and muttering under their breath about the weak-ness of the government. 
 But in Livonia, things have gone so hard with the landed gentry that they have energetically set about organising armed protection for their estates, with-out relying on the government, which cannot do anythingwith the peasants, or the workers, or the students. 
 TheBaltic barons are organising civil war in earnest: they arehiring whole squads, arming them with good magazine rifles, and posting them about their extensive estates. 
 And now it turns out that part of the members of the Germanstudent corporations in the Baltic provinces have joined suchsquads! Naturally, the Lettish and Russian students havenot only proclaimed a boycott against these Black Hundredsin student uniform, but have even appointed a special com-mission to investigate the participation of students in the landlord Black-Hundred bands. 
 Two members of this com-mission were sent into the countryside to gather informationfrom the peasants. 
 Both were arrested by the governmentand sent to prison in Riga. 
 The Lettish and Russian students then rose. 
 They called a huge meeting which passed a vigorous resolution. 
 The head of the Polytechnic, who had been invited to attend,was called upon to take immediate measures to secure the release of the arrested. 
 The resolution ended with a direct ultimatum: if within three days the arrested persons were’ not released at the time fixed, the students, with the aid of the Riga workers, would use every means in their power toeffect that release. 
 The Governor was away from Riga at the time, for he had gone to St. 
 Petersburg to obtain the powers of GovernorGeneral. 
 The acting Governor funked, and diplomatically wriggled out of the situation. 
 He summoned (so the Vossische Zeitung of October 20, N. 
 S. 
, reports) the head of the Polytechnic and the two arrested students, and askedthe latter whether they were aware that their actions wereunlawful. 
 They, of course, replied that they saw nothingunlawful in them. 
 The acting Governor, a Riga newspaper is said to have stated, then urged them to refrain from such unlawful acts, and—set both free. 
 “In the eyes of the students,” the correspondent, who feels for the Baltic barons, gloomily adds, “and in the eyes of themasses who stand behind them, the government has bowed tothe ultimatum. 
 And even a non-partisan must have gained the same impression. 
” Proletary , No. 
 23, Published according to October 31 (18), 1905 the text in Proletary THE PLANS OF A BUFFOON-MINISTER To gain a better understanding of today’s politics, it is sometimes worth while to look back at yesterday’s. 
 Here is what the usually well-informed correspondent of the London Times cabled from St. 
 Petersburg on October 10 (23): “From a high source I learn that the government has resolved to grant the four liberties demanded by the reformers subject however, to restrictions. 
 It is hoped that this concession will rally the Moderates. 
 Count Witte yesterday had a long conference on the sub-ject with the tsar. 
 Mr. 
 Goremykin is drafting a measure for endowingpeasants with state lands. 
 This will be placed on the table when theDuma meets. 
 It is thereby hoped to conciliate the peasant vote. 
 “Such briefly is the government’s plan of campaign. 
 It apparently excludes the intention of voluntarily granting a constitution before the meeting of the Duma, although some hope of this prevails amongthe Constitutional-Democrats. 
 One of the principal points to bediscussed at their Congress on Wednesday will be with regard to theaction of the party in the event of a constitution’s being granted onor before the assembling of the Duma—namely, whether the party shall consent in that case to work in the Duma or insist upon the convocation of a constituent assembly elected by universal suffrage. 
 “The supporters of the bureaucracy hope that the concessions which will be granted by the government will at last check theconstitutional movement without an extension of the suffrage or anendorsement of the legislative character of the Duma, but all the indications are the other way. 
” Indeed, the government’s “plan of campaign” is clear. 
 Equally clear to all people who have eyes to see is the “campaign” of the Constitutional-Democratic gentry, who arebargaining with the government. 
 There is only one snag: the working class is stirring, and stirring in such a waythat all the ingenious plans of both Mr. 
 Witte and theConstitutional-Democrats are crumbling to dust. 
 Proletary , No. 
 23, Published according to Proletary THE AGGRAVATION OF THE SITUATION IN RUSSIA It is under this headline that the Berlin liberal Vossische Zeitung has published the following interesting dispatch: “It is with irresistible force that events are developing in the empire of the tsars. 
 To every impartial observer it must be obviousthat neither the government nor any of the opposition or revolutionaryparties is in control of the situation. 
 The late Prince Trubetskoi and other professors of the higher educational institutions made vain attempts to dissuade the Russian students from the dangerous path,which they had taken when they decided to convert the universitiesinto places of political mass meetings. 
 The students paid enthusiastichomage to the memory of Trubetskoi, marched in masses in thefuneral procession, and turned the obsequies into an imposing political demonstration, but they did not follow his advice to keep outsiders out of the University. 
 At the University of St. 
 Petersburg,the Mining Academy and the Polytechnic mammoth meetings arebeing held, at which the students are often in the minority and whichlast from early morning till late at night. 
 Impassioned and fieryorations are delivered and revolutionary songs are sung. 
 Moreover, the liberals are roundly berated at these meetings, especially for their half-heartedness, which, it is claimed, is no accidental attribute ofRussian liberalism, but a quality that has been conditioned by eternalhistorical laws. 
 “There is something profoundly tragic in these reproaches, which, despite the historical references adduced to substantiate them, are in fact absolutely unhistorical, if only because the liberals in Russia have never had the slightest opportunity of displaying any half-heartedness that could in any way prejudice the cause of emancipationwhich is so important for all parties. 
 It is not their deeds, but rathertheir sufferings that handicap the liberals in their life course. 
 Thegovernment is just as helpless [italics in the original] in the face of these events as it is in the face of the labour troubles and the general unrest. 
 It is possible, of course, that it is planning a new blood-bath,and is only waiting for the moment when the movement becomes ripefor a Cossack attack. 
 But even if that should be the case, none of thepowers that be is certain that it will not lead to a still more violentoutbreak of disaffection. 
 Not even General Trepov has faith in his himself a doomed man, and that he expects no favourable results whatever from his administration. 
 ‘I am merely fulfilling my duty,and shall fulfil it to the end,’ he says. 
 “The tsar’s throne must be in a sad way indeed if the head of the police arrives at such conclusions. 
 And indeed it cannot but be recognised that despite all of Trepov’s efforts, despite the feverishactivity of endless commissions and conferences, the tension has notonly failed to relax since last year, but has even become much moreaccentuated. 
 Wherever one looks, the position everywhere has becomeworse and more threatening, everywhere the situation has become noticeably aggravated. 
” There is a great deal of truth in this appraisal, but at the same time a great deal of liberal stupidity. 
 “The liberals could not display a half-heartedness prejudicial to thecause. 
” Is that so? Why is it then that these poor liberals could nevertheless come forward more openly and freely thanthe other parties? No! The students are guided by a soundrevolutionary instinct, enhanced by their contact with the proletariat, when they zealously disassociate themselves from the Constitutional-Democrats, and discredit theseConstitutional-Democrats in the eyes of the people. 
 Themorrow will bring us great and epoch-making battles forliberty. 
 It is possible that the champions of liberty will yetsuffer more than one defeat. 
 But defeats will only serve to stir up the workers and peasants ever more profoundly, will only render the crisis more acute, and will only make moreformidable the inevitable ultimate victory of the cause ofliberty. 
 For our part, we shall bend every effort to preventthe bourgeois leeches of monarchist landlord liberalism fromattaching themselves to this victory, and to prevent the gentlemen of the big bourgeoisie from deriving the main benefit from this victory, as has happened more than once inEurope. 
 We shall bend all our efforts to bring this victory ofthe workers and peasants to its consummation, to bring about the utter destruction of all the loathsome institutions of autocracy, monarchy, bureaucracy, militarism and serf-ownership. 
 Only such a victory will put a real weapon into the hands of the proletariat—and then we shall set Europe ablaze, so as to make of the Russian democraticrevolution the prologue to a European socialist revolution. 
 Proletary , No. 
 23, Published according to October 31 (18), 1905 the text in Proletary NOTES ON “THE BRITISH LABOUR MOVEMENT AND THE TRADE UNION CONGRESS ”131 1 This is how the matter stood: the Taff Vale Railway sued the railway workers’ union for losses caused by the strike. 
 Despite bitter resistance by the workers, the bourgeois judges awarded damages to the capitalists! Court injunc-tions instructing trade unions to compensate the capital-ists for losses caused by a strike means in fact destroyingthe right to strike. 
 Judges who play the lackey to thebourgeoisie know well how to nullify even constitutionally guaranteed liberties, when it comes to the struggle between labour and capital. 
 2 Unfortunately, the British working-class movement promises to serve for a long time to come as a sad example of how the labour movement’s divorcement from socialism leads of necessity to its becoming shallow and bourgeoisin character. 
 Proletary , No. 
 23, Published according to October 31 (18), 1905 the text in Proletary AN EQUILIBRIUM OF FORCES132 1) The result to date (Monday, October 30 [17]) is an equilibrium of forces, as we already pointed out in Proletary No. 
 23. 
 2) Tsarism is no longer strong enough, the revolution not yet strong enough, to win. 
 3) Hence the tremendous amount of vacillation. 
 The terrific and enormous increase of revolutionary happenings(strikes, meetings, barricades, committees of public safety,complete paralysis of the government, etc. 
), on the other hand, the absence of resolute repressive measures. 
 The troops are wavering . 
 4) The tsar’s Court is wavering ( The Times and the Daily Telegraph ) between dictatorship and a constitution. 
 The Court is wavering and biding its time . 
 Strictly speak-ing, these are its correct tactics: the equilibrium of forces compels it to bide its time, for power is in its hands . 
 The revolution has reached a stage at which it is disad-vantageous for the counter-revolution to attack , to assume the offensive . 
 For us, for the proletariat, for consistent revolutionary democrats, this is not enough . 
 If we do not rise to a higher level, if we do not manage to launch an independent offensive, if we do not smash the forces of tsarism, do notdestroy its actual power, then the revolution will stop half-way, then the bourgeoisie will fool the workers . 
 5) Rumour has it that a constitution has been decided upon. 
 If that is so, then it follows that the tsar is heeding the lessons of 1848 and other revolutions: he wants to grant a constitution without a constituent assembly, before a constituent assembly, apart from a constituent assembly. 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR What kind of constitution? At best (for the tsar) =a Constitutional-Democratic constitution. 
 This implies: achievement of the Constitutional-Demo-crats’ ideal, skipping the revolution; deceiving the people,for all the same there will be no complete and actual freedom of elections. 
 Should not the revolution skip this granted constitution? Written on October 30 (17), 1905 First published in 1926 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany V the manuscript A SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC SWEETHEART To acclamation from Osvobozhdeniye , Comrade Starover continues to repent in the new Iskra for the sins he committed (unwisely) by participating in the old Iskra . 
 Comrade Starover very much resembles the heroine of a story by Chekhov entitled “Sweetheart”. 
 At first Sweetheart lived withan impresario and used to say: “Vanichka and I are stagingserious plays. 
” Later she lived with a timber merchant andwould say: “Vasichka and I are indignant at the high dutieson timber. 
” Finally, she lived with a veterinary surgeon and used to say: “Kolechka and I doctor horses. 
”—It is the same with Comrade Starover. 
 “Lenin and I” abused Mar-tynov. 
 “Martynov and I” are abusing Lenin. 
 CharmingSocial-Democratic Sweetheart! In whose embrace will youfind yourself tomorrow? Written in October 1905 First published in 1926 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany V the manuscript ON P. 
 B. 
 AXELROD ’S PAMPHLET THE PEOPLE ’S DUMA AND A WORKERS ’ CONGRESS ANALYSIS OF THE PAMPHLET133 In connection with P. 
 B. 
 Axelrod’s little pamphlet entitled The People ’s Duma and a Workers ’ Congress , the following should be noted: This is the prototype of all of Iskra ’s follies—both of a parallel parliament and a deal with the Constitutionalists-Democrats. 
 By and large, it is all playing at parliamentarianism — in the People’s Duma, and in arranging a deal with the Constitutionalists-Democrats—in the parliamentary inter-pretation of a “Workers’ Congress” with illustrations “fromLassalle” (who was working in conditions of a constitution ten years after it had been won by a revolution). 
 We have no end of ineptitudes here: “the first and primary foundation” (page 13) “of serious negotiations and agreements between our party and liberal organisations”... of a c t i o n . 
 What kind? Comrade P. 
 B. 
 Axelrod is three years late! Can this be considered an agreement with a p o l i t i c a l party ? It amounts to servicesrendered, technical in thefirst place, which weresufficient three years ago. 
 “School-level pedagogy”: even if the convoking of a P e o p l e ’ s D u m a and a Workers ’ Congress is a failure1) Material means ... 2) premises ... 3)a r m s [“delivery”] 4) influence on public in-stitutions,utilisation of connections 5) in the bureaucracy and the military, in the interests of open political action. 
 (page 12), “ the agitation and organisational work done will not have been lost ”. 
 Compare with an insurrection—can organisational work in one “ have been lost ”? No. 
 And agitation work? No, since an insurrection is in progress, is a fact. 
 As for the P e o p l e ’ s D u m a —that is a comedy, a phantom, a hollow phrase. 
 A saccharine approach to the workers . 
 Page 7: “of a constituent popular assembly, i. 
e. 
, a really ‘People ’s Duma ’. 
” {Not “ i. 
e. 
” and not “really”} (page 7) “‘The duties' of the People’s DumaI°1) “to present to the State Duma the demand that a constituent assembly be convened, and thatit declare [?—and?] itself non-competent, without the right to function. 
” 2) ~”~!! ha-ha! and what about the “right” to convenea constituent assembly? II° 3) “to serve as the centre and spokesman of the will of all democratic (page 7) sections of the population, andorganiser of defensive and offensive action by these sectionsagainst the government and its allies. 
” Compare this nonsense with a provisional revolutionary government as the organ of insurrection. 
 A spate of meaningless words, and the real-ity of revolution. 
 The difficulty of an uprising =the difficulty of climbing Mt. 
 Blanc. 
 The difficulty of a “People’s Duma” under the autocracy =“the difficulty” of flying through the air on to the top of Mt. 
 Blanc. 
 Note should be taken of confirmation of our Central Com-mittee’s opinion, as expressed in its leaflet, that Iskra ’s plan is a piece of invention coming from abroad. 
 Axelrodwants to bring round to his point of view his correspondent, who (a) (page 6) doubts whether the slogans of the People’s Duma and a Workers’ Congress will win over the mass of the people; (b) (page 14) has motivated the policy of an“active boycott” (page 15 and page 14 in fine ). 
 Axelrod considers the policy of an active boycott “reactionary and utopian”. 
 — reaction?—a conference of Social-Democrats $Osvo-bozhdeniye have settled this question. 
 A coalition with the Black Hundreds?—fear of Moskovskiye Vedomosti and Novoye Vremya . 
 — utopia? Two “utopias”: i n s u r r e c t i o n and p l a y- i n g a t p a r l i a m e n t a r i a n i s m . 
 Which of these is being effected is shown by the general strike and street fighting all over Russia. 
 The utter jumble of ideas about a “deal”, an “agreement” (page 7) “ w i t h t h e c e n t r a l o r g a n i s a t i o n s o f l i b e r a l d e m o c r a c y ”. 
 Complete inability to single out r e v o l u t i o n a r y democracy and indicate c o n c r e t e slogans on a politi-cal agreement with the latter. 
 Axelrod's slogans are all ofan Osvobozhdeniye nature. 
 Regarding a “workers’ congress”. 
The Third Congress: utilisation of open action so as to create points d’appui for the P a r t y . 
 134 (Clear and precise. 
) With P. 
 B. 
 Axelrod one cannot make out anything. 
 An All-Russia workers’ congress sans phrase (page 3)—or a “ p h r a s e ”? Quid est? It would be best to have t w o c o n g r e s s e s 1) a “General Congress” (page 4) 2) a “Social-Democratic congress” (“of mem-bers of a General Congress ? who share our programme, plus representatives of our Party organisations, for a reform of the whole Party”. 
 Page 4) The ridiculousness of a comparison with the Lassalle affair 1) there was already a c o n s t i t u t i o n then. 
 2) Then Lassalle was openly appealed to, and his appeal was an open one. 
 3) Then the formation of the Allgemeiner Deutscher Arbei-ter-Verein was a pretext for abuse of “workers’ independent activity” against the Social-Democratic Workers’ Party. 
 Written in October 1905 First published in 1926 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany V the manuscript TASKS OF REVOLUTIONARY ARMY CONTINGENTS 1. 
 Independent military action. 
 2. 
 Leadership of the mass. 
 The contingents may be of any strength, beginning with two or three people. 
 They must arm themselves as best they can (rifles, revolv-ers, bombs, knives, knuckle-dusters, sticks, rags soakedin kerosine for starting fires, ropes or rope ladders, shovelsfor building barricades, pyroxylin cartridges, barbed wire, nails [against cavalry], etc. 
, etc. 
). 
 Under no circumstances should they wait for help from other sources, from abovefrom the outside; they must procure everything themselves. 
 As far as possible, the contingents should consist of people who either live near each other, or who meet frequentlyand regularly at definite hours (preferably people of both categories, for regular meetings may be interrupted by the uprising). 
 They must arrange matters so as to be able to gettogether at the most critical moments, when things maytake the most unexpected turns. 
 Therefore, each group mustwork out beforehand ways and means of joint action; signsin windows, etc. 
, so as to find each other easily; previously agreed upon calls or whistles so that the comrades recognise one another in a crowd; previously arranged signals in theevent of meetings at night, etc. 
, etc. 
 Any energetic person,with the aid of two or three comrades, could work out awhole series of such rules and methods, which should be drawnup, learned and practised beforehand. 
 It must not be forgotten that the chances are 100 to 1 that events will take us unawares, and that it will be necessary to come togetherunder terribly difficult conditions. 
 Even without arms, the groups can play a most important part: 1) by leading the mass; 2) by attacking, whenever a favourable opportunity presents itself, policemen, stray Cossacks (as was the case in Moscow), etc. 
, and seizingtheir arms; 3) by rescuing the arrested or injured, whenthere are only few police about; 4) by getting on to the roofsor upper storeys of houses, etc. 
, and showering stones orpouring boiling water on the troops, etc. 
 Given sufficient push, an organised and well-knit combat group constitutes a tremendous force. 
 Under no circumstances should theformation of the group be abandoned or postponed on theplea of lack of arms. 
 As far as possible members of combat groups should have their duties assigned in advance, leaders or chiefs of groups being sometimes selected in this way. 
 It would be unwise, of course, to play at conferring ranks, but the enormousimportance of uniform leadership and rapid and determinedaction should not be forgotten. 
 Determination and pushare three-quarters of success. 
 As soon as the groups are formed—i. 
e. 
, right now—they must get down to comprehensive work—not only theoretical, but most certainly practical work as well. 
 By theoreticalwork we mean a study of military science, an acquaint-ance with military problems, the arrangement of lecturemeetings on military questions, talks by military men(officers, non-commissioned officers, etc. 
, etc. 
, including also workers who have served in the army); the reading, discus-sion and assimilation of illegal pamphlets and newspaperarticles on street fighting, etc. 
, etc. 
 Practical work, we repeat, should be started at once. 
 This falls into preparatory work and military operations. 
The preparatory work includes procuring all kinds of arms and ammunition, securing premises favourably located for street fighting (convenient for fighting from above, forstoring bombs and stones, etc. 
, or acids to be poured on thepolice, etc. 
, etc. 
; also suitable for headquarters, for col-lecting information, for sheltering fugitives from the police,for use as hospitals, etc. 
, etc. 
). 
 Further, preliminary activ-ity includes the immediate work of reconnaissance and gathering information—obtaining plans of prisons, policestations, ministries, etc. 
, ascertaining the routine in govern-ment offices, banks, etc. 
, and learning how they are guarded, endeavouring to establish contacts which could be of use (with employees in police departments, banks, courts, pris-ons, post-and telegraph-offices, etc. 
), ascertaining the where-abouts of arsenals, of all the gunsmiths’ shops in the city,etc. 
 There is a great deal of this sort of work to be done,and—what is more—it is work in which even those who arequite incapable of engaging in street fighting, even the very weak, women, youngsters, old people, and so on, can be of immense service. 
 Efforts should be made immediatelyto get into combat groups absolutely all those who want . 
 to take part in the uprising, for there is no such person, nor can there be one, who, provided he desires to work,cannot be of immense value, even if he is unarmed and is personally incapable of fighting. 
 Further, revolutionary army groups should under no circumstances confine themselves to preparatory work alone,but should begin military action as soon as possible so asto 1) train their fighting forces; 2) reconnoitre the enemy’svulnerable spots; 3) inflict partial defeats on the enemy; 4) rescue prisoners (the arrested); 5) procure arms; 6) obtain funds for the uprising (confiscation of government funds),and so on and so forth. 
 The groups can and should immedi-ately take advantage of every opportunity for active work,and must by no means put matters off until a generaluprising, because fitness for the uprising cannot be acquired except by training under fire . 
 All extremes, of course, are bad. 
 All that is good and useful, if carried to extremes, may become—and beyond acertain limit is bound to become—bad and injurious. 
 Disor-derly, unorganised and petty terrorist acts may, if carriedto extremes, only scatter and squander our forces. 
 That is a fact, which, of course, should not be forgotten. 
 On the other hand, under no circumstances should it be forgotten thata slogan calling for an uprising has already been issued , that the uprising has already begun . 
 To launch attacks under favourable circumstances is not only every revolutionary’sright, but his plain duty. 
 The killing of spies, policemen, gendarmes, the blowing up of police stations, the liberation of prisoners, the seizure of government funds for the needsof the uprising—such operations are already being carried out wherever insurrection is rife, in Poland and in the Caucasus, and every detachment of the revolutionary army must be ready to start such operations at a moment’s notice. 
 Each group should remember that if it allows a favourableopportunity for such an operation to-slip by today, it willbe guilty of unpardonable inactivity , of passivity—and such an offence is the greatest crime a revolutionary can commitat a time of insurrection, the greatest disgrace that can befall anyone who is striving for liberty in deed, and not in word alone. 
 As for the composition of these combat groups, the following may be said. 
 Experience will show how many membersare desirable in each group, and how their duties shouldbe distributed. 
 Each group must itself begin to acquire this experience, without waiting for instructions from outside. 
 The local revolutionary organisation should, of course,be asked to send a revolutionary with military experienceto deliver lectures, conduct discussions and give advice,but if such a person is not available it is absolutely incum-bent upon the group to do this work itself. 
 As regards Party divisions, it is natural that members of the same Party will prefer to belong to the same group. 
But there should be no hard and fast rule debarring mem-bers of other parties from joining. 
 It is precisely here thatwe must put into practice the alliance, the working agree-ment (without any merging of parties, of course), between the socialist proletariat and revolutionary democracy. 
 Who-ever wants to fight for liberty and proves in fact his readi-ness to do so may be regarded as a revolutionary democrat,and we must strive to carry on with such people the work ofpreparing for the uprising (provided, of course, the givenperson or group is quite trustworthy). 
 All other “democrats” should be emphatically rejected as quasi-democrats, as liberal windbags who must not be relied on at all, andwhom it would be criminal for a revolutionary to trust. 
 It is, of course, desirable for combat groups to unite their activities. 
 It would be extremely useful to work out theforms and terms of joint action. 
 Under no circumstances, however, should this be carried to the extreme of inventing complex plans and general schemes, or of postponing prac-tical work for the sake of pedantic concoctions, etc. 
 The uprising will inevitably take place under circumstances in which the unorganised elements will outnumber the organised thousands of times over; there will inevitably be cases when it will be necessary to take immediate action,right then and there, in twos or even singly—and one mustbe prepared to act on one’s own initiative, and at one’sown risk. 
 All delays, disputes, procrastination and indeci-sion spell ruin to the cause of the uprising. 
 Supreme deter-mination, maximum energy, immediate utilisation of each suitable moment, immediate stimulation of the revolution-ary ardour of the mass and the direction of this ardour tomore vigorous and the most determined action—such isthe prime duty of a revolutionary. 
 The fight against the Black Hundreds is an excellent type of military action, which will train the soldiers of the revolutionary army, give them their baptism of fire,and at the same time be of tremendous benefit to therevolution. 
 Revolutionary army groups must at once find outwho organises the Black Hundreds and where and how theyare organised, and then, without confining themselves to propaganda (which is useful, but inadequate) they must act with armed force, beat up and kill the members of theBlack-Hundred gangs, blow up their headquarters, etc. 
, etc. 
 Written in late October 1905 First published in 1926 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany V the manuscript WHAT THE LIBERALS EXPECT OF THE DUMA The liberals are trying to make the public optimistic regarding the composition of the Duma. 
 Here is what the Frankfurter Zeitung correspondent wrote from St. 
 Peters-burg on October 14 (New Style): “Consideration of the resultsof the pre-election meetings now taking place leads one tothe conclusion that the composition of the Duma will notbe as bad as it seemed before. 
 It may now be foretold with acertain degree of probability that conservative elements proper will hardly make up one half of the Duma. 
 The mod-erate liberals and the liberals have the best chances of being elected, whereas the radicals’ prospects are far less favour-able, though they may be called relatively good from theviewpoint of the pessimism with which the radicals regardedthe future as recently as in August. 
 There can hardly be any doubt that the radicals’ representation in the Duma will not be too weak. 
 The only question is in what degreethey will be able to make the liberals and the moderateliberals follow in their wake, since only if these threeelements present a solid front to the conservative core will aconstituent assembly be ensured. 
” By radicals the correspondent undoubtedly means the Constitutional-Democrats. 
 Their candidates in St. 
 Peters-burg are Nabokov, Kedrin, and Vinaver. 
 The “moderateliberals” are not defined with any precision, but amongtheir candidates mention has been made of Fyodorov (aconservative “proper”, but “one who might be supported by the liberals as well”!), and Nikitin (a candidate of the Right, but at the same time also a moderate-liberalcandidate). 
 So a constituent assembly is “ensured”, with the liberals and moderate liberals subordinated to the leadership of the “radical” Osvobozhdeniye League members.... 
 Indeed, here we have the liberal optimists “clutching at straws”. 
 Whatis most curious is their failure to see that even should aDuma majority vote for a constituent assembly, it willnot be the latter that will be “ensured” in actual fact, butonly a determined revolutionary struggle for one. 
 The Constitutional-Democrats would like to have two irons in the fire—to have dealings with the autocracy (legal oppositionin a legal Duma), and with the revolution (“we have doneour bit” for a constituent assembly). 
 Written in late October 1905 First published in 1931 Published according to in Lenin Miscellany XVI the manuscript THE FIRST VICTORY OF THE REVOLUTION Geneva, November 1 (October 19) Late Monday night the telegraph brought Europe the news of the tsar’s Manifesto of October 17. 
 The Times correspondent wired: “The people have won the day. 
 TheEmperor has surrendered. 
 The autocracy has ceased to exist. 
”Friends of the Russian revolution living in distant Balti-more (U. 
S. 
A. 
) expressed themselves differently in a cable they sent to Proletary : “Congratulations on the first great victory of the Russian revolution. 
” The latter appraisal of the events is undoubtedly far more accurate. 
 We have every reason to be jubilant. 
 Theconcession made by the tsar is indeed a great victory forthe revolution, but this victory is still a long way from deciding the fate of the entire cause of liberty. 
 The tsar is far from having surrendered. 
 The autocracy has by no meansceased to exist. 
 It has merely retreated, leaving the fieldof battle to the enemy; it has retreated after an exceedinglyheavy battle, but it has not yet been defeated by a longway. 
 It is mustering its forces, and the revolutionary people have still to solve many important military problems before they will be able to carry the revolution to real andfinal victory. 
 October 17 will go down in history as one of the great days of the Russian revolution. 
 On this day the nation-widestrike, the like of which the world had never before seen, reached its climax. 
 The mighty arm of the proletariat, which was raised in an outburst of heroic solidarity allover Russia, brought the entire industrial, commercial and administrative life of the country to a standstill. 
 It was the lull before the storm. 
 Reports, one more alarming than the other, began pouring in from various big cities. 
 The troops were wavering. 
 The government refrained fromtaking repressive measures, the revolutionaries had not yetlaunched any serious open attacks, but insurrection waserupting on all sides. 
 At the eleventh hour the tsarist government decided to yield, realising that an explosion was inevitable, that al-ready under no circumstances was it at all capable of gaininga full victory, but was very likely to suffer complete defeat. 
Trepov is reported as having said, “First there will be blood-shed, and then a constitution. 
” The inevitability of a consti-tution could no longer be doubted, even if the uprising were suppressed, so the government decided that it was better to avoid the risk of serious and general bloodshed, for tsaristrule would be swept away altogether in the event of thevictory of the people. 
 We know only an infinitesimal portion of that informa-tion possessed by the government on Monday, October 17, which compelled it to evade a desperate battle and yield. 
 The local and central authorities strained every effort tohold up or curtail messages about the alarming progressof the uprising, but even the scanty, random and curtailedreports that found their way into the European press leaveno doubt that this was a genuine uprising, capable of inspiring mortal fear in the tsar and his ministers. 
 The forces of tsarism and of the revolution are equally balanced, we wrote a week ago, on the basis of the firstnews of the country-wide political strike. 
 Tsarism was nolonger strong enough to crush the revolution; the revolutionwas not yet strong enough to crush tsarism. 
 But with such an equilibrium of forces, all delay was fraught with the greatest danger to tsarism, for delay was bound to cause thetroops to waver. 
 The uprising was spreading. 
 Blood was already being spilt all over Russia. 
 The people were fighting at thebarricades, from Revel to Odessa, from Poland to Siberia. 
 In isolated and small encounters the troops were victorious, but at the same time tidings of a new and unprecedented phe-nomenon began to come in, a phenomenon plainly testifying to the military impotence of the autocracy. 
 This was the news of the negotiations between the tsarist troops and the insurgent people (Kharkov), the news of the withdrawal of troops from cities (Kharkov, Revel) as the only way to restore tranquillity. 
 Negotiations with the insurgent people,the withdrawal of troops—that is the beginning of the end. 
Better than any arguments it proves that the militaryauthorities were aware of the extreme precariousness of their position. 
 It shows that disaffection among the troops has spread to a truly formidable extent. 
 Scattered news itemsand rumours seeped through to the foreign press. 
 In Kievsoldiers who had refused to fire were arrested. 
 Similarcases occurred in Poland. 
 In Odessa the infantry wereconfined to their barracks, the authorities fearing to bring the men out into the streets. 
 In St. 
 Petersburg unrest was beginning to manifest itself in the navy, and it was re-ported that the guards regiments were totally unreliable. 
 Asfor the Black Sea Fleet, it has been impossible to this veryday to ascertain the whole truth. 
 On October 17, telegramswere already reporting that rumours of a new mutiny in this fleet were very persistent, that all telegrams were being inter-cepted by the authorities, who resorted to every means in anattempt to prevent reports of the events from spreading. 
 If we bring together all these fragmentary reports we cannot but arrive at the conclusion that even from a purelymilitary standpoint the autocracy’s position was desperate. 
 It was still suppressing isolated outbreaks, its troops were still taking barricades here and there, but these isolatedencounters merely served to inflame passions, merely in-creased indignation, merely accelerated a mightier generaloutbreak, which the government particularly dreaded, sinceit could no longer rely on the army. 
 The enemy declined a pitched battle. 
 He retreated, aban-doning the battlefield to the revolutionary people—retreat-ed to new positions, which he considers better fortified,and where he hopes to rally more reliable forces, weld themtogether and infuse a new spirit into them, and choose abetter moment for an offensive. 
 This appraisal of the great day of October 17 is confirmed by a number of relatively “unbiased” reports in the Euro-pean bourgeois press. 
 On the one hand, the European bourgeoisie is sighing with relief. 
 The tsar’s Manifesto promises a regular consti-tution; the Duma is invested with legislative powers; no law can come into force prior to approval by the people’srepresentatives, ministerial responsibility has been granted;civil liberties have been granted—inviolability of the person,freedom of conscience, speech, assembly and association. 
The stock exchange is hastening to express fuller confi-dence in Russia’s finances. 
 Russian securities, which have been falling for the last few days, are now going up. 
 The for-eign bankers who fled from revolutionary St. 
 Petersburg-are promising to return within a fortnight. 
 In the constitutionthe European bourgeoisie sees a pledge of “peaceful” minorconcessions, which will wholly satisfy the propertied classes without at the same time allowing the revolutionary prole-tariat to acquire “too much” freedom. 
 On the other hand, even the liberal bourgeois cannot but see that the tsar’s Manifesto contains only hollow words,mere promises. 
 Who nowadays will believe promises alone?Are not all these phrases about inviolability of the person and freedom of speech sheer mockery when the prisons are still packed with so-called political offenders, and thecensorship is still operating? What kind of people will carryout the tsar’s promise? The Witte government, which isrumoured to include Kuzmin-Karavayev, Kosich, Koni?This government will not even be one of the liberal bourgeoi-sie. 
 It will only be a government of the liberal bureaucracy , which has so often been defeated by the reactionary Courtclique. 
 Can it be that the people have spilt their blood inthe struggle for liberty only to have to rely on the liberalbureaucrats, who confine themselves to mere words andpromises?! No, tsarism is still far from having surrendered. 
 The autocracy has by no means fallen as yet. 
 Many great battleswill still have to be fought by the revolutionary proletariat,and the first victory will help it to rally its forces andenlist new allies in the struggle. 
 “The very success of the cause of freedom,” The Times correspondent wrote the day the Manifesto was proclaimed, “will only stimulate the reactionary elements to greateractivity, and so long as the army remains under its present chiefs Russia cannot be safe from the possibility of a pro-nunciamento . 
” “It is ... doubtful whether the forced surrender of the government in the very midst of a revolutionary upheaval can be regarded otherwise than as a signal forfurther strife. 
” “It is not known whether the bureaucracy hasbeen ousted from its citadel or whether it has merely retreat-ed from its advance positions,” say the bourgeois optimists,although the facts show clearly that the “citadel” of the autocracy is still quite intact. 
 The enforced nature of the concession is what most of all disturbs the moderate bourgeois. 
 Le Temps , organ of the ruling money-bags of France, waxed highly indignant over“anarchy”, and showered abuse and slander on the organisersof the all-Russia political strike and its participants. 
 Though satisfied by the tsar’s constitutional promises as such, this newspaper now remarks with concern: “Insteadof acting on his own initiative, the tsar contended himselfwith signing the ‘instructions’ of the liberal opposition. 
This is a poor method, lending the subsequent reforms anenforced nature, the nature of something fragmentary and sudden. 
 This method places the government at odds with itself and sets a premium on violence. 
 Unfortunately, it isonly too clear that matters had reached a point where therewas no other way out of the impasse into which the govern-ment had been led. 
 Let us pass a wet sponge over the natureof this capitulation—capitulation not only to the consti-tutionalists, moderate souls, who should have been heeded sooner, but capitulation to a strike and revolution. 
” No, gentlemen of the bourgeoisie, the workers will never forget the enforced nature of the tsar’s capitulation! Theworkers will never forget that it was only by force, by theforce of their organisation, their unanimity and their mass heroism, that they wrested from tsarism a recognition of liberty in a paper manifesto; and only in this way will theywin real liberty for themselves. 
 We stated above that the enemy retreated, abandoning the battlefield to the revolutionary proletariat. 
 We mustadd now: the retreating enemy is being hard pressed. 
 On Monday, October 17, the tear’s Manifesto was issued. 
 On Tuesday, October 18, according to a Wolff Press Agencyreport, a Manifesto of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party was issued in St. 
 Petersburg in a huge number of copies. 
 It declares that the struggle of the proletariat will by no means cease as a result of the tsar’s Manifesto. 
 It must be the proletariat’s tactics to take advantage of rightsgranted under the force of its blows, to arrange workers’meetings to decide the question of the continuation of thestrike, to organise a militia to protect revolutionary rights,and to put forward the demand for a full amnesty. 
 At mass meetings Social-Democratic speakers are urging the con-vocation of a constituent assembly. 
 According to telegrams,the Strike Committee 135 is demanding an amnesty and the immediate convocation of a constituent assemblyelected on the basis of universal and direct suffrage. 
 Their revolutionary instinct at once prompted the St. 
 Petersburg workers to adopt the right slogan—energetic continuation of the struggle, and utilisation of the newly-won positions for a continued onslaught and the actualdestruction of the autocracy. 
 The struggle continues. 
 Meetingsare being held ever more frequently and are being attendedby larger number of people. 
 The joy and the legitimate pride evoked by the first victory are not hampering the new organisation of forces for the purpose of carrying the revo-lution to completion. 
 Its success depends on still broadersections of the people being won over to the side of liberty,on their enlightenment and organisation. 
 The working classhas shown its titanic might in the all-Russia political strike, but there is still much to be done among the back-ward sections of the urban proletariat. 
 While establishinga workers’ militia—the only bulwark of the revolution—while preparing ourselves for new and even more determinedstruggles, while upholding our old slogans, we must alsopay special attention to the army. 
 The tsar’s enforced con-cession was bound to give rise to the greatest wavering in its ranks, and now we must attract the soldiers to workers’meetings, intensify our agitation in the barracks, extendour liaisons with officers, creating, alongside of the revo-lutionary army of workers, cadres of class-consciousrevolutionaries among the troops as well, troops which only yesterday were most loyal to the tsar and are now on the verge of becoming a people’s army. 
 The revolutionary proletariat has succeeded in neutralising the army, after paralysing it in the great days of the general strike. 
 It must now work to bring the army completely over to the side of the people. 
 The revolutionary proletariat has brought about the first great victory of the urban revolution. 
 It must nowbroaden and deepen the foundations of the revolution byextending it to the countryside. 
 To raise the peasantry tothe level of conscious defence of the cause of liberty, to demand that serious measures be taken in the interests of the peasantry, and to prepare in the countryside a movementwhich, in conjunction with the advanced urban proletariat,will deal the final blow at the autocracy and win completeand genuine liberty—such is Russian Social-Democracy’snext task. 
 The success of the revolution depends on the size of the proletarian and peasant masses that will rise in its defenceand for its consummation. 
 Revolutionary war differs fromother wars in that it draws its main reserves from the campof its enemy’s erstwhile allies, erstwhile supporters oftsarism, or people who blindly obeyed tsarism. 
 The success of the all-Russia political strike will have a greater in-fluence over the minds and hearts of the peasants than theconfusing words of any possible manifestoes or laws. 
 When the Russian revolution was just getting under way, the liberal bourgeoisie occupied the whole political fore-ground; such was the situation a year ago. 
 The revolution asserted itself when the urban working class appeared on the scene on January 9. 
 The revolution won its first victory when the proletariat of all the nations of Russia rose as one man and made thetsar’s throne tremble, the throne that had caused suchincalculable distress to all the nations, and most of all to the toiling classes of all the nations. 
 The revolution will deal the enemy the final blow and sweep the throne of the blood-thirsty tsar from the face ofthe earth, when the workers rise once more, with thepeasantry following their lead. 
 And further, the Russian revolution has another reserve. 
 Gone are the times when nations and states could live isolated from one another. 
 Look—Europe is already stirring. 
Its bourgeoisie is disconcerted and prepared to give millions and billions to stop the conflagration in Russia. 
 The rulers of the militarist European powers are contemplating military assistance for the tsar. 
 Kaiser Wilhelm has already dispatched several cruisers and destroyers to establishdirect links between the German militarists and Peterhof. 
European counter-revolution is holding out a hand toRussian counter-revolution. 
 Just you try, citizen Hohenzollern! We too have a Euro-pean reserve of the Russian revolution. 
 This reserve is the international socialist proletariat, the international revo-lutionary Social-Democratic movement. 
 The workers ofthe whole world are hailing the victory of the Russianworkers with enthusiasm and, conscious of the close linksbetween the various contingents of the international army of socialism, are themselves preparing for the great and decisive struggle. 
 You are not alone, workers and peasants of all Russia! If you succeed in overthrowing, crushing and destroying thetyrants of feudal, police-ridden, landlord and tsaristRussia, your victory will serve as a signal for a world struggle against the tyranny of capital, a struggle for the complete, economic as well as political emancipation of the toilers,a struggle for the deliverance of humanity from destitution,and for the realisation of socialism. 
 Proletary , No. 
 24, Published according to November 7 (October 25), 1905 the text in Proletary as verified against the manuscript THE LATEST NEWS Geneva, November 4 (October 22) Nicholas the Bloodstained’s “Constitutional” Manifesto has been followed by countless new killings organised byTrepov and his thugs. 
 The ferocity of the Cossacks, theanti-Jewish pogroms, the shooting down in the streets offreshly “amnestied” political offenders, the pillage conduct-ed by the Black Hundreds with the aid of the police— everything has been brought into play so as to crush the revolutionary struggle. 
 The tsar has given the revolutionaries excellent help by confirming their appraisal of his false concession, theirappraisal of the vile comedy of a “liberal” manifesto. 
 The tsaris out to provoke a new and determined struggle. 
 So much the better! All of Social-Democracy’s activities, the entire energy of the proletariat will now be directed towards pre-paring for the next onslaught and destroying the monsterof tsarism, which, in its death throes, is trying for the lasttime to arouse evil instincts in the ignorant mob. 
 The greaterTrepov’s display of zeal, the more certain is the complete downfall of the entire Trepov set-up and of all the Roma-novs. 
 First published in 1925 in the supplement Published according to to Issue VI of the newspapers Vperyod and the manuscript Proletary , published by the History of the Party Institute of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) NIKOLAI ERNESTOVICH BAUMAN Today? November 3 (New Style), the news arrived by tele-graph that N. 
 E. 
 Bauman, veterinary surgeon and memberof the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, has been murdered in Moscow by the tsar’s soldiers. 
 A demonstration was held at his graveside, at which the widow of the de-ceased, also a member of our Party, delivered a speech callingon the people to rise in arms. 
 We are unable as yet to givea detailed biography of our fallen comrade. 
 For the timebeing, we shall merely enumerate the main events in his life. 
 He started work in the Social-Democratic organisation in St. 
 Petersburg in the nineties. 
 He was arrested, spenttwenty-two months in the Peter and Paul Fortress, andwas then exiled to Vyatka Gubernia. 
 He escaped fromhis place of exile, went abroad, and in 1900 participated inthe organisation of Iskra . 
 From its very inception he was one of the principal practical leaders of this enterprise, making frequent secret visits to Russia. 
 He was arrestedin February 1902 in Voronezh (betrayed by a doctor) inconnection with the organisation of Iskra , and was im-prisoned in Kiev. 
 In August 1902, he escaped together withten other Social-Democratic comrades. 
 He was a delegate of the Moscow Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 to the Second Congress of the Party (under the assumed name of Sorokin). 
He took part in the Second Congress of the League 136 (under the assumed name of Sarafsky). 
 Following this he becamea member of the Moscow Committee of the Party. 
 He wasarrested on June 19, 1904, and was held at Taganka Prison. 
 He must have been released from prison only a few days ago. 
 May the memory of this fighter in the ranks of the Russian Social-Democratic proletariat never die! May the memory of this revolutionary, who has fallen in the first days of the victorious revolution, live for ever! May the honours paid to his remains by the people who have risen in revolt be a pledge of the complete victory of the uprising and thecomplete destruction of accursed tsarism! The murder of N. 
 E. 
 Bauman clearly shows how correct the Social-Democratic speakers in St. 
 Petersburg were when they described the Manifesto of October 17 as a trap, andthe conduct of the government after publication of the Mani-festo as provocative. 
 What are all these promised libertiesworth, so long as power and armed force remain in thehands of the government? Is not this “amnesty” actually a trap, when those who are released from prison are shot down in the streets by Cossacks? Proletary , No. 
 24, Published according to November 7 (October 25), 1905 the text in Proletary PETTY-BOURGEOIS AND PROLETARIAN SOCIALISM137 Of the various socialist doctrines, Marxism is now pre-dominant in Europe, the struggle for the achievement of a socialist order being almost entirely waged as a struggle of the working class under the guidance of the Social-Demo-cratic parties. 
 This complete predominance of proletariansocialism grounded in the teachings of Marxism was notachieved all at once, but only after a long struggle againstall sorts of outworn doctrines, petty-bourgeois socialism, anarchism, and so on. 
 Some thirty years ago, Marxism was not predominant even in Germany, where the prevailing viewsof the time were in fact transitional, mixed and eclectic,lying between petty-bourgeois and proletarian socialism. 
The most widespread doctrines among advanced workersin the Romance countries, in France, Spain and Belgium, were Proudhonism, Blanquism and anarchism, which obviously expressed the viewpoint of the petty bourgeois,not of the proletarian. 
 What has been the cause of this rapid and complete vic-tory of Marxism during the last decades? The correctnessof the Marxist views has been confirmed to an ever greater extent by all the development of contemporary societies, both politically and economically, and by the whole experi-ence of the revolutionary movement and of the struggleof the oppressed classes. 
 The decline of the petty bourgeoisieinevitably led, sooner or later, to the extinction of allkinds of petty-bourgeois prejudices, while the growth of capitalism and the intensification of the class struggle within capitalist society were the best agitation for theideas of proletarian socialism. 
 Russia’s backwardness naturally accounts for the firm footing that various obsolete socialist doctrines gained in our country. 
 The entire history of Russian revolutionary thought during the last quarter of a century is the historyof the struggle waged by Marxism against petty-bourgeoisNarodnik socialism. 
 While the rapid growth and remarkablesuccesses of the Russian working-class movement havealready brought victory to Marxism in Russia too, the development of an indubitably revolutionary peasant movement—especially after the famous peasant revolts inthe Ukraine in 1902—has on the other hand caused a certainrevival of senile Narodism. 
 The Narodnik theories of old, em-bellished with modish European opportunism (revisionism,Bernsteinism, and criticism of Marx), make up all the original ideological stock-in-trade of the so-called Socialist-Revolutionaries. 
 That is why the peasant question is focalin the Marxists’ controversies with both the pure Narodniksand the Socialist-Revolutionaries. 
 To a certain extent Narodism was an integral and consist-ent doctrine. 
 It denied the domination of capitalism in Russia; it denied the factory workers’ role as the front-line fighters of the entire proletariat; it denied the importanceof a political revolution and bourgeois political liberty; itpreached an immediate socialist revolution, stemming fromthe peasant commune with its petty forms of husbandry. 
All that now survives of this integral theory is mere shreds, but to understand the controversies of the present day intelligently, and to prevent these controversies from degener-ating into mere squabbles, one should always rememberthe general and basic Narodnik roots of the errors of our Socialist-Revolutionaries. 
 The Narodniks considered the muzhik the man of the future in Russia, this view springing inevitably from their faith in the socialist character of the peasant commune,from their lack of faith in the future of capitalism. 
 TheMarxists considered the worker the man of the future inRussia, and the development of Russian capitalism in bothagriculture and industry is providing more and more confirmation of their views. 
 The working-class movement in Russia has won recognition for itself, but as for the peasantmovement, the gulf separating Narodism and Marxism is /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR to this day revealed in their different interpretations of this movement. 
 To the Narodniks the peasant movement pro-vides a refutation of Marxism. 
 It is a movement that stands for a direct socialist revolution; it does not recognisebourgeois political liberty; it stems from small-scale, notlarge-scale, production. 
 In a word, to the Narodnik, it is thepeasant movement that is the genuine, truly socialist andimmediately socialist movement. 
 The Narodnik faith in the peasant commune and the Narodnik brand of anarchism fully explain why such conclusions are inevitable. 
 To the Marxist, the peasant movement is a democratic, not a socialist, movement. 
 In Russia, just as was the casein other countries, it is a necessary concomitant of thedemocratic revolution, which is bourgeois in its social and economic content. 
 It is not in the least directed against the foundations of the bourgeois order, against commodityproduction, or against capital. 
 On the contrary, it is directedagainst the old, serf, pre-capitalist relationships in therural districts, and against landlordism, which is the main-stay of all the survivals of serf-ownership. 
 Consequently, full victory of this peasant movement will not abolish capi-talism; on the contrary, it will create a broader foundationfor its development, and will hasten and intensify purelycapitalist development. 
 Full victory of the peasant up-rising can only create a stronghold for a democratic bour-geois republic, within which a proletarian struggle against the bourgeoisie will for the first time develop in its purest form. 
 These, then, are the two contrasting views which must be clearly understood by anyone who wishes to examine thegulf in principles that lies between the Socialist-Revolu-tionaries and the Social-Democrats. 
 According to one view, the peasant movement is socialist, while according to the other it is a democratic-bourgeois movement. 
 Hence one cansee what ignorance our Socialist-Revolutionaries revealwhen they repeat for the hundredth time (see, for example,Revolutsionnaya Rossiya , No. 
 75) that orthodox Marxists have ignored the peasant question. 
 There is only one way of combating such crass ignorance, and that is by repeating the ABC, by setting forth the old consistently Narodnikviews, and by pointing out for the hundredth or the thousandth time that the real distinction between us does not lie in a desire or the non-desire to reckon with the peasant question, in recognition or non-recognition of it, but in our different appraisals of the present-day peasant movement and of the present-day peasant question in Russia. 
He who says that the Marxists ignore the peasant questionin Russia is, in the first place, an absolute ignoramussince all the principal writings of Russian Marxists, begin-ning with Plekhanov’s Our Differences (which appeared over twenty years ago), have in the main been devoted toexplaining the erroneousness of the Narodnik views on theRussian peasant question. 
 Secondly, he who says that theMarxists ignore the peasant question thereby proves hisdesire to avoid giving a complete appraisal of the actual difference in principles, giving the answer to the question whether or not the present-day peasant movement isdemocratic-bourgeois whether or not it is objectively directedagainst the survivals of serfdom. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionaries have never given, nor will they ever be able to give, a clear and precise answer to this question, for they are floundering hopelessly between the old Narodnik view and the present-day Marxist view on thepeasant question in Russia. 
 The Marxists say that theSocialist-Revolutionaries represent the standpoint of thepetty bourgeoisie (are ideologists of the petty bourgeoisie) forthe very reason that they cannot rid themselves of petty-bourgeois illusions and of the Narodnik imaginings in appraising the peasant movement. 
 That is why we have to go over the ABC once again. 
 What is the present-day peasant movement in Russia strivingfor? For land and liberty. 
 What significance will the com-plete victory of this movement have? After winning liberty, it will abolish the rule of the landlords and bureaucrats in the administration of the state. 
 After securing the land, itwill give the landlords’ estates to the peasants. 
 Will thefullest liberty and expropriation of the landlords do awaywith commodity production? No, it will not. 
 Will the fullestliberty and expropriation of the landlords abolish indi-vidual farming by peasant households on communal, or “so-cialised”, land? No, it will not. 
 Will the fullest liberty andexpropriation of the landlords bridge the deep gulf that separates the rich peasant, with his numerous horses and cows, from the farm-hand, the day-labourer, i. 
e. 
, the gulf that separates the peasant bourgeoisie from the rural proletariat? No, it will not. 
 On the contrary, the more com-pletely the highest social-estate (the landlords) is routed and annihilated, the more profound will the class distinction between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat be. 
 What willbe the objective significance of the complete victory of the peasant uprising? This victory will do away with all survivals of serfdom, but it will by no means destroy thebourgeois economic system, or destroy capitalism or thedivision of society into classes—into rich and poor, thebourgeoisie and the proletariat. 
 Why is the present-day peas-ant movement a democratic-bourgeois movement? Because, after destroying the power of the bureaucracy and the land-lords, it will set up a democratic system of society, without,however, altering the bourgeois foundation of that demo-cratic society, without abolishing the rule of capital. 
 Howshould the class-conscious worker, the socialist, regard thepresent-day peasant movement? He must support this movement, help the peasants in the most energetic fashion, help them throw off completely both the rule of the bureauc-racy and that of the landlords. 
 At the same time, however,he should explain to the peasants that it is not enoughto overthrow the rule of the bureaucracy and the landlords. 
When they overthrow that rule, they must at the same time prepare for the abolition of the rule of capital, the rule of the bourgeoisie, and for that purpose a doctrine that is fullysocialist, i. 
e. 
, Marxist, should be immediately disseminated,the rural proletarians should be united, welded together, andorganised for the struggle against the peasant bourgeoisieand the entire Russian bourgeoisie. 
 Can a class-conscious worker forget the democratic struggle for the sake of the socialist struggle, or forget the latter for the sake of theformer? No, a class-conscious worker calls himself a Social-Democrat for the reason that he understands the relationbetween the two struggles. 
 He knows that there is no otherroad to socialism save the road through democracy, through political liberty. 
 He therefore strives to achieve democra-tism completely and consistently in order to attain theultimate goal—socialism. 
 Why are the conditions for the democratic struggle not the same as those for the socialist struggle? Because the workers will certainly have different allies in each of those two struggles. 
 The democratic struggle is waged by the workers together with a section ofthe bourgeoisie, especially the petty bourgeoisie. 
 On theother hand, the socialist struggle is waged by the workersagainst the whole of the bourgeoisie. 
 The struggle againstthe bureaucrat and the landlord can and must be waged together with all the peasants, even the well-to-do and the middle peasants. 
 On the other hand, it is only togetherwith the rural proletariat that the struggle against thebourgeoisie, and therefore against the well-to-do peasantstoo, can be properly waged. 
 If we keep in mind all these elementary Marxist truths, which the Socialist-Revolutionaries always prefer to avoid going into, we shall have no difficulty in appraising the lat-ter’s “latest” objections to Marxism, such as the following: “Why was it necessary,” Revolutsionnaya Rossiya (No. 
 75) exclaims, “first to support the peasant in general againstthe landlord, and then (i. 
e. 
, at the same time) to support the proletariat against the peasant in general, instead of at once supporting the proletariat against the landlord;and what Marxism has to do with this, heaven alone knows. 
” This is the standpoint of the most primitive, childishly naïve anarchism. 
 For many centuries and even for thou-sands of years, mankind has dreamt of doing away “at once” with all and every kind of exploitation. 
 These dreams re-mained mere dreams until millions of the exploited all overthe world began to unite for a consistent, staunch and com-prehensive struggle to change capitalist society in thedirection the evolution of that society is naturally taking. 
Socialist dreams turned into the socialist struggle of the millions only when Marx’s scientific socialism had linked up the urge for change with the struggle of a definite class. 
Outside the class struggle, socialism is either a hollow phraseor a naïve dream. 
 In Russia, however, two different strugglesof two different social forces are taking place before ourvery eyes. 
 The proletariat is fighting against the bourgeoisie wherever capitalist relations of production exist (and they exist—be it known to our Socialist-Revolutionaries—even in the peasant commune, i. 
e. 
, on the land which from their standpoint is one hundred per cent “socialised”). 
 As a stratum of small landowners, of petty bourgeois, the peas-antry, is fighting against all survivals of serfdom, against the bureaucrats and the landlords. 
 Only those who are com-pletely ignorant of political economy and of the history ofrevolutions throughout the world can fail to see that theseare two distinct and different social wars. 
 To shut one’seyes to the diversity of these wars by demanding “at once”, is like hiding one’s head under one’s wing and refusing to make any analysis of reality. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionaries, who have lost the integ-rity of the old Narodnik views, have even forgotten many ofthe teachings of the Narodniks themselves. 
 As the selfsameRevolutsionnaya Rossiya writes in the same article: “By helping the peasantry to expropriate the landlords, Mr. 
 Lenin is unconsciously assisting in building up petty-bour-geois economy on the ruins of the more or less developedforms of capitalist agriculture. 
 Is not this a ‘step backward’from the standpoint of orthodox Marxism?” For shame, gentlemen! Why, you have forgotten your own Mr. 
 V. 
 V. 
! Consult his Destiny of Capitalism , the Sketches by Mr. 
 Nikolai—on,138 and other sources of your wisdom. 
 You will then recollect that landlord farming in Russia com-bines within itself features both of capitalism and of serf-ownership. 
 You will then find out that there is a system ofeconomy based on labour rent, which is a direct survival of the corvée system. 
 If, moreover, you take the trouble to consult such an orthodox Marxist book as the third volumeof Marx’s Capital , you will find that nowhere could the corvée system develop, and nowhere did it develop, andturn into capitalist farming except through the medium ofpetty-bourgeois peasant farming. 
 In your efforts to scatter Marxism to the winds, you resort to methods too primitive, methods too long ago exposed; you ascribe to Marxism agrotesquely oversimplified conception of large-scale capi-talist farming directly succeeding to large-scale farmingbased on the corvée system. 
 You argue that since the yieldon the landlords’ estates is higher than on the peasant farms the expropriation of the landlords is a step backward. 
 This argument is worthy of a fourth-form schoolboy. 
 Just consider,gentlemen: was it not a “step backward” to separate the low-yielding peasant lands from the high-yielding landlords’ estates when serfdom was abolished? Present-day landlord economy in Russia combines features of both capitalism and serf-ownership. 
 Objectively,the peasants’ struggle against the landlords today is astruggle against survivals of serfdom. 
 However, to attemptto enumerate all individual cases, to weigh each individualcase, and to determine with the precision of an apothecary’s scales exactly where serf-ownership ends and pure capitalism begins, is to ascribe one’s own pedantry to the Marxists. 
We cannot calculate what portion of the price of provi-sions bought from a petty shopkeeper represents labour-valueand what part of it represents swindling, etc. 
 Does thatmean, gentlemen, that we must discard the theory of labour-value? Contemporary landlord economy combines features of both capitalism and serfdom. 
 But only pedants can concludefrom this that it is our duty to weigh, count and copy outevery minute feature in every particular instance, andpigeon-hole it in this or that social category. 
 Only utopians can hence conclude that “there is no need” for us to draw a distinction between the two different social wars. 
 Indeed,the only actual conclusion that does follow is that both inour programme and in our tactics we must combine the purelyproletarian struggle against capitalism with the generaldemocratic (and general peasant) struggle against serfdom. 
 The more marked the capitalist features in present-day landlord semi-feudal economy, the more imperative is it toget right down to organising the rural proletariat separately,for this will help purely capitalist, or purely proletarian,antagonisms to assert themselves the sooner, wheneverconfiscation takes place. 
 The more marked the capitalist features in landlord economy, the sooner will democratic confiscation give an impetus to the real struggle for social-ism—and, consequently, the more dangerous is false ideal-isation of the democratic revolution through use of thecatchword of “socialisation”. 
 Such is the conclusion to bedrawn from the fact that landlord economy is a mixture of capitalism and serf-ownership relations. 
 Thus, we must combine the purely proletarian struggle with the general peasant struggle, but not confuse the two. 
 We must support the general democratic and general peasant struggle, but not become submerged in this non-class struggle; we must never idealise it with false catchwords such as “socialisation”, or ever forget the necessity of organisingboth the urban and the rural proletariat in an entirely independent class party of Social-Democracy. 
 While givingthe utmost support to the most determined democratism,that party will not allow itself to be diverted from the revolutionary path by reactionary dreams and experiments in “equalisation” under the system of commodity produc-tion. 
 The peasants’ struggle against the landlords is now arevolutionary struggle; the confiscation of the landlords’estates at the present stage of economic and political evolu-tion is revolutionary in every respect, and we back this revolutionary-democratic measure. 
 However, to call this measure “socialisation”, and to deceive oneself and thepeople concerning the possibility of “equality” in land tenureunder the system of commodity production, is a reactionarypetty-bourgeois utopia, which we leave to the socialist-reactionaries. 
 Proletary , No. 
 24, Published according to November 7 (October 25), 1905 the text in Proletary as verified against the manuscript THE DENOUEMENT IS AT HAND The forces are in equilibrium, we wrote a fortnight ago, * when the first news of the all-Russia political strike came in, and it was becoming evident that the government dare not make immediate use of its military forces. 
 The forces are in equilibrium, we repeated a week ago, ** when the Manifesto of October 17 was the latest in the politi-cal news, betokening to the whole people and to the worldat large that tsarism was in the grip of irresolution, and wasin retreat. 
 However, equilibrium of forces in no way precludes a struggle; on the contrary it makes the struggle more acute. 
The sole purpose of the government’s retreat is, as we havealready said, to enable it to choose what it considers a newand a more favourable situation for a battle. 
 The procla-mation of the “liberties” that adorn the scrap of paper known as the Manifesto of October 17 is merely an attempt to pre-pare the moral conditions for a struggle against the revo-lution, while Trepov, at the head of the all-Russia BlackHundreds, prepares the material conditions for that struggle. 
 The denouement is at hand, the new political situationis taking shape at breath-taking speed, one that marks only revolutionary epochs. 
 In words, the government has begun to fall back, but in deed it has immediately begun to preparefor an offensive. 
 Promises of a constitution have been fol-lowed by the most brutal and ugly acts of violence, whichhave seemed purposely designed to give the people a stillmore striking object lesson of the real significance of the *See pp. 
 394-95 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 **See p. 
 428 of this volume. 
— Ed. 
 autocracy’s real power. 
 The contrast between promises, words and scraps of paper, on the one hand, and the facts of reality on the other has become infinitely more manifest. 
 Events have begun to provide telling confirmation of atruth we long ago proclaimed to our readers, and shall repeatover and over again, namely, that until tsarism’s actualpower is overthrown, all its concessions, and even a constitu-ent assembly, are a phantom, a mirage, a piece of deception. 
 The revolutionary workers of St. 
 Petersburg made this perfectly clear in one of those daily bulletins 139 that have not yet reached us, but are being referred to more and morefrequently by foreign newspapers, astounded and frightenedby the might of the proletariat. 
 “We have been grantedfreedom of assembly,” the strike committee has written (we are translating from the English back into the Russian, so some inaccuracy is of course inevitable in the rendering),“but our meetings are surrounded by soldiers. 
 We have beengranted freedom of the press, but censorship continues. 
Freedom of learning has been promised, but the Universityis occupied by troops. 
 Inviolability of the person has been promised, but the prisons are packed with arrested people. 
 We have been granted Witte, but Trepov still exists. 
 Wehave been granted a constitution, but the autocracy stillexists. 
 We have been granted everything, but we havenothing. 
” The “Manifesto” has been suspended by Trepov. 
 The con-stitution has been held up by Trepov. 
 The real significance of the liberties granted has been clarified by the selfsameTrepov. 
 The amnesty has been mangled by Trepov. 
 But who is this Trepov? Is he some extraordinary per-sonality, whose removal is of special significance? Nothingof the kind. 
 He is just a most ordinary policeman, who is doing the autocracy’s everyday work, with the military and the police at his disposal. 
 Why is it that this most ordinary policeman and his routine “job” have suddenly acquired such extraordinary impor-tance? It is because the revolution has made immense prog-ress, and had brought the denouement closer. 
 Led by the proletariat, the people are becoming politically more mature with every day, nay with every hour, or, if you will,not by the year but by the week. 
 While to a people that was politically asleep, Trepov was just a most ordinary police-man, to a people that has grown aware that it is a political force, he has become insufferable, for he personifies all the brutality, criminality and senselessness of tsarism. 
 Revolution teaches. 
 It provides all classes of the people and all the nations of Russia with excellent object lessonson the subject of the nature of a constitution . 
 Revolution teaches by bringing to the fore the immediate and pressing political tasks, in their most manifest and compelling forms; it compels the masses to realise these tasks, and makes thepeople’s very existence impossible, without fulfilment ofthese tasks; it unmasks the worthlessness of all and sundrypretences, evasions, promises and acknowledgements. 
 “Wehave been granted everything, but we have nothing. 
” Indeed, we have been “granted” only promises, since we have no real power. 
 We have come close to liberty, have com-pelled all and sundry, even the tsar, to acknowledge the needfor liberty. 
 What we want, however, is not recognition ofthat need, but liberty itself. 
 What we want is not a scrapof paper with promises of legislative powers for the people’s representatives, but actual sovereignty of the people. 
 The closer we approach that sovereignty, the more intolerableits absence becomes. 
 The more tempting the tsar’s mani-festoes are, the more unbearable is his rule. 
 The struggle is approaching its denouement, the answer to the question whether actual power is to remain with the tsar’s government. 
 As for recognition of the revolution, it has now been generally recognised. 
 It was recognised quitelong ago by Mr. 
 Struve and the Osvobozhdeniye gentry. 
 It is now recognised by Mr. 
 Witte and by Nicholas Romanov. 
“I promise you anything you wish,” says the tsar, “only letme retain power, let me fulfil my own promises. 
” That is the gist of the tsar’s Manifesto, and it obviously had to spark off a determined struggle. 
 “I grant you everything exceptpower,” tsarism declares. 
 “Everything is illusory exceptpower,” the revolutionary people reply. 
 The real significance of the seeming senselessness into which Russian affairs have fallen lies in tsarism’s desire to deceive the people and evade revolution by striking a bargain with the bourgeoisie. 
 The tsar is making ever greaterpromises to the bourgeoisie, in the hope that the propertied classes, to the man, will at last turn towards “law and order”. 
 However, whilst that “law and order” is exemplified in the excesses of Trepov and his Black Hundreds, the tsar’s appeal seems likely to remain a voice crying in the wilder-ness. 
 The tsar stands in need of both Witte and Trepov inequal measure—Witte to attract some, and Trepov to in-timidate others; Witte for promises, and Trepov for action;Witte for the bourgeoisie, and Trepov for the proletariat. 
 Before our eyes there is again unfolding, only this time on a far higher level of development, a scene the same asthat witnessed at the beginning of the Moscow strikes—theliberals are doing the negotiating, while the workers aredoing the fighting. 
 Trepov has an excellent understanding of his role and his real significance. 
 He may have been somewhat too precipitate for the diplomatic Witte, but then he has beenafraid of being left behind by the rapid development of therevolution. 
 He has been even obliged to make haste, for herealises that the forces at his disposal are on the wane. 
 Simultaneously with its Manifesto on the Constitution, the autocracy has begun to take steps to preclude a consti-tution. 
 The Black Hundreds have got down to work in a wayRussia has never seen before. 
 Reports of massacres, po-groms, and acts of unparalleled brutality are pouring in fromall parts of the country. 
 The white terror is rampant. 
 Wher-ever they can, the police are inciting and organising the dregs of capitalist society for pillage and violence, plying the scum of the urban population with liquor, staging anti-Jewish pogroms, exhorting to violence against “students”and rebels, and helping in “giving a lesson” to Zemstvomembers. 
 Counter-revolution is working at full blast. 
 Trepovhas proved worthy of his salt. 
 Machine-guns are opening fire (Odessa), eyes are being put out (Kiev), people are being hurled from the upper storeys into the streets below, housesare being taken by assault and then sacked, fires are startedand nobody allowed to put them out, and those who dareoffer resistance to the Black Hundreds are being shot down. 
From Poland to Siberia, from the shores of the Gulf of Finland to the Black Sea—the picture is the same. 
 But simultaneously with this spate of Black-Hundred brutality, this orgy staged by the autocracy, these last convulsions of the tsarist monster, fresh onslaughts are being launched by the proletariat, which, as always, only appears to quieten down after each upsurge of the movement. 
 In actual fact, it is only mustering its forces and preparing to deala decisive blow. 
 For reasons already mentioned, policeatrocities in Russia have acquired a character quitedifferent from that of the past. 
 Parallel with the outbursts ofCossack vengeance and Trepov’s vindictiveness, the power of the tsar is disintegrating apace. 
 This is to be seen in the provinces, in Finland, and in St. 
 Petersburg; it is apparentin places where the people are the most downtroddenand the least developed politically, in the marginal areaswith a non-Russian population, as well as in the capital,which promises to become a scene of the revolution’s greatest drama. 
 Indeed, compare the following two telegraph messages, which we quote from a Vienna bourgeois liberal newspaper 140: “Tver . 
 The premises of the Zemstvo were attacked by a mob in the presence of Governor Sleptsov. 
 After a siegethe mob set fire to the building. 
 The firemen refused to extinguish the flames, while the troops stood by without taking any measures to curb the ruffians. 
” (Of course wecannot vouch for the absolute accuracy of this particularreport, but it is an undeniable fact that similar things, andothers a hundred times worse, are being perpetrated on allsides. 
) “ Kazan . 
 The police have been disarmed by the people. 
 Arms taken from the police have been distributed among the population. 
 A people’s militia has been set up. 
 Perfectorder prevails. 
” Is not a comparison of these two reports instructive? In one case there is vengeance, atrocities, and pogroms;in the other, the tsar’s authority has been overturned and a victorious uprising organised. 
 Finland presents a similar picture, only on a far greater scale. 
 The tsar’s viceroy has been expelled, and the lackey-senators removed by the people. 
 The Russian gendarmes arebeing driven out and are trying to take reprisals (a telegramfrom Haparanda, dated November 4, N. 
 S. 
) by damaging railway communications. 
 In such cases armed detachments of the people’s militia are sent to arrest the disorderlygendarmes. 
 A meeting of Tornio citizens has decided to organise the import of weapons and free literature. 
 Thou-sands and tens of thousands in town and countryside are enrolling in the Finnish militia. 
 The Russian garrison of a strong fortress (Sveaborg) are reported to have expressedsympathy with the insurgents, and turned the fortress overto the people’s militia. 
 Finland is rejoicing. 
 The tsar is mak-ing concessions. 
 He is prepared to summon the Diet, hasrepealed the unlawful manifesto of February 15, 1899, and has accepted the “resignation” of the senators ousted by the people. 
 Meanwhile, Novoye Vremya is advising the govern-ment to blockade all Finnish ports, and to crush the upris-ing by armed force. 
 According to foreign press reports,numerous Russian troops have been quartered in Helsingfors(it cannot be ascertained to what extent they can be relied on to crush the uprising). 
 There are reports that Russian warships have entered the inner harbour of Helsingfors. 
 St. 
 Petersburg. 
 Here Trepov is wreaking vengeance for the rejoicings of the revolutionary people (over the conces-sions wrested from the tsar). 
 Atrocities are being perpetratedby the Cossacks, and massacres are on the increase. 
 The police are openly organising the Black Hundreds. 
 The work-ers intended to hold a gigantic demonstration on Sunday,November 5 (October 23), to pay public homage to theirheroes, their comrades who had fallen in the struggle forliberty. 
 For its part, the government prepared a giganticblood-bath. 
 It was preparing for St. 
 Petersburg something similar to what had already taken place on a smaller scale in Moscow (the massacre at the funeral of Bauman, the workers’leader). 
 Trepov wanted to take advantage of the situationbefore his forces were weakened by part of them being dis-patched to Finland, and while the workers were preparingto demonstrate, not to fight. 
 The St. 
 Petersburg workers saw through the enemy’s scheme, and the demonstration was called off. 
 The workers’committee decided that the final battle should not takeplace at the time Trepov deigned to choose. 
 The committeewere quite right in thinking that a number of reasons(including the uprising in Finland) made postponement of the struggle disadvantageous to Trepov and advantageous to us. 
 Meanwhile arming of the people has proceeded apace,and propaganda in the army has met with remarkable success. 
 A hundred and fifty ratings of the 14th and the 18th Naval Depots are stated to have been arrested, and during the last week and a half ninety-two reports are said to have been submitted concerning sympathy for revolutionariesshown by officers. 
 Handbills calling on soldiers to go overto the side of the people are being distributed even amongpatrols “guarding” St. 
 Petersburg. 
 Freedom of the press,which was promised within limits prescribed by Trepov, is being extended to a greater degree by the mighty arm of the revolutionary proletariat. 
 According to messages inthe foreign press, only those St. 
 Petersburg newspapers cameout on Saturday, October 22 (November 4), which acceptedthe workers’ demand that they ignore the censorship. 
 TwoSt. 
 Petersburg German-language papers that wished to remain “loyal” (i. 
e. 
, servile) could not come out. 
 From the moment the St. 
 Petersburg strikers’ union, but not Trepov,began to determine the bounds of legality, the “legal” papersbegan speaking up in extremely bold tones. 
 “The strikehas been only suspended,” reads a cable to the Neue Freie Presse of October 23 (November 5). 
 “The strike, it is reported, will be resumed when the time for a final blow at the old order arrives. 
 Concessions no longer make the least impressionon the proletariat. 
 The situation is highly dangerous. 
 Revo-lutionary ideas are gaining an increasing hold on the masses. 
The working class feels that it is master of the situation. 
Those who are afraid of impending disaster are beginning to leave the city [St. 
 Petersburg]. 
” The denouement is at hand. 
 The victory of the people’s uprising is not far off now. 
 Revolutionary Social-Democra-cy’s slogans are being put into effect with unexpected rapid-ity. 
 Let Trepov go on dashing to and fro between revolu-tionary Finland and revolutionary St. 
 Petersburg, between the revolutionary marginal areas and the revolutionary provinces. 
 Let him try to choose a single safe place for un-trammelled military operations. 
 Let the tsar’s Manifesto becirculated more widely; let the news of the events in therevolutionary centres become more widespread—that willwin us new supporters, and bring fresh vacillation and disin-tegration into the dwindling ranks of the tsar’s adherents. 
 The all-Russia political strike has performed its tasks excellently by furthering the uprising, by inflicting frightful wounds on tsarism, and by frustrating the disgusting comedy of the disgusting State Duma. 
 The general rehear-sal is over. 
 The indications are that we are now on the eve of the drama itself. 
 Witte is wallowing in a spate of words,while Trepov is wallowing in rivers of blood. 
 The tsar isrunning short of promises he might yet make, while Trepovis running short of Black-Hundred forces he might send intothe final battle. 
 The ranks of the army of revolution are swelling all the time. 
 Its forces are being steeled in indi-vidual engagements, and the red flag is rising higher andhigher over the new Russia. 
 Proletary , No. 
 25, Published according to November 16 (3), 1905 the text in Proletary INSERTS TO V. 
 KALININ ’S ARTICLE “THE PEASANT CONGRESS ”141 1 We see, consequently, that consistent socialists must unequivocally support the revolutionary struggle of any section of the peasantry, even the well-to-do, against thebureaucracy and the landlords; however, consistent social-ists must make it clearly understood that the “generalredistribution” desired by the peasants is still not socialism. 
Socialism demands the abolition of the power of the money-bag, the power of capital, the abolition of all private ownership of the means of production, the abolition of com-modity economy. 
 Socialism demands that the land and thefactories should pass into the hands of all the working people,who, following an all-over plan, will organise large-scale—and not scattered and small-scale—production. 
 The peasants’ struggle for land and freedom is a big step towards socialism, but one that is very, very far fromsocialism. 
 2 The resolution on tactics as adopted by the Congress is amazing in its feebleness. 
 We are inclined to think that here one of the peasantry’s well-wishers (the liberals) hasagain been giving some kind of “explanation”. 
 Here is the resolution:“The activities of the Peasant Union may be public or secret (underground), this depending on local conditions. 
 All members of the Union must propagate their views and give effect to their demands, making use of all available methods, and disregarding opposition from Rural Superin-tendents, the police, or other authorities. 
 It is also insistently advised that use be made of the right to draw up public resolutions at village and volost gatherings and privateconferences, regarding improvements in the organisation ofthe State, and in the welfare of the people. 
” A resolution like this is most unsatisfactory. 
 Instead of the organisation of a revolutionary party, the resolution organises merely an extension to the liberal party. 
 The course of the movement itself must of necessity and inevi-tably bring about a split between the liberal landownersand the revolutionary peasants, and we, Social-Democrats,will try to accelerate that split. 
 Proletary , No. 
 25, Published according to November 16 (3), 1905 the text in Proletary as verified against the manuscript BETWEEN TWO BATTLES Geneva, November 15 (N. 
 S. 
) The big battle in which the proletariat has engaged tsar-ism is over. 
 The all-Russia political strike seems to havecome to an end almost everywhere. 
 The enemy has madethe biggest withdrawal on one flank (Finland), but he has dug himself in on the other (martial law in Poland). 
 In the centre, the enemy has fallen back very little, but holds astrong new position, and is preparing for an even more bloodyand more decisive battle. 
 Clashes are taking place alongthe whole battle line. 
 Both sides are hastening to make goodtheir losses, rally their ranks, get properly organised, and arm themselves as best they can for the next battle. 
 Such, approximately, is the state of things at present in the theatre of the struggle for freedom. 
 Civil war naturallydiffers from other kinds of warfare in that the forms of thefighting are far more varied, the strength and the composi-tion of the combatants on both sides are harder to estimate and fluctuate far more, and attempts to conclude peace, or at least an armistice do not originate in those engagedin the fighting, and are most fantastically interwoven withthe pattern of military operations. 
 Lulls in the fighting have a most encouraging effect on the initiative of the “conciliators”. 
 Witte is doing his utmost to pose as such a “conciliator”, both directly and through the agency of the servile press, and is covering up inevery possible way his role of tsarism’s diplomatic servant. 
To the delight of naïve liberals, a government report hasacknowledged the participation of the police in Black-Hundred outrages. 
 Press organs that fawn upon the govern-ment ( Novoye Vremya , for example) are making a pretence of condemning the extremes the reactionaries have gone to, and,of course, the “extremes” of the revolutionaries. 
 Displeased with the petty stakes involved, extremist representa-tives of reaction (Pobedonostsev, Vladimir, and Trepov) are leaving the scene. 
 It is partly because of their ob-tuseness that these people do not realise the importanceof this game for the preservation of the greatest power fortsarism, another reason is that they assume—and rightly so—that it is more convenient for them to acquire a free hand,and take part in the same game, but only in another role— that of “independent” fighters for the might of the monarchy, the role of “free” avengers for the “insulted national sentimentsof the Russian people”—insulted by the revolutionaries—or, in other words, the role of leaders of the BlackHundreds. 
 Witte is rubbing his hands in delight at the sight of the “great” successes of the amazingly shrewd game he is playing. 
 He is preserving liberalism’s innocence by pressing minis-terial posts upon leaders of the Constitutional-Democrats(even upon Milyukov, as telegraphed by the Temps corre-spondent), by addressing in his own handwriting a letter toMr. 
 Struve with an invitation to return to Russia, and by trying to present himself as a “White”, who is equally far removed from both the “Reds”’ and the “Blacks”. 
 At thesame time, he is acquiring, together with innocence, a tidyamount of capital, for he remains head of the tsar’sgovernment, which retains full power and is only awaiting asuitable opportunity to go over to a decisive offensive against the revolution. 
 Our qualification of Witte, as given in Proletary , is being borne out in full. 
 He is a minister-buffoon in his methods,“talents”, and the ends to which he has been put. 
 With regardto the real forces till now at his disposal, he is a ministerof the liberal bureaucracy, since he has not yet been able to strike a deal with the liberal bourgeoisie. 
 True, the haggling is making gradual progress. 
 The chafferers are bawl-ing out their rock-bottom prices, calling it a deal, butputting off the final agreement until the Zemstvo Congress,which is to meet in a few days, makes its decisions. 
 Witteis trying to win over the bourgeois intelligentsia by extend-ing their voting rights in the Duma elections, providing educational qualifications and even making paltry conces-sions to the workers (who are supposed to content themselves with 21st place in the system of indirect elections “on behalf of the workers”!!); he avers that if only the Duma meets, and if only that body—or at least a minority in it— comes out for universal suffrage, his support for this demandwill be fully ensured. 
 Till now the haggling has led nowhere. 
 The two sides are conducting their talks with no regard for those who aredoing the actual fighting, and this cannot but paralyse the efforts of our “honest brokers”. 
 For their own part, the lib-eral bourgeoisie would willingly accept the State Duma—they were willing to accept it even in a “consultative”variant, and already in September rejected an active boycott. 
However, the essence of the matter is that the revolutionhas made a tremendous stride forward in the two months that have since elapsed, the proletariat has given impor-tant battle, and at once scored its first big victory. 
 TheState Duma, that vile and despicable travesty of popularrepresentation, has been buried. 
 It was shattered by the firstblow delivered by the mighty onslaught of the proletariat. 
In the space of a few weeks, the revolution has shown up the short-sightedness of those who wanted to enter the Bulygin Duma, or support those who wanted to do so. 
 Thetactics of an active boycott received the most striking con-firmation that the tactics of political parties can receivein the thick of a struggle—confirmation in deed, verificationin the course of events, recognition as an indubitable fact of that which but yesterday seemed to short-sighted people and cowardly chafferers to be too bold a “leap into theunknown”. 
 The working class has given a good fright to the Duma comedians, such a fright that the latter are afraid to setfoot on this rickety and unreliable bridge, are afraid even to test the strength of the “latest”, hasty repairs made by the state botchers. 
 The roles have changed somewhat. 
 Onlyyesterday Comrades Parvus, Cherevanin and Martov wantedto obtain a revolutionary pledge from those who were aboutto mount this bridge—a pledge that, in the Duma, theywould demand a constituent assembly. 
 Today the place of these Social-Democrats has been taken by Count Sergei Yulyevich Witte, President of the Council of Ministers,who is already giving a “revolutionary” pledge to support any deputy to the Duma, even if he is the only one, who will demand that a constituent assembly be convoked. 
 So disgraceful was the showing the liberal bourgeois— the Constitutional-Democrats—made the first time thatthey were unwilling to repeat the unpleasant experience. 
They had already got the “election campaign” under way,had our good parliamentarians of Osvobozhdeniye and Rus-skiye Vedomosti ; they had already elected a central commit-tee to give guidance to that campaign; they had even set up a law office to advise the public as to whether the RuralSuperintendent has the right to disperse peasant electorson his own initiative, or whether he must first ask thegovernor for permission. 
 In a word, they were making readyto lay themselves down to sleep on the sofa graciously provided to all Russian Oblomovs, 142 when suddenly ... when suddenly the proletariat squared its shoulders and im-politely shook off the Duma and the entire Duma campaign. 
It is therefore not surprising that the liberal bourgeois arenow disinclined to give credence to “revolutionary pledges”made by the suave Count. 
 It is not surprising that they are even less inclined to accept the hand the Count is holding out to them, that they are more and more often glancingleftwards, though their mouths are literally watering atthe sight of the wonderful iced cake known as the Duma. 
 Without any doubt, Witte’s talks with leaders of the liberal bourgeoisie are of serious political significance, but only in the respect that they reconfirm the affinity of the would-be-liberal bureaucracy to those who are defendingthe interests of capital—only in the respect that they onceagain show who is out to bury the Russian revolution, and how. 
 These negotiations and deals, however, are not succeed-ing, for the simple reason that the revolution lives on. 
 The revolution is not only alive, but it is stronger than ever, and is very, very far from having said its last word; it isonly beginning to deploy all the forces of the proletariatand the revolutionary peasantry. 
 That is why the buffoon-minister’s talks and deals with the bourgeoisie are so point-less; they cannot acquire serious significance at the height of the struggle, when the hostile forces are confronting each other between two decisive battles. 
 At such a time, the policy of the revolutionary proletariat, which is conscious of its historic aims, is striving not only for the political but also for the economic emancipa-tion of the working people, without, however, forgetting its socialist aims—the policy of the proletariat must be mostfirm, clear and definite. 
 To the vicious lies of the minister-buffoon and the obtuse illusions of the liberal and bour-geois democrats regarding a constitution, it must contrapose,more resolutely than ever before, its slogan of the over-throw of the tsar’s rule by means of an armed uprising of the whole people. 
 The revolutionary proletariat abhors all cant,and is fighting relentlessly against all and any attemptsto obscure the actual state of affairs. 
 In present-day talkabout a constitutional regime there is not a single word butthat reeks of cant, and not a single sentence that is not a repetition of the old bureaucratic falsehood aimed at saving some remnant or other of the autocratic, serf-owning Russia. 
 There is talk of liberty, of popular representation; some hold forth on a constituent assembly, but what is beingconstantly, hourly and minutely lost sight of is that, withoutserious guarantees, all these fine things are but hollow phrases. 
 A serious guarantee can be provided only by a victorious rising of the people, only by the complete domination of the armed proletariat and the peasantry over all representa-tives of tsarist power, who, under pressure by the people,have retreated a pace but are far from having yielded to thepeople, and far from having been overthrown by the people. 
 Until that aim is achieved there can be no real liberty, no genuine popular representation, or a really constituent assembly with the power to set up a new order in Russia. 
 What is a constitution? A sheet of paper with the people’s rights recorded on it. 
 What is the guarantee of these rightsbeing really recognised? It lies in the strength of those classes of the people that have become aware of those rights, and have been able to win them. 
 Let us then not allowwords to delude us—that befits only babblers for bourgeoisdemocracy—let us not for a moment forget that strength is proved only by victory in the struggle, and that we are as yet far from having achieved complete victory. 
 Let us not believe handsome phrases, for we are living through times when an open struggle is going on, when all phrases and prom-ises at once are tested in action, when words, manifestoes, and promises of a constitution are being used to fool the people, weaken its forces, scatter its ranks, and induce it to disarm. 
 Nothing can be more false than such promises and phrases, and it is with pride that we can say that the prole-tariat of Russia has matured for the struggle both againstbrute force and against liberal-constitutional cant. 
 This isborne out by the appeal made by the railwaymen, recentlyreported in the foreign press (unfortunately we are not in possession of the original). 
 “Collect arms, comrades,” the appeal says, “organise yourselves for the struggle tirelessly,with multiplied energy. 
 It is only by arming and rallyingour ranks that we shall be able to defend what has been won,and achieve complete satisfaction of our demands. 
 Thetime will come when we shall again rise as one man in a new and still more stubborn struggle for full liberty. 
” Such are our sole guarantees. 
 Such is the only genuine constitution of a free Russia! Indeed, consider the Manifesto of October 17 and the facts of Russian life: can anythingbe more instructive than the contrast between this recogni-tion of a constitution by the tsar on paper, and the actual “constitution”, the actual application of the tsar’s power? On the face of it, the tsar’s Manifesto holds out promises ofan unequivocally constitutional character. 
 But we havebeen shown the price of these promises. 
 The person ofthe individual has been declared inviolate, yet those who arenot to the liking of the autocracy remain in prison, in exile or in banishment. 
 Freedom of assembly has been declared, yet the universities, which were the first to create actualfreedom of assembly in Russia, have been closed, and theirentrances are under police and military guard. 
 The press isfree, so therefore the newspaper Novaya Zhizn , 143 spokesman for the interests of the workers, has been confiscated for having published the programme of the Social-Democrats. 
 The places of Black-Hundred ministers have been taken byministers who have declared that they stand for the ruleof law, yet the Black Hundreds are “operating” ever moreintensely in the streets with the aid of the police and themilitary, and citizens of a free Russia who are not to the liking of the autocracy are being shot, beaten up and mauled freely and with impunity. 
 With such edifying examples before one’s eyes, one must be blind, or else blinded by class selfishness, to attach any really serious significance at the present time to whether Witte promises universal suffrage, or whether the tsar will sign a manifesto on the convocation of a “constituent”assembly. 
 Even if these “acts” were to take place, they wouldnot decide the outcome of the struggle; nor would they createactual freedom of election agitation, or ensure that a popularassembly of representatives would have a genuinely con-stituent character. 
 A constituent assembly should give legal shape and parliamentary form to the structure of a new Rus-sia, but before the victory of the new over the old can beconsolidated, and to give due form to this victory, actualvictory has to be won, the power of the old institutionshas to be broken, and the latter have to be swept away, the old edifice has to be levelled to the ground, and the possi-bility destroyed of any serious resistance on the part of thepolice and its gangs. 
 Full freedom of election, and full power for a constituent assembly can be ensured only by the complete victory ofthe uprising, the overthrow of tsarist rule, and its replace-ment by a provisional revolutionary government. 
 To this end all our efforts must be directed; the organisation andpreparation of an uprising must absolutely stand in theforeground. 
 Only in the measure in which the rising is vic-torious and in which victory leads to the decisive destruc-tion of the enemy—only in that measure will an assembly of the people’s representatives be a popular one not only on paper, and constituent not only in name. 
 Down with all cant, all falseness, and all equivocation! War has been declared, fighting has flared up, and what weare now experiencing is but a lull between two battles. 
There is no half-way. 
 The party of the “Whites” is sheer deception. 
 He who is not for revolution is one of the Black Hundreds. 
 It is not only we that say so. 
 The designationhas not been devised by us. 
 The blood-stained stones cry outthese words in the streets of Moscow and Odessa, in Kron-stadt and the Caucasus, in Poland and Tomsk. 
 He who is not for revolution is one of the Black Hun-dreds. 
 He who does not wish to put up with Russian freedom becoming freedom for the police to use violence, suborna-tion, vodka, and treacherous attacks upon unarmed people, must arm himself and immediately get ready for battle. 
 We must win genuine freedom, not promises of freedom, not scraps of paper about freedom. 
 We must achieve not merely humiliation of the tsar’s power, not only recognition ofthe people’s rights by that power, but the destruction ofthat power, since the power of the tsar means the powerof the Black Hundreds over Russia. 
 That conclusion doesnot belong to us either. 
 It has been drawn by the facts of life itself; it is the lesson taught by the events of the times. 
 It is the voice of those who till now have stood aside fromany revolutionary doctrine and dare not make a single freestep or say a single free word in the street, at a meeting,or at home, without running the imminent and terriblerisk of being crushed, tormented or torn to pieces by some gang of adherents of the tsar . 
 Finally, the revolution has obliged this “popular force” to come into the open—the force of the tsar’s adherents. 
It has revealed to the general view whom the tsar’s rulebanks on, and who really supports that rule. 
 There you haveit, this army of ferocious policemen, martinet-trained, half-witted soldiers, priests run wild, brutal shopkeepers, and the vodka-dazed riffraff of capitalist society. 
 It is they thatnow reign in Russia, with the connivance or direct support of nine-tenths of all our governmental institutions. 
 Hereit is—the Russian Vendée, 144 which resembles the French Vendée in the same measure that the “lawful” monarch Nicho-las Romanov resembles the adventurer Napoleon. 
 Our Vendée has not yet said its last word either—make no mistakeon that score, citizens. 
 It, too, is just beginning to deployits forces properly. 
 It, too, has its “reserves of combusti-bles”, accumulated during centuries of ignorance, oppression,serfdom, and police omnipotence. 
 It combines within itself unmitigated Asiatic backwardness with all the loathsome features of the refined methods used to exploit and stultifythose that are most downtrodden and tormented by thecivilisation of the capitalist cities, and been reduced toconditions worse than those of wild beasts. 
 This Vendée willnot vanish at any manifesto from the tsar, or messages from the Synod, or at changes in the upper or lower ranks of the bureaucracy. 
 It can be smashed only by the strength of anorganised and enlightened proletariat, for only the proletar- /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR iat, exploited as it is, is capable of rousing all that stand below it, awaken in them a sense that they are human beings and citizens, and show them the path of deliverance from all exploitation. 
 Only the proletariat can create the nucleusof a mighty revolutionary army, mighty both in its ideals,its discipline, its organisation, and its heroism in thestruggle, a heroism no Vendée can stand up to. 
 Guided by Social-Democracy, the proletariat has every-where begun forming that revolutionary army. 
 Its ranks should be joined by all who do not wish to be in the army ofthe Black Hundreds. 
 Civil war knows no neutrals. 
 Those whostand aside in it are thereby rendering support, by beingpassive, to the jubilant Black Hundreds. 
 The armed forces,too, are dividing into a Red army and a Black army. 
 Only a fortnight ago we wrote of the speed with which they are being drawn into the struggle for freedom. 
 The example ofKronstadt was ample proof of this. 
 The government of thescoundrel Witte may have put down the Kronstadt mu-tiny 145; it is now shooting down hundreds of sailors who have again raised the red flag—but that flag will fly much higher, for it is the flag of all working people and all the exploited the world over. 
 Let the servile press, like Novoye Vremya , bawl about the troops being neutral; this foul and hypocritical lie will vanish like smoke at every misdeedof the Black Hundreds. 
 The troops cannot be, have neverbeen, and will never be neutral. 
 Today, they are rapidly splitting up into troops that stand for freedom, and troops that stand for the Black Hundreds. 
 We shall accelerate theprocess. 
 We shall brand all those who are irresolute andvacillating, all those who balk at the idea of the immediateformation of a people’s militia (according to the latestreports in the foreign press, the Municipal Council of Moscow has rejected plans for the creation of a people’s militia). 
 We shall multiply our agitation among the masses, and ourorganisational activities to set up revolutionary detachments. 
Then the army of the conscious proletariat will merge withthe Red detachments of the Russian fighting forces—andthen we shall see whether the police’s Black Hundreds will be able to vanquish all the new, young and free Russia! Proletary , No. 
 26, Published according to November 25 (12), 1905 the text in Proletary N O T E S 1 2 3Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution was written by Lenin in Geneva, in June-July 1905. 
 The book was published in late July 1905, in Geneva, by the Central Com-mittee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 It was twice republished in Russia inthe same year, once by the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
,and the second time by the Moscow Committee of the Party, thistime in 10,000 copies. 
 The book was illegally distributed throughout the country— particularly in St. 
 Petersburg, Moscow, Kazan, Tiflis and Baku. 
On February 19, 1907 it was banned by the St. 
 Petersburg PressDepartment, and on December 22 of the same year the St. 
 Peters-burg Court issued an injunction for its destruction. 
 In 1907 Lenin had Two Tactics published in the miscellany Twelve Years , supplementing the book with new notes. 
 The material prepared by Lenin for this book, his plans, précis, andother notes, were published in Lenin Miscellany V , pp. 
 315-20, and XVI , pp. 
 151-56. 
 p. 
 15 The mutiny on the armoured cruiser Potemkin. 
 The mutiny broke out on June 14 (27), 1905. 
 The crew brought the warshipto the Port of Odessa, where a general strike was in progress. 
 How-ever, the favourable conditions that had arisen for joint actionby the Odessa workers and the sailors of the Potemkin were not utilised. 
 Numerous arrests of its members had weakened theOdessa Bolshevik organisation and it lacked unity. 
 The Menshe-viks were opposed to an armed uprising and held the workers andsailors back from taking offensive action. 
 The tsarist government or-dered the entire Black Sea Fleet to crush the Potemkin , but the crews refused to open fire on the cruiser. 
 The officers were compelled towithdraw their ships. 
 After eleven days of cruising in the Black Seathe crew of the Potemkin were forced by shortage of food and coal to take their vessel to a Rumanian port and surrender to theauthorities. 
 Most of the sailors remained abroad. 
 Those whoreturned to Russia were arrested and court-martialled. 
 The Potemkin mutiny was unsuccessful, but the fact that the crew of a big naval vessel had joined the revolution marked animportant stage in the development of the struggle against theautocracy. 
 Lenin called it “the attempt to form the nucleus of Proletary (The Proletarian )—the name of an illegal Bolshevik weekly, official organ of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 It was founded in accord-a revolutionary army ” (see present edition, Vol. 
 8, p. 
 562) . 
 p. 
 17 4ance with a resolution of the Third Congress of the Party. 
 Lenin was appointed editor-in-chief of Proletary by a decision of a plenary meeting of the Party’s Central Committee, on April 27 (May 10), 1905. 
 Proletary was published in Geneva from May 14 (27) till November 12 (25), 1905, a total of twenty-six issues being brought out. 
 Active in the work of the editorial board were V. 
 Vorovsky, A. 
 Lunacharsky, and M. 
 Olminsky. 
 Proletary continued the policy of the old, Leninist Iskra , and maintained full continuity with the Bolshevik newspaper Vperyod . 
 In all, Lenin wrote about 90 articles and items for Proletary his articles being reprinted in local Bolshevik periodicals, and also published in the form of leaflets. 
 Publication of Proletary was discontinued shortly after Lenin’s departure for Russia in November 1905, the last two issues (Nos. 
 25 and 26) being edited by V. 
 Vorovsky. 
 p. 
 17 The Party of Socialist-Revolutionaries —the Socialist-Revolution-aries (S. 
R. 
s) was the name by which a petty-bourgeois party in Russia was known. 
 It came into being in late 1901 and early 1902 as a result of the merging of various Narodnik groups and circles, such as The Union of Socialist-Revolutionaries , the Party of Socialist-Revolutionaries , etc. 
 Its views found official expres-sion in the newspaper Revolutsionnaya Rossiya (Revolutionary Russia ), published between the years 1900 and 1905, and the journal Vestnik Russkoi Revolutsii (Herald of the Russian Revo-lution )—1901-05. 
 The S. 
R. 
s saw no class distinctions between the proletarian and the petty proprietor, glossed over the class stratification and the contradictions within the peasantry, and rejected the proletariat’s guiding role in the revolution. 
 Their views were an eclectic mixture of the ideas of Narodism and revisionism. 
 As Lenin put it, they tried to mend “the rents in the Narodnik ideas” with “bits of fashionable opportunist ‘criticism’ of Marxism” (see p. 
 310 of this volume). 
 Advocated by the S. 
R. 
s as the chief method of struggle against the autocracy, the tactic of individual terrorism was greatly detrimental to the revo-lutionary movement, and hampered organisation of the masses for the revolutionary struggle. 
 The agrarian programme of the Socialist-Revolutionaries envisaged the abolition of private ownership of the land, which was to be transferred to the village commune on the basis of the labour principle and equalitarian tenure, and also the develop-ment of co-operatives. 
 There was nothing socialist in this programme, which the S. 
R. 
s termed “socialisation of the land”, since, as Lenin pointed out, the preservation of commodity production and private farming of communal land cannot do away with the domination of capital, or rid the working peasantry of exploitation and impoverishment. 
 Neither can co-operatives be the salvation of the small peasant in conditions of capitalism, for they serve only to enrich the rural bourgeoisie. 
 At the same time, the demand for equalitarian tenure of the land, though 5not socialist in character, was, as Lenin pointed out, of progres-sive, revolutionary-democratic significance, inasmuch as it was spearheaded against landlordism. 
 The Bolshevik Party unmasked the S. 
R. 
s’ attempts to pass themselves off as socialists, waged an unrelenting struggle against them for influence over the peasantry, and revealed the injurious effects of their tactic of individual terrorism on the working-class movement. 
 At the same time, on certain conditions, the Bolshe-viks entered into temporary agreements with the Socialist-Revolutionaries for the struggle against tsarism. 
 The absence of class homogeneity in the peasantry was the reason of the political and ideological instability in the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, and of its constant vacillation between the liberal bourgeoisie and the proletariat. 
 During the first Russian revolution there was a split in the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, its Right wing forming the legal “Toilers’ Popular Socialist Party”, whose views were close to those of the Constitutional-Democrats (Cadets), and the Left wing, taking shape as the semi-anarchist league of “Maximalists”. 
 During the period of the Stolypin reaction, the Socialist-Revolutionary Party un-derwent a complete breakdown in respect of ideology and organi-sation, and during the First World War most of its members took a social-chauvinistic stand. 
 Following the victory of the February bourgeois-democratic revolution of 1917, the Socialist-Revolutionaries together with the Mensheviks and the Constitutional-Democrats, were the main-stay of the counter-revolutionary bourgeois-landlord Provisional Government, such leaders of the party as Kerensky, Avksentyev and Chernov becoming members of that government. 
 The Socialist-Revolutionary Party discontinued its support of the peasants’ demand that landlord ownership of the land be abolished, on the contrary it came out for maintenance of that ownership, the S. 
R. 
 members of the Provisional Government authorising punitive action against peasants who had seized land belonging to landlords. 
 Late in November 1917, the Left wing of the S. 
R. 
 Party formed an independent party of Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, who in an effort to preserve their influence among the peasant masses, formally recognised Soviet rule and entered into an agreement with the Bolsheviks. 
 However, they soon began a struggle against the Soviets. 
 During the years of foreign intervention and civil war, the S. 
R. 
s carried on counter-revolutionary, subversive work, gave active support to the interventionists and White generals, took part in counter-revolutionary plots, and organised terroristic acts against leaders of the Soviet state and the Communist Party. 
 After the conclusion of the Civil War the S. 
R. 
s continued their hostile anti-Soviet acts within the country and in the camp of the White émigrés. 
 p. 
 18 Osvobozhdeniye (Emancipation )—a fortnightly journal published abroad from June 18 (July 1), 1902 until October 5 (18), 1905, 6 7 8under the editorship of P. 
 Struve. 
 Mouthpiece of the Russian liberal bourgeoisie, it consistently expressed the ideas of moderatemonarchist liberalism. 
 In 1903 the Osvobozhdeniye League developed around the journal, taking definite shape in January 1904, and existing until October 1905. 
 Together with the Zemstvo constitutionalists, the Osvobozh-deniye group formed the nucleus of the Constitutional-Democratic Party (Cadets) which came into being in October 1905, andbecame the chief party of the liberal monarchist bourgeoisie inRussia. 
 p. 
 19 The reference is to the new, Menshevik Iskra . 
 Following the Second Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 the Mensheviks gained controlof Iskra , with the connivance of Plekhanov, and from November 1903, beginning with number 52, Iskra became the organ of the Mensheviks. 
 It came out until October 1905. 
 p. 
 19 The Bulygin Commission —created by an imperial ukase in February 1905 and headed by Minister of the Interior Bulygin—hence its name—drafted a bill for the establishment of a StateDuma with advisory powers, and the Regulations on the Dumaelections. 
 The Bill and the Regulations were made public together with the tsar’s Manifesto of August 6 (19), 1905. 
 An active boy-cott of the Bulygin Duma was proclaimed by the Bolsheviks, andthe government’s attempt to convene the Duma failed under theimpact of the revolution. 
 For information on the boycott of theBulygin Duma see pages 179-87 of this volume. 
 p. 
 21 The Constitutional-Democratic Party (Cadets)—was the leading party of the liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie in Russia. 
 Foundedin October 1905, its membership was made up of representativesof the bourgeoisie, Zemstvo leaders of the landowning class, andbourgeois intellectuals. 
 To hoodwink the working people, theCadets hypocritically called themselves “the party of the people’s freedom”, while in actual fact they did not go beyond the demand for a constitutional monarchy. 
 They considered it theirprimary task to wage a struggle against the revolutionary move-ment, and were out to share power with the tsar and the feudallandlords. 
 During the First World War they actively supportedthe tsarist government’s predatory foreign policy, and did their best to save the monarchy during the bourgeois-democratic revolution of February 1917. 
 They held leading posts in the bour-geois Provisional Government, conducting a counter-revolutionarypolicy opposed to the interests of the people. 
 When the Great OctoberSocialist Revolution was victorious, the Cadets became irrecon-cilable enemies of the Soviets, and took part in all armed counter-revolutionary acts and campaigns of the interventionists. 
 They continued their anti-Soviet counter-revolutionary activities whenthey fled abroad after the rout of the interventionists and white-guards. 
 p. 
 21 9 10 11 12 13 14 15Millerandism —an opportunist trend named after the French socialist-reformist Millerand, who in 1899 entered the reactionarybourgeois government of France, in which the post of war minis-ter was held by General Gaston Galliffet, butcher of the Paris Commune. 
 p. 
 30 The Ninth of January —it was on this day that, by order of the tsar, a peaceful demonstration of St. 
 Petersburg workers wasbrutally shot down by the troops. 
 Led by the priest Gapon, thedemonstrators were marching towards the Winter Palace to present a petition to the tsar. 
 This cold-blooded massacre of unarmed workers started a wave of mass political strikes anddemonstrations all over Russia, under the slogan of “Down with theautocracy!” The events of January 9 marked the beginning ofthe revolution of 1905-07. 
 p. 
 32 Die Neue Rheinische Zeitung was published in Cologne from June 1, 1848 until May 19, 1849. 
 It was managed by Karl Marx andFrederick Engels, Marx being editor-in-chief. 
 Following theappearance of No. 
 301, the paper ceased publication because of itspersecution by the reactionaries. 
 Regarding Die Neue Rheinische Zeitung see K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Moscow 1958, Vol. 
 II, pp. 
 328-37. 
 p. 
 33 Sotsial-Demokrat (The Social-Democrat )—a Menshevik Georgian-language newspaper published in Tiflis between April andNovember 1905. 
 The article “The Zemsky Sobor and Our Tactics” was written by N. 
 Jordania, leader of the Caucasian Mensheviks. 
 It was crit-icised in detail by Lenin in Chapter Seven of Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution (see pp. 
 61-65 of this volume). 
 p. 
 35 The Black Hundreds —monarchist gangs formed by the tsarist police to fight against the revolutionary movement. 
 They assas-sinated revolutionaries, organised attacks on progressive intellec-tuals, and carried out anti-Jewish pogroms. 
 p. 
 36 A constitution à la Shipov —Lenin’s name for the draft of state structure drawn up by D. 
 Shipov, a moderate liberal leader of the Zemstvos’ Right wing. 
 In an attempt to curb the sweep of the revolution and also to obtain certain concessions from the tsaristgovernment in favour of the Zemstvos, Shipov proposed thecreation of an advisory representative body under the tsar. 
 Bya deal of this kind the moderate liberals wanted to deceive themasses, preserve the monarchy, and at the same time win certain political rights for themselves. 
 p. 
 37 Russkaya Starina (The Russian Antiquary ) a monthly journal of history published in St. 
 Petersburg from 1870 to 1918. 
 p. 
 43 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Moscow 1958, Vol. 
 II, p. 
 405. 
 p. 
 43 Russkiye Vedomosti (Russian Recorder )—a newspaper published in Moscow from 1863 onwards by a group of Moscow Universityliberal professors and Zemstvo leaders. 
 It was the mouthpiece of liberal landowners and bourgeoisie. 
 In 1905 it became the organ of the Right wing of the Constitutional-Democrats. 
 Afterthe October Revolution it ceased publication, together with other counter-revolutionary papers. 
 p. 
 51 Syn Otechestva (Son of the Fatherland )—a liberal daily published in St. 
 Petersburg from 1856 to 1900, and after November 18 (December 1), 1904. 
 Its contributors represented the Osvobozhdeniye trend and various shades of Narodism. 
 Following November 15 (28), 1905, it became the organ of the S. 
R. 
s. 
 It was suppressed on December 2 (15), 1905. 
 p. 
 51 Nasha Zhizn (Our Life )—a liberal daily newspaper that ap-peared in St. 
 Petersburg, with intervals, from November 6 (19),1904 to July 11 (24), 1906. 
 p. 
 51 Nashi Dni (Our Days )—a liberal daily published in St. 
 Peters-burg from December 18 (31), 1904 to February 5 (18), 1905. 
 Publication was resumed on December 7 (20), 1905, but only two issues came out. 
 p. 
 51 The man in the muffler —chief character in Chekhov’s story of the same name, a man typifying the narrow-minded philistinewho abhors all innovations or initiative. 
 p. 
 53 Lenin is referring to the book Aus dem literarischen Nachlass von Karl Marx , Friedrich Engels und Ferdinand Lassalle . 
 Heraus-gegeben von Franz Mehring , Band III, Stuttgart 1902, S. 
 211. 
 See K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Moscow 1958, Vol. 
 I, p. 
 67. 
 p. 
 59 The reference is to the resolution tabled by Starover (pseudonym of the Menshevik A. 
 N. 
 Potresov) on the attitude towards the lib-erals, which was adopted at the Second Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, and was criticised by Lenin in the article “Working-Class and Bour-geois Democracy” (see present edition, Vol. 
 8, pp. 
 72-82). 
 p. 
 60 The reference is to the naval engagement near the Island of Tsushima, which took place on May 14-15 (27-28), 1905, and ended in the defeat of the tsar’s fleet. 
 p. 
 62 The expression “parliamentary cretinism”, which is often met in Lenin’s writings, was coined by Marx and Engels. 
 As Engels wrote, “parliamentary cretinism” is an incurable disease, anailment “whose unfortunate victims are permeated by the lofty conviction that the whole world, its history and its future are 26 27 28 29 30 31 32directed and determined by a majority of votes of just that very representative institution that has the honour of having them inthe capacity of its members”. 
 This expression was applied by Lenin to those opportunists who considered the parliamentarian system all-powerful, andparliamentarian activities the sole form of political struggle. 
 p. 
 64 Differences of opinion were revealed during the discussion of the draft agrarian programme at the Breslau Congress of the German Social-Democratic Party, 1895. 
 p. 
 66 Rabocheye Dyelo (The Workers ’ Cause )—an Economist journal appearing irregularly in Geneva between April 1899 and February 1902 as the organ of the Union of Russian Social-DemocratsAbroad. 
 For a criticism of the Rabocheye Dyelo group see Lenin’s What Is To Be Done? (see present edition, Vol. 
 5, pp. 
 347-529). 
 p. 
 70 The reference is to Nadezhdin’s press attack on the plan of the Leninist Iskra (Nadezhdin was the pseudonym of Y. 
 O. 
 Zelen-sky). 
 Lenin criticised this attack as far back as 1902, in his What Is To Be Done? (see present edition, Vol. 
 5, pp. 
 347-529). 
 p. 
 70 The Frankfurter Zeitung —a bourgeois daily that spoke for the big financial interests of Germany. 
 It was published in Frank-fort on Main from 1856 to 1943. 
 It resumed publication in 1949 under the title of the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, asthe mouthpiece of the West-German monopolists. 
 p. 
 73 Bernsteinism —an anti-Marxist trend in international Social-Democracy. 
 It arose towards the close of the nineteenth century and bore the name of the Social-Democrat Eduard Bernstein, who tried to revise Marx’s theory of revolution in the spirit ofbourgeois liberalism. 
 In Russia this trend was represented by the “legal Marxists”, the Economists, the Bundists, and the Mensheviks. 
 p. 
 76 The reference is to Lenin’s articles entitled “Social-Democracy and the Provisional Revolutionary Government”, and “The Revolu-tionary-Democratic Dictatorship of the Proletariat and the Peas-antry”, which were published in issues 13 and 14 of the Bolshevik newspaper Vperyod (see present edition, Vol. 
 8, pp. 
 275-303). 
 p. 
 78 Lenin has in view the programme published in 1874 by the London Blanquist group of former members of the Paris Commune (see F. 
 Engels, “Flüchtlingsliteratur. 
 II. 
 Programm der blanqui-stischen Kommuneflüchtlinge”, Internationales aus dem Volks-staat , Berlin 1957, S. 
 47-56). 
 The Blanquists were adherents of the trend in the socialist movement of France headed by the outstanding revolutionistand representative of utopian communism Louis Auguste Blanqui (1805-81). 
 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40The Blanquists, as Lenin wrote, expected “that mankind will be emancipated from wage slavery, not by the proletarian class struggle, but through a conspiracy hatched by a small minority of intellectuals” (see present edition, Vol. 
 10, “The Congress Summed Up”). 
 They took no account of the concrete situa-tion required for an uprising to be victorious, and showed their disdain for ties with the masses by substituting for a revolutionary party activities by a handful of plotters. 
 p. 
 80 The Erfurt Programme of German Social-Democracy was adopted in October 1891 at a congress held in Erfurt. 
 For a criticism of this programme see F. 
 Engels, “Zur Kritik des sozialdemokrati-schen Programmentwurfes 1891”, Die Neue Zeit , Jg. 
 XX, 1901, B. 
 II, H. 
 1 and Lenin’s The State and Revolution . 
p . 
 8 6 In July 1905 Lenin wrote a note to Chapter Ten of Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution . 
 This note was not published in the first edition of the book, and first appeared in 1926, in Lenin Miscellany V . 
p . 
 8 7 See K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Correspondence , Moscow 1953, pp. 
 551-55. 
 p. 
 87 “Lenin has in view the article “On the Provisional Revolutionary Government” (see present edition, Vol. 
 8, pp. 
 461-81), and also the article by F. 
 Engels, Die Bakunisten an der Arbeit. 
 Denkschrift über den Aufstand in Spanien im Sommer 1873 , in which he criticises the Bakuninist resolution Lenin is referring to (see Der Volksstaat , Nos. 
 105, 106, 107, 1873). 
 p. 
 93 Credo was the name given to a manifesto issued in 1899 by a group of Economists (S. 
 Prokopovich, Y. 
 Kuskova, and others, who later became Constitutional-Democrats). 
 This manifesto was a most outspoken expression of Russian Economism’s opportunism. 
 Lenin countered the Credo with a trenchant protest denouncing the Economists’ views ( A Protest by Russian Social-Democrats , see present edition, Vol. 
 4, pp. 
 167-82). 
 p. 
 95 Rabochaya Mysl (Workers’ Thought )—organ of the Economists, which was published in 1897-1902. 
 The views of this newspaper as a Russian variety of international opportunism were criticised by Lenin in the article “A Retrograde Trend in Russian Social-Democ-racy”, and in his work What Is To Be Done? (see present edition, Vol. 
 4, pp. 
 255-85 and Vol. 
 5, pp. 
 347-529) and also in articles published in Iskra . 
p . 
 9 5 The reference is to Marx’s words in his Zur Kritik der Hegelschen Rechtsphilolophie , MEGA, 1. 
 Abt. 
, Bd. 
 1, S. 
 614. 
 p. 
 96 L’Humanité —a daily paper founded in 1904 by Jean Jaurès as the organ of the French Socialist Party. 
 Soon after the split 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48in the Socialist Party at the Tours Congress (December 1920) and the formation of the Communist Party of France, the paper became the latter’s organ. 
 It now appears in Paris as the central organ of the C. 
P. 
F. 
 p. 
 97 Varlin , Louis-Eugène (1839-71)—French worker and leader of the First International, member of the Central Committee of the National Guard and of the Paris Commune of 1871. 
 p. 
 108 The reference is to the “ Rules of Organisation ” adopted at the Geneva Menshevik Conference in 1905. 
 The “Rules” were also criticised by Lenin in the article “A Third Step Back” (see present edition, Vol. 
 8, pp. 
 544-54) and in “Preface to the Pamphlet Workers on the Split in the Party ” (see pp. 
 163-68 of this volume). 
 p . 
 110 See K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Moscow 1958, Vol. 
 I, p. 
 217. 
 p. 
 113 The Hirsch-Duncker Trade Unions —founded in 1865 in Germany by two bourgeois liberals—Hirsch and Duncker who, like the bour-geois economist Brentano, advocated “the harmony of class interests”, distracted the workers from the revolutionary class struggle against the bourgeoisie, and limited the role of the trade unions to the bounds of mutual aid societies and educational activities. 
 p. 
 120 Engels’s article Die Bakunisten an der Arbeit. 
 Denkschrift über den Aufstand in Spanien im Sommer 1873 was translated into Russian under Lenin’s editorship and in 1905 was published in Geneva by the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in the form of a pamphlet. 
 A second edition came out in 1906 in St. 
 Petersburg (see Der Volksstaat , Nos. 
 105, 106, 107, 1873). 
 Written by Marx and Engels in March 1850, the Address of the Central Committee to the Communist League was published in Russian in 1906 in the supplement to Marx’s pamphlet Ent-hüllungen über den Kommunistenprozess zu Köln , which was brought out by the Molot Publishers in St. 
 Petersburg (see K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Moscow 1958, Vol. 
 I, pp. 
 106-17). 
 p. 
 122 The following passage, as far as the words “We have shown that the Osvobozhdeniye people...” (see page 129) was omitted in the first edition of the book Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution . 
 The passage was first published in the newspaper Pravda in No. 
 112 of April 22, 1940. 
 p. 
 127 See K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Moscow 1958, Vol. 
 I, pp. 
 473-545. 
 p. 
 127 Moskovskiye Vedomosti (Moscow Recorder )—a newspaper founded in 1756. 
 From the sixties of the nineteenth century it voiced the views 49 50 51 52 5354 55 56 57 58 59 60of the most reactionary monarchist sections of the landlords and the clergy. 
 In 1905 it became a leading organ of the Black Hun-dreds, and was banned following the October Revolution of 1917. 
 p. 
 128 Franz Mehring (1846-1919)—a leading Left-winger in German Social-Democracy, historian, and publicist. 
 He was one of thefounders of the revolutionary Spartacus League, and then joinedthe Communist Party of Germany. 
 p. 
 130 See K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, MEGA, 1. 
 Abt. 
, Bd. 
 7, Moskau, 1935, S. 
 362. 
 p. 
 131 Ibid . 
, S. 
 28. 
 p. 
 132 Ibid . 
, S. 
 28-29. 
 p. 
 132 Ibid . 
, S. 
 8. 
 p. 
 133 Ibid . 
, S. 
 50-51. 
 p. 
 134 Ibid . 
, S. 
 260-61. 
 p. 
 135 The organ of the Cologne Workers’ League was originally called Zeitung des Arbeiter-Vereins zu Köln , with the subtitle Freiheit , Bruderlichkeit , Arbeit (Freedom , Brotherhood , Labour ). 
 Forty issues came out between April and October 1848, and another23 between October 1848 and June 1849, during which period thesubtitle became the paper’s title. 
 p. 
 137 The Communist League —the first international organisation of the revolutionary proletariat, was founded in London in thesummer of 1847 by a congress of delegates of revolutionary prole-tarian organisations. 
 The League was organised and guided by KarlMarx and Frederick Engels, who, on instructions from the League, wrote its programme—the Manifesto of the Communist Party . 
 It existed until 1852, its foremost members subsequently playing a leading part in the First International. 
 See the articleby F. 
 Engels, On the History of the Communist League (K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Moscow 1958, Vol. 
 II, pp. 
 338-57). 
 p. 
 138 Tovarishch (The Comrade )—a daily that was published in St. 
 Petersburg from March 1906 till January 1908. 
 Though formallynot the organ of any particular party it was in fact the mouth-piece of the Left Constitutional-Democrats, and published contributions from Mensheviks. 
 p. 
 139 See K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Moscow 1958, Vol. 
 II, p. 
 352. 
 p. 
 140 Khlestakov —the leading character in Gogol’s comedy The Inspector-General , an arrant boaster and liar. 
 p. 
 140 61 62 63 64 65 66 67The article “The Paris Commune and the Tasks of the Democratic Dictatorship” was published in Proletary , No. 
 8 of July 17 (4), 1905. 
 Its author, who is not known, provided a historical noteon the activities of the Paris Commune and the composition of its government, which, besides representatives of the petty bour-geoisie, included socialist workingmen prominent in the labourmovement. 
 The article was directed against the tactics of theMensheviks, who denied the possibility of Social-Democrats par-ticipating in a provisional revolutionary government. 
 The articlewas edited by Lenin, who changed the title, made a number of changes in the wording, and wrote the conclusion. 
 p. 
 141 Bureau of Majority Committees —the Bolsheviks’ organisational centre, was formed on Lenin’s initiative to prepare for the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
’s Third Congress. 
 It was elected at the close of 1904 atthree regional conferences—the Southern, the Caucasian, and the Northern. 
 p. 
 143 The conciliator members of the Central Committee who were arrested at its session on February 9 (22), 1905 in Moscow were:Ma—V. 
 A. 
 Noskov, Bem —M. 
 A. 
 Silvin; Vladimir —L. 
 Y. 
 Kar-pov; Innokenty —I . 
 F . 
 Dubrovinsky; Andrei —A . 
 A . 
 Kvyatkovsky; Voron —L. 
 Y. 
 Galperin. 
 p. 
 144 On May 7 (20), 1905 the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
appointed Plekhanov its representative in the InternationalSocialist Bureau (the executive body of the Second International),on the condition that he recognise the decisions of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
’s Third Congress as binding. 
 Plekhanov did not accept this condi-tion, upon which his appointment was cancelled. 
 In October 1905the Central Committee appointed Lenin its representative in theInternational Socialist Bureau. 
 Regarding the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
’srepresentation in the Bureau see also this volume, pp. 
 332-34. 
 p. 
 144 The Leipziger Volkszeitung —organ of the Left wing of German Social-Democracy, was founded in 1894. 
 p. 
 145 Lenin is referring to the article by Rosa Luxemburg Organisati-onsfragen der Russischen Sozialdemokratie , written by her at the request of the Mensheviks, and published in July 1904 in the Menshevik Iskra and in Die Neue Zeit . 
 A refutal of this article was contained in One Step Forward , Two Steps Back. 
 Reply by N. 
 Lenin was sent to Die Neue Zeit . 
 Kautsky, who supported the Mensheviks, refused to publish the reply. 
 p. 
 145 See F. 
 Engels, “Flüchtlingsliteratur. 
 II. 
 Programm der blan-quistischen Kommuneflüchtlinge”, Internationales aus dem Volksstaat , Berlin 1957, S. 
 50. 
 p. 
 156to Rosa Luxemburg (see present edition, Vol. 
 7, pp. 
 472-83) which /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR 68 69 70 71 72 73Posledniye Izvestia (News )—a periodical published abroad by the Bund from 1901 till 1906. 
 It expressed the Bundists’ bour-geois-nationalist views. 
 p. 
 160 This document is the original draft of Lenin’s introduction to the pamphlet Workers on the Split in the Party , which was pub-lished in Geneva in August 1905. 
 One of the variants of the title of the pamphlet was The Voice of the Workers and the Split in the Party . 
 The title of the document has been provided by the In-stitute of Marxism-Leninism, Central Committee, C. 
P. 
S. 
U. 
 p. 
 161 An Open Letter to the Mensheviks ’ Organising Committee from the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 ’s Central Committee was to have been published in No. 
 10 of Proletary , but was actually published in No. 
 11, August 9 (July 27), 1905. 
 The letter proposed negotiations on problems of uniting the Party on the basis of the Programme and Rules adopted by the Third Congress. 
 The first and second conferences of representatives of the Central Committee and the Organising Committee took place in July, and the third in September 1905. 
 The conferences showed that by their schismatic action the Mensheviks were wrecking unification of the Party. 
 p. 
 161 Manilovism —from Manilov, a character in Gogol’s Dead Souls , whose name has come to typify smug complacency, empty and saccharine prattle, and pipe-dreaming. 
 p. 
 163 Lenin is referring to Dnevnik Sotsial-Demokrata (Diary of a Social-Democrat )—a non-periodical organ published by Plekhanov in Geneva from March 1805 till April 1912. 
 In all, sixteen issues were brought out, at considerable intervals. 
 Publication was resumed in Petrograd in 1916, but only one issue appeared. 
 In the first eight issues (1905-06) Plekhanov advocated ex-tremely Right-wing, Menshevik and opportunist views, defended a bloc between Social-Democracy and the liberal bourgeoisie, rejected the alliance of the proletariat and the peasantry, and condemned the December insurrection. 
 In Nos. 
 9-16 (1909-12) he came out against the Menshevik liquidators, who wanted to disband underground party organi-sations. 
 In the basic questions of tactics, however, he remained on a Menshevik platform. 
 In No. 
 1 for 1916, Plekhanov’s social-chauvinist views found full expression. 
 Plekhanov’s opportunism and departure from revolutionary Marxism were roundly criticised by Lenin. 
 p. 
 168 The Union of Unions —a political organisation of liberal bour-geois intellectuals, founded in May 1905 at the first congress of representatives of 14 unions, such as lawyers, writers, medical men, engineers, teachers, and the like. 
 In 1905 the Union favoured a boycott of the Bulygin Duma, but soon changed its stand, deciding to take part in the Duma elections. 
 It fell apart towards the close of 1906. 
 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81Regarding the attitude of Social-Democracy towards the liberal unions see pp. 
 281-82 in this volume. 
 p. 
 169 Slovo (The Word )—a bourgeois daily published in St. 
 Peters-burg from 1903 till 1909. 
 Originally a Right-wing Zemstvo organ, it became the mouthpiece of the Octobrist Party from November 1905 till July 1906, when it ceased publication. 
 Publication was resumed on November 19 (December 2), 1906, when the paper became the organ of the constitutional monarchist party of “Peace-ful Renovation”, which in essence in no way differed from the Octobrists. 
 p. 
 170 Rural Superintendent (Zemsky Nachalnik )—an administrative post instituted in 1889 by the tsarist government with the aim of strengthening the landlords’ authority over the peasants. 
 Rural Superintendents were selected from among the local landed nobility, and were given very great powers not only of an admin-istrative character, but also judicial, which included the right to arrest peasants and administer corporal punishment. 
 p. 
 171 Suvorin , A. 
 S. 
—editor of the reactionary newspaper Novoye Vremya from 1876 till 1912. 
 p. 
 172 Until the Greek calends —a translation of the Latin ad calendas graecas . 
 The calends was the name given in the Roman calendar to the first day of each month. 
 The Greek calendar had no calends, so the expression means “never”. 
 p. 
 173 Le Matin —the name of a French bourgeois daily paper that was founded in 1884. 
 p. 
 176 The conference of R. 
 S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 organisations abroad (of Bolshevik and Menshevik representatives) was held in the summer of 1905. 
 Party branches in South Germany were represented at the confer-ence, whose resolution spoke of the need for a unity congress of the Party to be called, so as to resolve the problem of unification with the seceding section of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 (the Mensheviks). 
 The resolution was published in No. 
 12 of Proletary , with a note “from the Editors” written by Lenin. 
 p. 
 188 Uchitel (Teacher ) was the pseudonym used by M. 
 N. 
 Pokrovsky. 
 The article “The Osvobozhdeniye People at Work” was written by V. 
 D. 
 Bonch-Bruyevich. 
 p. 
 189 The present article is a reply to a letter from A Worker from Dvinsk. 
 The writer posed the following questions to the Edito-rial Board of Proletary , with reference to the decisions of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
’s Third Congress: “1) What role will be played by a provisional government; will it guide or rule the country, or do neither? 2) Under what circumstances is participation of proletar-ians in a provisional government possible? 3) What is all this agitation and propaganda about an insurrection?” p. 
 190 82 83 84Marshal of the Nobility —the elected representative of the nobility of a gubernia or uyezd, who was in charge of all the nobles’affairs in the area represented. 
 He held a position of influence in the administration, and took the chair at Zemstvo meetings. 
 p. 
 193 Burenin , V. 
 P. 
 , worked on the staff of the reactionary news-paper Novoye Vremya , engaged in libelling and besmearing repre-sentatives of all progressive public and political trends. 
 Lenin uses his name as a synonym for dishonest methods of conducting polemics. 
 p. 
 202 The Bund (The General Jewish Workers’ Union of Lithuania, Poland, and Russia) came into being in 1897 at the founding Con-gress of Jewish Social-Democratic groups in Vilna. 
 In the main, it comprised semi-proletarian Jewish artisans in the west of Russia. 
 At the First Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in 1898, the Bundjoined the latter “as an autonomous organisation, independent only in respect of questions affecting the Jewish proletariat specifi-cally”. 
 ( The C. 
P. 
 S. 
U. 
 in Resolutions and Decisions of Its Con-gresses , Conferences and Plenary Meetings of the Central Committee , Russ. 
 ed. 
, Moscow 1954, Part 1, p. 
 14. 
) The Bund was an expression of nationalism and separatism in the Russian working-class movement. 
 In April 1901 the Bund’s Fourth Congress decided to alter the organisational ties with theR. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, as established by the latter’s First Congress. 
 In its resolution, the Bund Congress declared that it regarded the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 as a federation of national organisations, and thatthe Bund should enter the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 as a federal section. 
 After the Second Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 turned down the Bund’s demand that it should be recognised the sole representative of theJewish proletariat, the Bund left the Party, but rejoined it in 1906 on the basis of a decision of the Fourth (Unity) Congress. 
 Within the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 the Bund constantly supported the Party’s opportunist wing (the Economists, Mensheviks, and Liquidators), and waged a struggle against Bolshevism and the Bolsheviks. 
 To the latter’s programmatic demand for the rightof nations to self-determination the Bund contraposed the demand for autonomy of national culture. 
 While the Stolypin reaction was raging, the Bund took a liquidationist stand, and was activein the formation of the August anti-Party bloc. 
 During the First World War the Bundists held a social-chauvinist stand, and in 1917 they supported the counter-revolutionary Provisional Govern-ment and sided with the enemies of the Great October Socialist Revolution. 
 During the foreign military intervention and the Civil War the Bund’s leaders made common cause with the forces of coun-ter-revolution. 
 Meanwhile there was a turn among the Bund’s rank and file for collaboration with the Soviets. 
 In March 1921 the Bund decided to dissolve itself, part of the membershipjoined the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) on the basis of the general rules of admission. 
 p. 
 203 85 86 87 8889 90 91Proletariatis Brdzola (The Struggle of the Proletariat )—an illegal Bolshevik newspaper, organ of the Caucasian League of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 It was published between April-May 1903 and October 1905, twelve issues coming out in all. 
 The paper waspublished in Georgian, Armenian and Russian. 
 The editorial board was in close touch with Lenin and the Bolshevik centre abroad, and systematically published reprints of articles by Lenin,and material from the Leninist Iskra , and later from Vperyod a n d Proletary . 
 p. 
 205 P. 
 Nikolayev’s pamphlet The Revolution in Russia was published by the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 in 1905 in Geneva. 
 Lenin wrote the present note on the Bulygin Duma while he wasamending the manuscript of the pamphlet. 
 The note refers to the passage that reads, “Minister for the Interior Bulygin intends to set up a State Duma... etc. 
” Also extant is the manuscript, writtenin Lenin’s hand, on the title page of the pamphlet, with the inscription, “P. 
 Nikolaew. 
 Die Revolution in Russland . 
 Workers of All Countries, Unite! Published by the Central Committee”(Lenin Miscellany XXVI , p. 
 345). 
 p. 
 211 S. 
 S. 
—the pseudonym of P. 
 N. 
 Milyukov, leader of the Con-stitutional-Democratic Party. 
 p. 
 216 The third element —an expression used to designate the Zemstvo democratic intelligentsia. 
 p. 
 217 The Vienna Arbeiter Zeitung —a daily newspaper that was the central organ of Austrian Social-Democracy. 
 It was founded by V. 
 Adler in Vienna in 1889. 
 In 1905 the paper reflected the militant temper of the workers and the toiling masses of Austria-Hungary who under the influence of the first Russian revolution were fighting for the introduction of universal suffrage in their country. 
 During the First World War the paper took a social-chauvinist stand, for which Lenin called it the newspaper of “The Viennese traitors to socialism” ( Collected Works , Vol. 
 29, “Heroes of the Berne International”). 
 Banned in 1934, the paper resumed publication in 1945 as the central organ of the Socialist Party of Austria. 
 p. 
 224 D. 
 F. 
 Trepov —Governor General of St. 
 Petersburg, who was active in the suppression of the first Russian revolution. 
 p. 
 226 The reference is to an item “Our Khlestakovs” by Lenin, pub-lished in No. 
 9 of Proletary , July 26 (13), 1905, which quoted a message sent by the Menshevik Iskra to a French socialist news-paper, containing exaggerated and false figures about the number of its adherents among the organised workers (see Lenin Miscellany XVI , pp. 
 128-29). 
 p. 
 228 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100 101 102Issue No. 
 10 of Proletary , August 2 (July 20), 1905, published a resolution of the Saratov Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, which held a conciliatory stand; the resolution had been adopted on a report on the Third Congress of the Party and the Mensheviks’ Conference. 
 Proletary published the resolution with an epilogue by Lenin (see Lenin Miscellany XVI , p. 
 130). 
 p. 
 230 Winter hiring —the hiring of peasants for summer work, practised by the landlords and kulaks during the winter, when the peasants were particularly in need of cash, and would agree to extortionate terms. 
 p. 
 233 An expression from Gogol’s Diary of a Madman . 
 p. 
 247 Die Vossische Zeitung —a moderate liberal newspaper published in Berlin between 1704 and 1934. 
 p. 
 253 Ledru-Rollin , Alexandre-Auguste (1807-1874)—French politician, representative of the petty-bourgeois democrats. 
 p. 
 257 Cavaignac , Louis-Eugène —French general; Minister for War in the provisional government following the February revolution of 1848. 
 During the June days of 1848, he was in charge of the suppression of the Paris workers’ uprising. 
 Thiers , Louis-Adolphe —French bourgeois politician and bitter enemy of the working class. 
 In 1871 he was head of the government and displayed great brutality in putting down the uprising of the Paris Communards. 
 p. 
 260 Jacoby , Johann (1805-1877)—German bourgeois democrat, par-ticipant in the revolution of 1848. 
 Became a Social-Democrat after the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71. 
 p. 
 261 The reference is to the following works: K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Revue , Mai bis October , 1850; K. 
 Marx, Enthüllungen über den Kommunistenprozess zu Köln (see K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Werke , Berlin 1960, Band 7, S. 
 440-41 and Band 8, S. 
 412-13). 
 p. 
 273 The Liberal Unions and Social-Democracy —an insert written by Lenin to an article by V. 
 V. 
 Vorovsky, which was published under the same title in Proletary , No. 
 18, September 26 (13), 1905. 
 p. 
 281 Sergei —the Grand Duke Sergei Alexandrovich Romanov, the tsar’s uncle, Governor General of Moscow and one of the most reactionary representatives of the tsarist autocracy. 
 Assassinated by the Socialist-Revolutionary Kalyaev on February 4 (17), 1905. 
 p. 
 283 Rabochy (The Worker )—an illegal and popular Social-Democratic newspaper, which was published in Moscow by the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
’s 103 104 105 106 107 108Central Committee in 1906 by decision of the Party’s Third Con-gress. 
 Four issues came out between August and October. 
 p. 
 289 The Cologne Congress of German Trade Unions took place in May 1905. 
 p. 
 292 The present draft of the article was not completed by Lenin. 
 p. 
 295 See K. 
 Marx and F. 
 Engels, Selected Works , Moscow 1958, Vol. 
 I, p. 
 251. 
 p. 
 296 The Conference of Social-Democratic Organisations in Russia was held in Riga on September 7-9 (20-22), 1905. 
 For the resolutions passed by the Conference see The C. 
P. 
 S. 
U. 
 in Resolutions and Decisions of Its Congresses , Conferences and Plenary Meetings of the Central Committee , Russ. 
 ed. 
, Moscow 1953, Part 1, pp. 
 91-94. 
 In a letter to members of the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 dated September 7, 1905 Lenin spoke of the close ties between the “Armenian Social-Democratic Workers’ Organisations” and the Bund (see Lenin Miscellany V , p. 
 493). 
 p. 
 300 The reference is to the Mensheviks’ plan of support for the “Zemstvo campaign” which was conducted by bourgeois liberals between the autumn of 1904 and January 1905. 
 The campaign consisted of a series of conferences public meetings, and banquets arranged by Zemstvo leaders. 
 At these affairs speeches were made and resolutions passed in support of moderate constitutionalist demands. 
 Lenin sharply criticised the “plan of the Zemstvo campaign” in an article entitled “The Zemstvo Campaign and p. 
 306 The Shidlovsky Commission , which was headed by Senator Shid-lovsky, was set up by an imperial ukase of January 29 (Febru-ary 11), 1905 ostensibly “to enquire without delay into the causes of discontent among the workers in the city of St. 
 Petersburg and its suburbs”. 
 The commission was made up of officials, the heads of government-owned factories, and factory owners. 
 The intention was also to include elected representatives of the workers. 
 The Bolsheviks, who considered this manoeuvre on the part of the tsarist regime an attempt to distract the workers from the revolutionary struggle, proposed that elections to the commission be used to present political demands to the tsar’s government (see the book Leaflets of the St. 
 Petersburg Bolsheviks , Vol. 
 1, 1939, pp. 
 197-202). 
 When the demands were rejected by the govern-ment the electors refused to nominate their representatives to the commission, and called upon the St. 
 Petersburg workers to strike. 
 On the following day mass political strikes began, and on February 20 (March 5) the authorities were obliged to abolish the commission. 
 p. 
 306Iskra ’s Plan” (see present edition, Vol. 
 7, pp. 
 495-516). 
 109 110 111 112 113 114 115 116 117 118The reference is to Benjamin Disraeli. 
 p. 
 307 David , Eduard —German economist and adherent of Bernstein. 
 A criticism of his views is given by Lenin in The Agrarian Question and the “Critics of Marx ”. 
 p. 
 311 Szarwark —statute labour for the repair and construction of roads, bridges and other, mostly military, structures, imposed on the peasants in Poland. 
 p. 
 311 Demesnes —lands belonging to members of the tsar’s family. 
 p. 
 312 Cut-off lands (otrezki )—land which the landlords “cut-off”, i. 
e. 
, took away from the peasants, when serfdom was abolished in Russia in 1861. 
 p. 
 314 Novoye Vremya (New Times )—a newspaper published in St. 
 Peters-burg from 1868 to October 1917. 
 Moderately liberal at the outset, it became, after 1876, the organ of reactionary circles of the nobility and the bureaucracy. 
 The paper was hostile not only to the revolutionary movement, but even to the liberal-bourgeois. 
 Following 1905 it became an organ of the Black Hun-dreds. 
 Lenin called Novoye Vremya the acme of venality in the press. 
 p. 
 318 Balalaikin —a character in Saltykov-Shchedrin’s Modern Idyll , a liberal windbag, adventurer and liar. 
 p. 
 324 On the Question of Party Unity —it was under this headline that Proletary , No. 
 20 of October 10 (September 27), 1905 pub-lished the following documents: minutes of the third conference of representatives of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
’s Central Committee and the Mensheviks’ Organising Committee as elected at the Geneva Conference, and the Central Committee’s comments on these minutes. 
 In its appraisal of the Mensheviks’ behaviour at the joint conference and the demands presented by them, the Central Commit-tee pointed out that their policy was the same as it had been prior to the Third Congress, and that it was leading to “the greatest chaos and anarchy, to the disintegration of the Party”. 
 The documents were published with a note “From the Editorial Board” written by Lenin. 
 p. 
 327 The Southern Russian Constituent Conference of the Mensheviks was held in Kiev in August 1905. 
 Its decisions were criticised by Lenin also in the article “The Latest in Iskra Tactics, or Mock Elections as a New Incentive to an Uprising” (see pp. 
 356-73 of this volume). 
 p. 
 330 The Kostroma Committee, which adhered to the Bolshevik stand, opposed the appointment of Plekhanov as representative to the 119 120 121 122 123 124“Talks with Our Readers ” is the editor’s introduction to a letter, published by Proletary in excerpts, from the Bolshevik S. 
 Gusev, who in the second half of 1905 was the secretary of the Odessa Com-mittee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 In his letter Gusev expressed his opinion of the Bolsheviks’ tactics in the 1905 Revolution, reported on the explanatory work among the masses that was being conducted on these questions, and criticised the decisions of the Geneva Conference of the Mensheviks. 
 Replying to Gusev on September 7 (20), 1905, Lenin wrote that he was instituting contacts between the Central Organ and practical workers, and that the editorial board intended publishing his letter in part. 
 “On the whole we are in agreement and hold the same opinions (your ideas coincide with mine in Two Tactics ),” Lenin wrote ( Collected Works , Vol. 
 34, “ A Letter to S. 
 I. 
 Gusev”). 
 p. 
 335 Days of Bloodshed in Moscow is a draft of the article “The Political Strike and the Street Fighting in Moscow”, which is published in this volume on pages 347-55. 
 p. 
 336 The Ivanovo-Voznesensk strike , which began at the end of May and lasted till early August in 1905, involved about 70,000 work-ers of both sexes. 
 Leadership was provided by the Northern Com-mittee of the Bolsheviks. 
 During the strike the workers formed a Council of Workers’ Representatives which in fact was one of the earliest Soviets of Workers’ Deputies in Russia. 
 p. 
 336 The police fired on Tiflis workers who had gathered on August 29 (September 11), 1905 in the building of the City Council to discuss the elections to the State Duma. 
 By order of the tsarist author-ities, the police and the Cossacks surrounded the building, broke into the hall where over 2,000 persons were assembled, and fell upon them. 
 Sixty people were killed and about 300 injured. 
 All over the Caucasus—in Tiflis, Kutaisi, Sukhumi, etc. 
— political demonstrations and strikes took place in protest against the crimes perpetrated by the tsarist regime. 
 Leaflets calling for an armed uprising against the autocracy were published by the Tiflis Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 and No. 
 18 of Proletary dated September 26 (13), 1905 carried a special bulletin signed by the Caucasian League Committee regarding the events in Tiflis. 
 p. 
 337 Vorwärts —central organ of German Social-Democracy, was published from 1876 onwards, under the editorship of Wilhelm Liebknecht and others. 
 In its columns Frederick Engels waged a struggle against all manifestations of opportunism. 
 From the middle nineties, after the death of Engels, the paper began systematic publication of writings by the opportunists dominant in German Social-Democracy and the Second International. 
 p. 
 349 Sotsial-Demokrat (The Social-Democrat )—a Menshevik news-paper published in Geneva from October 1904 till October 1905. 
 125 126 127 128 129 130 131 132The article signed M. 
 Borisov was first published in Proletary , and then republished in the St. 
 Petersburg Bolshevik newspaper Novaya Zhizn (New Life ), No. 
 7 of November 8 (21), 1905. 
 p. 
 374 The reference is to the liberal-bourgeois newspaper Rus whichcame out at intervals in St. 
 Petersburg between 1903 and 1908 under various names, such as Rus (Russia ), Molva (Hearsay ), and Dvadtsaty Vek (The Twentieth Century ). 
 p. 
 379 No. 
 22 of Proletary , October 24 (11), 1905 carried a review of No. 
 3 of the Russian language edition of Borba Proletariata , organ of the Caucasian League of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Part of thereview published in this volume was written by Lenin, andcontains an appraisal of the article by J. 
 Stalin entitled “Reply to Sotsial-Demokrat ”. 
 p. 
 388 No. 
 19 of Proletary , October 3 (September 20), 1905 published “An Open Letter to Comrades Abroad” from a group of Social-Democrats working in Kazan, Simbirsk and Nizhni-Novgorodgubernias. 
 The letter described the difficult conditions of under-ground work in Russia and the shortage of Party forces, and called upon the youth to remain in Russia to work there. 
 The letter wasaccompanied by the following editorial note: “We are publishing this statement by ‘comrades from out-of-the-way places’ so asto enable them to express in our columns their frame of mindand their opinion of Party work. 
 While we do not share the author’s too extreme opinion regarding the uselessness of ‘studies’ abroad we do however think it necessary more often to remind our com-rades abroad and the Party as a whole of the out-of-the-way places in Russia. 
” It has not been established who used the pseudonym of “Revolutionary”. 
 p. 
 389 Vasilyev —the Bolshevik F. 
 Lengnik; Schmidt —the Bolshevik P. 
 Rumyantsev. 
 The latter left the Party during the period of theStolypin reaction. 
 p. 
 390 Lenin is quoting from the poem by N. 
 Dobrolyubov In a Prussian Railway Carriage , signed “Konrad Lilienschwager” and published in 1862 in No. 
 8 of Svistok (The Whistle ), a supplement to Sovre-mennik (The Contemporary ) magazine. 
 p. 
 404 The article “The British Labour Movement and the Trade UnionCongress” was published without the author’s signature in No. 
 23of Proletary , October 31 (18), 1905. 
 The manuscript of the transla-tion of this article was edited by Lenin, who attached two notes toit—one on the Taff Vale case, mentioned in the article, and thesecond on the concluding part of the article. 
 p. 
 413 An Equilibrium of Forces was completed several hours before the telegraph brought the news to Geneva that the tsar’s Manifesto of 133 134 135October 17 (30) has been made public. 
 The questions touched upon in An Equilibrium of Forces were developed in detail in the article “The Denouement Is at Hand” (see pp. 
 447-54 of this volume). 
 p. 
 414 Lenin’s pamphlet on this subject was not published. 
 p. 
 417The reference is to the resolution written by Lenin and adopted by the Third Congress of the Party. 
 It was worded, “On the Ques-tion of Open Political Action by the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
” (see present edition, Vol. 
 8, pp. 
 377-78). 
 p. 
 419 The reference is to the St. 
 Petersburg Soviet of Workers’ Deputies, which arose as the united strike committee during the (OctoberAll-Russia political strike. 
 On October 13 (26), St. 
 Petersburg workers elected their representatives to the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies so as to give leadership to the strike. 
 In point oforganisation the Soviet took shape on October 17 (30), when the provisional executive committee was elected. 
 The first Soviets of Workers’ Deputies arose out of the strike movement even prior to the October general strike. 
 In May 1905 a Soviet was formed in Ivanovo-Voznesensk, and a month later in Kostroma, while in September Soviets of Deputies were formed inMoscow by workers in individual trades, such as printers and tobacco workers. 
 These first Soviets were already marked by a trend towards functions wider than those of strike committees, so that when theOctober strike broke out and a Soviet was formed in St. 
 Petersburg they gave an impetus to the appearance of Soviets in other parts of the country. 
 Shortly before the December insurrection in Moscow,the Moscow Soviet of Workers’ Deputies came into being, the example being followed in Kiev, Kharkov, Rostov-on-Don, Odessa, Nikolayev, Ekaterinoslav, Vladikavkaz, Revel, Novoros-siisk, Saratov, Chita, Irkutsk, Krasnoyarsk, Baku, and elsewhere. 
 In defiance of all the institutions of the tsar’s government, the Soviets issued their own decrees, orders and instructions, andon their own authority they introduced the eight-hour working day and instituted democratic liberties. 
 The Bolsheviks everywhere entered the Soviets, and wherever they succeeded in gaining dominant influence the Soviets became militant centres for the mobilisation of revolutionary forces, where preparations for an insurrection were made and carried out. 
 Thus,the Moscow Soviet was the headquarters of the December insur-rection, and in Krasnoyarsk and Novorossiisk the Soviets took over power. 
 The St. 
 Petersburg Soviet “was weakest as an organ of thenew power” (Lenin). 
 Leadership in that Soviet was seized by the Mensheviks, so that it could not perform its main task—become the organ of an armed uprising and of the struggle for the overthrowof the autocracy. 
 Lenin, who developed the theory of the Soviets, regarded them as a mass political organisation of the working class, as organs ofinsurrection, and embryos of a new revolutionary system of rule. 
 136 137 138 139 140The Bolsheviks differed sharply from the Mensheviks on the question of the role and significance of the Soviets of Workers’Deputies. 
 The Mensheviks belittled the role of the Soviets, reducingthem merely to organs of local self-government. 
 In their practicalactivities, the Mensheviks limited the functions of the Soviets tothe defence of the workers’ economic interests. 
 The Soviets of 1905, one of the greatest historic gains of the working class, were the prototype of Soviet power as establishedin 1917. 
 On the Soviets of Workers’ Deputies see the following articles by Lenin: “Our Tasks and the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies”; “Reso-lution of the Executive Committee of the St. 
 Petersburg Sovietof Workers’ Deputies on Measures for Counteracting the Lockout,Adopted on November 14 (27), 1905”; “The Provocation thatFailed”; “The Dying Autocracy and New Organs of Popular Rule”;“Socialism and Anarchism”, “The Socialist Party and Non-PartyRevolutionism”; “The Victory of the Cadets and the Tasks of theWorkers’ Party”, etc. 
 p. 
 432 The Second Congress of the “League of Russian Revolutionary Social-Democracy Abroad ” was held on October 13-18 (26-31), 1903 in Geneva. 
 It was convened by demand of the Mensheviks, whowished to contrapose it to the Second Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
Expressing himself against the congress of the League Abroad,Lenin wrote, “A League congress at present will provide everything for a squabble but nothing for practical purposes, i. 
e. 
, for workabroad” (see Collected Works , Vol. 
 34, “Letter to G. 
 D. 
 Leiteizen”, October 10, 1903). 
 p. 
 436 The article “Petty-Bourgeois and Proletarian Socialism” was reprinted in No. 
 9 of the Bolshevik newspaper Novaya Zhizn o f November 10 (23), 1905. 
 p. 
 438 V. 
 V. 
 —pseudonym of V. 
 Vorontsov, author of the book The Destiny of Capitalism in Russia ; Nikolai—on —pseudonym of N. 
 Danielson, author of the book Sketches on Our Post-Reform Social Economy . 
 Both men were ideologists of liberal Narodism of the 1880sand 1890s. 
 p. 
 444 Lenin is referring to Izvestia Sovieta Rabochikh Deputatov (Bul-letin of the Soviet of Workers ’ Deputies )—official organ of the St. 
 Petersburg Soviet of Workers’ Deputies, published from October17 (30) till December 14 (27), 1905. 
 It was made up and printed bythe workers at the print-shops of various bourgeois newspapers. 
In all, ten issues appeared, the eleventh being confiscated by thepolice while it was being printed. 
 p. 
 448 The reference is to the Neue Freie Presse , a liberal-bourgeois news-paper, published in Vienna from 1864 onwards. 
 p. 
 451 141 142 143 144 145This insert was written by Lenin while he was editing the article, “The Peasant Congress” by V. 
 Kalinin (pseudonym of V. 
 Karpinsky),which was published in No. 
 25 of Proletary , November 16 (3), 1905. 
 p. 
 455 Oblomov —the main character in the novel Oblomov by the writer I. 
 Goncharov. 
 The name has come to signify routine stagnation andincapacity for action. 
 p. 
 460 Novaya Zhizn (New Life )—the first legal Bolshevik newspaper, published as a St. 
 Petersburg daily from October 27 (November 9)to December 3 (16), 1905. 
 Lenin took over the editorship upon hisreturn to Russia in early November. 
 Novaya Zhizn was the actual central organ of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Closely associated with the paperwere V. 
 Vorovsky, M. 
 Olminsky, and A. 
 Lunacharsky, while MaximGorky contributed articles and gave the paper financial aid. 
 No. 
 9 of the paper, which appeared on November 10 (23), carried Lenin’s first article “On the Reorganisation of the Party”, whichwas followed by more than ten articles from his pen. 
 The paper’scirculation reached 80,000, though it was constantly persecuted. 
Of the 27 issues, 15 were confiscated. 
 It was banned after publica-tion of No. 
 27 on December 2 (15), No. 
 28 coming out illegally. 
 p. 
 462 Vendée —a department in France where, during the French bourgeois revolution, a counter-revolutionary insurrection of theignorant and reactionary peasantry took place, directed against therevolutionary Convention. 
 Staged under religious slogans, theuprising was directed by the counter-revolutionary clergy andlandlords. 
 p. 
 464 The mutiny of soldiers and naval ratings in Kronstadt began on October 26 (November 8), 1905. 
 The following demands were putforward by the rebels: convening of a constituent assembly on thebasis of universal suffrage; establishment of a democratic republic;freedom of speech, assembly and association; improvement of theconditions of soldiers and ratings. 
 The uprising was put down onOctober 28 (November 10). 
 p. 
 465 THE LIFE AND WORK OF V. 
 I. 
 LENIN Outstanding Dates (June-November 1905 ) 1905 Lenin writes Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution . 
 In a letter to the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, Lenin proposes that political guidance of Party organisations should be improved by means of regular publication of leaflets and bulletins by the Central Committee. 
 Lenin writes a letter to the Central Committee regarding the terms of G. 
 Plekhanov’s appointment as the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
’s representative to the Inter-national Socialist Bureau. 
 In a letter to the International Socialist Bureau Lenin exposes the Mensheviks’ schismatic tactics. 
 Lenin’s articles “Revolution Teaches” and “Wrathful Impotence” are published in No. 
 9 of Proletary . 
 Lenin writes the preface to Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution . 
 In a letter to the Central Committee, Lenin advises cancellation of the Central Committee’s decision to appoint Plekhanov as the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
’s representative to the International Socialist Bureau. 
 Lenin’s article “While the Proletariat Is Doing the Fighting the Bourgeoisie Is Stealing Towards Power” is published as the leading article in No. 
 10 of Proletary . 
 No. 
 11 of Proletary carries a report of the publi-cation of Lenin’s Two Tactics of Social-Democ-racy in the Democratic Revolution . 
 Lenin writes the preface to the pamphlet Workers on the Split in the Party . 
June-July June 28 (July 11) June 29 (July 12) July 11 (24) July 13 (26) July, follow-ing 13 (26) July 15 (28) July 20 (August 2) July 27 (August 9) July July-August August 1 (14) August 3 (16) August 9 (22) August 16 (29) August August 23 (September 5)Lenin edits the Russian translation of Marx’s The Civil War in France for the second edition which was brought out in 1905 by the Burevestnik Publishers in Odessa. 
 In a letter to the Central Committee, Lenin crit-icises the conciliatory stand taken by Central Committee members in Russia (Bogdanov, Krasin and others), and demands that the decisions of the Party’s Third Congress be unswervingly applied in solving the problem of unification with the break-away section of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 (the Mensheviks). 
 Lenin’s article “The Boycott of the Bulygin Duma, and Insurrection” is published as a leader in No. 
 12 of the newspaper Proletary . 
 No. 
 13 of Proletary carries Lenin’s article “Reply from the Proletary Editorial Board to Questions Put by Comrade Worker” and his note on M. 
 N. 
 Pokrovsky’s article “The Professional Intelligentsia and the Social-Democrats”. 
 No. 
 14 of Proletary carries the following articles by Lenin: “‘Oneness of the Tsar and the People, and of the People and the Tsar’” (leadingarticle), “The Black Hundreds and the Organisa-tion of an Uprising”, “Are the Zemstvo ‘Liberals’ Already Turning Back?”, and an editorial epi-logue to the article, “The Third Congress on Trial Before the Caucasian Mensheviks”, the latter republished from No. 
 1 of the newspaper Borba Proletariata . 
 Lenin writes the preface to the third edition of the pamphlet, The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats . 
 He writes the plan of his pamphlet, The Working Class and Revolution . 
 Publication of Lenin’s pamphlet The Agrarian Question and the “Critics of Marx ” (reprint of the first four chapters). 
 No. 
 15 of Proletary carries the following articles by Lenin: “In the Wake of the Monarchist Bourgeoisie, or in the Van of the Revolutionary Proletariat and Peasantry?” (leading article), “A Most Lucid Exposition of a Most Confused Plan”, and “Keeping International Social-Democracy Informed of Our Party Affairs”. 
 August 25 (September 7) September 1 (14) September 2 (15) September 3 (16) September 7 (20) Following September 10 (23) September 13 (26) Middle of SeptemberIn a letter to members of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
’sCentral Committee in Russia, Lenin protests against their conciliatory stand in matters of tactics and categorically insists on the Editorial Board of the Central Organ, Proletary , being kept abreast of the Central Committee’s activities. 
 No. 
 16 of Proletary carries the following articles by Lenin: “Social-Democracy’s Attitude Towards the Peasant Movement” (leading article), “What Our Liberal Bourgeois Want, and What They Fear” and “The Theory of Spontaneous Generation”. 
 In a letter to P. 
 A. 
 Krasikov, Lenin gives instruc-tions on the consolidation of R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 local committees and on the need to establish closer relations between the St. 
 Petersburg Committee and the Proletary Editorial Board. 
 In a letter to the Central Committee, Lenin insists on being informed in time of the Central Committee’s activities in Russia. 
 In a letter to the International Socialist Bureau, Lenin informs the latter of the consent of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
’s Central Committee to a conference proposed by the Bureau in connection with differences within the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 In a letter to S. 
 I. 
 Gusev Lenin writes of the need for Party workers from Russia to apply to the Proletary Editorial Board on matters of Bolshevik tactics and their implementation. 
 Lenin delivers a paper to Russian emigrants in Switzerland on the subject of Party tactics to-wards the Bulygin Duma. 
 No. 
 18 of Proletary carries the following articles by Lenin: “Friends Meet” (leading article), “Argue About Tactics, but Give Clear Slogans!”, “Playing at Parliamentarianism”, “From the Defen-sive to the Offensive”, “On the Current Moment”, and an insert to V. 
 V. 
 Vorovsky’s article “The Liberal Unions and Social-Democracy”. 
 Rabochy , mass organ of the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, publishes in issue No. 
 2 an appeal to all Party organisations, written by Lenin and entitled “From the Editorial Board of the Central Organ of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
” September 20 (October 3) September 25 (October 8) September, prior to the 27th(October 10) September 27 (October 10) September 30 (October 13) End of Septem-ber September-OctoberLenin’s article, “The Zemstvo Congress” is pub-lished in No. 
 19 of Proletary . 
 Lenin writes two letters to the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 with instructions on prepara-tions for the Fourth Congress of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
and stresses the importance of political literaturein giving leadership to Party work. 
 In a letter to the Central Committee, Lenin com-municates the decision of the Southern Russian Conference of the Mensheviks regarding Plekha-nov being empowered to act as the Mensheviks’representative to the International SocialistBureau, and proposes that V. 
 Vorovsky shouldrepresent the Bolsheviks. 
 Lenin writes the articles: “No Falsehood! Our Strength Lies in Stating the Truth!”, and “TheJena Congress of the German Social-DemocraticWorkers’ Party”. 
 No. 
 20 of Proletary carries the following articles by Lenin: “Socialism and the Peasantry” (leadingarticle), “A Replete Bourgeoisie and a CravingBourgeoisie”, “The Landlords on the Boycott ofthe Duma”, “On the Question of Party Unity”,“An Irate Reply”, “A New Menshevik Conference” and “Representation of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party in the InternationalSocialist Bureau”. 
 He writes the article “Days of Bloodshed in Moscow”. 
 In a letter to S. 
 I. 
 Gusev Lenin writes of the need to strengthen Party leadership in the trade unions. 
 Lenin writes the draft of the article “The Bour-geoisie Awakened from Its Slumber”. 
 Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution is illegally republished in Russia by the Central Committee, and separately by theMoscow Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Lenin’s pamphlet To the Rural Poor is illegally republished by the Moscow Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
, and legally by the Molot Publishers in St. 
 Petersburg, under the title of The Needs of the Countryside (To the Rural Poor ). 
 /hammersicle⋆ NOT FOR Early October October 3 (16) October 4 (17)Between Octo-ber 4 and 11(17 and 24) October 7 (20) October 11 (24) October 12 (25) October 13 (26)Lenin writes an item against A. 
 N. 
 Potresov (Starover) entitled “A Social-Democratic Sweet-heart”. 
 In a letter to the Combat Committee of the St. 
 Petersburg Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 Leningives directions on the formation of combat groupsand contingents of the revolutionary army foran insurrection. 
 The following articles by Lenin are published in No. 
 21 of Proletary : “The Political Strike and the Street Fighting in Moscow” (leadingarticle), “The Latest in Iskra Tactics, or Mock Elections as a New Incentive to an Uprising”. 
 The draft decisions of the Party’s Third Congress, which were written by Lenin, and the reportsand speeches Lenin delivered at the Congressare published for the first time in the book The Third Regular Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party. 
 Full Text of the Minutes , which was brought out in Geneva by the Central Committee. 
 Lenin writes the Rules of the Business Com-mittee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
’s Central Committee. 
 No. 
 22 of Proletary carries the following: Lenin’s article “The Lessons of the Moscow Events”;his note “The Youth Abroad and the RussianRevolution”, and his review of the article “Replyto Sotsial-Demokrat ” which was published in No. 
 3 (in Russian) of the newspaper Borba Prole-tariata . 
 In a letter to the Central Committee, Lenin acknowledges notification of his appointmentas the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
’s representative to theInternational Socialist Bureau. 
 Lenin writes “The All-Russia Political Strike”, which is published as the leading article inNo. 
 23 of Proletary , October 31 (18). 
 A letter is sent by Lenin to M. 
 M. 
 Essen in St. 
 Petersburg, regarding the need to build up preparations for an insurrection, and the formationof hundreds and thousands of combat groups. 
 October 14 (27) The second half of October October 17 (30) October 18 (31) October 19 (November 1) October 20 (November 2) October 25 (November 7) Late October November 2 (15) November 3 (16)Lenin writes to the International Socialist Bureau, informing it that F. 
 Lengnik, P. 
 Rumyan-tsev and he have been appointed to represent the Central Committee of the R. 
S. 
D. 
L. 
P. 
 at the conference proposed by the Bureau. 
 Lenin writes the articles “Tasks of Revolutionary Army Contingents” and “What the Liberals Expect of the Duma”. 
 Lenin draws up the plan of a pamphlet criti-cising P. 
 Axelrod’s The People’s Duma and a Labour Congress (1905). 
 Lenin writes an outline of the article “An Equi-librium of Forces”. 
 The following articles by Lenin are published in No. 
 23 of Proletary : “The First Results of the Political Alignment”, “The Hysterics of the Defeated”, “Revolutionary Riga’s Ultimatum”, “The Plans of a Buffoon-Minister”, and “The Aggravation of the Situation in Russia”. 
 Lenin writes the article “The First Victory of the Revolution”, on the occasion of the Mani-festo of October 17. 
 This article is published as the leader in No. 
 24 of Proletary , November 7 (October 25). 
 At a meeting of Russian Social-Democrats in Geneva Lenin delivers a report on the recent political events in Russia. 
 No. 
 24 of Proletary publishes Lenin’s articles “Petty-Bourgeois and Proletarian Socialism”, and “Nikolai Ernestovich Bauman” (an obituary). 
 Lenin leaves Geneva for Russia via Stockholm. 
Lenin writes the article “Between Two Battles”, which is subsequently published as the leading article in No. 
 26 of Proletary , November 25 (12). 
 Lenin’s “The Denouement Is at Hand” is published as the leading article in No. 
 25 of Proletary . 
 B. 
 n. 
 leHnH coЧnHeHnr Tom 9 На английскот языке